THE COUNCIL of TRENT
The Representation of the Fathers assembled in the Council of Trent begun
about the end of the year 1545. Concluded toward the end of 1563. under ye
Pontisicate of Paul III. Tulius III. Marcel II. Paul IV. and Pius IV. There
were XXV. Sessions, in which were present VII. Cardinals, V. whereof were the
Popes Legates, XVI. Ambassadors from Kings, Princes and Republics, CCL.
Patriarchs, Arch bishops, Bishops, -- Abbots and Generals of Orders, All
Divines and Doctors of the Civil and Canon Law.



THE HISTORY OF THE Council of TRENT.

In Eight Books.

Whereunto is prefixed A Discourse containing Historical Reflections on Councils,
and particularly on the Conduct of the Council of Trent, proving that the
Protestants are not obliged to submit thereto.

Written in French by Peter Jurieu, Doctor and Professor of Divinity.

And now done into English.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Edward Evets at the Green Dragon, and
Henry Faithorne and John Kersey at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXIV.

Historical Reflections ON COUNCILS; And particularly on the Council of TRENT:
PROVING That Protestants are not Obliged to submit thereto.
I Believe it will by all men readily be granted, that since the first
appearance of Christianity, there has not happened an Affair of greater moment
than was the separation of the Protestants from the Church of Rome, which fell
out in the beginning of the last Century. It was a mighty rupture, that took
whole States and Kingdoms from the Roman See. Schism is indeed one of the
greatest mischiefs which can befall the Church; it is an enemy to Charity, nay,
ruinous to it: and since Charity is no less necessary to Salvation than Faith,
Schism that destroys Charity is no less to be feared than Heresy that
overthrows the Faith. In our present subject we find both Heresy and Schism.
The mischief is great on either part. Those of the separation are Schismatics,
if they have not done it upon solid grounds. But if the Church from which they
separate has given occasion for such separation, and by her own errors made it
absolutely necessary; the guilt of the Schism falls then upon her. From hence
arises a great contest, to know who it is that must one day answer before the
Tribunal of God for this scandalous breach, that puts a stop to the progress of
Chtistianity, sowing among Christians the seeds of variance and contention. The
Roman Church pretends it to be a Cause already adjudged and determined: that
famous Assembly the General Council of Trent, who could not err, having
pronounced definitively upon it. By this Judgment, say they, men ought to
abide: for there will else be no end of Controversy. Disputes should not be
everlasting: but when the Judges have given their final Sentence, there can be
no further proceeding. The Protestants are very far from thinking thus of the
matter: they pretend a right to review the Cause; they cry out against the
incompetence of the Judge; they complain of undue and irregular proceedings;
and will admit no other Decision of the truth and antiquity of their Religion
than the Holy Scripture; as for Tradition, Councils, and Schools, by which they
are condemned, they look upon them as things doubtful, falsified, false, and
apt to occasion illusion and error. This Controversy is most certainly of the
greatest importance; no less than eternal Salvation depends upon it; so that it
is the interest of all men to examine it to the bottom. It were a thing to be
wished, that we might plead our cause before a disinteressed Judge: but it
cannot be. For all the sincere and worthy persons of Europe have already taken
part on one side or the other: and those that can still balance between the
two Religions, are too ill Christians to have the honor of being Judges in a
Cause, which properly speaking is the Cause of God. But we entreat the Reader
that at least for a few hours he will lay aside all manner of prepossession,
that he may so make the better Judgment of the force of our Arguments. My
intention is not to enter into the depth of this vast matter, for that were to
descend to particulars, and to examine the right and wrong of every dispute. I
will only show that the Protestants are not to be blamed for refusing to submit
to the Decisions of the Council of Trent, and that from reasons taken from the
Council it self. I will prove that it is not from giddiness, nor from
perverseness; but from a just and solid resolution that they refuse to submit.
For it seems reasonable, that giving the History of this Council, we do also
give an account why we conceive our selves not obliged to receive it.

1. First reason of not owning the Council of Trent, because it is a Party in
the Controversy.
In the first place the Reformed decline the jurisdiction of this Council, as a
Judge incompetent, because a Party. I easily foresee I shall be stopped short
here, and that it will be returned upon me, that the Churches being a Party, is
the ordinary refuge of Heretics. Had not the Arians as much right to tell the
Council of Nice, you are a Party, and therefore can be no Judge in the Cause?
What! is not the Church obliged to maintain the rights of truth against
Heretics; and shall this shadow of a pretense be able to deprive her of the
power to Judge? It is fit however that we be heard in the matter: to see if
there be not a mighty difference between what we allege for our selves, and
what they are pleased to make the Heretics say. The Church is certainly the
prop and the pillar of truth, as St. Paul speaks; that is, she is obliged to
support it. But yet Heretics must not for that reason look upon the Church as
a Party, and reject her as unfit to judge of religious Controversies. For
Legislators, and the Garrantees of Laws, cannot justly be considered as
Parties, when they have no other interest in a matter in question, but the
conservation of the Laws. Were it reasonable for a Murderer to harangue his
Judges thus; Gentlemen, you cannot be my Judges, you have an interest in the
prosecution, inasmuch as you have forbidden to commit murder. It is an easy
thing to foresee what Judgment you will give, thus prejudiced as you are by
your own Principles and Maxims. I demand therefore a fair and equal trial by
Judges wholly free from all prepossession. There could be nothing so senseless
as such kind of talk: yet such would be that of Heretics, who should reject
the judgment of the Church in Contests of this kind. Had the Council of Trent
been the Council of the Church, and without other interest than to defend the
truth, we might have appealed from its Judgment had it determined of any thing
contrary to truth, but we could not have refused to own it as a Council. But we
affirm, that the Council of Trent is not a Council of the Church, but of the
Pope, and of the Court of Rome, who are our determined Adversaries in the
Controversy. It is against the Pope that the Protestants contend; they dispute
his quality of Vicar of Jesus Christ, of supreme Head of the Church, of
infallible Judge of Controversies. By the dictates of common sense, there is
nothing so unjust, as to establish him for Judge of a Cause, against whom the
Suit is directly brought. But that the Council of Trent, was a Council of the
Popes, not of the Church, is most apparent. For it was convened by him; he
presided in it; it consisted only of persons who had taken an oath of fidelity
to him, and were for the greater part his Pensioners. And indeed he was so much
Master of the Assembly, that it acted nothing but as inspired or commanded by
him. But it will be replied, that the Pope being the natural Head of the
Church, and having the sole right of convening Councils, and presiding in them,
he was not bound to lay aside his Character in favor of the Protestants who
unjustly attaqued him. Were a King, whose Sovereign Power should by some
persons be disputed, obliged to divest himself of his Royal Dignity, and submit
it to the fantastic humors of men? The misfortune is that we are always
pestered with similies that have no manner of similitude. A lawful Prince,
whose rights are clear and indisputable, I confess, were not obliged to
renounce his Royal State. But a King whose rights were doubtful, false, and
contested by a Prince of the Royal blond, and by the greatest part of his
Subjects, were obliged for the interests of peace to be content to sit down as
a private person, and suffer a Judgment of the validity of his Title. Is the
Pope a Sovereign, whose rights are unquestionable? Is it acknowledged
genenerally that he has the sole right of convening Councils, and presiding in
them; without whose Authority no Act passed therein should be valid? So far
from it, that the greatest part of the Christian world denies it. It is not
believed by the Eastern Church, nor by the Churches of the North and South, or
of the Greeks, Ethiopians, Cophties, or Russians that their Councils are
unlawful, because the Pope does neither convene them, nor preside in them. The
Protestants may be also reckoned for something, not for their number only, but
chiefly for their reasons. For they bring a cloud of Witnesses to demonstrate
that the right of convening Councils belongs to the Emperors, and that the
Bishops of Rome have not always presided in them. The first Council of Nice was
called by Constantine the Great; and Alexander the then Bishop of
Constantinople did preside in it. The second General Council was called by
Theodosius at Constantinople, at which neither the Pope, nor any of his Legates
were present: and therefore cannot be said to have presided therein. There is
nothing farther from truth, R^pi. l. I. chapter ^5. and 34.
than what the Cardinal du Perron is pleased to affirm, that the first Council
of Constantinople besought the Pope to confirm its Decrees. On the contrary,
the Church of Rome opposed her self, in all that she was able, to what the
Council had done. She disapproved the Election of Flavius, whom the Council had
established in the Sea of Antioch, in the place of Meletius, who died at
Constantinople while the Council sat. She favored Paulinus, who had been
elected Bishop by a party in the Church of Antioch, in separation from the
rest. She could never relish the Canon of this Council, that ordains, That the
Bishop of Constantinople should have the Prerogatives of honor next to the
Bishop of Rome, because Constantinople was new Rome. And even in the time of
Gregory I. L. Ind. 15. Ep. 131.
which was in the beginning of the seventh Century, the Church of Rome was not
as yet reconciled with this Council. For Gregory affirms that this Council was
not acknowledged in the West. Yet after all the opposition of the Roman Church,
it passes still for a lawful and General Council. To this I might add the third
General Council assembled at Ephesus, the fourth at Calcedon, the fifth and
sixth at Constantinople, all convened by the Emperors, and not by the Popes. I
might add to all these, many other proofs of equal weight: but being fallen but
by accident upon this Dispute, I have no intention to enlarge farther upon the
proofs. Yet I cannot but take notice, that Pope Vigilius being at
Constantinople in the year 553. when the fifth General Council was there held;
he would not assist in it, nor did preside therein, either in Person, or by his
Legates: and yet the Council is received both for lawful and General. There is
then already just cause to doubt, that the Pope has such a right of convening
Councils and presiding in them, as to render them unlawful if called or managed
by others. But this is not all; for a considerable part of the Roman Church it
self hold this opinion to be most false, That the Pope has the sole right of
convening General Councils, and presiding in them. All the Gallican Church, and
generally all that own the Councils of Constance and Basil; that is to say, at
least France and Germany are of this Judgment. The Council of Constance could
not be convened by a lawful Pope, for it assembled it self at the solicitation
of the Christian Princes, and by the authority of the College of Cardinals, for
the deposing of three Popes who were then sitting; the one at Rome, being
Gregory XII. another at Bologna, being John XXIII. the third at Avignon, being
Benedict XIII. Not one of these Popes could preside in this Council, being all
thither cited, and there condemned as false Popes. The Cardinal of Cambray did
preside in the third Session, Cardinal Vrsini in the fifth, John Bishop of
Ostia Cardinal and Vice Chancellor of the Roman Church presided in the
seventh, and in all the rest, till the Election of Martin V. John XXIII. being
deposed, and retired, the Council declared in the third Session, That by the
departure of the Pope the Council was not dissolved, but did still continue in
its full authority. In the Council of Basil, Pope Eugenius IV. could not
possibly preside, for he was there condemned and deposed, and Amadeus Duke of
Savoy elected in his stead. In the seventeenth Session the same Council
declares, that during the absence of the Presidents, the first Prelate shall
have the right of presiding without waiting for the Popes Commission. This one
would imagine does not seem to import, that a Council must be only under the
direction of a Pope, or of those that are Commissioned by him. I am not
Ignorant that the Decrees of the Councils both of Basil and of Constance are
had in extreme horror by the Court of Rome. But I know also that that does not
hinder, but that the Gallican Church, and diverse others do receive and approve
them. And that suffices to show, that the rights of the Pope were not so clear
and uncontested but that for the sake of peace he might well remit them to be
examined and settled by a free Council: and that by consequence, upon his
refusing to do it, the Protestants have reason to consider as a Party and an
Adversary in the Controversy, that Council that the Pope has convened,
wherein he presided, and over which he reigned with absolute Dominion. That the
Church of Rome having once given Judgment upon the Controversy; and an Appeal
being brought, she could not proceed to a second Judgment.


But to evince more plainly this truth, That the Protestants have reason to
consider the Council of Trent as their Adverse Party; it is to be remarked that
the matters in question were not novel, but for the greater part had been
already decided either by Councils, or by Papal Constitutions, or by a Custom
universally approved by the Roman Church. The second Council of Nice had
decreed the adoration of Images. Transubstantiation, the Real Presence,
adoration of the Sacrament, Auricular Confession, had been passed into Laws by
Innocent III. in the fourth Council of Lateran, held in the year 1215. The Cup
in the Sacrament was taken from the Laity by Decree of the Council of
Constance, held in the year 1414. Purgatory, and the seven Sacraments, were
made Articles of Faith by the Council of Florence in the years 1438, and 1439.
In a word, there was scarce any of the controverted Points that had not been
decided. All that the Protestants did, amounted to no other, than an endeavor
to be relieved from the hardships of Judgments already given. Truly and
properly speaking, they were Appellants from the Decisions of the Roman Church
to the Holy Scripture. How great was then the injustice, to set up that Church
for Judge of a Cause against which she had already given Judgment, and from
which Judgment the Protestants had appealed? When there arise new and doubtful
matters in a Church, there is no doubt but that Church has a right to Judge of
them, and to assemble her Councils to that end. For instance, in the time of
Berengarius the dispute about the Real Presence was revived, which had lain
buried in forgetfulness since Bertrand and Paschasius. The Church of Rome
having not as then decided the matter, Berengarius had no reason but to hear
the Judgment of the Church, having first done all in him, in order to the
prevalence of truth. Had the Church decreed unjustly in the matter, he might
then have refused to acquiesce in the Judgment: for that the Conscience cannot
submit, but where it is fully convinced that the Decision is in conformity to
the Word of God. But when a Church has once pronounced upon a matter, and an
Appeal be rightly made, she has then certainly no power to give a second
Sentence in the same Cause; or if she does, no consequence as of a new
Condemnation can be justly drawn from it. Since therefore the Church of Rome,
had already passed her Decree upon the Points in question, before the Council
of Trent; we must look upon her as a Judge become a Party, as having long
before declared against the truth. But can it in conscience be thought, that
the Prelates assembled at Trent came thither with intent to deliberate, whether
the natural Body of Christ be in the Eucharist? whether the Sacrament shall
have the Worship of Latria? Were they not resolved already, ere they came to
Trent? Came they not merely to condemn the Lutherans, and not upon any
inquisition after truth? Had they not almost all an implacable hatred to the
Protestants? Did they not solicit Princes to destroy them with Fire and Sword?
And are these qualifications to be desired in Judges? If it be asked, how then
the Assembly should have been composed to have given content to the
Protestants? I answer, it should have been as the Lutherans of Germany desired
it. The Bishops should have been absolved from their Oaths of fidelity to the
Pope. The Council of Basil did it in a time when there was less need than when
the Council of Trent sat. The Protestant Divines should have been called, the
more moderate persons of each party should have been chosen, the Bishops should
have been prevailed with to lay aside all passion and prejudice, the truth
should have been sought with a sincere mind, and the Word of God been only
consulted for it. The one might have hoped that persons so qualified, by such a
conduct might have reached the truth.

Council of Trent for a lawful and natural Judge of our Controversies with the
Roman Church, 2. Second cause of rejecting the Council of Trent, tho it were
duly assembled, in could not be infallible.
yet were we in no sort obliged to receive and comply with all her Decisions
with an absolute resignation and a blind credulity: to which nothing can move
one but the fond supposition of the infallibility of Councils. Not to descend
to an Examen of the particular faults of the Council of Trent, it is impossible
to persuade ones self that a Council, that is to say, an Assembly, in which
there is no Prophet, nor any man inspired of the Holy Ghost, is not liable to
err; and for my part I very much question whether there be in the world any one
person that seriously thinks so. I will admit that to have recourse to an
infallible living Judge would be of high importance to the World. The Church of
Rome strongly supports her self by the artifice of possessing the People with
the belief of her infallibility.

But when it comes to be enquired where it is that this infallibility does
reside, one knows not where to find it. Some place it in the Pope alone, others
in the Council alone, and a third sort in Pope and Council united. Those that
place it in the Councils seem to have greater reason, than such as would fix it
to the person of the Pope. For Councils are indeed the undoubted Judges of
controversies in the Church: So that if there be any infallible Judge in the
Church, it should be them. As it certainly is most probable that the wisdom of
many in conjunction should be of greater prevalence and purity, than that of
any single person. The Pope, whose Authority is mere Usurpation, cannot be an
infallible Judge, nor has God given to the Bishop of Rome any power to judge
of controversies in the name of the Catholic Church. Yet after all that
appears so much to favor the Councils, it must be confessed that the opinion
that fixes the infallibility of the Roman Church upon the Pope, is much easier
to defend, than that which ascribes it to the Council. For this latter opinion
that makes Councils to be infallible is perhaps the most vain and empty Notion
that was ever started. I pass the proofs brought from Scripture for each
opinion: they are much of an equal weight. The Text, I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not, is as good a proof of the Popes infalliblility; as is
this, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them, to prove that Councils are infallible. That General Councils
came into the world but by accident.


But if we consult the light of reason and common sense, can any one endure to
see infallibility ascribed to these Assemblies, that they call General
Councils; things which have either never been at all, or rarely, and by
accident? For as to Diocesan, Provincial, and National Councils, the pretense
of infallibility reaches not to them. Let us then reflect a little, that these
General Councils were not known in the Church till the conversion of the Roman
Emperors. Constantine is the first of these Emperors. The Council of Nice,
held in the year 325. is the first of these General Councils: that is to say,
that for three hundred years together the Church had no such thing as an
infallible Judge. Bellarmine says very well, that the Church having continued
without General Councils for three hundred years, might as well have done so
for three hundred more, or even for six, or for nine hundred. Or it may be it
was because there was in those days no need of any Council, there were then
either no Heretics, or none that openly contended with the Church; but a
spirit of meekness and submission prevailed among all Believers. So far from
it, that Satan did never sight against the truths of the Gospel, nor poison
Christendom with more or greater Heresies, than in those times. The works of
Tertullian, of Irenaeus, of St. Austin, and of many others of the Fathers, do
sufficiently show it. Let us know a little, where rested this infallible spirit
during the three first Centuries; if it be true that it is only to be found in
General Councils; there having been none during all that time. But the Church
possibly was not then infallible. Could it be ever made out, that infallibility
were one of the privileges of the Church, it were much more tolerable to allow
it to a See that has been constantly supplied with an uninterrupted Succession
of Bishops, as that of Rome: And it falls more readily under our apprehension
of things, for the Holy Ghost so to inspire and guide some one particular
person, than a numerous Assembly, whereof the greater part of the members that
compose it are very often either counterfeit Christians, or men of restless and
turbulent minds. I think it will not be unworthy of our remark, that these
Assemblies, which they are pleased to entitle General Councils, have been but
by accident introduced into the Church. It is the conversion of the Emperors
that occasioned them. Let us suppose that the Roman Emperors had continued
Pagan, as it was very possible; there had been then no means of assembling the
Clergy of the whole Christian world; and consequently the Church had been
always abandoned to a spirit of Error. The Pagan Emperors would never have
suffered the Christians from all parts of the Empire, and of the world it self,
to have met together in a body, and united in a Council; they would have been
jealous that the public safety might have been endangered from such kind of
Assemblies. It is therefore evident that the conversion of the Emperors gave
occasion to them; and for that reason, that they are but accidental things. But
this will be yet more clear, if we farther suppose, what might also very well
have happened, that when the Roman Emperors became Converts to the faith of
Christ, they had lost the greatest part of their Empire, and retained no more
than Italy, or some less considerable Province. It is certain that in such case
they could not have assembled the Clergy of the whole Christian World. For the
neighboring Princes at enmity with them, would never have permitted the
Bishops subject to them to transport themselves into an enemies Country; lest
they might there be seduced to revolt and shake off the Dominion of their new
Masters. From all which it is most apparent, that it was very possible that
there might never have been any General Council known in the Church, and that
what has been is purely by accident. But such things as are ordained of God
for preservation of the truth, cannot be said to have fallen out by accident.
Besides, according to the order of Gods Providence in the Government of the
Church, Councils were designed to judge infallibly of Controversies; why has
it not pleased God to remove those obstructions that hindered the forming of
these Councils under the Pagan Emperors? For tho it is true that jealousy of
State might have proved a powerful obstacle; yet it is as true that as great
difficulties have been surmounted. All time were not alike averse to
Christianity. There have been among the Heathen Emperors some that were
favorable to it: and what could not have been done at one time, might have
been effected at another, nevertheless this design of a General Council came
never into any man's head till Constantine. Was it ever known, for the first
three hundred years together, that the Bishops had any intent of assembling
from all parts of the World? Or is it so much as read in any Author, that they
complained for not being able to do it? If it be true that these Assemblies are
the unerring Guides of the Church, the Fathers of the three first Centuries
could not be ignorant of it: if they knew it, it was a most supine and wretched
negligence not to use their utmost efforts for the assembling these infallible
Judges, to have put an end to the many differences that then disquieted the
Church: or if they found it absolutely impossible for them to convene them, it
is yet a strange insensibility never so much as to lament the affliction of
such an incapacity. Tertullian in his Book de Prescriptionibus tells us all the
several methods by him conceived most proper for convincing of Heretics. What
an astonishing thing is it, that he should not speak one word of doing it by
General Councils, a way so sure, so ready, so infallible! It must certainly be,
that the Fathers never dreamt of these infallible Judges. I conclude therefore,
that to deal sincerely one must needs confess, that the zeal of Constantine did
alone occasion that Assembly that is called the first General Council, and by
the Model of which the rest were formed. For the better determining a great
Controversy he was desirous to convene as many Bishops as he could; even all
that were in the large extent of his vast Empire, that so their Decision might
be the more solemn and efficacious. And this is the original of General
Councils. The Christian Emperors called together the Bishops from all parts of
the Roman Empire. That Empire was called, in the style not of the Church only,
but of the Apostles also, the whole world, and the Councils have taken from
thence the name of General or Universal Councils. When the parts that made up
this mighty Body the Empire came to separate, and to be formed into several
distinct States and Kingdoms, the Bishop of Rome puts himself into the Emperors
place; and by pretending a spiritual power still retains those several States
and Kingdoms in a spiritual jurisdiction to him, that were only at first
obliged by the temporal power of the Emperors. By this means he continues to
assemble the Bishops of those several States, and to term such Assembly a
general Council. Let any discerning person judge, whether these Assemblies thus
formed by accident, as is most apparent, can be vested with the privilege of
infallibility. There never were any Councils that could truly and properly be
called General Councils.


But after all, it is a great abuse of words to give the name of Ecumenical or
General Council to a Convention of two or three hundred Bishops out of five or
six Nations. Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 4. c. 8.
When the Roman Emperors became Christian, their Dominions did include the
greatest part of Christendom; but not the whole. There was in Persia a very
great number of Churches, and those considerable ones, in whose favor
Constantine wrote to Sapor King of Persia. Theod. l. 5. c. 33.
Theodoret gives an account of the indiscreet zeal of one Audas, a Persian
Bishop, who in the Reign of Isdigerdes burnt a Temple of the Persian God, which
was Fire; and by that ill managed zeal was the cause of a Persecution of thirty
years continuance, by which an infinite number of Christians perished there by
all manner of torments, Th. (...)
The same Theodoret tells us, that in the time of Constantine, the Gospel was
preached in India with success by Ae^ and Frumentius; and among the Iberians by
a captive woman. It is certain that these distant Churches sent not their
Bishops to the Councils that were held in Countries subject to the Roman
Emperors. A Council that might deserve the name of General, ought at least to
be composed of the Guides of the Church, of all the Learned, and of all those
that have attentively studied the mysteries of Religion. There is no place in
the world could hold such an Assembly, nor were it possible to deliberate in
it. But, alas! instead of the prodigious number of Guides and Pastors of the
Catholic Church, a very few, and those almost all of the same Nation, are, it
seems, enough to make a General Council. For it is certain, that the Provinces
near the place where the Council is celebrated do supply it with more Bishops
and Divines, than all the more remote Kingdoms put together: and yet this scrap
of a Council must pass for the Universal Church, must be supposed to be acted
by her Spirit, and endued with her infallibility: Than which there was never
certainly a more vain imagination. Certain it is, that there has as yet been
nothing that can be truly styled a General Council. The ancient Councils had
the name of General for that they were in time generally owned by the Church.
The second General Council consisted of but 150 Bishops, and those only of the
Provinces neighboring to Constantinople. The latter Councils are composed of
yet sewer Nations: there are only a few Italians, Spaniards, French, and some
Germans; but neither the North, the South, the East, nor the greatest part of
the West are concerned in them. I would very fain learn, why the Gallican
Church should not be infallible, should she form an Assembly of a thousand
Divines, as she easily may, and yet becomes infallible when joined to Germans,
Spaniards, and Italians? It is a mystery beyond comprehension. It were fit to
produce good proofs for the establishment of this infallibility of Councils; or
at least to show they are in possession of it by a Series of examples without
interruption. As for such proofs, they ought to be out of the Holy Scripture.
But I shall not stand to examine or contest the proofs, for that were to enter
into Theological disputes; whereas we intend here no more than Historical
Reflections: and such we cannot omit as we conceive will overthrow the
infallibility of Councils.

That many General Councils, so called, have actually erred.
Those that maintain the infallibility of these Assemblies, that they are
pleased to style General Councils, would do well to make out this Assertion of
theirs from History. They will produce it may be five or six Councils, whose
Canons are owned by the Christian World. But what if we on the other side
produce twice as many, whose Canons are rejected by the greatest part of
Christendom? It were much to be wished that we had certain undoubted Characters
for distinguishing of true from false Councils. For we see that such of them as
have established errors, are the same in externals with those that have
confirmed the truth. What difference is there between the most holy Council of
Nice, which condemned Arianism, and the Council of Tire and Jerusalem, which
but ten years after, in the year 335. condemned St. Athanasius and the Doctrine
of the Church? It was the good Emperor Constantine that assembled both these
Councils; and that the latter was General appears by Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 4. de
vita Constant.
who assures us that it was convened from all parts of the Empire, from Africa,
Asia, Europe, and Egypt: it fate first in Tire; and was after removed by
Constantine to Jerusalem, for the more solemn dedication of the Temple he had
there built to the honor of our Savior. In this Council Arianism so
prevailed, that St. Athanasius was condemned, and banished by Constantine to
Treves. What can be said of the Council of Antioch held concerning St.
Athanasius in the year 340, or 341? The holy Bishop was deposed in it,
Socrates, Hist. l. 2. c. 7.
George made Bishop of Alexandria in his room, the Christian Faith was
corrupted by it, and a Creed conceived in different terms from the Nicene
Creed. The word Consubstantial was left out, and other words were used instead
of it, which the Arians pretended to be of the same signification. Why, was not
this a General Council? Was it not, as well as the preceding, convened from all
parts of the Roman Empire? Bellarmine confesses it was a General Council; Tom.
2. l. 1. c. 6. de Conciliis.
and it is clear that it was so esteemed, for that the 25 Canons made by it
have been received, and are still reckoned among the Canons of the Universal
Church. Distinct. 16. Can. 11.
Gratian not only took it for a Lawful Council, but even thought it had been
celebrated by the Orthodox. What shall we say of the Council of Sardica,
Socrat. l. 2. lib.
in the year 341, the fourth General, upon the Cause of Arius? Sozomen. l. 3.
c. 10.
There were present 376 Bishops; some say that threescore and sixteen of them
were Arians, Baronius Annal. Tom. 2. ann. number. 67. 347.
and retired from the rest to hold a Convention by themselves in Thrace: but
others on the contrary do affirm, that the whole Assembly was Orthodox. However
there was at least three hundred of them Orthodox, that were met together from
all Parts. The holy Confessor Hosius, Bishop of Cordoua, did preside in it:
St. Athanasius was re-established in his See by it; and the Nicene Creed was
also by it explained according to truth. Nevertheless this very Council has not
been able to obtain to pass for legitimate. St. Austin formally rejects it; nor
is it reckoned among the first six. De. Conciliis. l. 1. c 7.
Bellarmine indeed so far favors it, as to account it among those that are in
part rejected, and in part approved. If the Ancients had believed that General
Councils were infallible, I cannot see why they should reject this, it having
all the marks of Universality. Gratus Bishop of Carthage was present at it,
with five and thirty African Bishops more; and yet the African Church never
received it: she took so little notice of it, that sixty or eighty years after,
she had no manner of knowledge of its Canons: which appears by the History of
the great Contest between the Church of Africa and the Bishops of Rome in the
Affair of Pelagius upon the right of Appealls. Celestius a Pelagian, who had
been condemned by the Councils of Africa, obtained of Pope Zosimus to be
acquitted of all the Censures that had been given against him. The Africans
opposed it, affirming, that the Canons permitted not that one accused of
Heresy should be tried out of his own Province, or but by his own Synod; and
that the Bishop of Rome had no authority to receive the Appeals of such as
stood condemned by the Bishops of Africa.

Zozimus produced a Canon, as of the Council of Nice, which permitted Appeals
to Rome: Tho it was not really a Canon of that Council, but of the Council of
Sardica. The Africans were surprised at it, and knew not on the sudden what to
reply; for in their Copies of the Canons of the Council of Nice there was no
such Canon to be found; so that not knowing from whence it might be taken,
because they knew nothing of the Council of Sardica, or its Canons; there was
need of time to clear the mystery. The fifth General Council upon the Cause of
Arius, was the Council of Milan, held about the year 354. Ruffinus plainly
says, that many of the Orthodox fell into the snares of Heresy. Hist. l. 1. c.
20.
And indeed the Bishops that held for Athanasius and the term Consubstantial
were in fine banished by the Emperor Constantius. Could there be a more famous
Council than was that of Ariminum in Italy? There were present and assisting in
it no fewer than six hundred Bishops, of which four hundred of the Eastern
Church, and two hundred of the West. If we may believe Socrates, Hist. l. 2. c.
29.
there was nothing done in this Council repugnant to the Faith of the Church.
But he is not in this to be credited. He thought perhaps it would be a mighty
service to the Church, to prevaricate in her behalf, and deny that this Great
Council was of the number of those that favored Arianism. But it is undeniable
that this Synod sunk under the violence of the Emperor Constantius, and was
over reached by the cunning and artifice of Vrsacius Bishop of Singidunum, and
of Valens Bishop of Mursa. The testimony of Athanasius in the Book by him
written concerning the Council of Ariminum puts the matter beyond all doubt;
especially when we consider the concurrent evidence of S. Austin in the
fourteenth Chapter of his third Book against Maximin; and of St. Hilary in his
Book de Synodis adversus Arianos, where we find the Letters of Liberius Bishop
of Rome to the Eastern Bishops, wherein he avers that the Fathers of the
Council of Ariminum overcome by the Emperor, and by the cheats of Valence and
Vrsacius, had pronounced contrary to the Faith of the Church; but were again
perfectly returned from their error, and had each of them pronounced Anathema
against the Confession of Faith made by the Council of Ariminuw. We have thus
already five General Councils that have erred about the same matter.

In the Cause of Eutiches, who confounded the two Natures of Christ, there were
two General Councils assembled. The first was at Ephesus in the year 449.
convened by Theodosius the younger, a Prince truly Catholic. All the
Patriarchs were present at it; Juvenal Patriarch of Jerusalem, Dioscorus of
Alexandria, Domnus of Antioch, Flavian of Constantinople, and by his Legates Leo
Bishop of Rome. Nothing was wanting to the Legality or Universality of this
Council. For to say that this Council was Illegal, because not convened by the
Pope, and that the Patriarch of Alexandria, and not the Popes Legates did
preside therein, is a very vain Allegation, the weakness of which however in
this place we are not concerned to show. For we oppose not such as make the
Pope Superior to Councils, and all the Authority of Councils to depend upon
the Popes Pleasure. We oppose such as make the Council Superior to the Pope,
and hold a Council to be nothing the less legal, or less infallible for not
being under the Popes direction; such as look upon the Councils of Constance
and of Basil as most holy Councils, tho the Popes did not preside in them; and
such in fine as require us to submit to the Council of Trent upon its own
Authority. This General Council of Ephesus, tho legally assembled, and
according to the Canons, is notwithstanding a detestable Convention that
justified the Heretic Eutiches, confirmed his Doctrine, and deposed Flavian
Patriarch of Constantinople, a most holy and Orthodox person. About nineteen
years, before there had been held another General Council at the same City of
Ephesus, in the Cause of Nestorius, who affirmed there was to Persons in
Christ. This Heresy was there condemned, and Truth triumphed. This certainly
makes an essential difference between these two Councils; tho otherwise there
be none that I can see as to Form and Externals: unless that Error was
victorious in the second Council with less scandal than truth overcame in the
first. For it is true indeed that Dioscorus, President of the second Council of
Ephesus, did with much facility cause the Heresy of Eutiches to prevail; the
Popes Legates, and some few others, having been only a little roughly treated:
whilst in the first Council of Ephesus, which is the third received General
Council, there was a horrible Schism occasioned by Cyril of Alexandria, and
John of Antioch, who made Parties, and deposed each other. Socrat. l. 7. c. 33.
Evagrius. l. 1. c. 4.
The Emperor was forced to interpose in the matter, and to make use of his
Authority to appease so dreadful a Sedition. It is apparent from all these
Considerations, that tho the Council of Trent could be considered as a General
Council, that would not bind us to believe it infallible, nor to submit blindly
to its Decisions.

3. Third reason of rejecting the Council of Trent. That it is a Council of the
Church of Rome, not of the Universal Church.
But to leave these general Arguments, and come up closer to the Council of
Trent: We say it is a Council of the Roman, not of the Catholic or Universal
Church; and that we can look on it as no other. So that were it true that
Occumenical Councils were infallible, yet the Council of Trent, nor any of
those held in the Church of Rome since the Schism of the Eastern and Western
Churches, would have no right to pretend to this privilege of Infallibility.
The Schism of those two Churches fell out in the tenth Century, beginning
indeed toward the end of the ninth; since that time the Greek Church has had
no Communion with the Latin. It is true, there have been several attempts to
reunite them, but without success. So that the Greeks have had no Voice in the
Latin Councils, nor the Latins in the Greek Councils, for six or seven hundred
years. The Church of the Latins is not near half of the Christian Church: yet
she will needs have it that hers are General Councils; whilst the Councils of
the Southern and Eastern Churches must pass forsooth but for little Consults or
a sort of Conventicles. It is a prodigious temerity for a Church scarce more
than a fourth of the Christian World to set up it self for the Universal
Church, and to count the rest for nothing. All the Churches of the East, North,
and South, the Greek Church, the Church of the Abyssins, who possess all
Ethiopia, which is a large share of Africa, and the Church of the Russians,
are, say they, Schismatical Assemblies; they have broken the bands of Union
with the Head which is the Pope, and are no longer worthy of the name of
Churches: for there are no true Christians but those that are subject to the
Holy See, which is the band of Unity. This indeed is an excellent Principle.
According to this Hypothesis, all the Christians in the East, in the South, and
in the North are condemned to everlasting Perdition. What can be imagined so
cruel as this Tenet? I cannot for my part believe that there is any reasonable
Man of the Romish Communion that dares seriously affirm, that an innumerable
multitude of Christians believing in Jesus Christ and receiving the Canons of
the Ancient Councils, are yet in a state of Reprobation, only for not
acknowledging the Papal Supremacy. I know very well that this Doctrine is
taught: but I appeal to the Conscience of those that teach it, and am fully
persuaded that they cannot but inwardly grant, that such Persons may be saved
out of the Pope's Communion. And were but that Point as openly confessed as it
is secretly owned, they must then be constrained to acknowledge that the
Councils of the Church of Rome are no General Councils. For if the Greeks may
be saved; it is because the Church of which they are Members is a true Church;
since all Men acknowledge, that out of the Church there is no Salvation. If then
the Greek Church be still a part of the true Church; it must necessarily
follow, that those Councils wherein she has no part, cannot be called General
Councils, nor can have the privileges of them.

4. Fourth Cause of Rejection. The Council of Trent was but a part even of the
Latin Church.
The nearer approaches we make to the Council of Trent, the more plainly we
discover the imperfections that ruin its Authority with the Protestants. We
have already seen, that this Council is their adverse Party in the Cause; that
granting it a General Council, it could not be infallible; that yet it is not a
General Council, for that three parts of the Christian Church have no part in
it: it follows, that it is then at most but a Council of the Roman Church. But,
alas, it is not so much as a General Council even of the Roman Church. It is a
Council of Italy, and of the Italians: it is a Council of some sixty odd
Bishops, whereof many were the Pope's Pensioners. This Council was assembled
three several times: the first time under Paul III. the second time under
Julius the 3d. the third time under Pius IV. In the two first, there were not
above sixty Bishops present, almost all Spaniards or Italians. Where then is
the Universality of a Council consisting of so few Persons? Yet have these few
adventured to decide the most important Matters. There were sixteen Sessions
held, during the two first Convocations; wherein were decided the Controversies
of the Scripture, Tradition, Original Sin, Grace, Justification, Baptism, the
Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction. Sixty Persons undertake to give Laws to
all the Consciences of the Christian World, and in things not understood by
them. They must needs be very blind, whose Faith can truckle to the Decisions
of so small a number of Men, of so little Understanding. Paul the 4th. was very
much in the right to say, as he often did, that it was great folly to send
sixty trifling Bishops to the Mountains, and imagine that they must presently
have the advantage of discerning the Truth, rather than the Sea of Rome, where
there is always so great a number of excellent Persons who make the Study of
Divinity the sole business of their Life. I must confess indeed that there were
above two hundred Prelates present at the third Convocation of the Council. But
how? There came some fifteen or twenty from France, and not till about the end
neither. There was yet a few more Spaniards. But no Germans, no Polonians, no
Hungarians; or if there were, it was so very few, as could never be thought to
represent the Nations. For it was one of the Policies of the Court of Rome, not
to permit to Vote by Nations, nor that the absent Bishops might Vote by Proxy,
and that each Bishop spoke only for himself. There might be about fifty or
sixty or some few more French, Spanish, and German Bishops; the rest were
Italians, and that rest were three parts of four, for there was more than one
hundred and fifty. Not the Lutherans only, but all Europe agreed in it, that
the Council of Trent was purely an Italian, a Papal Council.

5. Fifth Reason to reject it. The hatred of the Council of Trent to the
Protestants,
If we regard the conduct of this Council, we find from thence another reason to
reject it. Already we have taken notice with what heat and violence that
Council acted against those over whom it pretended to be Judge. It has
frequently quitted the quality of Judge, to assume that of being the adverse
Party; and such a Party as cared not to exceed all the bounds of honor and
good Faith. The Design of making odious the Doctrine of the Lutherans, was
apparently the reigning Passion of the Council. For it countenanced the false
extracts made of the Lutheran books; and made Heresy of the most trivial
matters: all the wild Opinions of Fanatique Sectaries were imputed to them. Nor
was any difficulty made of open and manifest contradictions, in order to
represent the Doctrine of the Protestants in hideous colors. Sometimes they
were made Pelagians, denying Original Sin: sometimes of the Sect of the
Manichees who denied Free Will. Yet is there nothing so wide and remote as are
the two Heresies of Pelagius and the Manichees. Man by this last Sect was
deprived of all his freedom; and by the other Free Will was established upon
the ruins of Grace. But with the Council of Trent, the End, it seems, which
was the blackening of the Protestants, was enough to consecrate the basest and
vilest Means. If there was any that had so much remaining honesty, as to
interpret the Protestant Sentiments a little favorably, there was an immediate
exclamation of Heresy! Heresy! Was any thing fair to be expected from such a
sort of Judges? But indeed, what other procedure could be expected from a
Council composed as this? The Judges were Bishops, and the Advocates were
Monks: both which by their particular interests were the implacable Enemies of
the Protestants. The Bishops saw plainly, that nothing less than their absolute
ruin was threatened: that the reforming of their softness, their Luxury, and
the pravity of their Manners, would not alone suffice; but that a reduction of
their vast Revenues, their large Dioceses, and their Despotique Sway over the
Church and Clergy was no less intended. That it was endeavored to bring them
down to plain Pastors, or at least to subject them to their Clergy, and to take
away that Pomp, that Wealth and Power they so much idolize, Let any one judge
what kind of Sentiments they must needs have for those that designed them so
much ill. As for the Monks, who explained matters, and pleaded before the
Bishops against the Lutherans, they looked upon the Protestants as upon a sort
of people that had resolved their ruin, and the ruin of all Monasteries; that
would have all the Wealth and Revenues restored back that these Religious
Houses enjoyed under a pretense of Piety. They strove out of Revenge to make
the Lutherans odious: For they well knew the Lutherans did not spare them, but
openly accused their Vows, of Tyranny; their seeming Sanctity, of deep
Hypocrisy; their Houses, of being sinks of filth and Impurity; their Retreats,
of being places where Men are nourished in Sloth, and in a sort of life that
shrouds under a Veil of Austerity the greatest softness and Luxury. He is
little acquainted with humane Nature, that knows not how mightily the motives
of Interest and Revenge do inslave the Mind, and depress Reason. I do not
therefore wonder at the implacable hatred of the Council to the Protestants; I
should rather wonder had it been otherwise: but I affirm that this known and
visible Hatred gave just cause to the Protestants to reject the Council.

6. Sixth Reason to reject i^. It was not a free Council.
But could the Council have cleared it self of this Hatred taken up both by
interest and inclination, yet the Protestants could have looked for no good
from it; for that it was the slave, the creature of the Court of Rome, and
wholly depended on it. This is so very notorious, that to deny or to question
it, is to lose all sense of shame and modesty. The Emperor, and the King of
France and Spain complained of it highly. These complaints were made publicly,
in the face of the World, discoursed, written, and repeated daily, and in
various forms as in this History shall be shown. Nothing was proposed in the
Council but by the Pope's Order, and by the mouth of his Legates: nor did it
determine of any thing, but by the express direction of the Court of Rome. When
difficulties were found in any Affair, so that it went no just as the Legates
would, but thwarted a little the Papal Interest; the Presidents of the Council
never wanted specious pretenses to procrastinate the matter: and these delays
were purely to gain time to consult the Pope's pleasure in the business; and to
know in what manner it should be decided; and this was called, a giving time
for allaying Men's Passions, that so the Holy Ghost might become Master of their
Minds, and might govern their Resolutions. When the Pope's Orders were arrived,
the Presidents employed their Pensioners in Caballing and secret working of the
matter; but if those Intrigues miscarried, the business was remitted to another
Session. But if no Arts would do, they took off the Masque, and plainly told
the Council, that such was the Pope's pleasure. Besides, the Pope had in the
Council under the management of Cardinal Simoneta five or six rude tumultuous
Persons, who abused and affronted any Man, making hideous noises by kicking and
striking the Benches with Hands and Feet, upon the delivering of an Opinion
that did not please them. Nay, these surious men came frequently to reproachful
Revilings, and even to Blows. Cardinal Pallavicini himself tells us, that the
Bishop della Cava, one of these so disorderly Persons, did one day box another
Bishop, and tore away part of his Beard, for having with some freedom delivered
his Opinion. The Bishop of Alista, who was maintaining that Bishops were
instituted by Christ, was interrupted by Cardinal Simoneta with, Be silent,
insolent Man, and let others speak. If any Man was disrelished for maintaining
Opinions contrary to the Italian Theology, he was either, wearied by rudeness
and ill treatment, forced to beg leave to retire, or made to be recalled by his
Superiors, if he had any; or otherwise plainly driven from the Assembly. When
Pius IV. was reproached with the little liberty he gave the Bishops in that
Council; he only excused it, by retorting upon Princes, that they left them
yet less liberty than he did. To deal truly, what the Pope said was not
altogether groundless: for the poor Bishops were the Slaves of Princes, as well
as of the Pope. The Pope himself made use of the Authority of Princes, to
restrain the over forwardness of some Prelates. Thus he obtained Letters from
the King of Spain, and from the Marquess de Pescara his Ambassador at the
Council and Governor of Milan, to hinder the Spanish Prelates from favoring
such as were desirous to set bounds to the Papal Power. From what happened in
the Disputes about the Residence and Power of Bishops by Divine Right, it is
easy to conjecture what would have happened had the Lutheran Tenants found
Partisans in the Council. The Spaniards, the French, and the Germans, insisted
upon the Councils declaring the Residence and Jurisdiction of Bishops to be
jure divino: they had their particular Intrigue in it, as the course of this
History will show. But the Interest of the Court of Rome lay in direct
opposition, and that the Point might not be decided in favor of the Bishops.
To effect which, no stone was left unturned, no means untried, that Artifice,
Violence and Tyranny could make use of. What then had been done, or rather what
had not been done, if, as the Protestants desired, the Pope's. Authority had
been directly struck at, and the subversion of his Grandeur openly attempted?
If the Council of Trent had but only offered at what was actually done by the
Council of Constance, that is the declaring of the Pope to be subject to the
Council; the Court of Rome would rather have set all Christendom in confusion,
that have suffered it. The Presidents had express Orders, if that Point came at
all into question, immediately to break up the Council, and return to Rome.

7. Seventh cause of Rejection. The Council of Trent has erred, even by the
Confession o^ those that would have us submit to it.
But I would very fain know, why we should be obliged to receive the Decisions
of the Council of Trent, since the Roman Church her self does not receive them?
Why should it be expected from us that we should look upon this Council as
Infallible, when thousands of the Roman Communion do believe that the Council
has de facto erred, and in consequence of that Belief do refuse to submit to
it, and daily reject its Canons? This last reason for our rejecting that
Council, is indeed of high importance: we shall therefore enlarge a little upon
it, and evidently make it appear, that those that would exact of us a
Submission to this Council, have themselves no regard to its Authority; and
that upon the score of its having erred. I shall not press upon the Council,
for having forbid Non-Residence under grievous Penalties, which yet, is now
universally connived at: for having forbidden Pluralities, and yet there are
now no Eminent Prelates but are guilty of it: for having forbidden to give
Dispensations but in Cases of great moment, and yet now at Rome they are denied
to none, but to such as want Money, that matter of mighty moment for which only
they are granted. For I very well know that to these, and to a hundred other
particulars in which I could instance, it will presently be replied, that they
are Corruptions indeed; but that those Corruptions indeed; but that those
Corruptions do not hinder the Decrees of the Council from being just and good.
And the Popes Flatterers will add, that he is not bound by the Decrees of the
Council, but has Power to dispense with the Canons, when he thinks fit. But I
speak of Decrees made by this Council and rejected by an infinite number of
People; Decrees that never were suffered to take place in France, after all the
endeavors of the Court of Rome. The French Kings, their Parliaments, and
Bishops, dislike several things in the Decrees of this Council. Reasons why the
Council of Trent is not received in France.
1. That the Council has done and suffered many things that suppose and
confirm a Superiority of the Pope over Councils. 2. That it has confirmed the
Papal Encroachments upon Ordinaries, Ses. 2. Res. c. 8.
by Exemption of Chapters, and Privileges of Regulars, who are both withdrawn
from Episcopal Jurisdiction. 3. That it has not restored to the Bishops
certain Functions appertaining to their Office, and taken from them, otherwise
than to execute them as Delegates of the Sea of Rome. 4. That it has infringed
the Privileges of Bishops, of being judged by their Metropolitan, and the
Bishops of the Province, by permitting a Removal of great Causes to Rome, and
giving Power to the Pope to name Commissioners to judge the Accused Bishop. 5.
That it has declared, that neither Princes, Magistrates, nor People, are to be
consulted in the placing and settling of Bishops. 6. That it has empowered
Bishops to proceed in their Jurisdictions by Civil Pains, by Imprisonment, and
by Seizure of Temporalties. 7. That it has made Bishops the Executors of all
Donations for Pious Uses. 8. That it has given them a superintendency over
Hospitals, Colleges and Fraternities, with Power of disposing their Goods and
Revenues, notwithstanding that those matters had been always managed by Laymen.
9. That it has ordained, that Bishops shall have the examining of all Notaries
Royal and Imperial, with Power to deprive or suspend, notwithstanding any
Opposition or Appeal. 10. That it has given Power to Bishops, with consent of
two Members of their Chapter, and of two of their Clergy, to take and retrench
part of the Revenue of Hospitals; nay, to take away Feodal Tithes belonging to
Laymen. 11. That it has made Bishops the Masters of Foundations of Piety, as
Churches, Chapels, and Hospitals; so as that those that have the care and
Government of them are obliged to be accomptable to the Bishops. 12. That in
confirming Ecclesiastical Exemptions, it has wholly ascribed to the Pope and
the Spiritual Judges, all Power of judging the Causes of accused Bishops; as if
Sovereign Princes had lost the Right they have over their Subjects, as soon as
they became Ecclesiastics. 13. That it has empowered the Ordinaries, and
Judges Ecclesiastical, in quality of Delegates of the Holy See, to enquire of
the Right and Possession of Lay-Patronages, and to quash and annul them; if
they were not of great necessity, and well founded. 14. That in prohibiting
Duels it had declared, that such Emperor, King or Prince as should show favor
to Duelling, should therefore be Excommunicated, and deprived of the Seignory
of the Place holding of the Church, where the Duel was sought. 15. That it has
permitted the Mendicant Friars to possess Immoveables. 16. That it has
ordained an Establishment of Judges, it calls Apostolic, in all Dioceses, with
Power to judge of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters, in prejudice of the
Ordinaries. 17. That it has declared, that Matrimonial Causes are of the
Churches Jurisdiction. 18. That it has enjoined Kings and Princes to leave
Ecclesiastics the free and entire Possession of the Jurisdiction granted them
by the Holy Canons and General Councils: that is to say, Usurped by the Clergy
over the Civil Power.
These are the principal Points disputed in France. Those that tend to the
diminution of the Authority and Privileges of Bishops, to enlarge the Roman
Power, are rejected by the Bishops: and those that would extend the Power of
Bishops to the prejudice of the Civil Authority, are rejected by the
Parliaments. Between both, this Council as enacting contrary to the Rights and
Liberties of the Gallican Church, was never at all received in France, so as to
obtain the force of a Law. Why then should that Assembly give Law to us
Protestants, that is rejected by so great a part of the Church of Rome? If it
has not erred, why do Roman Catholics (as they will be termed) refuse to
receive it? And if it has erred, what reason is there to press us to receive
it? I know what is answered to this: that matters of Faith and of Discipline
must be distinguished; that the Council did not, nor could not err in matters
of Faith and Doctrine, and that it was only mistaken in points of Discipline.
But we shall find this Answer to be a great Illusion. First of all, it is very
hard to comprehend why the Church should be endued with an Infallible Spirit
only in points of Doctrine, and not in matters that should establish Order and
Government. For certainly it is of the Essence of the Church to be governed
according to the intention of God, and of Christ, as certainly as it is
Essential to it to be guided in all Truth. Suppose it impossible to retain all
the speculative Truths, and therefore that Anarchy, Confusion, and Disorder
become prevalent: what sort of Church should we have? But the better to
dissipate this Illusion, it is to be observed, that there is no Point of
Discipline, but has a strict Union with some Point of Right: and that there
are some Points of Discipline that are Points of Doctrine likewise, and of the
first Class too. For example, the Roman Hierarchy, the disposition of that
great and mighty Clergy, distinguished into Priests, Bishops, Arch bishops,
Patriarchs, Primates, over whom is placed their great Head, whom they entitle
Christ's Vicar and Lieutenant upon Earth; Is not that a Point of Discipline? All
that respects the Guidance and Government of the Church, the Persons, their
Characters, their Charges, their Dignities, their Authority, and Jurisdiction,
are they not of the Discipline of the Church? If with this Pretext it should be
objected to the Romanists; Gentlemen, your Hierarchy in the whole, and in all
its parts, is a mere matter of Discipline; the Church might possibly err
concerning it; and it is therefore fit to review and re-examine it: What would
they reply to it? Methinks they would answer, that it is a Point of Discipline,
which is also a Point of Doctrine, and of Right. At least the Council of Trent
has so defined it; and has treated of the Hierarchy under the head of matters
of Doctrine. There are indeed three kinds of Doctrine: the first are purely
Speculative; as the Mystery of the Trinity, the Incarnation, and the
Redemption: the second are Practical, respecting our Manners, and of this kind
are the Moral Precepts that are the Rules for governing our Life, and directing
our Conscience* and the third are those Practical Doctrines that respect the
Guidance and Government of the Church; that is to say, that there must be a
Ministry in the Church; that Believers ought to obey their Guides; that the
Residence of Bishops is by Divine Right; that the Pastors are instituted by our
Lord Jesus Christ; that there must be a Lawful Call to the Ministry, that so
there may be a Right of governing the Church, that such Government may not be
Tyrannical; that the Church may not withdraw Believers from their Lawful Lords
in Temporal matters. It is most clear, that all these are Points of Doctrine
respecting Discipline. So that a Council that errs in Points of Discipline that
have an inseparable Connection with those Doctrinals, does by necessary
consequence err in Doctrine. But to render this General Consideration the more
sensible, I will particularly apply it to some Principal Articles of
Discipline, wherein it is confessed that the Council of Trent has exceeded the
limits of its Power; and which I will make out to be Articles of Doctrine also:
so that such as will confess that Council to have erred in Discipline, shall be
constrained to acknowledge that it has erred in Doctrine, and in matters of
Faith.

That the Popes Superiority over Councils is a Point of Doctrine, and was
decided in the Council of Trent.
Let us begin with the Article of the Superiority of the Council over the Pope,
or of the Pope over the Council. Few are ignorant with what heat this Question
has constantly been argued ever since the Councils of Constance and Basil; both
of which pronounced the Pope inferior to a General Council; and the Gallican
Church makes it an Article of her Faith to maintain the decisions of those
Councils. But I would fain be informed whether it be an Article of Faith, or of
Discipline: yet I think there is no doubt but it will be avowed for a Point of
Doctrine, it having always been considered as such. It is also certainly a
Point of Discipline: for all that respects the Form of the Churches Government
may fitly be brought under the head of Discipline. This important matter the
Council of Trent has decided in favor of the Pope; and yet the Gallican
Church still perseveres in the contrary belief: She believes therefore that the
Council erred in a Point of Doctrine. I know it will be said, That the Council
of Trent has not decided, that the Pope is Superior to Councils. Men may talk
as they please, but things for all that will continue as they are. It is true,
that among the Decrees and Canons of that Council, there is none that says in
express terms, The Pope is Superior to Councils, and can be judged by none:
but the effect of such Decision is apparent in all the Acts, and through the
whole Conduct of this Council. It is necessary for establishing the Sovereignty
of a Temporal Prince, that the States of his Country make a formal Declaration,
and thereby acknowledge him their Master and their Sovereign? Is it not enough,
that they obey him; that they suspend their resolutions, are convened, and
dissolved, at his pleasure; that in their Acts they style him their Lord, and
their King; and that they own that all they do is nothing unless confirmed by
his Authority? I believe there are none so unreasonable as to deny this to be
of equal Value with any express Declaration of Sovereignty. We shall therefore
make it unquestionably clear, that the carriage of the Council of Trent toward
the Pope has been in all points such.

In order to this, it is to be remembered, that the fifth Council of Lateran
(considered by the Court of Rome as a General Council, assembled by Julius II.
begun in the year 1512, under Leo X.) had repealed, annulled and abrogated the
Pragmatick Sanction; which was an Abstract of the Decisions of the Councils of
Basil and Constance, made at Bourges in the year 1438. by Order of Charles VII.
in a solemn Assembly of all the Clergy of France, and of the Parliaments. The
grand design of it was to abase the Pope, and to retrench the Tyrannical part
of his Power: the very Basis of all the Regulations and Proceedings of this
Assembly, being founded upon the Principle of the Subjection of Popes to
Councils. But then comes Julius II. in his Council of Lateran, and
re-establishes the Popes Superiority over the Council, declaring null and void
all that had been done in prejudice of it by the Councils of Constance and
Basil. Twenty eight years after was the first Convocation of the Council of
Trent. Between these there had been no General Council, nor any thing in
prejudice of that Superiority that was so re-established by the Council of
Lateran: On the contrary, there was something actually done of great advantage
to it; which was the Concordat. Lewis XII. who had the great Contests with Pope
Julius, died in the beginning of the year 1315. Francis I. succeeded, who
passed into Italy, took Milan, and Genoua, and visited the Pope, then Leo X. at
Bologna. It was at this interview that the Concordat was made, by which the
King consented to the abolishing of the Pragmatick Sanction, upon condition
that the Kings of France should have the Right of Presentation to all great
Benefices. Thus have we the Pragmatick Sanction, and all the Decisions of the
Councils of Constance and Basil utterly destroyed, with respect to France: and
the Pope re-established by this Act in the possession of his Superiority over
all the Church, and over the Councils without contradiction. The University of
Paris did indeed appeal from this Concordat to the next Council: but that still
makes for the Pope; because the University did not at the Council of Trent
prosecute the Appeal; by which silence the thing continued as the Council of
Lateran had adjudged it, and as the Concordat had confirmed it. Besides, the
Council of Florence, held by Pope Eugenius at the same time the Council of
Basil was held, did annul and make void all that was done at Constance and
Basil in prejudice of the Popes Authority. Spain and Italy acknowledge this of
Florence for a Lawful and General Council. And then there are two General
Councils that exalt the Pope over the Council. Then comes the Council of Trent,
and does not the least Act to invalidate or lessen the Decisions of the two
preceding Councils. On the contrary, it was convened upon this ground, that the
Pope was absolute Master of it, to continue or dissolve it at his pleasure. It
always appears to be acted by this Principle, paying in all things Submission
to the Pope. Is it not then apparent that this Article is decided by the very
Conduct of the Council of Trent, so exactly agreeable to the Decisions of the
Councils of Florence and Lateran? If there arise question of Jurisdiction
between two Judges, and there be a Regulation of the matter, and he that is
declared by Sentence to be the Inferior do for the future act as such without
appealing from the Judgment; does it not always pass as an adjudged Case; and
is not such Superior esteemed in peaceable possession of his Superiority?
There is therefore no more to do but to consider the Conduct of the Council of
Trent, and see if from the beginning to the end of it, it has not always paid
to the Pope the respect of an Inferior to a Superior.

I begin with the Name given by the Council to the Pope. And methinks it is
reasonable that Words should be the just and faithful Images of Thoughts; and
that the Names given to Persons be understood to signify the naked Characters
under which they are to be considered. The Council of Trent called the Pope
their most Holy Lord, Sanctissimus Dominus noster; as may be seen in diverse
places; two I shall cite. The first is that of the Controversy of the
Residence of Bishops, whether by Divine Right or not. The greater part were for
declaring it in the Affirmative: but the rest said either, Placet, prius
consulto Sanctissimo Domino nostro; or else, Non placet; nisi prius consulto
Sanctissimo Domino nostro. It is no sort of answer to say that these men were
far less in number than the others; for the difference of Votes respected the
Question only, whether he Judgment of it should be left to the Pope: but as to
the Name given him, it was contested by none. It were in vain, and even
ridiculous to go about to deny this. For it is the Language of the very Decrees
of the Council to the Pope. Read but the Decree of referring to the Pope the
demand of the Cup, at the end of the twenty second Session: The Council has
ordained that this whole matter be referred to our most holy Lord, ad
Sanctissimum Dominum nostrum. It cannot be said that this was only the
Complement of a few Flatterers: It is a Decree of the Council maturely debated
and approved by all the Fathers. As a Protestant I might well say, that it
seems an odd kind of thing to qualify the Pope with a Title that was never
given by the Apostles to Christ himself: They call him barely or Lord; and
never, our holy, or our most holy Lord. For my part I do not see that this
style of most holy, or thrice holy, is to be ascribed to any but to God alone:
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts. But this is not my present business. It is
enough for me to prove by it, that the Council of Trent has owned and
acknowledged the Pope, not simply for Superior, but for Sovereign, Master,
Lord, and most holy Lord.

Among the proofs we bring to show that the Council has acknowledged the Pope
for its Superior; we ought not to slight the Custom, so inviolably observed by
that Assembly from first to last, to deliberate of nothing, nor make any
Decision, but according to the Orders of the Court of Rome. It is in vain to
say, that it ought not to be imputed to the Council; but to the Legates that
presided therein. The Council did it, the Council suffered it, and all things
were turned on that Hinge. I know very well that the sound and unbyassed Part
of the Council were very much troubled at it: but I also know that the far
greater part would have it so, not barely consenting to, but supporting this
Conduct of the Legates: For all the Italians were of intelligence with the Pope
for the subjecting the Council to him. These Assemblies are obliged to answer
not only for what they do by Deliberation, but also for what they do by
Surprise. All Historians agree that the Fathers of the Council of Ariminum had
honest Intentions and Orthodox Minds. And yet because they suffered themselves
to be surprised by the Artifice of Vrsacius, and Valens, it is reckoned among
the Arrian Councils. It must be confessed, that the Italian subtilty was never
raised to a higher pitch, than by the Court of Rome, in managing the Council of
Trent, to make it act as absolutely depending on the Pope. And it must also be
acknowledged, that as the Court of Rome did succeed in the Design, so it
thereby engaged the Council in a Conduct that evidently establishes an Opinion
which passes for erroneous in the minds of many people. For what more can be
done by the most inferior Assemblies toward their Sovereigns, than to debate
nothing but by their direction, and to determine nothing but by their Order?

That Clause that occasioned so much noise, and so great discontent, that the
Council could deliberate of nothing but what was proposed by the Legates,
proponentibus Legatis, is it not a plain Decision of the Popes Superiority over
the Council? Was there ever any Inferior that durst prescribe to his
Superiors the Points upon which they were to deliberate; telling them, you
shall speak only as I direct you, you shall debate the Propositions that I
shall make you, and you shall not dare to exceed the bounds I set you? Yet such
was one of the Decrees of the Council, signed by all the Fathers, and made at
the opening of the third and most solemn Convocation of the Council. Was there
any thing done to remedy the consequences of this Clause? Truly just nothing in
effect. There was a little Decree made (and little it signified) to pacify
dissatisfied minds: it was, that the Legates a little before the end of the
Council should declare that it was not intended by this Clause to prejudice the
liberty of the Council, nor at all to alter the manner of proceeding that
former Councils had observed: but it is not said that there was no intent to
prejudice the opinion that subjects the Council to the Pope.

Those that shall read this History, will find by what passed from the twenty
second to the twenty third Session, what Endeavors were used by the Court of
Rome to slide in a Decree among the Acts of the Council to establish the Popes
Supremacy. There was a Minute of such a Decree sent from Rome, wherein it was
said, that the Pope has power to govern the Universal Church, Ecclesiam
universalem. The Emperor and the French joined to oppose it, as easily
penetrating the Design of exalating the Pope over the whole Church; of making
him absolute Master of it; and by consequence placing him above Councils. Well
then, and what was the issue of the Dispute? The Court of Rome feigned to yield
the Point, and the Decree did not pass: but yet the thing was after cunningly
done in another Decree, where the very words are used, but in a way that seems
as if it was without design. It is in the first Chapter of General Reformation
in the last Session, where it is said, that the Pope has the Administration of
the Universal Church. These words do plainly signify that the Pope is sole
Bishop, that the others are but his Delegates, and by consequence that he is
the Monarch and Superior of the Church, whether it be considered together as a
Body, or disjunctly in its Parts. If the words might admit of another
construction, yet the very Council it self did thus interpret them, and
therefore for a time did reject them; tho afterward it received them by
inadvertence. And this is another express Decision that exalts the Pope above
the whole Church.

It would certainly be tiresom to the Reader, should I produce all the Proofs
that might be brought, to show that the Council of Trent has acknowledged the
Pope for Superior. For I should then be obliged to speak of the Bulls of
Convocation that were registered and received by the Council, in which the sole
power of convening Councils, and presiding in them is ascribed to the Pope,
contrary to the Decisions of the Councils of Constance, and Basil. I should
also speak of the Bulls of Suspension sent by the Popes to their Legates, by
which as Masters and Superiors they empowered them to suspend, and to dissolve
the Council. I should in fine be obliged to speak of all that was done in those
two important Controversies that made so much noise in the Council: that is,
whether the Episcopal Order were of Christ's Institution, and whether the
Residence of Ecclesiastics be Jure Divino. But I shall leave the Readers to
make due Reflections upon the Legates presiding in the Council, and their
management of affairs. I shall only offer two Proofs, but the most convincing
that can be. The first shall be the last Chapter of Reformation in the last
Session. In this Chapter the Council declares, That all that has been ordained
concerning the Reformation of Manners, and Ecclesiastical Discipline is so
ordained as that the Council will thereby manifest to all the world, that the
Authority of the holy Apostolic See remains whole and untouched: That is to
say, that the Pope is not bound by the Canons, nor tied from dispensing with
them when he thinks fit. This is not our Gloss, but the Court of Rome's; it is
the plain intent of the Council that framed the Decree: it is agreeable to
constant and continual Practice; for the Pope de facto does daily dispense with
the Canons of this Council. It could not more plainly be pronounced that the
Pope is Master and Sovereign of the Council: nor could any thing be more
directly contrary to the Decisions of the Council of Constance. This latter
Council, speaks thus in the fourth and fifth Session, The holy Synod of
Constance duly assembled, being a General Council, and representing the
Catholic Church, is empowered immeditely from Jesus Christ: which every
person, of whatsoever condition or dignity, tho even of the Papal dignity, is
bound to obey in all things that relate to Faith, the extirpation of Heresy,
and the Reformation of the Church, as well in the Head as in the Members. That
is to say, the Council of Constance declares, that the Pope is bound to obey
the Canons of the Council: And the Council of Trent declares, that the
Authority of the Council reaches not to the Pope, but leaves his Power
untouched, One of the two Councils has therefore certainly erred, for their
Decisions are in direct contrariety to each other.

The last Proof I shall urge, is the Confirmation of its Decrees, which the
Council of Trent desired of the Pope. If that does not suppose that without
such Confirmation the Decrees of the Council were of no force, as the Court of
Rome pretends, it signifies just nothing. If the Validity of the Decisions of a
General Council depends upon the Popes Confirmation, it (...) it into
Propositions; and then it runs thus: The Church has Power over the
Temporalties of Kings, and private Persons; can take away their Possessions,
and give them to others; can proceed to Sentence and Execution by Corporal
punishment, by Imprisonment, and Sequestration; can take cognizance of the
validity of Wills and Testaments; can oblige Laymen to give an account of their
management of Donations for pious Uses; has Power to exercise all manner of
Judicature, and in Matrimonial Causes exclusive to all other Tribunals; In a
word, can hear and determine all matters Civil and Criminal. Is there not
reason then to allow this for Doctrine? Is not Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
matter of Doctrine? Has not the Council of Trent treated of it in the Chapter
of Order, as of a point of Doctrine? If the Jurisdiction of the Church be a
matter of Doctrine is it not absurd to say that the Decrees to which such
Jurisdiction does extend are merely points of Discipline? Are not the Whole,
and its Parts, of one nature? I^ the Jurisdiction of the Church considered
together and in gross belongs to Doctrine why not the parts, the branches, the
extent of it likewise? Thus have we another point of Doctrine, in which the
Gallican Church and all the Magistrates of the Christian World do affirm the
Council to have erred.

That Exemptions of Ecclesiastics is a point of Doctrine; wherein it is
confessed that the Council erred.
I go on to the Exemptions of Ecclesiastics, which are of near affinity to the
preceding Article. The Bishops of the Council of Trent, in the Decree we just
spoke of, by them entitled the Reformation of Princes, had made little
Sovereigns of the Clergy independent of the Secular Power; exempted from
pleading before a Temporal Judge, for whatsoever Cause or Crime. It Is true this
Decree did not pass, by reason of the great opposition made by the Ambassadors.
But the Council endeavored to supply the matter; for in the twentieth Chapter
of General Reformation, in the 25th. Session, it ordains, that the Immunities,
Exemptions, and Privileges of Ecclesiastics be ratified and confirmed to them,
according to the Constitutions of Popes, and Councils, and according to the
holy Canons. Now these Constitutions and these Canons, the observance whereof
it commands, are those that withdraw Ecclesiastics from the Power of Secular
Judgment, and subject them only to the Judges of the Church. And indeed since
the Council, the Clergy have with the utmost vigor endeavored the maintaining
themselves in the possession of these Privileges. Every body knows the famous
Quarrel that upon this occasion happened between Pope Paul V. and the
Venetians, and made so great a noise in the beginning of this present Century.
The Republic of Venice in the year 1605. made a Law, forbidding Ecclesiastics
to acquire Lands and fixed Possessions: and before that, there was another Law
in force, restraining the building of Churches, Hospitals, and Monasteries
without leave obtained of the Senate* At the same time the Republic caused to
be imprisoned Brandolino Valde-Marino Abbot of Nerveze; and Scipione Saracino,
Canon of Vicenza: the first, as being guilty of Rapine and Theft, accused o^
poisoning his Father and his Brother, o^ Incest with his Sister, of having
caused several Persons to be assassinated, and o^ employing Magic to corrupt
Women^ the second, for having broken off the Seal put upon the Bishops Court by
the Magistrates; and for attempting the chastity of a Widow of Quality with
most villa^nous outrages. Pope Paul V. looked up on these Laws, and the
imprisoning of these Men, as breaches of the Privileges of the Clergy, that the
Council of Trent ha^ confirmed. He commanded the Venetian to abrogate these
Laws, and to send the two Prisoners to be tried by the Nunc^ at Venice,
forasmuch as the proceeding of the Republic in this matter was contrary to the
Canons and Constitutions of the Councils. And upon the Republics refusing to
do it, in the year 1606. he thundered his Bull of Excommunication and
Interdiction against it. The business was made up in the year 1607. by the
mediation of the King of France, and by the negotiation of Cardinal de Joyeuse,
and Cardinal du Perron. The Interdict was taken off, but the Republic was
obliged to give up the Prisoners to the Pope, and to suspend the execution of
those Laws, till the Parties, that is to say, the Church and the State, had
settled the matter.

These Ecclesiastical Immunities were things unknown to the Primitive times.
The great and good Emperor Constantine did in Person, or by Commission hear
and determine the Crimes of Ecclesiastics, without excepting so much as Cases
of Schism and Heresy. It is true, he established a Tribunal of the Church,
Sozomer, l. 1. c. 9. Eujeb. de vita Constant. l 4. c. 27. Niceph. l. 7.46.
and gave a sort of Jurisdiction to Bishops for the affairs of Ecclesiastics.
But still they acted as the Emperors Delegates in those Tribunals: and we see
that Constantine did often ^re hear Causes, wherein the Bishops had before
given Sentence, Tom. 2. Ep. 162.
St. Austin tells us, that in the business of the

(...) That the diminution of Episcopal Authority is another Point of Doctrine,
wherein the Council of Trent is acknowledged to have erred.
It is not extremely necessary to enlarge upon the wrong done by the Council of
Trent to Bishops; in taking from them the power of hearing all the greater
Causes; in impowering them in most Episcopal Functions to act only as the Popes
Commissaries; and in confirming the Privileges of Chapters and Monasteries,
which dispense them from acknowledging the Ordinaries to be their Superiors.
The Bishops themselves do sufficiently complain of these wrongs: and they have
reason; for by the Privilege granted to Monks of immediate depending on the
Holy See, the great and numerous Congregations of Clugny, and of the
Cistercians, all the Houses of the Mendicants, and the new Order of Jesuits,
are not only withdrawn from Episcopal Jurisdiction, but are become so many
sworn Enemies to Episcopacy. Besides which, by the Exemption of Chapters, those
Assemblies are so many thorns in the Bishops sides, giving them a thousand
disturbances, and tiring them out by their oppositions. The accused Bishops
are, contrary to the Canons, forced and dragged to Rome to be tried; their
Causes are removed from their Metropolitan, and Synod of the Province, from
whom they might expect Justice; and those that seek their ruin, do procure
their Enemies to be named by the Pope for Commissioners to decide their Causes.
There is an instance of this in the troubles that happened in France about the
Doctrine of Jansenius. There were four Bishops that after the condemnation of
Jansenius by Innocent X. and Alexander VII. kept a wrangling and cavilling, a
little too long in the Jesuits opinion, upon the distinction of Right and Fact,
to avoid signing of the Formulary. The good Fathers procured a Brief from the
Court of Rome, to interdict them by Commissaries named by the Pope. These four
Bishops, who were the Bishops of Alez, of Pamiers, of Beauvais, and of Angers,
defended themselves against the Interdiction by Circular Letters, and by diverse
public Writings, wherein they cite the Ancient Canons, the fifteenth of the
Council of Antioch, in the year 341. the seventh of the Council of Sardica,
351. the Capitula of Adrian I. the Decisions of Leo IV. and of Benedict III.
his Successor, who lived about the middle of the Ninth Century. By all which it
appears, that accused Bishops, to be Canonically condemned, ought to be tried
by their fellow-Bishops of the same Province. They trace the possession of this
Right through the following Centuries; and at length they show, that the
Regulations of the Council of Trent, and the Concordat between Francis I. and
Leo X. cannot prejudice the Right of the Bishops, and so long a Possession; for
that the Parliaments, the Universities, and the Clergy of France opposed the
Concordat, and the Cardinal of Lorrain made opposition in the name of all the
Clergy of France, then when the Gentlemen of beyond the Mountains made the
Decree that impeaches this usage: Which (say they) has served for a ground of
the refusal, In the Circular Letter of the four Bishops to all the Bishops of
France. p. 8.
that this Kingdom has always made, to submit to it, and to several other
Regulations about Discipline, as being found contrary to the Liberties of this
Church; which the Kings, the Clergy, and the Parliaments of France have always
so carefully preserved. These Gentlemen are then persuaded that the Council of
Trent has in this point wronged the Bishops. But one cannot commit a Wrong
without Injustice, nor do an Injustice without Error. Whence it follows, that
it is not to be denied by these Gentlemen, but that according to them the
Council has erred. Yet still, say they, it is but an Error in Discipline. And
still they must give me leave to tell them, that this reply is nothing but a
mere illusion. For it is a real Point of Doctrine, to know how far the Rights
of Bishops do or do not extend. It is a clear Case that all the Grievances the
Bishops complain of depend upon the question, Whether Bishops were instituted
by Jesus Christ, and are the Apostles Successors. For if Bishops are by Divine
Right, and not of Papal Institution, it is manifest that the Pope cannot
deprive them of a power he did not give them, nor can so much as lessen that
power. If a Bishop does jure divino watch over the conduct of those of his
Diocese, there is no man that by any right can take a part of his Flock from
him, or forbid him to execute his Pastoral Charge in any instance; for no man
has power to alter what God has established. On the contrary, if the Pope
has conferred upon Bishops all the Authority they have, he may revoke, lessen,
or enlarge it at his pleasure; nor could the Bishops then have any cause to
complain, for he may make use of his just right and power. If the Pope be
absolute Master of the Church, and Bishops but his Substitutes, he may proceed
judicially against them as he thinks most fit, by a Synod, by Commissaries, or
by himself. And the Bishops know it very well: for the Spanish Bishops, who
stickled so much in the Council that the Residence and Institution of Bishops
might be declared to be jure divino, had no other end in it, but to strengthen
the Episcopal Dignity, and shake off the Papal Yoke that oppressed them. The
Authors of those Writings that have made so much noise in the world about the
affair of Signatures are likewise perfectly convinced of this truth. For
speaking of the wrongs done to Bishops by the Court of Rome, they tell us, that
the Popes Ministers take delight to show in Act and by Example what the Roman
Doctors teach in their Books: Circular Letter of the four Bishops, p. 15.
That the Pope is the absolute Master and Sovereign of the Church: That Bishops
are but his Vicars, holding all their power from him: That he either does, or
does not hearken to them, as he thinks fit: That if he makes answer when they
consult him, he does them grace and favor, but does them no wrong if he refuse
to answer. To this erroneous and false opinion of the Doctors, Partisans of the
Court of Rome, they oppose the pure truth of the Gospel; that is, Page 14.
That all Bishops do succeed to the Apostles: That the Pope by Divine Right is
their Head and Superior, but not the sole Bishop: That they derive their power
from Christ himself: That it is the Holy Ghost that has set them over the
Flock, that the Great Shepherd has acquired by his blood, that each might
govern as his Vicar that portion that falls to his lot, etc. that they are so
inferior to the Pope, as to be yet his Brethren, and Colleagues in that only
Episcopat, of which each of them holds an entire part according to the Fathers.
This is truly the state of the Question; and can this be thought to be a mere
matter of Discipline? Or can it be other than a Point of Doctrine? When the
French and Spaniards did so mightily insist in the Council, to have it declared
that Bishops are not the Popes Vicars, nor set up by him, but established by
Christ; and when on the other side the Partisans of the Court of Rome opposed
this design with so much violence, every where preaching up the Pope to be the
sole Bishop; that the Ordinaries are but a succession of Commissaries, holding
all their Authority from the Holy See, was this Controversy considered by the
two Parties as a matter of Discipline? Was it not considered in the Examen of
the Sacrament of Orders, which is a Point of Doctrine? And not touched in the
Chapters of Reformation, to which was referred all that concerned Discipline.
The Bishops could not prevail to have it declared that their Order is by Divine
Right; but at least they hindered that no Decree was made for declaring them
only the Popes Vicars. Yet that is of no great service to them; for in all the
Decrees of the Council they are still treated as the Popes Vicars. And it must
needs be acknowledged that the Council, in declaring that the Pope has power
to abridge the Authority of Bishops, to hinder their Episcopal Functions, to
try them in Person, or by his Commissaries, has sufficiently declared them to
be no more than his Vicars. So we have another Point of Doctrine wherein two
thirds of Europe agree that the Council of Trent has erred.

That the People ought to have part in Canonical Elections: that herein also
the Council of Trent has erred, by the Confession of many Roman Catholics.
I go on to Canonical Elections. Those persons that within thirty or forty years
past have made themselves so much talked of in the World, for that
extraordinary appearance of zeal to restore the ancient luster of the Church,
those persons, I say, do consider this matter of Canonical Elections as a Point
of highest importance. They lament that favor, interest, and birth are the
only steps that raise to Ecclesiastical Dignities; and that the custom of
elevating to Prelacy by Election and Canonical ways those who are most worthy
of it, is now no more in use. They complain of it with much grief; and know not
how to forgive the memory of Chancellor du Prat, who is accused to have
abolished the Pragmatick Sanction, First Dialogue of the Parishioners of Sr.
Hill. du Mont. p. 10.
that is, as they express it, The pure observation of the ancient Canons in the
Church of France: and to have made the Concordat of Francis I. with Leo X.
which ruined the Apostolical Discipline in France, abolished Canonical
Elections, and subjected the Church of France to a deplorable servitude. They
tell us in the marginal refutations of M. d' Ambrun's Petition to the King,
Page 10.
that in several Parish Churches there have been for a long time Public
Prayers to God for the abolishing the Concordat, and the re-establishing
Canonical Elections. We must not say these Gentlemen have reason, lest it give
offense; for if they chance to agree in any opinion with us, it is presently
made a crime. Neither is it here extremely important, whether they are in the
right or not. It is enough for us that they zealously condemn whatsoever
favors the abolition of Canonical Elections. For thereby they are necessarily
engaged to condemn that Canon of the Council of Trent, which pronounces an
Anathema against such as hold, Session 23. Canon. 7.
that Orders may not be conferred without the consent or call of the People; or
of the Secular Powers. Methinks Canonical Elections should be such as are made
according to the ancient Canons, and in the Form prescribed by the Custom and
Constitutions of the ancient Church. Those that have any sort of knowledge of
Antiquity can never say that the ancient Canons do declare with the Council of
Trent, that the consent and the call of the People is not necessary to a lawful
Ordination. There is no going on with instances to the Primitive times, for
that were to oppress the Reader with the multitude as well as to convince him
by the strength of Testimonies. I shall therefore pass by Matthias and
Barsabas, who were presented to God to choose one by Lot to complete the number
of the Apostles, Acts 1.13.
and their being elected by the whole Assembly of Brethren. I shall say nothing
of St. Cyprian's refusing to establish a Subdeacon or a Chanter without
consulting his People. Epist 33, 34. and 37.
In the Ordination of Clerks, says this holy Martyr to his People, we are wont,
my dear Brethren, to consult you, and to weigh in a Public Assembly the
manners and virtues of such as are to be received. It is he that says in his 68
Epistle, that chiefly to the People belongs the right of electing of Priests
worthy of that Vocation, and to reject the unworthy. It is he that describing
the Canonical Election of a Bishop, Epist. 55. 7.
says, That he is elected and chosen by the suffrages of all the People with
peace: that is, without divided opinions, and without heats and contests. I
shall not mention the People of Cyzicus, who chose themselves a Bishop, as
Socrates tells us in the seventh Book of his History, Chapter 28. Theodoret in
his fourth Book, Chapter 22. speaks of a Letter of Peter Bishop of Alexandria,
Successor to St. Athanasius, where in accusing the Ordination of Lucius a
pretended Bishop, he acquaints us what were Canonical Ordinations: That man was
not established by the Assembly of Bishops, by the suffrage of the Clergy, and
at the request of the People. The same thing is to be seen in the Synodal
Epistle of the Council of Constantinople, the second General, where the Fathers
say, Theodor. Hist. l. 6. c. 9.
That they have established Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, in the presence
of the Emperor Theodosius, and by the approbation of all the Clergy, and of
all the People. I shall not speak of the Election of St. Ambrose Bishop of
Milan, which was done by the People; nor shall I bring an hundred other Proofs
than I am able to produce, to demonstrate that the voice of the People is
necessary in all Canonical Ordinations and Elections, I will only say, that in
those Ages wherein the Discipline of the Church began extremely to relax, it
was yet acknowledged, that according to the ancient Canons Elections ought to
be made by the Votes of the People, or at least by their consent. Gratian, who
lived about the middle of the twelfth Century, does in his Decretal bring
diverse proofs of this matter. For instance, in the Canon quanto, there is an
Extract out of the second Book of the Epistles of St. Gregory the Great, drawn
from Epist. 30. Distinct. 63.
Chap. 69. wherein the Pope, after the death of Laurence, Bishop of Milan,
orders to Elect him a Successor, not by the Votes of the Clergy only, but of
all the People. And because many of the People of Milan were at that time
retired to Genoa, to avoid the Calamities of War, Gregory requires that persons
be sent to Genoa to take the Votes of the absent. In the Canon Plebs
Diotrensis, he relates an Ordinance of Gelasius, who lived in the year 492. by
which that Pope declares, that a Bishop is to be chosen by the suffrage of all
the People. Leo I. was Bishop of Rome thirty or forty years before this
Gelasius: In the 87. of his Epistles, he says it is necessary to render an
Election Canonical, that the chief of the Laity do give their Votes, as Gratian
reports it in the same Distinction, in the Canon Vota civium. Again, in the
Canon Sacrorum we have an Ordinance drawn from the Capitula of Charlemagne, and
of Louis le Delonnaire his Son, which declares that Bishops are to be elected
and established by the Votes of the People, and of the Clergy, and not
otherwise. One might descend yet lower, to the Canonical Elections made by the
Votes of the People nearer to our times. But it is not needful, and possibly
what we have already spoken of this matter is superfluous, this Article not
being contested. It remains then only to remark, that this so constant practice
of the pure and primitive Church, is condemned as Heretical by the Council of
Trent. It will without question be replied, that this Canon of the Council
concerns only the Ordination of Priests, and not the Election of Bishops: that
the Council only condemns the Lutheran Opinion, that Vocation depends of the
People; and does not condemn the Canonical Election of Bishops, made by the
Votes of the People. But the Canon immediately following shows the vanity of
this reply, wherein the Council declares, that such Bishops as have been
promoted by the only authority of the Pope, without any Assembly of Bishops,
consent of Clergy, or suffrage of the People, are true and lawful Bishops; and
Anathema is pronounced against all that believe otherwise. Is not that a
condemnation of the Sentiments of the Fathers, who say that a Bishop who is not
elected by his Clergy, chosen by his People, and consecrated in an Assembly of
Bishops, is not a true Bishop? When the Council says, that a Bishop who is
neither elected by his Clergy, chosen by his People, nor Consecrated by other
Bishops, is yet a lawful Bishop, if sent by the Pope. If this be not to
anathematise Canonical Elections, there is no such thing as common sense; or
else it is come in fashion for things to be expressed by terms of just opposite
signification. How can it be, that it is not intended to exclude the People
from the right of giving their Suffrages in the Election of Bishops, by the
Canon which says that Consent and Vocation are not necessary to the validity of
Ordination? For if the People have no voice in the Election of a Priest, how is
it that they may vote in the Election of Bishops, superior to Priests? If it
be further replied, that the Election and the Ordination both of Priest and
Bishop are to be distinguished; that the People may have voice in the Election,
but can have none in the Ordination. I answer, that Ordination is but a
consequent of Election; and when the People vote in the Election of a Pastor,
they do it to the Ordination. But in the Roman Church the People have no voice,
neither for Election, nor Ordination. This therefore ought to be a fixed and
determined Point among all that wish for the re-establishing of Canonical
Elections, i. e. that the Council of Trent has erred in destroying them. It
only remains to see whether it be an Error simply in Discipline, or in
Doctrine. But this can admit of no difficulty: the two Canons of the Council of
Trent, which ruin Canonical Elections, are in the Decree of the Doctrine of
the Sacrament of Orders; and not in that of Reformation, which relates to
Discipline. And indeed it is clearly a Point of Doctrine that absolutely
depends upon that great Principle maintained against the Court of Rome by the
Followers of Gerson; that is, that the Keys were given, not to the Person of
St. Peter, but to the whole Church: This, says the Author of the Apology for
Gerson, is the principal Point of the Controversy, In Prafations.
that this most Orthodox Doctor lays down, as does St. Austin, for a most
strong and firm support of the Sentiments of the University of Paris, that
Jesus Christ immediately and by himself gave the Keys to the whole Church in
General, and considered as a Body, to the intent that the power of them might
be exercised by one. And consequently St Peter, and the other Prelates
considered apart, are in possession of the Keys but ministerially and
instrumentally, as representing the whole Church, to which the Keys do
appertain principally, and in respect of dominion. Vide Tract. 124. in Joh. and
Tract. 50.
It is certain that St. Austin's opinion is, that Christ gave the Keys to the
whole Church in general, as composed of the People and of the Clergy. Now it
that be so, most certainly the Votes both of the People and of the Clergy are
necessary to a lawful Ordination. For if the Keys belong to Christians in
general, they are not to be entrusted but by a general consent.

This may suffice to show, that the Council of Trent has erred even by the
confession of a great part of the Church of Rome, and that it has erred in
points of Doctrine. I will only add a word or two about Clandestine Marriages.
The Council in Session 24. has declared them to be null. This is a point of
Doctrine; for it is a question that directly touches the matter of Sacraments;
that is to say, Whether the Church can invalidate an action which was till then
a true Sacrament. For the Council declares that Clandestine Marriages are true
Sacraments, and at the same time declares them to be null and void. It must
therefore have a Power of annulling true Sacraments. And this is a question of
Right, and a point of Doctrine, if ever there were any. Nevertheless upon this
point, which is a matter of Doctrine, the Church of Rome does not conceive her
self bound to believe that the Council has not erred.

Treatise of the Interd^^^ of Paul V. First Propositi^^
The Divines of the Republic of Venice, tell us, that the Decree of the
Invalidity of Clandestine Marriages, which belongs to the matter of the
Sacrament, according to the universal Opinion, is not obligatory in places
where the Council has not been promulgated: So that it is agreed on all hands,
that in such places Clandestine Marriages are good. To conclude, it were unjust
to oblige us to have a better Opinion of the Council of Trent, than the very
Fathers of that Council had. But to consider the manner of their words and
actions, it is a very hard matter to think that they themselves were convinced
that that Assembly was infallible. There can be nothing more true and more
judicious than what was said by Baptista Cigale Bishop of Albenga, when the
Canons upon the matter of the Sacraments were to be formed; That no Man ever
quitted his Opinion merely because condemned; and that when Doctors remit
matters to the Judgment of the Church, it is no more than a civility and should
not be abused. This Man spoke as he thought; and I am mistaken if one that
talks thus be well satisfied that Councils are infallible. If an instance be
required of the truth of this expression of the Bishop of Albenga, it is found
in this very Council, in the conduct of the Archbishop of Granada, and of the
Spaniards upon the question, Whether our Lord did Sacrifice himself in the
Institution of the Eucharist? It is certainly an important question, the famous
Controversy of the Sacrifice of the Mass depending absolutely upon it. The
Archbishop and his Partisans after the decision of the matter, persevered in
their Opinion, and even in their opposition, until the very moment the Decree
was published. They were not, in all appearance, convinced that the Council was
infallible; but on the contrary, they seemed strongly persuaded that it had
erred in a point of Doctrine of great importance.

These are the Principal reasons brought by the Protestants to evince that they
cannot with justice be obliged to submit to the Decisions of the Council of
Trent. They have also other Reasons that persuade them that they are obliged
not to submit to it: as that they believe that this Council has established
Errors that destroy the true Religion. But it is not our intent to report or
examine them.

It is manifest that the understanding of the Reasons we have produced, does
wholly depend upon knowing the History of this Council. And consequently it is
highly necessary for all such Protestants to be well instructed in this History
as are desirous to be able to defend the refusal they make as Protestants to
submit to the Council of Trent. The difficulty may be, to find a faithful
Historian who may be credited in the matter. For it is certain that every one
is not to be believed in it. We are told, that the Collections that the
Lutherans may have made upon the conduct of the Council, can deserve but little
Faith; that they were Parties; that Objects are strangely transformed by
Passion; and that a relation by the Pen of an Author partial and by assed
carries with it the tincture of his Passions. But it has pleased God in his
Providence to raise up even in the Church of Rome, a Wise, a Moderate, a
Judicious and sincere Man, one that in a word was the greatest Man of his Age,
who has carefully wrote this History. He has all the Perfections required to
complete an Historian. Of great Judgment, and Abilities, strong and clear
Sense, perfectly instructed in Affairs, of a vast penetration, and one that
wanted no kind of assistance needful to the completing his Work. When this
Author began to appear in the World, the memory of the Council of Trent was
still fresh in Men's Minds; so that he may very well pass for a contemporary
Author. He was a Neighbor to the place where the things he writes of had been
transacted. He lived in a City full of Curious Persons, who had collected
Memorials of what had passed in this great Affair: and was himself one that
kept correspondence with all the Learned Men of Europe. Nay, he had great
intimacy with Oliva Camillo, who had been Secretary to the Cardinal of Mantua
Legate and President of the Council in the last Convocation; and there is no
doubt but he drew considerable advantages to his Work from such a Person, who
had been an Eyewitness of all that had passed. Now since this Author was
neither Lutheran nor Protestant, he is not in reason to be suspected of the
Church of Rome: and as he was no servile Idolater of the Roman Court, he ought
not to be suspected of the Protestants. There shines indeed throughout his
whole Work an Air of sincerity and honesty, which happily united to his vast
Abilities has made him pass as unquestionably the ablest of his Age in the Art
of writing History. But in an Age so depraved as ours, it is dangerous to be
honest. The Sincerity of Father Paul has raised against him a multitude of
Enemies. The Court of Rome endeavors to make him pass for a Villain, an
Impostor, and the most Profligate of Men; and his Work for a malevolent and
poisonous Satyr. And yet to so many important Truths by him laid open to the
World, nothing but Scurrilities are opposed; till at last after forty years
Cardinal Pallavicini it seems bethought himself to publish a new History of the
Council of Trent, or if you please an Answer to Father Paul, for he cites him
and refutes him in every Page. This Work appeared with all the External
Advantages that can well recommend a Book. It had Pope Alexander VII. to whom
it was dedicated, for Patron; and for Author, one of the, so called, Princes of
the Church. One that was of a Society well acquainted with the Arts of engaging
Men's Minds; and one that in this Work defended a Darling Cause favored and
supported by the Number and Quality of its Partisans. And yet with all this, he
has not been able to attract all that applause and approbation that the Court
of Rome had hoped. Men judged that he came much too late to instruct them in
the Transactions of this Council. Nor indeed is an Opinion once settled so
easily shaken off. After having left (...) not be forgotten, he takes care to
have it repeated in an Epistle Dedicatory, that he causes his Bookseller to
make to the second Volume. Yet all that knew him affirm him to have been one of
the most Wise and Pious Men, of great Moderation in his Passions, and very
Religious. The Proof the Cardinal brings of his Accusation is this, that Father
Paul having all the Heretical Opinions, did yet live in the Communion of the
Catholic Church; which showed a settled Contempt of Religion. This sure is a
rash way of reasoning. It is true, that by the Principles of the Court of Rome
Father Paul was a Heretic; for he did not believe that the Pope was absolute
Lord of the Church, that he had Power to Excommunicate Princes, and interdict
their Dominions at his pleasure: He did not believe there was any Obligation
for a blind Obedience to the Pope's Commands: He did believe it very possible
for the Pope to err, and that there is no submission due to his Errors: And he
highly disapproved that corruption in Discipline and Manners every where
prevalent, but chiefly in the Papal Court. I must confess that according to the
Principles of Cardinal Pallavicini, and those of his Party, this is enough to
make him pass at Rome for Impious and an Atheist. And yet Father Paul in all
his contests with the Pope for the Republic of Venice, has always spoken of,
what they call, the Holy See, with the greatest respect imaginable. He lived
and died in his Religion with the greatest Devotion in the World. He was most
exact in the observation of all the Ceremonies of his Church. And though he was
of a nice and tender Constitution, yet would he never dispense with himself in
the keeping of Lent, even to seventy years of Age. In a word, he was an Atheist
after the same manner that an infinite number of Persons of Virtue and Honor
in France, Flanders and Germany are so, who will not be Slaves to the Court of
Rome, who wish that several things were reformed in the Church; and yet
disapprove the Separation of the Protestants.

It had been a surprising thing, for a Jesuit to write the History of
Lutheranism, without frequent Blows at Father Paul, It is not therefore to be
wondered at, if Father Maimbourg treats him sometimes a little roughly. Though
it must yet be said, that he does it with less rudeness than the Cardinal. As I
do not judge it needful to enter into the Particulars of the Accusations of
Cardinal Pallavicini for the justification of Father Paul, because it would
draw me too far; so for the same reason I shall not amuse my self to justify
him in certain matters wherein Father Maimbourg accuses him; though it were
very easy to show that Father Paul is more in the right than Father Maimbourg.

But yet I cannot but here take some notice of what a sufficient known Author
says in a little Book, containing Reflections upon History, and upon the Art of
writing History. This Author judges of the Quality and Merit of Historians
methinks after a very Magisterial manner. Among others he speaks of Father
Paul, and says; Page 125.
Never was anything written with greater wit, or with less reason and truth. He
is facetious upon all occasions, that he may not be thought angry; and is much
too airy in a subject so serious. If this Author had consulted Thuanus, to whom
the French owe some respect, his History being an honor to their Country, he
would not have given such a Character of the Historian of the Council of Trent;
for he would have seen that these two great men do perfectly agree. For my
part, by our modern Authors good leave, I shall much rather give credit to M.
de Salo, a famous Counselor in the Parliament of Paris, Author of the first
Journals under the name of the Sieur de Hedouville: And thus he speaks in the
Journal of 23 of March, 1665. As Cardinal Pallavicini has ordered it, one
cannot read nor understand his Book, without also reading Father Paul's. And
then there is some danger, that History being very well done, that one may
prefer it before the Cardinals, which may be truer, but is not more probable.
It is easy to ununderstand the meaning of these words from so prudent a person
as M. de Hedouville. I am tempted to believe that the Author of the Reflections
upon the Art of writing History has never read the History of Father Paul,
because he says that that Historian makes mirth with every thing, and is much
too airy in so serious a subject. Whereas never was any Work of a more
different Character, more wise, more moderate, more free from foolish trisling
mirth. So that, because in the body of so large a Work there are found some few
Railleries of Persons dissatisfied with the Council, reported with the fidelity
of an exact Historian, to call this a continual drolling, is willingly to
expose his Reputation and his Judgment. But if in this particular I was much
surprised, I could hardly believe my eyes in reading another Period some few
Pages following in the same Book; That this History is a Satyr upon the Roman
Church and Religion, Page 130.
of which he exposes a train of knaveries, to be revenged of the Pope, for
deluding him with the vain hopes of being made a Cardinal. This is surprising
indeed (...) and permission, and with a Preface giving it high Eulogies of
Sincerity. But France is not a place where Libels and Satyrs against the Roman
Church are published with approbation and permission.

True it is, that Father Paul lays open the very bottom of the conduct of the
Roman Court, and plainly shows it to be governed merely by humane Policy. Yet
are his Enemies very imprudent to impute that to him as a Crime; because that
Imputation constrains his Defenders to make it apparent that the History of
Cardinal Pallavicini is a thousand times more injurious to the Council of Trent
and to the Court of Rome, than is that written by Father Paul. This latter
indeed is accused to have expressed discontent and spite against that Court,
for discovering the Maxims of its Policy; and showing its aim to be only Power
and Greatness; and that it had no regard to the Interests of Piety and
Religion. But it is most certain that Cardinal Pallavicini does expose it under
that Character extremely more than Father Paul. The Father contents himself
with remarking its Conduct, and giving us the History of its Actions, without
saying much of its Maxims. But the Cardinal gives us the naked View of all the
Maxims of the Roman Polity, shows us the very Basis of it, and that it consists
of humane and carnal things, blended with things dangerous and criminal. It is
true, that in proposing the Maxims of this Polity, he undertakes also to defend
it; and makes a mighty merit of it in those that are the Guides and Directors
of the Roman Church: whilst those that are of contrary Sentiments pass with
him for sottish, ignorant and blind Zealots. But in praising these Criminal
Maxims, he does not make them better. The difference between Father Paul and
Cardinal Pallavicini is this, Father Paul in giving us the History of the
Polity of the Court of Rome, has done it in such a manner as plainly shows his
dislike of it; and Pallavicini represents it too as it is, but wounds it deeper
by his Apology, than its Enemies do by their most severe Invectives. For had he
gone about to show us, that the Maxims of the Court of Rome, and the Principles
of its Morals, are directly opposite to the Spirit of Christ and Christianity,
he could have gone no better way to work. The Gospel represents the Church as a
Society of People who should take up their Cross, ^enounce the World and
worldly Maxims and Policies, and even themselves; who should despise the Pomp,
the Wealth and Pleasures of the World, and only glory in their sufferings,
their Poverty, their Mortification, and their Good Works; and who should draw
Unbelievers to the Yoke of Christ by ways of mildness, by humility, and by the
exercise of a sincere and ardent Charity. But let us see after what sort
Pallavicini represents the Roman Church.

1. L. 1. c. 23.
He confesses that she mixes in her conduct carnal and worldly Polity; that her
present Government is framed by the rules of this World, and maintains that to
be according to the intention of Christ.

2. Ibidem.
He confesses that the Churches aim is to augment her Wealth and Glory, and
says, that she ought to endeavor to possess the perfection of humane
happiness, for that Christ has framed her in the most fit manner to enjoy such
happiness; and so as that if Plato and Aristotle were living, they would avow
that according to the Rules of their worldly Wisdom and Philosophy, L. 12. c. 3.
there could not be a more noble and excellent form of Republic, than the
Christian.

3. And therefore, as according to the Idea of the Wise Men of this World, a
Republic to be fortunate and well formed, ought to be opulent, flourishing in
Wealth, abounding in pleasures, and full of Wise Men according to humanity, L.
19 c. 9. L. 17. c. 10. L. 23. c. 3. Introd. c. 6. L. 24. c. 12.
so he will needs have it that the Church should be the same, and confesses
that the Church of Rome is formed upon this Idea.

4. In owning that this Church makes use of all the ways, accused for
Simonical, to heap up Money, he undertakes to defend this Simony, and all the
means she uses to maintain her Opulence; as First Fruits, Pensions, Commendams.
Pluralities, frequent Jubilees, Indulgences, and Dispensations given for money.

5. L. 1. c. 2. and alibi passim. Introd. c. 10.
He ridicules those that would reform the Church according to the Model and
Idea that the Gospel gives us of it. He terms such a Reformation, an imaginary
Whimsey, only sought by People pushed on by blind Zeal, and filled with
extravagant conceptions: Men that are enslaved to vulgar Opinions, L. 1. c. 25.
L. 16. c. 10.
who know nothing of the World, nor have any understanding in Affairs. Pope
Adrian VI. who acknowledged the corruption of the Court of Rome, and was
willing to have reformed it, was, according to Cardinal Pallavicini, one of
those blind Zealots who feed themselves with vain imaginations: His designs
were abstracted Ideas, L. 2. c. 6.
lovely in contemplation, but whose form bare no proportion to the condition of
the matter. He was to blame to make so free a confession of the corruption of
the Court of Rome; L. 2. c. 7.
it was too severely to censure his Predecessors; and an indiscreet Zeal: In a
word, such kind of People are the very Pests of public Tranquillity.

6. L. 17. c. 14.
According to Pallavicini, nothing is more horrid to the Church than Poverty,
and she ought to nourish this abhorrence in the minds of Men; and her self
strive to avoid this evil. L. 9. c. 9.
Those therefore who say, that the greater part of the Goods of the Church
ought to be given to the poor, are the Churches Enemies; and the Cardinal
maintains that to do so were directly contrary to the humane happiness of the
Church, to Gods Institution, and to Nature. Ibidem.
He approves very well that the Goods of the Church be employed to maintain the
pomp and luster of the Court of Rome, composed of Cardinals, Abbots, and the
rest of the numerous Officers. L. 8. c. 17.
He pretends that it is by this splendor that Infidels and Mahometans may be
converted to the Faith.

7. And the better to bring in Infidels, and preserve to the Church those that
are already of it, according to Cardinal Pallavicini the Court of Rome
treasures up delights and pleasures, affects Shows and Theaters, and therein to
outdo the magnificence of the World, that so the World may be vanquished by its
own Weapons. L. 1. c. 3.


8. In all respects, according to Pallavicini, the Court of Rome sets itself to
make Laws to flatter Sense. L. 1. c. 25.
It is not, says he, Gods intent to root out of our minds our natural
Inclinations: Men are naturally fond of Pleasre, Wealth, and Honor; and averse
to Poverty, and meaness, etc. Introduct. c. 8.
it is fit to accommodate the Laws, and form the Church according to these
inclinations; regard must be had to the dregs of Adam, and to what sort of
People we live among. It is a Maxim not absolutely true, that Evil is not to be
suffered to the end that Good may come of it. The Cardinal proves it by the
Example of those dissolute Women, who are prompted to prostitute themselves; L.
2. c. 8.
Come sivide nella permissione delle meretrici. According to this Maxim things
must be suited to the Frailties of the Persons of which the Church consists,
and they must be so governed as God and Nature send them into the World.

9. L 9 c 9.
He represents the Church of Rome as averse to Reformation. L. 9. c 16.
It is a Word, says he, that will always sound ill, not only in the Ears of
the Courtiers, but of the strictest Fraternities. And therefore he confesses
that the Reformation made by the Council of Trent was very inconsiderable, and
yet it is despised at Rome, where its Canons are dispensed with, and its
Decisions eluded; because the Council ordained that no Dispensation should be
granted but for weighty Reasons: L. 23. c. 8.
It is judged, says he, that the great Sums that are given for the purchase of
Dispensations, are a sufficient Reason to grant them.

10. According to Cardinal Pallavicini, Men are called by the Court of Rome to
the Priesthood, and other sacred Functions, whose business is the Salvation of
Souls, by the hope of Pleasure, Wealth, and Greatness. From thence is the
Spring and Origin of their Virtue; from thence their Calling: and that which
awakens and animates their Zeal is the hope cherished by each Individual of
becoming a Bishop, L. 1. c. 25.
a Cardinal, L. 3. c. 10.
and even Pope. Thus Ambition and the desire of Glory are the Spurs that
quicken and excite Men in the service of the Church. L. 12. c. 5.
It is therefore that the Church heaps up Riches, Crosiers, Mitres, and
Benesices, to draw Men by these cords of Humanity. Judge then what must be the
Zeal of these Pastors, who are only moved by these worldly things to consecrate
themselves to God. L. 8. c. 17.
And yet, says Pallavicini, the Court of Rome holds that Abundance is the
Breast that nourishes Virtue in the Church. L. 23. c. 3. and L. 1. c. 25.
And therefore in the same Spirit he maintains, that humane Felicity and
temporal Prosperity may be sound at Rome and in the Pope, as in their natural
Spring. That all the World ought to pay Tribute there to support the Majesty of
that Court: And that as the Sacraments though Corporal, are the Sources of
Spiritual Graces; so the Goods of this World are Springs of Virtue in the
Church. L. 23. c. 12. L. 8. c. 17. L. 6. c. 3.


11. As for the Pope, according to the Maxims of the Court of Rome, he is
Monarch of the Universe, his Power unlimited and independent of all Creatures;
all Kings ought to be his Tributaries, and he may dispose of the Estates of all
Men though against their will. L. 1. c. 25. L. 2. c. 26.
The Pope is as the Stomach of the Body of the Church, to receive all the Goods
of the World, and distribute them to the Members of the Clergy. L. 24. c. 10.
He says it were no harm if the Pope were actually Master of all the
possessions of the World to distribute to each according to his merit, without
any regard to the rights of Inheritance, by which those matters descend from
men to their Posterity.

12. As for Councils, they are, say they, more than unprositable Assemblies:
they are the most Fatal Conjunctions that are made in the Heaven of the Church.
He owns that the Court of Rome, L. 16. c. 10.
when the convening of the Council of Trent was spoken of, Introduct. c. 10.
was extremely fearful and apprehensive of it, and did all that was possible to
prevent it; and that chiefly because Councils are apt to meddle in reforming.
It would be therefore a tempting of God, to assemblies a General Council: L.
16. c. 10.
and such Assemblies do commonly threaten a Schism.

13. L. 1. c. 25.
He says it is a folly to think of reforming the Present Church according to
the Model of the Ancient Church. He makes Lainez say, L. 21. c. ^^.
that those who required the re-establishing of Canonical Elections, were
provoked thereto by instinct of the Devil. L. 23. c. 10.
He says it is great foolishness to believe that what is Ancient, is better
than what is New: that the Church was in her Infancy when she was so severe,
but that now her Decrees are of a riper and more advanced Age: L. 1. c. 25.
that Societies change as Bodies do, and are to be governed according to their
Age: that the Church is to live after another manner in a more refined world:
L. 6. c. 4.
that what is called corruption, is a refined conduct of Ecclesiastical
affairs, requisite for the times: Introduct. c. 8.
that to talk of the Worlds being worse now than heretofore, is nothing but
vain prattle, and the Sentiments of those whose minds are enslaved to Vulgar
Opinions: that it were as ridiculous to go about to reduce the Church to her
first Purity and Simplicity, L. 1. c. 15.
as to think to oblige men to live upon Acorns. The first Councils understood
nothing with their holiness and simplicity. The Council of Trent was composed
of men of Worth and Parts, that understood the World. When Philip II. took
Trent in his way to Spain, the Legates made him a Magnificent Reception. They
causes a Palace to be erected upon the River of Adige, three hundred paces from
the City, and treated him there with a noble Entertainment, with a Comedy,
Dancing, and all sorts of Divertisements; that Prince himself dancing there.
Father Paul had forgotten this Notable Passage; tho so singular and remarkable.
The Ancient Councils, consisting of men un-refined, gave no Entertainments with
Balls and Comedies. This is the Picture Pallavicini gives us of the Conduct and
Maxims of the Council, and of the Court of Rome. And has he not given it an
admirable Description? Has Father Paul done any thing like it? Has he ever said
any thing more injurious to it? Or is it possible for the greatest Enemies of
the Church of Rome to give a more hideous Portraiture of the Morals by which
they govern themselves at Rome? Let it be no more said, that Father Paul, under
the name of a History of the Council of Trent, has made a Satyr against the
Court of Rome. For a hundred such Enemies as Father Paul can never prove so
injurious to it, as the Illustrious Historian has who undertook its defense.

But let it suffice to have spoken thus much of Father Paul's Work, a word or
two now of our own. In reading Father Paul's History one may remark two things:
The first, that it is filled with things absolutely necessary to be known of
all men, but more particularly of the Protestants. The second thing is, that it
is full of Theological Disputes and Reflections: which makes it indeed most
useful for Divines; but less fit for others. There is scarce any, but a
Professed Divine, who could have the patience to read a Folio Volume of seven
or eight hundred Pages, of which two Thirds are most subtle and intricate
School Disputes. Which having already been tedious to the Bishops who were of
the Audience, it is not to be thought strange that they are now tiresom to the
Readers. So that although this Work be exquisite in its kind, yet it must needs be
owned that it is useful but to a few.

The Original is in a Language that not many in this Country understand. The
Translation that we have of it, is not new enough to satisfy such as can
suffer nothing in our Language that has an air of Antiquity. Both the
Translation and the Original are full of Graces that can never decay. And yet
it is not to be denied but this Work has lost some of its Beauties by changing
Language. For these Reasons it falls out that this excellent Book is not so
much read as it ought to be. It has been therefore conceived that the rendering
this Work more Popular would be of great use to the World. And that is the
Design of the present Undertaking, there being nothing of importance forgotten
here, yet Brevity is observed. And as for the Theological Disputes, you have
here all that is Essential in them for the knowledge of the Nature and State of
the Controversies that were managed in the Council of Trent. You have the
Principal Arguments made use of by the several Parties for maintaining their
Opinions. But the tedious Discourses of the Divines and Prelates, which Father
Paul reports at length, and with great exactness, are here omitted. This
History will at least serve for these two ends: the one, to occasion that
abundance of People will inform themselves in the Conduct of this Council, who
had never done it, if they had no other means but that of Father Paul's
Voluminious Work. The other, to refresh the memory of those that have read that
Work, and let them review in little what there they saw more at large.

In some places there is a diversity as to Order between this History and that
of Father Paul; his being written in form of a Journal; which is the most
proper indeed for exactness, but is not always so pleasing to the Reader. Great
Affairs very rarely happen without interruption, several things intervene, and
one and the same day may produce diverse great Events. So that in observing the
Order of Days, one is obliged to take the Reader from a subject of which he
would fain see the Issue, and that makes him uneasy. In this History therefore
the Connection of things is observed; which in that of Father Paul are divided.
And tho I have here observed the Order and Number of Books, yet there are many
things in Father Paul's History at the end of the Books, which are at the
beginning here. Nay, there are some in a quite different Book; as the
circumstances of the great Quarrel between the French and Spaniards for
Precedence. They are dispersed in the three last Books of Father Paul; but are
here brought all together in the beginning of the eighth Book. This hint was
necessary, because such as may have the Curiosity to read any Transaction at
length, or to compare the two Histories, not finding their matter just where
they looked for it, might question the fidelity of the Present Historian. But I
begin to perceive that the length of this Discourse, is a little contrary to
the Design of this Work. For it being composed in favor of those who have
little leisure or inclination for long Reading; it is to be feared they will
complain, we have been somewhat too tedious in the Introduction.

THE HISTORY OF THE Council of TRENT.
BOOK I.
LEO. X.
IN the beginning of the fifteenth Century, the Sea of Rome being then
universally acknowledged as Supreme in all the Western Provinces, the state of
the Church was peaceable and quiet enough. There was indeed in the Valleys of
Piedmont a remnant of people, supposed to be descended from the Waldenses and
Albigenses, that retained the Opinions and Worship of their Ancestors, and
could neither be totally destroyed, nor yet reduced to obedience and
subjection: but these Mountaneers, being a dull and ignorant sort of people,
were incapable of forming any considerable party, or of propagating their
Sentiments amongst others; and the rather because that all their Neighbors
were possessed with a bad opinion of them, and had them generally in abhorrence
and detestation. Bohemia some of the same Waldenses, who went by the name of
Picards; and some of the followers of John Huss, called Calixtins and
Subutraquists, because they did communicate in both kinds. But these last
cannot be said to have been enemies, seeing in all things else they were
conformable to the Church of Rome; and though all these Separatists could have
united and joined together in judgment and interest; yet, were they unable to
make any great party, or to cause any considerable revolutions.

Contests betwixt Pope Julius II. and Lewis XII. of France.
It is true that in the beginning of the same Century, the Church of Rome had
been threatened with a Schism, through the conduct o^ Pope Julius II. a man of a
turbulent, haughty spirit, and a lover of War: for in the contests he had with
Lewis XII. of France, he had proceeded even to the excommunication of that
Prince. Lewis on the other side made a party against Julius, and the Cardinals
whom he had gained to his Faction were assembled at Pisa, in order to the
holding of a Council, and electing of another Pope; but the Death of Julius
happening opportunely at that time, put a period to those differences. Leo X.
of the House of Medicis was chosen in his place, the eleventh of March 1513,
who quickly reunited the separated Cardinals, and reconciled the King of
France to the holy See.

Leo X. had many good qualities for a Prince, but few of those that are
requisite for a good Pope: he was liberal, generous, gentile, civil, courteous,
and a lover of men of learning; but he was not over Devout, nor much addicted
to the affairs of Religion. He was magnificent and very expensive; insomuch
that for a supply to this profusion, he was soon forced to betake himself to
the means often practiced by the Court of Rome for raising of Money; Leo X.
sends Indulgences into Germany.
I mean, the emission and publication of Indulgences. Laurence Pucci Cardinal
of Santiquatro advised him to this expedient: The original of the tribute of
Indulgences.
and it was a kind of Tribute that took its rise in the Church after the
eleventh Century, and owes its original to the Croisades, which were made at
that time for the expedition and conquest of the Holy Land. Urban II. granted
Indulgences to all that would list themselves under the Cross, and engage in
that expedition. In subsequent Croisades, the same Indulgences were granted to
those who not being able to go in person, did send a Soldier to the Holy War:
at length those who desired the benefit of the Indulgences, but would neither
go nor send to the War, purchased their exemption by money. In process of
time, whenever the Court of Rome stood in need of money, they published a
distribution of Indulgences in favor of all that would contribute to their
necessities. Then were Rates set on Sins, and he that had a mind to compound
knew what he was to pay for the Crime he desired a Pardon for. Leo X. caused
therefore a Sale of these Pardons to be published, in all the Provinces subject
to the Church of Rome, and gave to his Sister Magdalene married to Francesco
Cibo Natural Son to Pope Innocent VIII. the profits that did accrue from the
distribution of these Indulgences in the Province of Saxony, and a great part
of Germany. Magdalene, for raising of this Tribute, made use of one Arembold,
who from a Genoese (...) Lutherans from the Church of Rome: for on the one
hand, the Universities of Louvain and Cologne burnt the writings of Luther:
Luther burns the Pope's Bull, and the Book of Decretals.
and on the other Luther assembled the University of Wittemberg, and obtained a
sentence, whereby not only the Pope's Bull, but all the Decretals were
condemned to the flames, which was accordingly executed. At the same time, for
his own Justification he published a Manifesto, wherein he accuses the Pope as
a Tyrant, for having usurped a Supremacy over Kings and Princes, and corrupted
the Doctrine of the Church; the Pope was thought to have raised this storm by
his Precipitance, and by an unseasonable and ill weighed Zeal; nor indeed could
the more moderate approve the Bull of Leo, they thought it violent, and were
amazed that with so little formality, he had ventured to decide matters of so
great importance. And as every one had a lash at that Bull, so the Grammarians
were pleased to play upon a Period in it, consisting of four hundred words,
inserted betwixt these two inhibentes omnibus, and these other, ne praefatos
errors asserere praesumant.

The Emperor Charles the Fifth, after the Death of his Grandfather Maximilian,
being in the Year 1520 chosen Emperor, next year after held a Diet at Worms,
concerning the Affairs of Religion. Luther cited to Worms before the Emperor
Charles the Fifth.
Luther was cited thither, came under safe conduct of the Emperor, and
appeared before him on the 17th of April; there he was exhorted to burn his
Books, and to recant; but he answered with the same resolution that brought him
thither; for his friends had done all they could to divert him from that
Journey, and had no other answer from him but that if Luther in that Diet, but
without any success; He would neither recant, nor condemn his Doctrine.
for no more could be obtained from him, but an acknowledgment that his manner
of writing was too eager and violent, which he promised to mend for the future;
they were about to secure his Person notwithstanding the Emperor's safe
conduct, according to the procedure of the Council of Constance in relation to
John Huss; but the Electour Palatine withstood it, and Charles the Fifth
himself being unwilling either to stain his reputation, or violate his promise
by such a Treachery, sent him home, resolving to prosecute him by fair means,
and to give him his hands full on it in an open Trial. Accordingly he was the
same year, and in the same Assembly accused and sentenced by an Edict past the
8th. of May, whereby Luther's writings were condemned to be burnt, The Edict of
Worms against Luther.
his Person to be seized within twenty days, and committed to prison, with
strict prohibition to all Princes and States to harbor or relieve him: but for
all this the Electour of Saxony secured him in a Castle, where he continued
Nine months, no man knowing where he was. And now did every one reckon it an
honor to appear in public against him; the University of Paris condemned his
Doctrine. Henry the Eighth of England, Henry VIII. King of England writes
against him.
who had followed his Studies in order to have been Archbishop of Canterbury
before the Death of his Elder brother, wrote likewise against him, for the
seven Sacraments, and the Authority of the Pope. Leo X. was grateful to that
Prince; and in recompense gave him the Title of Defender of the Faith, which
the Kings of England bear to this day. Luther answered all these writings, not
sparing Henry the Eighth, whom, without any respect to his dignity, he answered
with much sharpness and severity. All Europe was presently full of these
writings; and the heat of the controversy and quality of those who engaged in
the quarrel excited the Curiosity of many; every one was willing to know and
pry into the matter under debate, and that was the reason why many espoused the
Party of those who condemned Corruptions, and demanded the Reformation of the
Church.

Zurich receives the reformation of Zuinglius.
At the same time Zuinglius made great Progresses at Zurich: The Bishop of
Constance having sent thither the Pope's Bull, and the Edict of the Emperor,
exhorted the Senate to banish Zuinglius, and to continue in Submission and
Obedience to the Church of Rome; but Zuinglius wrote back to the Bishop
concerning that matter, and to all the Cantons of Suisserland. The Senate, at
length, appointed an Assembly of all the Divines within their Jurisdiction; the
Bishop of Constance sent thither James le Fevre, his great Vicar, who was after
Bishop of Vienna. This man did what lay in his Power to break up the Assembly,
and to obstruct all Debates about matters of Religion. Zuinglius persisted,
and, in fine, the Assembly being dissolved, the Senate made an order that the
Doctrine of the reformed Religion should be preached with full liberty. This so
sudden and violent growth of the Distemper, made all People wish for a general
Council, as the only remedy for restoring peace and tranquillity to the
Church. The Princes desired it in hopes by that means, to provide against the
Usurpations of the Priests and Bishops, who daily invaded the Estates of
Seculars: the People longed for it, for the reformation of the manners of the
Clergy which were horribly corrupted; the Sea of Rome seemed to desire it, to
support its tottering Authority: but Luther and his Adherents protested from
the beginning, that they would not submit to it, unless it were free, and the
Controversies decided only by the word of God. The Pope dreaded this remedy
worse than the Disease; he apprehended an Assembly where his Authority might be
struck at, and those Abuses reformed, from which the Court of Rome reaped so
much profit; besides all this, he was at a stand about the choice of the place,
he would with all his heart have held the Council either at Rome, or in any
other Town of the Ecclesiastic state, where he might have been absolute
Master; but he foresaw that this design must meet with great opposition;
however his death which happened about the latter end of the year 1521 put an
end to all his perplexities.

ADRIAN. VI.
After the death of Leo X. Adaian VI. is chosen in his place.
On the Ninth of January 1522 Adrian born in Utrecht, was chosen in his place;
this Election was somewhat rare, because Adrian at that time was absent from
Rome, and himself not so much as known there; he was then in Biscaye, and at
Victoria received the News of his promotion; but arrived in Rome about the end
of August the same year.

Adrian was reckoned an honest and well meaning man, P. Adrian desires to
reform the Church.
that did not approve the disorders Rome; he looked upon the Doctrine of Luther
as foolish and stupid, not thinking it capable to make any great progress, but
that those who had embraced that party, had only done it to be revenged of the
Clergy, for the oppression they suffered from them, and for the aversion they
had to the manners of the Churchmen; so that purposing by all means to pacify
these troubles, he took a resolution of reforming the Court of Rome. As for the
Doctrine he was only of opinion to give some Explanations concerning the
Efficacy of Indulgences, declaring that that Efficacy depends upon the works of
those that receive the Indulgences; so that they who neglect, or perform amiss
the works imposed upon them, receive no benefit from the Indulgences, but in
proportion to their works. Cardinal Cajetan a man consummated in School
Divinity, was, at the bottom, of the same Judgment with Adrian; but he told him
however that that Doctrine was not to be divulged, because it would extinguish
the Zeal that People had for Indulgences, and lessen the Authority of the Pope;
for, said he, if once the People be persuaded that the Efficacy of Indulgences
depends upon their own good works, they will look upon themselves as the cause
of the benefit they reap from them, and set light by the Pope, and the present
that he makes them: and farther they will easily be induced to believe that
their good works alone, are sufficient to procure them a full remission, if
they be allowed to think that the Efficacy of Indulgences depends upon their
good works. These reasons did preponderate with Adrian, insomuch that he joined
in opinion with the Cardinal, who thought fit, that the rigor of the ancient
penitential Canons should be revived, that thereby the Necessity of Indulgences
might appear; because when Sinners should see themselves obnoxious to twenty or
thirty years Penance according to the Canons, they would then easily
acknowledge the absolute Necessity of Indulgences, to ease them from such
severe pains; but the Congregation appointed by the Pope to enquire into that
affair, could not digest that resolution, and Laurence Pucci Cardinal of
Santiquatro powerfully withstood it.

But he could not succeed in the design of that Reformation.
Adrian, in the mean while did not wholly lay aside the design of reformation:
he sent for John Peter Caraffa Archbishop of Chieti, and Marcel Cazel Bishop of
Cajeta, that he might have the assistance of their Councils, because both were
held in great reputation for probity, and knowledge in the Discipline of the
Church. He was minded to have abolished the use of Dispensations, and to have
cut off every thing that looked like Simony; but when he came to cast about for
the means of effecting this, he found himself in great Perplexity. At length,
Francis Soderin Cardinal of Volterre, put a stop to all these specious designs
of reformation: He told the Pope that that was the way to puff up the Lutheran
party, that it would be a great blow to the Authority of the Church, by a
reformation to confess her possibility of erring; that Heretics would from
thence draw great advantages, and that the holy See would by that means lose
all its credit in the minds of the People; he concluded that Croisades were the
only expedient to root out growing Heresies; which he confirmed by the
Instance of that great success obtained by Innocent III. in the ruin of the
Albigenses by the way of force. Adrian yielded to his reasons, seeing he could
do no more but sigh in secret for the Disorders which he could not remedy
publicly. In the mean while he sent Francis Cherigat Bishop of Fabriano, to
the Diet at Nuremberg; he wrote to the Princes, Adrian sends a Letter into
Germany confessing that the Church and Court of Rome are corrupted.
and particularly to the Duke of Saxony, exhorting them to extirpate the
Lutherans by Fire and Sword. He confessed to them, that there were great abused
in the Court of Rome, and that the original of all the Mischief came from
thence, promising to remedy it, and in the first Place to reform the holy See,
in imitation of our Lord Jesus Christ, who in reforming of Jerusalem, began at
the Temple, out of which he drove the Merchants and Money Changers; but he
excused himself that that was not the business of one day; at the same time he
complained of the disorders of the Regular and Secular Priests of Germany, of
which the one forsook their Monasteries to live again in the World, and the
others married, to the great Scandal of the Church. The Diet made answer in a
kind of ambiguous manner, but which did insinuate to the Pope, that all the
Mischief sprung from the Court of Rome; and that therefore before any violent
course could be used against the Lutherans, it was necessary to attempt the
Reformation of the Ecclesiastics; they demanded that the Annates which had
been formerly appointed for carrying on the War against the Turks might be no
more sent to Rome, but that they should remain in the Empire, in the hands of a
Receiver to be named, for which he should be accountable. In a word, they
solicited the Pope speedily to call a free Council in Germany, where all, as
well Seculars as Churchmen might have free liberty to speak their opinions.
This discourse did not at all please the Nuncio, and therefore he addressed
himself in a manner not very satisfactory to the Diet; for his answer tended
only to let them know, that Germany ought to suffer with patience, and expect
the Reformation from the holy See: and withal told them that he took it ill,
that in demanding a Council, the Diet had added these words, with the Consent
of his Imperial Majesty. The secular Princes who felt the oppression stopped not
there; they met by themselves, and formed that famous writing, which they
called centum gravamina, the hundred Grievances; the Nuncio had notice of it,
but he departed before it was drawn up fair; and therefore they themselves sent
it to the Pope. These hundred Grievances related chiefly to the oppression that
the Seculars suffered from the Churchmen, the Usurpation of their Estates by
the Clergy, the means practiced by the Churchmen and Court of Rome to pillage
the People, the Annates, Reservations, abuse of Commendums, the selling of the
Sacraments, and Burying, the Exemptions of the Clergy, and the manner of
transferring Causes from Civil to Ecclesiastic Courts. And because the
Emperor Charles the V. was then in Spain, the Diet that was held in his
absence, did both act and speak with greater Liberty: so the Recess, that is to
March 1523. and immediately thereafter all the Memoires of it were printed; to
wit, the Pope's Brief, the Nuncio's instructions, the Diets answer, and the
hundred Grievances. Those that were engaged in the Interests of the Court of
Rome, were not well pleased to find in the Brief the frank and ingenuous
Confession of Adrian, that the original of the Mischief proceeded from the
Corruption of his Court, and the looseness of the Discipline and Manners of the
Church. This Diet did certainly much forward the Affairs of the Lutherans: but
Adrian lived not long after the Return of his Nuncio, for he died the 13th. of
September 1523. without being much lamented by the Court of Rome, who stood in
awe of his Probity, and the sincere Intentions which he still retained in his
Heart of reforming the Abuses of that Court.

CLEM. VII.
Adrian dies without any thing done. Julius of Medicis is chosen in his place
by the name of Clement VII.
On the nineteenth of November, Julius of Medicis, Cousin to Leo X. was chosen
Pope, who took the name of Clement VII. he was certainly a man of less virtue
than Adrian, but of more wit, greater politic cunning and address, and more
skill in the true interests of the Court of Rome. He took a course quite
opposite to that of Adrian, and was not of opinion to acknowledge so frankly
the disorders which he intended not to meddle with. Nevertheless seeing he
observed in the centum gravamina, He sends another Legate into Germany to the
Diet at Nuremberg.
that most of the Articles referred to the German Clergy, he thought fit in
some things to satisfy the Germans. He therefore sent Laurence Campeggio
Cardinal of St. Anastase to the Diet at Nuremberg, which was held in the year
1524. Adrian: for the Cardinal spoke not a word of the hundred Grievances, but
only offered a Reformation of the inferior Clergy. The Diet made answer that
they were in the same mind as they had been the year before, and that they had
given in writing what they demanded, and what they thought necessary for
composing the troubles of Religion. The Cardinal answered that neither the Pope
nor he had ever heard of any Writings being presented to the College of
Cardinals; that indeed some Copies of the centum gravamina had been seen at
Rome, but that it was not believed, that that Writing had been framed by the
Princes of the Empire, but was rather looked upon as the work of some private
person a great enemy to the Court of Rome. He added, that the Pope was ready to
satisfy the Germans touching the Reformation, and that he himself had a full
power to set about it. The Diet built no great hopes upon these fair promises:
however they deputed some Princes to confer with the Cardinal, but these
conferences produced nothing at all; for the Princes persisted in demanding the
Reformation of the Court of Rome, and the Cardinal refused it, nor would he
engage any farther, than in reforming the Clergy of Germany. In that he was as
good as his word, for he made a kind of Reformation, which reached only the
puny Clergy; but it was rejected by the Diet, who perceived that it made only
for raising the power and greatness of the Prelates, by lessening their
inferiors. The 18. of April the Diet passed their Edict, the Emperor being
absent, as he was the year before. Amongst other things it was concluded in
that Recess, that a free Council should, by the Pope and consent of the
Emperor, with all expedition be convened in Germany; that the States of the
Empire should assemble at Spire, to examine Luther's Books, and to advise about
the measures that ought to be taken concerning matters of Religion till that
Council were called; and in the mean time that the Magistrates should take
care, that the Gospel should be preached according to the Doctrine of Authors
approved by the Church, and that no Pamphlets or Books injurious to the Court
of Rome should be published.

The Legate assembles the Catholic Princes at Ratisbonne and obtains a Decree
against Luther.
The Legate being altogether dissatisfied with these resolutions, prevailed with
the Catholic Princes to assemble at Ratisbonne; where in presence of Ferdinand
the Emperor's Brother, he got a Decree past against the Lutherans, which
commanded that the Edict of Worms should in all points be put in execution
against Luther. He did more, for he persuaded those Princes to admit of that
gentle Reformation of the Clergy, whereof he had proposed the Scheme; and in a
word, got these Catholic Princes to enter into a League defensive for the
preservation of their Estates and Religion. The rest of the Princes and States
of Germany, without whom this Assembly at Ratisbonne was held, complained
loudly against it: but the Cardinal Legate did not much value that, his
intention being only to serve his Master according to his humor, by staving
off the Council, and making a Reformation by the sole authority of the Pope,
without the interposition of any other. And indeed, as affairs stood, Pope
Clement was convinced that the calling of a Council was the most pernicious
counsel that could be given him.

The Emperor is dissatisfied with the Diet of Nuremberg; and writes thereupon
sharply States of Germany
The Emperor, who was in Spain, was as ill satisfied with the Edict of
Nuremberg, as the Legate was: because the thought they had encroached upon his
authority, in treating of affairs of that importance in this absence. He
thereupon wrote to the Princes of the Empire pretty sharply, letting them to
know that he did not take it well that they had infringed the Edict of Worms,
by which al Luther's Books were prohibited; seeing by the Decree of Nuremberg,
none but defamatory Libels, violent and reproachful Writings were forbidden.
He blamed them for having been too high and peremptory in their way of
demanding a Council, that it was the Pope's concern and his own, and that they
ought to have applied themselves to him, that he might have obtained it of the
Pope. However, as to the main he confessed that he agreed with them in opinion,
concerning the necessity of a Council; which he promised to take care of, and
have it convened in such time and place as that himself might be present. After
all he charged them to assemble to more at Spire, and commanded them to obey
the Edict of Worms. The Germans could not tell what to make of this imperious
style, who were not wont to be so treated by the Emperors Charles his
Predecessors: but the Emperor knew what he did; he thought thereby to draw
the Pope to his side against the King of France, with whom he was then in War.

The supervenient Troubles stifle all thoughts of a Council.
All things seemed now to look as if a Council should be held maugre the
intentions of the Court of Rome but the following year 1525. produced such
troubles and dismal revolutions, that there was a necessity of breaking off all
Negotiations in Germany: the Bores revolted from their obedience to the Princes
and Magistrates; and being animated by a furious spirit of Anabaptism, which
began that year to appear, they broke out into strange and astonishing
disorders, in the Countries bordering on the Rhine. The Battle of Pavia was
fought in Italy, and King Francis the first, there taken Prisoner; which
success so raised the heart of Charles, that he thought nothing impossible for
him to atchieve. This made the States of Germany begin to be jealous of their
Liberty, and to enter into a League against the Emperor; when at the same time
the Pope grew likewise apprehensive of that Prince's power in Italy.

The Troubles being over, the Negotiations about matters of Religion were again
renewed.
The year following, the Negotiations about the affairs of Religion were again
set on foot: and about the end of June the States of the Empire met and held a
Diet at Spire, where were read the Emperor's Letters which pressed the
execution of the Edict of Worms. Hereupon there arose great Debates, some
being for, and others against it; and nothing less than a fatal rupture seemed
to be threatened: but Ferdinand Brother to the Emperor, thought it no
seasonable Juncture to carry it too stiffly in that affair; and therefore he
condescended to the making of an ambiguous Decree, whereby it was enacted that
the several Princes should in their own States govern matters of Religion, so
as that they might be able to give the Emperor a good account of the same, to
whom Ambassadors were to be sent, to entreat him that within the space of a
year, he would endeavor the calling of a Council in Germany, either General
for all Christendom, or National for the German Nation alone.

The Pope clashes with the Emperor, and absolves Francis of his oaths that he
had taken in Prison.
The same year the Pope began to clash with the Emperor. The King of France
being delivered out of Prison, the Pope treated an Alliance with him, dispensed
with all the Oaths he had taken during his captivity, and made a League against
Charles, into which he drew the Princes of Italy, and called it the Holy
League. This Treaty was kept secret for some time; but the Pope being no longer
able to endure the conduct and actions of the Emperor, which tended evidently
to the diminution of the Papal authority, broke forth, and wrote two Briefs to
him, the one dated January 23. and the other the day after: the first was
sharp, full of invectives and complaints against the conduct of the Emperor;
but particularly he expostulated with him for his invasions of the Rights of
the Holy See, in that he undertook every where to make Edicts and Orders
concerning matters of Religion, the cognizance whereof belonged only to the
Pope. The second was much milder, and took no more notice of the former, than
if it had never been. The design of this Intrigue was to terrify Charles by
the threats of the first Brief, and to soften him by the promises of the
second; but that trick would not take. Charles who yielded to him neither in
haughtiness nor cunning, answered him in the same manner by two Letters, of
which the latter was delivered just next day after the former, and were each of
them suited to the different style of the Pope's Briefs. In the first he found
fault with the Pope's conduct, as not becoming the character of a true Pastor;
and having justified his actions by a long Narrative of all he had done from
the beginning of the troubles, he protested that if what he wrote did not
satisfy him, he would appeal to a holy general Council. His answer to the
second Brief was in a softer style: and both his Letters were seconded with an
Address to the College of Cardinals, wherein Charles spared not the Pope,
exhorting them to call a Council, if the Pope should seem refractary, and
promising them his assistance therein; but withal declared, that if they
granted not what he desired, he would by his Imperial authority provide for the
affairs of the Church according as he should think convenient. These Letters
wounded the Pope to the Heart, and brought him to an open Declaration,
resolving to employ all his force both Spiritual and Temporal against the
Emperor. He therefore caused his Forces to march toward Lombardy, to join the
Venetians and the other Confederates, The Emperor provides work enough for the
Pope within Rome, by means of the Colonna's who enter the City in Arms, and
plunder the Vatican.
who were in league for preserving the liberty of Italy.

Whilst these Negotiations were on foot, the Emperor fomented Divisions in
Rome, and openly favored a powerful Faction formed against the Pope, by the
House of Colonna. Cardinal Pompeio one of that House, supported by Vespasian
and Ascanio both of the same Family, was wholly at the Emperor's Devotion,
whose interests the Viceroy of Naples stoutly maintained; the Cardinal, being a
bold and daring man, said publicly, That it was the Destiny of his Family to
be hated by Tyrannical Popes; but that also it was their good luck to rid the
Church of them. The Pope published a severe Monitory against him, and adjourned
him upon pain of highest Censures to appear at Rome; but finding that his
Affairs went ill every where, he thought it not convenient to press these ways
of rigor. He therefore patcht up an agreement with the Colonna's, and revoked
the Monitory, which he had published against the Cardinal. The Colonna's in the
mean time who saw into the Pope's politics, did not rely too much on his
promises: they armed their Friends and Subjects, and on the 20th of September,
appeared in Arms near Rome on the side of Borgo di San Pedro. The Pope who
expected no such thing, being in great surprise, thought of imitating the
Example of Boniface VIII. and by putting himself in his Pontifical Robes, try
if the Colonna's did inherit all the Audaciousness of their Ancestors, and if
that House would dare once more again, to violate in his Person the Majesty of
the Supreme Priesthood; but he was better advised than to run so great a
risque. He therefore put himself under the protection of the walls of the
Castle St. Angelo, which were thought a stronger defense, than the Pontifical
Habit. The Colonna's entered Rome, and plundered the Vatican and St. Peter's
Church; but the party of the Ursini having awakened those of their Faction,
hindered them from advancing any farther; so that the Colonna's were forced to
draw out of the Town, to a place of retreat which they had provided near Rome.
The Pope being reduced to this extremity, was fain to make a Treaty with the
Viceroy of Naples, and a Truce for four Months with Don Hugo de Moncado, who
commanded the imperial Army in Naples for the assistance of the Colonna's; the
Conditions of this Truce were, that the Colonna's and Neapolitans should draw
off from the Neighborhood of Rome, and that the Pope should recall the Troops
which he had sent into Lombardy against the Emperor. This he did in effect,
but against his will, as soon appeared: for no sooner was he reassured by the
presence of his Forces, but he excommunicated Cardinal Pompeio and all of his
Family as Heretics and Abetters of Heretics. The Cardinal was secure enough
at Naples, from whence he published an appeal to the Council, which he caused
in the Night time to be affixt in several places of Rome; that Appeal struck
Terror into the Heart of Clement; not only because he was a Bastard, but also
because he had stole up into the Chair by the slight of Simony, which the
Cardinal could easily prove: and this was one reason that made him dread a
Council above all things in the World, as fearing to be accused, and to meet
with a party there, The War is renewed. Charles of Bourbon with the Imperial
Army takes Rome, and makes the Pope Prisoner.
every way as powerful as Cardinal Colonna.

The year 1526 was spent in these stirs; but next year after the War broke out
with much greater flame and heat; there was now no more talk of Treaties, nor
of a Council, all was buried in silence by the rage of Arms. The Emperor had
an Army in Lombardy, commanded by Charles of Bourbon a Prince of the
Bloud-royal and Constable of France; who falling into disgrace, had betaken
himself to the Emperor's service, from whom he had received the Investiture of
the Duchy of Milan, and whereof he had made himself Master, in spite of the
Efforts of the Confederates. This same Charles of Bourbon, advanced toward
Rome, whilst the Viceroy of Naples on the other side brought his Forces into
the Field against the Pope, pretending to call him to an account as a
Truce-breaker, because of his procedure against the Colonna's. The Duke of
Bourbon had in his Army, besides the Imperial Troops, fourteen thousand Germans
almost all Lutherans, commanded by the Count of Fronsperg also a Lutheran: who,
with his Soldiers aspired to nothing more than the plunder of Rome, that so
they might revenge themselves of the persecutions that had befallen them from
thence. About the end of January, Charles of Bourbon passed the Po, and put the
Pope into a terrible Consternation, who expected no less than an ignominious
Death: for Fronsperg who commanded the Lutherans, was a Man of a violent
temper; and through the interest of his party was so transported with revenge,
that he caused an Halter to be carried behind his own Colors, wherewith he
threatened to hang the Pope. This obliged Clement to make a second Agreement
with the Viceroy of Naples, whereby they clapped up a second Truce for eight
Months, upon no advantageous Conditions for Rome. The Duke of Bourbon, in the
mean time, though Naples, yet would not accept of that Truce, nor engage in the
Treaty, when even the Death of Fronsperg who died of an Apoplexy, was a
considerable loss, and deprived him of a valiant Commander. So on he marched,
until he came and encamped under the very Walls of Rome with a brave Army, but
no Cannon. Next day after his arrival he made an assault by Scalade on the side
of the Vatican; and was there killed by a Musket Shot which he received in the
right Groin. The Imperial Army, notwithstanding, remained victorious, though
vigorously opposed by the Pope's Soldiers, and Roman youth. The Town was taken
by force, the Churches plundered, the Cardinals basely used, led about in
procession riding on Asses in their Pontifical Habit, nay and some of them
soundly bastonnado'd too. Nothing was spared in the City; the plundering lasted
three days, and all excess committed that the Rage of War could suggest. It was
also very observable that (as all acknowledge) the Italians and Spaniards, who
were so good Catholics out-did the Lutheran Germans in Cruelty, in brutish
baseness toward the women, greediness in plundering, and in barbarity toward
the Cardinals. The Pope rejected the Counsel that had been given him of
withdrawing and leaving the City; but for safety betook himself to the Castle
St. Angelo; where being besieged, he was forced to render on discretion, and
was detained Prisoner in the same place. The City of Florence, that groaned
under the Government of the Medicis, laid hold on this occasion of regaining
their Liberty; for Cardinal Cortona who was Governor for the Pope, having left
the place, the Citizens immediately, re-established their ancient Government,
drove out the Medicis, and threw down their Statues. Whilst this Tragedy was
acting, the Emperor was at Madrid; and being a great Master in the Art of
Dissimulation, seemed to be extremely affected with the sad Condition of the
Church, and of its Head the Pope: At Valladolid, where he was when the News was
brought him, he caused the public rejoycings, that then were making there for
the Birth of his Son, to cease: but made no haste, for all that, to set the
Pope at liberty; only sent him great Complements of Condoleance for his
Misfortunes, and ample Excuses for what had been acted against him, and, in the
mean time, let him lie seven Months in Prison. Nor would he at all have been
dissatisfied it the Pope had been brought into Spain, that he might have
triumphed over him, as he had done before over Francis I. But the Spanish
Prelates abhorring that design, he durst not push it farther; only he obliged
the Pope to accept of ignominious Conditions of Peace, and for Caution, to give
him up the Towns of Ostia, Civita Vecchia, Civita Castellana, and the Citadel
of Forli, with his tow Nephews Hippolito and Alexander for Hostages. This being
concluded, he had liberty to go out on the 9th of December; but he thought it
not fit to expect the prefixed day, nor to come out as a released Prisoner; he
therefore retired by Night on the Eighth, under the disguise of a Merchant, and
went to Monte-Fiascone.

During the troubles of Italy the affairs of Religion went ill for the interest
of the Court of Rome: for the City of Berne in Suisserland following the
example of Zurich, Zuinglius's Reformation gains ground in Suisserland. Berne
and Basil embrace it.
received the Doctrine Zuinglius. At Basil they broke down the Images, and the
same year the Cities of Strasbourg, Constance and Geneva fell off from their
obedience to the Church of Rome. These new Preachers had the boldness to preach
the Doctrine of Reformation even in Italy, and in places subject to the Pope's
Dominion, and amongst others in the Town of Faenza, which belongs to the
Ecclesiastic State. 1528.


The Imperialists quit Rome. the Pope makes Peace with the Emperor.
The year following the countenance of affairs was much changed in Italy. The
French made great progresses in the Kingdom of Naples, and forced the
Imperialists to abandon the City of Rome. This little interval wrought such an
alteration, that the Pope was solicited to excommunicate the Emperor, and to
depose him from the Kingdom of Naples; but he found his Party as yet too weak
to venture on giving so great a blow. He had, besides, other, prospects than
those of his Allies, a great mind to recover Florence, and knew of none but the
Emperor that could serve him that Design: for as to the Venetians and French,
he was sufficiently persuaded, that if they had the better on it they would
leave the Florentines to their liberty. He therefore resolved to be reconciled
to the Emperor upon any terms whatsoever. Throughout this whole year, his
discourse was so submissive and humble, that for some time it was really
thought, his afflictions had humbled him in good earnest. He often said
Germany, and there lead so holy a Life, that all might take example from him,
be converted and return into the bosom of the Church.

Clement succeeded in his Intentions, he moved the Emperor to compassion, who
restored to him Civita Vecchia, Ostia, and the other cautionary Towns; and by
the mouth of Francis Guignonez Cardinal of Santacroce made him great offers on
his part. Amongst other things, Charles obliged himself to re-establish
Alexander de Medicis the Pope's Nephew in the Principality of Florence, and to
give him Margaret his natural Daughter in Marriage. He promised him also
assistance for recovering of the Towns of Cervia, Modena, Ravenna and Reggio,
which the Venetians and the Duke of Ferrara had taken from him. Nor were the
Lutherans forgot in this Treaty; for the Emperor promised to employ his Arms
against them, if no fair means could prevail. On his own part he demanded of
the Pope the Convocation of a Council; but nothing was then fixed upon as to
that. And thus by this Treaty, which was held at Barcelona, the Sea of Rome
did, as it were, in a moment, recover its ancient Splendor and Greatness, to
the amazement of all Europe.

A Diet at Spire, where it is attempted to divide the Lutherans and Zuinglians.
The same year, in the Month of March, there was a Diet held at Spire, where the
Roman Catholics powerfully bestirred themselves to divide their Adversaries;
and for that end industriously improved the difference of opinions that was
betwixt Luther and Zuinglius concerning the Doctrine of the Eucharist. But the
prudence of the Landgrave of Hesse hindered Worms to be put in Execution in
all places where it had been begun to be executed; but as for other places
where some innovation had been made, matters should continue, at least, as they
were without farther proceeding until the ensuing Council, and that in the
mean time, no person should be permitted to turn Lutheran; after all, the
Decree ordained that the Celebration of Mass should be permitted every where,
and that no new opinions should be started. The Electour of Saxony, with five
other Princes, and fourteen of the chief Towns of Germany protested against
this Decree, declaring that they could not recede from the resolutions that had
been taken in former Diets, whereby every Prince was allowed to live in his own
Religion, and to have power within his own Territories, either to establish the
reformation, or prohibit the Exercise of the Roman Religion as he should think
fit: And thereupon they appealed to the Emperor, and a free Council; from this
Protestation the Followers of Luther and Zuinglius got the Name of Protestants.

The Landgrave of Hess attempts an agreement betwixt Luther and Zuinglius, but
without success.
The Landgrave of Hesse, having in the last Diet well observed what might be the
consequences of the difference in opinion betwixt Luther and Zuinglius, formed
a design of bringing them to an Agreement; and to compass this design, he
assembled the heads of both parties to a Conference at Marpurg, which lasted
all the Month of October. But these Conferences had no effect, flesh and blood
came in for a share, and both parties were too much addicted to their
Sentiments to yield in any thing. Some time after, Luther wrote to one of his
Friends, that he would not expose the Princes of his party to a greater hatred
of the Romanists, by Adopting the expressions of the Zuinglians, which were
detested by all men. And this probably was the consideration that hindered him
from condescending to the agreement proposed.

The first interview of the Pope and the Emperor at Bologna: the Emperor is
Crowned there by the Pope.
In the Treaty concluded betwixt the Emperor and the Pope, it was agreed that
the Emperor should receive the Imperial Crown from the Pope; and that the City
of Bologna should be the place where the Ceremony was to be performed. In order
thereunto they met there in the Month of November, One thousand five hundred
and twenty nine. They continued there four Months, and Lodged in the same
place: During which time they had many and great conferences. The chief matters
in hand were the means of procuring the Peace of Italy; but especially the
Destruction of the Lutherans in Germany. Charles and his Counselors
endeavored to persuade the Pope, to try if mildness could do the thing, and
to determine the controversies by a Council: But the Pope gave many reasons to
prove that a Council would produce nothing but mischief, and omitted nothing
that could persuade the Emperor that there was a necessity of employing Force
and Arms to reduce those that had separated themselves from the Church. Charles
V. seemed to yield to his reasons; and so they parted with a resolution to join
their Forces for the ruin of the Protestant party. The Emperor was Crowned
the eighth of March; and immediately after he called a Diet to be held at
Ausbourg the eighth of May following. About the end of March he parted from
Bologna, but arrived not at Ausbourg before the thirteenth of June.

The Diet of Ausbourg, where the Protestants present their Confessions, and
depart without any accommodation, though attempted in vain.
This was one of the most famous Diets that ever was held in the Empire: The
Emperor was there in person, after an absence of many years that he had spent
in Spain. Cardinal Campeggio came to the Diet in quality of Legate, and Paul
Vergerio as Nuncio to King Ferdinand, both with instructions from the Pope to
oppose all deliberations decisive about matters of Religion, and especially to
hinder all resolutions that tended to the calling of a Council. The Emperor
arrived at Ausbourg on Holy-thursday Eve, but the Protestant Princes refused to
assist at the Ceremonies of the next days Festival. The Emperor being offended
that he could obtain nothing as to that point, was more positive in another:
which was, that the Duke of Saxony, as high Martial of the Empire, should carry
the Sword before him, when he went to Mass, which was to be sung at the opening
of the Diet. The Divines were hereupon consulted, who dispensed with the Duke
to do what was demanded of him, according to the example of Naaman whom the
Prophet Elisha permitted to wait on his Master, and to serve him in the Temple
of the Idol. In this famous Diet the Lutherans by the hands of the Duke of
Saxony presented their Confession of Faith, which derives its name from thence,
and is called the Confession of Ausbourg. Luther gave the heads of it, and
Melancthon who was of a far more moderate temper, put it into form. This
Confession of the Lutherans was read in open Assembly, and the Emperor by
advice of the Legate caused a refutation of it to be made, which was also
publicly read; but this did not put an end to the differences. The Emperor
endeavored to divide the Ambassadors of the Protestant-towns; but neither did
that succeed; and therefore, at length he condescended to a conference betwixt
the two parties. At first there were seven Disputants allowed on each side, but
they were afterward reduced to three; yet all these conferences and disputes
had no happy issue; for though both parties were willing to remit in some
slight matters, and accordingly some Articles presently agreed upon; yet when
they came to points of greater importance, both were obstinate and inflexible.

The Emperor gaining no ground by this means, attempted both publicly and
privately to draw over the most Zealous; but all these endeavors were
unprofitable, nor could either his promises or threatenings work any effect: Nay
he could not obtain so much of the Protestants that they would suffer Mass to
be said within their Territories till the meeting of the next Council, though
he promised it should fit within six months. Therefore about the end of
September they departed; but not before they had heard the Imperial Edict read,
which gave them six months time to renounce Lutheranism, and strictly
prohibited them to make any innovation in the Faith, or to hinder the free
exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion. But in the conclusion of the Diet,
the Emperor made another Edict against them, wherein he decided the points of
Faith in the controverted Articles. As for instance, about Images, the
Sacraments, Free Will, Justification by Faith alone, the invocation of Saints,
Holy days, Fasts and many other points. He Commanded that this Edict should
stand for a rule of Faith until the meeting of the next Council, that no other
Religion should be tolerated in Germany, and that the disobedient should be
punished with the highest rigor.

The Pope is dissatisfied with Charles, and the Protestant Princes despise his
rigorous Edicts.
The Pope was no ways satisfied with the Emperor's conduct herein; he looked
upon it as an Encroachment on his Authority, that a Secular Prince should make
himself Judge of controversies. But being a man of great Sense, that he might
not clash a second time with the Emperor, he pretended that it was done by
their mutual consent, and accordingly wrote to all Christian Princes. The
Protestant Princes, on the other hand took this occasion of writing to them
also, to justify themselves, and to desire their assistance for calling a
Council. In prosecution of the Edict of Ausbourg, the whole year 1532 was spent
in rigorous proceedings against the Protestants. Nothing but sentences and
confiscations: but the Princes that were absolute in their own Territories
despised these rigours, and contemned the Decrees of the Imperial Chamber at
Spire. Such courses served only to put them upon their Guard, and to think of
strengthening themselves by Foreign alliances, and mutual leagues at home, that
they might not be exposed to violence. And so they did in their Assembly of
Smalcalde, where all the Protestant Princes and Towns made a League defensive,
for the security of their States and Religion. This brought the Emperor to
condescend to milder courses: and several means being proposed, it was at
length concluded that for a better accommodation, a Diet should be held at
Ratisbonne the year following 1532.

A religious War in Suisserland, wherein Zuinglius is killed.
The same year 1531. there arose such heats in Suisserland, that the Cantons,
fell together by the Ears. The City of Zurich sent their Forces to this War, as
all the other Protestant Cantons did, and Zuinglius went along with the
Zurichers. The eleventh of October they Fought, the Zurichers were defeated,
and Zuinglius killed in the Battle. Oecolampadius his Friend and Colleague died
for grief a few days after: and the death of those two made way for an
accommodation amongst the Suissers. For the Roman Catholic Cantons were apt to
believe, that seeing Providence had rid them of those two Preachers, who had
been able to stir up so many people, all would again return into the Bosom of
the Church, from which they had fallen off.

Next year was employed in negotiating an accommodation betwixt the Catholic
and Protestant parties; wherein the Elector of Mentz, and the Palatine
endeavored all that lay in their power. But the Emperor finding that such
tentatives for healing of Religion would never succeed, persisted in his
thoughts of calling a Council. He wanted a pretext for using of Force, and
hoped to find one in a Council, because the Protestants would be obliged to
submit to it, and if they Rome to represent to the Pope and College of
Cardinals the necessity of calling a Council without any delay. The Emperor
presses a Council, and not obtaining it makes his first Edict in favor of
Protestants.
This demand was seconded by the Ambassador of the King of France; and though
the Pope was resolved not to grant, yet durst he not flatly refuse it. He
therefore consented to it, but under conditions that rendered the thing
impossible; for he purposed the holding of a Council at Bologna, Piacenza, or
in some other Town of the Ecclesiastic State; well foreseeing that the Germans
would never agree to that. He also declared that none but Bishops and Abbots
should have a decisive Vote; which was not the free Council that the Germans so
urgently desired. The Emperor perceiving that nothing was to be expected on
that side, at length resolved to restore Peace to Germany; which he did by the
Edict of Nuremberg, dated July 23, 1532. whereby he gave full liberty to all
States, Princes, Towns and private Persons to enjoy and live in the Religion
that they had chosen, without molesting of others, and without being molested
by any, till the sitting of the next Council, which the Pope should be
solicited to call within six months, and open within a year. This was the first
Edict of toleration that the Protestants obtained in Germany, which extremely
netled the Court of Rome. Things however were hushed up, and after all, they
found that the Emperor was not so much to be blamed: For the Protestants
obstinately refused to make head against Solomon, who with a formidable Army
was coming to power in upon Austria, unless that indulgence were granted them.
So that the fear of the Turks, whom Charles had to do with, was the sole cause
of his moderation.

A second interview betwixt the Pope and the Emperor, the Pope refuses a
Council; but after grants it on conditions which the Protestants refuse to
accept.
So soon as that War was ended, and the Turks driven out of Austria, the
Emperor renewed his design of concluding the affairs of Religion in Germany.
He made a journey into Italy, and had a second interview with the Pope at
Bologna. In this interview they had a fresh conference about the necessity of
holding a Council, the Pope persisted to oppose it, and if at any time he
seemed to condescend, yet stood he firm that the Council should be held upon
the conditions he had proposed. Charles who had no other interest in the
affair, than that of his Authority which he desired to settle, by obliging the
Germans to live under the same Laws, was not very much troubled upon what
conditions a Council were held, provided the Lutherans accepted them. They
therefore agreed betwixt themselves to send Ambassadors to the Elector of
Saxony, to incline him to accept of the conditions proposed by the Pope: The
Elector desires leave to communicate the affairs to the Assembly of Protestants
which was to be held at Smalcalde the 23 of June the same year. And, indeed, he
did so; but the Assembly rejected the Pope's propositions, and persisted in
demanding a free Council, to be held in Germany, where every one might have
freedom to speak their minds, and wherein judgment should be pronounced
according to the word of Go, without any respect had to the Authority of the
Pope, Traditions or Canons. Their Answer was long and argumentative, of which
Copies were sent to the Pope and the Emperor, and afterward Printed with the
Pope's propositions.

The Pope dissatisfied with the Emperor, enters into a league with the King of
France.
This interveiw of the Pope and Emperor did not all contribute to the cementing
of their friendship; for they began to entertain Jealousies one of another: the
Pope could not relish those reiterated instances that the Emperor made to him
for calling a Council, to which he had an incurable aversion: But above all,
that which most increased their misunderstanding, was the Judgment given by the
Emperor upon the debate which the Pope had with the Duke of Ferrara concerning
the Towns of Rheggio and Modena. Both parties agreed to refer that affair to
the determination of the Emperor, that as Umpire he might give Sentence
therein. The Emperor pronounced against the Pope, and confirmed the Duke of
Ferrara in the possession of those two Towns. So that the Pope being ill
satisfied with the Emperor, took a resolution of entering into a strict
alliance with the King of France: and at the same time to raise the Grandeur of
his Family, he Married Catharine of Medicis his Neice to Henry, second Son to
that King: and for the accomplishment and confirmation of the Treaty, the Pope
gave the King of France an interveiw at Marseilles. Amongst other things that
past at that interveiw, the Pope required of the King that he would use his
interest with the Protestants of Germany, and especially with the Landgrave of
Hesse, to take them off from demanding a Council, or that they should demand it
on conditions more easy for the Court of Rome. The King attempted it, but
could not succeed; however the Landgrave of Hesse yielded in some things, and
consented that the Council might not be held in Germany, provided the place of
its meeting were out of Italy, and in a Town where the Council might be free.
The King himself proposed to the Pope the Town of Geneva, an dundertook to get
the Protestants to accept of it. This proposal seemed strange to the Pope, who
perceived that the King of France was no fit Agent to transact matters
according to the intentions of the Court of Rome; and therefore they thanked
him for the pains he had taken, and desired him to proceed no farther; so that
a stop was put to that Negotiation in the beginning of the year 1534.

Henry King of England shakes off the Pope's authority, without any innovation
in Religion.
The same year the Court of Rome had the trouble to see one of the most
considerable Members of the Roman Church fall off from it; whilst they
endeavored to recover Germany, they lose England. Henry VIII. had Married
Catharine, Infanta of Spain, Aunt by the Mother to the Emperor Charles V. This
Princess by a former Marriage had been Wife to Prince Arthur elder Brother to
Henry. Arthur being dead, the Father with a dispensation from Pope Julius II.
gave her to his second Son; by whom she had only one Daughter alive, called
Mary. Henry who passionately desired to have Male issue, sought to Divorce her,
under color of invalidity in the dispensation. This afforded matter for a long
and tedious process, which depended from the year 1528. to 1534. In the
beginning of this Campeggio his Legate in England, so to manage the Trial, that
the procedures might run in favor of Henry, thereby vex Charles V. but a
reconciliation being pieced up betwixt the Pope and the Emperor, the case of
the Divorce betwixt Henry and Catharine changed countenance, because the Pope
intended to oblige Charles, by favoring his Aunt. This change provoked Henry,
so that he prohibited all his Subjects to pay any Peter Pence to the Receivers:
and the Pope by and Evocation brought the Trial to Rome, where the business
went very slowly on. Henry who could no longer endure these delays, published
his Divorce with Catharine of Spain; and in the year 1535. Married Anne Bullen.
Sometime after, News, whether true or false was brought to Rome, that there had
been a Comedy Acted before the King of England, wherein the whole Court of
Rome, the Pope and Cardinals, had been shamefully exposed, and turned into
ridicule. This was News indeed that overheated the spleen of all those who
thought themselves concerned, and set them on revenge; which made them outrun
the constable in pronouncing Sentence the 24. of March: whereby the Marriage of
Henry and Catharine, was declared good and valid; and upon that account Henry
ordained to adhere to her, and in case of refusal, that he should ipso facto be
Excommunicated. Henry on the other hand took the alarm as hot as they, when he
had seen this Sentence. Well, said he, let the Pope be Bishop of Rome, and for
my part, I Will be Master within my own Kingdom. And so he was as good as his
word; for he issued out a Proclamation, wherein he declared himself head of the
Church of England, prohibited the paying of Peter Pence to the Pope's
Receivers, and got this Declaration confirmed by Act of Parliament: though in
all other things he retained the Roman Religion, and afterward published
severe Proclamations against the Doctrine of Luther.

In Germany the State of affairs was nothing better; they began to take up
Arms; for King Ferdinand had seized the Duchy of Wittenberg from Prince
Ulrich, and the Landgrave of Hesse had by Force of Arms retaken and restored it
to its lawful Master. The Emperor who feared that things might not stop here,
was in good earnest angry with the Pope, for starting so many difficulties to
obstruct the holding of a Council, and thereupon wrote expostulatory Letters to
Rome. But within a few days after the receipt of these Letters, Clement fell
sick of a Distemper that carried him out of the world, about the end of
September 1534.

PAUL. III.
Pope Clement dies. Paul. III. succeeds him.
Cardinal Farnese succeeded to him, and was chosen the same day the Conclave was
shut up. At first he took the name of Honorius V. but at his Inauguration he
quitted that, and took the name of Paul III. He wanted not Virtue, though the
character he went under was, of a reserved and slye man. Besides all his other
qualities, he was consummated in the knowledge of affairs, having been Cardinal
under six Popes, and all along employed in important Negotiations; he was also
chief of the Cardinals, as being Dean of the Sacred College, which advantages
did not a little facilitate his

Fruitless attempts of Paul III. for the reformation of the Court of Rome.
he made a Bull for a Reformation, and named Cardinals to act in it: This also
was without effect. In fine, well perceiving that he would be accused of having
made all these steps without any design of touching the abuses of the Court of
Rome; for his own Justification, he resolved to renew his design of
reformation. He named four Cardinals and five Prelates, to whom he gave
commission to make an exact collection of all the abuses that deserved
amendment. They observed four and twenty abuses in the administration of
Ecclesiastic affairs, and four in the Government of Rome, of which they gave
the Pope a particular account. These articles were examined in a Consistory;
but Nicolas Schomberg a Jacobin, Cardinal of Santo Sixto, withstood that
reformation, and having made use of the same reasons which Francis Soderini
Cardinal of Volterre had used in the time of Adrian, he had the same success,
that is to say, he took the Pope off from all these designs of Reformation.

The Pope calls a Council in the Town of Vicenza, where the Legates go, but no
body appears.
So that Paul III. having now no other affair to mind, but that of a Council,
published a new Bull for convocating it in the City of Vicenza under the
Dominion of the Venetians; and that the Prelates might have time to repair to
the place, he appointed the first of May 1538 for the opening of the Assembly.
Henry King of England who slipped to occasion of exercising his pen against Rome,
wrote against that Bull, as well as against the former, and made the same
declarations as he had done before, protesting Vicenza for a true Council, than
he had done that which was to have been held at Mantua. the Legates, in the
mean time went to Vicenza, to make the overture of the Council, on the day
prefixed: And the Pope, An interview of the Pope, Emperor, and K. of France.
being at Nice where the Emperor and the King of France were come to see him,
and to confer about means of restoring peace to their subjects, endeavored to
persuade them to send their Prelates to Vicenza; but both desired time to
consult their Bishops about the matter. So that the Legates who were to preside
in the Council, to wit, Campeggio, Simmonetto and Alexander, stayed three
Months at Vicenza expecting the Prelates, who never came; of this they gave the
Pope an account, who was fain to recall them by a Bull dated July 28. 1538. and
to defer the opening of the Council till Easter following. This was the year
wherein Paul III. The Pope thunders a Bull of Excommunication against Henry
VIII. King of England.
losing all patience toward Henry King of England, let fly a Bull of
Excommunication against him. The Pope had entertained hopes of reclaiming him
by patience, and besides that, he was loath to let that thunder go out of his
hands, which men were grown now almost proof against. But Henry proceeded so
incorrigibly, that there was now no more dallying. It was not enough that he
had made himself Head of the Church of England; but he also rased and burnt the
Bones of St. Thomas of Canterbury, who was killed in the year 1171. and died a
Martyr for the Authority of the Pope. He cut off the head of Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, without respect to the dignity of the Cardinalship, with which the
Pope had honored him during his imprisonment, as a reward for his vigorous
maintaining the interests of the Court of Rome, against the attempts of Henry.
In a word, the Pope looking on him as a sinner hardened in impenitence,
thundered a terrible Bull against him, which had been framed in the year 1535.
By that Bull he deprived him of his dominions, and his adherents of all their
Estates. He absolved the English and all other his Subjects from their
obedience to him, prohibited all strangers to have any commerce with that
Kingdom, and charged all Christian people to rise in arms against him and his
dominions, bestowing them as a prey upon him that first could conquer them.
This Bull, though more terrible than any that the Predecessors of Paul had
ever thundered, yet wrought no effect, and hindered not, but that the Emperor,
the King of France and other Catholic Princes made Leagues and Alliances with
Henry King of England.

An amicable Conference is appointed betwixt the Catholics and Protestants of
Germany.
Next year, which was the year 1539. the affairs of Religion threatened new
trouble in Germany; because the Catholic Princes had made a League amongst
themselves at Nuremberg, as the Protestants had made another at Smalcalde;
which obliged the Emperor and States of the Empire, to hold a Diet at
Frankfort. In this assembly, after long debates, it was resolved, that an
amicable conference should be appointed betwixt the Doctors of both parties,
to try if it were possible to find a mean to satisfy both. Nuremberg was
pitched upon for the place of the conference, and the opening of it appointed to
be the first of August. So soon as the news of this was brought to Rome; The
Pope was startled at it, as being done without his Authority, and as being a
prejudicating of the Council which he had promised, not to expect from it the
decision of controversies. So that he immediately dispatched the Bishop of
Monte Pulciano to the Emperor in Spain, to persuade him to annull the Decrees
of the Diet of Frankfort, and to put a stop to that conference. But the
Emperor thought it not fit to do any thing, nor to declare himself against
the conference of Nuremberg; he foresaw a storm coming from France, and had the
Turk likewise to deal with: and therefore he resolved at any rate, to satisfy
the Protestants. Nevertheless that conference was not held, because the
Emperor had other affairs that more nearly concerned him. The Emperess died,
and Ghent with part of the low Countries revolted: so that being taken up with
other matters, he had no time to mind this. But being obliged to go into
Flanders; to settle these troubles, his brother Ferdinand went thither to wait
on him; where both together agreed to grant that conference. Cardinal Farnese,
a young man of twenty years of age, seconded by the Counsels of Marcello
Cervino, who was afterward Pope, with great vigor opposed it, and endeavored
to ward that blow by promising a Council, which should speedily be convened; he
solicited the Emperor to make use of his arms, rather than of conferences,
which could not succeed, and which struck at the Pope's Authority. The Emperor
and Ferdinand continued firm in their resolutions, and the Diet was called at
Haguenaw where all the Princes were invited to Lutheran Ministers and Catholic
Doctors came; but the Diet was spent in idle Janglings about Preliminaries:
and seeing heats began to arise, the Conference was put off till October the
28th to be held in the City of Worms, A Conference at Worms, which has as
little success as the rest.
where the Pope's Nuncio's, if they pleased, might be present. The Emperor
confirmed that Decree, condescended to the time and place, and sent thither as
his Commissioner, Granvelle, who carried with him his Son, that was afterward
Bishop of Arras and Cardinal: Thomas Campeggio Bishop of Feltre came thither in
quality of the Peope's Nuncio; but this Conference lasted but three days.
Eckius spoke for the Catholics, and Melancthon for the Protestants; the
subject of their Dispute being about Original Sin. But whilst the Pope seemed
to give way to the Conference, by the presence of his Nuncio, who was there; at
the same time by his Nuncio resident at the Emperor's Court, he endeavored to
break it up. This Nuncio represented to the Emperor, that it could not but
engender a Schism, make all Germany Lutheran, and ruin both the authority of
the Pope and Emperor. These Reasons, or rather some private interests, obliged
the Emperor to break up the Conference: He recalled Granvelle, and adjourned
the Diet to Ratisbonne. The opening of this Diet was in the month of March,
next year after. The Emperor was there in person, and for a famous Dispute
that happened, named the Disputants himself: for the Catholics John Eckius,
Julius Fluggius, and John Groper; for the Protestants, Melancthon, Bucer, and
John Pistorius: the Electour for the Protestants, and Granvelle for the
Emperor, were Moderatours of the Conference. Cardinal Contarini, who had the
reputation of a learned and wise man, was there as the Pope's Legate. Upon some
points they came to an agreement, as upon Justification, the merit of Works,
Free Will, Original Sin, the Scripture, etc. but in many others nothing could
be agreed upon; as the Power of the Church, the Sacrament of Penance, Single
Life, the Eucharist, and the Hierarchy; not to name many considerable points
that were not meddled with. The result of the Conference was communicated to the
Diet; which the Legate pleaded ought to be sent to the Pope for his judgment
and approbation, and promised a General Council to prevent the holding of a
National Synod. This Legate did set about the making of some Reformation in the
Clergy; but that essay was fruitless, as all the former had been. At length the
Emperor made the Edict of the Diet, date July the 28th, whereby he referred
the decision of the Affair either to a General or National Council of Germany,
or else to another Diet of the Empire. In the interim he charged the
Protestants to make no Innovation, to keep to the Points that had been agreed
upon; and that none should presume either by persuasion or violence, to draw
off any from the Roman Catholic Religion. But, in the mean time, by particular
and private Grants, he allowed all a free exercise of Religion; so true it is,
that the most zealous Princes in appearance, have no other Religion but
Interest. However, they were pretty well satisfied at Rome, that these
Conferences had no effect; but Cardinal Contarini was accused of having
favored the Lutherans, and had much ado to justify himself, and to get off.
A fourth interview betwixt the Pope and the Emperor.
After the conclusion of the Diet, the Emperor went to Italy, and had an
interview with the Pope in the City of Luca; where the matter they chiefly
treated of, was the holding of a Council. The Pope had heretofore called one at
Vicenza, but he was forced to suspend the Convocation, first till Easter in the
year 1539. and afterward by a Bull of the 13th of June the same year, the
suspension was prolonged until it should please the Pope to take it off. In
the Conference of Luca, the Pope and the Emperor remained steadfast in their
resolution of holding the Council at Vicenza; but the Venetians to whom this
City belonged, recalled the consent they had given. They were afraid of
offending the Turk, with whom they had just concluded a Peace, because in that
Council Overtures were to be proposed of making War against the Infidels. This
is the reason that was alleged; but the true reason, perhaps, was, that they
were not very willing the City should be in a manner abandoned to so many
Strangers, as must needs flock thither upon account of the Council.

The Pope declares that he will call the Council at Trend: but it is retarded
by the War betwixt the Emperor and the King of France.
The year 1541. being thus spent, next year after a Diet of the Empire was held:
The Pope sent thither John Morone Bishop of Modena, and declared, that since he
could not agree neither with the Duke of Mantua, nor the Venetians, about
holding of a Council either at Mantua or Vicenza, he was resolved it should be
held at Trent. The Protestants would not accept that proposition; however, the
Pope published his Bull dated January 22. and appointed the opening of the
Council to be the first of November following. About the same time the War
broke out between the Emperor and the King of France. This last declared War
the same year, and published reproachful Manifesto's against the Emperor;
which War prevented the effect of the Bull of Convocation. In the mean time the
Pope sent his Legates to Trent, and the Emperor, his Ambassadors; but after
they had continued there seven months, they were fain to separate; because no
Prelates came, except some of the Kingdom of Naples, and of the Ecclesiastic
state, whom the Pope and the Emperor had sent with their Ambassadors. Francis
the first, King of France, foreseeing that it would be imputed to him as a
great crime, to have obstructed the holding of a Council, by so unseasonable a
declaration of War; to excuse himself with the Pope, made Edicts against the
Protestants of his Kingdom, which he caused to be rigorously put in execution.
The Pope, in the mean time, as common Father both to the Emperor and the King
of France, endeavored to make them friends, but could not succeed in it. He
had another interview with the Emperor betwixt Parma and Piacenza; A fifth
interview of the Emperor and Pope.
but no talk then of a Council or the affairs of Religion. The interest of the
Emperor obliged him to draw the Pope to his side against the King of France;
which he attempted to do, and even to procure money of him for the charges of
the War. On the other hand, the Pope had an eye upon the Duchy of Milan, which
he desired might return to his Family, Octavio Farnese his Nephew, who had
married Margaret natural Daughter to Charles the fifth. They broke off without
concluding any thing, being jealous one of another, and parted seemingly very
well satisfied; because both well understood the art of disguising their
thoughts.

The Emperor having no assurances of the Pope, addressed himself to Henry King
of England, and made a League with him against France. That incensed the Pope
extremely, who complained publicly, that a Prince who ought to be Protector
of the Church, should make alliance with an Excommunicate King. He added
moreover, that since the beginning of the Troubles Charles had carried it with
an extreme tenderness toward the Protestants; and to render that conduct of
the Emperor the more odious, he compared it with that of the King of France,
who had made so many severe Edicts and rigorous Laws against the Innovatours,
for maintaining the Religion and Papal authority. This War, and these mutual
misunderstandings put a stop to all thoughts of a Council for that year 1543.
The year following there was a Diet held at Spire, A Diet at Spire, where the
Emperor gives a new Edict of liberty till the next Council.
wherein the Emperor represented the pains he had taken for obtaining a
Council, telling them that it had been called, but that the Arms of France
hindered its sitting. Endeavors were there used to compose the affairs of
Religion; and the result was, that the Emperor who had need of the
Protestants, made and Edict of Pacification to last till the sitting of the
Council. That Edict allowed the Lutherans not only

THE HISTORY OF THE Council of TRENT.
BOOK II.
PAUL III.
THE War between the Emperor and King of France, had hitherto hindered the
opening of the Council; but that War which lasted not much above a Year, The
Peace between the Emperor and K. of France, revives the proposals of a Council.
being ended by the Peace that was concluded at Crespy, December 24. 1544. both
Princes obliged themselves to use their best endeavors for the preservation of
the ancient Religion and Union of the Church, and for the Reformation of the
Court of Rome. And that they might the better succeed in these three great
Designs, they concluded it necessary to press the convocation of a Council. The
Pope willing to have all the Honor of it alone, so soon as he understood the
Intentions of the Emperor and King of France, without expecting the demand,
that these Princes designed to make to him, issued forth immediately, the Bull
of Convocation for a Council to be held in the City of Trent, and appointed the
15. of March to be the first day of its Meeting. The Emperor was not pleased
that this Publication was made without asking his Advice; however, he put the
best Face he could upon it, as purposing to appear the principal Actor in this
whole Affair, and sent to all the Courts in Europe to invite the Princes to
send their Prelates to Trent. He Assembled the Divines of Louvain, appointing
them to reduce the Matters in Controversy into certain Heads, to be presented
to the Council. They thereupon made two and thirty bare Conclusions without any
Reasons or Arguments to back them; and Charles the Fifth, who loved to be
Supreme as well in Matters of Religion as in the Affairs of State, afterward
confirmed them by an Edict. The King of France would needs do the same, and
Assembled the Divines of Paris at Melun, to consult about the Matters that were
to be demanded in the Council; but they could not agree; for, some were for
demanding the restitution of the Pragmatick Sanction, and the Decrees of the
Councils of Constance and Basil. Others were against it, because that would be
to declare themselves against the King, and overthrow the Agreement that he had
made with Leo X. So, nothing being fixed upon there, they stood to the twenty
five Points of Doctrine, which the Sorbonne had published two Years before. The
Pope appoints Legates to preside in the Council, and sends them to Trent.


The Pope did what lay in his Power to content the Emperor, who had conceived
a great displeasure, that after he had labored so much, and had had so great a
hand in calling of this Council, yet the Bull should be published without
asking his consent; but, for all that, went on still, to hasten the
accomplishment of what he had alone begun. He named three Legates to preside in
the Council: The Cardinal of Monte, called otherwise Cardinal of Praeneste,
Marcello Corvino Cardinal of Santacroce, and Reynold Pool and English Man, of
the Bloud-Royal of England. The first was Cardinal Bishop, the Second Cardinal
Priest, and the Third Cardinal Deacon. The last was chosen more for Pomp than
Necessity, because of the Grandeur of his Family, and that it might appear that
though the Kingdom of England had made defection from the Church, yet those who
continued in their Obedience were still honored and esteemed. The Pope
dispatched the Legates, with the Bull of Legation, without the Plenepotentiary
Bull, because he would have time to consider in what Form he should give it;
but some time after their Arrival at Trent, they received their Plenepotentiary
Bull. At the same time the Pope made a Second Bull of that Nature, whereby he
gave them power to adjourn the Council to any other place, if they thought fit,
because he was not certain whether Trent might agree with them or not; but this
second Bull was not then sent, but kept secret. The Legates did not approve of
the Plenepotentiary Bull, because it ordered them to proceed in all things
according to the resolutions of the Council; whereas, on the contrary, their
intention was, that in all things the Council should comply with them. That
Place of the Bull must therefore be mended, and there was trouble enough about
it, before they could agree upon the Form of the Legates Commission; there
having been no precedents for such kind of Legations. In all former Councils
that had been held for four or five hundred Years, the Popes always presided in
Person, except in the Council of Basil, which in the beginning had the Legates
of Pope Eugenius for Presidents: but the Name of that Council was so odious to
the Court of Rome, that they looked upon it as a crime to imitate anything that
had been done there.

The Presidents arrive at Trent, and remain there a long while alone.
The Legates arrived at Trent the thirteenth of March, two days before the
Council was to be opened. The Poe had given but very short warning; for there
was no more than three Months betwixt the last Bull of Convocation and the
opening of the Council; and the remote Prelates, as the Germans, Spanish and
French, could not be present in so short a time. However the Pope knew what he
did; for it concerned him to have none there in the beginning, but Italians,
and such as he could dispose of at his pleasure: because in the Preliminaries,
the manner of proceeding during the whole sitting of the Council was to be
regulated, and thereupon depended the Authority which the Pope was to keep in
his own Hands, of being Absolute and Supreme in all the deliberations of that
Assembly. The Legates in the mean time could not open the Council on the day
prefixed, because they found no Body at Trent; and when Don Diego de Mendoza the
Emperor's Ambassador came, who arrived ten days after, he found none there
but the Legates and three Bishops. In the beginning the Legates communicated to
Don Diego, and that small Number of Bishops, the Letters which they received
from Rome, as if they intended to Act nothing without their Participation, but
it was not long so. The Legates perceived that the Ambassador and the Bishops
getting thereby Footing, began to meddle too much. They therefore wrote to
Rome, that there should be always two Letters sent them, one which might be
Communicated to all, and another private for themselves alone; they likewise
demanded a Cipher for the safe communication of Affairs of Weight and Moment;
and thus did they prepare themselves to receive the inspirations of the
Holy Ghost.

The Month of March was now spent without any appearance at Trent; and the
Legates were ashamed to open a Council with no more than three Bishops. Orders
were thereupon to be expected from Rome, and whilst they stayed for them, the
Ambassadors of Ferdinand King of the Romans arrived, and were admitted into
the Congregation. Now began Disputes about precedence to arise; for Don Diego
de Mendoza the Emperor's Ambassador challenged his place immediately after
the Legates, before Cardinal Madoncio, otherwise called Cardinal of Trent, who
was present, and before all the Cardinals that might afterward appear. An
expedient was found out to place them so that none should be above another, but
that decided not the Controversy; to Rome it must go, and thither the Legates
sent it.

Worms, wherein the Emperor caused Intimation to be made to the Protestants
of the holding of a Council: The Emperor gives intimation to the Protestants,
of the Convocation of a Council, and upon their refusing to submit to it,
concludes a League with the Pope against them.
but they protested against that Assembly, and even refused to give the
Emperor any assistance against the Turk, unless he did confirm the Edicts of
Pacification which had been granted to them. The Emperor arrived at Worms on
the sixteenth of May, where he was attended by Cardinal Farnese the Legate.
This Cardinal according to the Instructions he had received, solicited the
Emperor to employ open Force for the reducing of the Protestants; which agreed
very well with the Intentions of Charles the Fifth, who thereupon discovered
himself more than ever he had done before, and promised the Legate to take up
Arms for suppressing the Lutherans, so soon as he had concluded a Truce with
the Turk. At the same time the Cardinal negotiated the same Affairs with the
Catholics, and especially the Churchmen that were at the Diet, promising them
in the name of the Pope, money and assistance, if they would enter into that
holy League. These Treaties were carried on under the Seal of greatest Secrecy.
Nevertheless the Protestants suspected some such thing, and were the more
confirmed in their conjecture, by the Indiscretion of a Cordelier, who
Preaching before the Emperor, King Ferdinand and the Legate, turned toward
the Emperor, and told him, that by his Character and Dignity, he was obliged
to defend the Church by Arms. There was Advice likewise from Rome, that the
Pope dismissing some Officers of War, made them a promise to employ them the
Year following. These Presages made the Protestants apprehend a severe Storm a
coming: the Emperor, however carried it fair, and endeavored to persuade the
Lutherans to submit to the Council, and to supply Money for the War against the
Turk. But they looked upon this as a design to drain them, under pretext of a
Turkish War, that so they might the more easily be oppressed, and therefore they
protest against the Council of Trent, and persist in demanding a perpetual and
unlimited Edict of Pacification. The Emperor made answer, that he could not
exempt them from a Council, to which all Christians ought to be subject, and
that therefore he could not grant them that Peace in the manner they demanded
it. The truth is, he was very far from granting what they desired, seeing his
design was to make use of their refusal of submitting to the Council, for a
pretext of proceeding against them as Rebels. But it was not as yet time to
open his mind freely, because of other important Affairs that lay upon his
shoulders. He therefore left all things in suspense, ordaining the Treaty of
Peace to subsist until the Diet which he appointed in January following to be
held in the City of Ratisbonne: and for amusing the Protestants, he granted a
conference to be had about matters of Religion betwixt four Doctors and two
Judges of each Party, to begin in December, for preparing of matters against
the opening of the Diet. The Emperor caused Herman, Archbishop of Cologne to
be summoned to appear at this Diet, within thirty days, either personally or by
his Proctor; and that because without declaring himself Lutheran, he had
embraced the Doctrine of Luther, and had upon that Foot endeavored to reform
his Diocese both as to Doctrine and Discipline. In order whereunto, he had in
the Year 1543. Assembled the Clergy, Nobility, and the most considerable
Persons of his Diocese. And though he disowned all conformity with the
Lutherans, yet it was easy to be seen, that under the Name of Doctrines
consonant to the Holy Scriptures, he established many Tenets opposite to those
of the Church of Rome. Most part of his Clergy opposed this, and appealed to
the Pope as Head, and to the Emperor as Protector of the Church; which was the
pretext of that Citation. The Emperor's whole Conduct in that Diet, and
especially this last Action, extremely vexed the Court of Rome. The Prelates
assembled at Trent, said openly that the Proceedings of the Emperor were
scandalous; that to decide Affairs of Religion, appoint Conferences, name
Disputants, make Confessions, and Formularies of Faith, cite Archbishops and
Churchmen who were accused of Heresy, was an evident arrogating to himself a
Supremacy in the Church, and an Encroachment on the Council which was
immediately to be opened. The truth is, throughout the whole Conduct of the
Emperor, it is manifest that his sole design was Greatness and the Advancement
of his Authority; for he let slip no opportunity of invading the Rights of the
Pope, and the Authority which the holy See challenges to its self. The Pope was
extremely netled at The Emperor's Proceedings in relation to the Archbishop of
Cologne, but durst not break forth into resentment: all he did, was to thwart
that Citation by another; for he adjourned the Archbishop within two Months, to
appear before him in Person.

The Pope will not have the Bishops appear in Council by Proxy.
But let us now return to Trent, where the Prelates made but very slow progress.
The Kingdom of Naples had one hundred Bishops; but the Viceroy conceiving that
the absence of so many Prelates, if all went to Trent, would occasion a great
solitude in the Church; did therefore name four to go in their own Names, and
as charged with procurations from the rest. The Bishops, who had all a mind to
be concerned in that weighty affair, opposed the resolution; and the Pope, who
from time to time was to draw his recruits out of Italy, according as his
occasions did require, resolved likewise to withstand the intentions of the
Viceroy, by a very severe Bull, which was already past. This Bull ordained that
all who should adventure to appear in Council by Proxy, should ipso facto incur
the censure of Suspension: but the Legates themselves judged it a little too
rigorous, and therefore wrote to the Pope, that he would suffer them to keep it
secret. And this advice of suppressing it, appreared afterward to have been
much the safer, by what happened in respect of the Envoys of the Cardinal
Electour of Mentz. They arrived at Trent the 18th. of May, and produced their
Commissions. The Legates made some difficulty to admit them; because of the
Pope's prohibition of appearing by Proxy: and the Envoys of the Electour were
ready to withdraw and depart, had they not been staid by ample Excuses that
were made to them, telling them that the Pope's order did not reach Persons of
the Quality and Character of their Master, who was both a Cardinal and a
Prince. In the mean time the Legates wrote to Rome to represent to the Pope,
the necessity of qualifying the severity of that Bull; who sent them back
orders that they should entertain the Procuratours of the Electour of Mentz
with fair words, and give them the best satisfaction they could; but he durst
neither recall nor moderate his Bull, because of the Viceroy of Naples, who
had, in effect, carried it against the Bishops, and had got four to be deputed
in name of all the rest. These four Bishops durst not own neither at Rome nor
Trent, that they were charged with procurations from the rest, so that, in the
main, the Viceroy of Naples did not obtain what he desired. With ten Bishops at
Trent, the Congregation began to handle Preliminaries.
Till the end of April there were no more than three or four Bishops arrived at
Trent; but, at length, the third of May, they made up the Number of Ten, with
whom a Congregation was held for regulating the Preliminaries; wherein in there
was a great deal of discourse, but nothing concluded; proposals were made about
the Ornaments which the Legates were to have, about empty places that were to
be left for the Pope and the Emperor, and the rights of precedence amongst the
German Bishops who were Princes: but nothing was concluded on, save only that
they must expect till the Council were assembled in a fuller body. There was,
indeed, a great deal of discourse about the time of opening the Council; and
there was one reason that pleaded for a delay, to wit, the small number of
Bishops; but there were others that urged the hastening of it, and the Chief
was, that thereby a stop might be put to the Enterprises of Princes, and
especially to those of the Emperor, who upon all occasions offered at the
deciding of matters of Religion, which perhaps, he might be more cautious in
doing, if once the Council were opened. After all there considerations, it was
concluded that they should expect advice from Cardinal Farnese, who was Legate
with the Emperor.

The Prelates at Trent are weary of staying, but they are stopped, and money
ordered to be given to the poor Bishops.
About the end of May there were got together at Trent, twenty Bishops, five
Generals of Orders, and an Auditour of the Rota: the first comers were already
very weary of delay, and were therefore called in Raillery, The hotheaded
Gentlemen; but their Zeal quickly cooled. They began in good earnest to think
of withdrawing, and the most part without Ceremony, plainly begged leave to
return home; others desired liberty to go to Venice, and other neighboring
Towns, to buy Clothes and change the Air, under pretense of some indisposition;
but the Legates suffered none to depart. Most of these Prelates were poor
Italian Bishops sent by the Pope; who declared themselves unable to subsist
there at their own charges. It is true, the Pope had remitted all tenths to
those Bishops that should go to the Council; but that not much increase the
Revenues of those poor Bishops, and therefore the Legates were fain to give
them Money to encourage them to stay. Others there were who made use of the
Emperor's conduct for a Color of withdrawing, saying that they could not
endure to see the Council so disparaged and slighted, by his endeavoring to
judge of matter of Religion, the decision whereof belonged properly to it; but
notwithstanding all their impatience, the Prelates were necessitated to bear
with these delays, and to wait five Months, June, July, August, September and
October before the Council could be opened The Emperor who played his game with
the Protestants, and did not intend to exasperate them, stopped all, and held
matters in suspense. Sometimes he flattered the Lutherans with the hopes of
preventing the sitting of the Council, provided they consented to what he
desired of them; and sometimes again he threatened them with the Council, that
would arm all Christendom against them. Don Diego de Mendoza his Ambassador
returned to his Embassy at Venice, entreating the Legates not to open the
Council without his presence. The true cause of all this Conduct was, that the
Emperor intended not that the Council should proceed against the Lutherans,
before the had made his Peace with the Turk, that so he might not have too many
Enemies at the same time to encounter. These delays put the Pope out of all
Patience; he many times repented the calling of the Council, and if he could
have done it with honor, would certainly have revoked all that had been done:
thus not daring to break up and dissolve the Council, it was said, that he
intended to remove it to a place where his Power and Authority was greater. At
length he resolved to sent the Bishop of Caserta to the Emperor to make an end
of that affair, and to bring him to consent to one of these three things,
either to the Opening, or to the Suspension, or to the Translation of the
Council. The Emperor consents to the opening of the Council conditionally, and
the Pope is angry.
The Emperor rejected the Suspension and Translation: but persisted in
starting difficulties as to the Opening, because he was willing to expect the
issue of the approaching Diet which was called at Ratisbonne in the Month of
January; however he consented to the opening of the Council in the Month of
October, provided that nothing concerning the Lutherans were brought under
debate, and nothing but the matter of Reformation taken into Consideration.
This last fetch of the Emperors in regard of the Lutherans put the Pope out of
Patience, however without any show of discontent at that answer, he resolved to
act by himself, and the last of October wrote to his Legates, that without
farther delay, they should open the Council on the thirteenth of December. This
was very grateful News to the Prelates assembled at Trent; but the Legates
were troubled to see that the French Bishops who were but three in number, were
recalled by their King: for that did insinuate as if France designed not to
approve of that Council, nor to have any hand in it. These small heart-burnings
however hindered not but that the least things that concerned the Glory and
Authority of the Pope were carefully looked after: advice was therefore given,
that in opening of the Council, the Bull that appointed it, should be read; to
the end that all that was done in the Council, might appear to depend on the
Authority of the holy See, with prospect of establishing thereby the Pope's
Superiority over the Council: and so the Bull was sent according as the Legates
had desired.

December came, on which the Pope had ordered the opening of the Council: and
for the greater Solemnity, the Pope appointed a Jubilee at Rome, and that all
should after three days fasting, confess and receive the Sacrament. The twenty
five Prelates that were at Trent, made a solemn Procession in their
Pontificals. The Church was hung with Tapestry, the Cardinal di Monte first
Legate said the Mass of the Holy Ghost, The Sermon of the Bishop of Bitonto is
disliked by many.
and Cornelius de Muis Bishop of Bitonto made a Sermon: after which the Legates
made a long Discourse about the necessity of holding a Council, and what their
procedure ought to be therein. The Discourse of the Legates was pretty well
liked, but the Bishop's Sermon was found to be stuffed with a pedantick and idle
strain of Eloquence. He largely proved the necessity of holding a Council, laid
before them the Disorders of the Church, made a long Encomium on the Pope, and
another somewhat shorter on the Emperor, he praised the Legates severally, and
made some bald Puns and Allusions upon their Names: then turning to the
Bishops, he told them, that they should open their hearts to receive the Holy
Ghost; which if they did not, God would nevertheless open their Lips as he did
to Balaam and Caiaphas. This last passage pleased no body; for the Prelates did
not take it well to be compared to false Prophets; nor was it well digested by
the rest, that he promised a Spirit of Prophecy and Infallibility to men that
might be as wicked as Balaam or Caiaphas; but nothing was taken worse of this
Orator, than when he compared the Council to the Trojan horse, into the body
of which all Bishops ought to enter. This was reckoned an odious comparison,
and the discontented were busy in emproving that thought, and making their
best on it. saying that the Council would prove like the Trojan horse, that is
to say, a treacherous Engine to set the World in a flame. These Ceremonies
being over, the Decree was read, and all that was done in that first Session,
was the putting the question to the Prelates; Are ye willing that the Council
be opened? to which they all answered, Placet: the next Session was appointed
to be the seventh of January following; and this being done the Legates wrote
to Rome for Instructions about the way of Consulting, Voting and Concluding,
that was to be observed in the Council. For instance, if the Persons of
Heretics and their Heresies should be condemned at one and the same time, what
Seal should be made use of, and especially if the Votes should be taken by the
individual Persons, or by the Nations they belonged to; this last way had been
practiced in the Councils of Basil and Constance, that is to say, the Votes
past there by Nations. In expectation of an answer, the Prelates were amused
with the consideration of very trivial matters, as what manner of Clothes the
Prelates should wear out of Festival-days; if they should appear in secular
Habits or otherwise. At length the answer came, which ordered the Legates not
to make too much haste, but to spin out the time in matters of small
importance, until they should adjust at Rome the best measures for the way of
proceeding in the Council. But without farther delay, the Pope determined the
matter of Voting, that it should not be by Nations, because thereby they would
lose the benefit that was expected from the Italians, who were in great Numbers
to be sent to the Council. The Pope sent also Money to his poor Prelates, and
made no Mystery of it as if he feared to be accused of having bought Votes;
because, said he, when a Council is assembled, the Head of the Church is
obliged to such Works of Charity.

What was the form of the Council of Trent, and what had been that of the
ancient Councils.
When the Pope's Answer was come, the Cardinal di Monte began to propose to the
Prelates the order wherein matters were to be examined, before they should be
brought to conclusion, and sentence past thereon. He went not so far back as
the ancient Councils for a Pattern; but stoptat the last Council of Lateran
that was called against Lewis XII. by Julius II. where himself had assisted in
quality of Archbishop of Siponto. Certainly if a model had been borrowed from
the Ancient. Church, the Council of Trent would not have observed the method
that they followed, for there is nothing more different than the ancient and
modern Councils. In the first Ages of Christianity the fervor of the Zeal and
Charity of the primitive Christians, easily put an end to the little
differences that sprung up in the Church, without such great Assemblies; they
met without Ceremony, and without any great observation of Forms; every one
gave his judgment according as God gave him knowledge and put it into his
heart, and the ancientest or ablest Man presided by Election. When the Church
had weathered the Storms of Persecution, the Emperors took upon them the Care
of its Government; they called Councils, and either presided in them
themselves, or by their Ambassadors, nay and pronounced interlocutory Decrees
in differences that occurred. Thus Constantine moderated the Council of Nice.
Marcellinus represented the same Emperor at the Conference which was held in
Africa betwixt the Catholics and Donatists. Candidian presided in the Council
of Ephesus, in the Name of Theodosius the younger. The Emperor Martian was
personally present in the Council of Chalcedon; and Constantine termed
Pogonatus, in that of Constantinople, which was held in the Palace, and is
called in Trullo. It was the chief Magistrate then, who prescribed the form,
commanding some to speak and others to be silent. In those days there was no
distinction made betwixt Congregations and Sessions; when they met it was to
give their opinions concerning the differences that were to be decided, or the
Doctrine they were to judge of: sometimes they made an end in one Session;
sometimes more were required. The Disputes, Examinations and Conferences which
were held for clearing of matters, were termed the Acts of the Council, as well
as the Decisions and Canons: they were not kept secret, but freely communicated
to all: but in later Councils affairs are much altered: Princes have been
wholly excluded and deprived of all right of sitting in Councils as Judges;
they only now assist as Witnesses and Spectatours. Heretofore even Laymen,
though they were not Princes, were admitted; but the Churchmen now have driven
them thence. The Popes have taken to themselves the Power of calling Councils,
and deprived Sovereigns of the same. By a distinction heretofore unknown, the
Congregations are distinguished from Sessions: the Congregations have been
appointed for debating, examining and resolving on, matters; and the Sessions
only for the Ceremony of publishing the Points that were agreed upon in the
Congregations. In fine, it has been given out, that only the Decrees and
Canons ought to pass for the Acts of the Council: And therefore it is that all
the Debates and Conferences of Trent have been suppressed, and nothing
published but the Decrees thereof; with design to keep from the knowledge of
the public, the heats and diversity of Sentiments which broke out, with no
small scandal during the whole sitting of that Council.

The Pattern then of proceeding in the Council of Trent was taken from the
later occidental Councils, and especially from the last Council of Lateran. It
was resolved upon, that matters should be examined privately in Assemblies
called Congregations, that in the public Sessions all things might be carried
decently and without Contest. The Congregations were likewise distinguished
into Particular and General; when a matter had been canvassed in Particular
Congregations appointed by the Presidents, it was reported to a General
Congregation of all the Prelates, where it was sully determined. At length the
matters concluded upon were published, and this was done with great Ceremony in
the Cathedral-church, where after Mass and Sermon, one Prelate in presence of
all the rest read the Decrees, and the others gave no other Vote but placet or
non placet.

A Debate concerning the Title of the Council, and the words, (representing the
universal Church.)
Whilst the second Session was expected, wherein there was nothing as yet to be
done, the Legates proposed a Decree for regulating the manner of living
Christianly at Trent, during the sitting of the Council: this Decree was read
with the Title of the Council, the form of which had been sent by the Pope in
these words, The most holy and sacred Oecumenick and universal Council of,
Trent, the Apostolic Legates presiding therein. The French who had their
prospects, to favor the opinions that prevail in France touching the
Superiority of a Council over the Pope, desired these words to be added,
Representing the universal Church; most of the Bishops were of the same
opinion; but the Legates opposed it, because the Councils of Constance and
Basil had used that clause, with design to establish the Superiority of the
Church and General Councils over the Pope.

John de Salazar Bishop of Lanciano maintained the opinion of the Legates,
vigorously insisting that that clause should not be added, because the ancient
Councils had never used it. But he was also of opinion that the clause, The
Apostolic Legates presiding therein, ought to be left out, because it was not
of ancient use. He farther added that great and pompous Titles of Councils were
not to be affected; since every thing there ought to favor of Moderation and
Humility. The Legates took the first part of the Advice of the Bishop of
Lanciano, and past by the second; so that notwithstanding all opposition, the
Title stood, as it had been sent from Rome. The rest of the Decree past without
any difficulty; for it could not be called in question, seeing it contained
nothing but exhortations to all to lead a Christian, honest and a sober Life.
It enjoined all the Members of the Council that were Priests, to say Mass at
least once every Sunday: and in the conclusion of the Decree, they Council
declared that if any one in the Assemblies should speak out of his turn, or sit
out of his place, he should not thereby sustain any prejudice, nor yet forfeit
nor acquire any right.

January the second Session was held; 1546.
in the which were present twenty eight Bishops, four Archbishops, three Abbots
of the Congregation of Mount Cassin, four Generals of Orders, who with the
three Legates and the Cardinal Bishop and Lord of Trent made up an Assembly of
three and forty Persons. This company met in the house of the first Legate, and
from thence went in great Pomp through a lane of Musketeers, to the Cathedral.
So soon as the Prelates entered the Church, the Soldiers drew up round the
place, and gave a Volley: then was Mass said, and a Sermon preached; after
which the Decree was read, and all answered with a Place^; except the French,
who persisted in demanding the words, universam ecclesiam representans, to be
added to the Title. This being done the next Session was appointed to be on the
fourth of February.

The Legates complain that there appeared division in the very Session, and
pretend to enter upon business.
There was no Congregation held until the thirteenth of January, wherein the
Legates complained that opposition had been made to the Title of the Council
even in the Session; alleging that it was neither prudence nor wisdom
publicly to break out into diversity of Sentiments, because nothing could
prevail more to bring the Lutherans to submit to the Council, than the harmony
and union that should appear in their Proceedings. Afterward they gave it out
that they intended to enter into matters of importance, as the Prelates
desired. They proposed to them the three Heads contained in the Pope's Bull,
for which the Council was called, to wit, the extirpation of Heresies, the
reformation of Discipline, and the restoration of Peace; they asked the
Bishops counsels concerning the Order wherein these three Points ought to be
handled, beseeching them to pray for the assistance of God in it, and to come
prepared for treating thereof in the next Congregation. This was so much time
gained, during which the Legates expeded Letters from Rome. They had wrote to
Rome to know if the Pope would be satisfied that they should remit any thing as
to the words in the Title, representing the Universal Church: but in particular
they acquainted him that they were informed by Cardinal Pacieco, that the
Emperor had enjoined the Spanish Bishops to repair to the Council, and that
therefore it was necessary that he should send ten or twelve trusty Italian
Prelates, on whom he might rely, to be opposed to the Spaniards that were to
come: because the Italians who were then at Trent were men of no great interest
nor authority.

The second Congregation was held the eighteenth of January, where opinions
were given about the method of handling the three above mentioned Heads. The
Germans alleged that there could be no hopes of success in the extirpation of
Heresies, before the Church was reformed, and that therefore before all things,
they should set about a Reformation. The others, though in very small number,
were for taking a quite opposite Course, and that they should begin with
matters of Faith. There was a third party of opinion that they should treat of
Doctrine and Reformation at one and the same time, which opinion prevailed in
the Sequel: but it was not the Legates intention that any thing should be
concluded in that Congregation; they therefore broke it up, and referred the
matter to another time. This, indeed, was resolved upon, that the Congregations
should be regularly held twice a week, to wit, Monday and Friday, to avoid
farther trouble in calling them.

The Legates wrote again to Rome, urging that they might at length have
instructions sent them, as had been promised, and money for the poor Bishops,
because they could no longer amuse the Prelates with Preliminaries, that the
time of the third Session drew nigh, and no body could tell what might be
decided in it. The Pope was in no haste, the Council was least in his thoughts;
for he was wholly bent upon a War, which Cardinal Farnese had the year before
concluded with the Emperor, against the Lutherans. A great party of the
Council are for beginning with Reformation; but the Legates oppose it.
During these delays that party of the Prelates which was for beginning the
actions of the Council by the reformation of Discipline grew strong: and that
was quite contrary to the intentions of the Court of Rome, which aimed only at
the Lutherans, and dreaded a Reformation. The Legates therefore, who had for a
long time dexterously evaded that proposition, were at length forced to oppose
it openly in a Congregation of the twenty second of January; and made use of
this reason that stood them in great stead, That the Emperor had promised the
Protestants that if the Council made no progress in the decision of
Controversies, he himself would call a Diet to end all differences in Religion.
They therefore alleged that if they did not first meddle with matters of
Doctrine, they could not hinder the Germans from taking a course of their own,
without expecting the Decisions of the Council. In was thereupon concluded,
that the matter of Reformation and of Doctrine, A debate about the Seal, that
the Council was to use for their Letters.
should go hand in hand together; there arose also some debates about the Seal
which the Council should make use of in sealing the Letters that they might
have occasion to write to the Pope, to give him thanks, and to Kings to invite
them to send their Prelates to the Council. Most part were for the Councils
having a Seal, and some proposed to have it of Lead, with the Image of the holy
Ghost on one side, and the name of the Council on the Reverse: others proposed
other forms; but the Legates had no mind to any of them, they cunningly told
them there was no Engraver at Trent, that they must therefore send to Venice,
which would be tedious; and that it were better at present to make use of the
chief Legate's Seal. This seemed to be no great matter, but however there was
somewhat in it; for the Court of Rome were not for the Councils having a proper
Seal, that so all its Authority might in every thing seem to depend on the
Pope. Inferior and dependant Courts seal their orders with the Seal of the
Prince, and they had a mind to bring the Council to that. And thus did the
Legates find ways of amusing the Prelates that they might gain time, according
to the Pope's intentions, till their instructions were sent them. But in this
they found no matter, that could deserve a decision: the day of the Session
approached, and they could not imagine what excuse to make; since they intended
neither to treat of any Article of Doctrine, nor of Reformation. At length
Cardinal Pool hit upon a very seasonable expedient; To amuse the Council the
Creed is published.
that in that Session the symbol of the Creed of the Church of Rome ought to be
confirmed and published. The sharper sighted alleged that it was to expose the
Council to derision, to publish and confirm a Creed, which for twelve hundred
years had been universally received in the Church, at a time when there were so
many controversies to be determined. But that reason had no effect; and the
Legates were overjoyed to have found out that Biass, to take them off from
litigious contests. The Decree past upon it notwithstanding all the opposition
of those who said, that after the pursuits and negotiations of twenty years,
they were now at length assembled to hear the rehearsal of the Creed.

Third Session.
The Session was held the fourth of February, and the Prelates went in body to
the Church with the usual Ceremonies, though in secular habit; but took their
Pontificals when they came into the Church. Peter Tagliava Archbishop of
Palermo officiated, and Ambrosio Catarino of Siena a Jacobin Monk made the
Sermon. Afterward according to the Decree of the Council the Creed was read,
with a Preface importing, that therein they imitated the ancient Councils,
which secured themselves with that shield against Heresies, before they began
to act any thing. Then was read the other Decree whereby the next Session was
appointed to be the eighth of April, that is two Months after. The Legates used
a pretext for that long interval, that it behoved them to expect the coming of
many Prelates who were on their Journey to the Council.

The Reformation advances in Germany.
The opening of the Council and the small matters that were acted in it,
hindered not but that the affairs of Religion proceeded in the same manner as
before in Germany: the Reformation advanced in some states, whilst it was
opposed in others. The Elector Palatin re-established the Communion under both
kinds, the marriage of Priests, and the Divine Service in the vulgar tongue,
and that was a beginning of Reformation, that at that time went no farther. The
Conference at Ratisbonne which produced nothing.
The conference of Ratisbonne which the Emperor had appointed the year before,
began in the Month of January, and the Emperor deputed the Bishop of
Eichstadt, and the Count of Furstemberg to preside therein in his name. But it
had no happy issue; for the Emperor's own Deputies, without doubt according to
the instructions and intentions of their Master, who had no other design by
these conferences, but to amuse the Protestants, and give Jealousy to the
Pope, first crossed and then broke it off. However his design being to find a
pretext of War with the Protestants, he made a great noise about the rupture of
that conference, came to Ratisbonne in Person, wrote and complained of it to
all the Princes of the Empire. The same year Martin Luther died in his great
Climacterick, being sixty three years of age, on the tenth of February. The
death of this Man filled all the Catholics with Joy, who verily believed that
the great work of the pretended Reformation would certainly fall to the ground,
after the death of him that first set his hand to it. The Council of Trent
looked upon that accident as a presage that Heresy should be overthrown by its
Authority, since that in the beginning of its Actions, the great Haeresiarcha
was fallen. But such kind of Prognostics are not always certain, as experience
has demonstrated.

After the third Session which was held the fourth of February, the Legates
wrote to Rome, At length they prepare to begin the Examination of matters, and
choose that of the Scriptures.
showing the impossibility of holding the Members of the Council any longer in
suspense, or of putting them off with trifles, as had been done till then. The
Pope therefore at length gave consent, that they should set to work in good
earnest, and the Legates were of opinion that they ought first to begin with
the subject of the Scripture. The Council had been in doubt, where to begin for
confuting and censuring the Doctrine of Luther; some were for following the
order of the confession of Ausbourg; but others thought that that would be too
great an honor for the Confession: they liked better to have abstracts made of
their Books, and to follow the order that the Divines should think most proper.
The Doctrine of the Protestants, that they intended to condemn, was reduced to
four Heads. The first was concerning the sufficiency of holy Scriptures, and
the necessity of Traditions; the second of the Canonical Books, and their
number; the third was about the Authority of the Vulgar Translation, and the
necessity of having recourse to the Originals; the fourth related to the
Intelligibleness and Perspicuitie of the Scripture, the sense that it ought to
be taken in, and the Interpreters that were to be followed. Besides these there
was a fifth Article proposed to be examined, to wit, if these matters should be
condemned with Anathema's. There waited on the Council about thirty Divines,
most part Monks, who till then had been of no use but in making some Sermons in
praise of the Pope and Council: but now there is work cut out for them; for
they were employed to open the matters, and to make the first inquiry into the
controversies; and hereupon they discoursed in Congregations appointed for that
purpose, in presence of the Prelates, who afterward gave their Judgment upon
what they had learnt in the Congregations of the Divines. But the Divines had
no Vote, in consulting and forming the Decrees. The heads above mentioned were
therefore stated in the Congregation, and left to the disputations of the
Divines. As to the first head, that concerned traditions, they were almost all
very well agreed, that they ought to be received as a part of the revelation of
God's Will. Antony Marinier is not of opinion that the necessity of Traditions
should be made a point of faith.
But Antony Marinier a Carmelite Monk started a considerable opinion; he did
not think it pertinent to make that a point of Faith, because for asserting the
absolute necessity of Traditions, one of these two things must be granted,
Either that God had forbidden to write the whole revelation of his will, or
that the Prophets and Apostles had written their books at random, without
design of transmitting that revelation by Scripture; and that hence it was that
part of that revelation had been written, and the rest unwritten: he urged that
the first could not be proved, to wit, that God had for bidden to commit all
his revelation to writing; and that the second was injurious to providence,
which guided both the Conduct and Pen of these holy Writers. He gave therefore
his opinion, that they should follow the Course of the Fathers, who had made
use of Traditions when there was occasion, without making their necessity a
matter of Faith. This opinion was not at all like, and Cardinal Pool one of the
Legates censured it severely, saying that it had been sitter to have been
started in a Conference of Lutherans in Germany, than in a Council.

Four opinions about the Canonical Books.
Upon the Article of the Canonical Books, there were four opinions: some were
for ranking them into two Classes, that in the first should be placed the Books
which had never been contested, and in the second, those which had; this was
the Opinion of Luigi di Catanea a Jacobin, who grounded it upon the Authorities
of St. Jerome and Cardinal Cajetan, who had both done so: some were for having
them divided into three Orders; the first, of those whereof no doubt was ever
made; the second, of those which had been heretofore questioned, but which now
are received; and the third, of those of which no perfect Certainty was ever
pretended to. The third opinion was for reducing them into a Catalogue without
any distinction; and, in a word, some were for naming expressly those Books that
had been controverted, to the end they might be declared Canonical. The Book of
Baruch gave them more trouble than the rest, because no Pope, nor Council had
ever cited it for Canonical: but a certain Person made a shameful remark, that
the Church read part of it in the Desk, and that was enough to canonize it.

By the Eighth of March the Divines had made an end of their Conferences about
the Articles proposed to them: and next day the Prelates assembled in
Congregation, to consult, conclude, and form the Decrees. They past the Article
of Traditions, ordaining the same Authority to be given to them, Vergerio drawn
over by the Lutherans, at length openly declares himself.
as to the written word, and referred to another time the point concerning
Canonical Books; some days after Don Francisco de Toledo, the second of the
Emperor's Ambassadors Colleague to Don Diego de Mendoza, came to Trent: and
the same time Vergerio who had a Bishopric bordering on Germany arrived there
also. This man was famous for many Nunciatures that he performed in Germany;
and several Conferences which he had with Luther and the Lutherans by
Commission from the Pope. But instead of convincing the Lutherans in these
Conferences, the Lutherans had convinced him: and Vergerio had not so well
disguised his Sentiments, but that he had raised himself an Enemy, one Friar
Hannibal an Inquisitour, who stirred up a Sedition of the People of his Diocese
against him. He came therefore to the Council to justify himself, but was ill
received, and referred to the Pope. Instead of going to Rome, he resolved to
return to his Bishopric, hoping to find the Tumult quieted. But the Nuncio
that was at Venice sent him orders to the contrary, and was preparing to
proceed against him, by order of the Court of Rome. In sine, Vergerio took the
Course of declaring himself openly, and retreating into a place of safety: he
fled into the Country of the Grisons, where he made a public Profession of
the Lutheran Doctrine, and afterward wrote many things against the Pope and
Church of Rome. In the Congregation of the 15th of March, it was ordained that
all the Canonical Books of Scripture should be equally approved of, and no
distinction made amongst them: but there happened great Debates about the
vulgar Translation. Luigi di Catanea a Jacobin was of opinion, that the method
of Cardinal Cajetan ought to be followed, who had recourse to the Greek and
Hebrew texts, and had them interpreted to him word for word, because he
understood not the Languages. This Cardinal was wont in his last days to say,
that they who contented themselves with the Latin text, had not the word of God
pure, and without mixture of errors; this Jacobin stood stiff for the
Originals against Translations; but the Plurality of Votes were for the vulgar
Latin, and for having its Authority to be absolutely established without any
reserve. And some were even for having it declared, that the Author of that
Translation was guided by a Spirit of Prophecy. One reason that influenced the
Patrons of the vulgar Translation was, that if they re-established the original
Greek and Hebrew in their ancient Authority, the Grammarians would for the
future be the Masters of Theology, and the Divines and Inquisitours be obliged
to learn the Languages. But there were some learned men in that Assembly, who
could not endure to have it said, that the Latin interpreter had a Spirit of
Prophecy: Isidorus Clarius a Bressian Abbot of St. Benet, an able man and
versed in the knowledge of Languages, refuted that opinion; he gave a History
of that version, and showed it to be made up of an ancient Latin Translation,
which was called the Italick, and the version of St. Jerome; he endeavored to
prove that it was not the work of one man, but of many, and that it being made
up of pieces patcht together, he concluded that it was not at all likely, that
all who had labored therein, were inspired; adding withal, that it was
evident enough that these different Authors were not infallible, since many
faults were to be found in that Translation. It was nevertheless still his
opinion, that it ought to be preferred before all other versions, provided it
were first corrected. Andreas de Vega was of the same mind, that there were
faults in the vulgar Translation; but was, notwithstanding, of the opinion that
it should be declared Authentic, without prejudice to any to consult the
Originals. They proceeded next to the Article of the sense and interpretation
of Scripture. It was thought that the liberty that men had taken to themselves
in these later years of interpreting Scripture, was the cause of the Heresies
in Germany: And therefore the Council purposed to remedy that, by barring
private men from expounding the Scriptures according to their fancy. Some were
for admitting all modern interpretation, provided it were not contrary to the
Faith, and that opinion Cajetan had maintained. Others thought that some
liberty might be allowed to diversity of interpretation, provided they did not
clash and contradict one another; and these last approved the remark of
Cardinal di Cusa, who heretofore said that Scripture ought to be interpreted
variously, according to the times, and the Heresies that are to be confuted.
But most part were of a contrary opinion, and judged it necessary to confine
Expositours to the Interpretations of the Fathers, and not to admit of any new
expositions. A Cordelier of Mons called Richard, went a little farther, and
said that the Holy Scripture was not now any longer necessary for teaching
Divinity, which is sufficiently to be found in the Books of the Schoolmen; and
that at present Scripture was not to be read for the instruction of the People,
but only for Devotion. The conclusion, at length, of all these disputes was,
that the vulgar Translation was declared Authentic, with a proviso that it
should be corrected, and Deputies were appointed to make the amendments. But
sometime after, the Pope put a stop to that work which was begun, and caused it
to be differred until new orders; in fine, all liberty of broaching any new
sense of Scripture different from that of the Fathers, was taken away.

In the Congregation of the 29th of March, the question was debated, whether
Canons and Anathema's were to pass upon these points; some there were that
thought it very hard to declare Heretics and pronounce Anathema's against
those who might question the supreme Authority of the vulgar Translation, and
take the liberty to observe faults in it; but an expedient was found, which
was, to make a Canon touching the necessity of Traditions, and the number of
Canonical books with Anathema's, and to refer the vulgar Translation, and what
concerned the interpretation of Scripture to the Chapter of Reformation where
none were to be used.

In consequence of this it was moved, that means ought to be found to put a
stop to the bad use that Libertines and profane People make of the Holy
Scriptures; some in Magical operations, and others in defamatory Libels, where
they pervert texts of Scripture by wicked and impious Applications. The
Cardinal di Monte was very hot about this, being much concerned at the
Pasquinades of Rome, by reason of the Disorders of his Life. At length it was
resolved that a Decree should be made, whereby, without descending to
particulars, such kinds of abuses should be Prohibited in general terms, and
all Printers forbid to print them.

April, the day appointed for the fourth Session, forty eight Bishops, and five
Cardinals, went in the usual order, and with the accustomed Ceremonies to the
Cathedral Church: after which the Decrees were published, declaring Traditions
to be of equal Authority with the Holy Scripture; the Catalogue of the
Canonical Books were regulated, the vulgar Translation made Authentic, and the
licentiousness of Libertines and Printers repressed. In the same Session Don
Francisco de Toledo the Emperor's Ambassador caused the Emperor's Commission
for Don Diego de Mendoza who was sick at Venice, and for himself, to be
publicly read; and then made his Master's Complements to the Council, which
were returned.

There first Decrees of the Council were ill relished by the Germans, and they
did not take it well that so small a number of men should take upon them in
quality of a General Council, to judge of so important a matter. But the Pope
was extremely well satisfied with their proceedings; and that made him
intimately concerned for the affairs of the Council; fortifying the
Congregation of Cardinals at Rome, to whom these affairs were particularly
committed: he dispatched three Orders to the Legates who presided in the Council
of Trent; first, that they should publish no Decree without first acquainting
him with it, secondly that they should not spend time about matters that were
not controverted;
and lastly, that they should not suffer the Authority of the Pope to be called
in question. About the same time the Pope excommunicated the Archbishop of
Cologne at the instance of the Bishops of Utrecht, Liege, and of the Clergy of
Cologne: The Pope excommunicates Herman Archbishop of Cologne.
he declared him deposed from his Archbishopric, and absolved his Subjects
from their Oath of Allegiance to him, as being an Heretic and an Abettour of
Heretics; ordained them to submit to the Count of Shawembourg his Coadjutour,
as to their Archbishop. The Emperor who valued not the Ordinances of Rome, but
as they made for his interest, did not immediately upon this excommunication
break with the Archbishop; but for sometime continued to treat with him as
Archbishop of Cologne; because he was afraid that if he put him too hard to it,
he might join in War with the Confederates against him, whereas till then he
had persevered in his Obedience. So that that Sentence did no great harm to the
Archbishop; but wrought pernicious effects in the minds of the Protestants, and
those that favored them. This does evidently demonstrate, say they, that the
Council signifies no more than a formal Convocation, seeing People are
excommunicated for Doctrines which ought to remain undecided, until the
Council have pronounced a definitive Sentence. Nevertheless, sometime after,
Herman was obliged to resign his Archbishopric.

The Synodal actions were again renewed in the Council, that the matters might
be prepared which were to be Judged in the next Session. The Pope had enjoined
his Legates to set on foot the question of original sin; but the Germans
opposed it, and would have them to fall upon the matter of Reformation. Don
Francisco de Toledo insisted so much thereupon, in the Emperor's name, that
the Legates were forced to tell him in plain terms, that they had express
orders from the Pope not to meddle with the matter of Reformation; and because
the Ambassador was not satisfied with that answer, but continued his
Instances, the Legates wrote about it to Rome. Whilst they stayed for new
Orders from thence, they caused some regulations to be made about the manner of
proceeding, that matters might be carried more orderly. It was ordained, that
for the future, three kinds of Congregations should be held, one wherein the
Divines should examine matters of Doctrine; the other for handling the affair
of Reformation, into which the Doctors of the Canon Law should be admitted; and
lastly, a third sort which was only to consist of Prelates, to form the
Decrees concerning Doctrine and Reformation. To comply with the Germans, who
desired that the matter of Reformation of Discipline should be taken in hand
before all things else, the Legates gave way to the resuming the matter of
Lectures and Preaching; which had been already moved before the last Session, A
considerable debate on the subject of Preaching, the Mendicant Friars having
invaded the Pulpits.
and had been referred to another time. The great corruption of the Clergy, and
the supine ignorance of the Priests in past ages, was the cause that the
Bishops and Priests who had the cure of Souls, did wholly abandon the care of
instruction and the charge of Preaching. The Colleges and Mendicant Friars
seized the Pulpits which they found empty, and obtained privileges from Popes
to Preach every where without the Permission of the Ordinaries, that is, of the
Bishops; and the Monks had now a possession of two or three hundred years to
confirm their Title. The Bishops bestirred themselves vigorously to recover the
possession of their rights, and demanded the revocation of those privileges:
the Monks defended their cause, and many writings and great debates were
thereupon occasioned on both sides. The Divines and Canonists were consulted,
and most part gave their opinions in writing: the Legates, in the mean time,
under pretense that the reading of these Papers would take up too much of the
Councils time, caused an abstract of them to be made, which should be read in a
solemn and general Congregation. But because that abridgement was probably
defective or partial, one Braccio Martello, Bishop of Fiesole, opposed the
reading of it, and spoke with a great deal of freedom: he told them plainly
that their deliberations ought not to come packt to them from other places,
meaning Rome, nor that it was fit that two or three Persons should be the sole
Arbitrators in all affairs, intimating the Legates; and that therefore it was
necessary that all should hear the reasons, and that in their full extent, that
they might be the more able to comprehend their strength, and pass their
Judgment upon them in the assembly. This discourse choked the Legates, who not
only rebuked him upon the spot, but wrote to Rome also to have him banished
the Council, and the Bishop of Chioza prohibited to return thither any more.
This last Bishop had had a little too bold dispute with the Legate Pool
concerning the opinion of Antony Marinier the Carmelite, touching Traditions:
he had defended the opinion of the Carmelite, complaining that there was no
liberty allowed in the Council, and in consequence of that, he had absented
himself presently after the Session, under pretense of being indisposed. The
Pope, however, was more prudent than the Legates; for though he was no less
resolved than they to oppress the liberty of the Council, yet he thought it fit
to observe measures, and to wink at the actions of those two Bishops. The
abstract was then read, notwithstanding the opposition of the Bishop of
Fiesole; and the Bishops alleged their reasons, upbraiding the predicant Monks
with Avarice, with the Collections and Alms which they erogated under color of
Preaching and instructing Souls. The Monks, on the other hand, pleaded that
they could not be accused of Usurpation, since by permission from the chief
Pastor of the Church, they had stepped into the Pulpits, which they found
forsaken. This Article, as well as others, must wait for its decision from
Rome. The Pope wrote to the Legates, that they should endeavor to maintain the
privileges of the Universities and Monks; but withal find out some expedient
to satisfy the Bishops. But if the Bishops intended to make themselves
absolute Masters within their Diocesses, to the prejudice of the exemptions
granted by the Popes, that they should not fail to oppose it, and to defend the
Monks against the Bishops; because the Monks depending immediately on the holy
See, have been always the chief supports of its Authority, and have been very
useful for bringing down the Bishops. The expedient which was, at length
found, was to re-establish, according to the ancient custom, in Cathedral
Churches, a Doctor of Divinity for reading of Lectures. The name of that office
was still in being in Cathedral Churches; for there was one in the chapter
called the Scholasticus, to whose office there was a Prebend annexed, as being
chief of the Lecturers, and he himself ought to be a Professor of Divinity,
the superintendance of that affair was without any difficulty granted to the
Bishops. But it was not so easy a matter to allow them the same power over
Monasteries, wherein they also intended to re-establish the custom of Lectures
of Divinity, for instructing those to House. The Legates could not endure that
the Bishops should have the oversight of that, though the business was not
about the Mendicant Friars, but only simple Monks, for fear of detracting from
the privileges that had been granted by the Popes, and of emancipating the
Monasteries from the holy See, to subject them again to the Bishops. Whilst
they were sticking at this point, A considerable overture of Sebastiano
Pighino, for contenting the Bishops without diminishing the Authority of the
holy See.
Sebastiano Pighino Auditour of the Rota made an overture that brought the
Council out of these difficulties. His opinion was that the Bishops ought to
have power to re-establish the Lectures of Theology in Monasteries, not in
quality of Bishops, but as Delegates of the holy See: that is to say, that they
should act in that affair by the Pope's Authority, and as it were, in his name.
It is incredible of what use this invention was in the sequel of the Council;
and it was a fetch always employed when any thing was to be restored to the
Bishops, without diminution of the Authority which the Pope had usurped over
them. That so well contrived expedient was presently laid hold of; for it was
Enacted that Parochial Churches united to Monasteries, and which depended on no
Diocese, should for the future be under the Direction of the Metropolitan, as
Delegate of the holy See. In like manner because there were Preachers who had
obtained privileges from Rome to answer to none but the Pope, it was ordained
that they might be punished by the Bishops in the same quality of Commissioners
delegated by the Pope.

As to the matter of Preaching, the privilege was continued to the Monks: but
to give some satisfaction to the Bishops, it was ordained that it should be in
their power to admit or reject those religious Preachers, when they offered to
Preach in other Churches than those of their Order, and that the Monks before
they could Preach, even in their own Churches, should be obliged to receive the
Bishops Benediction: and in short, that the Bishops might punish the religious
Preachers, and suspend them from Preaching, in case of Heresy and Scandal. The
Generals of the Orders were not over well satisfied with these regulations, but
the Legates found means to appease them. The Council enters upon the matter of
Original sin, notwithstanding the opposition of the Germans.


And now the Legates having received new orders from the Pope to handle the
matter of Original sin, set about the execution of that Commission. Cardinal
Pacieco a Spaniard, and all the Imperialists, withstood it again, but all to no
purpose, for the matter must be so.

The first thing they did, was to propose the errors that were to be
condemned, distributed into nine Articles. But for the convenience of Dispute,
before these nine Articles were condemned, it was thought fit to reduce the
whole matter to four principal heads; the first, what was Adam's sin; the
second, what is it that is derived from him to his posterity; the third, in
what manner that sin is transmitted to his descendants;
and the last, how it is pardoned and forgiven. As to the first head it was
agreed, that Adam by his sin lost his original righteousness and innocence;
that by the loss of that innocence came the disobedience of the affections, and
the rebellion of the members, which the Scripture calls Concupiscence. They
likewise agreed that these evils could not properly be called the sin of Adam,
because they are the effects and punishments of his sin, rather than the sin it
self. So that they defined that the sin of Adam consisted properly in the
action which he had committed against tho command of God: and here they gave
themselves the liberty to enlarge, and dispute about the nature and kind of
that action, to wit, whether it was pride or infidelity, gluttony or simple
disobedience.

They found more difficulty about the second head, to wit, what it is that is
derived from the first man unto his posterity. Hereupon many different opinions
arose; some followed the sentiment of St. Austin, who will have concupiscence
to be the original sin derived from Adam: The Cordeliers were of the opinion,
of Anselme and Scotus, who say that the privation of original Righteousness is
truly original Sin, and not Concupiscence; because Concupiscence remains after
Baptism, which purges away original Sin. Most part of the Jacobins were of the
Judgment of their own St. Thomas, who thinks that the privation of original
Righteousness, and Concupiscence made up original Sin, so that the privation of
original Righteousness, is as the form, and Concupiscence as the matter.

As to the third head that relates to the manner how that Sin is transmitted to
the Descendents of the first Man, as the matter is more obscure, so the Divines
found themselves more puzzled about it; all the various opinions of the
Schoolmen were offered; and each of them had its adherents: but that
occasioned no great Debates; no more than the fourth head, which respected the
manner how original Sin is pardoned and forgiven: They all agreed, that it is
fully blotted out by Baptism, and that thereby the Soul becomes as pure as the
Soul of Adam was in the State of Innocence; there was nevertheless some dispute
betwixt Ambrosio Catarino and Dominico a Soto about the Nature of original Sin:
Catarino maintained that the privation of original Righteousness, and
Concupiscence could not be the true original Sin, because these are rather the
Punishments of Sin than the Sin it self; and therefore he pretended that the
Action of Adam was solely and properly original Sin, and that that Action was
transmitted to his Posterity by imputation, by virtue of the Covenant that God
had made with Adam, at that time when he represented all Mankind, and acted in
the Name of all his Posterity; he moreover denied that the Corruption of Sin
could either be transmitted by the Soul or by the Body; because the Body,
according to the supposition of that Divine, can neither act upon the Soul, nor
the Soul upon the Body, Dominico a Soto defended the opinion of St. Thomas, and
said that after the Commission of Sin there remains a stain and inherent
quality, and that that stain and that corrupt quality descends from Parents to
their Children.

Whilst they were disputing about these four heads, the Council at the same
time were upon the censuring of the nine Articles, that had been proposed in
the beginning, according to the relation they stood in to the four heads that
were under examination. The two first Articles that were proposed to be
censured, denied original Sin, or made it only to be derived to Children by
way of imitation, The Council censures the nine Articles of Doctrine which are
imputed to Protestants about original Sin.
and were without difficulty condemned as heretical. Not that they were found
in the Writings of Luther, but they thought that they had found in the Writings
of Zuinglius that he believed not original Sin. However the more intelligent
and less passionate having well examined his expressions were of opinion that
his design was not to deny the propagation of that Corruption, nor the
depravation of Nature; but that he only denied that that original Corruption
could be referred to that kind of beings, which are called actions, reckoning
them to be only dispositions to action, which is the Sentiment of the whole
Church. Erasmus was accused of maintaining some opinions contrary to those of
the Church touching original Sin, and of believing that it past from Parents to
Children only by example and imitation. In one of the Articles taken out of
the Books of Luther, they made him say that original Sin consists in ignorance,
in the contempt of God, and in the privation of the fear, affiance in, and love
of God; which they looked upon to be an extremity opposite to that opinion of
the Pelagians. So that Luther was not accused of denying original Sin, but
rather of making it consist in actions only to be found in men grown up;
because Infants can neither contemn nor hate God; this difficulty being often
proposed to the Lutherans in the Conferences of Germany, they made answer that
by these expressions they meant inclinations to the contempt and hatred of God;
which shows that they only offended in the manner of expression; but because
the Council was resolved to make every thing a Crime, these harsh expressions
were reckoned amongst their Errors. The most important question that was
discussed about that matter was, whether original Sin remains after Baptism;
and nevertheless it is hardly any thing but a contest about words; for all
Divines are agreed that Concupiscence remains after Baptism; and the question
only is then, whether or no that Concupiscence be original Sin; for if that be
the remaining Concupiscence, without doubt original Sin remains also. So that
all the question comes to this, to know whether after Baptism Concupiscence
ought to be called Sin, as the Protestants pretend, or barely a decay and
sickness of Nature, as the Catholics would have it; that was no very important
question then: and yet all were agreed, except the Carmelite* Antony Marinier,
that there was enough in it to fasten Heresy on the Lutherans. He was willing
to acknowledge with all the rest, that original Sin does not remain after
Baptism; but he thought it an excess of severity to condemn the contrary
opinion as heretical. He maintained that both the one and the other might be
safely said, that original Sin remains after Baptism, and that it does not
remain; that St. Austin had expressed himself two manner of ways that seem
contrary; that in his Books to Boniface, he has said that Concupiscence was
not Sin, but both the cause and effect of Sin; and that on the contrary in his
Books against Julian he has expressly said, that Concupiscence is Sin, the
cause of Sin, and the effect of Sin; and that therefore it was evident that
according to his thought, one may hold the one or other opinion without
Heresy, and say that Concupiscence after Baptism is a Sin; or is not a Sin.
This discourse created many Jealousies against the Carmelite, and made them
suspect him to be infected with Lutheranism; and the rather because he had been
observed before that, to have said many things in his Sermons agreeable to the
Doctrine of the Lutherans. Amongst other things he had said, that we ought to
put all our trust in God, and not to rely on our works, that all the virtues of
Heathens were real Sins, and that a man might have some assurance of his being
in the state of Grace. One of the Articles that was to be condemned, respected
the Punishments that are due to original Sin, and to which Infants that die
without Baptism are obnoxious. The opinion of St. Austin, and of Gregory of
Rimini a famous School-man, which condemns such Infants to everlasting
Torments, was unanimously rejected by all. The Cordelier Divines who were at
the Council, maintained that the place to which these Infants were confined was
not under the Earth, but upon the Earth, and in the light; others added that
they were taken up in reasoning about the works of Nature, and that they tasted
that satisfaction which men find in the discovery of curious matters. But
Catarino went a great deal farther, and allotted them a kind of supernatural
Bliss: saying, that in the place where God put them, they should be visited by
Angels and Saints: he labored all he could to get the opinion of St. Austin
condemned, but to no purpose. It was indeed disapproved, but out of the respect
that was had to that Saint, they would not declare it heretical. The sentiment
of the Jacobins which placed these Infants in a Limbus where they are without
sorrows and pain, but deprived of Beatitude and Joy, prevailed and was most
approved.

The Prelates understand not the matter of original Sin, and know not how to
make Decrees about it.
After these long Conferences of the Divines were over, the Prelates held their
Congregations for forming the Decrees and Canons. But they knew not how to set
about it; for it is a thorny question, and part of the Bishops understood it
not. Most part were of opinion, that they should not define original Sin, nor
propose heads of Doctrine to declare the Judgment of the Church concerning that
matter. They who better understood the question opposed that, saying that
Councils were called as well for instructing Believers, as for condemning of
Heretics, and therefore they ought to declare what true Christians ought to
believe, as well as what they ought not. But the Bishop of Sinigaglia and
Gieronimo Seripande General of the Augustines who insisted on that, gained no
ground; for it behoved the Bishops, before they could lay down heads of
Doctrine touching that thorny question, to be well instructed in it, and they
resolved not to trouble themselves about that: though, perhaps when they had
taken all the pains they could, they might not have been able so to have
fathomed the point, as to have explained it clearly. They, therefore, thought
it enough to form Canons seconded with Anathema's: And the first of them
condemns those who deny that Adam lost original Righteousness by his rebellion;
The second is against those who deny that original Sin is transmitted from Adam
to his Posterity; The third Anathematises those who say, that original Sin is
not fully washed away by Baptism; The fourth condemns those who say, that
Baptism is not of absolute Necessity for purging away original Pollution; and
the fifth, at length, pronounces a Curse against those, who hold Concupiscence
after Baptism to be a Sin.


A Dispute betwixt the Jacobins and Cordelier about the immaculate Conception
of the blessed Virgin.
Upon occasion of the second Anathema pronounced against those who deny that the
Sin of Adam is communicated to all his Posterity, there arose a great dispute
betwixt the Cordeliers and Jacobins, concerning the manner how the Decree was
to be couched. The Cordeliers being engaged in the Party of Scotus, who was of
their order, maintain the immaculate Conception of the blessed Virgin: And the
Jacobins who follow St. Thomas deny it. About the Year eleven hundred and
thirty six, the Canons of Lions started that opinion of the immaculate
Conception, and would have established a Service for celebrating it, but St.
Bernard opposed it. The Thomists opposed that Sentiment until the Year
thirteen hundred, at which time Johannes Scotus, a Cordelier, made a Problem
of that opinion and judged it probable: afterward the Cordeliers pusht it on
from probability to certainty, and made it almost an Article of Faith. On the
contrary the Jacobins persisted in the Sentiment of St. Bernard and St. Thomas:
and this sowed the seeds of a War which has lasted three hundred Years, and
does still continue betwixt those two Parties. The University of Paris has
embraced the opinion of the Cordeliers, several Popes have declared for it, and
some against it. Pope John XXII. favored the Jacobins, because of the hatred
he bore to the Cordeliers, who stood for the Party of the Emperor Lewis of
Bavaria whom he had excommunicated. Sixtus IV. who was a Cordelier openly
favored his order, and made a Bull in the Year fourteen hundred and seventy
four, whereby he prohibited any to censure the opinion of the immaculate
Conception as heretical, and confirmed the new Service that had been made for
celebrating the Festival of that Conception. This War continued still very hot
at the time of the Council: And therefore the Jacobins endeavored to obtain,
that it might be declared in general terms without any exception, that the
Corruption of Adam was transmitted to all men, that so the blessed Virgin might
be comprehended therein. On the other part the Cordeliers pleaded that she
might be excepted from the general rule. The Court of Rome was consulted upon
the matter, and the answer from thence was, that they should not meddle with
that controversy: so that the Legates declared that they were not assembled to
pronounce upon differences that Catholics had amongst themselves, but only to
condemn Heretics. The Council therefore not to offend either of the Parties,
but to satisfy the Cordeliers without condemning the Jacobins, added a clause
to the end of the Decree; that it was not their intention in all that had been
said, to do any prejudice to the opinion of the immaculate Conception; but
that the mind of the Council was that the Constitution of Sixtus IV. should be
observed.

Rome, all that had been done was approved of; the Session was held the
seventeenth of June, and after the Ceremonies were over, the Decrees were
publicly read by the Bishop that had officiated. There were two Decrees, one
concerning Doctrine, and the other about Reformation; the first contained the
five Canons against the errors of the Lutherans, and other Protestants about
original Sin, which have been mentioned before. In the second Decree there were
two articles; the first related to the Lectures of Divinity which were to be
re-established in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches. It ordained that in such
Churches able men should be chosen for making Lectures of Divinity upon the
Scripture; that the same should be done in Monasteries; that the Abbots should
take the care of that, and in case of their neglect that the Bishop might
compel them to it, but still by a Power delegated from the holy See. And, in
fine, that the Readers in Divinity before they began to make their Lectures,
should be approved by the Bishop, excepting those of Cloisters whom the Council
did not oblige to demand that approbation. The second Article of the Decree of
Reformation; did regulate the matter of Preaching and Preachers. It ordained
that the Bishops should preach themselves, and that if they could not, they
should fill their places with men fit to instruct and edify: that the Curates
should be obliged to make Sermons or Prones at least every Sunday and all holy
Days: that the Preachers who should preach in Parishes under the Jurisdiction
of Bishops, should have license from them before they take possession of the
Pulpits: that the Preachers in Cloisters, should at least take the Bishops
Blessing: that if these Preachers should prove to be Heretics or scandalous,
they might be suspended by the Ordinaries: that if they had a Privilege from
the Pope that exempted them from the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, yet they
might still be suspended and punished by them, as Delegates of the holy See;
and that the Collectours should neither preach themselves, nor cause others to
preach up the sale of Indulgences. This being done, the next Session was
appointed to be held the nine and twentieth of July, and before the breaking up
of the present, Peter Danes Ambassador of Francis I. King of France was
received into the Council; he delivered his Master's Letters, Peter Danes
Ambassador of France comes to the Council, and there makes a long Speech.
and backed them with an eloquent Speech, wherein he did with much pomp
enumerate the great obligations that the holy See had to the Crown of France:
he told them what Charlemaigne had done in favor of the Popes; how Adrian the
first had granted him the Power of creating the Pope, and how the goodness of
Lewis le Debonaire had made him remit, and for himself and his Successors
renounce that right: he enlarged much in demonstrating the Zeal that the Kings
of France have always had for the maintenance of the Purity of Doctrine in the
Church, and the Propagation of the Christian Faith. At length, he concluded
with his Master Francis the First, whom he commended for his Care and Prudence
in hindering the growth of Heresy within his Dominions, telling them that by
the Rigor of his Edicts he had provided so well, that no Assembly of
Protestants had as yet met within his Territories. Hercules Severolla Proctour
of the Council answered him in a sew words; he thanked the most Christian King
for having sent to the Council, told the Ambassador that his arrival was very
grateful to them; assured him that they had always had a great veneration for
the Gallicane Church, and promised that the Council would on all occasions be
ready to do her all good offices for the future.

Whilst the Council of Trent are darting Anathema's against the Protestants,
the Pope and Emperor prepare another sort of arms against them. The treaty
which the year before was begun by Cardinal Farnese, was completed by the
Cardinal of Trent, within a few days after the last Session. War is declared
betwixt the Pope, the Emperor and the Protestants; the Emperor gets great
advantages, and the Pope is deceived by the Emperor.
In this treaty the Emperor obliged himself to reduce the Lutherans to the
obedience of the holy See, because they refused to submit to the Council. The
Pope, on his part, promised to furnish the Emperor with twelve thousand Foot,
and five hundred Horse, and two hundred thousand Crowns for the Charges of the
War; besides he permitted the Emperor to sell of Lands belonging to
Monasteries as much as might amount to fifteen hundred thousand Livers, and to
have for one year the half of the Revenues of the Church of Spain; on condition
that he should have a share in the advantages of the Conquests that should be
made, and that nothing should be granted the Protestants, especially in matters
of Religion without the Pope's consent; there was also a secret Article,
whereby the Pope obliged himself to excommunicate the King of France, if he
took up arms against Charles during this War. To strengthen this League the
Pope solicited several other Princes to enter into it, and amongst others the
Catholic Cantons of Suisserland, but they would not espouse the Party. This
treaty was kept secret betwixt them, and the Emperor desired it should be so,
that he might the more easily pretend, that it was no War for Religion. He
published, therefore, in his manifesto's, that he had taken up arms to reduce
Rebels who by violence had invaded the Estates of the Church, making Abbey and
Bishops lands hereditary to themselves, and who made alliances with Strangers
contrary to his own, and the interests of the Empire. The design of this
Politic fetch was to retain those Lutherans on his side, who were not engaged
in League with the Confederates; and indeed several of them furnished the
Emperor with Troops; amongst whom were Maurice of Saxony and Albert of
Brandebourg. On the other side the Landgrave of Hesse, the Electour of Saxony
and the rest of the Protestants published a Manifesto, wherein they laid open
the Mystery of that League, and showed it to be a War for Religion, of which
the Pope and Council were the Authors.

This Mystery was soon discovered, for the Pope published a Jubilee at Rome the
fifteenth of July, for the good Success of the Arms of the Church and Emperor,
which were joined for reducing Heretics to their obedience by force. In the
mean time the Emperor continued to proceed upon the account of a War of State;
for he Outlawed the Landgrave and Electour of Saxony, and published a
Proclamation thereupon, dated the two and twentieth of July; wherein he accused
them of having conspired against him, of having made War against other Princes
of the Empire, of seizing on Bishoprics, of having robbed several People of
their Estates, and having cloaked all these attempts under the fair pretext of
Peace, Liberty and Religion: so that he proscribed them as seditious Traitors,
and disturbers of the public Peace, forfeited all their Dignities, and
absolved their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance; though in all this
charge there was not the least word that accused them of Heresy, or defection
from the Church. By these two opposite Declarations which were made by the
Emperor and the Pope, they were mutually vexed, and crossed one another in the
private designs which each of them had. All men easily saw into the meaning of
this; for it was evident that the Pope had only undertaken the War for the
ruin of the Protestants; but on the contrary that the Emperor was not much
concerned for the interests of the Church, if he could but advance the
greatness of his Family. The Italians were not satisfied with the Pope's
Conduct; for thereby they saw that he afforded the Emperor means of making
himself absolute Master of Germany; which could not come to pass, without
exposing the Princes of Italy to the same dint of oppression.

The Pope had a great mind to draw another advantage from that War, and that
was of finding a pretext to dissolve the Council. The Protestant Army who had a
design to hinder the joining of the Emperor and Pope's Forces, was advanced
near the County of Tirol, which is not far from Trent. This was enough to alarm
the Prelates who were already weary of their long stay, and of the small
matters they had done. Besides, Trent lay in the passage of the Troops which
marched from Italy into Germany to the assistance of the Emperor, so that
during the whole Month of August, that City was continually pestered with
Soldiers, which interrupted the proceedings of the Council. Thus all
circumstances seemed favorable for the breaking up of that Assembly; or, at
least for translating it into some Town in Italy; which was passionately
desired by the Court of Rome, who therefore snatched at all occasions to do it.
But the Emperor was of another mind: the Council was useful to his designs of
having a pretext to oppress those that would not submit to it, and so would
have it continue where it was. He therefore sent to Trent, promised the
Prelates to see to their safety; and because the Cardinal di Santa Croce one of
the Legates inclined mightily to have the Council separated, he made his
Ambassador threaten him, that if he stirred the least in the affair of
dissolving or translating the Council, he would cause him to be thrown into the
River of Adige: at least so much has been said and written by the Historians
of that time. The Emperor had great success in this War: the Armies had lain a
pretty long space near one another; and the Protestants had had many fair
occasions of gaining considerable advantages upon the Imperialists: but they
could make no use of them, because they were commanded by two Generals of equal
Authority; to wit, the Electour of Saxony and the Landgrave of Hesse. This
Parity in authority and command is always fatal to Armies, because Jealousy
never fails to raise division and misunderstanding betwixt the two Generals.
However the advantages were much alike on both sides until the end of October,
at which time the Emperor caused the Army of the Bohemians, and of his Allies
under the Command of his Brother Ferdinand and Duke Maurice of Saxony, to march
into the Territories of the Landgrave and Electour, who were the two heads of
the Protestants. This obliged them to draw off, and to march to the defense of
their own Countries: and so the Emperor without fighting remained Master of
the upper Germany; and all the States in those Quarters, whether Princes or
Towns, submitted to his Laws. He got of them a great supply of Artillery for
his Army, and vast sums of money; but in requital allowed all liberty of
Conscience, and the free exercise of their Religion. And now the Pope began to
discover the true intentions of Charles the Emperor, who gave him no share in
what he got, destroyed not the Protestants, but left them in full liberty as to
Religion; and the forces of the Church served for no other end, but to render
him absolute Master of Germany. Nay, he had even promised to Duke Maurice the
Electorate of Saxony, though he was no less Lutheran than his Cousin. This
conduct opened the Pope's eyes, and made him see his true interests. He
therefore, in the first place recalled Alexander Farnese, one of his Nephews,
whom he had sent as Legate with his Army, and some time after, about the middle
of December, he commanded Octavian Farnese Duke of Parma Son in Law to the
Emperor, his other Nephew and General of his Forces, to draw them back into
Italy. The Emperor complained of this; but he excused himself in that the time
of six Months for which he had promised his Troops was expired, and that he was
no longer able to support so great a charge. The Protestants, who had suffered
bad usage, revenged themselves on the Pope by publishing a Manifesto against
him, stuffed with all sorts of reproaches, wherein they called him Antichrist and
the instrument of the Devil; they accused him of having sent People into
Germany to poison the Wells, and standing Waters, and to set fire into several
places in Saxony; and gave all People warning to beware of such Poisoners and
Incendiaries. Though these accusations were not believed, but looked upon as
Calumnies dictated by a Spirit of Revenge; the Pope however, got nothing by
that Conjunction with the Emperor, but trouble, confusion and shame, besides
the loss of his Troops, which returned in very bad equipage.

During these troubles the Fathers of the Council of Trent were still a-doeing,
but proceeded very slowly. The Pope and the Emperor for reasons quite
different were glad that affairs were protracted. The Emperor, because he
desired that the Council might not decide the controversies of the Lutherans,
before he had made an end of the War that he was engaged in. The Pope, because
he hoped that by managing affairs slowly in the Council, he might at length
tire out both People and Prelates, and cause a final dissolution of the
Assembly. And so the Session which was to have been held the nine and twentieth
of July, was put off till the thirteenth of January following. These seven
Months were spent in Disputes; for the Legates loosed the Reins to the Divines,
and left them to that humor of jangling and contradiction to which they are
most commonly too much addicted.

Next day after the Session that had been held the seventeenth of June, the
Legates called a Congregation, wherein they consulted of the matter which was
to be decided in the next Session. The Pope's Divines presented a writing to
prove that after the business of Original sin, which had been then decided, The
subject of Grace and Justification, is chosen for the next Session.
the next thing the Council ought to treat of, was the matter of Justification
and Grace: because it is natural to speak of the remedy after one has
discovered the evil, that Grace is the remedy of Original sin; and that that
was likewise the method observed in the confession of Ausbourg. On the other
side the Emperor's Ambassadors persisted to urge that they should not pursue
the examination of Doctrine, but proceed in the matter of Reformation. The
Legates told the Ambassadors, that it was always profitable to examine matters
of Doctrine, that it was good to be instructed, and that that examination
should not engage them in a decision of controversies, but that they might
afterward be delayed as long as should be desired; and that whilst the Divines
should examine the matter of Justification, the Bishops and Canonists should
consult about Reformation. They concluded upon this, and ordained a search to
be made into the Books of Luther and other Protestants, to pick out of them the
Heretical propositions that ought to be condemned. In the next Congregation,
the Legates, that they might be as good as their word, moved that they might
consult about Reformation. Residence is proposed as a point of Reformation.
The Cardinal of Monte proposed the point of Residence, and pressed the
necessity of it, affirming that all the present troubles and disorders of the
Church sprung from the non-residence of Bishops, because the vices of the
Clergy, and Heresies were occasioned (...) faith working by Charity. But the
Jacobins and Cordeliers that were united against him, carried it: nevertheless
they all agreed to condemn the opinion of Justification by faith alone.

A Debate about the nature of works that precede Grace. Ambrosio Catarino
maintains the opinion of St. Austin and the Protestants.
Afterward the Divines disputed of the nature of works that precede Grace: and
most of the Votes were against the opinion of the Protestants, who affirm that
all works done without faith are sins. But Ambrosio Catarino undertook the
defense of that opinion; he maintained that it was the judgment of St. Austin
and St. Thomas. He confessed that he had been heretofore of the sentiment of
the Schoolmen but that he had renounced it, after that he had read the
Scriptures and the Fathers; and proceeding, he censured the vain subtilty, of
the School-Divines, who abandoning the Scripture and the Fathers, suffered
themselves to be guided by the false light of Philosophy. He backed his
assertion with the words of our Savior, a bad tree cannot bring forth good
fruit, and with those of St. Paul, who says. To be unclean all things are
unclean. Dominico a Soto, a great Enemy of the Doctrine of Grace, opposed
Catarino with so much Passion that he called him Heretic, and accused him of
denying free will as the Lutherans did. For his part he maintained that
Infidels might fulfill all the Law; that is to say, that they might do all the
good works that are commanded, though they did them not for the ends for which
they have been commanded, to wit, the glory of God, and eternal Salvation; but
he maintained that it was sufficient for doing an action without sin, to
observe the substance of the commandment. He therefore asserted that without
Grace one might avoid all sins, and that he might a little correct the
expression which seemed Pelagian, he added that without Grace one might very
well avoid every sin considered separately, but not all sins taken together.
Just, said he, as one may stop all the holes of a leaky Ship in a hundred
places, if you consider them separately; yet not be able to stop them all when
you take them all together, because one cannot be in all places, and whilst one
is busied in stopping of one, the water gets in by the rest. The Pelagianism of
the School had taken such deep rooting in the minds of many, that they did not
even approve that exception of Soto's; they would have had it allowed without
distinction, that men without the assistance of Grace are able to shun all sins.

In the next place they examined the question, A dispute about the preparations
to grace, and the merit of congruity.
if works performed without Grace are preparations for Justification. If
Dominico a Soto durst have stuck to his principles, having with so much
vehemence asserted the goodness of such works, he could not but have affirmed
that they were immediate preparations for Grace; but he durst not, because of
St. Austin, and especially because of St. Thomas, of whose Doctrine he made
profession. And therefore he fell off, and said for justification. But the
Cordeliers who preferred their own Scotus before St. Austin and St. Thomas
advanced a step, and maintained that they were immediate dispositions, and even
merited justification. Scotus was the great Champion for this Merit of
Congruity, according to whom the Schoolmen said, that it was suitable to the
justice and goodness of God to assist him that does all he can, according to
the Maxim, facienti quod in se est Deus non deest; since that time they have
restrained this Merit of Congruity to works that are performed by preventing
grace, before the infusion of justifying grace; but before the Council of Trent
the School was more than Demi-pelagian, and maintained that men without grace
might do all kinds of good works, even love God above all things, and that
these works were true preparations for Justification. The Jacobins would have
been very willing that there had been no mention made of that Merit de congruo,
because St. Thomas grew out of conceit with it, especially in his old age.

Afterward they came to dispute of those Motions which are wrought in the
hearts of men by the first inspirations of preventing grace, before the
infusion of habitual Righteousness. Luther was accused of saying that all these
motions, such as the fear of Punishment, and an abhorrence of sin, were real
sins; that opinion was condemned as heretical, because they had agreed that
those first motions of conversions are good works. The Carmelite Antony
Marinier maintained that this was but a dispute about words, saying that these
actions done out of the state of grace were like Lukewarmness betwixt heat and
cold: that they were in a mean betwixt actions done without grace which are
real sins, and those which are performed in the state of grace which are truly
good. And that so as Lukewarmness is but a less cold, these fears of
Punishments which precede conversion are a lesser kind of sins; but he was fain
to recant his opinion, because all the Divines were against him.

Of justification and imputed righteousness.
In the next place they came to speak of Justification it self; and the
signification of the word Justify was examined. Dominico a Soto maintained
that in the Epistles of St. Paul the word Justify signifies, to infuse into
the soul habitual and inherent Righteousness; but the Carmelite Marinier
maintained that it signified to absolve, and proved it by the opposition that
St. Paul makes of the word Justify to that of Condemn: who is he that
condemns, it is God that justifies? from the name they came to the thing, and
herein there happened a vehement dispute betwixt the Cordeliers and Jacobins
about the question, whether habitual or justifying grace be the same quality as
Charity, or if it be a distinct and different habit. Scotus and after him the
Cordeliers maintain, that habitual Grace and Charity are one and the same
thing; But St. Thomas and the Jacobins affirm that they are two different
qualities.

The Divines then descended to the question of imputed Righteousness; they all
agreed, that Jesus Christ has merited for us, and that his merit is imputed to
us. Albertus Pighius, in giving his opinion, besides inherent Righteousness had
expressly asserted that imputation of the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which
is made in favor of a justified man. Andreas de Vega was for retaining the
word as very proper, though it be not to be found in Scripture, and to back his
opinion produced the testimony of St. Bernard, who had used it in his hundred
and ninth Epistle. Dominico a Soto maintained that it ought to be exploded,
because neither the Fathers nor the Scriptures have ever used it; and
especially because the Lutherans abused it, affirming that that imputed
Righteousness is the sole Justification of man; he added that it cut off all
necessity of satisfaction, and equalled the meanest of all Saints to the
blessed Virgin. This dispute was managed so sharply, and there was so much
affectation in condemning a term that was acknowledged to be innocent, that it
showed by what Spirit the Council was acted, and persuaded all men that the
Lutherans were in all points to be made Heretics at what rate soever.

There was no end of debating; for the Monks who are naturally wranglers
furnished matter for them, and the Legates to gain time fomented the Divisions.
But for some time the disputes were interrupted by the March of Soldiers, and
the Jubilee, that was published and celebrated for obtaining a happy success in
the War against the Heretics. At length the Month of August being half spent,
and the Council being at liberty and in a condition of acting; matters must
needs be brought upon the stage again; the Subject of Justification had been
sufficiently canvassed; and now it was time to form Decrees, and to hold a
Session; but it was neither the intention of the Pope nor of the Emperor that
affairs should proceed with so much expedition. The Pope sought an opportunity
of breaking up the Council, and the Emperor would have had the matter of
Reformation first handled, before they condemned the Lutherans in a concern of
the highest importance, as that of Justification was. Wherefore it was
necessary to gain time, though it was difficult to make any pretext for delay.
However the Cardinal of Santa Croce, who was more skilled in the janglings of
School Divinity than this Colleagues, underttook the business, and engaged to
revive all the disputes, and to make them last as long as they pleased. In the
Congregation of the twentieth of August, it was resolved that some should be
employed to compose the Decrees upon the matters that had been debated; for
this end were named three Bishops, three Generals of Orders, and the Cardinal
of Santa Croce to preside in this little Cabal. The Cardinal made a Project of
Decisions and Canons very pat for reviving the former Debates, which missed not
of its effect: for when the Deputies who had composed the Canons and Decrees
proposed them in the Congregations, all the Subjects that had been discoursed
of before were reviewed; as Grace, the certainty that one may have that he is
in the state of Grace, Works performed out of the state of grace, and in grace,
imputed Righteousness, Debate about the certainty that one may have that he is
in the state of Grace, Ambrosio Catarino and the Carmelite Marinier defend the
opinion of the Protestants.
and the Merits of Congruity. The Cardinal all the while encouraged the Divines
to the dispute, telling them that they were weighty matters, and could not be
too well examined.

In the first place Andreas the Vega, and Dominico a Soto grapled with Ambrosio
Catarino and Marinier the Carmelite, about the certainty that one may have that
he is in the state of Grace. They who held that man cannot be assured of
Justification, maintained their opinion by all the Reasons and Arguments, that
are at this day used against the Protestants. Ambrosio Catarino and Marinier
alleged on the contrary all the Arguments that are at present employed by the
reformed Divines. And because they were much urged with the Authority of the
Fathers, who seem to assert that one cannot be sure of his Justification, they
opposed passage to passage, and concluded that the Fathers had spoken variously
upon that subject, according to the different views and apprehensions that they
had of it, and that therefore without consulting them, the only recourse must
be had to be holy Scriptures. These reasons wrought some effect, and obliged
the others not to call that certainty, that one is in the state of grace, any
more, a rash Presumption. Andreas de Vega went farther, he acknowledged that
one might have an experimental certainty of his own Righteousness that banishes
all doubting: as when one is hot, said he, he knows it certainly, by a
certainty of sense: but he would not have that assurance called a certainty of
Faith; which the rest called a moral Faith. Catarino, for his part, would have
that assurance called a certainty of Faith; but would not, however, affirm that
it was an act of Catholic and universal Faith; but of a particular Faith: so
that he owned that it was not the same faith as that whereby one believes the
Articles of the Creed, and the truths of Religion. All the Carmelites were on
Catarino's side, because of John Bacon a Monk of their order, who had been of
that opinion. However, those very men who were of Catarino's Judgment, thought
that he expressed himself a little too hard, and strained the point too far.
The Bishops and Divines came to such heats in that Dispute, that the Cardinal
di Santa Croce had no more need of adding fuel, but rather of quenching the
fire, They enter upon the matter of free will, and six Articles on that
Subject, are drawn out of the Books of the Lutherans.
which he did by calling another cause. He put them upon the matter of free
will, which is closely linked to that of grace: and the Council named Bishops
and Divines to cull out of Luther's Books such propositions as might be thought
worthy of censure; these Deputies picked out Six; 1. That God is the cause of
all actions good and bad, and that he operated in the treachery of Judas, as
well as in the Conversion of St. Paul. 2. That men have no free will, and that
every thing happens by absolute necessity. 3. That by the fall of Adam man lost
his free will, and retains no more but the name of it. 4. That man has now no
free will but to do evil. 5. That the free will does not concur with grace,
and that men are driven on to conversion like brute beasts. 6. That God
converts those whom he will, even though the resist.


The two first propositions were not confuted by reasons but by invectives;
they were called mad, monstrous, impious and blasphemous opinions. The
Carmelite Marinier who liked not that violent way, was for interpreting those
Articles in some good sense, and especially that which affirms our actions to
be necessary, not free. He observed that it was not true that all our actions
are in our own power, and that the Schoolmen themselves are obliged to except
the first motives which men cannot restrain. Andreas de Vega discoursed upon
that matter in a very obscure manner, and was hardly understood till he came to
a Conclusion; wherein he said, that there was no difference betwixt the
Lutherans and Catholics as to the nature of free will in civil actions, and in
the moral and external works of the Law, and that the Lutherans did not strip
man of his free will, but in respect of supernatural works that prepared man
for Salvation; which being consonant to the Sentiment of Catholics, he was of
opinion that in this particular, something should be done for peace sake. That
name of peace was odious and grating; we are not met for that, answered they,
it is the business of Conferences to accommodate differences, but of Councils
to condemn Heresies: and indeed this Council was very far from indulging any
thing to the Lutherans; this debate was the cause of another, that arose
betwixt the two Schools of Scotus and Thomas, that is to say, betwixt the
Cordeliers and Jacobins, to wit, if it be in the Power of man to believe or not
to believe. The Cordeliers maintained the opinion of Scotus, that it is not in
the liberty of man not to believe, because the understanding is necessarily
determined by its object: when a truth is presented to it, it cannot but see
it, and when it perceives it, it cannot refuse to close with the same. But the
Jacobins on the contrary defended the opinion of St. Thomas, and said that
faith was a free action that might be enjoined or hindered by the will.
Concerning the third article wherein the Lutherans say, that man's free will is
lost since that fall of Adam, the Champions for the pure Doctrine of Grace
produced many Arguments and Authorities, and particularly they cited several
passages of St. Austin wherein he says, Adam perdidit se and liberum arbitrium.
But to that Dominico a Soto made answer, that the word free was sometimes
opposed to necessity, and sometimes to slavery: that the Lutherans took it in
the first sense, when they say that man has lost his free will, because they
would thereby signify, that man acts by an inevitable necessity. But that St.
Austin had taken the word free in the second sense as it is opposite to
slavery, and that his meaning was, that man had lost his free will, because
that free will is captivated under the bondage of sin; though the last is
absolutely the sense of the Protestants, as well as of St. Austin. This
explication of Dominico a Soto was not well relished, they would not have the
free will to be a slave, neither to necessity according to the sense that was
attributed to the Lutherans, nor to sin according to the sense of St. Austin.
The Council could not endure that the free will should be made a slave upon any
account whatsoever; for had they owned with Soto, that it is under the bondage
of sin, they could not have condemned the title of Luther's book de servo
arbitrio, as they designed to do. The fourth Article which says that man has
only free will to do evil, was reckoned ridiculous; and the Divines of the
Council laid it down as a certain truth, that free will is a power of
determining ones self to one of two contraries, to good or to evil. There were
some, nevertheless, that were not so passionate, who told them that their
Maxim was not unexceptionable, and that God was free without having the power
of determining himself to evil.

There arose great Debates in the examination of the fifth and sixth articles
concerning the manner how free will concurs with grace in the work of
conversion. The Cordeliers following the Theology and Principles of their
Master Scotus, maintained that the will which can prepare it self for grace,
can by much stronger reason admit or reject grace when it is offered. But the
Jacobins, who are Thomists attributed to grace, the first motions of
conversion. The Thomists are divided, the beginning of the new Thomists. These
last maintain that Grace is efficacious of it self.
Here the Thomists were divided; for Dominico a Soto a Jacobin, acknowledged
preventing grace, but he said that it was in the power of man to accept or
reject that grace; so that he made the efficacy of grace to depend on the will
of man, and on the determination of that will, and denied grace of it self to
be efficacious. In this particular all the difference that was betwixt Soto,
and the Cordeliers or Scotists was about the preparations: for the Scotists
pretended that the will goes before grace by immediate preparations, which
proceed from the will it self; And Soto denied these immediate preparations,
and only admitted certain remote preparations of the will for the reception of
grace. Luigi di Catanea a Jacobin and Thomist, said that according to the
Doctrine of St. Thomas the will may indeed reject sufficient grace, but not
effectual grace; because this grace gets always the victory over the will. In
this manner he laid down as a ground in Divinity, that the difference betwixt
effectual grace, and sufficient grace proceeds only from the operation of God,
and not from the consent of the will; that is, he affirmed grace to be
effectual of it self. This is that Luigi di Catanea who may be called the
Patriarch of the new Thomists, who have made themselves very considerable since
the Council of Trent, in undertaking the defense of the Doctrine of St. Austin
concerning Grace, which the School of Scotus that was Semipelagian, had almost
stifled. Dominico a Soto maintained against Luigi di Catanea, that the
distinction betwixt grace efficacious and grace sufficient proceeds from the
will, and that the consent and determination of the will alone makes that which
was only sufficient, to become effectual grace; this last opinion carried it
with applause in the Council; but by no other force than that of prejudice. For
it could not be denied but that Soto spoke in an ambiguous and obscure manner,
not daring to rely too much upon what he said, that he made a running kind of a
fight on it, and seemed diffident of his own Hypothesis. On the contrary Catanea
proposed his Arguments with confidence and assurance, giving them a Character
of evidence that confounded all his hearers. He boldly said that he could not
see how the opinion of Soto could be excused of Pelagianism: that to avoid the
extremity wherein Luther had precipitated himself, he run upon another, that
was every way as dangerous. Above all, he laid great stress on this, that the
Doctrine of Dominico a Soto overturned free Predestination, and established
Predestination by the prescience of works; because if the efficacy of Grace
depend on the Will of man, it is that Will which puts the difference betwixt
the elect and the reprobate; a Sentiment confuted by all Divines. In effect,
the Theology of Scotus is no consequential Theology, whose principles support
one another and are well linked together: for on the one hand it defends free
election and absolute reprobation, and on the other, it oppugns the efficacy of
grace of it self, and maintains that the will may prepare it self for
Justification by its now strength. Now they who have but a smattering in
Divinity may easily see, that these two principles destroy one another; for if
men distinguish themselves one from another in this world, only by accepting
through the sole Power of their own free Will, Grace sufficient, which others
do reject, it is clear that God must from Eternity have elected those whom he
foresaw would separate themselves from others by the acceptance of sufficient
Grace. They enter into the matter of Predestination, and finding nothing to be
censured amongst the Lutherans, they condemn seven Propositions of the
Zuinglians.
This last consideration of Catanea's obliged the Fathers of the Council to
enter upon the matter of Predestination. They commissionated some Divines to
make abstracts of the Books of the Protestants, that they might know what
propositions were to be condemned. Nothing was found in the Writings of the
Lutherans, but out of the Books of the Zuinglians they drew Eight propositions.
1. That in Predestination and Reprobation man has no hand, but only the will
and pleasure of God. 2. That the Predestinate cannot be damned, nor the
reprobate saved. 3. That the Elect alone are justified. 4. That the justified
ought to have Faith, and believe that they are predestined. 5. That the
justified cannot fall from Grace. 6. That the Reprobate do never receive Grace.
7. That a man ought to believe that he shall persevere, when he is in Grace. 8.
That a justified man ought to believe that though he fall, he shall rise again.


Most part of the Divines thought, that the first proposition was very sound
and catholic, to wit, that in predestination and reprobation, the will of God
alone does all: that is to say, they approved absolute and gratuitous
predestination, and they pretended that it was not only consonant to the
judgment of St. Thomas, but also to that of Scotus. This opinion was backed by a
great number of authorities taken from holy Scripture, and the Fathers,
particularly St. Austin, who in his old age had vigorously maintained this
absolute and free predestination: yet the election by foreknowledge of works
found its Champions. The Bishops of Bitonto and Salpi put themselves at the
head of the Monks, and made a Party against free and absolute predestination.
They said that God resolved to give all men sufficient Grace, and that in the
foreknowledge of God, election and reprobation depended on the good or bad use
of that sufficient Grace, because God elected those whom he had fore-known
would consent to and accept of that Grace, and reprobated those that would
reject it, they added that the contrary opinion was cruel and inhumane, that it
made God unjust and an accepter of persons, and supposed him to make his choice
without any reason, but out of mere fancy. When they fought with the Arms of
reason, they triumphed; but sunk under the weight of the Authorities of
Scripture and Fathers.

Ambrosio Catarino, who in all other things had been reasonable, espoused here
an ill quarrel, he was of their opinion who grounded predestination on the
foreknowledge of works; A strange opinion of Catarino about Predestination.
and to avoid the force of the texts of Scripture which prove free and absolute
predestination, he made use of a ridiculous Medium; he made two
predestinations, the one certain, effectual and absolute without the
foreknowledge of works, saying that that predestination extended only to a
small number whom God absolutely decrees to save, and for whom in order to that
he prepares effectual means: to that election he applied all the passages
whereby absolute predestination is proved. As for instance those of the ninth
Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, where St. Paul says that God loved Jacob
and hated Esau, before either of them had done good or evil: that of one lump
he makes some Vessels of honor and others of dishonor; that it is neither of
him that runs, nor of him that wills, but God that gives the Blessing.
But he added that besides that absolute predestination without foreknowledge
of works, there is another wherein God had decreed to save all those that
should be converted; and that for that end he had given all men sufficient
Grace, to which some submit, and others do resist: and that this last election
was uncertain, unlimited, conditional, and dependant on the will and works of
man; he confessed that his opinion was contrary to that of St. Austin; but he
also said, that St. Austin's was contrary to the opinion of all others.

The second proposition was variously censured according to the diversity of
principles: and the proposition was, that the Elect could not be Damned, nor
the Reprobate Saved. Catarino confessed that the Elect could not be Damned; but
he would not say that the Reprobate could not be Saved; because that God giving
them sufficient Grace, if they made good use of it, they might be saved. Here
the Thom^sts flourished their distinction, in sensu composito and in sensu
diviso, and said that in an sense compounded or complexe the Elect could not be
Damned; but in a sense divided or distinct they might. That is to say that the
Elect considered under a decree of election could not be Damned; but if
considered simply as men, abstractedly from that decree of Election, it might
be said, that they might be Damned, because they might never have been Elected.
This distinction raised more mist before the eyes of the Prelates, who were
neither great Philosophers nor Divines, than it brought light to the question.
The other six propositions were condemned by unanimous consent; particularly
that which asserted the perseverance of true Saints, and the inamissibility of
righteousness. They alleged the examples of Saul, Solomon, Judas, and others
who had totally fallen from the real righteousness wherewith they had been
invested.

The Decrees are made with a great deal of Difficulty and affected Ambiguity,
to give all content.
After matters were thoroughly examined, Canons and Decrees must pass upon them.
But they were in great perplexity how to do that; every Party striving to have
the Decrees worded in terms that might favor their opinions. Giacomo Cocco,
Archbishop of Corfu, was of the mind that no opinion which could be interpreted
in a sound sense, should be condemned: and therefore he desired that all
necessary exceptions and limitations should be put in the Canons for removing
all Ambiguity. Others opposed that, saying that if all interpretations must be
inserted, it would render the Canons long, tedious and intricate. But the
Bishop of Sinigaglia proposed a method which was approved, and followed during
the remaining time of the Council. He said that there ought to be made in the
first place a Decree of Doctrine, which should be divided into Chapters; that
therein the Doctrine of the Church should be declared in a Style and Method
capable to give content to all Catholics: and that then another Decree ought
to be made containing nothing but the Canons and Anathema's against Heretics.
The Legate Cardinal Santa Croce applied all his Pains and Skill in the
composing of these Decrees; and labored in it with so much success that he
gave content to all; because he worded them with so much Ambiguity, that every
Party found their opinions therein. But this was not done without trouble; for
there were above an hundred Congregations as well of Divines as Prelates held
about it, and from the beginning of September until the end of November, there
past not a day wherein the Cardinal did not peruse his Decrees, and alter
something in them. In a word, they found a means to satisfy the Scotists and
the Thomists, Catarino and his adherents, who stood for the certainty that one
may have of his own justification, and those that opposed it. The Decrees were
so artificially contrived to please all, that Dominico a Soto immediately after
wrote three Books, de natura and gratia, and found all his opinions in the
decisions of the Council. And nevertheless Andreas de Vega a famous Cordelier,
on the other hand composed fifteen large Books upon the same Subject, and found
all his opinions in the same Decrees, though they were quite opposite to the
sentiments of Soto.

Whilst these matters of Doctrine were in agitation, Congregations were also
held about Reformation. The first thing then that was proposed, was the settling
of some good Order, that none might enter into Episcopal Sees, but such as were
capable to govern and edify the Church. But the Council despaired of finding
remedies proper for the evil; because Canonical Elections were abolished, and
in most places the nomination to Bishoprics belonged either to Kings or to the
Pope. They considered very well that it was to no purpose to make Canons; for
it would be impossible to make those Persons ever submit to them. So the
Council past by that consultation, and proceeded to the point of Residence as
well of Bishops as of Curates and other Beneficiaries. Horrid was the
corruption that prevailed in this particular. The Bishops knew not what it was
to reside; nay, and if a Living was but sufficient to maintain the Curate and
his Vicar, he abandoned the care of his Flock, and lived where he had a mind.
From the time of St. Jerome there had been a custom of ordaining Priests
without a Title, who were not confined to any place, nor obliged to Residence:
St. Jerome himself was one of these Priests; he was a Priest of Antioch where
he never resided, and so was Ruffinus Priest of Aquileia. But however, these
Priests without Churches had no Profits nor Revenues. The custom of bearing
the Titles and receiving the Profits of Benefices without any Service, began in
the Latin Church about the seventh Century; for then began Princes to reward
their Servants with Presentations to vacant Benefices. And by degrees was
introduced the distinction of Benefices of Residence, and Sine-cures or
Benefices of Non-residence, under pretense that there were Benefices in which
one was not obliged to reside. The Canonists established this maxim, that every
Benefice is given for Office: that is to say, that a Beneficiary is precisely
obliged to no more but to say his Breviary, for enjoying his Benefice with a
good Conscience. The Popes had often thundered against the Non-residence of
Bishops and other Pastors that had the cure of Souls; but they meddled not with
Benefices that were called Sine-cures, because they were glad that all
Churchmen might not reside, that so their Courts might be more numerous and
glorious. This was such an overspreading and so great a corruption, that all
were fain to own it. But the Bishops to extenuate their fault alleged that no
man was obliged to Residence but by the order of the Pope, and not the command
of God. This gave occasion to the starting of a controversy, whether Residence
be of Divine right and appointment, or only Humane and Papal; and Cardinal
Cajetan was on their side, who thought it to be of Divine right. The necessity
of Residence, that was proposed by the Legates and backed by the Bishops,
brought this question upon the stage, Whether it was of Divine or Humane right.
We shall find in the sequel what terrible debates this occasioned in the
Council; though the first time that the question was proposed, the heat of
dispute was but moderate.

The Legates thought it enough to propose means to oblige Pastors to
Residence: but the Monks and especially the Jacobins to tie the knot of this
obligation a little faster, averred that Residence was necessary by Divine
right. Two Spanish Monks, Bartholome de Carranza who was afterward Archbishop
of Toledo and Dominico a Soto reasoned strongly for that. The Canonists and
Italian Bishops were of a contrary opinion that the necessity of Residence was
only of Humane right. Ambrosio Catarino though a Jacobin, was of the same
sentiment, and said that there was but only one Episcopate established by
Jesus Christ, which is that of the Pope; that all other Bishops holding their
Authority of him, were no more obliged to Residence, but according as he was
pleased to enjoin them. The Spanish Bishops not only publicly favored
Residence of Divine right, but privately encouraged the Jacobins to maintain it
stoutly. In this they had secret and mysterious designs, which they did not
communicate to any; they aimed at the restoration of the Authority of the
Bishops, which was born down and oppressed by the Pope; for it once it had been
decided that Bishops hold their Authority from Jesus Christ, and that they are
obliged to reside in the midst of their Flocks, to take the care of them, not
by the command of the Pope, but by the appointment of God, they persuaded
themselves that they might easily provide against the enterprises of the Court
of Rome practiced upon the Ordinaries; which shall be set forth more at large
in the sequel, when we shall have a new occasion to speak of this question,
which was bandied with much more fierceness, in the third convocation of the
Council under Pius IV. If the Spaniards were cunning enough in disguising the
true reasons of their Conduct, the Legates were not behind hand in diving into
their intentions: and therefore they dexterously waved that question by
referring it to another Session.

In pursuance of the matter of Reformation, they entered upon the examination of
the Exemptions which were granted by the Pope to the prejudice of Ordinaries.
In the Eastern Church all that is comprehended within the precincts of a
Diocese, whether Monasteries, Churches, or Benefices, is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of the Diocese. But in the Latin Church it is not
so: in the first place rich and powerful Abbots, to free themselves from the
jurisdiction of the Bishops, to whom they gave Umbrage, and with whom they
often quarelled, obtained of the Popes to be taken under the Protection of St.
Peter, and to hold immediately from the holy See. The Popes found that that hit
very pat with their interests; because thereby they acquired Subjects in all
places, and that he who obtains privileges, is obliged to maintain the
Authority of him that grants them: and therefore they were very liberal in
their Exemptions. They thereupon took from under the jurisdiction of Bishops
those great Societies of Clugny and Cistaux; they granted the same privileges
to the Chapters of Cathedral Churches, and at length all the Orders of the
mendicant Friars in their first institution obtained the same privileges of
holding immediately from the holy See. The Bishops could not but grumble at
these Exemptions that deprived them of so many subjects; And they would have
taken it extremely well it Giacomo Cortese Bishop of Vaison, had demanded the
abolition of them. This affair having been referred to another Session, was
brought in again with the case of Residence; but hardly any thing could be
obtained concerning these two Articles. As to the first which is the case of
Residence, it was concluded, that the ancient Canons which command Residence
under such and such Pains, should be reinforced with new Penalties. It was
therefore decreed that a Bishop who should for six Months together be absent
from his Diocese should lose a fourth part of his Temporals: that if his
absence continued a Year, he should forfeit the half of his Revenue; and that
if he persisted in that fault he should by the Metropolitan be complained of to
the Pope, to the end that the holy See might take Cognizance thereof, and
either punish that negligent Pastor, or put another in his place; that if the
non-resident Prelate were a Metropolitan, he should be complained of to the
Pope by the Eldest of his Suffragans. As for inferior Pastors, it was ordered
that they might be by the Bishops compelled to Residence, and if among the
non-resident Curates any one might happen to have an Exemption from the Pope,
he might nevertheless be forced to Residence by the Bishop, acting as the
Delegate of the holy See.

As to the matter of Exemptions it was decreed, that no Monk being out of his
Convent under pretext of the Privilege of his Order should excuse himself from
being punished and corrected by the Ordinary of the place, but in this also the
Bishop must act as Delegate of the holy See; it was likewise ordained that the
Chapters of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches might not decline the
Jurisdiction of the Bishops as to the visitation and correction of manners. And
last of all Bishops were prohibited to perform any Episcopal function in the
Diocese of another, without permission.

Matters being thus prepared, nothing could hinder the holding of the Session,
nor was the Pope himself of opinion that it should be delayed any longer. On
the contrary he was glad of that opportunity to nettle the Emperor, who
instantly desired that no controversy should be decided, till he had reduced
the Lutherans to a Necessity of submitting to the Council. The unions of Great
men, having no other foundation but interest, are never firm, nor of long
continuance. The Pope and the Emperor who had been so good friends in the
beginning of the year, fell a clashing one with another before it was ended.
And thereupon the Pope ordered that the Session should be held, notwithstanding
the opposition of the Emperor's Ambassadors.

January was the day appointed for that Ceremony. Andrea Cornaro Archbishop of
Spalato in Dalmatia said high Mass, Sixth Session. 1547.
and Thomas Stella Bishop of Salpi preached the Sermon After this the Decrees
were read, which contained sixteen Chapters, and thirty three Canons concerning
Doctrine, and five Chapters about Reformation. In the Chapters of Doctrine
according as it had been resolved upon, the Judgment of the Church was
declared, concerning the points of Justification, the nature of Grace, the
nature of good works, the certainty that one may have of his own Justification,
the necessity of good works, the perseverance of Saints, free Will, and
generally concerning all the points that had been agitated amongst the Divines,
which we have mentioned before: in the Canons Anathema was pronounced against
all the propositions that were attributed to the Lutherans. In the Decree of
Reformation, Residence was enjoined, the Exemptions of Monks and of Cathedral
and Collegiate Churches regulated, and the mutual attempts of Bishops upon one
another rights repressed, in the manner, as we told you, had been agreed upon
in the Congregations.

Censures by the male Contents, of the Decrees of this Sessions.
The Court of Rome made no new reflections upon these Decrees, for to them they
were not new; but so soon as they came abroad in Germany the Malcontents, of
whom it was full, revenged themselves on the Council by a public and
censorious reflection that let nothing pass; they critisized even to the very
expressions, and the Grammarians made themselves sport with that flourish,
which is to be found in the fifth Chapter cum neque homo ipse nihil omnino
agat; they said it was little better than gibberish and nonsense, because every
proposition wherein there are two Negatives, ought to be resolved into an
Affirmative; so that that proposition ought to be resolved into this cum etiam
homo ipse aliquid omnino agat, which is nonsense. But the Divines made more
important remarks: they said that the Doctrine of the Council, which affirms
that man may resist, even to the end, the inspirations of the Holy Ghost, does
not at all agree with that ancient Prayer of the Church, Et ad te nostras etiam
rebels compelle propitius voluntates. It was thought that the Council had a
design to condemn effectual Grace which St. Austin asserted; that is to say,
Grace effectual in it self: they also picked out contradictions therein; as for
instance in that which is said in the seventh Chapter, that Justice is given in
a certain measure according to God's good will and pleasure, and the
disposition of him that receives it; they could not comprehend how Grace was
given at the same time according to the good will and pleasure of God, and
according to the disposition of him that receives it; for if it be according to
the pleasure of God, it is without any respect to dispositions, and if God have
any regard to dispositions, then it depends not absolutely on his pleasure.
They found another contradiction, in that here the Council condemns those who
say that men are not able to fulfill the Commandments of God, and in the second
Session had commanded men to obey the Commandments of God, quantum quisque
poterit, as far as one is able; because these terms suppose that every one is
not able to fulfill the Law of God. By these censures it was made apparent that
in a matter purely Theological the Fathers of the Council had made use of many
terms borrowed from Philosophy, insomuch that without the assistance of
Aristotle they could not have made an Article of Faith. But above all other,
there happened one unlucky hit to the Council, and made it evident that they
had conceived their Decisions with intent to please all men except the
Lutherans, which was this. In the Book which Dominico a Soto wrote de natura
and gratia, which we mentioned before, when he comes to treat of the certainty
that one may have of his own Justification, he proved that the intention of the
Council was to condemn the opinion which affirms, that one may have such a
certainty of his being in the State of Grace as excludes all doubting. Catarino
that was present at the Council as well as Soto, published a Book wherein he
asserted that the intention of the Council was not to condemn those who say,
that one may believe that he is in the State of Grace with as much certainty as
one believes an Article of Faith. On the contrary that the Council favored
that opinion, because it is expressed in the twenty sixth Canon, that the
righteous man ought to hope for a reward. Catarino concluded that a righteous
man cannot expect his reward, unless he be assured of his Righteousness. These
two Authors wrote several Books against one another on this subject, and even
complained to the Council, that Decisions and Sentiments were imposed upon
them, which they had not indeed intended. The Council was in perplexity and
could not tell what to think of this controversy; which made People laugh in
their sleeve: It was thought strange that the Fathers should not understand
their own Decisions, and that brought the Bishop of Bitonto's Sermon into men's
minds, who in the opening of the Council promised the Prelates that the holy
Ghost would inspire them as he did Caiaphas, who spoke a Prophecy which he
understood not.

The point of the Sacraments in general, of Baptism and extreme unction chosen
for the next Session.
Next day after the sixth Session, which was the fourteenth of January, the
Legates called a general Congregation to make choice of the Controversy which
should be decided the next Session; they had made a kind of resolution in the
beginning to follow the Order of the Confession of Ausbourg: and the point of
the ministerial function in the Church, was the next in order in that
Confession to that of Justification. But because the point of Administration
carried along with it that of the Authority of the Council and the Pope, which
the Legates would not meddle with, they wisely laid it aside, and favored the
Divines to whom that subject was not very agreeable neither, but for reasons
far different from those of the Legates; for that is a point the Schoolmen do
not much treat of, nor are well versed in. So it was concluded that the matter
of the Sacraments which depend on the ministerial function should be discussed,
for the Chapter of Doctrine: and that they might jointly treat of Reformation,
as had been resolved, it was thought fit to endeavor the Reformation of abuses
that had crept into the Administration of the Sacraments. The Cardinal di Santa
Croce had the Change of presiding in the Congregations for Doctrine, and the
Cardinal di Monte undertook the Province of moderating in the Congregations of
the Canonists, for Reformation; besides these, the matter of Residence was
again brought upon the stage: the Bishops, and particularly the Spaniards,
pressed to have it declared of Divine right. But the Cardinal di Monte a brisk
and subtle Protector of the papal Power perceiving that that would make a
considerable breach in his Master's Authority, presently alleged reasons for
having it deferred till another time; he told them that that Subject had been
handled too eagerly, that they ought to suffer the Stirs of Passion to be
composed to make way for the Calm of Charity, that so the holy Ghost might
breath upon them by his inspirations: however he concluded these devout
Considerations with a plain and positive prohibition not to meddle with that
subject for the present. This seemed a little hard, and somewhat inconsistent
with the Liberty of the Council. Nevertheless they condescended to treat of the
Causes which hindered Residence, the most considerable of which is the
Plurality of Benefices.

To begin with the Point of Doctrine, abstracts were made of the Books of the
Lutherans, that they might know their opinions as to the Sacraments in general,
and in particular, as to Baptism and Confirmation. The Articles that were drawn
out as to the Sacraments in general were in number fourteen, as to Baptism
seventeen, and as to Confirmation four; wherein under the title of Lutheran
errors, were comprehended all the opinions of the Anabaptists, which are
rejected by true Protestants. All these articles were examined in
Congregations, and great Debates happened about some of them; they began first
with the number of the Sacraments: The Divines agreed upon the number of seven,
which had been first defined by the Master of the Sentences, and then confirmed
by a Decision of the Council of Florence in their instruction to the Armenians.
But they were not of opinion that this number should be determined to be
neither more nor less than seven, because of the difficulty of defining a
Sacrament, in regard that according to the different definitions that may be
given of it, a thing may be or not be a Sacrament. There was some difficulty
also started about the opinions of some of the Ancients; of whom some had held
our Savior's washing the Apostles feet to be a Sacrament, as St. Cyprian and
St. Bernard. Others, as St. Austin, had called all the Ceremonies of the Church
Sacraments, and sometimes had restrained the Name of Sacrament to Baptism and
the Lord's Supper; they therefore concluded, that they ought to retain the
number of seven Sacraments, but not determine it by a Decree, nor second that
with Anathema's. But others who were resolved to show no favor to the
Lutherans, maintained that the boldness of Heretics ought to be taken down,
who assumed the liberty to make sometimes three Sacraments, sometimes four, and
sometimes more. And here it was that diverse pretty reasons were started for
proving the number of seven Sacraments, some taken from the seven Cardinal
virtues, others from the seven Deadly sins, many from the seven Days of the
Creation, the seven principal Plagues of Egypt, and the seven Planets; though
these reasons of the Divines were diverting enough; yet because the deduction
of them was long, they were somewhat tedious to the Prelates. They likewise
proposed that the seven Sacraments should be named, lest some rash Heretic
keeping still the number of seven, might strike out one of the true, and clap a
false one into the place; they resolved in like manner to determine that the
Sacraments were instituted by Jesus Christ: but some were of opinion that it
would be better not to decide that point, that they might spare the reputation
of some Catholic Doctors who had maintained a different opinion: as the
Master of the Sentences, who holds that St. James instituted Extreme Unction,
Bonaventure and Alexander de Hale who maintained that Confirmation began after
the time of the Apostles: nay and the same Bonaventure was of opinion that the
Apostles had instituted the Sacrament of Penance.

The second Article of the abstracts related to the necessity of the
Sacraments, which the Lutherans were accused of denying; some were of opinion
that it ought not to be pronounced absolutely and without reserve that the
Sacraments are necessary; because some there are that may be let alone, nay and
some that are inconsistent together, as Orders and Marriage. The Carmelite
Marinier reasoned strongly against the absolute Necessity of the Sacraments; he
proved that there could be no use of the distinction of Actus and Voto and
Proposito in the Point of the Necessity of the Sacraments for receiving of
Grace; as if it were absolutely necessary to receive the Sacraments at least in
purpose and intention, because some have received Grace, even before they knew
that there was any such thing as a Sacrament: he produced the Example of
Cornelius and his whole Family, and of the Thief that was converted, who had
all received the Holy Ghost before they knew that there was a Baptism: whence
it is clear that they had neither received it actually nor in intention, and
nevertheless they had received Grace. This strong Reason was evaded by a
distinction of a confused knowledge and a distinct knowledge; saying that these
People had at least a confused knowledge and implicit intention of receiving
this Sacrament. The third Article of these abstracts related to the dignity of
the Sacraments; because this opinion was imputed to the Lutherans that all the
Sacraments are equal in dignity. This being a matter of less importance, it
took up but little time, and the proposition that admits of an equality in the
Sacraments was adjudged to be false, because every Sacrament has its
particular Excellency.

Concerning the fourth Article which related to the manner how the Sacraments
operate, they pretended that according to the opinion of Zuinglius they are but
Emblemes, and at most but signs of the Grace which one has already received,
and not means of receiving it. All unanimously condemned that error, and
concurred in Judgment, That the Sacraments are the Causes of Grace. But here
arose a great Debate betwixt the Schools of Thomas and Scotus, that is to say,
betwixt the Jacobins and the Cordeliers; the Thomists maintained that the
Sacraments are physical and instrumental Causes of Grace: on the contrary, the
Cordeliers, according to the Sentiments of Scotus and Bonaventure, their chief
Divines, said that God produces not Grace which is spiritual by a thing that is
corporeal, and that therefore all the Efficacy of the Sacraments depends on the
Gospel Covenant, whereby God has engaged himself to confer inward Grace, as
often as the outward Sacrament is administered; so that they maintained the
Sacraments to be only moral Causes. The Jacobins accused the Cordeliers of
approaching near the opinion of the Lutherans: And the Cordeliers twitted the
Thomists for asserting an absurdity that gave the Heretics advantage over the
Church. And it was impossible to make them friends. The Legates complained to
the Generals of the Orders, of the Vehemence of their Religious, and even wrote
to Rome that it was necessary to repress them.

There happened also another quarrel betwixt the Jacobins and Cordeliers about
the difference of the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament, upon occasion of
the sixth Article of the Abstracts. That Article imported, that according to
the Doctrine of the Lutherans the Sacraments of the Old Testament had the
virtue of conferring Grace: and this gave an opportunity of handling the
question concerning the Efficacy of the ancient Sacraments. The Jacobins
maintained that those of the Old Law did not justify ex opere operato, but ex
opere operantis, that is to say, in their Language that they did not justify
by virtue of the Ceremony, but according to the dispositions of the heart of
those that received them. Scotus and Bonaventure were of opinion that
Circumcision justified ex opere operato, and to this the Cordeliers adhered;
they proved it by the Infants who under the Law were saved by Circumcision; if
Circumcision justified Infants, said they, that could not be by virtue of
Faith, nor Charity, nor any other Disposition, because Infants could have no
actual virtue. And because St. Thomas had answered to that, that in those days
Infants were saved by the Faith of their Parents; the Cordeliers loaded that
answer with this great absurdity, that nowadays the Condition of Christians
would be worse than that of the Jews, seeing at present no Infant is saved in
Baptism by the sole Faith of its Parents.

The fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth Articles were past over; the fifth
because it had been sufficiently decided already in the preceding Session; that
Article set forth, that according to the Lutherans, Faith alone without the
Sacraments confers Grace. And the Council in the foregoing Session had defined
that Faith alone does not justify. The sixth was laid aside because of the
Debate we just now mentioned, betwixt the Jacobins and Cordeliers about the
Efficacy of the Sacraments of the Old Testament. The seventh and eighth, it was
thought, might be taken in an Orthodox sense, because these Articles affirmed
that Grace is not given to all who receive the Sacraments. But upon account of
the ninth Article which denied, according to the Sentiment of the Lutherans
that any Character was imprinted in the Sacraments, why they might not be
reiterated, there was some dispute. Dominico a Soto would have had it defined,
that that Character is founded on Scripture; others were of a contrary opinion,
because neither Gratian, nor the Master of the Sentences say any thing as to
that, and that Scotus confesses that it can neither be maintained by Scripture
nor the Fathers, but only by the Authority of the Church: And it is to be
observed that that is the manner of this Author when he would smoothly condemn
an opinion. It was decided against the tenth Article of the Doctrine attributed
to the Lutherans, that it is false, That a wicked Minister cannot administer a
true Sacrament. Against the Eleventh, that it is false that all Christians of
what Sex or Condition soever may preach the word and administer all the
Sacraments. Against the Twelfth that it belongs not to all Pastors to increase
or diminish the Ceremonies of the Sacraments.

A remarkable opinion of Catarino about the intention that is necessary in him
that administers the Sacrament.
On occasion of the thirteenth Article which regards the intention that is
thought necessary for the Validity of a Sacrament, there arose great Debates.
The Council of Florence had determined it to be necessary; and that was a Knot
not to be untied; but Ambrosio Catarino Bishop of Minori started a very
considerable opinion; he strongly urged that the intention of the Priest could
not be necessary, because if so, the Salvation of Souls would depend on the
will of a man, who might be so wicked as to administer the Sacraments without
intention: he aggravated the inconveniences of that opinion by this argument,
that if a Child baptized without intention should become a Bishop, he not being
truly baptized all the Priests that he might ordain would not be Priests, and
could not administer true Sacraments, and that so many Millions of Souls would
perish by the Crime of one single man. He therefore concluded that the
intention which is necessary, is an external intention that may be gathered
from the Ceremonies, and is signified by visible actions, which fully agrees
with the opinion of the Protestants; that overture was rejected, though the
Council was stunned with the weight of his reasons, no man being in a condition
to make him an Answer. They decided against the fourteenth without any Dispute,
that it is false, That the Sacraments have only been instituted for the
quickening of Faith.

There happened much less Dispute about the seventeen Articles of Baptism; for
without any Debate it was defined. 1. That in the Roman Church there is true
Baptism; secondly, that it is absolutely necessary to Salvation. In the third
place that Baptism administered by Heretics is true Baptism; and so of all the
other propositions that were attributed to the Protestants, which were
condemned with great Unanimity. The last of the Articles about Confirmation,
which related to the manner of administering it, occasioned a somewhat greater
Noise. The Divines would have the Bishop only to be the Minister of
Confirmation; but the action of Pope Gregory the Great puzzled them. This Pope
permitted a simple Priest to confirm; But the Cordeliers and all the School of
Scotus, who attribute this Power only to the Bishop, alleged that that had
never been but once permitted by St. Gregory, and that perhaps that action was
no true Sacrament. Thomas did indeed confess that properly the Bishop is the
Minister of Confirmation; but he said that a Priest might administer it by a
permission from the Pope.

Whilst these matters were canvassing in the Congregation for Doctrine, in the
other Congregation where the Cardinal di Monte presided they treated about the
means of reforming the abuses which had crept into the Administration of the
Sacraments; and it was ordained. 1. That the Sacraments of the Church should be
conferred gratis, and no man allowed to take any Profit, Alms, or voluntary
Gift upon any pretext whatsoever. 2. That the Sacrament of Baptism should not
be administered but in Churches, and that in Mother Churches where there are
baptismal Fonts and Chapels, except in Cases of Necessity, and when the
Children of Great Princes were to be baptized. 3. That no excommunicate Person
should be admitted to be a Godfather, nor any other under the age of fourteen,
and that they should not admit but of one Godfather; besides that, there were
some Orders made for regulating the Decency of Baptism, but they are not very
important.
There was not so much jangling amongst the Canonists about Reformation, as had
been among the Divines concerning the matter of Doctrine; and yet they had much
ado to agree about the gratuitous way of administering the Sacraments. The
rigider sort would not have had it allowed to the Churchmen to accept of any
Present, Alms or voluntary Offering, under pretense of any contrary Custom,
and pressed hard these words of the Gospel, freely have ye received, freely
give: they added many Canons denouncing Anathema's out of the ancient Councils,
against that kind of Simony. The Cardinal di Monte who otherways was not very
zealous for Reformation powerfully backed that Party: But others more remiss
maintained that voluntary Offerings might be taken; they produced for
themselves a Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage, which allows the taking
of what is offered by him that brings a Child to be baptized; above all they
defended their Cause by the sixty sixth Chapter of the fourth Council of
Lateran held under Innocent the third, which permits it as a laudable Custom
to give Offerings at the Administration of the Sacraments. The Cardinal di
Monte made answer that that sixty sixth Chapter of the fourth Council of
Lateran, ought to be understood of Offerings that have been always settled in
the Church, as Tithes, first Fruits and Offerings that are made at the Altar;
and because they could not agree upon the matter, they referred it to a general
Congregation, but the same difficulties hindered the Conclusion of that Point
there also.

In the general Congregation they had much ado to agree about the form of the
Decrees concerning the Doctrine of the Sacraments. At length they framed
fourteen Canons with Anathema's concerning the Doctrine of the Sacraments in
general, ten about that of Baptism; and three concerning that of Confirmation.
The Divines desired that besides the Anathema's Chapters might be drawn up, as
had been done in the point of Justification, for publishing and declaring the
Doctrine of the Church. But they found it to be a very difficult matter, by
reason of the diversity of opinions. They could not be so fortunate in this as
they had been in the preceding Session, when they found Ambiguous Terms that
gave content to all; for on the present Subject they could not hit upon Terms
which did not cross either one side or other; and that they had no mind to do,
being willing to please all Parties. So that the Council resolved to rest
satisfied with Anathema's; and that opinion prevailed the rather, because the
contrary was very judiciously opposed by Giovanni Baptista Cigale Bishop of
Albinga, who told them that never any man had forsaken his opinion because it
had been condemned, and that though all Catholics do profess that they will
refer themselves to the judgment of the Church, nevertheless they do not do so;
but more obstinately defend their opinion, when once it is condemned. The
Protestations, said he, that the Doctors make of submitting to the judgment of
the Church, are but Complements and terms of Civility, which are not so to be
abused, as to be taken literally; they are to be answered by a civil conduct
and charitable deportment. Every one was convinced of the truth of this in
their own Consciences, and therefore they yielded to that reason. So that there
was no decision made touching the questions in controversy amongst the
Catholics themselves, that they might not condemn any, nor give occasion to a
spirit of Defection. The Legates acquainted the Pope with all these
difficulties, and whilst they expected an answer, they fell to treat of other
matters. In the Congregation of the twenty fifth of January the business of
Reformation was proposed, they came to speak of the remisness of Bishops in the
discharge of their Duties; and the Legates who were not vexed to see the blame
laid at the Bishops doors, and that they were looked upon as the cause of all
the disorders, opposed nothing that was moved upon that Subject; so the
Prelates sported themselves with an imaginary liberty in declaming against
themselves. Giovanni Salazar Bishop of Lanciano was not so patiently heard;
because he attributed the source of all the evils to the abuses of the Court of
Rome; however he was suffered to speak. But Cornelius Muis Bishop of Bitonto,
that spoke next, refuted him, and made it appear that the disorders proceeded
from Kings who had the nomination to Bishoprics.

The abuse of the Plurality of Benefices, and its various sources.
From this they went on to that thorny matter about Plurality of Benefices which
was a hinderance to Residence; because a Prelate who had two Bishoprics could
not be in two places. This Plurality of Benefices was introduced three manner
of ways. First, under pretext that one Benefice alone was not enough for the
maintenance of a Minister at the Altar, more were given him, and Benefices
were distinguished into Compatible and Incompatible. The Compatible are such as
do not oblige to Residence, and have not the cure of Souls; the Incompatible
are those that bind to Residence. Though in the beginning they might make some
scruple of annexing Incompatible Benefices, yet they made none in joining those
that were called Compatible. Now the sufficiency of a Benefice was reckoned
according to the quality of the Incumbent; for as a Gentleman or a Lord could
not subsist at so easy a rate as an ordinary man, so they allotted him more
Compatible Benefices according to the Character he bore of Abbot, Bishop or
Cardinal. The second cause of the multiplication of Benefices are Commendums.
Heretofore when a Benefice was vacant, and for some reason, as of Plague or
War, it was not possible to proceed so soon to the Election of a Successor, he
that had the right of Patronage recommended the care of the Benefice to some
Person with whose prudence he was well satisfied; during the time of the
vacancy this Commendatary received the Fruits, and was accountable for them.
But in progress of time, it came to pass that under diverse pretexts the
Commendataries disposed of the Revenues of the Benefice, and retarded as much
as lay in their power the Election of him who ought to possess the Benefice in
Title. To put a stop to these disorders, it was ordained that these Commendums
should not continue above six Months. But the Popes began quickly to grant them
for much longer time, and at length granted them for Life, giving liberty to
the Commendataries to enjoy the Profits during Life. By this means a man could
enjoy but one Benefice in Title, but he might possess several in Commendum: and
even Bishoprics and smaller Cures were thus bestowed. This was a very great
abuse, at which the Adherents of Luther complained much; but the Court of Rome
were so far from being ashamed of this abuse, that they showed a prodigious
instance of it, at the very same time when the Lutherans most fiercely declamed
against the corruptions of the Church, and that was in the year 1534. when
Clement VII. gave all the Benefices in Christendom in Commendum to his Nephew
Hippolito de Medicis for six Months, to count from the day that he took
possession of them, with Power to take up all the Rents, and to apply them to
his proper use. In a word, the last way of evading the Canons which prohibited
Plurality of Benefices, was the Annexing of Benefices. The Pope was wont to
cast together forty or fifty Benefices, and though they were in several
Kingdoms, yet that was reckoned but the enjoying of one Benefice according to
the Canons, because of many Benefices they had made but one. But lest this
Union of Benefices might in progress of time lessen the number of Livings, it
was appointed to last no longer than the Life of the Incumbent, in whose favor
it had been granted; and that by his Death the Benefices should be reputed ipso
facto disunited. There was a necessity of abolishing these three abuses for
hindering the Plurality of Benefices: and the Prelates as to that, gave their
opinions with a great deal of liberty. They spared not the Cardinals who
possessed several Bishoprics, nor the Court of Rome that by Dispensations
favored that corruption. The Legates who feared that the matter might be pusht
on too far, seconded the overture that was made by the Bishop of Albinga, of
referring it to the Pope. They said that it was a matter that principally
concerned the Court of Rome, and that it would be a disgrace to the Pope to be
thought incapable of Reforming his own Court. The Legates wrote immediately to
Rome about it, and the Pope gladly received the proposition. He removed to Rome
the whole affair of that Reformation, by a Bull; but the Legates durst not show
it, because it was too ample, the Pope therein taking too much Authority to
himself, and because the Bishops also who seemed to consent to that Reference,
opposed it. The Spanish Bishops were so far from the opinion of referring the
matter to Rome, The Spanish Bishops vigorously bestir themselves for a
Reformation; but without success.
that they themselves undertook to give a model of that Reformation. They drew
up a censure in writing, which contained eleven Articles for a very strict
Reformation; as for regulating the exactness that ought to be had in the
examination of Bishops and Curates when they were to be preferred to Churches,
for obliging Cardinal Bishops to reside at least six Months in their
Bishoprics, for declaring Residence to be of Divine right, for preventing that
intolerable abuse that one man should enjoy several Cathedral Churches, for
obliging the Cardinals themselves to resign all they had but one, which they
might enjoy, for prohibiting those Unions of Benefices for Life, for rescinding
and annulling all Dispensations obtained or to be obtained from the Court of
Rome without lawful cause, and for giving the Ordinaries power of judging the
Validity of the cause for which the Dispensation had been obtained. This was
signed by twenty Bishops, and by Cardinal Pacieco. The attempt surprised the
Legates, because of the boldness of the propositions, and that the Bishops had
adventured to assemble themselves without their permission. These Articles were
sent to Rome, and at the same time the Cardinal di Monte wrote that it was his
advice, that that Enterprise ought to be withstood without the least
condescension; adding withal that it would be convenient to make some
Reformation at Rome, to stop the Mouth of the Council. But above all things the
Legates urged, that the Italian Bishops who were retired to keep Lent at home
in their own Churches, should forthwith be sent back to Trent. The Pope
followed that advice, and gave order to his Nuncio at Venice to oblige the
Italian Bishops who passed by Venice, or who were there still, to return with
all speed to Trent, that they might make head against the Spaniards. At the
same time he called a Congregation of the Deputies at Rome for examining the
Writing. That Congregation was not wholly of Cardinal di Monte's opinion, they
thought it not fit to break with the Spanish Prelates, nor peremptorily to
refuse all that they demanded. They thought it sufficient by answering every
Article, to elude all their demands, and in effect, they made a project of
answers to be made to them, wherein, to speak the truth, they showed an Address
becoming the Court of Rome: the Memoires of it were sent to the Cardinal di
Monte, and the Pope committed the management of that Affair to the Prudence of
the Legates, and of those who were styled the well affected, whom the
Protestants named the slaves of the Sea of Rome; he gave them power either
absolutely to reject the demands of the Spaniards, or to make use of the
qualifications which he sent them; according as occasion proved more or less
favorable.

The Pope fearing the Spaniards, resolves to remove the Council to Bologna.
The Court of Rome made great reflections upon that attempt of the Spaniards, and
the Pope began to dread a Combination betwixt them and the Germans; so that not
thinking his Authority safe enough in the Zeal of the Legates, and the Recruit
of the Italians whom he had sent to the Council, he resolved to remove the
Council unto a Town where he might neither stand in awe of the Emperor, nor of
the Bishops of Spain, and to that purpose cast his eyes upon the City of
Bologna. But he was not willing to do it of himself; but thought it more proper
to have it done by his Legates; to the end that if the matter succeeded not,
all the disgrace might fall upon them, and that he himself might only divide
with them the trouble of the disappointment; for that end he sent them a Bull,
bearing date the fifteenth of February, 1547. but which was very well known to
have been made two years before; by that Bull he gave them full power to remove
the Council whithersoever they should think fit, but at the same time sent
orders that they should not mention the Translation till the ensuing Session
were over. Whilst these resolutions were on foot at Rome, the Cardinal di Monte
played his part: he sounded the tempers, gained some by promises, and drew
others over by diverse ways, that so he might defeat the designs of the
Spaniards; and indeed, it cost him not much pains to accomplish his aim. So
that in the following Congregations the Spaniards were baulked, and could not
obtain the handling of the point which they chiefly desired, that is, the
Divine right of Residence. They spoke to it, indeed, with great freedom, and a
Spanish Monk called Bartholome di Carranza who was afterward Bishop of Toledo,
took the boldness to say, that the opinion which held that Residence was only
of Papal right, was Diabolical. The Cardinal di Santa Croce was of the mind
that according to the Memoires sent from the Congregation of Rome; something
should be granted them: but the Legate di Monte stood his ground and carried
it, that no satisfaction should be given them. At length the Legates framed the
Decree of Reformation, containing fifteen Chapters, and proposed it to a
general Congregation. It should have seemed that by that Decree, there had been
a design of indulging somewhat to those who demanded a Reformation, and
especially as to the Plurality of Benefices; but in the main there was nothing
less, because to that Article, and to all the rest, it was always added, saving
in all things the Authority of the holy See; which rendered all the promises of
Reformation useless, because the Pope continued still absolute Master of all
The Spaniards, and particularly the Bishop of Badajox found fault with it,
would have had that clause left out, and that the Pope should not have the
power to dispense against the Canons: But it was to no purpose for them to
protest and declare against it, it must needs go so. They urged that the
Cardinals might be expressly named in the prohibition of possessing several
Benefices; but that as all the rest was refused them. These Decrees, which
seemed to rectify the abuse concerning the Plurality of Benefices, approved
nevertheless a certain constitution of Innocent III. called de Multa, which
condemning the Plurality of Benefices, does notwithstanding permit it, provided
one have a Dispensation from Rome. This, to speak properly, is to do nothing at
all, for what is prohibited in show, is in effect permitted by the benefit of
Dispensations. The Spaniards withstood this, desiring that the Pope might not
have power to give Dispensations for possessing several Benefices: But the
Plurality of Votes gained by the Legates, were for approving of the Decrees.
The Reformation of abuses about the administration of the Sacraments was put
off to another Session, because the matter had not been sufficiently examined.

March. Cariolano Martirano Bishop of St. Mark, was to have made the Sermon;
but he would not, because being one of those who had pressed the Reformation,
and the point of the Divine right of Residence, he had been sharply taken up in
the Congregation, and therefore would not appear at the Session to say a Placet
to a thing that did not at all please him; nor indeed was it safe for him
publicly to oppose the Decrees in a Session. He therefore pretended sickness;
but none of all those learned men that made up the Council was in a condition
to step up into the Pulpit for him, though they had had some hours notice
beforehand to prepare themselves: so that there was no Sermon. On the matter of
the Sacraments in general, fourteen Anathema's were pronounced; seventeen
concerning Baptism, and three about Confirmation, which may be seen in the
Decrees of the Council. Afterward the Decree of Reformation, containing
fifteen Articles was read. According to the model of the Legates, it was
ordained that no man should be made a Bishop, but he that was begot in lawful
Marriage, of mature Age, learned, and of approved Life and Conversation; that
one single man should not be capable of holding several Bishoprics neither in
Title nor Commendum, nor by way of Union during life, and the same was
appointed as to inferior Benefices. There were also Orders made against the
Licenses de promovendo, made use of by the undeserving, for obtaining Orders
from others than their own Bishops, to avoid being examined; there were
likewise some against Exemptions whereby the Members of the Clergy declined the
jurisdiction of their Ordinaries. But all these things put together made but a
very superficial Reformation: and what might otherways have been good was
overthrown by the clause Salva authoritate sedis Apostolicae. The Bishops who
had withstood it in the Congregations renewed their opposition in the Session,
The Legates make a translation of the Council, under pretext of bad Air.
but with less heat, and as little success.

After the conclusion of the Session, the Courier who brought from Rome the
Plenepotentiary Bull for removing the Council, arrived. The Legates kept it
private, and according to the Pope's instructions sought for a specious pretext
of removal. By good luck some distempers broke out at Trent, occasioned by the
season of the year or the confluence of people; and next day a Bishop died. The
Physicians were hereupon consulted, and especially Gieronimo Fracastorio, who
had the Title of Physician to the Council. These Gentlemen gave out what they
had orders to say: the report was presently spread abroad upon this, that the
Plague was in the Town, that the City of Verona was about to prohibit all
commerce with Trent, and all the Prelates began to prepare to be gone. In fine,
the Legates having managed the matter with singular Artifice, finding that it
was now time to declare themselves, called a Congregation and entreated the
Prelates to take their measures as to the inconvenience that threatened them. On
the ninth of March the Attestation of the Physicians was publicly read: and
the most timorous, and those who were in the Plot protested that they would be
gone. At length, after many Proposals of remedies to the mischief, Cardinal di
Monte proposed the Translation, telling them that he had power to do it. The
Imperialists and Spaniards began to smell out the trick, and upon the spot made
answer that the distemper was not yet so great, as to break up an Assembly of
that Importance, or to remove it to any other place, that those who were most
afraid might have liberty to be gone, and that the next Session might be put
off for some Months. The Imperialists being come out informed themselves of the
truth of the report that was spread abroad concerning the Contagion, and found
it to be a mere contrivance of the Legates. Next day, being the tenth of March
another Congregation was held upon the same Subject: and the Cardinal di Monte
proposed the City of Bologna as a place whither the Council might be removed.
The Imperialists opposed it again; but to no purpose; the translation was
resolved upon, and the Decree for it drawn up. The day following, the eleventh
of March the eighth Session was held, wherein the Decree of the translation of
the Council to Bologna was read. Thirty five Bishops and three Generals of
Orders consented to it; but Cardinal Pacieco and seventeen Bishops subject to
the Emperor were against it.

Trent by command of the Ambassador, until they had Orders from the Imperial
Court. Eight Bishops or more were gone before the Session: so that in all there
was not above threescore Bishops in the Council, as there had not been in that
which was held under Julius III. In both there were not many Bishops of
Germany, fewer French, and none of Poland, nor of the other States of
Christendom; for the Prelates were almost all Italian and Spanish. Wherefore
this Assembly had not at all the countenance of a General Council; which ought
to be composed of a great number of Bishops from all Parts of the Christian
World. To be short, this accident opened the eyes of the most prejudiced, and
made it appear how much the Council was enslaved, since that upon the first
glimpse of an apparent Liberty, it was transported into a Town of the
Ecclesiastic State, where it could easily be made sure of. The Emperor was
extrernely troubled to find himself slighted to that degree as to see an Action
of that Importance done without his consent. Francis the first of France never
heard of the News; for he died at Rambouillet the one and twentieth of the same
Month of March, and Henry the Second succeeded him.

THE HISTORY OF THE Council of TRENT.
BOOK III.
PAUL III.
THE Bishops that staid at Trent received Orders from the Emperor not to go
to Bologna: and those of Bologna used great endeavors to bring them over, but
they could not prevail with any, except Galeatio Florimante Bishop of Aquila.
They wrote to and fro to one another; those of Bologna styling their Assembly,
Sancta Synodus Bononiensis, the holy Council of Bologna; and the others at
Trent calling theirs Sancta Synodus in quocunque sit loco, the holy Council in
what place soever it be.

The first at Bologna.
The one and twentieth of April the ninth Session was held, which was the first
at Bologna, wherein there was nothing done but only the Confirmation of the
Council. It was also agreed upon that they should write to the Bishops who
continued at Trent, to signify to them that they could not be reputed an
Ecclesiastic body, and that their separation gave a very great Scandal. The
Prelates at Trent did not like this Letter; however they thought it not fit to
make answer to it, for fear of breeding ill Blood; nor did they engage in any
Synodal act, lest it might occasion a Schism.

A great Victory obtained by the Emperor against the Protestants. The Electour
of Saxony is taken, conderaned to death, and afterward to perpetual
Imprisonment, and deprived of his Electorship.
At the same time the Emperor was succesfull in his Attempts against the
Protestants in Germany; the twenty fourth of April he fought a Battle on the
Elbe, wherein the Army of the Saxons was worsted, and the Electour of Saxony
wounded and taken. Afterward the Emperor condemned him to lose his head; but
the sentence was not put in execution, only the Electour was kept Prisoner,
and the Electourship transferred to the Branch of Maurice of Saxony his Cousin.
The Landgrave of Hesse was also made Prisoner; but by a base piece of treachery
which sullied the Honor of the Victory, that poor Prince was deceived by the
Emperor, to whom he had surrendered himself upon promise of life and the
preservation of his liberty and goods; but not a tittle of the promise given
him, was made good. He left the place whither he had retreated for safety, came
into Saxony, begged the Emperor's pardon, and was the same day made Prisoner;
so that Charles remained absolute Master of all Germany. This great success
gave jealousy to the Pope, and obliged him to renew his Alliances with the
King of France, Henry II. He sent his Legate the Cardinal of St. George into
France, who treated with Henry, and obtained of him Diana his natural Daughter,
whom he had by the famous Diana of Poictiers, for Horatio Farnese his Nephew;
and pressed him hard to send his Bishops to Bologna. Charles in the midst of
his Victories did not neglect those things which might procure him the
Reputation of a Religious Prince, and at the same time mortify the
Protestants; wherefore Don Pedro de Toledo Viceroy of Naples by Orders from him
attempted the settling of the Inquisition in that Kingdom; and this caused a
very great sedition, the Spaniards were forced to fly into the Castle, and
were not able to establish the Inquisition; but they punished a considerable
number of the Seditious.

Bologna knew not how to employ their time: the number of Prelates and Divines
was too small, and they only held Congregations for formality sake. The matter
of the Eucharist was started there, but nothing concluded about it. The second
of June, Tenth Session, the second at Bologna.
was held the tenth Session, which is the second at Bologna, wherein all that
was done was to Prorogue it until the fifteenth of September: the tenth of the
same month of June Pietro Aloisio Farnese Duke of Piacenza and Nephew to the
Pope, a man of an enormous life was by some Gentlemen assassinated in his own
Palace, and immediately after Ferrante Gonzaga Governor of Milan seized the
City of Piacenza in the Emperor's Name. This accident put the Court of Rome
into so great disorder, that all thoughts of a Council were laid aside. So that
the day of the Session drawing nigh, the Cardinal di Monte called together the
Prelates that were about him, and ordered a Prorogation of the next Session
until such time as the Council should think fit to hold it.

A Diet at Ausbourg wherein the Protestants promise to submit to the Council.
About the end of August the Emperor held a Diet at Ausbourg, having a great
Army lying round the Town, part of which he put into the place. And now he
thought it time to get the Catholic Prelates to write to the Pope to solicit
the restitution of the Council at Trent, for which purpose he wrote very
earnestly himself. Cardinal Sfondrato the Pope's Legate at this Diet at
Ausbourg pressed the Emperor on the other hand to admit of the Translation,
plying him with vain hopes of conquering the Kingdom of England, which was
fallen into Heresy, and was governed only by a Child. The Emperor would not
swallow that bait, but persisted, and sent Madruccio Cardinal of Trent to Rome
to press the re-establishment of the Council at Trent. At the same time having
the Power in his hands, he obliged the Protestant Princes and Towns to promise
to submit to the Council, upon large assurances which he gave them that they
should receive all kind of satisfaction. The favors which Maurice had freshly
received from the Emperor, who had invested him in the Electorate whereof
Prince Frederick had been dispossessed, the fear of his arms, and his promises
wrought upon the Protestants to make that false step, which yet produced no bad
effects for their party in the end. Only the Electour Frederic, a Prisoner
stripped of all, could neither be moved by Prayers nor Threats. The Cardinal of
Trent at Rome used all possible diligence to obtain the re-establishment of the
Council at Trent. On the ninth of December he moved it in a full College of
Cardinals, and prosecuted the same in private Conferences, but nothing was to
be obtained: and therefore he left the Negotiation to Don Diego de Mendoza
Ambassador in ordinary. This man followed it close; and spoke publicly of the
matter in a solemn Consistory, which the Pope had called for conferring a Hat
on the Cardinal of Guise, who was then present. The new created Cardinal made a
long discourse, which was not favorable to the Imperialists; for though he did
not formally oppose what Don Diego had said, yet he did pretty well insinuate,
that the holy See might on this occasion expect from France all kind of
assistance against the Imperialists. And, in effect, Henry the II. in the
sequel, not only approved the Translation of the Council, but hindered the
Pope from giving any satisfaction to the Emperor as to that point, to the end
he might set them at variance. The Pope finding himself hard put to it,
pretended that he would know what was the opinion of the Prelates assembled at
Bologna: He therefore wrote to them, and received their answer according as he
had concerted the matter with them; which was, that it was inconsistent with
the Dignity of the Council to return to Trent, that it was necessary that the
Prelates which remained at Trent should first rejoyn the body at Bologna, and
that then they would consult what was fittest to be done, but that it was not
reasonable that the greater number should give way to the lesser. The Pope
signified this answer to Don Diego, approving and ratifying the same: and he on
the other hand was just about to make a Declaration against the Assembly at
Bologna to declare it unlawful, and to protest that all that should be done
there should be null and of none effect, had he not been hindered by Cardinal
di Trani Dean of the sacred College; so that for that time he thought it was
enough to inform the Emperor of what had past. At the same time the Pope made
an answer to the Letter which he had received from the Churchmen of the Diet
at Ausbourg, gave them good words, but in the main refused the re-establishment
of the Council at Trent, and sent them a Copy of the Letter of the Fathers of
Bologna. The Emperor having learnt the Pope's final resolution, sent to
Bologna Francisco de Vargas and Martino Velasco, who appeared before the
Fathers of Bologna the sixteenth of January with a Letter from the Emperor
bearing this superscription Conventui Patrum Bononiae; this Title offended the
Assembly, and Cardinal di Monte interrupted de Vargas, telling him that though
the Council was not obliged to hear him, since the Letter gave not the Council
the Title which belonged to them, yet they would without prejudice give him
Audience. Vargas spoke smartly to persuade them to return to Trent: But the
Cardinal Legate answered proudly, that he was President of the sacred Council,
Legate of Paul III. the Vicar of Jesus Christ, that he declared the Council to
have been lawfully transferred, and that no threatenings could hinder him from
continuing it. On the contrary he threatened the Emperor, that if he
endeavored to obstruct it, he should incur the Penalties imposed by the
Canons. Upon that Answer Velasco read the Protestation wherewith he was
charged, which in the end came to this, The Emperor protests at Rome, and at
Bologna against the Pope and his Council of Bologna.
that the Translation of the Council was null and unlawful, with all that had
followed or might follow thereupon, declaring that the Answer which the Pope
and they had given was fraudulent and illusory, and that the Emperor should
not be obliged to answer for the Mischiefs that might arise from that matter.
Mendoza likewise on the other side having kneeled down in a full Consistory
made the same Protestation to the Pope: and having turned toward the
Cardinals, and protested also against them, he withdrew leaving the Paper which
he had read behind him. This blow did a little amaze the Pope, but he quickly
came to himself again, the Roman Policy was not at a stand in this Juncture;
they saw that matters would not long subsist in the Biass that was taken. And
therefore with a Sovereign and matchless Piece of Policy the Pope resolved to
bring that affair about another way; he well perceived that by that Act of
Protestation, he himself was brought in as a Party; and that was an evident
prejudice to the Character of a supreme Judge who can be judged by no man,
which he claims as his Right. He therefore pretended to have understood that
that Protestation was not made against him, but against the Council; and in a
Consistory held the first of February 1548, he made answer to Mendoza, that in
quality of Judge he was very willing to take Cognizance of that Controversy
which the Emperor had with the Council of Bologna, that he removed the Cause
to his own Judgment, and that he had named four Cardinals, Paris, Burgos, Pool
and Crescencio, to make a Report to him about it; but that was accompanied with
long Complaints against that violent way of procedure, which was never used but
by those who had shaken off the Yoke of Obedience. The Imperialists set light
by that distinction, they would not run into the noose, and Mendoza declared
that he had Orders to make the Protestation in the form wherein it had been
made.

Trent, that he was ready to hear them; he discharged those of Bologna from
entering upon any Synodal action, until the Process should be decided. The
Bishops at Trent answered cunningly to the Pope's Remonstrances, insisted with
him to remit the Council to Trent, and accepted not of the Offer which the Pope
made of judging in that matter. The Bishops at Bologna were acquainted with the
Letter, that came from Trent: they examined the Articles of it, and made answer
to them: And then as if the Process had been sufficiently stated, they pressed
the Pope to give Judgment. But he durst not, because no body appeared to plead
the cause of those of Trent: and besides that, he had no mind to clash any more
with the Emperor, out of whose hands he would willingly have got Piacenza. He
therefore bestirred himself with all imaginable care to obtain that place to be
again restored to his Family, but the Emperor refused to give it back. This
put the Pope into a Passion, and made him threaten to excommunicate those that
held it. But Charles was not much concerned at these Menaces: he briskly
answered the Pope, that his Conduct did infinitely displease him, and that he
should take notice, that he could no longer suffer the Calumnies which the
Court of Rome spread abroad of him, as if he intended to make a Schism in the
Church because he demanded the re-establishment of the Council at Trent: that
as to the City of Piacenza, it was a Town of the Duchy of Milan, which the
Popes had unjustly invaded within a few years; that if the Church had any Right
to it, he should make it out, and that he would do him Justice. The Pope
essayed to cut out work for the Emperor by means of the Venetians and French:
but he found them in no disposition to it; for he being now upwards of
fourscore Years of Age, it could not be expected that a League with him could
either be succesfull, or of long Continuance; and besides his own interest
being deeply concerned, he was not willing to furnish the necessary expense for
the War, nor to part from such sums of money as he needs must lay out to make
any considerable Levies amongst the Venetians.

The Emperor makes the Interim, and a Decree of Reformation at the Diet of
Ausbourg.
These misunderstandings and clashings having put the Emperor out of all hopes
of bringing back the Council to Trent, he took pretty odd measures at the Diet
of Ausbourg. He resolved to regulate the Affairs of Religion himself; and for
that end he named three Divines, Julius Phlug, Michael Helding Titular Bishop
of Sidon, and Johannes Agricola of Islebe, by whose means he framed a certain
Formulary of Faith about all matters of Religion; to which he would oblige all
the People of Germany to submit, until the Council should define them; and
therefore that famous Piece was called the Interim. It contained thirty five
Chapters; wherein they endeavored to qualify those Doctrines of the Church of
Rome, which most offended the Protestants; as for instance, the Marriage of
Priests was thereby allowed, the Communion in both kinds granted: the Sacrifice
of the Mass was not called Propitiatory; Liberty was allowed to cut off such
Ceremonies as tended to superstition: the Pope was only acknowledged head of
the Church for Union sake, and for preventing of Schism; and the power of
Bishops was declared of Divine right.

When this Work came to Rome, it met with many Opponents: most part were of
opinion that it ought to be opposed by the most violent means and strongest
Antidotes, not only because it was an unparalled undertaking for a secular
Prince to meddle in settling the Affairs of Religion, but also because the
Catholic Religion was notoriously wounded by that Interim. But the Pope saw
farther than all the rest; he smelt out what happened, that the Emperor had
fallen upon the way of making both Parties against him: and therefore he
dissembled the dissatisfaction which he conceived at that attempt; ordered his
Legate at Ausbourg to make but a slight opposition to it, and then to depart,
that he might not be present at the publication of the Interim; giving him
instructions, in the mean time, to sow Seeds of Jealousy betwixt the German
Prelates and the Emperor; and to alarm the Protestants, by insinuating to
them, that it was only an invention to oppress their Liberty and Conscience,
and that it was no snare laid for the Catholics, of whose faith the Emperor
could not make himself Judge. The fifteenth of May that Book was read in
presence of the Assembly; and no body durst contradict it, though all were
displeased. None but the Electour of Mentz spoke, and thanked the Emperor of
his own head, without any Commission from the rest: and the Emperor seemed to
accept of those thanks as a general approbation. Farthermore, on the fourteenth
of June following, Charles caused a Decree of Reformation to be published,
containing two and twenty Chapters, and about one hundred and thirty
Ordinances, for the Reformation of the Clergy, against the Plurality of
Benefices, concerning the Duty of Preachers, the Ceremonies of the Sacraments
and their Administration, concerning Discipline, the Clergy, Schools,
Universities, Councils, Excommunication, etc. and very good Regulations were
made in all these particulars: but that Piece was as ill taken at Rome as the
Interim: not only because these Regulations did in no wise jump with the
interest of that Court; but also because it is a fundamental Law at Rome, that
no Secular has any right of giving Laws to Churchmen. Nevertheless that Piece
of Tyranny was born with, because it could not be helped. At the same time an
Act past in the Diet commanding Provincial and Diocesan Synods to be held
yearly, for settling the Decree of Reformation. The Diet ended the last day of
June, and the Edict was published wherein the Emperor engaged himself to
procure the Council to be continued at Trent.

Much opposition made to the Establishment of the Interim.
After that, Charles set about the Execution of the Interim; but was almost
every where opposed by the Protestants. Frederick Duke of Saxony though a
Prisoner refused to submit to it, and a little Town in Germany made, upon that
occasion, a Remonstrance which deserves to be transmitted to Posterity. If our
Lives and Fortunes belong to you, said they, suffer our Conscience at least to
be God's. If you were persuaded of the truth of this form of faith, it would be
a powerful Motive to make us embrace it. But seeing you your self look upon it
as false, why would you have us receive it as true? For, the truth is, the
Emperor had no design to persuade the World that he himself had renounced the
Doctrines of the Church of Rome, which he had either impaired or qualified in
his Interim. On the contrary in the Preface, he prohibited all those who had
till then continued in the Roman Communion, to make any alteration in Doctrine
or Ceremonies. Though this opposition was pretty general, yet some consented to
admit of that Interim, or at least pretended to do so: But the City of
Magdebourg did formally reject it, and in such a slighting way too, as obliged
the Emperor to declare them Rebels, and make War against them. They maintained
that War a long time, and obstinately refused to surrender. The Emperor had
likewise expressly commanded that no man should write against the Interim, and
nevertheless, a whole swarm of writings came forth against that Book, both from
Protestants and Roman Catholics.

Francisco Romeo General of the Jacobins by command of the Pope assembled the
most Learned of his Order, and caused a smart Refutation of it to be made. It
had the ill luck also to stir up division amongst the Protestants of Germany,
that is to say, betwixt those who had admitted of it, and those who would not,
and divided them into two Sects; for they who in compliance with the Emperor
had allowed the re-establishment of the ancient Ceremonies, in that justified
their own Proceedings, maintaining Ceremonies to be things indifferent. But the
rest objected that weakness to them as a great Crime, and separated themselves
from them, calling them the Indifferent, or Adiaphorists.

The Execution of the Edict of Reformation which the Emperor had made, caused
as great troubles; for the German Prelates who stuck fastest to the Pope,
desired that at least, he might have some hand in the business: and therefore
the Emperor at their Solicitation acquainted the Pope with all that he had
done, and prayed him to send Legates to join with him in his design of
Reforming the Church of Germany. The Pope had it least in his thoughts to
become the Executor of the Orders of an Emperor, whom he looked upon as an
Usurper of his Rights. Nevertheless, that he might not absolutely break with
the Germans who he feared might make a general revolt, and lest in imitation of
Henry the Eighth, King of England, Charles might declare himself Head of the
Church, he resolved to send two Legates, not for executing the Edict of
Reformation, but to give Absolution to the. Lutherans who should return into
the Bosom of the Church; with power to grant all manner of Dispensations, even
as far as to allow the Communion in both kinds to those who would confess that
the Church does not err in prohibiting it. He gave them likewise Authority to
abrogate some of the Ceremonies of the Church, and to remit somewhat of the
ancient Discipline. He empowred them not only to absolve Seculars, Princes and
Towns, but also Apostate Monks who had left their Monasteries; allowing them to
live abroad in the World, provided that under the habit of Secular Priests,
they should wear that of Regulars. This last seemed a pretty odd kind of an
Order, and a Mystery that no body could tell what to make of. He caused Copies
of this Bull to be dispersed, that so he might thwart the Edict of Charles, and
retreive the possession of the power of Reforming Manners and Doctrine which
the Emperor would have invaded. In execution of the Emperor's Edict, some
Provincial Synods were held in Germany. The Archbishop of Cologne called one,
wherein some good Acts were made concerning Discipline, which were approved by
Charles the Fifth; but no mention at all of matters of Faith. The Electour of
Mentz observed not the same measures; for in his Synod he made eight and forty
Decrees about matters of Faith, and fifty six concerning the Reformation of
Discipline. In things that had been decided he followed the Council of Trent,
and in the rest, the most received opinions of the Schoolmen: except in the
point of Images, where he declared that Images are only appointed for bare
Commemoration, and not for objects of Devotion; and in that of Saints, where he
asserts that the honor due to Saints is an honor of Society and Dilection,
and not a Religious Worship. The Nuncio's who were named in the year 1548. set
not forward on their Journey to Germany until the year 1549. Germany was to no
purpose, they took the Emperor's Counsel, which was to substitute Bishops in
their place to see to the execution of the Bull, according as they had power to
do. This substitution then was made, but it signified nothing, for the
Catholics who persisted in their obedience, would not make use of the
Indulgence which the Bull allowed, and the Protestants on the other hand, would
hold nothing from the Pope's Liberality.

JULIUS III.
Paul III dies. Giovanni Maria di Monte is chosen in his place, and takes the
Name of Julius III.
The same year 1549. on the seventh of November, Pope Paul the Third died. And
immediately upon the news, the Cardinal di Monte left Bologna, and so the
remnant of that Council was dispersed. It is the custom to enter into the
Conclave for election of a new Pope the tenth day after the death of the
former, because the Ceremonies of the Funeral last nine days: but because many
were absent they entered not before the twenty eighth of Pacieco, Head of the
Prelates who continued at Trent, came not before the Conclave was shut up,
because he had expected the Emperor's Orders which were long a coming. The
Conclave was divided into three Factions, the French, the German, and that of
the Farneses. The French were for Cardinal Salviati, the Imperialists for
Cardinal Pool, and the Farneses for one of the Creatures of their Uncle. None
of the Factions was strong enough to carry it over the rest; but at length,
after they had been shut up in the Conclave ten or eleven weeks, the Farneses
having joined with the French, they concluded to choose Cardinal Giovanni Maria
di Monte, who had been Legate President at Trent and Bologna. The Imperialists
who could not hinder, seemed to give way to it, and to concur with the
Farneses. He was therefore chosen the eighth of February, and Crowned the three
and twentieth: Immediately after his Election he was sworn to continue the
Council, as it had been agreed upon amongst the Cardinals; and on the twenty
fourth he took the name of Julius III. He performed the Ceremony of opening the
Golden Gate, a Ceremony commonly used on Christmas-Eve at the opening of the
Jubilee.

The Emperor immediately dispatched Luigi Davila to Rome with Orders, so soon
as he had made the usual Complements to the Pope upon his Promotion, to
solicit the re-establishment of the Council. The Pope made answer in an
ambiguous manner, and gave Cardinal Pacieco some grounds to hope, that he would
not be against the restitution of the Council, provided that it might only
serve for the ruin of Heretics, and not for overthrowing the Authority of the
holy See. What difficulties soever he made as to that; yet they quickly began
to have hopes of overcoming them, because after his exaltation he gave himself
wholly over to pleasure and ease. Don Diego de Mendoza wrote to the Emperor
that the Pope grew effeminate in his pleasures, and that he would not retain
vigor enough to resist those importunities that might create him trouble.
Being raised to the height of Dignity, he thought himself no longer obliged to
live under constraint, and therefore giving way to his inclinations he led a
pretty easy and soft kind of a life. Nay, and in the very beginning of his
Pontificate he committed an action which confirmed the suspicions that men had
conceived, that his pleasures had been none of the most gentile and innocent.
And that was, that when according to the custom, upon his exaltation to the
Papacy he was to dispose of his Cardinals hat, he gave it to a man of so base
extraction, that his name and family are still unknown in the World; all that
could be said of him was, that he was born in the City of Piacenza. Giovanni
Maria di Monte, who was then but Bishop of Siponto and Governor of Bologna,
took that young boy into his Service, and had so great an affection for him,
that he used him as if he had been his own Son. When he was Legate at Trent,
this Favorite fell sick; he sent him to Verona for change of Air, and after he
had recovered, knowing what day he was to return, he carried his retinue with
him out of Town, under pretext of a walk on the rode to Verona, where having
met him, he received him with extraordinary Caresses: and, at length, when he
was Pope, he obliged his Brother to adopt the Boy who was called Innocent, and
so gave him the Name of Innocent di Monte, making him at the same time both his
Nephew and Cardinal. Innocent love does not commonly go so far.

The Emperor obtains the Council to be re-established in the City of Trent.
Charles abating nothing of his instances for the re-establishment of the
Council at Trent, the Pope was at length forced to take advice thereupon. The
opinions were extremely different according to the various Prospects that he
and his Counselors might have. The reasons which obliged Paul III to make that
Translation were still in force, and Julius being now Pope seemed to be more
engaged to maintain it, because it had been a work of his own making whilst he
was Cardinal. But on the other hand he did not find himself so well seated in
his Chair as to be able to resist the shocks of those struglings that had given
so much trouble to his Predecessor Paul III. though confirmed in the Papacy by
a long Possession; he therefore resolved to yield, but to keep a Decorum he
would have it done in the usual Forms: and for that end he concealed his
resolution; he called an Assembly of Cardinals and others, into which he
purposely admitted many Imperialists and Spaniards, and referred himself to
what they should think fit to resolve upon.

The Imperialists who followed their inclinations, and the favorers of the
Court of Rome who knew the Pope's secret, concluded that the Council could not
be called at Bologna, and that therefore it must be remitted to Trent. The
reason that was given out for this, and to which Julius pretended to acquiesce,
was, that the matter of the Translation having caused a Process whereof Pope
Paul III. had made himself Judge, Julius III. being now Pope could not be Judge
in a controversy wherein a little before he was a Party, being Legate and
Cardinal. So that he declared, that with his fortune he had changed his
thoughts and interest, and that Pope Julius did not think himself obliged to
maintain all that had been done by the Cardinal di Monte; he therefore resolved
to run the risque of a Council, wherein notwithstanding he was much afraid that
the Spaniards would attempt something contrary to his Authority: but as to that
he used all the Caution and Circumspection that he could, he got a promise from
Charles that he would maintain the dignity of the holy See; which the Emperor
gave with Complements that had, perhaps, more of Civility than Sincerity. They
were somewhat apprehensive at Rome that the Choice of the place would not
please the King of France, because he had no reason to take it well to see a
Council held in Germany, by reason of the Clashings that he had with the
Emperor. Nevertheless Trivulcio Bishop of Tolon, the Nuncio sent about that
affair, did so well acquit himself of the Commission that he had to manage the
King of France, that he compassed his ends; he prevailed with him to accept of
the Place, and engaged him to defend the Papal Authority, if the Imperialists
should attempt the lessening of it.

Ausbourg, whither the Bishop of Siponto came to wait on him in name of the
Pope, to bring him his consent to the return of the Council to Trent, and to
demand some things of him. First, because that the place might be suspected by
the French, that the Emperor would give that Nation all the security that
might reasonably be demanded, to the end that they might send their Prelates to
the Council; as he on his part had promised Henry, that the Council should make
no Impeachments of the Liberties of the Gallicane Church. Secondly, that the
Actions of the Council might be hastened on, to lessen the great expense that
the Pope was at during the sitting of it. Thirdly, that he would oblige the
Protestants to submit to it, and to receive the Decisions which had been
already past therein. And in the fourth place that he would be pleased to take
upon him the Care of maintaining the Authority of the holy See against the
attempts of so many ill affected People. As to the first the Emperor answered
that it was just that France should have all manner of satisfaction. To the
second, that it was very reasonable that the Council should be employed in
business so long as it continued. To the third, that in the last Diet he had
obtained the consent of the Protestants to submit to the Council; but that it
was not time to discourse the Question, to wit, whether the things that have
been decided might be reviewed or not, that that was more proper to be handled
in the Council. And as to the last, his Answer was, that he had always been the
Protector of the Dignity of the holy See, and that he would still continue to
be so. The Pope was not very well satisfied with the Answer to the third
Article: For the Court of Rome was resolved never to consent that the matters
decided in the former Sessions should be again reviewed, and according to the
Answer of Charles, the Pope was afraid that his design was to favor the
Lutherans, who demanded the revising of the Decrees. But he dissembled his
thoughts as to the answer, and acted as if that Article had been really
concluded, and upon that foot formed the Bull of Convocation.

Charles continued the Diet at Ausbourg, and pressed the Protestants hard to
confirm the promise, that they made him of submitting to the Council. But the
Ambassadors of some Protestant Princes, and amongst others, of the Electour of
Saxony, declared that they could not submit to it, unless, these conditions
were granted them. 1. That the Decrees which had been made at Trent might be
reviewed. 2. That the Council should be free. 3. That the Protestant-Divines
might have a Vote in it. 4. That the Pope should not preside therein. 5. That
the Bishops should be freed from the Oath which they had taken to the Pope.
However the greatest part of the Protestants pretended to submit to the
Council with less Limitation, because at that Diet as at the former the
Emperor was in arms, and they had not liberty to speak what they thought. The
Emperor had desired of the Pope that he would send him the Minute of the Bull
of Convocation before he published it. But the Pope would not, as not thinking
it consistent with his Dignity, nor the Character of Head of the Church to
submit the Examination of Bulls before they were formed, to the Judgment and
Censure of a Secular Prince. He sent it him dated, closed up and sealed, but
not as yet published. The Bull of Convocation was sent to the Emperor who did
not presently propose it to the Protestants because it was too high and lofty.
It was not presently communicated to the Protestants, because the Emperor
thought that it would only serve to incense them the more, seeing the Pope
extremely magnified his Authority therein. He called himself the Vicar of Jesus
Christ, and took solely to himself the power of calling and presiding in
Councils. The Emperor used all the interest that he could at Rome with the
Pope to make him alter it: but the Pope continued firm and inflexible in his
resolution, and fell even into a kind of Passion when the proposal was made to
him. And that he might put a stop to the Suits and Importunities that were made
to him about that affair; he published a Brief for the Publication and
Confirmation of the Bull, causing both of them to be affixed on the Gates of
the Churches of St. Peter and St. John of Lateran. The Emperor therefore,
finding that he could obtain nothing, caused the Bull to be read in the Diet,
where it produced the very effects which he had foreseen. The Protestants
recalled their promise, and the Catholics themselves condemned that haughty
and lofty Conduct at so unseasonable a time. Charles essayed to allay the
disorders, promising positively that notwithstanding the expressions in the
Bull, he would so order matters that all, even the Protestants themselves,
should receive satisfaction; he past his word that he would keep himself within
near distance of the Council, where he might have an Eye upon the Conduct and
Proceedings of that Assembly. And so on the thirteenth of February 1551. the
Recess of the Diet was made, the Conclusion whereof was that after the
re-establishment of the Council at Trent, all Germany should with a submissive
spirit expect what should there be decreed: that the Emperor should be there,
and give orders that all might freely propose what they had to say, and that he
should bring matters so about that the Controversies should be decided by the
Scriptures and Fathers. That did not at all please the Court of Rome, and they
easily perceived that that Edict was made to lash the Bull. The Pope in the
Bull declared that he alone had Right to govern the Council, to preside
therein, and to prescribe the manner of proceeding; and the Emperor in the
Recess engaged himself to govern the Council, according as the should think
convenient: Nay more, he promised therein matters which he could not perform
without obliging the Council to follow a Conduct quite opposite to that which
had been observed in the first Convocation. Nevertheless the Pope went on to
accomplish what was necessary for the holding of the Council. He named but one
Legate to assist at it in his name Marcello Crescenoci Cardinal of S. Marco;
and instead of another Legate gave him two Nuncio's for Colleagues, Sebastian
Pighini Archbishop of Siponto, and Luigi Lipomani Boshop of Verona; the first
because of the intimate Friendship that he had had with him, and the other
because of the great reputation of integrity that he was had in. He discovered
his Secrets to them, gave them their Commission, and ordered them to open the
Council the first of May the same year 1551. without farther delay, though none
should be there but themselves alone, as the Legates of Martin V. had done, who
opened the Council of Pavia without the assistance of any Prelate.

THE HISTORY OF THE Council of TRENT.
BOOK IV.
JULIUS III.
Trent, they found but a very small number of Prelates there, The opening of
the Council is made at Trent for the second Convocation.
and, indeed, during the whole time that the Council continued under Julius
III. there were never above threescore Bishops in it. But though the Bishops
were very inconsiderable in number, yet the Council was opened on the day
prefixed which was the first of May. The Eleventh Session 1. May 1551.
All that was done in that Session was only the putting of the question to the
Prelates, Are ye pleased to begin again the Actions of the Council at Trent? to
which answer was made by a Placet. Afterward the day for the next Session was
assigned to be the first of September following.

About that time, that is to say, a little before the opening of the Council,
there happened a troublesome Accident which hindered the French Prelates from
coming to Trent, as King Henry the second had promised, had bred a quarrel
betwixt the Pope and the King. The Pope clashes with the King of France. The
King sends not his Prelates to the Council.
Ottavio Farnese Grandchild of the late Pope and Son-in-Law to the Emperor,
having married Margarite his natural Daughter, and been by Julius III. restored
to the Possession of the City of Parma. Charles the fifth that he might become
more powerful and get greater footing in Italy had a design to seize that
Town, as he had already seized Piaoenza and another part of the Parmesan, after
the murder of Pietro Luigi, Ottavio's father, purposing to give his Son-in-Law
an Estate elsewhere in lieu of it. Ottavio fearing the designs of the Emperor
his Father-in-Law, and the boldness of Ferrante Gonzaga Governor of Milan, his
Enemy and Neighbor, put himself under the Protection of France, and received a
French Garrison into Parma. The Emperor was extremely vexed at that, and found
means to persuade the Pope, that that enterprise was very Derogatory to his
Authority, since that City ought to be considered as part of the Ecclesiastic
State, because Ottavio held it of none but the Pope, who had been pleased to
put him in possession thereof. Ottavio had acted nothing in that affair without
having in some manner obtained the Pope's permission; for he had desired of the
Court of Rome, either that they would protect him against the Enterprises of
the Emperor, or that he might be permitted to take the best Course he could
for the Security of the Place, according as he should judge most convenient,
which was granted him. However Julius who had not foreseen the Consequences of
the permission which he had granted, being solicited by the Emperor, without
more ado broke out into rage; published an Edict against Ottavio, cited him to
Rome, and in case of Nonappearance declared him a Rebel, and implored the
Emperor's Assistance against him. The Emperor gave a favorable answer, and
promised the Pope assistance to reduce Ottavio to reason. The King of France
sent de Term Ambassador to Rome, to pacify the Pope, and to give him to
understand that he had not taken upon him the Protection of Parma with any
other design than the preservation of the liberty of Italy, which Charles the
fifth intended to oppress. De Term finding the Pope stiff, told him that if he
were for war, the Council might be dissolved, and that though it were continued
in being, yet it could not be called a General Council, because the French
Prelates could not be there; nay he did not spare to tell him, that his Master
would be ready enough to take arms, and make use of the means that his
Ancestors had employed against the Popes who had showed themselves Partial.
The Pope hereupon fell into a Passion, and told him that if the King took Parma
from him, he would take France and the Commerce of all Christendom from the
King. Notwithstanding he huft at this rate, yet he was still in great fear; and
therefore gave orders to the Bishop of Imola his Nuncio to acquaint the
Emperor with all that had past betwixt him and the Ambassador of France, and
withal gave him instructions to engage the Emperor as much as possible he
could to the Interests of the Court of Rome. Henry of France having in vain
essayed to move the Pope by promises and threatenings, began to act. And in the
first place, he sent orders to all the Prelates of his Kingdom, to repair to
their Diocesses within six Months, to prepare themselves for a National
Council. This order was intimated to the French Bishops and Cardinals that were
at Rome in great number. They obeyed, and the Pope durst not withstand it. That
blow a little amazed him, and made him resolve to speak more mildly. He
therefore sent Ascanio Della Corna his Nephew into France, with orders to
bestir himself with all possible diligence, to prevail with the King not to
protect the Duke of Parma who was his Vassal and in Rebellion against him; and
to break off the design of a National Council, by representing to him that it
was the beginning of a Schism. The King to be even with the Pope in matter of
civility sent to him Monluc, Archbishop of Bourdeaux Elect; but these
Negotiations produced no effect, because neither Party would yield in any
thing. The King would not abandon the Duke of Parma, and the Pope would not be
pacified. It is certain that it was the interest of the Pope, as well as of all
Italy, that Ottavio should secure Parma against the designs of the Emperor:
and the Power of the French who had nothing in Italy, ought to have been far
less formidable to the Italians than the Greatness of Charles the fifth, who
was already so powerful amongst them; and therefore no body could tell what to
make of the Pope's Conduct. That was the reason that made some cast about to
find out some Mystery in it; and to imagine that since he could not be ignorant
of his own interest, he had only declared against the Duke of Parma, to set
the Emperor and King of France together by the ears; that so he might put a
stop to the Progress of the Council, which he had called against his Will. And
indeed it was observed that the Pope did not seem much concerned about the
affairs of the Council, after it had been opened. It was not so with the
Emperor, for as he had taken a great deal of pains to have it renewed, so was
he very solicitous to oblige the Protestants to repair to it. The Protestants
prepare to send their Divines to the Council.
Maurice Duke of Saxony who under a feigned Compliance was hatching great
designs, assembled his Divines, and commanded Melancthon to gather together the
Articles which were to be proposed to the Council. Christopher Duke of
Wittemberg did the like, and the Divines having mutually communicated their
Writings, they found that they agreed in all matters. But before they would set
out on their Journey to Trent, they desired a safe Conduct from the Council,
besides what they had from the Emperor; that they might not fall into the
misfortune of John Huss, who was burnt at the Council of Constance,
notwithstanding the safe Conduct of Sigismond. Charles promised them this safe
Conduct, and sent three Ambassadors to the Council with full power to act and
do all that he could do and act himself, if he were personally present. These
Plenipotentiaries were Hugh Count of Montfort, Don Francisco de Toledo Prior of
Roncevaux, and William of Poictiers Archdeacon of Champaigne. The Emperor by
his solicitations prevailed with the Electours of Cologne, Mentz and Treves,
and as many German and Spanish Bishops as he could, to go thither; and yet, in
that Council which lasted Eight months, there were not above threescore and
four Prelates, including the Presidents and Ecclesiastic Princes.

1 September 155^. the second under Julius.
The first of September the day prefixed for the Session was come; And yet
nothing was done in it, because there were but a few Members arrived, and more
were daily expected.

After the Ceremonies were over, the Secretary of the Council read a long
exhortation which the Legates had given him, tending in General to persuade all
to a peaceable temper of mind, that all their actions might be carried on with
Calmness; then was the Decree read, which contained nothing but the Assignation
of the next Session to be the Eleventh of October forty days after, and an
intimation that after the Sacraments in general, and particularly Baptism and
Confirmation were handled, they would in that ensuing Session decide the
Controversies of the Eucharist; and treat about Reformation in matters that
obstruct Residence. The procuration of the Emperor was also read and approved
by the Council, and the Harangues and usual Complements were made. The Count de
Montfort made a speech, and Giovanni Baptista Castello Promooter of the Council
made him an answer. The Procuration of the King of the Romans was like wise
read, who sent to represent him, Paolo Gregoriani Bishop of Zagabria a Town in
Sclavonia, and Frederick Nauseus Bishop of Vienna. The Council gave them a
favorable reception, as they had done to the Emperor's Ambassadors; but
after them came another Ambassador, who was not so kindly received, and that
was James Amiot Abbot of Bellosane, Amiot presents himself before the Council,
and protests in name of his Master the King of France. Sanctissimis in Christo
Patribus conventus Tridentini.
and afterward Bishop of Auxerre, Ambassador from the King of France; he
presented his Master's Letters, with this superscription, To the most holy
Fathers in Christ of the Assembly of Trent. This superscription presently
offended the Spaniards and put them in a flame, they said that that Letter was
not for them, that they were not, I cannot tell what, Assembly but a true
Council; they wrangled a long time about the word Conventus. The Imperialists
and Spaniards maintained that it was a reproachful word, and others, on the
contrary, said it was no injury to the Council to call it so. At length, the
Legate, Nuncio's, and the Emperor's Ambassadors retired into the Vestry, and
after some short Conference, came back and said that the holy Council were
resolved that the Letters should be read sine praejudicio; this occasioned some
talk that five or six men should call themselves the holy Council, and made
some observe that the greatest matters as well as the smallest were carried so
by a few who were Masters and disposed of all the rest. However it be, the
Letters of the King of France were read; and the Electour of Mentz was so eager
for it, that he told them: if you will not hear a King who calls you a most
holy Assembly, how will you give audience to the Protestants that call you
Ecclesiam malignantium the Assembly of Malignants. That Letter accused the Pope
and excused Henry King of France; in the beginning whereof he made a Complement
to the Fathers of the Assembly of Trent, and offered to make them Judges of the
Debate he had with the Pope about the Business of Parma; but the conclusion was
in another Style; for Amiot protested by word and by writing in name of his
Master, that he could not own that for a General Council wherein the French
Bishops could not be present, declaring that they could not be sent, because
Trent was no secure place for them, and that through the Pope's Conduct the
King and his Prelates were excluded the Council. He added that his Master would
take his course by the Law of Arms to have reparation of the injuries that were
done him, and desired that he might have an instrument of his Protestation; he
was refused that instrument, and told that he should have an answer the next
Session. This Protestation had been already made at Rome by De Term, but had
not come to the knowledge of many. Here it was made publicly, in sight of all
the World, and furnished matter for conversation and for the reflections of
Politicians. The Imperialists slighted it, and said that the greater number
carries it over the lesser, that the French had been invited to the Council,
and that if they refused to come, it could be no prejudice to its Authority.
But there were others who made more serious reflections upon it, and did not
think that that could be called a General Council, which was only composed of
Italians, Spaniards and some few Germans. The Parliament of Paris attributed
great weight to the King's Protestation, and maintained that the greater number
carries it not over the lesser, but in affairs where the interest is not
common: but that in common interests prohibentis conditio est potior, the right
of the opposers is strongest. They farther added that Churches which are not
present in a Council, are not obliged by its Decrees, which was a thing never
questioned amongst the Ancients: seeing that after Councils had been held, the
Decrees past in them were sent to all absent Churches to have their
Confirmation; without which in those Churches they could not bind nor have the
force of a Law. The sober, discreet and charitable sort made a third Party,
blamed the King as having given the Council a mortal stab, and laid a ground
for a prejudice against it, which would be very hard to remove. Could one think
or persuade himself that the Holy Ghost could have presided in that Council,
against which a most Christian King, Eldest Son of the Church and a great
Persecutor of all new Sects, had made a Protestation? however the King of
France stopped not there; he published a Manifesto against the Pope, and made a
prohibition that no money should be carried to Rome upon pretext of
Dispensations, Annates or any other Title. That Manifesto was verified in
Parliament, where a great liberty was taken in speaking especially against
Dispensations, which they termed Shams and Tricks, incapable of giving any
assurance to Consciences. Whilst Henry proceeded in this manner against the
Pope, that he might not be suspected of Heresy, he doubled his persecutions
against the Protestants, made more rigorous Edicts against them, and inflicted
severe punishments upon a great many. He likewise made a distinction betwixt
the holy See, and the Pope and Court of R^me; for he protested that he still
retained the same Reverence for the holy See, though he was preparing to give
the Pope his hands full on it. This distinction did not go down neither at Rome
nor Trent; the Italians maintained that the Pope and the holy See were one and
the same thing. The French said no; and proved it by the Authority of Victor
III. and Stephen IV. who though both were Popes, yet confessed that the holy
See was their Lord and Master.

The Council falls upon business, and chooses the point of the Eucharist for
Doctrine, and the Jurisdiction of Bishops for Reformation.
These oppositions of the French King did not put a stop to the Synodal actions
at Trent, for next day after the Session, a general Congregation was held,
wherein a Committee of Fathers was appointed for drawing up Articles concerning
the Eucharist, and to give them to be examined by the Divines: they also
discoursed of Reformation, and made choice of the point of Jurisdiction, which
the Bishops complained, was wholly taken from them by Evocations, Appeals,
Exemptions, and Commissions directed from the Court of Rome. They who had
Commission to enquire into the matter of Doctrine extracted ten Articles
concerning the Eucharist from the Books of the Zuinglians and Lutherans,
amongst which they intermingled errors which could neither be imputed to
Zuinglius nor Luther. For the examination of these Articles, an Order was made
that the Divines should prove their opinions by Scripture, the Fathers and
Councils, avoiding all nice and superfluous Questions: but this Order was not
acceptable to the Italians who were very quaint in School Divinity, but
ignorant in all things else; the Germans liked it somewhat better, because the
Disputes which they had had with the Lutherans had obliged them to study
Languages, the Fathers, Councils, and the Scripture. The Italians made Speeches
against that Method, and pleaded the cause of Ratiocination against
Authorities. They alleged that there needed no more but a good Memory to
collect passages, and that that Method gave the Lutherans the Victory who were
excellent in such kind of Collections, and skillful in Grammar-learning for the
interpretation of passages. They had as good have said nothing; for the Order
past, though to no great purpose, for it hindered not Scholastic Disputations,
as will appear hereafter.

They came to the examination of the Articles concerning the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, every one gave his opinion thereupon, and it suffered no great
debate. The second was against those who say that Jesus Christ is not eaten
sacramentally but spiritually; several thought the question to be of no great
importance, because the Heretics did not deny but that our Savior Jesus
Christ was eaten sacramentally. The third was against the opinion of
Impanators, who maintain the assumption of Bread, and its hypostatick Union
with the body of our Lord; but they were told that that opinion which was the
opinion of Robert Abbot of Tuits was dead with himself above four hundred years
ago, and that it had no asserters. There was some Dispute on the Jacobins side
about the necessity of Confession before the Communion, which is mentioned in
the last of these ten Articles, and they affirmed that many able and holy
Catholics had been of the judgment that it was not always necessary. The
eighth and ninth Articles that relate to the Communion in both kinds took up
longer time. The Divines enlarged in proving that the Communion in one kind was
sufficient, but the Dispute lasted not long; for they came to an agreement to
reduce those ten Articles into seven Canons, fortified with Anathema's against
the enemies of the Real Presence, Transubstantiation, Adoration, Communion
under one kind, and against those who condemn the other Opinions and Rites of
the Church of Rome in relation to the Eucharist. It was likewise resolved that
Chapters should be made on this head, as had been done about the point of
Justification, and not to rest barely on Canons as was done in the matter of
the Sacraments in general. This rejoiced the Italians, who thought they had got
their revenge on the Germans, because for forming of those Chapters of
Doctrine, recourse must be had to their School Divinity, which had been
neglected in framing of the Canons. These Chapters were reduced to eight in
number, of which there was one that handled the point of the Communion in both
kinds, against the Protestants.

Upon this occasion the Count de Montfort and the rest of the Emperor's
Ambassadors interposed and alleged that the matter of the Cup was a popular
thing, known of all, and that it was one of the stumbling blocks to the
Protestants of Germany; that it ought not to be decided unless they were
present at the Council; that to come thither as they had promised, they desired
a safe Conduct from the Council as well as from the Emperor. They demanded
that safe Conduct, and prayed that they might forbear treating about matter of
Doctrine, and apply themselves to Reformation wherein they would find business
enough. The Legates and Nuncio's refused to supersede the examination of points
of Doctrine, but insisted not much on the Article of retrenching the Cup, nor
the safe Conduct. They expressed themselves only in general terms telling them
that they would next Session take it into consideration, and immediately
acquainted the Pope with all. The Pope took Council about the matter; the
result of which was, that though there was no hopes of reclaiming the
Lutherans, yet that they might have no pretext of complaining, they should
defer the point of retrenching the Cup, but that that delay should not extend
beyond three Months. The matter of a safe Conduct suffered more difficulty; for
most part were against the granting of it, because no Council had ever done it,
but that of Basil, the least action whereof they scrupled to imitate; they
added that the coming of the Lutherans to the Council, would only serve to
seduce people, because they would not forbear their Dogmatical Cant; that on
the whole, if they refused to submit, that safe conduct would be dishonorable
to the Council, from which they required a compliance which ought never to be
granted to Heretics. To remove all these difficulties they thought of giving a
safe Conduct in general terms, wherein the Protestants should not be named, but
only designed under the Title of Churchmen and Seculars of the German Nation;
that so if at any other time necessity did require, they might say that by
these terms none were meant but Catholics. Whilst they were consulting at Rome
about the safe Conduct, at Trent points of Doctrine were under examination, and
that inquiry was not so calm and peaceable, as the other about the Anathema's
and Canons against Protestants; for it was impossible to keep the Jacobins and
Cordeliers from going together by tho ears about the matter of
Transubstantiation. The Jacobins pretended that the body of our Savior is made
present in the Eucharist by way of Production, because the Body of Jesus Christ
without coming down from Heaven, where it is in its natural being, is rendered
present in the Bread by a reproduction of the same substance, according to
which Doctrine the substance, according to which Doctrine the substance of the
Bread is changed into the substance of our Lord's Body. The Cordeliers on the
other hand, defended that Transubstantiation which is called Adductive, they
alleged that our Lord's Body is brought down from Heaven, not by a successive,
but momentany change, and that the substance of Bread is not changed into the
substance of the Body of Jesus Christ, but that the Flesh and Blood of Jesus
Christ succeeds into the place of the substance of the Bread, being conveyed
thither from another place. Each Party maintained their opinions with
wonderful heat, branding one another with absurdities and contradictions. The
Electour of Cologne who had had the patience to hear these wretched janglings,
said very pleasantly, that both Parties were in the right when they refuted,
and charged one another with absurdities; but that they seemed all of them to
be out of the way when they asserted their opinions; because they spoke nothing
that was Sense or Intelligible; at length seeing there was no declaring for one
Party without offending the other, they satisfied them both by couching the
Decree in very general terms. In the same Congregation they discoursed of many
abuses that concerned the Eucharist, which ought to be reformed: such as are
the failings in reverence and respect to the holy Sacrament. It was complained
of, that they did not kneel before it, that they let it mould in the Pixes,
that it was administered with little reverence, and that they took money from
Communicants. This last abuse was committed particularly at Rome, where the
Communicants carried in one hand a hollow Taper, and a piece of money in the
Taper, which was the Priests see. It was resolved that Canons should be made
against that abuse, and many more of the like nature.

The original of the Jurisdiction of the Tribunals of the Church, with their
progress.
At the same time other Congregations were held consisting only of Doctors of
the Canon Law, for handling the matter of Discipline; the Head that was
examined was that of the Jurisdiction of Bishops. The end the Bishops proposed
to themselves was not the rectifying of the abuses of that Jurisdiction, by
restraining it to the just and lawful bounds whereby it was limited in the
Apostles time, and in the primitive Ages of the Church; on the contrary they
would have enlarged it by exempting it from the power and attempts of the Court
of Rome. That Jurisdiction in the first Ages was only grounded on the sixth
Chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians, wherein St. Paul exhorts
believers not to bring their Causes before Infidels, but to choose out amongst
themselves fit persons to compose their differences: but because the Tribunal
which St. Paul establishes in that place was merely a tribunal of Charity,
which had no coercive power, so the Sentences that past there were only
Verdicts of Arbitration, which men stood by if they thought fit: by the six and
fiftieth Chapter of the second Book of the Constitutions attributed to St.
Clement, it appears that the Bishop and Priests met every Monday for
determining the affairs of their Flock. And it rarely happened that any one
appealed from these Decisions, because of the great respect that men in those
days had for the Church. But after the times of persecution were over, the
Bishops supported by the Emperors who were become Christians erected Real
Tribunals, the Decrees and Sentences whereof were put in execution by the
Authority of the Magistrate. It is said, that Constantine ordained that the
Sentences of Bishops should be without appeal, and be put in execution by the
Secular Judges; and that if one of the Parties should desire that a Process
commenced before a Secular Judge, might be referred to the Tribunal of the
Bishop, the reference should be granted in spite of all opposition either from
the Judge or the adverse Party. In the year three hundred sixty five the
Emperor Valens enlarged that Jurisdiction, and Possidius reports that St.
Austin was taken up in those trials of Civil matters many times even till
night, which troubled him much, because it took him off from the true functions
of his Ministry. That Law of Constantine in favor of this Tribunal of Bishops
was revoked, or at least limited by the Emperors Arcadius and Honorius: for
they ordained that Bishops should decide in no Causes but those of Religion,
and in Civil matters, when both Parties consented to it. In the year four
hundred and fifty two, the Emperor Valentinian confirmed that Law which
restrained the power of Bishops: Justinian restored to them part of what they
had been deprived of, allowing them besides the Causes of Conscience, power to
take cognizance of the Crimes of the Clergy, and to perform several other acts
of Jurisdiction over Laics. And thus by the indiscreet favor of Emperors, the
power of the Church which is all Spiritual became a Carnal Dominion. In the
following Ages the Jurisdiction and Authority of the Bishops got ground apace,
and especially in the Western Church; because the chief of the Clergy were the
ablest Statesmen; they were commonly of Princes Councils, and managed and Civil
matters. That was the reason that in a short time they grew to be sole Judges
of all Causes Civil and Criminal of the Clergy, and that they extended their
Jurisdiction over Laics under various pretexts: for instance they took upon
them to Judge of the Validity of last Will and Testaments, to make Inventories
and apply Seals, under pretext that Widows and Orphans are recommended to the
care of the Church. Heretofore all contracts were confirmed and ratified by
Oath, and because an Oath is a matter of Conscience, they made themselves
Judges of all Causes that related to Contracts and Promises. Besides these
Jurisdictions they established a Court which they called the Mixed Court wherein
they Judged of all civil Causes belonging to the Magistrate; if the Court of
the Church had by anticipation taken cognizance of the Cause; but on the other
side if the Magistrate had anticipated them, then the Ecclesiastick-Court had
no more Power. They likewise laid down for a Maxim, which brought a great many
Causes before them, that when the Magistrate neglected or refused to do
Justice, then the Cause devolved to the Ecclesiastick-Court: And in fine, to
fill up the measure of corruption, in the eleventh Century, they labored to
lay down this for a Maxim that Bishops did not derive this great Power from the
Concessions of Princes, but immediately from Jesus Christ. Otherwise if the
Bishops had acknowledged that they held these Privileges from Princes;
Sovereigns would have always had power to punish them, and rectify the abuses
committed by them in their Jurisdiction. But that they might put themselves out
of reach of Animadversion, they persuaded People that their Jurisdiction was
independent of the Power of Princes. At last, that they might frame an Empire
Paramount over all the States of Christendom, the Pope was made Head of that
Jurisdiction which the Bishops had usurped and reared up within the space of
thirteen hundred years. For after that the Bishops had taken from Magistrates a
great part of their Jurisdicton, the Pope found a way to strip the Ordinaries
of the greatest part of their Power, by Evocations, Appeals, and Exemptions. So
that if on the one hand the Secular Judges complained of the usurpations of the
Bishops: on the other hand the Bishops complained of the encroachments of the
holy See. This in general, was the matter that then was handled in the
Congregations of the Canonists, whilst in the others, matters of Faith were
examined. Gropper votes for the abolishing of Episcopal Jurisdiction, and
Ecclesiastic Tribunals.
Gropper who was in the Council both as a Lawyer and a Divine, reasoned
accurately about these abuses of Jurisdiction, and showed that in the
beginning, the sentences of Bishops were sentences of Charity; that these
sentences were rendered not by Officials as now adays; but by the Bishop and
Priests assembled in a kind of Consistory or Synod. That moreover, there was no
such thing known as Appeals from those sentences to the Pope, that if any
Appeal was made, it was to their next immediate Superiors which are Synods.
And therefore he was of opinion, that these Synodal Judgments should be
restored, that the Courts and Judgments of Officials should be abolished, and
that all Appeals to the Pope immediately, without passing through subordinate
Superiors, should be discharged.

The Legate, Nuncio's and Italians, slaves to the Court of Rome listened to
this discourse with a great deal of impatience, and having consulted together
they set on the Promooter of the Council Giovanni Baptista Castello a Bolonian,
who in a long harangue maintained that it was lawful to Appeal immediately to
the Pope, Baptista Castello Promooter of the Council refutes Gropper about the
subject of immediate Appeals to the Pope.
and to bring Actions before the holy See, without passing through the
Intermedial Judges. The Bishops were not satisfied with Gropper's Discourse,
but far less with that of Castello. For he raised the Authority of the Pope to
such a pitch, that the Italians themselves murmured at it, because according to
Castello's Maxims, the Pope was all in all, and the Bishops signified nothing
at all; and that made the Italians recoyl and talk of accommodation. In effect
they came to an accommodation, and adjusted matters in this manner, That there
should be no Appeals from the definitive Sentences of Bishops and Officials but
in causes criminal, and that even in criminal matters it should not be lawful
to Appeal from Interlocutory Sentences; until Definitive Sentence were
pronounced. But they would not re-establish Synodal Judgments by ruining the
Officials. The Bishops urged not to be re-established in their ancient right of
being Judged by their Synods, that is to say, by the Metropolitan, and their
Comprovincials; because men are not commonly inclined to facilitate Judgments
against themselves, and Processes against Bishops are much more difficult when
one must go to Rome, or procure a Commission from thence, than if they could be
accused upon the place before their proper Judges, which are Synods. The power
was therefore left to the Pope of Judging them by Commissaries delegated in
partibus. Only the Council made some Regulations, that none inferior to the
Bishop in Dignity should be chosen as a Commissary of the Pope, to Judge him.
It is one of the Grievances against the Council of Trent; and one of the
reasons why it is not received in France, that contrary to the ancient Canons,
it deprives Bishops of the right of being Judged by the Metropolitan and their
Comprovincials.

Of Degradations, their Original and Progress.
There was also another great abuse in the Jurisdiction of Bishops, of which a
Reformation was demanded, and that was the manner of Degradations. According to
the Privileges that have been granted to the Clergy, or which they have
usurped, this Maxim has been long received, that the Magistrate has no power
over Clerks so long as they remain Clerks. So that a Member of the Clergy must
be degraded before he can be delivered over to the Secular Power, for capital
and enormous Crimes, where sentence of death is to be pronounced, which cannot
be given by an Ecclesiastic Court, because it imbrues not the hand in Blood:
and this custom was confirmed by the Laws of Justinian. It was even the
custom in preceding Ages, that is, in the fourth and fifth Century, when a
Member of the Clergy returned into the World, to degrade him by the same
Ceremonies whereby he had been installed, but in a manner inverse and
retrograde, that is to say, that they clothed him in all his Priestly Habits,
and then stripped him of the same one after another, applying words quite
contrary to those of Ordination. But since, about the year six hundred, these
Degradations were abolished; and those who had taken high Orders were
prohibited from returning again into the World; so that the custom of
Degradations is only retained in Criminal matters, when a Member of the Clergy
is to be delivered over to the Secular Power to be punished. But these
Degradations of Clerks convicted, must be done according to the new Canons,
with so many Ceremonies as rendered the punishment of the Members of the Clergy
almost impossible. That was their Scope, and they only clogged Degradations
with so many difficulties, that they might live in impunity. For Degrading a
Bishop, thirteen Degrading Bishops were required, besides twelve Assistants.
For Degrading a Priest, there must be six Bishops, for Degrading a Deacon three
Bishops, whereas for Consecrating a Bishop three are sufficient, and one for
Ordaining a Priest. How difficult a matter was it to get so many Bishops
together, and how chargeable must that be, especially in Germny, where Bishops
are very thin and at a great distance one from another? These Degradations were
performed with great Ceremonies in Pontifical Habit, and extraordinary
concourse of People. The matter was very long canvassed, but the Council Judged
it not expedient to abolish the use of Degradations, only it was thought fit
to find out some way of facilitating them, that they might be done with less
trouble. Whilst the Council was thus taken up, the Cardinal Legate had time to
receive news from Rome. So soon as it came, without telling the Council that he
had written, and without communicating his answers, he called the General
Congregation, and had it concluded according as it was resolved by the Pope,
that they should grant the Protestants a safe Conduct in general terms, and
that they should refer the point of the Cup to another Session. Amongst the
points that were to be handled again, the Communion of young Children was one,
and the Article of retrenching the Cup was divided into three others, thereby
to multiply them, and that they might not be necessitated to resume a
Controversy which had already been decided, for one point omitted or forgot.

Thirteenth Session the eleventh of October. 1551
The eleventh of October the Session was held with the usual Ceremonies. Mass
was said by the Bishop of Majorca, and the Sermon Preached by the Archbishop of
Torn. Then were read the Decree, the Chapters of Doctrine, the Canons and the
Anathema's for asserting the Real Presence, the Sacramental Manducation,
Transubstantiation, the Concomitancy, the Adoration of the Sacrament, the
Reservation of the Kinds, the Necessity of Confession, and the other points
that were opposed by the Lutherans and Protestants. The Decree of Reformation
began with a grave Exhortation to Bishops to use their Jurisdiction moderately,
then it ordained that it should not be lawful to Appeal from the Judgment of
Bishops before Definitive Sentence. That when there is place for an Appeal, and
that the Pope shall grant Commission in partibus, that is on the Places, that
none shall be Commissionated but the Metropolitan or his great Vicar, and if
they be suspected, that none can be Commissionated but neighboring Bishops. To
lessen the difficulty of Degradations, it ordained that one Bishop with as many
Abbots as the Canons required Bishops, might Degrade Clerks. To satisfy the
Bishops as to Exemptions, it ordained that the Bishops might Judge of these
Exemptions and of Favors obtained upon false Suggestions, and annull them in
quality of Subdelegates of the holy See. But the Council reserved to the Pope
the Cognizance of greater Causes, and that the Causes of Bishops, wherein the
nature of the crime required Personal appearance should be brought before the
Pope and be determined by him. In the same Decree of Reformation there were
some other Regulations that tended a little to the satisfaction of the Bishops,
that they might the more casily bear the Yoke of the Church of Rome: but in all
those places where any thing of Authority was granted them, they had no power
to act but in quality of the Delegates of the holy See. After that a Decree for
deferring the Article of the Cup, and the Safe Conduct which the Council
granted the Protestants, were publicly read.

The Ambassadors of the Electour of Brandenburg a Protestant Prince appear at
the Council.
At the same Session appeared Christopher Strasfen and John Hofman Ambassadors
from Joachim Electour of Brandenburg a Protestant Prince. Christopher Strasfen
one of the Ambassadors made a long speech, wherein in very civil but general
terms he assured the Fathers of the Council of the respect his Master had for
them, and mentioned nothing at all of the matter of Religion. The Council made
answer by their Promooter, and amongst other things told him, that with much
Joy the Fathers had heard from his mouth, that that Prince submitted to the
Council, and promised to obey its Decrees: In the mean while, the Ambassador
had said no such thing, but they thought they had gained a great point, in so
interpreting the Complements and civil Expressions that the Ambassador had
made use of. All men made observations upon the Conduct of the Electour and the
Council. It was easily perceived that the Electour intended to observe the best
measures he could with the Council, that the Court of Rome might not cross the
Election of his Son Frederick to the Archbishopric of Magdebourg, which had
been made by the Chapter; but the prudence of the Council was much more admired
who had so dexterously turned the sense of the Electour's Complements to an
engagement of submission. According to the intimation that was made to the
Abbot of Bellosana, they intended to have given an answer to the King of
France, but no Abbot appeared, he returned by order of his Master immediately
after he had made his Protestation. It was not the mind of the Court of France
that the Ambassador should expect the Session to enter into a debate which
could not in the conclusion but be of troublesome consequence, since the Pope
and Spaniards who were the Parties in that affair, must also have been the
Judges. The Apparitours made a Proclamation at the Church-door that if any one
was there for the most Christian King, he should appear; but though no man
appeared, yet the answer was read, which contained Complaints of the King's
proceedings, and Protestations on the part of the Council; that they wore not
assembled upon any private interest, but for the general good of all
Christendom, and the extirpation of Heresies; after all, they prayed him to
send his Prelates to the Council, not to make use of any other means, but to
think of his Name of the most Christian King, and to sacrifice his particular
Quarrels to the general good of Christendom.

The Decrees of the Session were forthwith printed, and all People reflected
upon them according to their several Passions and Interests. The Protestants
failed not to observe a contradiction betwixt the first Chapter of Doctrine,
and the sourth with the second Canon. In the first Chapter the Council says,
that hardly can one express the manner of the Real Presence of Jesus Christ in
the Eucharist, and in the sourth Chapter it says, that that manner has been
convenienter and proprie called Transubstantiation, and in the second Canon the
Council says, that it is ap^issime called so; it was likewise thought that the
Council had made use of a kind of an improper and incommodious expression as to
the point of Consecration; because it says that Jesus Christ after the
Benediction declared, that that which he gave was his Real Body; which seems to
insinuate that the change was made by the Benediction, so that these words,
This is my Body, could be no more but a Declaration of the change that was
made, when the Bread was blessed. Now that would overthrow the universal belief
of the Church of Rome, that the change is made by these words, hoc est corpus
meum, which were not pronounced but in the distribution of the Bread, and
sometime after the Benediction. The Priests were very ill satisfied that their
Yoke was made heavier, by enlarging the Authority of the Bishops over them: but
above all others, the Protestants were dissatisfied at the Decree which was
made to delay the examination of the point of the Cup in their Favor. Because
that supposed that they had consented to admit of all the other Decrees of the
Council of Trent, and that they only dissented about this; whereas they had
always demanded that they should all be reviewed. Nor were they satisfied
neither with the Safe Conduct, suspecting it to be a Cheat all over, but
chiefly the limitation that was in it in these words, in as much as belongs to
the Council. They looked upon that as a Backdoor that the Pope had reserved to
himself, in case he intended to use violence. And therefore without concerting
together any resolution, they gave about by word of Mouth one from another,
That they ought not to accept of any Safe Conduct but in the Form that was
granted to the Bohemians by the Council of Basil; that is to say, that it
should be absolute without any Reservation, that the Council should engage in
writing to decide the Controversies by the Scripture: and concluded that if
this were denied them, they should have good reason to recall the promise that
they had made to the Emperor of going and submitting to the Council.

The point of Penance is chosen for the next Session.
The day following a general Congregation was held for adjusting the point of
Penance, which was to be handled and decided in the next Session. It was moved
in the first place, that the Divines had transgressed the Laws that had been
prescribed to them for their Disputations; that they had not avoided the Quirks
of the School and nice Questions, which had produced scandalous Debates.
Therefore the Order was renewed for obliging the Divines to prove their
Propositions by Scripture, the Fathers, the Tradition of the Church, Councils,
and the Decisions of Popes. But that took as little effect as the rest of the
Orders of that nature, and particularly of confining the Disputants to a
certain time, that they should not be tedious in their Discourses. They who
were deputed to make the Abstracts drew twelve Articles out of the Books of
Luther concerning Penance, and four about Extreme Unction, which were delivered
to the Divines, and submitted to their Censure* For preventing of quarrels that
might arise amongst the Divines, the Council regulated the Order wherein every
one of them should speak: the Pope's Divines were to speak first, then those of
the Emperor, and next the Divines of Louvain, after them the Divines of the
Queen of Hungary, then those of the Electours in the Order of the Precedence of
their Princes, the Secular Priests according to the Order of their Promotion,
and last of all the Monks or Regulars, one after another, according to the
dignity of their Orders. It was also ordained that the Congregations should be
held twice a day, in the Morning and Afternoon. Afterward there was a
Collection made of fifteen Articles concerning Reformation to employ the
Congregations of the Canonists. The Nuncio Bishop of Verona had the charge of
presiding in the Congregation of Doctrine, and the Archbishop of Siponto the
other Nuncio in that of Reformation. Whilst these things were carried on at
Trent, the Pope renewed his Instances with the Switzers to persuade them to
send their Divines to the Council, and the King of France dissuaded them by his
Ambassador Morlay, wherein he succeeded, by the help and assistance of
Vergerio who had formerly been the Pope's Nuncio, and was then a Minister in
the Country of the Grisons. And so neither Catholics nor Protestants sent to
the Council, nay the Grisons recalled Thomans Plant Bishop of Coira, who was
at Trent.

In the following Congregations the matters that had been proposed were
examined; the Order that had been made concerning the way of examination, and
the trouble that they had put themselves to to mark the Heads from whence the
Proofs were to be taken, served for no other end but to multiply discourse, and
render the disputes more ridiculous. The School-way came still in play, and
because at the same time they would obey the Regulation that ordered them to
draw their Proofs from Scripture; the Divines puzzled themselves to find them
out, but they applied the Texts in a sense quite different from the true, and
at every turn put them to the Rack. For instance as to the point of Confession,
there was not a place in the Psalms or any where else in Scripture where the
words Confess and Confession did occur, but what they interpreted in favor of
Auricular Confession; and this was the Head they laid greatest stress upon.
Several Figures of the Old Testament were made to authorize this Confession;
and a prodigious number of Miracles were alleged, both Ancient and Modern,
which has been wrought, either in favor of the Votaries of Confession, or
against those that slighted it. In sine, one may safely say, that the disputes
about this subject wanted both judgment and choice, and were ever now and then
childish and insipid. The disputes being ended, the Decree which is to be seen
in the Acts of the Council, was made: and that contained nine Chapters about
Penance, and three concerning Extreme Unction. The first Chapter treats of the
necessity and institution of the Sacrament of Penance; the second, of the
difference betwixt the Sacrament of Baptism and that of Penance; the third, of
the parts and fruits of that Sacrament; the fourth of Contrition; the fifth of
Confession; the sixth of the Minister of that Sacrament; the seventh of Cases
reserved; the eighth of the necessity and benefit of Satisfaction; and the
ninth of the works of Satisfaction. As to Extreme Unction, the first Chapter
speaks of the institution of that Sacrament: the second of its effect, and the
third of the minister thereof. To these were added fifteen Canons as to the
matter of Penance, and four about Extreme Unction. They could not meet with the
same good luck, nor use the same art about this matter, as they had found in
the former Sessions, that is, Opposition of the Divines as to the Decrees that
concern Penance, the President takes no notice of it.
so to frame the Decrees and Canons as to satisfy all the different Parties,
and make them find their own opinions in them. The Divines of Louvain opposed
the Chapter and Canon which appointed a Reservation of certain Cases; as (...)
pensations should be of no force. The Bishops also complained that Titular
Bishops with a Privilege obtained from the Court of Rome, retired into Places
out of the Bishop's Jurisdictions, and there conferred Orders on all that
demanded them, who could not have otherways obtained them because of their
insufficiency. This was also prohibited, but without making the least mention
of the Pope who had granted those Privileges. There was another great abuse in
the Exercise of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, and that is, when a man was accused
before the Bishop's Tribunal, he appealed to Rome, and by means of money
obtained a Judge at his own option, to whom Power was given to protect and
defend him, and to put a stop to all Prosecutions against him: and this
protection was extended even to the Domestic Servants of the Party accused;
those Judges were called Conservatours, and these Exemptions, Conservatory
Privileges, the Judges Conservatours being many times the Bishops Persecutours.
That abuse was somewhat moderated, but not wholly extirpated; for it was
indeed, enacted that notwithstanding these Conservatory Privileges a man might
be sued before the Ordinaries, especially in criminal Cases: but Universities,
Colleges, Hospitals and Convents were expressly excepted. The Bishops cried out
mightily against that Exception, because it was far more comprehensive than the
Rule. But nothing could be obtained, because for the Grandeur of the Court of
Rome, the Pope would have the Monks and Universities depend immediately on the
holy See; and the Legate received Orders from Rome not to yield the least in
that point; so that the Party of the Court of Rome being the more numerous, the
rest were fain to give way, and take good words for payment. It being a
grievance that, contrary to the ancient Canons, Dispensations were granted to
wilful Murderers to enter into holy Orders; that was prohibited in the
seventh Chapter. There were also some other regulations made, against the
various ways that Criminals took to avoid Episcopal Correction: against Bishops
who by Power from the Pope exercised Jurisdiction out of their Dioceses:
against the abuse of annexing a Church in one Diocese, to another Church in
another, which gave liberty to a Bishop to exercise Jurisdiction in the Diocese
of another Bishop; and in fine, against the abuse of the Right of Patronage.
The springhead of all these abuses was the Court of Rome, the ancient Canons
being clearly against these Corruptions and bad Customs, but Dispensations
evacuated the Force of Canons: the Bishops were therefore for having it decreed
that the Court of Rome should not give Dispensations contrary to the Canons;
but they could never obtain it. So that in the whole there was no disorder
remedied, because the Legate, and the Nuncio's would by no means suffer the
Pope to be named, nor that even the Names of the great Penitentiary and other
Ministers of the Chancery should enter into any of the Decrees. Now it is an
undoubted Maxim amongst the Canonists, that in all Laws wherein the Pope is
not expressly named, all that is enacted can be no way prejudicial to his
Authority. Insomuch that the Decrees deprived not the Pope of the Power of
giving Dispensations in any Cases, but served only to enhaunce the value of
Dispensations, and to enrich the Chancery. The Monks made great instances for
obtaining the abolition of Commendums; but it was thought sufficient to ordain
that Benefices which were not as yet in Commendum, when they came to be vacant,
should only be given in Title, and to the Religious of the same Order; and
thus the Number of Commendums was not lessened, but care taken that they should
not increase.

The Ambassadors of the Duke of Wirtemberg come to Trent, and cannot have
Audience.
Whilst these matters were on foot in the Congregations John Thierry Pleningher,
and John Heclin Ambassadors of the Duke of Wirtemberg came to the Council.
They applied themselves to the Count of Montfort the Emperor's Ambassador,
that they might have Audience of the Council. The Count acquainted the Legate
with it, who told him that it was the Custom of other Ambassadors to impart
their Instructions to the Presidents of the Council, and that these of
Wirtemberg ought to have done so; that they should address themselves to him,
and that he would receive them with all imaginable Civility. The Ambassadors
refused to do that, because one of the Articles which they had to demand was,
that the Pope should not preside in the Council, and therefore they could not
address themselves to his Legates as Presidents. The Legate having received
that answer, wrote immediately to Rome for instructions. It is easy to imagine
what the instructions were; and indeed they had Orders not to abate a hair in
that point, but to hazard all, and even to break up the Council according to
the Power they had, if they thought in necessary, rather than to suffer the
least diminution of the Authority of the holy See. About that time the Emperor
came to Inspruck, which is but a few days Journey from Trent, that he might
observe the actions of the Council at a nearer distance. This gave the Pope
some umbrage, who would have no other Master over the Council but himself;
however he dissembled his displeasure.

25. November. 1551.
At length the day prefixed for the Session came, which was the five and
twentieth of November 1551. And this Session in the collection of the Decrees
is reckoned the fourteenth. Therein were published the Decrees and Canons which
we have mentioned, concerning Penance, Extreme Unction, and the Reformation in
favor of Episcopal Jurisdiction. The Legate did what he could to hinder the
Impression of these Decrees, and indeed, they were not printed at Ripa where
the Printing House of the Council was; but they had Manuscripts of them in
Germany, which were quickly printed, and every one after the usual manner, took
the liberty to exercise their Talent in censuring of them.

Next day after the Session, the Presidents called a General Congregation to
advise about the matters that were to be handled in the following Session; and
the Points of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Communion in both kinds were
proposed. In the following Congregations, after the points had been discussed,
four Chapters of Doctrines were made, and thirteen Anathema's; but because they
signified nothing, and were not published, as will appear hereafter, it is to
no purpose to reckon them up at length. In the Congregations that were held
after Christmas, they treated also of the Sacrament of Orders, concerning
which twelve Articles, drawn out of the Books of the Lutherans, were proposed,
and after many Conferences four Chapters of Doctrine, and eight Canons with
Anathema's past upon them; but neither were they published. We shall therefore
refer the treating of these Points to the History of the third Convocation of
the Council, under Pius IV.

The Council will not hear the Protestants, though the Emperor had past his
word that they should.
The Ambassadors of the Duke of Wirtemberg wrote to their Master, to give him
an account of the Difficulties they met with, and to know what he intended they
should do. He wrote back to them again that they should manage the business as
well as they could, but what ever came on it that they should find out a way to
propose their Doctrine. They thereupon applied themselves to the Cardinal of
Trent in the absence of Count Montfort the Emperor's Ambassador, and gave him
a Breviate of their Commission, which imported that they should endeavor to
obtain a Safe Conduct in ampler Form than that which had been given, and which
should in all things agree with that of the Council of Basil, that afterward
they should propose and defend their Doctrine. The Cardinal acquainted the
Legate with this; who without any hesitation made answer, That the Lutherans
should not be heard, that Abstracts of their Books should be made as had been
hitherto done, and that they should proceed to Judgment thereupon; that if they
humbly desired instruction, it should be given them; that he would not suffer
an ace of this to be abated; and that for the matter of the Safe Conduct it was
an intolerable affront to the Council, not to trust to their word. This was
down right contrary to the Emperor's positive promise which he gave to the
Protestants, that they should be heard, and that they should have all
imaginable Security. And therefore the Cardinal thought not fit to tell the
Ambassadors of Wirtemberg that answer. He thought it enough to acquaint them
that the Legate was angry that they should offer to begin by proposing their
Doctrine, as if they would give the Law to those from whom they were to receive
it, that they must have patience for some days till the Legate's anger was
over, and begin with some other Article, but not that. The Emperor's
Ambassador moved the Legate also upon the same subject, but finding nothing to
be done with him as to that particular, he devised several pretexts to amuse
the Protestant Ambassadors, and to spin out the time, till he might fall upon
some Expedient to save his Master's honor, who had so positively past his
word, which was so little regarded by the Council. Stratsburg and five other
Protestant Towns sent likewise their Ambassadors to Trent, who were stopped by
the same Difficulties. So the Emperor's Ambassador gave advice to his Master
that the Council would not hear the Protestants, contrary to the promise that
he had made them: whereupon the Emperor sent him Orders that he should stop
the Protestant Ambassadors and make them stay a little; that the Ambassadors
of Saxony were speedily to be at Inspruck, and that he would advise with them
about means to procure them satisfaction* About the same time Maximilian the
Son of Ferdinand King of the Romans past through Trent, and the Protestants
made their grievances known to him; he exhorted them to patience, and promised
them to treat with the Emperor his Uncle, that what he had assured them of
should be accomplished.

The Pope who knew very well that there was a considerable party forming
against him, and did not think the Cardinals so true to his cause, because all
of them had already espoused the interests of foreign Princes, at Christmas
1551, at one dash created fourteen Cardinals all Italians: he named thirteen,
and reserved the fourteenth in petto, and that was the Bishop of Siponto one of
his Nuncio's at the Council.

And now, from all parts nothing was heard but Rumors of War, Soldiers were
raised under several Pretexts throughout all Germany. The Protestant Princes
who had been constrained to promise that they would submit to the Council,
bestirred themselves to get loose from their Engagement. The Emperor had
likewise exercised in all places great Severities to oblige the Princes and
Towns, to receive the interim: all Germany groaned under the Yoke of Charles
his Power, and longed to shake it off. On the other side the King of France
fomented the Divisions; so that a furious storm began to gather, and the
Fathers of the Council of Trent took the Alarm; though the Emperor endeavored
what he could to encourage them; he told them that the Ambassadors of the
Electour of Saxony of whom the greatest talk was, were then with him at
Inspruck on their way to Trent, and that he would omit nothing that might
contribute to the security of the Council.

The Ambassadors of Saxony come to the Council, and speak higher than the rest.
The seventh of January the Ambassadors of the Duke of Saxony arrived at the
Council. Maurice their Master had not the least intention to submit to it, but
that he might lull the Emperor asleep whilst he was cutting out work for him,
he sent his Ambassadors to Trent, who were Wolf Collar, and Leonard Badehorn.
These Ambassadors spoke in a higher strain than the rest, as well knowing that
their Master would quickly be in a condition to make the best of them afraid of
him. They had Conference with the Emperor's Ambassadors, and declared to them
that their Master expected a Safe Conduct in the form of that of Basil. They
demanded that a stop might be made to all proceedings in Council until the
arrival of the Protestant Divines, who were but forty Leagues off, waiting
only for a Safe Conduct; that the Decrees which had past, should be examined
again anew; that the Pope should not preside in the Council; that the Votes
should be free, and that the Bishops should be absolved from their Oath to the
Pope. Afterward the Ambassadors made their Complements to the Electours, and
to the Cardinal of Trent, and discoursed every thing with them; but they would
have no Conference with the Legate, because they refused to acknowledge him for
President of the Council. The Emperor's Ambassadors according to their Orders
used those of Saxony very civilly, because they began to have some
Apprehensions of their Master; but the Legate observed no measures with them,
no more than they did with him. He made answer that they should have no other
Safe Conduct; that the Council should give public audience to these
Ambassadors, and the other Protestants, seeing it had been promised them by
the Emperor; but that first of all they must own the Legate and Nuncio's for
lawful Presidents, and that for the other demands, that the Pope should not
preside in the Council, and that the Bishops should be freed from the Oath of
Fidelity, that they had taken to him; they were so insolent and bordered so
near upon blasphemy, that they would sooner lose their Lives than suffer any
such thing; rather dissolve the Council, and use the utmost rigours. The
Emperor who perceived that this Conduct tended to an irreparable breach, and
that that would give a lawful Pretext to the Duke of Saxony to provide for his
own Security by way of Arms, gave Orders to his Ambassadors, and to the
Cardinal of Trent to Employ both Entreaties and the Threats of the Imperial
Authority to bring the Legate to a milder way of answering. They so handled the
matter that at length the Legate abated somewhat of his height. He condescended
to give the Ambassadors an audience in a General Congregation to be held in
his Palace, that all the proceedings of Council should be superseded, and as to
the business of the Safe Conduct, it should be referred to the pleasure of the
Fathers. A Congregation was thereupon held, wherein the point of superseding
the proceedings of the Council, past without difficulty: but the matter of the
Safe Conduct suffered more Debate; but in fine, the Authority of the Emperor,
of the three Electours, and Cardinal of Trent, so far prevailed, that they
resolved to grant them one in ampler form. The likewise resolved to give the
Protestant Ambassadors an audience in a General Congregation* But here, Peter
Taillevoy Archbishop of Palermo started a difficulty about the place of the
Ambassadors to whom they were to give Audience. He said that if they were
treated according to their Character of Heretics, the Council could give them
no place of honor, and that they must hear them as Criminals; but that in so
doing all would be lost, because they would not endure to be heard as
Delinquents, but would immediately withdraw; and on the other side, if they did
otherways, it would prove a prejudice to the Church. To get out of this strait
it was resolved, according to the overture proposed by the Bishop of Namburg,
that they should give the Protestants places of honor, making first a
Protestation that it was done out of Charity and Compassion, which are motives
above the Law. The four and twentieth of January was therefore appointed for
the General Congregation, wherein Audience was to be given to the Ambassadors
of Saxony: and the Council named deputies who with the Bishop of Siponto one of
the Nuncio's were to draw up the Safe Conduct. The Emperor's Ambassadors
desired to have the minute of it, that they might communicate the same to the
Protestants, and that it might be altered, if need were, before it should be
published.

A rough draught of the Safe Conduct being drawn, and given to the Emperor's
Ambassadors, they sent for the Protestants, made them a long Speech in praise
of the Fathers of the Council, whose goodness, clemency, and condescension so
much appeared by what they granted in their favor, telling them that on the
other hand, they ought to submit and carry it prudently. That as to the demand
they made that the Pope should submit to the Council, it ought to be proposed
with great circumspection, that the Divines were to be expected, and that they
themselves had great matters to propose as to that particular on the Emperor's
part, so soon as the Overture should be made by the Protestants; that the
Fathers of the Council themselves were very sensible, that the greatness of the
Pope ought to be lessened: but that it ought to be set about warily, and not in
that brisk manner as the Protestants designed. In fine, they showed them the
Safe Conduct, which did not please them; because it was not in the form of that
of Basil: which had granted the Bohemians four things that they also demanded.
1. That they should have a decisive Vote in the Council. 2. That matters should
be there decided by the Scriptures, and Interpreters that agree with them. 3.
That they should have Exercise of their Religion in their own Houses during the
Council.
And lastly, that nothing should be done to disgrace and reproach their
Doctrine; they found fault likewise that the Council gave no security in name
of the Pope, and of the College of Cardinals, as the Council of Basil had done.
The Emperor's Ambassadors were angry that they were not satisfied with the
Safe Conduct, which they had with so much trouble obtained: but they could not
move the Protestants to yield, so that they promised to make a Report of the
matter in the next Congregation. This, indeed, they did, but the Presidents and
Prelates stood firm to their resolution not to alter any thing in the
Safe Conduct, saying that it was false that the Council of Basil had granted
the Deputies of Bohemia a decisive Vote; that as to the Exercise of their
Religion in their Houses, it was sufficiently expressed in the Safe Conduct,
seeing it was not prohibited; and that as to the fourth point, that nothing
should be done to the Contempt of their Doctrine, care enough was taken as to
that by the Terms of the Safe Conduct; in a word they alleged that it was as
ample as that of the Council of Basil. The Count of Montfort made a motion
thereupon, that to take from the Protestants all occasion of cavilling, they
should copy the Safe Conduct of Basil word for word, only changing the Names.
That Proposal broke the Presidents measures, they looked at one another, as
uncertain what to say; till the Legate hit upon a ready expedient of referring
the matter to the next Congregation. That was a fetch of a man of parts, for by
this means the Presidents had time to solicit the Bishops vigorously to
maintain the cause of God, for so they called the interest of the Pope, against
the attempts of the Council of Basil, which the Pope and his Adherents did so
detest, that they would not imitate any thing that had been done there. The
Presidents of the Council obtained what they desired, and there was nothing
altered in the Safe Conduct. At length the Congregation was held the four and
twentieth of January for giving audience to the Protestants. At the opening of
it the Legate made a speech, wherein he laid before them the importance of the
affair that they were going to enter upon: and the Protestation that was framed
upon occasion of the difficulty started by the Archbishop of Palermo concerning
the places of the Protestant Ambassadors, being read, and ordered to be
inserted into the Acts, the Ambassadors were introduced. Badehorn, for the
Duke of Saxony, bowing to the Prelates, called them Reverendissimi and
amplissimi Patres; The Council gives audience to the Ambassadors of Saxony,
who reiterate all their demands.
he demanded that they would grant them a Safe Conduct in the form of that of
Basil, that they would put a stop to all Synodal proceedings until the arrival
of their Divines, that they might be heard in the defense of their Doctrine;
that the Pope as being concerned might not be Judge in that cause; that before
all things, the Pope should be declared inferior to the Council, that all
things that had been handled in the former Sessions should be examined over
again, because the number of Divines had been too small, and that the same
thing should be done which was acted in the third Session of the Council of
Basil, wherein all were declared free from the Oa^h of Allegiance which they
had made to the Pope. This was only said to amuse, and to gain time; for they
knew very well that nothing was to be obtained; they gave their speech in
writing, and then the Ambassadors of Wirtemberg were heard; who spoke little,
and demanded the same things. The Promooter of the Council answered them, that
they might expect their answer in time and place convenient. After that, the
Electours and Ambassadors withdrew.

January, 25 January 1552. A New Safe Conduct ampler than the former, is
granted to the Protestants.
the Session was held, wherein the Decree of delay and intermission of all
Synodal proceedings in favor of the Protestants until the nineteenth of March
ensuing, was read; The Safe Conduct was also read, and put into more ample form
than the former. The Protestant Princes and all the rest of the same Party,
were expressly named in it, and all security given them for coming to Trent,
staying there, and returning back; they had power allowed them to punish those
of their Retinues as should commit any insolency at Trent, or on the rode. And
if any should happen to do them injury, the Council promised them all the
Justice that they themselves should require. In fine, in case they should be
obliged to withdraw from the Council, they should have twenty days allowed them
to betake themselves to places of Safety. At the same time the Court of Rome
sent new instructions to the Presidents to hasten as much as they could the
conclusion of the Council. And therefore during the intermission which had been
granted to the Protestants, the Legate and Nuncio's caused matters to be
prepared for the following Sessions, thinking that in two or three Sessions
more, they might be able to dispatch what remained to be done.

The Pope was well informed of what had past at Trent betwixt the Emperor's
Ministers and the Protestant Ambassadors, and how that they had in some
measure given mutual promises to endeavor the diminution of the Papal
Authority; he knew likewise that the Spanish Prelates had much such another
design; so that beginning now to apprehend the Council and Germans, he resolved
to trust the Emperor no longer, but to strike in with the King of France, and
negotiated his treaty with Tournon the French Minister. The Protestants after
the Session made a great bustle, because nothing had been altered in the
Safe Conduct; but the Emperor's Ambassadors told them that upon the main all
that they demanded was in it, that all they stood upon was only the form,
which was not worth the minding; though these reasons did not satisfy them,
yet they accepted the Safe Conduct, but only that they might send it to their
Masters. In the mean time, the Presidents that they might hasten on the
dissolution of the Council, as it had been ordered at Rome, held a General
Congregation to frame Articles upon the Subject of Marriage, and in the
following Congregations they proceeded so far as to frame Canons. The
Protestants hereupon made a great noise, saying that they were made fools of,
since contrary to the word that was given them, new Decisions were daily made:
that when they had demanded a forbearance, it was not barely a forbearance of
Sessions, which were but Ceremonies, but of all Synodal proceedings. The
Emperor's Ministers seconded them, and endeavored to obtain an intermission
of all action, which the Presidents refused. But the Emperor sent an Agent to
Trent to prevail with the Council to supersede giving him Orders to go to
Rome; if he could obtain nothing at Trent, and to advance even to a
Protestation against all that should be done; that Protestation, wherewith the
Council was threatened, put a stop to the Congregations, and a resolution was
taken of forbearing all Synodal proceedings, till such time as the Council
should think otherways. The Pope was fain to consent to this whether he would
or not, and that incensed him the more against the Emperor. He wrote to Trent
that that forbearance should not be extended beyond a few days, and that
afterward they should fall again to action without any fear of danger.

To employ the Council, who in this time of intermission had nothing to do,
they held Stations during the Lent at Trent, as at Rome they did in the
beginning of March. The Ministers of Saxony received Letters from their Master,
who to amuse the Emperor wrote to them that they should make fresh instances
to the Council, for obtaining what they had demanded, giving them to understand
that within a few days he was to go wait on the Emperor, to advise with him
about the best means for carrying on their common designs. However this did not
prevent a rumor that was quickly spread abroad of a League between the King of
France and the Protestant Princes of Germany against the Emperor. And upon
this Rumor the Electours of Cologne and Mentz parted from Trent, and past
through Inspruck, where they had long and secret Conferences with the Emperor.
The Ambassadors of Saxony not thinking themselves safe enough at Trent parted
from thence likewise about the beginning of March, and returned home by
different ways. Nevertheless the Protestant Divines under the Protection of
their Safe-conducts came to Trent, four from Wirtemberg, and two from
Stratsbourg. And now the nineteenth of March the day prefixed for holding the
Session drawing near; the Presidents instead of a Session called a General
Congregation that day, wherein it was concluded that they should not too
hastily give an answer to the instances which the Ambassadors of Wirtemberg
sued for; and therefore they prorogued the Session to the first of May. At the
same time the Ambassador of Portugal arrived, and made and received the usual
Complements in that Congregation. The Protestants pressed daily for an answer,
and that the Council would fall to their proceedings again, because their
Divines were come; but the Presidents waved all their instances: so that in a
few days the countenance of affairs was much altered; but a little while before
they would not defer any thing in favor of the Protestants; and now they
refused to proceed to business, though the Protestants earnestly urged it. The
truth is, they would have very willingly continued the Synodal proceedings; but
they durst not, because they had no mind to hear the Protestants nor to give
them any answer, as had been promised; and therefore they daily found out some
new reason for delay. At length they had a very plausible pretext, which was
the sickness of the Legate Marcello Crescentio who on the five and twentieth of
March was taken ill by a strange Accident. He had been busy all day till night
in dispatching Letters for Rome, and rising from his seat to take a little
breath, he thought he saw a prodigious great black Dog with flaming Eyes, and
long hanging Ears coming straight toward him, which afterward disappeared
under the Table. This put him into a great fright; but being come to himself
again a little, he called his Servants who were in the Antichamber, and bid
them beat out that black Dog; but the Dog not being found, the fright cast him
into a fit of sickness of which he never recovered; his sickness served for a
good pretext for the delays that were made in answering the Protestants: And
besides, no sooner was one difficulty removed, but the Pope's Agents started
another, because they were no less apprehensive of the Emperor and
Imperialists, than they were of the Protestants, and they waited only for a
favorable occasion of breaking up the Council, which soon happened. The German
Bishops were already gone upon the Rumor of a War, Maurice Duke of Saxony
takes up Arms for the Liberty of Germany and of Religion.
and there was but a small number of Prelates at Trent, and those too only
Spanish and Italian. At length the design of the Electour of Saxony broke out;
and Charles the V. that mighty Politician was out-shot in his own bow. The
Electour with an Army of the Confederates, on the seventeenth of April, laid
siege of Ausburg. In the last Diet of Germany Commissions had been given to
Maurice Duke of Saxony to reduce the City of Magdeburg, declared rebel to the
Empire because it had refused to accept of the Interim: upon that pretext he
had received an Army, and that Army was at his Devotion; this War was soon
over, because the City of Magdeburg made their peace; but the Duke of Saxony
nevertheless continued to make secret Levies, whilst he gave it out that he
would submit to the Council, sent his Ambassadors thither as we have seen,
promised to wait on the Emperor, and set out on his Journey in order
thereunto; and all this to lull the Emperor asleep. But whilst he thus played
his game with the Emperor, Albert Marquess of Brandenburg went secretly into
France and made a Treaty with Henry the II. of France. Maurice in the mean
while, about the beginning of the Spring brought into the Field the men whom he
had raised during the Winter; and then published a Manifesto addressed to all
the States of the Empire, wherein he remonstrated that he had been amused with
vain hopes of a Reformation, that notwithstanding severest rigours were used
against the Protestants, particularly in banishing the Ministers of the Gospel.
Secondly he complained of the detention of his Father-in-Law the Landgrave of
Hesse who was kept Prisoner by the Emperor; and in that particular accused the
Emperor of breach of promise to him; but he chiefly represented to the States
of the Empire the Emperor's design, which was evident that he intended to
render himself absolute Master of Germany; and thereupon laid open all the
Encroachments that had been made tending to that end. The Confederate Princes
therefore, besieged the City of Ausburg, and took it in three days; the news of
this being brought to Trent, and that the Army advanced to Inspruck; the
Italians embarked upon the River of Adige and came by water to Verona; so great
was the Consternation at Trent, that the Presidents wrote immediately to Rome
for a Bull to empower them to suspend the Council. The Pope who had treated
with the King of France, and regarded the Emperor no more, made no scruple of
sending to the Nuncio's the Bull which they desired, but withal ordered them
to keep it secret. The Nuncio's having received the Bull, advised with the
Prelates and Ambassadors, what was fittest to be done in the present Juncture.
28. April 1552. The Council is suspended because of the War in Germany.
The Emperor's Ministers according to their Master's intentions were for
staying; but the Bishops who were smitten with fear, were not of that opinion,
but concluded that the Council must be adjourned; so that the Nuncio's
Presidents finding it unsafe to stay till the first of May, the day appointed
for the Session, did anticipate it by two days; it was therefore held the
twenty eighth of April, where there was but a small appearance, most part being
gone before; few Ceremonies were used, and those in a hurry: the Decree of
Suspension for two Years because of the troubles of Germany, and for longer
time if the troubles were not by that time over, was publicly read; whereby it
was likewise ordained, that so soon as the troubles ceased, without any
necessity of a new Convocation, the Prelates should reassemble at Trent, and
that all that had been hitherto decided should be religiously observed. The
Spaniards opposed this Suspension, and protested against the Act that past
thereupon; but for all their Protestation, they marched off with the rest. Rome
is jealous of the smallest matter that may seem to entrench upon the Papal
Authority; and therefore the Pope was very ill satisfied with the Presidents,
that in the Conclusion of the Decree, the observation of the things that had
been already decided in the Council, was strictly enjoined, without expecting
the Confirmation of the holy See. At that time the Court of Rome judged it a
matter of highest importance to do any thing that might give ground to imagine
that the Council and its Decrees had any Power and Force, but what they derived
from the Authority of the Pope.

The Emperor now at last received great blows all of a sudden. He saw in a
moment all the great hopes defeated which he had conceived of raising the
Grandeur of his Family upon the Ruins of the Protestants, and the Depression
of the Authority of the Pope, by means of a Council. The Pope turned his back
upon him, all the Protestants of Germany revolted from him, and shook off the
Yoke of that absolute Dominion that he endeavored to lay upon them; his design
was to have rendered the Empire hereditary to his Family, and to retain for his
Posterity those great Dignities and Territories which he had united in his own
Person. It is true, that he could not hinder his Brother Ferdinand from
succeeding to him in the Empire, seeing he was already King of the Romans.
Nevertheless some Historians do say, that he had desired of Ferdinand a
resignation of the Dignity of King of the Romans in favor of his Son Philip;
but that Ferdinand after he had well thought on it, would not make that
resignation. At least Charles used his endeavors that his Son Philip should
succeed to Ferdinand. These great designs and hopes vanished all at once.
Maurice pressed him to grant liberty of Religion in Germany: Ferdinand who had
prospects of interest contrary to those of his Brother, being Kind to the
Protestants had endeavored to incline the Emperor to peace; but all his
attempts were successless. And therefore Maurice having in vain essayed all
ways of accommodation by the mediation of Ferdinand, at last betook himself to
the way of Arms: the Confederates having taken Ausbourg and the Fort of
Eremberg; drew near Inspruck where the Emperor was, which put the whole
Imperial Court into such a terror, that the Emperor fled by night, and
retired into Carinthia in mighty disorder. Before he left Inspruck he set at
liberty Frederick of Saxony after he had been several Years Prisoner. And that
Prince followed the Emperor a long time in hopes of being again restored by
him to his Electourship. Maurice arrived the same night at Inspruck, and did no
injury to the House of Frederick nor to the Towns-people; but he plundered the
Emperor and all his Court. At length in August following the peace was
concluded at Passau; the Landgrave of Hesse was enlarged, liberty of Conscience
granted to all, the banished Ministers recalled, and the Interim was abolished.

THE HISTORY OF THE Council of TRENT.
BOOK V.
JULIUS III.
THE Pope finding himself eased of a Burden that had lain heavy upon him, by
the breaking up of the Council, resolved with himself to keep out of the
Briars, The Pope has enough of Councils, neither does the Emperor care for
them.
and not to run into such straits again. Nevertheless to persuade the world
that he was concerned at that Rupture, or rather to convince them what a
useless thing a Council was, he himself undertook the Reformation of the
Church; and for that end appointed a numerous Congregation of Cardinals; but
this, as all the other designs of Reformation, presently vanished; it produced
nothing but a great many Debates; so that within a few Months it was wholly
laid aside. Nor was there any more talk of reassembling the Council, which was
at this time interrupted for almost ten Years. Charles the V. who had been the
great stickler for the Convocation of the Council, had not now the same
interests to prompt him; his main design was the greatness of his Family, and
he had made it his business to render the Empire hereditary, as the Kingdom of
Spain and his other Dominions were. He thought to have accomplished his ends by
depressing the Protestant Princes and the Pope, and that the Council of Trent
was the fittest instrument for that purpose. And, indeed, this Emperor had got
so great an Ascendant over the minds of all of his Family, that he could
persuade them to any thing, even contrary to their own interests; his Brother
Ferdinand was King of the Romans, and by consequence apparent Emperor: and he
had prevailed with him that the Empire should be shared betwixt him and his Son
Philip, as the Antonins had done heretofore. Mary Queen of Hungary their Sister
who was wholly at Charles his Devotion for reasons, perhaps, not fit to be
named, had persuaded Ferdinand to admit of that partnership; but Maximilian,
Ferdinand's Son, perceiving that by that design he was like to be frustrated of
the hopes of succeeding his Father in the Empire, defeated all the intrigues.
So that the Prospects of Charles being at an end with his hopes; the Council
was no more in his thoughts, and Julius cared far less for it than he. It is
true, the Rupture of the Council, and the peace of Passau had quite
exstinguished the Pope's hopes of ever seeing the revolted Germans reduced
again to the obedience of the holy See. But to comfort himself for the loss of
the Germans, he drew from a remote Corner of the World, I know not what, a kind
of subjects who submitted themselves to the Authority of his See. Sultacan who
called himself Patriarch of the People which inhabit betwixt Euphrates and the
Indies, comes to Rome to render homage to the Pope.
The same course had been taken by Pope Eugenius IV. who whilst they were
undermining the Foundations of his Dominions in the Council of Basil, on the
other hand fed his vanity, and underpropt his tottering Dignity by the vain
homages of the Greeks, who in the Council of Florence came to submit to him,
and by a counterfeit Pomp of pretended Armenians who desired instruction from
him: this is a kind of Comedy that takes mightily at Rome. Paul III. during his
Pontificate had also with great Solemnity and Ceremonies received the homages
of one Stephen, who had taken the name of Patriarch of Armenia the greater, and
who came to Rome attended by an Archbishop and two Bishops, upon design of
recognizing the Pope for head of the Church; and now under Julius a certain man
named Simon Sultacan who called himself Patriarch of all the People that
inhabit betwixt the River Euphrates and the Indies, came to demand the
Confirmation of his Patriarchship from the Pope, as from the Vicar of Jesus
Christ. The Pope made him a Bishop, and then gave him the Patriarchal Pall;
that happy accident was loudly proclaimed abroad, and the great increase that
the holy See received by the submission of so many People who owned its
Authority, was made a matter of great triumph; but to these Apparitions of
Grandeur, there succeeded somewhat more substantial for the Glory of the Sea of
Rome. VI. King of England died the sixth of July 1553. His Father Henry VIII.
had shaken off the Yoke of the Pope's Power without any innovation in Religion:
Edward King of England dies, his Sister Mary succeeds to him, and restores the
Catholic Religion. 1553.
And Edward under the Regence of the Duke of Sommerset had completed what his
Father began, and introduced a Reformation into the Church of England. But he
lived not long enough to establish and confirm that great Work; by his last
Will he had disinherited his two Sisters Mary and Elizabeth the Daughters of
his Father Henry; the former Daughter of Catharine of Aragon who was divorced,
and the second Daughter of Anne Bullen, whom Henry had caused to be beheaded.
He had appointed the Lady Jane Gray his Cousin and Daughter to a Sister of Henry
to be Heir of the Crown. Jane was proclaimed Queen; but her Reign was of short
continuance, and cost her her Life. Mary was advanced to the Crown, both by the
Privilege of her Birth, and by the Will of her Father, who had appointed that
if Edward should die without Children, Mary should succeed, and that Elizabeth
should succeed to Mary. Mary being in the Throne, pretended at first that she
would alter nothing in Religion, though she professed herself to be a
Catholic; but great hopes were conceived at Rome, that this Queen might be
useful in reducing that Kingdom to its ancient Obedience: And therefore Julius
presently named Cardinal Pool for the Legation of England. But the Cardinal
durst not undertake the Journey without great Circumspection, because he had
been banished the Kingdom, and degraded of his honor: and therefore he wrote
to the Queen, and negotiated his return by Giovanni Francisco Commendone; and
having received a favorable answer he set out on his Journey.

The Parliament of England being called, declared the Marriage of Henry VIII.
with Catharine of Aragon the Queens Mother, valid, and by consequence
pronounced the Divorce unlawful. And the Acts made in the Reign of Edward were
Repealed, and Religion reinstated in the same condition it was in when Henry
died. The confirmation of the Marriage of Henry was a great step toward an
accommodation with Rome, seeing the Marriage of Henry and Catharine could not
be declared lawful, without admitting the Dispensation of Julius II. who had
dispensed with Henry to Marry his Brother's Widow. So that the Parliament by
that procedure owned that the Pope has Power to dispense with the Laws of God,
and by consequence acknowledged him Head of the Church. A motion was made of
Marrying the Queen who was already forty years old, and three Matches were
proposed; Cardinal Pool who was of the Blood Royal; the Lord Courtenay Cousin to
Henry VIII and Philip Prince of Spain. Mary chose Philip: and the Emperor
fearing lest Cardinal Pool who had been his Son's Competitor might by his
presence cross his Marriage with Mary, did all he could not make him delay his
Journey, and not being able to persuade him, sent Don Diego de Mendoza to stop
him in the Palatinate by Force and Authority. The Cardinal complained of this,
as of an action that did violate the Majesty of the holy See, and an affront
done to the Pope and his Legates: So that Charles having detained him sometime,
was forced to give him his liberty, and sent him to Brussels. But he found a
means to amuse him in Brabant, under color of engaging him in a negotiation of
Peace betwixt the King of France and himself, until the Marriage was
accomplished. In the beginning of the year, 1554. The Emperor sent four
Ambassadors into England for concluding the Treaty betwixt the Queen of
England, his Son and himself. Mary, in the mean while, who with much prudence
went gradually on in the reestablishment of Religion, made new Proclamations;
restored the use of the Latin Tongue in Divine Service, renounced the Supremacy
in the Church, gave it back to the Pope, and so annulled the Acts of her
Father. The matter was brought before the Parliament; where it met with
opposition amongst the Lords because of the Church Lands possessed by the
Nobles, which they must be obliged to give back again. So that the Pope's
Supremacy past not at that time. Prince Philip that he might not seem inferior
to Mary in Dignity, took the Title of King of Naples, and consummated his
Marriage at London the twenty fifth of July, being St. James his day the Patron
of Spain. The Parliament met again in the month of November following, and
Cardinal Pool was therein restored to all his rights and honors. Two Members
of Parliament were sent to bring him over into England, and he arrived at
London the twenty third of November, with the Silver Cross carried before him.
Being brought into the House of Lords, where the King and Queen were present,
he made a Speech to that Illustrious Assembly, thanking them for the favor
they had done him in restoring him to his Honors and Country. He earnestly
exhorted them to return again to the obedience of the holy See, wherein he
prevailed, and the Ceremony of Reconciliation was performed the last day of
November; for the Authority of the King and Queen had obliged all the
dissatisfied Members to silence, which silence was taken as a consent. The
Queen caused a Petition to be framed wherein the Parliament begged Pardon of
the Pope, for having withdrawn themselves from under his obedience. This
Petition was presented to the King and Queen, who rising immediately from their
Chairs of State, went to the Legate and besought him to grant the Parliament
the Pardon which they begged. The Legate standing up, and all the Members of
Parliament kneeling before him, made a Speech concerning the Joy that the
repentance of sinners causes in Heaven; and then having prayed over them he
gave them absolution. The Members rose up, and the whole Parliament went in
body to the Church where Te Deum was Sung. Next day three Ambassadors were
named to go render homage to the Pope in name of the whole Nation: and this
success caused so great Joy at Rome, that the Pope proclaimed a Jubilee the
twenty fourth of December, to render thanks to God for so great a blessing. The
Parliament of England sitting till the middle of the next year, Philip and Mary
got all the Ancient Laws against Here-ticks to be revived. All Acts to the
contrary Henry, and his Son Edward were Repealed: and afterward the rigor of
the Laws that were now again in force, was put in execution against the
Protestants. One hundred threescore and sixteen persons of Quality besides
inferior people, were by Mary's Order that year put to death: amongst whom
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury and the rest of the Bishops who had been the
Authors of the Reformation were burnt. It was put to their choice either to dye
or to recant, but none of them would save their Lives by a Recantation. This
persecution extended to the very Graves, and the ashes of the dead; the bodies
of Bucer and Paulus Fagius, who had been dead some four years, were taken up
and burnt. So that the Protestants went to pot in all places: for at the same
time Henry the II. caused a great many of the reformed Religion to be burnt in
France, not so much out of Zeal, as to satisfy the insatiable avarice of Diana
of Poictiers Duchess of Valentinois his Mistress, to whom he had given the
forfeitures of all that should be condemned for Heresy. On the other hand
Ferdinand King of the Romans published an Edict, whereby he strictly charged
all his Subjects not to make any innovation in matters of Religion, and
banished above two hundred Ministers out of Bohemia. Several of his most
considerable Nobility prayed him, that he would at least permit the use of the
Cup; but he refused it, and caused a Catechism to be made, according to which
all School masters should instruct their Scholars: But this Edict did not
altogether please the Pope, who complained that a Prince should have undertaken
to make a Formulary of Faith.

Ausbourg for composing the troubles of Religion. Ferdinand made a long Speech
in it, 1555. A Diet at Ausbourg during which the Pope dies.
wherein he reckoned up the mischiefs that had been occasioned in Germany by
those controversies in Religion; and the horrid corruption of manners that
these debates had drawn after them. Diverse means were proposed for taking up
these differences, and amongst others a conference of the learned of both
sides: but the Pope who had an aversion to any thing that bore the name of
conference, approved not that expedient; he caused Cardinal Morone his Legate
in Germany to represent to the Diet that all conferences ought to be avoided,
and that the only way to put an end to controversies was that which was taken
in England; to wit, to return again to the obedience of the holy See. But
Cardinal Morone was not long at Ausbourg before he heard of the death of
Julius, which happened in February 1555. He therefore returned to Rome, to
assist at the Election of a new Pope, and found the business done before he
came.

MARCEL II.
Marcello Cervino Cardinal of Santa Croce was created Pope on the eighth of
April 1555. It is observed as a thing singular in him, that he would not change
his name as others do. This custom of changing of names upon promotion to the
Papacy, came from the Germans, whose names are somewhat rough and unpleasant.
Those of that Nation who had been chosen Popes, made choice of Latin names,
that at least by their names they might not sound harsh in the Romans.
Afterward they made a mystery of that change, and the Cardinals who are chosen
to fill the holy See, would thereby signify, that they have renounced all
their former Characters that they may become new men. Cardinal Santa Croce
would not change his name, that he might give all to understand, that he had
been the same man in the Cardinalship, as he intended to be in the Papacy. He
had gained the reputation of a grave and severe man, and of a high and steady
Soul, but he lived not long enough to give a proof of what he could do. So
soon as he was exalted to the Pontifical Chair, he laid a design of calling the
Council again for settling the affairs of Religion, and that the Council might
be happy in its proceedings, he thought it his own duty to begin with a
thorough Reformation of the Clergy and Court of Rome, which had been often
proposed by his Predecessors; but never heartily meant by most of them. All
his designs perished with him; for he died of an Apoplexy the last day of the
same Month of April. So that he filled the Chair but two and twenty days.

PAUL IV.
Paul IV. chosen. He was of the House of the Caraffa's.
The twenty third of May following the Cardinals chose Giovanni Pietro Caraffa,
who took the name of Paul IV. They made him take an Oath that he should convene
the Council within two years, and that he should not for the first two years of
his Pontificate create more than four Cardinals, because the sacred College was
very numerous and full. The Character of his temper hitherto, made him a man of
a severity that was somewhat morose and rough. He had been a Theatin Monk,
Rome, he would bring it about, what ever came on it: but they were soon rid of
all these fears, for he presently laid aside that affected severity of life. He
still retained a morose humor, This Pope was proud and insolent to the highest
degree.
which being joined to an insupportable haughtiness, he became the most proud
and insolent man living. Never was there Pope of Rome that carried it with
greater Pomp and Grandeur. The Steward of his house having asked him how he
intended to be served for the future; like a great Prince, answered he. He
would be crowned with greater Pomp than any of his Predecessors, and affected
never to appear abroad but in great State and Splendor. The English
Ambassadors who came to render homage to the holy See, arrived just upon the
day of his Exaltation, which he took as a good presage. The Ambassadors
falling down at his feet begged pardon for the whole Kingdom: The Pope took
them up, granted them what they desired, and without being solicited, erected
Ireland into a Kingdom in favor of the King and Queen. This was a very
surprising Act, and no body understood the mystery of it, nor could any imagine
what he drove at, in giving the name of Kingdom to an Island which the Kings of
England peaceably possessed under that Title* But that was a fetch of Roman
Policy: Henry VIII. after his separation from the Church of Rome, had erected
Ireland into a Kingdom, and had left it to Edward under that Title. Now the
Pope pretending to have the only right of disposing of Crowns, and erecting
States into Kingdoms, had a design to oblige Queen Mary to quit the Title of
Queen of Ireland; but perceiving very well that that would prove too hard a
task, he thought it better without saying any thing, and as being ignorant of
what Henry had done, to erect that Country into a Kingdom, that so Mary might
enjoy the Title of it, as holding it of the Pope, and not deriving it from her
Father. Moreover, with an imperious Air and full of Authority he told the
Ambassadors, that the Revenues and Church Lands must forthwith be restored to
the Clergy, and the Tribute of St. Peter be settled again as formerly. Queen
Mary endeavored to give the Pope satisfaction as to that, but she could not
prevail; because most of the great men of the Nation were in actual and
hereditary possession of the Revenues of the Church, and could not be brought
to part from them. So that all that she could do was to restore what she her
self possessed, and what had been annexed to the Crown.

The Diet at Ausbourg makes an Edict of Liberty, which offends the Pope.
Whilst matters went in this manner at Rome and in England, the Diet at Ausbourg
which began in February last, was still continued. The Germans devised several
means for putting an end to the controversies about Religion, but seeing they
were not likely to take effect, they were forced to settle a Peace by making
all the Princes within their own Territories supreme in matters of Religion.
The Protestants moved that it might be permitted to Bishops and Abbots to
change their Religion without losing their Dignities and Revenues, but that did
not pass. The Catholics on the other hand, urged that those States which had
accepted the Interim some seven years before, should not have the liberty of
returning again to the Confession of Ausbourg, but at length they yielded, and
so all the States enjoyed full liberty of Conscience; nay, and the Lutherans
were maintained in the possession of the Church-Revenues, which they had
already allotted for the entertainment of their Ministers and Schools. Pope
Paul, the most haughty and passionate man living, fell into a furious rage
against this Edict of Liberty. He publicly threatened the Emperor and
Ferdinand King of the Romans, that he would make them repent the injury they
had done to the holy See. He exhorted them to recall those Edicts, wherein if
they failed, he threatened to proceed against them with as severe Censures as he
intended to use against the Lutherans, he said that all the misfortunes that
had befallen Charles, proceeded from the wrath of God against him, because of
his indifference, and that he had not vigorously bestirred himself in reducing
Germany to the obedience of the holy See, which he might have done. In this
manner, and with such kind of Discourse he entertained the Emperor's
Ambassador, and the Cardinal of Ausbourg. He observed the same Character with
all other Ambassadors; telling them often that he was above all Princes, that
he expected not that any of them should treat with him as his equal; that he
could alter and take away Kingdoms as he thought good: nay, and being one day
at table he lasht out so far as to say in the presence a great many persons of
Illustrious Quality, that he would subject all Princes under this foot,
stamping on the ground with his foot; he added that he would rather turn all
things topsy turvy, and set fire to the four Corners of the World, than to
commit the least base action in derogating from his Authority. The Pope listens
to the persuasion of useing carnal Arms for supporting his Authority.
This lofty and proud humor was yet more and more fomented by his Nephew
Charles Caraffa, who from a Captain being become Cardinal, carried along with
him into the Church all the violent inclinations of War. As for the Pope he
stood it out merely by his haughtiness, and did not think he stood in need of
other Arms, than those which the Character of Pope put into his hands; he
persuaded himself that by his Spiritual Weapons he could do whatsoever he
pleased, for never man valued himself more upon the account of Fortune than he,
because all things had ever succeeded with him. Nevertheless, seeing he
entertained vast thoughts and aimed at all, he easily let himself be persuaded,
that he ought to make use of all. Insomuch, that if on the one hand the Uncle
was inclineable enough of himself to employ the Power of the Church with utmost
rigor, the Nephew on the other hand, put it in his head to fortify the
Spiritual Power by Temporal Arms, and the Pope consented to it; but he would
have that Union of the Arms of the World with those of the Church to be made
very secretly, and not to appear sooner than was necessary. He therefore
treated very secretly with the King of France to take the Kingdom of Naples
from the House of Austria, and to transfer it to the Crown of France; on
condition that a good part of it should be annexed to the Ecclesiastic State.
That affair was managed privately at Rome first with the Cardinal of Lorrain,
and afterward with the Cardinal de Tournon.

For the carrying on these great designs the Pope resolved to create a great
number of Cardinals, who might depend on him as being his Creatures. Upon his
Elevation he had taken an Oath to make but a few Cardinals, because the Sacred
College was already too numerous. So soon as mention was made of this promotion
so contrary to what he had promised, and so opposite to the Emperor's
interest, to whom the Pope intended to raise as many Enemies as he made
Cardinals, the Sacred College and especially the Imperialists resolved to
oppose it. The Pope had notice of that, called a Consistory on the twentieth of
December, and so soon as he had taken his place, he told them that he would
grant Audience to none, that he himself would only speak, that he had weighty
matters to propose, and that none must interrupt him: The Cardinal of St. Jago
a Spaniard rising to speak to him, he puncht him several times on the breast
and thrust him back. When all were set down after this Preface, he complained
of the rumors that were spread abroad, that he could not lawfully create more
than four Cardinals because of the Oath that had been exacted from him at his
Inauguration. He told them, that he would have them know that the Pope could
not be bound by any Engagement, nor by any Man, nor indeed bind himself by any
Oath; that to think the contrary was Heresy, from which out of Favor and
Grace he absolved those who by such an opinion had incurred the penalties due
to Heretics, because he was willing to believe that they were not obstinately
engaged in it; but that if any one persisted to think or speak so, he would put
him in the Inquisition; telling them plainly that he would make Cardinals, and
that he would not be contradicted. He named seven, one of whom, to wit, Gropper
a Divine of Cologne, refused the Hat.

In England Cardinal Pool, who till then would not take the orders of
Priesthood, was made Priest, and four Months after, Archbishop of Canterbury in
the place of Cranmer who was burnt. In Germany the People of Austria demanded
of Ferdinand Liberty of Conscience; Ferdinand refused it under pretext that he
was bound by Oath to the Church, nevertheless he granted them the Cup
conditionally until the next Council, and prohibited them to endeavor any
change in the rest of the Ceremonies. The Duke of Bavaria made also the same
prohibition within his Territories, and allowed the Cup to his People. But the
Palatinate was wholly reformed: for the Electour being dead, his Nephew
succeeded him, and so soon as he was fixed, he forbid the Mass, and the Exercise
of the Roman Religion within his Territories.

Pope Paul who omitted nothing that might make for his Reputation, and confirm
his Authority, undertook to reform the Church, and for that end established a
great Congregation composed of an hundred and fifty Persons, The Pope proposes
a Reformation of the Church, but that proposal had no success.
which he divided into three Chambers; he assigned them first, the matter of
Simony to be examined; but that is a nice point, it is the Springhead of all
the Wealth of the Court of Rome. Some were for the rigor in cutting off all
manner of ways, whereby money is taken for spiritual things. The Pope himself
seemed to favor that opinion so far, that he said he would not grant any
Matrimonial Dispensations; but the heat of that Zeal lasted not long, for the
opposition was so great, and the Difficulties so terrible, that all was laid
aside; some proposed to him the Calling of the Council again for carrying on of
that Reformation, and, indeed, at his Inauguration he had sworn so to do: but
he laughed at that, saying that he had nothing to do with a Council, that he
was above those things, and that it was a great silliness to have sent twice
already threescore Bishops and forty Divines the weakest of all the
Mountaineers, to determine Controversies of the highest Nature: as if these
good Folks had had more knowledge and capacity than the Vicar of Jesus Christ,
adding notwithstanding, that provided the Council were held at Rome, he would
not be against it. But especially when he came to know what toleration King
Ferdinand and the Duke of Bavaria had granted their Subjects to communicate
under both kinds, he took the Alarm and looked upon that action as an attempt,
hardly to be remedied without a Council. The Ambassador of Poland sent to
Complement him upon his exaltation, The Pope falls into a rage upon occasion of
some demands made to him by the Ambassador of Poland.
proposed to him some Demands in name of that State which vexed him much more
than the Actions of Ferdinand and the Duke of Bavaria had done. The first was,
that they might have liberty to celebrate Mass in the Vulgar Tongue; the
second, that the Communion might be administered under both kinds; the third,
that Priests might be allowed to Mary; and the fourth, that they might pay no
more Annats, and that a national Synod might be called in Poland, for adjusting
the Differences about Religion. He broke forth into a rage, when the Proposals
were made to him, and all these things concurring together made him resolve to
call a Council at Rome. He ordered the Ambassadors to acquaint their Masters,
that he intended to celebrate a Council in the Church of Lateran, and declared
the same in a Congregation of Cardinals. On his Coronation-day being the six
and twentieth of May, a great many Cardinals with the Ambassadors of Princes
being with him at Table, he said that he had acquainted Princes with his design
merely out of form and civility; that he would make them sensible what the Holy
See can do, when it is possessed by a resolute and courageous Pope; that he well
foresaw that his Proposal would displease them because of the Place that he had
pitched upon, but that though they should not send one Prelate to his Council,
he would not be much concerned, and that he well knew how far his Authority
reached.

Whilst matters went thus at Rome, news came that by the mediation of Cardinal
Pool, the Emperor and the King of France had made a Truce for five Years;
Peace is made betwixt the Emperor and the King of France, the Pope breaks it
off.
this News vexed the Pope to the heart, because it broke all his measures, and
suited not at all with the design he had of engaging the King of France in the
War of Naples, and of making use of the Arms of that Prince for seizing that
Kingdom; however he pretended to be glad at it. But he could not forgive
Cardinal Pool, to whom he owed so great obligations, for having reduced England
to the obedience of the Holy See; for he sought a pretext to break with him, he
deprived him of his Legateship, and put into the Inquisition his Friend Thomas
de S. Felix Bishop Della Cava. Immediately he dispatched two Legates, one into
France, and another into Germany, under pretext of essaying to convert the
Truce into a Peace. But instead of endeavoring to make peace, Caraffa his
Legate in France persuaded the King to break the Truce; and offered him
absolution from his Oath. The Princes of the house of Guise solicited him to
that action, but the rest of the Court looked upon that perfidiousness with
abhorrence. There was only one thing that stuck with Henry II. and that was
that the Pope being extremely old, he could not hold out long; that after him
another would come, who might take other measures; and that so he would be left
alone in the mire into which the Pope had plunged him. The Cardinal of Lorrain
a man for expedients, found out one presently: he told the King that he must
get the Pope to create so many Cardinals of the French faction, that the King
might always be sure of having in the holy See a man at his Devotion. This was
a cross ill laid trap, however Henry was caught in it, and did whatsoever they
would have him do. But these Negotiations could not be kept so secret, but
that the Emperor began to suspect that the work that was preparing for him was
of the Pope's cutting out; for the Legate that was sent to him made but very
small Journeys, and when he came to Maestricht he had orders from Caraffa to
come into France, to stop there; and not to go to the Emperor, though he was
but two days Journey from him.

The Pope breaks with the Emperor, and undertakes a War which proved fatal to
him.
The Pope seeing his Train pretty well laid, sought for no more but a fair
pretext to break with the Emperor: which he presently found in that Ascanio
Colonna and Marco Antonio his Son were protected at Naples. The Pope had
excommunicated both, deprived them of all their Lands and Estates, and given
their Forfeitures to his Nephew Montorio, with the Title of Duke of Pagliano.
The Colonna's fled to Naples, from whence they made frequent inrodes upon the
Ecclesiastic State, and especially upon the Lands that had been taken from
them. The Pope was mad with the Emperor because his Enemy had found refuge
within the Territories of that Prince, and spoke of Charles and Ferdinand, in
very outrageous terms, in presence of their Ambassadors and Friends. In fine
he resolved to make open War, he secured all suspected Persons, and shut up
several Cardinals and Gentlemen in the Castle of St. Angelo. Nay and
Garcillasso di Vega King Philip's Ambassador, and Postmaster of the Empire; he
gave protection to those that were banished out of Naples, and broke open the
Emperor's packets. When the Duke of Alva who was then Viceroy of Naples
expostulated with him for these injuries, threatening that if he persisted in so
doing his Master would right himself by the Law of Arms; the Pope made answer
that he was a free Prince, that as he was not to give account of his Actions to
any, so as Pope he might call all men to an account of theirs, and that nothing
could move him to fail in what he was obliged to do for the maintenance of the
Church. At length the Duke of Alva finding that fair means could not prevail
with him, and that great preparations were making in the Pope's Territories,
thought it his part to take the start, and declare War first; which he did the
fourth of September, 1556. He seized almost that whole Country which is called
Campania di Roma, keeping it in name of the succeeding Pope, and put Rome it
self into a fright. The Pope fell to fortifying the City, and forced all even
the Monks to labor at the Works. There was a weak place at the end of the
Street called Flaminia, where stood a stately Church of our Lady that hindered
the fortifications: The Pope was about to demolish it; but the Duke of Alva
sent to entreat him not to do it, promising not to take advantage of that
place. In the mean time the Duke thinking it enough to have put Rome in a
fright, drew off and did not lay siege to the place.

This was the Year wherein Charles made a Resignation of all his Dignities, and
retreated to a solitary Life, having first made over his hereditary Dominions
to his Son, The resignation of Charles the V.
and the Empire to his Brother. People hereupon made reflections much to the
disadvantage of the Pope; for they compared his haughtiness with the humility
of that great Prince, who being born in the height of honor, and having lived
in so great Glory, had freely renounced all the Pomps and Vanities of the
World; whereas, on the other hand, Paul having been first a Bishop, and having
afterward betaken himself to a Monastery of Theatins, came out again to be a
Cardinal, and at the age of 80 Years created Pope, was become the proudest and
most insupportable man living.

The Resignation of Charles did not put an end to the War of Naples. The Duke
of Guise was forced to march into Italy to the assistance of the Pope; he had a
design to have stopped at Lombardy to make a Diversion; but the Pope would have
him on any terms to march forward into the Kingdom of Naples, where he did
nothing at all. And now the Pope to make good his promise created ten
Cardinals, but they were neither French men, nor devoted to the French interest
as he had promised, which a little disgusted that Nation. On the other side the
Court of Rome had no great reason to be much satisfied with the Succors of
France, for notwithstanding their assistance, the Duke of Alva took the Town of
Signey, and threatened the same to Pagliano. The Pope being alarmed at this
great Success; opened his grievances in a consistory of Cardinals, to whom,
amongst other things, he told that he resolutely expected Martyrdom; but the
Cardinals could not well conceive how he could die a Martyr in a War which he
had kindled by his treachery and ambition. At the same time the French were
defeated at St. Quentin in Picardy by the Forces of the K. of Spain, which
forced the K. of France to recall his Forces out of Italy; and the Pope was
constrained to make peace with the Duke of Alva: but though he had been
worsted, yet would he needs make his peace as if he had been victorious; The
Pope being overcome makes peace like a Conqueror.
He would neither suffer the Colonna's to be mentioned in the Treaty, nor
himself to be accused of having violated the Law of Nations by imprisoning the
Ministers of the Emperor and King of Spain; but on the contrary the Duke of
Alva must come to Rome in person to beg on his Knees absolution for himself,
and in name of the King his Master. Never was there any thing more haughty, and
indeed the Inundation of the Tyber, which at that time overflowed all the City
of Rome and ruined the Fortifications of the Castle of St. Angelo, was looked
upon as an effect of that prodigious pride which provoked Divine Vengeance. One
thing is reported of this Pope, which very well shows his humor; in order to
this war he had raised Troops amongst the Grisons; and they being Protestants,
according to the usual Insolence of Soldiers, made havoc in all Churches where
they past, even to the pulling down of Images. The Cardinals of the Inquisition
complained of this; but the Pope answered, (...) Roman Religion wholly banished
the Kingdom. About the same time another thing happened which overwhelmed the
Pope in trouble; and that was that in the Diet of Ausbourg the Acts of the last
Years Conference, which ended without any Success, having been examined, the
Emperor confirmed the Liberty of Religion according to the Pacification at
Passau, and the Recesses of the Diets which had been held afterward. The Pope
could not hinder, nor oppose it by his Legates; for he had excluded himself
from all Negotiation with Germany by the affront and injury he had done to
Ferdinand. And to mortify him for good and all, peace was concluded at
Cambray, the third of April, betwixt the Kings of France and Spain. So that he
found himself left alone, forsaken of all men, hated of those two Princes,
betwixt whom he had kindled a War, instead of quenching it, as it was the Duty
of the Common Father of the Church. In that Treaty the two Kings obliged
themselves mutually to endeavor the Reformation of the Church, and the Calling
of a Council for rooting out of Heresies. Philip and Henry were both great
Persecutours of Protestants: especially Philip of Spain, who thought it not
enough to use Fire and Sword in a most cruel manner within his own Dominions;
but sent Ambassadors to all Neighboring Princes to solicit them to take the
same violent Courses against Protestants. Perhaps there was more of resentment
and revenge than Zeal for Religion in this Conduct; for he had a mortal hatred
to the Protestants of Germany, because they had been the Cause that he was not
named King of the Romans in the Diet of Ausbourg in the Year 1551. for the
reformed States favored Ferdinand and Maximilian his Son who opposed the
Election of Philip. From the time of the first Edict of Charles the fifth,
there had been above fifty thousand men put to death by most cruel Torments in
the low Countries; but this being not sufficient to Philip, he made a League
with France for the total Subversion of the Reformation. The Cardinal of
Lorrain in France, and Granvel Bishop of Arras were the great sticklers for
that Enterprise.

For putting of this design in execution, Philip had a great mind to have
brought the Inquisition into the low Countries; but his Father Charles the V.
having heretofore succeeded so ill in that design, that he was forced to leave
it off, he feared that that Enterprise might cost him more trouble than it had
done his Father. To cut off some of the Difficulties that might happen he
resolved to begin with the multiplication of Bishoprics, in hopes that these
Bishops might contribute much to the accomplishment of his design. There were
but two Bishoprics in all the low Countries, Utrecht and Cambray, all the rest
of the Clergy were under the Jurisdiction of German and French Bishops, and
these two Bishops were also Suffragans to Strangers. Philip drew his
Territories from under a foreign spiritual Jurisdiction, and erected into
Bishoprics, Namur, Antwerp, Balise-duc, Ghent, Bruges, Ipres, St. Omer,
Harlem, Midleburg, Leuvarden, Groninguen, Ruremonde and Deventer, and
established three Archbishopricks, Cambray, Malines and Utrecht. The People
perceived very well what that tended to: and therefore they grew more
obstinate, and became inclinable to embrace the Reformation, refusing to pay
any Taxes till the Spanish Soldiers were removed. Henry II. on his part did all
that lay in his power to ruin the Protestants in his Kingdom. He resolved to
be present at the famous Mercurial which was held the fifteenth of June, this
was the name that was given to the Assemblies which met on Wednesdays, for
examining and correcting the manners of the Judges of Parliament. Matters of
Religion were to be treated of there, and the King would hear the Judges argue
that affair, that he himself might know who were infected with new opinions.
After that Assembly he caused Lewis le Fevre, and Anne du Bourg both Judges to
be apprehended, because they had been of opinion that some favor should be
showed in punishing People who were only guilty, said they, in discovering the
Corruptions of the Court of Rome.

The first national Synod of the Protestants in France.
The Protestants notwithstanding the rigor of Persecutions went on with their
business, and framed a Discipline in the Church: they met at St. Germain, and
held their first national Synod there, wherein Francis Morel was President. The
Pope, on his part, did all that lay in his Power to encourage those two Kings,
and seeing he extremely dreaded a Council, and yet passionately desired the
Ruin of the Protestants, he importuned those Princes to settle the
Inquisition, extolling and praising it as the only means to extirpate
Heresies. The Protestants of Germany interceded with Henry France was killed on
the second of July, by Montgommeri, Henry King of France is killed.
Count de Lorge, who in a Turnement run a Lance into his Eye. The Protestants
looked upon the death of the King as a Miracle in all its Circumstances; they
published several small Pamphlets, wherein they observed that the King was
killed by Captain de Lorge, whom he had employed to apprehend the two suspected
Judges after that famous Mercurial of the fifteenth of June; they added that he
was smitten in the Eye as a Punishment for his swearing that with his Eyes he
would see Anne du Bourg burnt. All these unseasonable observations did only
hasten the death of poor Anne du Bourg, for the Queen being incensed by these
Libels pressed the Judges to condemn him; which they did contrary to their
inclinations. The Pope was extremely afflicted at the news of the Death of
Henry, whom he looked upon as his Protector against the attempts of the Germans
and Spaniards upon the Authority of the holy See. But he stood not long in need
of a Protector in this World; The Pope dies. Pius IV. of the House of Medicis
is chosen.
for he died the eighteenth of August the same year: on his Deathbed he
commended nothing to the Cardinals but the Inquisition, as the only means of
preserving the Church. Paul was no sooner dead, but the People who had more
than a hatred for him, rose in a terrible fury; they beat off the head of his
Statue, dragged the Statue through the City, opened the Prisons that he had
filled Minerva, the Monks whereof had the Charge of the Inquisition, narrowly
escaped being burnt. The Cardinals also took Cardinal Morone out of the Castle
of St. Angelo, to which he had been committed by the late Pope: and all the
Caraffa's Arms were defaced, torn in pieces and broken down, wherever they were
found. On the fifth of September the Cardinals went into the Conclave, the Sea
was vacant almost three Months, and the Factions that usually happen on such
occasions, retarded the Election until the four and twentieth of December.

PIUS IV.
Philip uses great Cruelty in Spain against the Protestants.
During that time Philip left the low Countries, and went to Spain: he was near
being cast away in a storm, and being buried in the same waves that had
swallowed up his rich Furniture and part of his Retinue. When he was arrived in
Spain, he made it his chief care to choke the Seeds of new opinions that had
been sown there; the very day he arrived at Sevil, which was the twenty fourth
of September, he caused John Pontio of Leon Son of the Count of Baileno, and
twelve other men and women of Quality to be burnt as Lutherans. He caused the
Effigies of Constantin Pontio who sometimes before died in the Prison of the
Inquisition, to be burnt, he had been the Emperor's Confessor, and in his
Arms Charles gave up the Ghost: so that it was thought he did not much consult
the honor of his Father in that action, for if the Directour of his Conscience
was a Lutheran, it was strange if he himself was not tainted with Lutheranism;
from thence he went to Valladolid, and caused eight and twenty Gentlemen of the
Country to be burnt in his presence, and committed to Prison Bartholome de
Carranza, whom we mentioned in the Acts of the first Convocation of the
Council, and who was afterward made Archbishop of Toledo. To be accused was
enough to make a man guilty in the Judgment of Philip; for in reality the
Archbishop of Toledo was innocent, and the Council held under Pius IV. in the
year 1563. having appointed Doctors to examine the Book for which he was
accused, approved the Book, notwithstanding that Cazdellun Secretary of the
Embassy at the Council, and the Count de Luna Ambassador of Spain, both
opposed it. These Torments and Cruelties made the Spaniards, who in their
hearts had an Aversion to the Sea of Rome, conceal themselves. And certainly
the Roman Church has this obligation to Philip, that he hindered the Change of
Religion in Spain, for in all appearance the Reformation would have made as
great progress there as it had done elsewhere.

At length, December 24th. at night Cardinal Giovanni Angelo de Medicis was
chosen Pope, who took the name of Pius IV. Immediately upon his promotion he
put a stop to the disorders which the hatred of the House of Caraffa had raised
in the City; and reconciled himself to the Emperor Ferdinand, to whom he
acknowledged his Predecessor had been in the wrong. There was, however, some
little debate about the Terms which the Pope would have had the Count D' Arco
the Emperor's Reverence, but the Pope would have the Emperor promise him
Obedience. Cardinal Pacieco a Spaniard advised the Count to stick exactly to
his Commission: But the Cardinals Morone and Madruocio prevailed more with him;
and so the matter went as the Pope would have it. The Ceremony of his
Coronation was performed the first of January 1560. and the eleventh of the
same Month he called a Congregation of Cardinals, wherein he declared to them
his design of restoring the Council. He dreaded it as all other Popes had done;
but he looked upon it as an unavoidable evil, foreseeing that he would be so
solicited to it, as that he could not deny it. He therefore resolved to do the
thing with good Grace, and made known his intention to the Ambassadors of
Princes. The Duke of Savoy after an Embassy of obedience, sent to Rome to
obtain liberty from the Pope to hold a Conference with those of his Subjects
inhabiting the Valleys of Piedmont, who had fallen off from the Church of Rome.
These People who before the Reformation had separated themselves from the Roman
Communion, joined with the City of Geneva so soon as it had shaken off the
Jurisdiction of the Pope. The Duke had put a great many of them to Death, and
sent others to the Galleys. They suffered patiently a long while; but at length
they put it to deliberation, if they could lawfully put themselves in a posture
of defense against their Sovereign. Opinions were divided, and part of them
took up Arms. However the Duke knowing that they had not been prompted to that
by a Spirit of Rebellion, resolved to try fair means with them. But at Rome the
proposal was rejected with indignation; they counseled him to use force, which
he followed, and for eighteen Months waged War against these Wretches.

In the beginning of the same year a great Conspiracy was hatched in France, The
Conspiracy of Amboise.
they who were engaged in the Plot were put upon it as much through interest of
State as of Religion. The House of Guise were absolute Masters both of the
King's person and mind: and this being a grievance to many, they formed a Party
and entered into a Confederacy for putting a stop to the fury of the
Persecution, and at the same time for rescuing the person of Francis the Second
out of the hands of the Princes of Guise. But the Plot was discovered, the
Court went from Blois to Amboise, where there is a Citadel; part of the
Conspirators were taken and put to Death; and so that Conspiracy of which one
Renaude, was the chief was quickly dispersed and brought to naught. The
Protestants, in the mean while, increased amidst all these Persecutions, and
that made the King's Council look out for other means of composing the
troubles, than what had been employed hitherto: it was concluded that a Council
of the whole Nation must be called; but Cardinal d' Armagnac who was wholly for
the interest of the Court of Rome, and was as good as any Inquisitor against
the Protestants, withstood that resolution. Monluc Bishop of Valence was of
opinion for calling a national Synod, and that prevailed. This resolution was
signified to the Pope, but he approved not of it. On the contrary he complained
publicly at Rome against the King's proceedings, who by a Declaration of the
eighteenth of March had pardoned all who upon account of Religion had taken up
Arms against him. The Pope said it was the cause of God, and that no Prince has
power to pardon such Crimes; that besides, national Councils were good for
nothing but to breed Schisms, that there was need of a General Council, and
that he intended to convene it without delay. The Pope solicites the King of
France to take Geneva.
He sent into France the Bishop of Viterbo to represent the same things: and
that he might employ the King, and take him off from thinking of that national
Synod, he essayed to persuade him to bend his forces against the City of
Geneva. He also solicited the Duke of Savoy, and the King of Spain to the same
Enterprise, the King of Spain being a Neighbor to Geneva by the Franche Comte.
The Savoyard would have been very willing, provided he could have kept Geneva
for himself, nor perhaps would the King of Spain have been against that: but he
knew very well that the King of France would never allow it to be in any other
Prince's Possession; and therefore he chose rather to suffer the new Religion
to reign there, than to see it in the hands of the French who were already too
near Neighbors to the County of Burgundy, which then belonged to the King of
Spain; so that that matter went no farther. The King of Spain who thought it
not proper to unite with the King of France for the Ruin of Geneva, as he had
been solicited by the Pope, thought himself obliged, at least to comply with
the Pope's inclinations in dissuading the French from holding a national
Council. For that effect, he sent into France Antiono de Toledo Prior of Leon,
with instructions to offer France forces and assistance for the destruction of
the Heretics; and it is certain that he could not do more than what he did to
satisfy the Pope by the Ruin of the Protestants. The Court of France did not
much listen to these Proposals, they would, indeed, have been willing to have
had Geneva; but they feared the Switsers, and the stirs that the Huguenots
might raise in France during that War. As to the matter of the Council, they
were steadfast in their design, of calling a national one in France, giving the
Pope, in the mean time, assurance that nothing should be attempted in it
contrary to his Authority. But he could not trust too much to that, he was very
apprehensive of the French Prelates, who were accused to be infected with
Heresy, and were at least prepossest with some Tenets which they call the
Privileges of the Gallican Church, and with Maxims that suit not with that
Supremacy which is challenged by the Court of Rome. The apprehension of this
made the Pope absolutely resolve to call the General Council: The Pope resolves
to call a General Council.
But he was at a stand as to the place, he would have been very willing to have
held it at Bologna, but he did not expect that the Prelates would come thither.
Milan was offered him, but he would not accept of it, unless the Citadel were
put into his hands during the sitting of the Council. The King of Spain, for
all he was so good a Catholic, could not be brought to condescend to that; for
as to the point of worldly affairs and interests, the Pope and other Princes
are trusted much alike. At length he concluded upon the City of Trent, where it
had been already assembled. There happened two considerable matters which
confirmed him in his resolution of hastening the Convocation of the Council;
the one was the Revolt of Scotland, which banished Mary the Queen regent, and
fell off from the Church of Rome: the other was the Jealousy that they had of
Maximilian King of Bohemia Son to the Emperor Ferdinand; Maximilian King of
Bohemia and the Romans is suspected of Lutheranism.
who was always thought too favorable to the Protestants. Paul IV. had accused
him as an Abbetter of Heresy, and one day he made an answer to the Pope's
Ambassadors, that much increased the suspicion that they had of him. The
Pope's Nephew Maroo Altemps exhorting Maximilian in behalf of Pius IV. to
continue a good Catholic, promising him on the one hand that if he did, the
Pope would corroborate the pretentions he had to the Empire; and on the other
hand threatening, that if he persisted to give Causes of Suspicion, he would
never confirm him King of the Romans, but would deprive him of all his
Territories. Maximilian made answer to the promises that were made him of
favor and assistance, that he was very much obliged to his Holiness, but that
the Salvation of his Soul was much dearer to him than all worldly Enjoyments.
Now at Rome this kind of style was looked upon as an infallible sign of
Lutheranism, and as the badge of those who were Enemies to the holy See.

All these reasons made the Pope, on the third of June, call together the
Ambassadors of Princes, and told them more plainly than hitherto he had done,
his design of re-establishing the Council at Trent, ordering them to acquaint
their Masters with the same. He himself wrote to his Nuncio's in all places,
that they should exhort the Princes to have their Arms in readiness to
constrain the Rebels to return into the bosom of the Church, for it was not so
much his thought to hold a Council for deciding of Controversies, as to take
from Princes all pretext of dealing with Protestants in the way of Lenity and
Mildness. The opinions of the Princes were extremely divided as to that
particular. The King of Spain approved both the Council, and the choice of the
place, but the French refused the City of Trent, and proposed Treves,
Constance, Worms, or Haguenau. The Emperor was of the same mind, affirming
that the Lutherans did abominate the Council which was begun, that it would be
impossible ever to induce them to come, or to submit to the Council, if a new
one were not called. He added that he could not undertake for the Empire,
before he had assembled a General Diet, and that for his hereditary Dominions,
it would be hard for him to make them come to the Council, if the Cup and
Marriage of Priests were not again allowed them. These proposals did not please
the Pope: he declared that he would never suffer the matters which had been
already decided at Trent, to be examined over again, if it should cost him his
life; that as to the Restitution of the Chalice and the Marriage of Priests
which were only of positive right, he should refer himself to the Council, but
that he would act nothing of himself alone, though he had Authority to do so.

The Assembly at Fontainebleau, where it is resolved that a National Council
shall be called in France, and Severities, in the mean time, cease.
The Protestants multiplied in France, and the dissentions increased also. The
King was, therefore obliged to call a numerous Assembly of the chief of the
Kingdom to meet at Fontainebleau the twentieth of August in the same year 1560.
Jean de Mouluc Bishop of Valence who was no Enemy to the Protestants, and who
wished for some Reformation in the Church, gave his Judgment there for a
national Council, and for the forbearance of Persecution; affirming that People
were amazed at the Constancy of those that suffered, which made them inform
themselves about their Religion; he was seconded by a great many more; and
Admiral Coligny himself presented to the King Petitions that had been delivered
to him in Normandy, which begged that a stop might be put to all Severities,
until the Cause should be tried. He added that having enquired whence these
Petitions came, they had made him answer that fifty thousand were ready to set
their hands to them. The Duke and Cardinal of Guise opposed these opinions, and
rejecting a national Council, voted for the continuance of Severities. The
conclusion of the Assembly was, an Edict ordaining the States to meet at Meaux
the tenth of December ensuing; and that if a General Council were not called,
the Bishops of France should assemble the thirteenth of January following, that
they might take their measures for holding of a national Council; and that in
the mean time Severities should cease.

That Assembly of Fontainebleau gave the Pope fresh Jealousies, and he was the
more afraid of the National Council, because he found that the Protestants
likewise demanded it. He sent therefore orders to the Cardinal of Tournon his
Legate in France to endeavor what lay in his power to prevent the Assembly of
the Bishops, and pressed the affair of calling the General Council. He proposed
it once again to the Ambassadors, and represented to them the disorders that
would be occasioned by a National Synod; but he could not forbear discovering
the true reason of the hatred which he bore to these National Synods in which
he had not the absolute power. They pretend, said he, to subject the Pope and
Court of Rome to a Council, but I am ready to lay down my life rather than to
suffer it: Pro fide and religione volumus mori. He would have the Ministers of
Princes to give their opinions concerning that affair. The Emperor's
Ambassador, according to his Master's intention was of the mind that the
matter should not be hastened too much, that a Diet might be assembled to
consult about it: but the other Ambassadors consented to a speedy Convocation
of the Council according to the intentions of the Pope In the mean time, the
Politicians looked upon all this eagerness of the Pope to be a kind of Comedy.
For they thought it a clear case, that if he could not avoid a Council, he
would at least endeavor to put it off until he had enriched his Family and
his Nephews; and that afterward he would be willing to give others good
Examples of frugality and moderation, and bear more easily with the
Reformations that might be made in the Council. About the beginning of
November, Letters came to Rome from the Emperor's Court, still pressing that
the Council might not be called at Trent, and that that Convocation might not
pass for a Continuation of the former Council, because the Place and that
Continuation would be stumbling blocks to the Lutherans, and would raise
difficulties never to be surmounted. France continued likewise in the same
mind, and the Union of those two great Powers in the same Sentiments, put the
Pope into a great deal of perplexity, and made him thereupon hold several
Congregations. At length he resolved to pass over all these difficulties, he
minuted the Bull of Convocation, The Pope forms the Bull of Convocation of the
Council, and still chooses the City of Trent.
and devised a form that might give content to all, as well those who were
only for removing the Suspension of the Council, as the rest who desired a
Council to be called anew. He gave this title to his Bull, The Indiction of the
Council of Trent, which seemed to insinuate that it was to be a new Council:
but in the body of the Bull, he said that he removed the Suspension, and made
use of the word Continue. This middle way contented no body, and displeased
both parties: However the Pope did all he could to persuade Princes to be
satisfied, and sent orders to his Ministers in France to endeavor to remove
all Scruples about the word Continue, because that should not hinder but that
the affairs which had been decided under Paul and Julius III. might be
reviewed, if the Council thought it expedient.

Easterday in the year 1561. And the Pope dispatched the Bull into all places,
with Nuncio's to invite not only Catholic Princes to the Council, but all
Protestant Princes also. He sent the Abbot Martinengo to the Queen of England;
but she forbid him to enter her Dominions, though the Kings that were in
alliance with her had used all their interests to persuade her to receive him.
He had likewise designed to have sent a Nuncio into Muscovy to invite the Czar
who is of the Greek Church to come to the Council.

The Death of Francis II. the Queen Regent Assembles the States at Orleans.
The same year on the fifth of December Francis II. King of France died, and his
Brother Charles IX. being but ten years old succeeded him. The death of this
Prince put the Protestants in heart, and made them hope for a change in
affairs, because the King of Navarre first Prince of the blood was to have a
great share in the Government during the King's Minority. Now this King was a
declared Protestant, and was influenced by the Councils of Admiral Coligny a
great Protector of the Protestants. The Queen Mother and her Council thought
sit to assemble the States at Orleans, and to open the Assembly the thirteenth
of December; where opinions were strongly argued pro and con concerning Liberty
of Conscience. At length it was concluded, that the King should publish an
Edict for cessation of Rigours and Criminal Prosecutions upon account of
Religion. The Edict past and at the same time the King gave orders to the
Prelates to prepare themselves to go to Trent to the Council. The Count of
Rochfort who spoke for the Gentry, presented a Petition in name of the
Gentlemen for obtaining permission for the public Exercise of the reformed
Religion; but no answer was given to that Petition, it was referred to the
States which were to meet in May following. In the same Estates at Orleans it
was ordained that Canonical Elections should be restored, that Bishops should
be chosen by the Chapters with consent of the People and Nobility; that the
Annates which were sent to Rome should be abolished, that Bishops and Curates
should reside, that all Abbots and Monks should be subject to the Jurisdiction
of Bishops, and that no man might give any Lands or Estates to Monasteries. The
Pope and King of Spain used their utmost endeavors to hinder the effect of the
resolution which was taken in the Estates at Orleans concerning the Suspension
of Rigours against Protestants: they even attempted to bring over the King of
Navarre by vain and imaginary hopes, not only of restoring Navarre which the
Spaniards kept from him, but also of making him King of England: which, as they
said, Queen Elizabeth had forfeited by the Crime of Heresy. These vain hopes
and the natural weakness of that poor Prince made him halt between the two
opinions even till his death: for though he was in arms against the
Protestants, when he was killed at the Siege of Rouen, yet it is certain his
Conscience was not fully satisfied as to the Religion of the Church of Rome.

The Protestants of Germany met at Namburg to consult what measures they were
to take to provide against the inconveniences that threatened them from the
Council. They essayed first to compose their own differences that they might
not be upbraided with Divisions among themselves: and therefore they proposed
the fixing of a common Confession of Faith to which all might agree, because
there was even some difference in the several Editions of the Confession of
Ausburg, but they could not find means to adjust this. As concerning the
Council, they resolved to petition the Emperor, that he would procure one
which might be free, where the Pope should not preside, and wherein the
Protestant-Divines might have a Vote. They had no hopes of obtaining such a
Council, but they made the demand, that they might have a Pretext not to go to
that which the Pope called at Trent. About the same time two Nuncio's arrived
in Austria with the Bull of Convocation.

The Pope sends Nuncio's to the Protestant States, to invite them to the
Council, but they are ill received.
The Emperor advised them to go to the Protestants whilst they were assembled
at Namburg, and sent three Ambassadors with them. The Protestants gave a
submissive hearing to what the Emperor's Ministers had to propose to them, and
made them answer, that they were much obliged to his Imperial Majesty; but that
they could not submit to a Council, which was not free, and wherein
Controversies would not be decided purely by the word of God, which was the
thing they expected. As for the Nuncio's, they received and heard them civilly,
but they sent them back the Pope's Briefs sealed up as they had presented them;
and having considered what answer they should make, they thought it best to
tell them in plain terms, that they acknowledged not the Pope's Jurisdiction,
that they were not obliged to declare to him their thoughts concerning a
Council, and that they had acquainted the Emperor with their intentions as to
that. The Nuncio's met with no better reception at Nuremberg, Franckfort,
Ausburg, and in all the other Protestant Towns: but the King of Denmark was
more rude with them still; for he commanded them not to enter within his
Dominions, and sent them word that neither his Father nor he having ever had
any business with the Pope, he would receive no Ambassadors from him. That
answer extremely vexed the Nuncio Commendone, who had stopped at Lubeck expecting
the King's Passports to come into Denmark. And it was no small mortification to
the Pope, that after he had stoopt so low as to send Nuncio's to those whom he
looked upon as Heretics, he should be slighted by them in that manner; but it
was still some comfort, that his friends made it their business to give it out
in all places, that that great condescension was an effect of his Singular
Piety and Zeal. The Switzers received a Nuncio from Rome also, and in their
Assembly at Bade, one of the Burgomasters of Zurich, which was a
Protestant-Town, kissed the Brief when he received it. The news of this was
very grateful to the Pope; but that was all he got by it; for the reformed
Cantons refused to come to the Council, and the Catholics promised they would.
So that every where almost the Nuncio's met with opposition; for the Emperor
himself made a kind of an ambiguous answer, and insisted that that Assembly
might pass for a new Council. Spain on the other hand, stumbled at the title of
Indiction, and would only have it to be a removal of the Suspension, demanding
that it might be expressly declared, that that Assembly was a Continuation of
the Council of Trent. But on the contrary, France openly demanded an amendment
in the Bull as to the point of Continuation, urging that it should no where be
called the Continuation of the Council of Trent. It was likewise taken ill that
the King of France was not expressly named in the Bull, seeing the Dignity of so
great a Monarch did not admit that he should be cast in with others, and only
designed in general terms. The Pope had done so, because he would not name him
before the King of Spain, and durst not name him after. He made the best excuse
he could, and gave no great heed to those Remonstrances, because he was
extremely offended at the proceedings of the Estates at Orleans, who had acted
so contrary to his Authority and Interests; for in that Assembly, the Annates
were taken away, the Concordat betwixt Leo X. and Francis I. infringed, and the
Monks subjected to the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, in so much that he gave
France almost over for lost.

The Pope names Legates to preside in the Council, and sends them away.
The time appointed by the Pope for the opening of the Council drawing nigh, he
deputed Legates to preside in it, to wit Hercules de Gonzaga Cardinal of
Mantua, and Giacomo Puteo Cardinal of Nizza: the first because of his interest
and extraction, and the second because of his ability in the Canon Law, being
Dean of the Rota. At length the Pope received Letters from the Court of France
dated the third of March 1561. wherein the King gave an absolute consent to the
Council. Spain did the like; and so the difficulties were by little and little
removed; but at the same time the Portuguese were said to be coming to the
Council, with a design to get the Superiority of a Council over the Pope to de
defined, and that they took instructions about that point. The Spaniards as to
that, were more dreaded than the Portuguese; but the French most of all,
because they have been of a long time possessed with that opinion. Easter now
drew nigh, and therefore the Pope pressed the Legates and Italian Bishops to
hasten their departure for Trent. Cardinal Puteo falling very sick, Cardinal
Girolamo Seripando a famous Divine was named in his place. He had orders to
pass by Mantua, and to take his Colleague with him; but they arrived not at
Trent till Easter Tuesday, where they found nine Bishops already come.

About the same time the Duke of Savoy made peace with his Subjects inhabiting
the Valleys. The War had been unsuccesfull to him, he was most commonly
worsted, and one day lost an Army of seven thousand Men, the Waldenses having
lost but fourteen of theirs. The Agreement was made the fifth of June 1561. and
they had certain places allotted them for the free Exercise of their Religion.
This displeased the Pope exceedingly, who had contributed considerable Sums of
Money for carrying on the War, but Necessity has no Law.

A Convocation of the Clergy was resolved upon in France, and to prevent any
Suspicion that the Pope might thereby conceive, they assured him that they
would treat of nothing but of means to pay off the King's Debts, and about
matters in general which they might have to propose in Council. This did not
remove the Pope's Anxiety: and therefore he sent the Cardinal of Ferrara to
that Assembly, to have an Eye over it, that nothing might be acted there
contrary to his Authority. The Protestant party increased considerably, and all
France was distinguished by these two Names Papists and Huguenots. I shall
observe by the bye, that this word Huguenot, the original of which seems
obscure to Authors, comes from the Suisse-word Eidgnossen which signifies
Associates or Allies. Those of Geneva, who before the Bishop was expelled from
thence, resisted his Enterprises for oppressing their Liberties, were called
Eidgnossen, because they were associated with the Cantons of Berne and
Fribourg: and since, the Bishop having been banished, and Religion changed,
they still retained the name of Eidgnossen Allies.

The Cardinal of Ferrara came therefore into France to oppose the Torrent which
threatened an inundation in that Kingdom, through the Authority of several great
men who were engaged in the party of the Huguenots. About the same time there
was a train discovered, laid by the Clergy of France not only against the
Protestant Religion, but against the State also. One Artus Desire was
apprehended at Orleans with instructions from those of the Clergy who were of
the faction of the House of Guise. With these instructions he was going into
Spain to procure assistance against the Heretics, who could not be
sufficiently quelled by a Woman and a Child, as the Commission of that Envoy
imported. This did the Protestants some kindness; for it procured an Edict in
their favor, prohibiting any to molest them, or to search their Houses under
pretext of discovering their Assemblies; the Prisons were opened, their
Prisoners set at liberty, and their banished recalled. This Artus was condemned
to make the Amend honorable, and to perpetual Imprisonment in the Chartreux.
The Edict of July against the Protestants.
But that Edict had not the happy effects which might have been expected,
because of the opposition that the Enemies of the Protestants made against it.
For in July following another Edict past in Parliament, the King being present,
prohibiting the Exercise of any other Religion except that of the Church of
Rome, granting nevertheless pardon for what was past, and ordering that for the
future such as should be accused for Religion, should only be sentenced to
banishment. At the same time, another Edict past for holding a Conference at
Poissy betwixt the learned of the one and the other Religion, A conference
appointed at Poissy betwixt the Roman Catholics and the Protestants.
to see if the differences between them could by any fair means be
accommodated. Several Catholics opposed it, as being a Compliance below the
Church to enter the lists with Heretics; but the Cardinal of Lorrain who hoped
to make his parts conspicuous on that occasion carried it. The Pope was
somewhat satisfied with the Edict of July, and had been more if the Punishment
of the Heretics had not been mitigated to Banishment; but he was extremely
offended at the Conference of Poissy and the Edict which appointed it. He wrote
to the Bishops of France, that they had no power to make Edicts in matters
which concerned Religion in General, that if they adventured upon any thing
beyond the reach of their power, he would rescind all that they did, and
proceed against them with all rigor. The Bishops did not much value these
threats; only assured the Pope that he had no reason to be startled at that
Assembly. France was an inexhaustible Spring of Troubles for the Pope, from
thence they flowed daily upon him; and it was no small vexation that he
received from the Estates at Pontoise, wherein upon a debate that arose about
Precedence betwixt the Princes and the Cardinals, it was judged in favor of
the Princes against the Cardinals. The Cardinals of Chatillon and Armagnac
yielded, but those of Tournon, Lorrain and Guise withdrew, murmuring against
their Colleagues. This vexed the Pope indeed, but he was touched to the quick by
a letter which he received from the Queen Regent dated the fourth of August,
wherein she bewailed the sad condition of France, and the numerousness of the
Protestant Party, proposing to him some Remedies which she thought necessary in
the present juncture; that is, several Reformations which according to her
Judgment ought to be made in Religion, as the taking of Images out of Churches,
the abolition of the use of Spittle and Exorcisms in Baptism, the allowing the
Cup to the People, the restoring of the Vulgar Tongue in Divine Service, and
the abrogating of the Festival of Corpus Christi which had only been
instituted for Pomp. This Letter was written with great freedom, and John de
Monluc Bishop of Valence, was thought to have had a hand in it. The Pope
perceived that it was now high time to make use of Remedies, and that it was
necessary to hasten the Council. There was none now but the Emperor who
opposed it, but in the very nick of time, the Pope received his consent in
terms of great submission to that Assembly, which was very Joyful News. The
Italian Bishops had no great mind to go to the Council; but the Pope forced
them to it, that they might Counterbalance the Spaniards and French, who as he
said, came only to subject the Pope to a Council, an attempt which the
Italians, who have the honor to have the Head of the Church in their Country,
ought vigorously to oppose.

The tenth of August was the day appointed for opening the Conference at
Poissy; fourteen Protestant Ministers who were secured by ample Pasports
appeared there, of whom the chief were Peter Martyr and Theodore Beza. They
presented to the King a Petition containing four Heads: First, that the
Controversies might be handled by the word of God: Secondly, that the Bishops
might not be the Judges: Thirdly, that the King and his Council would preside;
and Fourthly that all that past might be committed to writing. (...) granted
them that the King should (...), and the Queen appointed one of the (...)
Secretaries of State of Officiate as Clerk. In opening the Assembly the
Chancellor made a long Speech, wherein he touched at several things which did
not please the zealous favorers of the Court of Rome, because he concluded
that they might very well be without the Aid of the Pope and of a General
Council, in determining differences in Religion, and that many times Provincial
Synods had rectified the mistakes of General Councils. As an Instance of this
he named the Provincial Synod held in France by St. Hilary which rejected
Arianism that had been established by the General Council of Rimini. He farther
added that the Protestants were Christians, having the same Baptism, the same
God, and the same Jesus Christ as Catholics had, and that therefore People
must shake off that prejudice and aversion that they entertained against them.
This Speech, whereof a Copy was sent to the Pope, so highly displeased him,
that he threatened to summon the Chancellor to appear before the Tribunal of
the Inquisition as a Heretic. The Cardinals of Tournon and Lorrain demanded a
Copy of it, but it was refused them. This whole Conference was spent in
Harangues on both sides, in discourses and private conferences, to try if any
Points could be couched in general terms which both Parties might sign: and
particularly much time was taken up in minuting, changing and correcting a
Decision concerning the Eucharist that might give content to all, but they
could not succeed in it. One day the Cardinal of Lorrain thought to have
gravelled Theodore Beza concerning that Point of the Eucharist, he asked him
briskly if his Colleagues and he would refuse to Subscribe to the confession of
Ausburg as to that particular? This put Beza to some stand, but presently
recollecting himself, he demanded of the Cardinal, in whose name do you ask
that question, will you and your Colleagues Subscribe to that confession in all
Points? The Cardinal was now put to it as well as he, and having nothing to
reply, Beza thought it not fit neither to give a more particular answer. And so
all the Pains that was taken to adjust matters was fruitless, and the
conference had no success. A Spanish Jesuit of the Retinue of the Cardinal of
Ferrara signalised himself in that conference by his boldness. He rose up in
the midst of the Assembly, and without any warrant to speak, fell foul on the
Protestants, and censured the Queen very sharply, in that she meddled with
matters which did not at all concern her. She took that insolent rebuke very
ill, but then was the time of suffering. The Pope was much pleased to hear that
the conference had produced no effect.

The Parliament was informed that the Cardinal of Ferrara, who came into France
whilst the conference was on foot, had amongst his other Instructions one Point
which concerned the revocation of the Articles of Reformation decreed in the
Estates of Orleans the year before, and especially of that which prohibited the
carrying of Money to Rome under pretext of Annates, or of obtaining of
Dispensations and Benefices. They therefore speedily confirmed the Articles of
the Estates at Orleans, and when the Legate according to custom presented his
Commission to be confirmed in Parliament; because without that confirmation he
could not discharge the Office of Legate, it was even refused him. Nor was that
rub the only trouble he met with; several Libels were published against him,
wherein they raked up the horrid Impurities of Alexander VI. Father to Lucretia
Borgia the Cardinal's Mother, and the enormous filthiness of this Lucretia who
lay with her Father, and was, as they said, Daughter and Concubine to that
Pope. The Legate perceived the times were not fit to carry things by Authority,
and therefore he made it his business to win the minds of the People, and went
so far in that complaisance, that he even conversed frequently with Huguenots,
ate with them, and went to hear their Sermons: but that way did not take as he
expected.

The Conference of Poissy did good to no Party: It made the Queen be ill
thought of by all the Princes of her Religion, so that she was fain to make her
Apology to the King of Spain, who was a mortal Enemy to those ways of
tampering, and was on all occasions for her employing Fire and Sword as he had
done. But above all, she had much ado to Justify her self to the Pope: and
yet when she made her Apology to him, she had so much confidence as to desire
favors of him; for she endeavored to procure the Legation of Avignon for the
Cardinal of Bourbon. That proposal was rejected with much indignation, and some
great design was suspected to be hid under it, which perhaps, was true enough.
The French Bishops continued at Poissy after the breaking up of the conference;
and though they had promised not to meddle with any thing but civil matters,
yet they discoursed of restoring the Communion under both kinds. The Cardinal
of Lorrain was even of that opinion, and he brought over with him the Legate
Cardinal of Ferrara. They resolved to demand it of the Pope, and the Legate
wrote to him about it. The Pope seemed at first to condescend; but having
called together the Cardinals, they withstood it tooth and nail, insomuch that
they called the French who had made that demand, Heretics and Schismatics: He
therefore referred the matter to the Council. The Cardinal of Ferrara who was a
man of a very prudent Conduct, and extreme civil to all People, even to the
Enemies of the Church of Rome, prevailed so far by his solicitations, that he
obtained a Suspension of the Decrees of the Estates at Orleans, and permission
to execute his Legation in France, giving a counter promise that he would not
make use of that permission. The King was willing to grant him that for
formalities sake, and that he might not have the disgrace of returning back
without being owned for Legate. The Chancelour would not sign the Brief, so
that it was only signed by the King, Queen and chief Officers of the Crown.

Suspicions of the Court of Rome against the French.
This demand of the Cup made by the French, with the other matters that had past
in France, began already to beget some Jealousies of them: and these suspicions
were much increased by news that came from Germany which gave out that the
German Protestants had received Letters from France exhorting them to continue
steadfast in their Doctrine, with promises that the French would favor them in
the Council. The French Ambassador did what he could at Rome to remove these
suspicions; but to no purpose, for some new thing happened daily that revived
the discontents and heartburnings of the Court of Rome: as was the business of
Tanquerel. John Tanquerel a Batchelour in Divinity, published Theses to be
defended, wherein he maintained, that the Pope as Vicar of Jesus Christ, could
deprive Princes that were disobedient to him of their Dignities and Kingdoms.
For this he was by a Decree of Parliament, sentenced to make a public
Recantation, and because he had fled for it, the Bedle appeared for him, and
made the Recantation in his name. This ruined the Reputation in his name. This
ruined the Reputation of the French for good and all; for to deny the Pope's
Power over Kings in Temporals, is looked upon at Rome as a capital Heresy.

After many delays, the Pope will have the Council opened.
Whilst affairs were in this condition, the Legates and many Bishops had been at
Trent ever since Easter expecting the opening of the Council, which was put off
from day to day. The Pope at length, being weary of these delays, resolved to
order the opening of it. For that end he called a Congregation of Cardinals,
and laid before them the necessity of opening the Council; of which they were
very sensible, and thought it not fit to make longer delay. The Pope had
appointed the Cardinal of Warmia to be a Colleague to the first two; and to
these three he added two more, to wit, Cardinal Simoneta a learned man in the
Canon Law, and Cardinal d' Altemps his Nephew by the Sister. Simoneta came to
Trent the ninth of December. He was a zealous Protector of the rights and
pretensions of the Holy See, and was therefore entrusted with all the Pope's
Secrets, at parting he received Orders to open the Council so soon as he
arrived at Trent: but upon his coming, he received a Letter from the Pope which
ordered him still to defer it till after New Years day. The Emperor's
Ambassador at Rome had procured this delay, that the Ambassadors whom his
Master was to send to Trent might be there at the opening of the Council, and
he hoped that they might get thither by the middle of January. About that time
two Polish Bishops came to the Council: they visited the Legates, and
acquainted them that the Lutherans used great endeavors to bring their
pretended Reformation into Poland; that the Bishops could not leave their
Churches, because they were obliged continually to watch the motions of these
Enemies; that therefore they demanded that they might have their place and
votes in the Council by Proxies: and seeing these two Bishops were charged with
Procurations from all the rest, they required that they two alone might have as
many Votes as they had Procurations. The Legates answered them civilly in
general terms, but without determining any thing, and in the mean time wrote to
Rome concerning this matter. The Pope thereupon called a Consistory, where the
Proposal was rejected, because it was contrary to what had been resolved upon
at the very first Convocation of the Council of Trent; that the Votes should
not be taken by Nations but by Heads. There was danger they knew, in granting
what they demanded, because all other Nations would have expected the same
privilege: So that the Italians who carried it far by number would quickly have
lost the plurality of Votes, which was always on their side. The French were to
be in the Council with their Maxims of the Sorbonne, and Parliament of Paris,
which are so inconsistent with the Grandeur of the Holy See. The intentions of
the Spaniards were not much more favorable to the Court of Rome: for they
already slyly proposed that the power of the Pope ought to be limited, and the
privileges of the Bishops enlarged. And especially they were for taking from
the Pope the power of dispensing with the Canons of the present Council,
because that otherwise it would be in vain to hold Councils at so great charge
for making of Canons, which after all, would bind the Pope no farther than he
should think good. Hence it was concluded, that if the Poles, Spaniards and
French were permitted to sit in Council by Proxies and Procurations, there
would be as many Votes as there are Bishops in those Kingdoms, who would carry
all by plurality of Votes, and that the Italians would be too weak to hinder
the Tramontani from overruling the Council. For all these reasons the Poles
got no other satisfaction but fair words: they promised to do any thing else
they pleased to demand for their generous Nation; but that they could not alter
the Methods that were fixed by the Council, of which the present Assembly was
but a Continuation. The Poles made no great bustle about the matter, but within
a few days after, under pretext of business at Venice, they went away and
returned no more.

The Pope discovering more and more the designs that the Tramontani had of
clipping the Wings of his Authority, thought it not convenient any longer to
delay the opening of the Council, but that it behoved him to endeavor to break
that Party before it was more firmly linkt and knit together. He therefore
wrote to Trent that they should open the Council so soon as the Marquess of
Pescara the Ambassador of Spain, the Emperor's and Venetian Ambassadors
should arrive; but that if these Ministers did not come before the middle of
January, it should be no hinderance to the opening of the Council.

THE HISTORY OF THE Council of TRENT.
BOOK VI.
PIUS IV.
January held a General Congregation concerning the Preliminaries of the
ensuing Session and of the opening of the Council. They prepare for the opening
of the Council.
In that Congregation, the Cardinal of Mantua made an excellent Speech touching
the necessity of holding a Council, after which the Briefs and Bulls of the
Pope were read; wherein besides a Command to hold and open the Council, there
were several Regulations about the forms that ought to be observed in it; and
one particularly relating to Precedence; which did appoint that the Patriarchs
having taken their place after the Cardinals, the Archbishops should sit next,
and after them the Bishops: but for avoiding of all Debates which have been
occasioned upon account of the Dignities and Privileges of Sees, the Prelates
should be placed according to their Seniority in promotion, without any respect
to Dignities enjoying Primacy. Bartholomeo di Martiri Archbishop of Braganza in
Portugal vigorously opposed this Order, and could not endure to think that a
Petty Archbishop of Rosano who has not one Suffragan, or of Nissia, a little
Isle in the Archipelago, or of Antivari in Sclavonia, who have not so much as
one Christian under their Jurisdiction, and never reside in their Sees, should
take place of Archbishops of Churches having Primacy, considerable in Dignity
and Privileges, for no other reason but that of Seniority in Promotion. However
he must bear with that, and be satisfied with a Declaration in writing,
importing that it was not the intention of the Pope nor Council to derogate
from any man's rights, but that after the Council was over, all men might enjoy
their several Privileges. In the same Congregation the Spaniards urged that the
Council might be reckoned a Continuation of the former, and so declared in the
first Act of the Session. The Bishop of Zante in compliance with the Interests
of the Emperor and King of France who desired the contrary, opposed it: but
though the Legates of Mantua and Warmia seconded the opinion of the Bishop of
Zante; yet the matter past according as it had been resolved at Rome, and
ordered in the Bull. When the Congregation was ended the Legates drew up and
framed the Decree of Commencement, into which these words were cunningly
inserted, proponentibus Legatis, whereby it was ordained that no proposal
should be made but by the Legates. This was a great fetch of Roman
Court-policy, to exclude the French and Spanish Bishops, who, as the Pope well
foresaw, had Proposals to make which tended to the diminution of his Authority,
and the enlarging of Episcopal Dignity. They were apprehensive likewise of
Princes, who by their Ambassadors might make Overtures disadvantageous to the
Holy See, and contrary to its Interests: and therefore it was thought fit that
they, who had any thing to propose, should apply themselves to the Legates,
without whose consent nothing could be examined in the Council. By this means
the Court of Rome was secure from the attempts of those that had no great
kindness for it.

Session 17. the first of the third Convocation.
The Session was held January the eighteenth, wherein the Decree was read, and
the question put: Fathers, are ye pleased that from this day forward, all
suspension being taken off, the General Council of Trent be Celebrated, for
handling in order the matters which the Legates shall think fit to propose to
the Council? The Answer was placet; But four Spanish Prelates, the Archbishop
of Granada, the Bishops of Orense, Leon and Almeria, objected against the
clause proponentibus legatis, and desired an Instrument of their Protestation;
but they went on for all that, and the Legates having written to the Pope about
it, he would by no means have that clause omitted. This business made a great
deal of noise in the Sequel, but at present the Spaniards bore the brunt alone.
The next Session was assigned to be the twenty sixth of February.

At the same time they held an Assembly in France at St. Germain en Lay. The
Assembly of St. Germain which makes the Edict of January in favor of the
Protestants.
It began the seventeenth of January, and the Affairs of the Protestants who
increased mightily, were taken into consideration. The Queen of Navarre, the
Prince of Conde and Admiral Coligny, with many other great Men and Persons of
Quality made powerful instances in favor of the Protestants, that they might
have liberty to exercise their Religion, which they already did without
permission. To this Assembly was called a select number of Presidents and able
Judges from all the Parliaments in France: and the Chancellor made a Judicious
and Pithy Speech at the opening of it for the mitigation of Rigor. To those
who stood stiff for the severity of the Penal Edicts, he applied that saying of
Cicero; that Cato behaved himself among the Dregs of Romulus, as if he had been
in the Imaginary Commonwealth of Plato, concluding thence, that it was
necessary to accommodate themselves to the times. This Opinion prevailed,
notwithstanding all the opposition of the Persecutors, and the Edict of January
past, which allowed Liberty to Protestants to assemble out of Towns, and to
live in the exercise of their Religion under the Kings Permission, provided
they taught nothing contrary to the Council of Nice, and the Old and
New Testament. The Parliament of Paris strongly opposed the Confirmation of
this Edict: but the King commanded it to be done, declaring however, that the
Edict was but granted in provision until the holding of the General Council.
The Protestants by this Edict took Courage to show themselves, and it is
reported, that at that time there were two thousand one hundred and fifty
Congregations, which they called Churches in France.

The Council begins with Books to be prohibited, and the Indices Expurgatorii;
the Original of these Indices Expurgatorii.
They began now to fall to business at Trent, and the Legates held a
Congregation the seven and twentieth of January, wherein three Proposals were
made: the first, concerning the Examination of Books that had been written
since the breaking out of Heresy, which were to be suppressed Secondly,
whether it was necessary to cite all those who were concerned in such Books to
appear before the Council; and thirdly whether it was necessary to invite the
Heretics to Council, and grant them a Safe Conduct. The first point which
related to the discharging of Heretical Books to be read deserved to be well
weighed, because the matter was new. It is true, that in the ancient Church
they who read the Books of Authors who were Enemies of the truth, were
censured. The Enemies of St. Jerome objected it to him as a Crime that he read
and perused the Books of Pagan Writers; and he blames himself for it, saying
that he was one day lasht before the Tribunal of Jesus Christ for his Curiosity
in having read too much of the Works of Cicero. However they made no Catalogue
of the Books of Heretics or Pagans, that they might forbid the reading of
them. The Emperors, indeed, did sometimes prohibit the Books of Heretics.
Constantine prohibited the Arian, Arcadius the Eunomian and Manichean,
Theodosius the Nestorian, and Martian the Eutychian Books; but the Bishops
meddled not with them, or, at least, did not take that Authority upon them. In
process of time it became a Custom to make Catalogues of Apocryphal Books,
that is, of Books not approved, as Pope Gelasus did in the end of the fifth
Century. But the reading of those Books was not prohibited, it served only for
a Rule to Believers, that they might know what to rely upon, and what Doctrines
they were to receive or to reject. Since the year eight hundred, there are some
instances of Books condemned and prohibited by Popes; but these instances are
very rare. Martin the fifth condemned Wiclef and his followers, and
excommunicated them; nevertheless he did not prohibit their Books. Leo the
tenth was the first that brought this Custom most in vogue; for he prohibited
the reading of all Luther's Books under pain of Excommunication, and since
that, the Popes in the Bull de Coena Domini have excommunicated all those who
read the Books of Heretics. In these Prohibitions the Books were not named but
in General, which caused nothing but Confusion, because dangerous Books not
being distinguished by the Names of their Authors and Titles, one must read
over a Book to know whether it were dangerous or not, and when that was done,
it was not so easy a matter to agree upon the nature of what was contained in
it, some maintaining the Book to be good, and others condemning it as naught.
Therefore the Inquisitours in several places, for their own use made Catalogues
of Books, the reading of which they intended to prohibit. Philip King of Spain,
a zealous Prince against the progress of the new Doctrine, in the year 1558.
caused all the Books which the Inquisition of Spain had prohibited, to be
reduced into a more ample Catalogue, and to be printed. Pope Paul IV. did the
like at Rome, and these are the ancientest and most famed Indices Expurgatorii.
Pope Paul, besides Authors who were reckoned Heretics, put into his Catalogue
many of the Works of Authors that past for Catholics, nay and some Books
which had been approved by Popes, amongst others Erasmus his Annotations upon
the New Testament, which Leo X. had approved by a Brief. That Pope, who was so
zealous for the greatness of his See, crowded into his Catalogue all the
Authors whom he did not think favorable enough to the Holy See of Rome. They
proceeded so far as absolutely and under pain of Excommunication to prohibit
the reading of all Books which had been printed by some certain Printers who
were named, to the number of threescore and two: and the Penalties annexed to
these prohibitions were so rigorous that the Pope reserved to himself the
absolution of those who had incurred the Censures of prohibited Books. The
excessiveness of this rigor was complained of to Pope Pius IV. who referred
the whole matter to the Council.

As to this point Opinions were extremely divided, some thought it not fit to
meddle with what had been done by Paul IV. that that Catalogue was absolutely
to be approved, and that so, the best Course that could be taken, was not to
take any notice of that affair. What matter, said Luigi Beccatelli Archbishop
of Ragusa, though amongst those prohibited Books there may be some Works that
deserve not to be blasted, there are but too many Books in the World, since
printing has been invented? It were better to prohibit a thousand good Books,
since there would be enough still remaining, than not to prohibit a bad one.
But Thomas de St. Felix Bishop Della Cava was of a contrary opinion; his
Judgment was that that matter ought to be re-examined, because the Tramontani,
especially the French abhorred every thing that came from the Tribunal of the
Inquisition; on the contrary they had a Veneration for a Council; and therefore
they did not regard what was done by the Inquisitours, if the Council did not
interfere; besides, said he, Laws which cannot be obeyed, must of necessity be
moderated. Indeed, so great was the number of prohibited Books, and the
Censures so severe, that it was impossible but many must needs incur the pain
of Excommunication. They who were of this opinion urged also, that in the
Examination of Books, care should be taken not to condemn men without a
hearing, and that therefore the Parties concerned, if they were Catholics,
ought to be called; or the Authors themselves if they were still alive, or
their Relations who concerned themselves for the reputation of the deceased;
some were even for calling the Protestant Authors before their works were
condemned. As to the matter of the Safe Conduct, opinions varied also. The
Cardinals of Mantua and some others were for granting a very General one with
an oblivion for all that was past: but the Inquisitours of Spain withstood
that, because they were apprehensive, that under the protection of a General
Safe Conduct and of that oblivion, a great many Spaniards might pull off the
Vizard, and declare themselves Protestants. As to the first of these points, it
was resolved that the Expurgatory Index should be reviewed, and that Deputies
should be named for that effect. As to the second that notice should be given
to the Parties concerned, that the Council was ready to hear them, if they had
any thing to say in their own Justification: and the matter of the Safe Conduct
was referred to another time.

February the fifth Cardinal Altemps the Pope's Nephew, and fifth Legate
arrived, and next day after Anthony Muglits Archbishop of Prague the Emperor's
Ambassador was received into the Congregation. He pretended to have place
above Cardinal Madruccio, as representing the Emperor, but he could not obtain
it. The ninth of the same month Ferdinando Martinez Mascarenno Ambassador of
Portugal, was received into the Council, which must needs have the patience to
hear the long Harangue of a certain Doctor of his Retinue, in praise of the
King of Portugal and the Ambassador: and on the Eleventh the Sieur Sigismund
Thurin the Emperor's second Ambassador was received with very little
Ceremonies. In this Congregation of the Eleventh, Commissioners were appointed
to frame the Index Expurgatorius, to wit, George Draskevits Bishop of the five
Churches, the Emperor's Ambassador for the Kingdom of Hungary, John Trevisano
Patriarch of Venice, four Archbishops, nine Bishops, one Abbot and two Generals
of Orders.

In the Congregation held the thirteenth of the same Month, the Emperor's
Ambassadors presented five Demands in writing; first, that they would spare
the terms of Continuation of the Council; secondly, that the next Session might
be delayed; thirdly, that they would not irritate those of the Confession of
Ausburg by condemning their Books; fourthly, that the Protestants might have a
very ample Pasport, and fifthly that Secrecy might be enjoined in all matters
that should be handled in the Congregations. These five Demands were by the
Legates in a manner granted to the Ambassadors. At the same time George
Draskevits Bishop of the five Churches the Emperor's third Ambassador, whom
he sent from the Kingdom of Hungary, appeared at Trent in Quality of
Ambassador: he had been in the Council ever since January, but only with the
Character of a Bishop: but in the twenty fourth of February he presented his
Commission, and made a long discourse in praise of his Master; at that meeting
the Fathers of the Council were strictly enjoined Secrecy. About the same time
Lewis de Saint Gelais Lord of Lansac was sent from France Ambassador
extraordinary to Rome. The Pope was highly offended that the liberty of
preaching had been granted to the Protestants by the Edict of January: and
Lansac's chief instructions were to excuse that action. He cast the blame upon
the misfortune of the times, and the impossibility of resisting so great a
Torrent, because most of the great men were engaged in that Party. The Pope was
not satisfied with these excuses, saying that he prayed God to pardon those who
were the cause of so many evils. The Designs of the Queen of France for
Reformation.
However designs of afar different nature were hatching in France, which would
have netled the Pope much more, if he had known them. The Queen mother sent for
the Bishops of Valence and Seez, the Doctors Bouthilier, Dispense, Picherel
and Maillard famous Divines, to St. Germain, that they might consult together
about the Reformation of the abuses committed in the use of Images. They were
all almost of opinion to prohibit the making of any Images of the Trinity, the
rendering any worship to other Images, and the carrying of any in procession
but the Cross. But Nicholas Maillard Dean of the Sorbonne did so oppose it,
that in this nothing was concluded, no more than in the Conference at Poissy.
These Conferences were procured by the King of Navarre, who favored the
Reformation, but durst not advance toward it but slowly. The Princes of the
House of Guise, the Duke and Cardinal of Lorrain entertained far contrary
designs to those of the King of Navarre; but by an action they did at this time
they easily made it appear that what they would have had taken for Zeal in
Religion, was a piece of carnal Wisdom, that struck at the Ruin of a Party
which obstructed their way to the Crown. They had a Conference at Saverne with
the Duke of Wirtemberg a Protestant Prince and his Ministers. In this
Conference they endeavored to engage the Lutherans in a League against the
Protestants of France, under Pretext that the Huguenots of France were
Zuinglians, and different from them in their opinion about the Eucharist. These
so Catholic Princes were very willing to enter into Alliance with Heretics,
that did them no prejudice, for the Ruin of other Heretics who stood too much
in their way as they thought; but this Conduct created Jealousies in the minds
both of the Pope and King of France; because the King did not like that his
Subjects should entertain secret Conferences with Strangers, and the Pope
understood not the meaning of such a Union with Heretics: and it was this
interview, perhaps, that gave occasion to the Rumor that was spread abroad
afterward, that the Cardinal of Lorrain was very favorable to the Confession
of Ausburg: Nay it was reported of him that after the Council of Trent he
should have said, that he had been once of the opinion of that Confession, but
that after the Decisions of the Council he had submitted. February 26 the
Session was held, wherein there happened some Contests about Precedence betwixt
the Portuguese and Hungarian Ambassadors. The Ambassador of Hungary as being
a Bishop sat on the left side of the Church, on the Legates right hand, in the
rank of the Prelates; and he of Portugal, as being a Secular, sat on the right
side, where the Ambassadors and Orators of Princes were placed. So that in
that respect they could have no Debate; but the Quarrel broke out when the
Instructions of their Princes were to be read. To compose this difference
without prejudicing the Rights of the Parties, the Council ordered that these
Instructions should be read according to the order of time wherein they had
been presented; and so Portugal went first. Then the Pope's Brief, whereby the
matter of the Index was referred to the Council, was read; for seeing Pope Paul
had meddled in that affair, the Council thinking that the Holy See had taken the
Cognizance thereof to it self, would not undertake the Examination of it
without the Pope's permission. Last of all the Decree was read by Antonio Helio
Patriarch of Jerusalem, who had officiated. This Decree imported that the
matter of the Index was referred to a Committee named by the Council; that the
Council invited all who had made Separation from the Roman Church to peace and
reconciliation, promising, in Congregation, to grant them a Safe Conduct, in
the same form as had been formerly granted; and the next Session was appointed
to be the 14th. of March. The Legates had written to Rome to know in what form
they should invite those who had shaken off the Yoke of the Church, to
repentance, and of what extent the Safe Conduct should be. The Pope judged it
not convenient to grant an oblivion, nor to invite Heretics, because it was
his opinion, it would be to no purpose; and for the Safe Conduct, he thought it
might be granted in General terms according to the form of that which was given
to the Germans in the year 1552. but he would not condescend that the same
Safe Conduct should be granted to those who lived under the Inquisition.
Nevertheless he would not have that exception mentioned, lest it might be
thought that the Pope had not a Supreme Power over the Tribunal of the
Inquisition, and that he could not exempt any from the Rigours of the same. In
the beginning of March the Council held several Congregations about that point,
and at length the Legates brought matters so about, that the resolutions of the
Council agreed exactly with the Sentiments of the Pope. So they adjusted the
form of the Decree, which was divided into three Articles. In the first the
Council granted the Germans a Safe Conduct in the same form as it had been
granted them before. In the second this Safe Conduct was extended to all places
where they preached, and publicly taught Doctrines contrary to the Doctrine of
the Church. In the third it contained this Qualification, that though the
Safe Conduct seemed not to extend to all Nations, yet none who would return
into the bosom of the Church should be excluded from the benefit of the
Oblivion, and that a Safe Conduct was also intended for that third sort. But as
to these last, the Council did not perform the promise.

The German Ambassadors were still for pressing a Reformation, and now the
Emperor's Ministers desired that they would write to the Protestants to invite
them to the Council. As to this last point the Legates answered, that that was
the way to expose the Councils Letters to the danger of being used by the
Protestants, as the Nuncio's of his Holiness had been already served; that is,
with insolence and indignity. As to the matter of Reformation, having first
twitted them with the absence of the German Prelates who of all others stood
most in need of being reformed, they resolved to give them some satisfaction.
And therefore on the Eleventh of March, the Legates called a General
Congregation, wherein they proposed twelve or thirteen Articles relating to
Reformation, as concerning Residence, The Legates propose twelve Articles
tending to Reformation.
Promo^ions to Holy Orders, Priests without a Title, the Plurality of Titles
and of Priests in great Parishes, the annexing of Benefices that had Cure of
Souls, Unions made under pretext that the Benefices are two small, if taken
separately, for the maintenance of a Curate; daily Distributions, the Validity
of Clandestine Marriages, concerning the abuses committed by Collectours or
Alms-gatherers, and some other matters of the like nature which shall be
mentioned hereafter; but a Rumor began now to be spread abroad that the
Germans stirred again, and levied Soldiers, which alarmed the Council, and for
some time put a stop to all Deliberations and interrupted the Congregations: so
that the fourteenth of March the day appointed for the Session past without any
thing done; and Easter-holy-days coming on afterward, was the cause of another
delay.

The sixteenth of March the Council gave Audience to Ferdinando d' Avalos
Marquess of Pescara Ambassador from the King of Spain and Governor of Milan;
wherein the usual Complements were mutually interchanged. In the Congregation
of the Eighteenth the Ambassador of the Duke of Tuscany was also received; in
that of the twentieth of March, the Ambassadors of the Catholic Cantons of
Switzerland had Audience. And in the Congregation of the sixth of April, the
Council admitted Andrea Dudicio Bishop of Tin^^, and Giovanni Colosvarino
Bishop of Canadia the Deputies of the Clergy of Hungary. The first of those two
Andrea Dudicio is famous not only for Learning, but also because he turned
Protestant afterward, declaring that nothing had more inclined him to that
change, than what he had seen in the Council of Trent.

After the Easter-holy-days, the Congregations were held without interruption
from the seventh of April until the eighteenth, and therein the matters which
had been proposed in the Congregation of the Eleventh of March, were brought
under Debate. In the first place the point of Residence was argued with strange
heats; They enter upon the Point of the Residence of Bishops.
the Pope's faction essayed to put a stop to that deliberation, alleging that
it was a matter concluded under Paul III and that the care of putting in
execution what had been decreed should be left to the People. But the
Archbishop of Granada and the rest of the Spaniards were for bringing the
matter under examination again, saying that a more effectual means had been
proposed to oblige to Residence, And the question if it be of Divine right is
again started. This Point is argued with extraordinary heat.
than those that were pitched upon in the first Convocation; and that was to
declare it to be of Divine Right; which presently put the Council into a
Fermentation. Paulus Jovius Bishop of Nocera, who made himself remarkable by
the singularity of his reasons, was against the having it declared either
necessary or of Divine Right. He alleged that the Churches wherein Bishops
resided were not a whit better governed than those wherein Bishops made no
Residence; and was so plain as to urge the Church of Rome it self for an
instance which was full of Corruptions notwithstanding that for many ages the
Pope had continually resided there. He added that if Residence were declared to
be of Divine Right, it would prove a Source of Rebellion; because when an
heretical or scandalous Bishop was got into possession of a Church, the Pope
could never be able to punish him; seeing under pretext that Residence is of
Divine Right, he might refuse to leave his See to come to an appearance; that
upon the same Principle the Curates also would find a means to decline the
Jurisdiction of their Bishops, alleging that by the Law of God they are placed
immediate Pastors of their Flocks. Giovanni Baptista Bernardo Bishop of Aiace
stood up for the Divine Right of Residence; nevertheless he was not of opinion
that that question should be debated in the Council, because that since the
Council had no other aim but to oblige all to Residence, it would be enough to
make a Decree prohibiting all Bishops to discharge any secular office or
employment in the Courts of Princes, and that then he was pretty sure that few
Bishops would be seen abroad out of their own Churches. The Bishop of the five
Churches a Hungarian vigorously opposed this overture, and in a long Discourse
made it out that for the space of eight hundred years Prelates had been
employed in secular Affairs, not only with great Success but much Honor also
to the Church, and profit and advantage to States, and that a custom of so
long continuance ought not to be condemned* Here the Bishops who were for the
Divine Right of Residence made it visibly appear that their own hearts deceived
them, if they thought themselves prompted on by the Zeal that a good Pastor
ought to have for the conduct of his Flock; for they listened to the opinion of
the Bishop of the five Churches with extraordinary delight and gave it great
applause. Nevertheless nothing could be more opposite to the design they had of
asserting the necessity of Residence; for it is manifest that worldly Business
and Employments wherein Bishops are entangled are the greatest obstruction of
Residence. But both they and the Bishop of the five Churches jumpt in one and
the same design, to wit, the Advancement of Episcopal dignity: And therefore
they liked any thing that made for that, though it were by quite opposite
courses; all maintained their opinions in this cause, with inconceivable heat,
and it was no easy matter to gather the Votes that the result might be known.
Cardinal Simoneta Legate held Residence to be of Positive Right; and the
Cardinal of Mantua thought it to be of Divine Right; but durst not declare
himself openly, because of the Court of Rome, which could not endure that
opinion; all that he ventured to do was to affirm that the Plurality of Votes
was on that side. He had two Legates who joined with him: to wit, the Cardinals
of Warmia and Seripando. But Altemps the Pope's Nephew was for Cardinal
Simoneta; who both maintained that the Plurality of Votes was for the Positive
Right; for determining this difference a General Congregation was held on the
twentieth of April, wherein the Presidents prayed the Fathers to give their
Judgments upon the point of the Divine Right of Residence by a placet or non
placet, that that Article might speedily be decided. When the Votes were
gathered, there were sixty eight, who said absolutely placet for the Divine
Right: thirty three who voted absolutely non placet: thirteen who said, placet
consulto prius sanctissimo Domino nostro, and seventeen who said, non placet
nisi prius consulto sanctissimo, etc. The Plurality was evidently for the
Divine Right of Residence, since there were sixty eight Votes to thirty three,
besides the thirteen who were for it with submission to the good will and
pleasure of the Pope; so that it ought to have been concluded; but instead of
that the Faction of the Court of Rome started great Debates, and the rest of
the Congregation was spent in much confusion, which obliged the Legates to
dismiss the Assembly; and having consulted together, they resolved to acquaint
the Pope with all that had past, and to expect his answer. This was not managed
so privately, The Spaniards make a great bustle, because the Legates will not
frame the Decree of Residence according to the Plurality of Votes.
but that it came to the knowledge of the Spaniards who were for Residence Jure
Divino; they openly complained of it, and said that it was a palpable
oppression, that though a matter had been put to the Vote, and debated with all
the Formalities, yet they would not submit to the Plurality of Suffrages, that
they sent to Rome for the Decision of a point, which had been lawfully
determined in the Council; that that violent conduct contrary to the Liberty of
a Council had given ground to the blasphemous saying which was in every body's
mouth, that the Holy Ghost which presided in the Council came weekly from Rome
in the Cloak-back of a Courrier; and that nothing was more unlike a free
Council, than the Assembly at Trent. In a subsequent Congregation they would
have brought the matter about again; but their minds were so exasperated, that
they could not be persuaded to speak with moderation, insomuch that the
Cardinal of Warmia who presided in it, was necessitated to break off the
discourse, and speak of another subject. To busy the Prelates, he proposed
that they would think of means of procuring the liberty of the English
Catholic Bishops who were in Prison, that they might come to the Council. It
was reckoned a very civil Proposal, but very impossible to be effected, because
no body was in a condition to constrain Elizabeth, and she was in no
disposition to value the Remonstrances of the Council. Whilst the point of
Residence was in agitation, other Articles of Reformation which had been
proposed by the Legates were also started in the same Congregations. Of Priests
without Benefice.
The Scope of one of these Articles was to hinder the Ordination of Priests
without a Title, that is to say, without a Benefice or an Estate of their own
sufficient to maintain them; because that was the cause of the vast numbers of
Indigent and Vagabond Priests. The Ancient Canons provided that no man should
be received into the Order of Priesthood, if he had not a Benefice sufficient
to maintain him, and a Flock also to take the cure of, that Priests might not
be without employment. The Council of Chalcedon amongst others prohibited
Ordinations of Priests who had not a call to some Church. Long after that
Alexander III. in the third Lateran Council held in the year 1160. ordered that
no Priest should be ordained without a Title, unless he had an Estate
sufficient to maintain himself. But all this care has not as yet been able to
prevent the being of a great many Vagabond and Mendicant Priests; since the
fortunes of such men which are commonly very small being spent, they must needs
fall into Poverty. The Spaniards who held Residence to be of Divine Right, made
it a Remedy against all Evils, and alleged it would prevent the disorder they
had before them; because then Clerks could not be made without Benefices, nor
Priests in Title of Estates without a Flock, and without doubt they were in the
right. Others thought it hard that men other ways qualified for Orders, should
because of Poverty be rejected, and said, that it was no shame for the Poor
Clergy to labor with their hands in imitation of the first Preachers of the
Gospel; that, after all, the Poverty of Priests was useful to the Church, and
facilitated the means of performing Offices for the Dead, which the Rich
Priests would not take the pains to do; seeing an Itinerane Priest without
Benefice or Estate says Mass for the Dead at a much cheaper rate, than they who
are rich and have the cure of Souls. This opinion was not well relished,
because it would have had Priests, who wanted business in the Church, to labor
with their hands for a lively hood, which was not thought suitable to the
Dignity of the Character. But another way to prevent the Poverty of Priests was
proposed, and that was, that a Bishop should ordain no man a Priest who had not
a Benefice or Fortune sufficient for his maintenance; and to hinder the
squandering away of their Patrimonies, that it should be enacted that they
could not be alienated: Gabriel le Veneur a French man Bishop of Evreux did
with much reason oppose this; alleging that the temporal Estates of Clergymen
were subject to temporal Laws, which many times appointed Alienation; and that,
though it were not so, yet such a constitution would be a fair means to make
Priests remiss in paying their debts.

Of Free Ordinations.
The third Article related to the Money that is given when one receives Orders,
not only to the Bishop and his Secretary, but to the Clark or Notary that
expedes the Orders. Our Savior said, freely ye have received, freely give; for
eluding the force of this Law, about the tenth Century they hit upon a knack of
distinguishing in Ordination the Collation of Orders, from the Collation of the
Benefice; they would not own the taking of any thing for Orders, because it is
a Spiritual Grace which cannot be sold; but they would be paid for conferring
the Benefice which is a Temporal Estate; and this kind of Simony got footing
afterward under the name of Annates or first fruits, fees, writing, seals, and
other titles. The abuse increased by the institution of Itinerant Bishops, who
nowadays are called Suffragans. They are a kind of Lieutenants to Bishops who
perform the Ecclesiastic and Episcopal Functions of the Diocese, whilst the
true Bishops in title, who enjoy the Revenues are wholly taken up with the
cares of the World. These Suffragan Bishops having no Benefice nor Revenues,
were forced for a subsistence to draw Presents and take Alms from those on whom
they conferred Orders. The rich Bishops who could easily dispense with Alms,
let fly against that abuse, and called it downright Simony. On the contrary the
poor Bishops, who were present, wanted not arguments to prove that they might
take free gifts from those who received Orders; they alleged that such as
would hinder those free gifts, had a design to extinguish Charity, that the
reasons which they made use of struck at all voluntary offerings that are made
at Confession, at Mass, and at Funerals. But the strongest of all their reasons
was, that Bishops might very well take some small present for conferring
Orders, since at Rome vast sums of money were exacted for bestowing the
Pallium on Metropolitans: that Pope Innocent III. in the fourth Lateran
Council, had decreed, that for the administration of Sacraments, believers
should make those voluntary offerings, which at present they would condemn. For
all these reasons, one Denis Bishop of Milopotamo in Candia went a great deal
farther than any who had spoken before him: He alleged that the Clergy was not
near the tenth part of the People, and yet they had the Tithes, which is the
tenth part of the fruits of the Earth; besides a great deal of Lands which they
possess that amounts to much more: that if there were poor Bishops, it was not
to be imputed to the Poverty of the Church, but to the bad distribution of its
wealth; and that so, it was not to be suffered that the Church should take
money in consideration of services, for which she was so well paid; he added,
that it was not enough to prohibit Bishops to take any thing for conferring of
Orders, unless they were likewise hindered from making money of those things
that go before Orders; for instance in the Chanceries of Bishops they granted
Letters which were called Dimissorial, whereby a man was allowed to provide
himself of an Ordainer where he thought good, and for these Letters money was
taken. In like manner at Rome. permissions were granted for money, to receive
Orders out of the times appointed for that. And therefore he moved that these
abuses might be remedied. The Legates approved of that opinion as to
Dimissorial Letters, which only regard the Bishop's Chanceries: but as to the
Permissions that were given at Rome for money, that Court being a noli me
tangere, Cardinal Simoneta said, that it belonged to the Pope, and not to the
Council to meddle with that. In this manner the Legates, without having the
Superiority of the Pope over a Council plainly asserted, acted in all things,
as if that Superiority had been unquestionable: for if the Council were above
the Pope, it would have power to reform the Court of Rome. Amongst other
considerations that were made on that subject, it was moved that Notaries and
Clarks who wrote and dispatched the Orders, ought not to be barred from taking
of money; because it was a mere temporal Office, and such men ought to live by
their Callings.

Of daily Distributions.
The fourth Article concerned Prebends and the Distributions in Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches, which have a Chapter and Canons. Heretofore the Canons
lived in common and ate all at one Table: or at least they had a daily
Distribution of what was necessary for them. This Distribution was made after
Divine Service, where they had assisted at the hours appointed by the Canons:
and hence it is that the hours appointed for Prayers have been called Canonical
hours, and those that did officiate at the Service Canonici or Canons. In the
beginning this Distribution was made in specie or in Money; but that lasted not
long, and instead of those Distributions which were made daily, the Revenues
were divided, and each Canon had a Dividend, which Dividends were called
Prebends. When Distributions were in use, it made the Canons diligent in
waiting on Service, because nothing was given to the absent: but so soon as
Cathedral and Collegiate Revenues were divided into Prebends, every one
received his Rent though he did no Service, and this made the Canons very
negligent in performing their Duties; which negligence was thought to stand in
need of Reformation. It is true, that in some Collegiate Churches the custom
of daily Distributions still continued; but in many places they were so small
that the Canons did not think it worth their while to attend for so
inconsiderable a Profit. Luca Bisantio, a poor Prelate but a good man, Bishop
of Cataro in Sclavonia, was for obliging the Canons by Censures and Deprivation
of Profits to be punctual in attending Divine Service. But the Council was of
opinion rather to convert some of the Prebends into daily Distributions, that
so the profit and advantage might engage the Canons to attendance. The other
Points were also examined, and met with no great difficulty, but were regulated
as we shall see hereafter.

The Pope is alarmed at the Attempts of the Spaniards, and is distrustful of
his Legates.
When the news of what had past at Trent, came to the Pope. The Court of Rome
was much startled, both at the heats wherewith the point of the Divine Right of
Residence had been debated; and at the vigorousness of the Spaniards in
asserting the Liberty of the Council. The Pope began to be Jealous of and to
distrust his own Legates; particularly the Cardinal of Mantua, who was
suspected not to be firm enough to the interests of the Holy See: The Pope
likewise had some high words with de Vargas the Spanish Ambassador concerning
the Clause proponentibus Legatis. The Ambassador represented to him, that if
the Clause had been barely, that the Legates should propose, this would not
have excluded the Prelates from the liberty of proposing also: but that that
proponentibus Legatis in the Ablative case, as Grammarians say, imported an
exclusion of all others. The Pope answered disdainfully, that he had something
else to do than to mind cujus generis and casus, that he was no Grammarian,
and that these terms were sincerely and without prevarication employed to
express his thoughts. In this manner he continued firm in his resolution to
alter nothing in that Clause, and endeavored by some excuses to put off the
King of Spain, who had declared, that he did not take it well that words so
prejudicial to the liberty of the Council should have been inserted in the
Decree. The Point of Residence was consulted at Rome in several Congregations
of Cardinals and Ambassadors; they saw very well into the consequences of that
opinion which the Spaniards would have had asserted: and the Cardinals who held
Bishoprics knew that to oblige them to Residence by the Law of God, was the
way to rob them of their Benefices, seeing they always attended at the Court of
Rome. But, which is more than all, the Court of Rome perceived very well that
the intention of the Bishops was to make themselves absolute over their Flocks,
and Independent of the Holy See. However the Pope dissembled that he knew any
thing of the design of the Bishops, and acted as if the Question had only been
about obliging the Bishops to Residence. And therefore having well weighed the
matter, he declared that he ^^erved it to himself, that he would issue out a
Bull enjoining all Bishops to Residence under pain of losing their Bishoprics:
that he alone had the Power of putting the Laws of Jesus Christ in execution by
that command that was given to St. Peter, seed my Sheep, and that after all, it
was no great matter on what Right Residence was founded, whether Divine or
Ecclesiastic, provided it was observed. At the same time he resolved to give
an answer to the Letters which he had received from Trent: And wrote, in
effect, that he intended no encroachment on the Council, but that it might
enjoy the liberty that it always had, provided the Council owned him for its
Head, and rendered that respect which is due to the Holy See. Some consultation
there was about sending of other Legates, and recalling the Cardinal of Mantua;
but they durst not, because of the great reputation of probity that he had
acquired. The Pope was in good hopes that he would himself desire liberty to
lay down, when he found how ill they were satisfied with him. In the mean time
that he might by all means secure himself against the designs of the Spaniards
upon his Authority, he earnestly solicited the Venetian and Florentine
Ambassadors to deal with their Masters, that they would order their Ministers
who were at Trent to stand up for the Authority of the Holy See. For obtaining
the favor of the King of France and of the French, he promised to make the
King a present of an hundred thousand Crowns, and to lend him an hundred
thousand more. And at the same time he dispatched to Trent a fresh recruit of
Italian Bishops who were at Rome, that they might in some measure
counterbalance the Spanish Faction.

The Legates having received the Pope's Answer, proceeded according to the
instructions that were sent them from the Court of Rome. The thirteen Articles
of Reformation proposed by the Legates were reduced to nine in making of the
Decree; because with consent of the Prelates the Legates had struck out those
which concerned Clandestine Marriages; and of their own head or by Orders from
Rome cut off that which related to Residence. The Decrees were read in the
Congregation, where the omission of the Article of Residence raised a new
tumult and made a great noise, but it came to no Head; for the Legates having
made some bald excuses that did not take, refused with Authority to meddle with
that point at present. At length the fourteenth of May, the day appointed for
the Session came; wherein nothing was done, but the Prorogation of the Session
to the fourth of June. Session. 19.
The Marquess de Pescara Ambassador of Spain made great instances, that in
that Session the Council might be declared to be a Continuation of that of Paul
and Julius; but the Emperor's Ambassadors opposing it with the same
vehemence, nothing was concluded therein. Immediately after the Session the
Marquess of Pescara parted from Trent under pretext of going to give orders
about the affairs of his Government; but in reality to shun Competition with
the Ambassador of France who was shortly to arrive. In effect, two or three
days after Lewis de S. Gelais, Lord of Lansac chief of the Embassy arrived,
and was followed some days after by Arnold Ferrier President of the Parliament
of Paris, and Guy Favre Sieur de Pibrac, who was also a gown man.
Misunderstandings betwixt the Pope and the Council, and of the Fathers of the
Council among themselves.
Misunderstandings grew daily more and more betwixt the Court of Rome and the
Council, for amongst other things that troubled the Pope, he was vexed at the
Cardinal of Mantua, because he had not complied with the intentions of the
Marquess of Pescara and the Spaniards who urged that the present Council might
be declared to be a Continuation of the former. The Emperor who was informed
of those fresh instances of the Spaniards, had sent orders to his Ambassadors
to leave the Council so soon as the Spaniards should have obtained the
Declaration which they demanded; and the Pope imagined that that clashing would
have broke up the Council, which was the thing in the world he most desired; so
that he complained of the Cardinal of Mantua, that he had joined with the
Spaniards in the point of Residence, and had opposed them in the matter of the
Continuation of the Council; which made it apparent that he was always engaged
in opposite interests to those of the Pope; and therefore it was brought into
consultation a second time, whether the Cardinal should be called home, or at
least a new Colleague should be sent him, to whom the chief instructions should
be addressed. On the other hand the Council at Trent was as little satisfied with
the Court of Rome, as the Court of Rome was with the Council; so that there was
nothing but Discontents every where; for even in the Council most part of the
Prelates were dissatisfied with one another, and many times came to big words.
About this time the Bishops of Paris and Capoccio having had a little Debate in
an Assembly of Prelates; the Bishop of Paris asked the Bishop of Capoccio how
many Souls he had committed to his Care; he made answer, five hundred,
whereupon the Bishop of Paris replied, that as man to man he was willing to
yield to him, but when they acted in name of those they represented, he that
spoke only for five hundred Souls ought not to think himself equal to him who
spoke for five hundred thousand.

This was the State of Affairs, when the Ambassadors of France, who arrived
some time before, were received into the Congregation of the twenty sixth of
May.

The Sieur de Pibrac made a smart and bold Speech; he condemned the indiscreet
and ill weighed Zeal of those that would yield nothing for peace-sake, and by
standing up for the Church even to the meanest Ceremonies give occasion to
Schism. The French Ambassadors are received they make Speeches, and receive no
Answer.
He complained pretty openly of the violence that was put upon the Council, in
denying it the Liberty which it ought to have; he blamed the later Councils
which had been held some ages before, as wanting that courage and vigor which
they ought to have had in withstanding oppression, and in remedying the Evils
of the Church, and exhorted the Prelates to take a better course for restoring
peace to Christendom. Other Ambassadors at their first Audience made only
some Complements, so that there needed no preparation to make them an answer.
But this extraordinary Push of the French put the Council so off of the hinges,
that the Promooter had nothing to say to them, and thus the Congregation
concluded with that harangue. Next day the same Ambassadors waited on the
Legates to show them their commission; and demanded forthwith that the Council
might be declared a new Council, and that these words might be struck out of
the Bull Indicendo continuamus, and continuando indicimus, which contained an
ambiguous Sense unbeseeming Christians. But this Remonstrance made no
impression, the Legates answering that their power did not extend to declare
this Council to be a new Council, but only to preside therein, according to
the Will of the Council. These last words of the Legates answer were quickly
spread abroad, and made the Archbishop of Granada and the rest of the Spaniards
say, that the Presidents spoke in the Style of very humble Servants, but acted
like very absolute Masters. Afterward the French joined with the Ambassadors
of the Emperor and King of Spain, to demand that in the next Session the point
of Residence which had been sufficiently examined, might be decided; they said
farther, that the King their Master expected that they would treat of
Reformation, before they entered upon Doctrines, that the Protestants seeing
the Church reformed, might more easily submit to the Decisions that should be
made in points of Doctrine. Cardinal Simoneta answered cunningly as to the
matter of Reformation, that it was a difficult point, seeing it depended in
part on the correction of the abuses which Princes committed in bestowing of
Benefices; and that he had a special regard to the Kings of France, who by
virtue of a Concordat made betwixt Leo X. and Francis I. had the Nomination to
all great Benefices, by which Canonical Elections were abolished. This work
spoken in season stopped the Ambassadors mouths as to that particular; but it
was not so easy a matter to stop them as to the point of Residence, the excuse
that the Legates made being evidently ridiculous; for they alleged that the
matter had not been sufficiently examined, and nevertheless nothing was ever
more; what the Legates reason wanted in force it had sufficiently in Authority
which gives weight to the weakest Arguments; so great was the sharpness of
contention that this matter occasioned, that many of the Bishops beyond the
Alps were just ready to protest and be gone. But the Ambassadors, who saw
that the Pope desired no better than to have an occasion to break up the
Council, put a stop to that; they thought it more expedient to wave the points
of Residence, and of the Continuation of the Council, than to give an occasion
of a Rupture. Nevertheless the Pope, who earnestly sought for an opportunity of
dissolving the Council, resolved to declare, according to the desire of the
King of Spain, that that Assembly was a continuation of the Council of Paul
III. and Julius III. that he might thereby give occasion to the Germans and
French to protest and withdraw. He therefore sent orders to his Legates to make
that Declaration, which troubled them extremely. They had had much ado to
prevail with the French and Germans not to insist any more on that particular,
and they could not tell how they could handsomely come off with it. They
therefore sent to Rome Cardinal Altemps the Pope's Nephew, to inform him of the
State of Affairs, and to take him off of that resolution which would do great
Damage to his Reputation, and occasion the dissolution of the Council.

June being come, the Session was held; wherein the Commissions of the
Ambassadors of the Archbishop of Salisburg and King of France were read.
Cardinal Altemps and the Prelates of the faction of the Court of Rome had been
pricked to the quick by Pibrac's harangue; so that they resolved to give him an
answer this Session in a strain capable to repel the Insolence of that prating
Barrister, for so they called him. Baptist a Castello Promooter of the Council
had orders to prepare himself to answer Pibrac's Speech; which he did with much
sharpness according to his Instructions; he made an Apology for the precedent
Councils which had been blamed, and justified this from the indirect Reflections
that had been cast upon it, of swaying with the interests of Princes, and
giving occasion to the snares of the Devil by a damnable compliance. The French
were not very well pleased with that Harangue, nor, indeed, was it the Legates
intention to please them. Afterward the Decree was read which was only an Act
giving reasons why the Publication of the Decrees was put off till the next
Session, which was appointed to be the twenty sixth of July.

They propose in the Congregations to treat of the Communion in both kinds, and
of the Communion of Children.
In the Congregation that was held in the Afternoon the same fourth day of June,
six Articles were proposed concerning matters to be handled in the ensuing
Session; to wit, the Communion of young Children, and the Communion in both
kinds. But they could not tell how to set about it, because these Points had
been already handled in the Council of Julius and not decided; some were of
opinion that they should make use of the matter that had been prepared to their
hand. They alleged that if they must hear the Sentiments of fourscore and
eight Divines that were at Council upon that subject, it would make tedious
work; that therefore it was better and a more compendious way to publish the
Decrees which were already framed. Here the Champians for the Divine Right of
Residence took occasion to renew the Quarrel; and thirty Bishops moved that the
Point of the Cup might be adjusted in a few days, provided the Method that had
been proposed were followed, but that it was now time according to the promise
that past, to treat of the Point of Residence; others again warmly opposed it:
so that heats beginning to arise, there was like to have been some noise, if
the Cardinal of Mantua had not wisely pacified them, promising to treat of
Residence, when they came to handle the Sacrament of Orders. But Cardinal
Simoneta was not satisfied that the Cardinal of Mantua had inconfiderately
engaged to bring the Point of Residence upon the Stage again, without the
Pope's Order.

The Germans present their Demands to the Council tending to Reformation, which
amaze the Pope and oblige him to look to his own Security.
The Germans had some satisfaction in that they had obtained the Communion in
both kinds to be handled, and thought it now time to propose the things which
they had orders to demand; so that according to the instructions they had
received from the Emperor, they presented to the Legates twenty Articles of
Demands tending to Reformation, and particularly to the Reformation of the
Court of Rome. In these Memoires they demanded that the number of Cardinals
should not exceed twenty six; that no more Dispensations nor Exemptions should
be granted against Common Law; that the Monasteries should be subjected to the
Bishops; that Plurality of Benefices should be taken away; that Bishops should
be obliged to Residence, without spending time in cavilling about the question
whether it be of Divine right or no; that Ecclesiastical Constitutions should
be restrained to a less number, and that they should not have the same
Authority as the Laws of God; that it should not be lawful to excommunicate
any but such as were notoriously guilty of mortal Sin; that Divine Service
should be celebrated in a Language intelligible to the People; that whatsoever
is not contained in Scripture should be left out of Missals and Breviaries;
that Priests and Monks should be reformed according to the standard of the
ancient institution; that somewhat of the Rigor of Positive Laws should be
abated; and that in some places the distinction of Meats, Lent, and the Celibat
of Priests should be abolished: And these were the Principal heads of their
demands. The Legates designed, if possibly they could, to have suppressed that
Piece which they looked upon as terrible: and therefore they gave the
Ambassadors a fair and soft answer, that these matters could not be moved in
the next Session; but that they would lay hold on an occasion to discourse them
with the Fathers of the Council. This answer gave no satisfaction to the
Ambassadors: and therefore they sent the Archbishop of Prague by Post for new
instructions, that he might make all haste and be back again before the next
Session. The Legates on their part also thought fit to acquaint the Pope with
what past, and dispatched to him Leonardo Marino Archbishop of Lanciano; he had
orders to pacify the Pope, and Court of Rome; who were much dislatisfied with
the whole Council, and particularly with the Cardinal of Mantua: but the
Anxiety of the Pope was doubled when he saw the Proposals of the Germans; he
well perceived that the Emperor, in prospect of having his Son elected King of
the Romans, liad a design to gain the Protestants; he dreaded the arrival of
the French Prelates who were to join with the Spaniards and Germans, and made
no doubt but that they would offer bolder Proposals and more prejudicial still
to his Authority. And this made him seek out Pretexts for raising of Soldiers,
that so he might be in a condition to maintain his Grandeur by the Arms of the
Flesh, if the Arms of the Spirit did not succeed with him. His design of
opposing the Enterprises of the Huguenots who troubled the County of Avignon,
afforded him a very plausible Pretext. Under that color then he levied four
thousand Switzers, and three thousand German Horse; part of them he sent to
Avignon, and furnished the Duke of Savoy with money to arm for the same cause.
At the same time he endeavored to form a League amongst the Ministers of the
Princes that were at the Council against the Protestants; but no body would
consent to it, all the Princes excusing themselves upon particular accounts;
but using this reason in general, that it would be a hinderance to the
Continuation of the Council. That last reason weighed not much with the Pope;
for the Rupture of the Council, which the Princes so much feared, was the thing
that he most desired; and therefore he proposed once again in Consistory the
deciding of the Debate about the Continuation of the Council according to the
intention of the Spaniards, thereby to vex the Germans and French, and force
them to withdraw. In the mean while he complained continually of the manner how
he was used, and said that Lansac seemed rather the Ambassador of the
Huguenots than of the King of France: that he and his Colleagues fomented the
Divisions, and encouraged those that raised the Authority of the Council above
the Pope; an heretical opinion, said he, the Abbetters whereof he was resolved
to prosecute and punish. He accused Lansac, of having said that so many German
and French Bishops would come, as should be strong enough to drive the Idol
from Rome. He found no less fault with the Cardinals of Mantua, Seripando and
Warmia his Legates, saying that they deserved not to wear the Hat of a
Cardinal. He sent Carlo Visconts Bishop of Vintimiglia with Orders to watch
over their proceedings, promising him a Cardinals Cap at the first promotion,
wherein he was as good as his word. He gave him a list of those who were
faithful to the Holy See, that he might converse freely and open his heart to
them. Visconte faithfully discharged his Commission, and was a very exact Spy
in the Council, giving the Pope an account of the least thing that happened
there, Cardinal Simoneta had given the Pope advice that the Cardinal of Mantua
had engaged himself by an express promise to bring the Point of Residence into
play again, this made him break out into an open passion, and he had certainly
been transported into some rash action, had not the Archbishop of Lanciano
arrived very opportunely, who acquitted himself extraordinary well of his
Commission in justifying the Cardinal. He presented to the Pope a Letter signed
by more than thirty Bishops, who protested to his Holiness that they had not
the least design to lessen his Authority by demanding that Residence might be
declared to be of Divine Right. That calmed him a little, and disposed him to
receive more patiently the excuses of the Cardinals of Mantua, Seripando and
Warmia; so that by the pains of the Archbishop of Lanciano, the Pope became
more moderate, wrote to the Legates in a softer Style, and acquainted the
Fathers that he desired the Council might be free, that he was not against the
deciding of the Point of Residence, but that they must wait till the heats and
animosities were over. In particular he gave orders to tell the Cardinal of
Mantua that he was satisfied with his innocence, and that with much Joy he
acknowledged it. Poor Camillo Oliva, the Cardinal of Mantua's Secretary, had no
share in his Master's reconciliation with the Pope; for after the death of the
Cardinal, as that faithful Servant waited on his Corpse to Mantua, the Pope
upon idle and silly Pretexts caused him to be put into the Inquisition, where
for many years he suffered inconceivable misery.

The Divines give their opinion about the Demand of the Cup which the Germans
made.
During this time the Fathers of the Council were employed in examination of the
matters which were to be decided in the next Session. The Congregations began
the ninth of June, and continued until the three and twentieth. Threescore
Divines were heard upon the Point of the Communion in both kinds: but that
being a Point of Antiquity for the knowledge of which School Divinity was of
little use, they came very ill off about it. They all agreed that the Cup was
not necessary, and endeavored to prove, that from the very times of the
Apostles dry Communions had been in use, because there is often mention made of
breaking of Bread, without speaking any thing of Wine. They proved the same
Communions without the Cup also, by the Communion of the Laics, which is
frequently mentioned in the writings of the Ancients; when any Member of the
Clergy fell from his Post, he was turned off to the Laick Communion. Now, said
they, seeing that Communion of Laics is distinguished from the Communion of
the Clergy, it must needs have been different; and that difference could be no
other but this, that the Clergy communicated in both kinds, and the People
only in one. A little more knowledge in Antiquity would have taught them that
the Communion of Laics was not different from that of the Clergy, but only in
Order and Place; for the Clergy received in the Chancel and before the People,
and the People afterward extra cancellos, in the Body of the Church. Most of
their other Arguments we disliked by the knowing men, because they urged them
without choice or discretion. For instance, some would make it out that it was
not necessary to take the Cup, because Jonathan took only a little honey on
the end of his stick, and that his eyes were cleared without having drunk. But
amongst all these able Disputants, no man was more remarked for the Singularity
of Argument, than James Paiva Andradius; he alleged that our Savior gave the
Communion to his Disciples in Bread alone, whilst they were yet Laics, which
proved that the Bread belonged to all the Laics; but that having given them
the Bread, before he gave the Cup, he ordained them Priests, saying, do this
in remembrance of me. At length, he gave them the Cup, saying, drink ye all of
it: whence it is clear, said he, that the Cup belongs only to the Priests.
Anthony Mandolphe a Divine belonging to the Archbishop of Prague, having
protested that he was of the same opinion with the rest, did nevertheless quite
overthrow all the Arguments which they had drawn from Scripture and Tradition.
He demonstrated, that dry Communions were unknown to Antiquity, and that by
consequence no other Authority could be alleged for them but the Council of
Constance; which must be submitted to, and the Point taken as decided, that
Communion under both kinds is not necessary; but that that was not the question
in hand, the matter now under examination being whether the Cup might be
rendered to those that desired it; to the handling of which he thought they
ought to proceed, and pass by the other. John Paul, Divine to the Bishop of the
five Churches Ambassador for the Kingdom of Hungary, was of the same mind, and
concluded that the Cup might be restored; but neither of them were favorably
heard, since what they said was easily seen to be the Dictates and Instructions
of their Master. The handling of the third Article proposed by the Legates
raised some noise; the substance of it was that they who only received the
Bread were not deprived of any necessary Grace. For there were some that did
not agree to that, but maintained that he who receives the Cup receives more
abundant Grace. One Friar Amant of the Order of the Servite, Divine to the
Bishop of Sebenico in Sclavonia, went farther than all the rest, and said that
according to the Doctrine of Cardinal Cajetan, the Blood is no part of
substance of Man's body, but merely an Aliment; and that so the Blood was not
necessarily in the Flesh by Concomitance, seeing it does not follow that a Body
must of necessity be always accompanied with its Aliment. He added that
according to the words of our Savior, drink, this is my Blood, that Blood must
have been out of his Veins, because Blood running in the Veins could not be
drunk. This reasoning raised a Tumult, a clashing of Hands, and rattling of the
Benches amongst the Divines; which obliged the Disputant not only to be
silent, but to recant, saying that it had escaped him in the heat of the
Dispute. And thus, in spite of all opposition, the Conclusion of the Debate
was, that he who did communicate in one kind reaped as much Benefit as he who
received in both. Nevertheless, to give some satisfaction to those who
maintained that there was more Grace conveyed in receiving both the signs, it
was thought fit to have it inserted, that a Believer was not deprived of any
Grace that was necessary to Salvation. And this might insinuate that one was
deprived of some saving Grace, though it was not of absolute Necessity. But the
fourth Article occasioned great contests, and was thus couched: Whether the
reasons which had obliged the Church to allow the Bread alone to the Laics,
did still hinder the granting of the Cup. For the Prelates and Spanish Divines
had conspired in a wonderful Union, not to suffer the Cup to be restored to
any Nation They made use of all the reasons that had enduced the Church to
forbid the Cup, pretending that they were in force still. With much affectation
they aggravated the danger of Effusion, and urged how unsafe a thing it was to
change a Practice established in the Church, since Heretics would draw great
advantages from thence. Some of them either ignorant in Antiquity, or confident
and rash, pleaded that the Church did prohibit the Cup for confuting the Error
of Nestorius, who did not believe that Jesus Christ was wholly and entirely
under one of the kinds, adding that since that Error was broached again by
modern Heretics, they ought to retain the Practice which served to confound
that Heresy. What a gross and foul impertinence was this? For the Cup was not
retrenched in the Age of Nestorius, nor did ever that Heretic maintain any
dispute about the Real Presence. From Reasons they came to Reproaches, and flew
so high as to call all those, who demanded the Chalice, Heretics. A certain
Portuguese Jacobin called Francisco Forier, thinking to make himself remarkable
by a piece of wit, said that Princes who desired the Cup for their Subjects,
had a mind by the Councils leave to turn Lutherans. This was looked upon as an
insolent expression, because it reflected upon the Emperor. Francisco de
Torrez a Spanish Jesuit said with less wit but more Passion, that the Devil did
here transform himself into an Angel of light, and that under color of
desiring the Blood of Jesus Christ, he set the People on to demand a poisoned
Cup. God Almighty was at least as much offended by the extravagance of the
Jesuit, as the Emperor was by the insolence of the Jacobin: but the Jesuit
could defend his assertion by the Authority of Cardinal St. Angelo great
Penitentiary, and of the Pope himself; for not long before these words had been
spoken at Rome in a Congregation of Cardinals in presence of the Pope, who past
it by very well, and was not at all troubled at it. The German Divines did,
indeed, raise a counter-Battery, but the Party was not equal, for there were
but very few Germans, and a great many Spaniards in the Council. It is true,
there were some Divines of other Nations more moderate, who, in a Spirit of
Charity, were for allowing the Cup to those that demanded it, under certain
conditions; nay and some were so condescending as to think it might be granted
absolutely and without any restriction.

The Point of the Communion of Children was only added to swell up the bulk of
the matters that were to be decided in the Session, that it might not seem to
have done but little, and therefore it occasioned no dispute, all agreeing that
it was not necessary. When the Decrees came to be drawn up, the Legates were
inclineable enough to have satisfied the Germans in granting them the Cup,
under the conditions proposed by Paul III. and therefore in a Congregation of
Prelates which was held after the Congregations of the Divines were over, they
were for passing by the fourth Point which concerned the granting of the Cup,
and for framing Decrees upon the rest, reserving this till another time that
they had prepared the Council to admit of it. But the Spaniards suspecting
that, made a great stir, and under Pretext that matters must be done in order,
they would by no means proceed to the fifth Point until the fourth were
adjusted. This caused some disorder and bitterness among the Prelates, which
obliged the Presidents to dismiss the Assembly without doing any thing. These
abrupt breakings up of Assemblies were very frequent, The way that Cardinal
Simoneta made use of to break up the Congregations, when matters went contrary
to his intentions.
and Cardinal Simoneta with his address and cunning was the cause of all these
Confusions, when he perceived that matters went not according to his mind. This
Cardinal was entrusted with the greatest Secrets of the Court of Rome; and was
the chief of the Pope's pensionary Bishops who were not a few, and who had
orders to stand by him. He had picked out some of the wittiest and boldest of
them, as the Bishops della Cava and Capo d'Istria, Zambeccari Bishop of
Sulmona, and Bartholomeo Serigo Bishop of Castellanetta; who when they found
that matters went cross to the intentions of the Court of Rome; they
interrupted those that were giving their opinions by raillery, and turning
their reasons into ridicule. This never failed to occasion Debates, from Debate
they fell into Passion, and so all withdrew without concluding any thing.

The Ambassador of the Duke of Bavaria had been now two Months at Trent in
quality of a private Person, because of his pretensions of having Precedence
before the Venetian Ambassador who would not give him the Place. At length, he
received Orders from his Master to yield, and was publicly received in the
Congregation of the seven and twentieth of June, having made his Protestation
that his condescension at present was only for the sake of Peace, and not to
the prejudice of his Master and the other Princes of Germany. He made a very
long and a very free Speech, wherein he complained extremely of the Corruption
of the German Clergy, and of the Concubinage of the Priests; and enumerating
the evils which had happened upon the retrenching of the Cup, he urged hard
that it might be restored to the People, and demanded that Priests who had a
mind to Marry might be dispensed from their obligation to a single life. The
Council by the mouth of their Promooter gave him upon the spot a very civil
answer. The French Ambassadors took this ill, and complained that the
Ambassador of Bavaria having spoken with as great liberty as they, he had
been, notwithstanding, civilly answered, whereas their Speech had been refuted
in a sharp and unbecoming manner. The Emperor's Ambassadors finding
themselves backed by the Bavarians, thought it time to oppose the violence of
the Spaniards, who could not endure the demand of the Cup for the People. They
therefore drew up a Memoir upon that Subject, which, after the Ambassador of
Bavaria had spoken, they presented in the same Congregation. In that Writing
they urged that Pope Paul and Pope Julius had been sensible of the necessity of
granting the Cup to those who demanded it; that it was the only way to retain
the Calixtins and the Kingdom of Bohemia in the obedience of the Church of
Rome; that in Hungary the People did already constrain the Priests to give them
the Communion in both kinds, by seizing their goods and threatening to kill
them; and that to answer those who in so haughty a manner desired to know who
they were that demanded the Cup, they gave them to understand, that it was the
Emperor himself.

The French join with the Germans in the Demand of the Cup.
In the Congregation of the fourth of July, the Ambassadors of France presented
a Writing tending to the same end; that is to say, that they joined with the
Germans in the demand of the Cup. They pleaded that in matters which are only
of Positive Right too much rigor is not to be used, and that it is good to
comply with the weakness of those of whom we have the conduct. This Conjunction
startled the Legates, who were afraid that things would not stop there. They
were pretty well inclined to restore the Cup to the Germans, but they had no
mind that it should extend to France also. Besides the Pope's Party was alarmed
at the reasons alleged by the French, that in matters which are only of
Humane constitution a latitude ought to be allowed; this seemed a very
suspicious Proposal from the Mouth of the French, who stretched that Positive
Right to a great compass. In effect: Lansac the chief of the Embassy, let slip
some words in a great entertainment that he had been at some days before. He
hinted that the French wished that Divine Service might be allowed them in the
vulgar Tongue, that Priests might have liberty to Marry, and that Images were
taken out of the Churches: so that the Legates were of opinion, that for that
time it was not convenient to meddle with the Point of restoring the use of the
Cup. They treated about that in private with the Germans, and at length brought
them to consent that it might be referred to another Session: and the French
who stickled not much for it, did not oppose the design: but the Spaniards
persisted to show the aversion they had to the demand of the French and
Germans. However the Bishop of Lerida in Spain did not seem to be altogether
against it; for giving his opinion in the Congregation of the ninth of July,
after that he had professed that he was not of the mind that the Cup should be
restored to the People, he added that there might be some words inserted in the
Decree for reserving to the French the privilege of giving the Communion in
both kinds, if they thought good: that in that case the French might do as
other Nations did, and amongst others the Greeks, who did partake of the Cup by
Virtue of an express privilege, granted them by Popes, which he said, he had
seen. After the Congregation was up, du Ferrier one of the French Ambassadors
pressed the Bishop of Lerida, whose name was Antonio Agostino, very hard to
tell him, what Pope it was who had granted that privilege to the Greeks of
communicating in both kinds. The ignorance of the Spaniards in matters of
Antiquity.
The Bishop made him answer that it was Pope Damasus. This made du Ferrier, who
was well Skilled in antiquity, laugh, and confirmed all People in the opinion
that the Spaniards are very ignorant therein. For Damasus lived about the end
of the fourth Century, when the Church of Rome was very far from giving the Cup
by way of Privilege, since for more than a hundred years after, to abstain from
it was by her looked upon as Sacrilege; as appears by the Decision of Pope
Gelasus, which is inserted in the Decree of Gratian. In the Congregation of the
tenth of July, Leonard Haller Titular Bishop of Philadelphia moved, that it was
necessary to stay for the Germans, as a few days before Daniel Barbaro
Patriarch of Aquileia had demanded that they might stay for the French, to the
end that the Council might be called General, as being made up of all Nations;
for there were none but Spaniards and Italians in it; and these Italians almost
all of them the Pope's Pensioners, who most cunningly stood up for the
Interests of the Court of Rome. There were even some that said publicly
enough, that that Council was not the Council of the Universal Church, but of
the Pope, since he did in it what he pleased: and these were those who had
spoken with some freedom as to the Point of Residence. The Papal Party had a
great pique against them, which appeared so plainly, that they did not think
themselves secure enough even at Trent: and therefore they thought of
withdrawing, some of them had already obtained leave; amongst whom were Egidio
Foscararo Bishop of Modena; the Bishops of Viviers, Acqui, and the Archbishop
of Surriento. But the Ambassador of Portugal having represented that that
would do hurt to the reputation of the Council, seeing the cause of their
departure was generally known, they were detained by fair promises of better
usage for the future. However there was no notice taken of the demand that was
made of waiting for the coming of the German and French Prelates. In the
following Congregations the Chapters of Reformation were read, and some Bishops
spoke with a great deal of liberty. As to the Point of free Ordinations the
Bishop of Vegla an Island near Sclavonia, said that it would be to no purpose
to lay a restraint upon ordaining Bishops not to take money, if at the same
time it were not Decreed that no fees should be taken at Rome for Dispensations
to receive Orders out of the usual times, and before the Age appointed; that
the greatest expense was there, and that the small gratuities given at
Ordinations was nothing to it. He farther said that when any such Dispensations
were presented to him, it was his custom to ask if they had cost any money;
and that if he found they had been bought, he rejected and did not value them.
As to the Point concerning those that got into Priests Orders without a
sufficient Estate to maintain them, the Bishop of the five Churches spoke with
great freedom, that it was of much more importance to prevent a man's entering
into Orders without having a Church and Cure to serve, than to hinder him upon
the account of wanting an Estate, and that it was very disgraceful to the
Church to have priests who had no other Employment but to live idly and take
their ease upon a good fat Benefice. In one of the Articles of Reformation it
was ordained that great Parishes should be divided into two, that they might be
the better served: whereupon the same Bishop said, that that was good, but that
it was much better to divide the Bishoprics, which are of so great extent,
that it is not possible for one man to take the care of so many Souls. These
opinions pleased no body, neither the Prelates nor the Presidents. Afterward
the Bishop of Sidonia an Hungarian took the boldness to say that all these
petty Reformations of the Members of the Church signified nothing, so long as
the Head continued without Reformation; that it behoved them to begin with the
greater matters, and that the lesser would pass without any difficulty. This
liberty was very offensive to the Legates, and therefore they met to consult
about means of repressing that boldness. John Baptista Castello, Promooter of
the Council, who had discharged the same office in the Council under Julius
III. said that the course must be taken which had been used by Cardinal
Crescentio, who enjoined the Prelates silence when they did in the least
deviate from the Subject that had been proposed. But the Cardinal of Warmia did
not approve that conduct, and affirmed that God had not blessed the Council of
Julius because he approved not those violent methods of Cardinal Crescentio;
that after all, it was impossible to avoid contests in Councils. The Cardinal
of Mantua was of the same Judgment. So that they thought it sufficient to limit
every one to a certain time in speaking, and to make it short, that so they
might not have leisure to speak many things which might give disgust. The day
for holding the Session which was the sixteenth of July, drew nigh; and the
Germans who had consented that nothing should be moved in it about the
permission of the Cup, demanded now a great deal more, and urged that nothing
might be done at all, that so they might give time to their Bishops to come.
The Legates to prevent the disgrace of being so long without doing any thing,
would needs have the Chapters of Doctrine and Reformation which had been
minuted, to be published: And they must be read overagain in the Congregation,
before they could be published in the Session; which was not done without
debate. In the second Chapter of Doctrine these words were slipped in, that the
Church might as well take away the use of the Cup, as it had changed the form
of Baptism. Jacobo Gilberto de Nogueras Bishop of Aliphe a Spaniard starting up
said, that that was Blasphemy, because the Church had no Power to change the
form of Sacraments, nor to alter any thing that is essential to them, and that
in effect the form of Baptism had never been changed; that hint was taken
notice of, and the Clause left out. In the third Chapter it is said, that he
who is barred from the Cup is not deprived of any Grace necessary to Salvation,
and that therefore the Church has Power to retrench it. The Cardinal of Warmia
one of the Legates set on by some Divines observed as to that, that thence it
might be inferred that the Church may wholly take away the Eucharist, because
it is not necessary to Salvation, and desired some alteration in that Clause.
But Cardinal Simoneta being vexed at what had past in the Congregation told the
Cardinal of Warmia, that he had very imprudently suffered himself to be put
upon in making that Overture, and that if he would everlastingly give ear to
those Doctors accustomed to the cavillings of the School, nothing could be
concluded in the next Session. The Cardinal of Warmia submitted, excusing
himself in that what he had done was designed for a good end. In the
Congregation that was held the day before the Session, there happened some
Debates still, as in all the rest: but they were not very considerable, and
continued not long.

July, 16. July.
the day appointed for the Session; and the Legates, Ambassadors and Prelates
went to the Church with the usual Ceremonies. After Mass and Sermon the Decrees
were read; the Decree of Doctrine contained four Chapters, and as many Canons
with Anathema's, wherein was decided. 1. That believing Laics are not obliged
by command to communicate in both kinds. 2. That the Church had very good
ground for taking away the Cup, and that she has power to do so. 3. That he
who receives the bread alone, receives Jesus Christ entirely, and is not
deprived of any saving Grace. 4. That the Communion of Children is not
necessary.
In all this no notice was taken of the question, whether it was expedient to
allow the Cup to People that demanded it, because that point was reserved for
another Session, as they had promised the Germans, and was accordingly by a
Decree referred to the following Session, which is inserted in the Acts of the
Council. The nine Chapters of Reformation were also read. The first ordains,
that the Collation of Orders, the Dimissorial and Testimonial Letters, the Seal
and other things of that nature shall be given gratis, without so much as
taking any voluntary offering. The second, that no man shall receive Orders if
he have not a Benefice, or at least an Estate of his own to subsist on, which
Estate is not to be alienated without the consent of the Bishop. The third,
that in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, where there are no Distributions, or
where they are but small, the Bishop may convert a third of the Prebends into
Distributions. The fourth, that in great Parishes the Curates shall take the
assistance of a sufficient number of Vicars, and that such as are of too large
an extent shall be divided, and provided with new Rectours, if that be judged
necessary. The fifth, that Bishops may make Unions to perpetuity of Benefices
that have cure of Souls; when they are not singly sufficient for the
Subsistence of a Curate. The sixth, that Curates who are negligent in their
Duties, shall have Vicars appointed them whether they will or not, and that
part of the profits of the Living shall be allotted to these Vicars, and that
if the Curates continue in Scandal, they shall be deprived of their Benefices.
The seventh, that the Bishops as Delegates of the holy See, may annex the
Benefices of decayed and demolished Churches, to other Churches, and cause
Parochial Churches to be repaired. The eighth, that the Bishops also as
Delegates of the holy See, may visit Monasteries that are in Commendum, to
settle the observation of Discipline therein. And the last Chapter abolished
the Collectours or Alms-gatherers. These Collectours were a sort of men who
under Pretext of some pious work, as the building an Hospital for the Sick, the
bringing up of Orphans or the like, obtained Letters of Recommendation from the
Bishop, and with these Letters run over a whole Country to gather Collections
under the notion of Almsdeeds. Some of them also obtained a License from the
Pope, that they might not be hindered by the Bishops in their Collections. This
custom had degenerated into a horrid abuse, in that these Collectours treated
with the Court of Rome that part of the purchase should be brought thither, nay
and it was even specified in the Bull how much the Collectour was to keep for
himself, and how much he was to pay out; so publicly was that Corruption
tolerated. Of these gatherings a very small portion was employed in the
charitable Work which served for a Pretext, and the rest went into the Pocket
of the Collectours, and of those that had got them the Privilege. Many time
also they who obtained from Rome Patents to empower them to gather Charity,
farmed out their right to the off-scourings of the People, who, to make the
most of their Farm, by a thousand damnable Tricks frightened the People out of
their wits and money. They put themselves into strange Antic dresses, and
carried about with them bells and other tinckling instruments, preached up
counterfeit Indulgence, and denounced a thousand Evils to those who refused
them contributions, and these were the Collectours that were then abolished.
This was all the Product of eight whole Months labor, during which nothing was
to be seen but Couriers without intermission posting from Rome to Trent, and
from Trent to Rome; continual Treaties, Negotiations, and Conferences betwixt
the Ambassadors of all the Princes in Europe, and the Legates, not to mention
the infinite number of consultations and deliberations amongst the Prelates,
who were four times more in number, than they were in the two first
Convocations of the Council. These great Engines having wrought so little,
People could not forbear to apply the Proverb, Parturiunt montes, nascetur
ridiculus mus. The discontented and those professed Critics that stand in awe
of no Tribunal, made their observations, that there was no great need of
meeting at Trent to blast the Memory of the Fathers of the Church by deciding a
question concerning the Communion of young Children, in such a manner as made
the Judgment of the Ancients Heresy, who would have Infants immediately after
Baptism to receive the Communion: and particularly they could not but condemn
that Decree as absolutely unnecessary, because nowadays no body labored to
introduce the custom again. But the less censorious could not forbear to mark
a great want of Judgment in the second Canon, which under Pain of an Anathema
condemns those that will not believe that the Church had good reason to
retrench the Cup. All men wondered that that refusing of the Cup being looked
upon as a matter of Humane Right, since by a formal Decree of the Council it
was left in suspense, whether it should be restored or no, should
notwithstanding be decided under Anathema, as a matter of Divine Right that the
Church had reason in refusing it. Matters are prepared for the following
Session, and the Presidents are reconciled.


This Session being over, the Legates thought fit to prepare matters for the
next: but the Court of Rome judged it absolutely necessary to make the
Cardinals of Mantua and Simoneta friends, before they proceeded any farther.
For this reconciliation the Pope employed the Mediation of Cardinal Gonzaga
Uncle to the Cardinal of Mantua, and of Alexander Simoneta Brother to the
Cardinal of the same name: both of them wrote so effectually to their
Relations, that the peace was made, and the Sunday after the Session Simoneta
dined with the Cardinal of Mantua. They consulted together what means were to
be used to satisfy the Pope as to the Point of Residence, and the King of
Spain as to the Demand he made that the present Council might be declared a
Continuation of the former. But to extricate them out of these Difficulties a
Letter came very opportunely from the King of Spain, which ordered the Marquess
of Pescara not to insist any more for having the Continuation of the Council
declared, provided all words that might import that it was a new Council were
avoided. The same Letter gave orders to acquaint the Spanish Prelates, that the
King commended their Zeal in making so many instances for having Residence to
be declared of Divine Right, but that it was not convenient for the present
that that question should be decided. The Archbishop of Granada chief of that
Party was not very well satisfied with the Complement, but however it cooled
his heat a little.

The twentieth of July, a Congregation was held to begin the preparation of
matters to be decreed in the next Session: The Cardinal of Mantua made a Speech
to the Prelates to persuade them to speak their opinions calmly and in sew
words, telling them that the Presidents had made orders to prevent Confusion in
the Congregations of the Divines. These orders appointed the number of Divines
that were to speak, to wit, four for the Pope, three for every Ambassador, for
the Legates one of their Domestics, and for every Religious Order three who
should be chosen by their General: And to satisfy those who should not be
chosen to speak; it was ordered that they might communicate to the Legates
their mind in writing. But one order was made that would have thoroughly vexed
those Spokes-men, had it taken effect; and that was that no Divine should speak
above half an hour, and that he might be interrupted by the Presidents if he
spoke any longer. In the same Congregation the Legates proposed the matters
which were to be examined, and they resolved to handle the Sacrifice of the
Mass, The matter of the Sacrifice of the Mass is chosen.
and the abuses committed therein. The matter had been already examined in the
Council of Julius, and therefore the Cardinal Seripando, and the Archbishop of
Granada were of opinion that they might be short about that, and pass by a
great many considerations, since hardly any thing remained to be done, but to
review and publish what had been already minuted upon that subject, but their
advice was not followed. This head was divided into thirteen Articles, wherein
were comprehended all the controversies about that Subject, which are at this
day argued betwixt the Church of Rome and the Protestants: to wit, whether the
Mass be a Propitiatory Sacrifice, whether it derogates from the Sacrifice of
Jesus Christ, whether Jesus Christ by saying do this has appointed the
Sacrifice of his Body, whether private Masses be lawful and good, whether it
be lawful to celebrate Masses to the honor of Saints, whether the Ceremonies
of the Mass are good and holy, whether there be Errors in the Canon of the
Mass, whether the words of Consecration ought to be pronounced with a low
voice; with some other questions of less importance.

The French Ambassadors stayed at the Council with very little satisfaction,
for they saw that matters of highest moment were going to be handled without
expecting, the Prelates of their Nation; and so all things would be carried by
the Spaniards, some Portuguese and the Italians. They therefore wrote to the
King that he would hasten away the Bishops of France; that they durst not
hitherto propose any point of Reformation, because they had no body to second
them; that the Pope was absolute Master of the Council; that the door was
barred against all proposals tending to Reformation by the Clause proponentibus
Legatis: that the Court of Rome was Mistress of all Deliberations as well as
Propositions, by the great number of Pensionary Bishops that the Pope
entertained at the Council: and that the Spaniards who had shows some Zeal for
Reformation were cooled by orders which they had received from their Prince.
They concluded, that having considered all these things, there was but little
to be expected from that Council. Next day after that first Congregation, they
fell to work. Two Jesuits, Alphonso Salmerone and Francisco de La Torre the
Pope's Divines spoke first, and made nothing of the half hour Regulation; for
Salmerone took up the whole time of the Congregation. Next Morning the Jesuit
de La Torre did as much, and neither of them in those long discourses said any
thing that was remarkable: toward the end, the Jesuit Torre said that the
passage of St. John, if ye eat not my Flesh and drink not my Blood, ye can have
no life in you, could not be understood but of the Sacramental Communion. This
Divinity did not please the Legates, because the contrary seemed to have been
defined in the first Chapter of Doctrine of the former Session: but especially
because that interpretation inferred the necessity of the Cup; for if our
Savior in that place speak of Sacramental Manducation, and that without
drinking his Blood in a Sacramental way, it is impossible to have life, it is
clear that the Cup is necessary: for the Blood of Jesus Christ is not drunk
Sacramentally, but in taking the Cup. These were two turbulent Jesuits, they
had already made a clutter the very day of the last Session, about the first
Chapter of Doctrine; wherein they would have had it more expressly defined, that
Jesus Christ had not instituted the Sacrament in both kinds but only for the
officiating Priest, and not for the rest. And that displeased the Legates,
because it was ill timed. Besides that, the Jesuit de La Torre in particular
was not well liked of by Cardinal Simoneta, for all he was a Jesuit and the
Pope's Divine, because he had written against Catarino for the Divine Right of
Residence. And in fine, the Legates took it very ill that they had so
insolently violated the half hour Regulation; so that they resolved among
themselves to curb that Sauciness for the future.

Great Debates about the Question whether Jesus Christ offered himself when he
instituted the Eucharist.
When the Examination of the Points came to the Vote, all the Divines agreed to
condemn the opinions of the Protestants, and enlarged very much in proving the
Mass to be a true Sacrifice. They alleged all the Arguments that are used at
this day: Melchizedeck's Sacrifice of Bread and Wine, the Type of the Paschal
Lamb which represented the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, the pure oblation spoken
of in the Prophecy of Malachi, and all the other Passages that are made use of
for that purpose. But a great Debate arose upon occasion of this Argument: one
of the Disputants affirmed that Jesus Christ was Sacrificed in the Institution
of the Eucharist, and that afterward he had said, do this, that is to say,
do this that I have done, whence it was manifest, said he, that our Lord
commanded us to sacrifice, and therefore that the Mass was a Sacrifice. There
were a great many others who maintained the contrary, and that our Savior was
not then sacrificed. This Question, whether our Savior did sacrifice himself
in the first Eucharist, was not set down among the Points that were to be
examined, but Providence permitted it to be occasionally started; and nothing
could happen more luckily to show what till then the Sentiment of the Roman
Church was concerning the nature of the Mass. No man of common Sense ought to
doubt but that our Lord by these words, do this in remembrance of me, gave no
other Command to his Disciples, but to do precisely that which he himself had
done; for it is evident that these words, do this, signify, do that which I
have just now done, so that it is a matter of the highest consequence to know
what it was that Jesus Christ did, that is to say, whether he sacrificed
himself in the institution of his Supper; for if he did not sacrifice himself,
neither did he command that he should be sacrificed. They who held that Jesus
Christ sacrificed himself, maintained that it was absolutely necessary to
assert that truth, because the chief Argument of Heretics against the
Sacrifice of the Mass, was that Jesus Christ did not sacrifice himself in the
Eucharist. But the opposite Party proved by irrefragable Arguments that our
Savior could not have sacrificed himself in the Eucharist. They affirmed that
the Mass is a Sacrifice of Commemoration of the Sacrifice on the Cross, that
Jesus Christ was not as yet sacrificed on the Cross, when he instituted the
Eucharist, and that so he could not make a Commemorative Sacrifice of that
which was not as yet come to pass. They farther urged that neither the Canon of
the Mass, nor the Scripture, nor the Fathers spoke any thing of our Lord's
having sacrificed himself. But more particularly they said, that either the
Sacrifice of our Lord in the Eucharist was Propitiatory or not; if it was
Propitiatory, that then the Sacrifice of the Cross was needless, because the
Sins of Mankind were expiated by the Sacrifice of the Eucharist: and that if
that was not Propitiatory, neither can this be, since it is the same that our
Savior offered.

In the Congregation of the twenty fourth of July, it came to the turn of the
Divines of the King of Portugal to speak. One of them named Ataide took a
Medium to prove the Sacrifice of the Mass, Ataide a Portuguese Divine
overthrows all the Arguments drawn by the others from Scripture for the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and departs.
which surprised many, for he overthrew all the Arguments taken from Scripture:
in examining the several Passages he evidently demonstrated, that nothing could
be concluded from them to prove that the Mass was a Sacrifice; he resumed also
all the reasons of the Protestants, and set them off in their full force, and,
in fine, concluded that the Sacrifice of the Mass was built upon no other
Foundation but Tradition* It may easily be imagined how this discourse was
taken: And therefore James Paiva Andradius a Portuguese Divine also did what
lay in his Power to make amends for that fault; he recapitulated all the
Protestant Arguments that were proposed by Ataide, and answered them, assuring
the Council that his Colleague had only proposed them, with design to have them
refuted. The Ambassadors and Portuguese Prelates endeavored likewise to
justify him to the Legates: Nevertheless within a few days after he left
Trent, and it is no hard matter to guess at the reason of it. Amongst the last
Divines that spoke was Antonino Da Valtellina a Jacobin, who was not of opinion
that the Council should confirm by Decree the Ceremonies of the Roman Mass, and
enlarged much to prove that there had been always great Diversities of
Ceremonies in the Church. For a proof of th^^ he instanced the Ambrosian, the
Gregorian and Roman Orders, which are Rituals differing one from another; the
different Liturgies of St. James, of St. Mark, and of St. Chrysostom. He
mentioned also the Mozarabick Service heretofore in use in Spain, into which
Horses and Moresk dancing were brought in as Ceremonies signifying great
Mysteries. Gregory VII. abolished that Service, but even at the time of the
Council of Trent it was still in use on certain days, and in some certain
places of Spain. He therefore concluded that if the Roman Ceremonies were
established by Decree, it was to condemn those Ancient Churches, who used not
all those Ceremonies. This discourse highly offended the Council; but the
Bishop of the five Churches seconded him, and affirmed that they who condemned
what he said, were ignorant. The truth is, it was his concern to have that
opinion pass, that so under Pretext of Uniformity of Ceremonies, he might not
be denied that which he had demanded for Germany, I mean that the Germans might
not be obliged to follow the Ceremonies of the Roman Church, particularly the
want of the Cup, and the use of the Latin tongue in Divine Service.

When the Congregations of Divines had made an end, the Bishops assembled for
forming the Decrees; but the same Difficulties that were started amongst the
Divines, arose likewise in the Congregations of the Prolates. Martin Perez.
Bishop of Segovia who had been in the Council which was held under Julius, was
of opinion that nothing was to be done; but only to (...) what was then
digested concerning that controversy. Cardinal Seripando was not of that mind;
but alleged that the Canons and Decrees which had been framed at that time
might expose the Doctrine of the Church to calumny, and might give advantage to
Heretics; because they were long instructions which give occasion to long
refutations, and against which the Heretics find always means to make
troublesome exceptions: that to correct what had been done, was not the way,
but that the Council must set to work a fresh to adjust the matters; which
opinion was followed. They therefore fell to the making of new Decrees, but
they found it no easy task to pitch upon the reasons that ought to be inserted
in the Decree for confirming the Sacrifice of the Mass, some approving one
reason, and others rejecting it. Cardinal Seripando one of the Legates, and the
Archbishop of Granada were on their side who said that it ought not to be put
into the Decree that Jesus Christ sacrificed in the first Eucharist. And on the
other hand, the Cardinal of Warmia was for them who would have that Clause to
be inserted; and this caused a great deal of Debate, as we shall see hereafter.

In the Congregation of the thirteenth of August, the Proxies of the Bishops of
Ratisbonne and Basil were received. The City of Basil was reformed and owned
not their Bishop, giving him only the Title of Bishop of Porentruto; but the
Council strove to do him the greater honor, that they might comfort him for
the loss of his Bishopric. And this being done, they fell again upon the point
of the Sacrifice of the Mass. The Archbishop of Lanciano was of opinion that
for ending all differences they should pass by the Chapters of Doctrine, and
only make Canons with Anathema's, as the Council had already done concerning
the Points of Original sin, the Sacraments in general, and the Sacrament of
Baptism. Ottaviano Preconio Archibishop of Palermo speaking next opposed what
had been said, showing that they ought not to omit the Declaration of the
Doctrine of the Church, nor the reasons which confirm it, for fear of
Heretics, because what course soever were taken, they would never be quiet;
but that the Catholics ought to be instructed. That point was canvassed for
several days; and at length it was concluded to proceed as they had begun, and
to make Chapters of Doctrine.

The Controversy of Restdence is revived.
Whilst these Disputes about the Sacrifice of the Mass were on foot, the
Champions for the Divine Right of Residence were not asleep: they resolved to
have another tug at it, and began again with fresh instances to urge the
performance of the promise that had been made them of deciding that
controversy, and pronouncing sentence thereupon. The Legates followed the
instructions they had received from Rome by the Archbishop of Lanciano, which
were, not to oppose the Spaniards openly, but slyly to pack Votes and cast them
by Plurality. They labored therefore under hand to draw Bishops over to their
side, that there might no more mention be made of Residence. The Italians were
easily corrupted, but the Spaniards united more closely to oppose that
caballing, and could by no means be gained. They wrote to the King of Spain an
answer to the Letter which he had sent them at the solicitation of the Marquess
of Pescara. They complained of the Pope's procedure in making so great
oppositions against the decision of the Point of Residence. They gave him to
understand that the Council was not free, that it was enslaved by the Legates
and Pensionary Bishops, and prayed his Majesty to consult wise men about the
matter, who would advise him without doubt, to protect the Catholic opinion of
the Divine Right of Residence. The Legates now found that no ground was to be
gained upon the Spaniards, since neither the Letter of their Prince, nor all
the submissions that had been used to gain them, could work any effect upon
them. They therefore resolved to take the surest course they could: for that
end they sent a Copy of the Letter which the King of Spain had written to the
Marquess of Pescara, to the Cardinal of Ferrara Legate in France, that he might
procure the like from the King of France to his Ambassadors, to hinder the
French from joining with the Spaniards. And at the same time they wrote to the
King of Spain that the Archbishop of Granada and the Bishop of Segovia the two
leading men of the Party for Residence, who seemed so untractable in a Point
that his Catholic Majesty did not at all concern himself in, had promised
their Suffrages to the Bishop of the sive Churches for allowing the Cup to the
Germans, contrary to the intentions and sentiments of their King.

On the other hand the Pope used all his endeavors to secure himself from any
damage that he might be in danger of from the Council; he went on to raise
Soldiers, he negotiated a League betwixt the Italian Princes and himself; he
wrote to his Legates to stifle the matter of Residence, and that if after all,
they could not hinder the prosecution of it, they should so bring it about that
the affair might be referred to him, and above all things that they should
labor to put a period to the Council before the French came, and before the
sitting of the next Diet in Germany, wherein he foresaw that Ferdinand to
obtain the favor of the Protestants might engage to make new Proposals to the
Council of more dangerous consequence than the former. As the Pope on the one
hand intended speedily to put an end to the Council, so on the other hand, the
French Ambassadors made it their business to prolong it, that their Prelates
might have time to come* And therefore having by word of mouth made several
instances to that purpose, they gave in a Memorial wherein they represented the
necessity of expecting the French Prelates, that so the Council might be
reckoned General, and be received in France. They promised that they should
arrive about the end of September at farthest, and desired that the Session
might be put off. But the Legates made answer, that that could not be; that
they had been expected six months already, and that the other Prelates suffered
too much by that delay. The French were vexed at that answer, and desired leave
to make their Proposals to the Council assembled in Congregation. The Legates
refused it, saying that it was ordered that the Ambassadors should treat only
with the Legates, and never speak in public but the day of their reception.
And this renewed the grievances about the Bondage of the Council. The Spaniards
joined with the French, and said that they must see that Decree that was so
much talked of, which hindered Ambassadors from speaking in Council: that if
there were any such, yet after all, it ought not to be regarded, since it was
contrary to the practice of all the ancient Councils. The King of France gave
also orders to his Ambassador at Rome to press the Pope to enjoin the Council
to stay for his Prelates. The Pope referred himself to his Legates, the Legates
remitted it to the Council; and it was not permitted to speak to this Council,
to which all things were referred. Lansac observed very well, that that was a
fooling with his Master, and with the World And thus, notwithstanding all the
endeavors that were made for obtaining a delay, they fell to work again the
Eleventh of August to review the matter of the Sacrifice of the Mass, in order
to the Decrees, and stuck again at the Question, whether it ought to be put
into the Decree that Jesus Christ was sacrificed in the Eucharist. The Assembly
was divided into two parts which were for a long time equal.

James Lainez General of the Jesuits arrived the fourteenth of August, and
created no small trouble to the Council, because he would not be satisfied with
the place that was assigned him after all the other Generals of Orders, upon
Pretext, that the Society is an Order of Regular Priests, and that Regular
Priests ought to go before the Monks. The Jesuits Salmeron, and La Torre used
all their endeavors to procure him the Precedence. However his name was set
down after all the other Generals of Orders. At the same time Pibrac one of the
French Ambassadors left Trent, and his departure gave the Legates a great deal
of Jealousy, who were afraid lest some thing might be done in France against
the interests of the Pope and Council. Cardinal Simoneta, one of the Legates,
ordered one of his Confidents to insinuate himself cunningly into Lansac, and
get out of him, what the meaning of that Journey was. Lansac answered that
Pibrac was gone about his own affairs, but that there was no doubt, but that he
would complain of a Council where matters went so ill.

Means used to cause it to be defined that our Lord Jesus Christ sacrificed
himself in the Eucharist.
Congregations were continued until the Eighteenth of August, about the
Sacrifice of the Mass, the question still depending, if Jesus Christ was
offered up in Sacrifice in the first Eucharist. Salmeron the Jesuit held the
affirmative, and labored tooth and nail to get his opinion ratified. He
prevailed with the Cardinal Legate of Warmia to do things on that occasion
that might be called violent Actions. This Jesuit went from house to house to
solicit Votes, making promises to some, and threatening others; which was done
so publicly, and in so importunate a manner, that in the Congregation of the
Eighteenth of August the Bishops of Chioza and Veglia complained of it, and
this last spoke against the opinion of Salmeron with so much force, and backed
his Sentiment with so many reasons, that he brought over almost all the
Assembly to his Judgment, which was, that it ought not to be said in the Decree
that our Savior sacrificed himself when he instituted the Eucharist. The same
day the Archbishop of Prague, who went from Trent some days before, came back
with Letters from the Emperor to the Legates, wherein he prayed them, that
they would put off the handling the Point of the Sacrifice of the Mass until
the Diet of Germany was over, and that in the next Session they would discuss
the matter of the Cup, which the Germans desired. The first Point was refused,
because it must needs be dispatched whatever came on it; but they granted the
second, because the Pope being solicited by the Emperor had written to his
Legates, that they should treat of the matter of the Cup to satisfy the
Germans, and to clear business as fast as they could. Lainez General of the
Jesuits was the last that spoke to the Question, to wit, whether our Savior
was sacrificed in the Eucharist; and he took up the whole time of a
Congregation maintaining the affirmative. But notwithstanding all these long
Harangues and Canvassings, the opinions were still almost equal. At length the
Cardinal of Warmia carried the day, and the Legates resolved that it should be
expressed that Jesus Christ was offered in the Eucharist, but that the words,
in Propitiatory Sacrifice, should be left out, and only mentioned that the
Lord was sacrificed. So that the Difficulty was not removed; for the
Protestants still demanded, was Jesus Christ offered in Propitiatory Sacrifice
in the Eucharist or no? if the Sacrifice was not Propitiatory; then that of the
Mass is not, for the Lord said do this, do that which I have now done: if it
be Propitiatory, then the Sacrifice of the Cross was not, since that the
Propitiation being made in the Eucharist, the Sacrifice of the Cross had
nothing to do. It is also observable that their opinion was not condemned who
affirmed that neither the Scripture, the Canon of the Mass nor the Fathers said
any thing that Jesus Christ sacrificed himself. So that it is certain that it
was the current opinion before the Council of Trent, that the first Eucharist
was not a Sacrifice, and that it was only the fear of the consequences that
the Protestants might draw from thence which obliged the Council to change that
opinion.

Afterward the Bishop of the five Churches the Emperor's Ambassador spoke,
The restoring of the Cup to the Germans as moved.
and in name of his Master represented the necessity of restoring the Cup in
Germany, without which it would be impossible to keep that People united to the
Church, and prevent others from falling off from it. He said that if the
dismembring the States of the Empire were suffered, there could be no
resistance made against the Turks, who continually lay hovering over it. When
he had spoken he presented a Memorial, wherein he declared the manner how he
desired that matter might be managed; but a murmurring of contradiction
arising, the Assembly was thereupon dismissed. In the Congregation of the third
of September the French Ambassadors renewed their instances for a delay of the
Session four or five Weeks longer; but the Legates had lately received Letters
from Cardinal Ferrara Legate in France, which informed them that the Cardinal
of Lorrain with the French Bishops and twenty Parisian Doctors were to come;
and, as other Letters imported, that their design was to handle the Superiority
of a Council over the Pope, and that the Cardinal of Lorrain intended to take
from the College of Cardinals the power of choosing the Pope. This news allarmed
the Legates, and made them desire that the Council might be ended before the
coming of that Company; and therefore they were far from granting the French
Ambassadors the delay which they demanded. So it was refused, and the Legates
disguising the true reasons of it, gave the Ambassadors the same answer that
they had had before, but Lansac not satisfied with that, complained only of
the little regard that was had to the Demands of his Master. In opposition to
the French a writing went about at that time, wherein it was asserted that the
Council could not long subsist at Trent, because in the Month of September
there would be a want of Provisions there. But the true reasons why they would
grant no delay was imprudently enough thrown out, for, said they, if we must
wait for the French and Germans, the Council will not only be free, but wholly
Libertine.

The Legates therefore made all the haste they could in forming the Decrees;
and that of the Sacrifice of the Mass being in a pretty considerable
forwardness, they proposed the matter of the Cup, whether or not it might be
granted to the Germans. There were three opinions as to that, one that it
should in no manner of way be granted, nor upon any conditions; another that it
might be granted under certain conditions; and that was the opinion of fifty of
the best Heads of the Council, who were for commissionating men upon the
places, to judge of the necessity, and upon what conditions it might be proper
to grant it according to the different dispositions of the people. The third
opinion was, that the matter should be referred to the Pope; some that he might
absolutely refuse or grant it, and others that he might allow it according to
his Prudence. All the Spaniards were inflexibly for refusing the Cup, for fear
lest it being granted to some Nations, it might occasion commotions in the
Low Countries, and the Territories which the King of Spain had in Italy, for
obtaining the same privilege their neighbors enjoyed. The Venetian Prelates
fet on by their Ambassadors were for the refusal, upon the same account of
neighborhood to Germany. The Archbishop of Granada, who, though a Spaniard had
engaged himself to the Bishop of the five Churches to give his suffrage for the
Cup, durst neither declare himself openly to be against what he had promised,
nor yet give his Vote contrary to the will and interests of his King. So that
he went about the bush, and concluded that it was an affair that could not be
decided that Session, because the decision of it depended on several
circumstances of place, and the humors of the People. He nevertheless
confessed that the stress of the matter was no more but a ceremony which might
be changed by restoring the Cup to the People, if the union of the Church
required it. Gasparo de Casal Bishop of Liria, though a Spaniard also, gave his
Vote for the concession of the Cup, and some Portuguese Bishops favored the
Germans demand; amongst others Don Bartholome Archbishop of Bragansa, and the
Bishop of Conimbre; but this last added his reasons, that they to whom the Cup
was allowed should abjure Heresy; that they should profess the belief of the
Real Presence and the Concomitance, that they should banish Heretical
Preachers, that they should not keep the Chalice, and that it should not be
carried to the Sick; that that concession should not be made openly in Council,
but by the Pope's Legates being upon the place, that so it might be done with
less show and scandal. It came to the Bishop of the five Churches turn again to
speak as a Prelate, he refuted all that had been said against the concession of
the Cup. He showed that the Council of Basil had retained the Bohemians in the
communion of the Church, only by granting them the Cup. He affirmed that the
Calixtins of Bohemia communicating in both kinds, were still very good
Catholics, that they had lately acknowledged the Archbishop of Prague for
their Superior, and prayed him to ordain their Priests. The last Congregation
that was held upon that Subject was on the fifth of September, The Prev freely
Pope's rity. happen himth
wherein the Abbot of Preval a Genoese spoke against those who demanded the
Cup, and alleged that the Council of Basil were so far from granting the Cup,
that after a consultation of several days they concluded, that it ought to be
refused* And laying hold on that occasion he spoke so advantagiously of the
Council of Basil, that the Legates and Slaves of the Court of Rome took great
umbrage at it: it was not doubted but that he was one of those, whose seditious
principles, as they called them, tended to subject the Pope to a Council. The
Legates were confirmed in their thoughts, because this Abbot was seen to go
often to the French Ambassadors; and it was known that he pressed them to
hasten the coming of their Prelates; nay in some former Congregations speaking
of the Sacrifice of the Mass he had said by the bye, that he doubted whether
the Pope was above a Council or not, and had promised to speak his mind freely
as to that, when the question came to be handled. The Legates thought it not
fit that such a man should stay in the Council; and therefore they sought an
opportunity to make his General recall him upon some plausible pretext. But
there was no need of that, for he was used in such a manner as vexed him into a
fit of sickness, whereof he died the six and twentieth of November following.

The Prelates gave their opinions at large concerning the demand of the
Germans; but besides what we have mentioned, there was not any thing
considerable in all they said; except in the discourse of Peter Danez Bishop of
Lavaur, who spoke with much freedom against those who would refer the matter to
the Pope. He said that the Pope had referred the affair to the Council, and
that for the Council to send it back again to the Pope, was to play at fast and
loose; that after all, he could not tell under what Character they considered
the Pope, in remitting the business to him, whether as Superior or Inferior
to the Council; that the Pope must be obliged to act very differently,
according to these different Characters; and that therefore it was necessary in
the first place to discuss the question of the Superiority of a Council over
the Pope. This discourse netled the Pope's Party; and amongst so many different
opinions the Legates were exceedingly perplexed. They seemed to be serious in
their intentions to satisfy the Emperor about the concession of the Cup; but
they could not find means to do it, because of the multitude of opposers. So
that they resolved at length, to get out of the briars by referring the matter
to the Pope, and cunningly brought about part of the Bishops who were against
the concession of the Cup, and amongst others the Venetians, to consent to it.
The matter of the Cup is referred to the Pope.
The Bishop of the five Churches yielded also; but he desired that a Decree of
Reference should be made amongst the Acts, and that it should be specified in
that Decree, that the Council had thought it convenient to restore the Cup, and
that they referred it to the Holy Father to determine to whom, and upon what
conditions it ought to be done. He obtained indeed a Decree of Reference, but
not that it should be inserted in it that the Council judged it convenient to
restore the Cup. In fine, he suffered himself to be persuaded to desist his
Instances, at least till such time as the Heats were a little over.

And this affair being in some measure adjusted, they set about the finishing
of the Decree of the Mass. The Jesuits Lainez, Salmeron and de la Torre, by
means of the Cardinal of Warmia one of the Presidents, whom they had gained to
their opinion, started new difficulties and made fresh instances, that it might
be expressed in the Decree not only that Jesus Christ was offered, but that he
was offered in Propitiatory Sacrifice. There was a world of trouble to make
them be quiet; and the difficulties that at every turn they started, had almost
taken away all hopes that the Session could be held on the day prefixed. But, at
length, in the Congregation of the seventh of November, the Decree was agreed
on in the form that it stands in at present: most part consented to it; but the
Archbishop of Granada was none of that number; for he persisted in his opinion,
that it should not be said that our Savior offered himself in Sacrifice when
he instituted the Eucharist. After that, were proposed ten Articles of
Reformation concerning Abuses in the Mass, and eleven others about several
matters, all of them of very little importance; which obliged the Bishop of
Philadelphia, Grievances of the Bishops that the Council is taken up about
Trifles.
John Suarez Bishop of Conimbre, the Bishop of Paris, the Bishop of Segovia,
and the Bishop of Oreate in Spain, to complain, and say that the Council was
taken up about trifles, that Germany, France, and all Europe had for an hundred
and fifty years desired a Reformation of the Church, in the Head and in the
Members; that they ought to have begun with the Pope, proceeded to the
Cardinals and Bishops, and that the rest would have been easily done afterward;
but that what was now done was merely a Grievance to Catholics, and an
occasion of Laughter to the Heretics. The Bishop of Oreate spoke freely, that
a Declaration ought to be made that the Decrees of a General Council obliged
the Head as well as the Members. That saying fell not to the ground, for
presently there was a great muttering among the Pope's Party, and the Bishop
thought it convenient to explain himself, and to say, that his meaning was that
the Decrees ought to have a Directive but not a Coactive Power in regard of the
Head of the Church.

There were not now above three or four days to the sitting of the Session, and
yet a great deal of business to be done: particularly the important point about
the Concession of the Cup was not as yet fully adjusted, and withal the French
Ambassadors were still urging a delay of the Session. The French Ambassador
at Rome did so instantly press it, that the Pope was fain to tell him that he
referred it wholly to the Council, that it was the business of the Fathers, and
that it was no wonder if they refused delays; but that he was ready to write to
Trent, that for his own part, he was content that they should condescend to the
delay which the French demanded. In effect he did write much to this purpose.
But Cardinal Simoneta, who knew more of the Pope's mind than was contained in
the Letter, stood firm against a Prorogation, and carried it: for he was fully
satisfied that the design of the Court of Rome was to put an end to the Council
speedily, and that the Pope had only written that Letter to ease himself of
the importunities of the Ambassador, and to load the Legates with the
displeasure of the French. When it was once resolved that the Session should
not be Prorogued, the Chapters about the abuses in the Mass, and the eleven
Articles of Reformation were quickly dispatched; nor did they find so much
difficulty as they imagined, concerning the matter of the Cup. The Legates drew
up the Decree of Reference, which imported that the affair was referred to the
Pope, that with the advice and consent of the Council his Holiness might do
therein what he should judge expedient. Because those words seemed to intimate
that the Council consented, that the Pope should restore the Cup to some
People, if he thought fit, all who were for the refusing of it, opposed the
passing of that Clause, and the Legates as being out of humor wholly abandoned
the matter. But the Emperor's Ambassadors who desired that upon any terms the
Cause should be referred to the Pope, because they were confident of obtaining
from him what they desired, pressed the Legates to leave out the Clause that
was excepted against, and to propose the Decree a second time. The Legates
would willingly have done it, but because of the short time that remained, they
foresaw that if that affair were stated again, it would still furnish new
matter of Debate, and that so the Session must of necessity be put off. They
therefore were positive not to speak a word of that Decree; but the
Ambassadors protested, that they would no more appear in any Congregation, or
Session, since they used the Emperor with so much contempt, until they had
informed him of all that had past, and received new Instructions from him. This
Protestation obliged the Legates once more to propose the Decree of Reference
with the Amendments that had been made in it. And at length the matter was
carried by Plurality of Votes, though opposed by all that stood for the
absolute refusal of the Cup. And thus all things are now in a readiness for the
Session which was to be held the morrow after.

The Germans were indeed somewhat satisfied in that they had carried this
Point, but on the other hand they were extremely displeased that there had been
so little regard had to the Emperor's Instances for putting off the matter of
the Mass till after the Diet of the Empire; in which he hoped to obtain
something of the Protestants. And therefore seeing all things in a readiness
for the Session, they assembled together into their house the French and all
the other Ambassadors of Princes, except the Ambassadors of Venice and
Florence who refused to come: In which Assembly the Bishop of the five Churches
made a long Speech, and told them that hitherto the Council had been amused
with matters of little Importance, that their whole business had been to make
Decisions which were good for nothing but to exasperate the Protestants,
neglecting the necessary work of a good Reformation; that all things were now
in a readiness for the next Session; and no way left to prevent it; but that it
behoved them at least to take care for the future, that the Legates might not
continue to do the same, that therefore it was incumbent on them so to order
Affairs, that in the subsequent Session the Point of the Sacraments, or any
other matter of Doctrine, should not be handled, but only the Reformation
which all Europe so passionately desired. The Secretary of the Marquess of
Pescara the Spanish Ambassador opposed this opinion; for he feared that if the
method of proceeding, which had been hitherto used, came to be altered, it
might give occasion to think that the Council was a new Council, and do a
prejudice to the King his Master's design who intended to oblige the Fathers
before their separation to declare, that this Council was a Continuation of the
former: so that Doctrine and Reformation having been always treated of jointly,
he would not consent that the Council should be moved to omit the matters of
Doctrine, and apply themselves only to Reformation. And for this reason he
withdrew, as also the Ambassadors of Portugal and the Switzers did. The rest
remained, and deputed Lansac the French Ambassador to propose the matter in
name of them all. He made the Proposal to the Legates much to the same effect
as has been mentioned, but in softer terms, that he might give them no cause
of offense. The Legates answered very civilly that it was the design of the
Council to settle a good Reformation, that what was already done was nothing to
what they intended to do; but that it was impossible to alter the method which
had been hitherto observed in treating of Doctrine and Reformation jointly;
that it was in like manner impossible to put off the next Session, because all
the Fathers were weary of Trent, and it was not reasonable to detain them and
do nothing. The Ambassadors made no reply; seeing they were just going to the
last Congregation to adjust the Decrees. In that Congregation the Archbishop of
Granada made fresh instances for a Prorogation of the Session, but all in vain;
the Decrees were read again, and new Debates, as was usual began to be started
about the Form, but the Legates found ways to keep all things in quiet.

17. September 1562.
And thus in spite of all opposition, the two and twentieth Session was held
the seventeenth of September. The usual Ceremonies past; and the Bishop of
Vintimiglia made a long Harangue in praise of the Pope. After that a Letter
from Cardinal Amulio, Protector of the Oriental Nations, was read in the
Assembly. This Letter informed the Council that one Abdissi Patriarch of Muzal
was come to render homage to the Pope, had owned him for his Sovereign, and had
received from him the Pallium, and Confirmation in his Patriarchship; that he
had assured his Holiness that the Religion of his People was in all things
agreeable to that of the Roman Church, that it used the same Ceremonies, and
that they had Books as old as the days of the Apostles At length he concluded
that the People under the Jurisdiction of that Prelate, were so numerous, that
they reached beyond the River of Ganges, and that they were partly under the
Dominion of the Turk and Sophie of Persia, and partly under the King of
Portugal. At this last word the Portugal Ambassador starred up, and in his
Master's name protested that the Oriental Bishops subjects to his Master,
acknowledged to Patriarch for their Superior. Afterward they read the
Confession of Faith of that Patriarch, and the Letter which he wrote to the
Council, wherein he excused himself that he could not be there; because of the
great Journey he had already made, and was still to make; but promised to
submit to all that should be Decreed therein. The Protestation of the Portugal
Ambassador made the truth of this story to be much doubted. The Council came
now to their Synodal Actions, and first was read the Decree of Doctrine
containing nine Chapters, and as many Canons with Anathema's, establishing the
necessity of a perpetual Sacrifice, and the truth of the Sacrifice of the Mass,
as being really Propitiatory. They confirmed the Ceremonies of that Sacrifice,
the Purity of the Canon of the Mass, the use of the Latin Tongue in the
celebration of that Sacrifice, the Masses without Communicants, the Masses in
honor of the Saints, and the mingling of Water with the Wine. To this Decree
the Fathers gave their consent by a Placet, except two or three and twenty, who
persisted to oppose that Clause which says, that Jesus Christ offered up
himself in Sacrifice in the first Eucharist. The Archbishop of Granada, the
chief of those who disliked that Clause, came not to the Session, that he might
not have the trouble to see a Doctrine pass for an Article of Faith, which, in
his opinion, was so repugnant to Truth. But the Legates sent thrice for him,
and at last forced him to come. This constraint put him into such a fret, that
he had a good mind to renew his opposition, that he might be revenged for the
Contempt that was put upon him, in undervaluing his opinion: and it is somewhat
strange if he and so many Prelates who brought along with them a spirit of
contradiction even to the Session, should all of a sudden lay it aside, and
cloth themselves with a spirit of humility and submission. So that it is clear
that these Bishops, The Bishops apparently ill satisfied with the Infallibility
of the Council.
most of them Spaniards and strict Catholics, were notwithstanding very ill
satisfied with the Infallibility of the Council. Immediately after, the Bishop
who did officiate, read the Decree of Reformation against the Abuses committed
in the Mass; which prohibited, all treating and bargaining for saying of
Masses; the suffering of vagabond Priests who were unknown or notoriously
infamous to celebrate; the saying of Mass in private houses; to be present at
Service in an undecent habit; the using of lascivious Music in singing of
Mass; the making of noise, speaking or walking in time of Service; the
celebrating of Mass out of the hours appointed for it; the celebrating with
unusual Ceremonies; the having a certain limited number of Candles at Mass; and
for conclusion it contained an exhortation to the People to repair to Mass in
their own Parish Churches, at least on Holy days and Sundays. In the next place
the Decree of general Reformation was read, consisting of eleven Chapters,
containing hardly any thing worth the naming: only some petty Regulations to
hinder undeserving Persons from being promoted to Bishoprics. It is true that
in some places the Decree seems to enlarge the Power of Bishops, allowing them
the Privilege to enquire into the nature of Dispensations, to wit, whether they
have not been obtained by surreption or obreption, stealth or wheadling; to
visit Hospitals, Colleges, Fraternities, Public Stocks for rellef of the Poor,
and to have the direction and oversight of all Pious Houses and Foundations;
but still with this Clause of Limitation, as Delegates of the Holy See. The
eleventh Chapter decrees, that whosoever shall seize the Goods of Churches,
Benefices, or public Stocks of Charity, let him be King or Emperor, shall be
excommunicated, until he have made restitution, and that he may not be
absolved but by the Pope. Lastly, the Decree of referring the matter of the Cup
to the Pope was read; and seeing it was a Decree that related to a Point of
Faith, it ought in course to have come after the Decree of the Mass; but it was
otherways, because they could not get votes enough to make it pass as a Point
of Doctrine; it was an order of the Council that no Point of Doctrine could be
established, if a considerable Party opposed it, though it had been carried by
Plurality of Votes; but that some casting Votes were sufficient for a Point of
Reformation: And the Legates who were resolved upon any terms, that the matter
of the Cup should be referred to the Pope, finding that they could not have
Votes enough to make it pass for a Point of Doctrine, thought it the best way
to propose it as a matter of Reformation; and therefore it is placed in the
Acts amongst the Chapters of Reformation. This Maxim that we have been
speaking of, that a Point of Doctrine is not to be looked upon as decided, when
a considerable Party oppose the Decision, occasioned some Debates and Scruples,
as to that Clause of the Decree, which asserts that Jesus Christ offered
himself in the Eucharist, because it had been contradicted by a considerable
Party; for though there were but three and twenty Prelates that opposed it in
the Session, yet it had been refuted by a great many in the Congregations, and
not one of them had changed his opinion.

The Decrees of this Session gave but small content to any: the German
Ambassadors, indeed, were pretty well pleased, that the Affair of the Cup was
remitted to the Pope; but the Emperor himself was not at all satisfied with
it, because his great aim was to please the German People, who had no liking to
the Pope's Jurisdiction. They would have much rather accepted a favor from the
Council, a name they did not quarrel with, than from the Pope, whom they could
not endure. But the People were far more dissatisfied; for besides the
Emperor's reason, they thought they were abused, in being removed from one
Judicature to another, seeing the Pope had referred the matter to the Council,
and that the Council sent it back again to the Pope. It was taken very ill also
that in the Decree of Reformation, the Power of Bishops was extended to Pious
Foundations, which had been settled by Laymen, with intention that they should
be likewise governed by Laics. They said, that that was the way whereby the
Clergy had appropriated to themselves the Revenues of Colleges, Hospitals, and
Pious Foundations; when under pretext of being the Administratours, they made
themselves absolute Masters of them. Nowadays, cried they, instead of
restoring to Colleges and Hospitals what the Churchmen have taken from them,
they put into their hands what remains, and what they have not as yet invaded.
The Parliament of Paris especially, according to its Maxims, looked upon that
as an encroachment upon the Civil Jurisdiction; because the Clergy meddled with
and disposed of the Goods of Seculars. In the same manner they censured the
Decree, that gives Bishops power over last Wills and Testaments: for that
Decree ordains that Alterations made in Wills by permission obtained from Rome
is not to take effect, until the Bishop have taken Cognizance, whether or not
the permission has been obtained by fraud and upon false information. They
thought Wills to be matters of mere Civil right, which the Clergy ought not to
meddle in.

The Pope on the other hand was extremely well satisfied with the Actions of
this Session, and, indeed, he could not otherwise choose; since nothing had been
done there, but according to his instructions and the Orders that the
Presidents had punctually observed, in spite of the opposition of all those
who favored not his interests. He took the surest measures he could for the
future that matters might run in the same Chanel. He feared the Cardinal of
Lorrain, knowing him to be a man of vast designs, and dreaded the coming of the
French, who hold Maxims so contrary to his Authority. That Assembly of
Ambassadors, who met at the House of the Imperialists, gave him a great deal
of Jealousy; but he resolved to send a fresh supply of Italian Bishops to
overpower the Tramontani by number as well as by caballing: And in the mean
time sent very civil Complements to the Secretary of the Marquess of Pescara,
to the Portugal, Suisse, Venetian and Florentine Ambassadors, for the Zeal and
Fidelity they had expressed to the Holy See; which were not lost, for by these
Civilities he engaged them more and more to his Interests.

THE HISTORY OF THE Council of TRENT.
BOOK VII.
PIUS IV.
THE French Ambassadors were no sooner come from the Session, than they
received a Dispatch from their Master, which ordered them to make fresh
instances for a delay. New Instructions come to the French Ambassadors.
It was now too late, and therefore, according to the Instructions they had
received, they demanded that at least matters of Doctrine might be laid aside,
and only Reformation handled, that the French might have time to come before
all the Points of Doctrine should be determined, seeing there remained no more
to be discussed, but the Points of the Sacraments of Orders and Marriage, which
would soon be examined; and then the French would only come to the Close of
the Council; whereas the head of Reformation being very large, considerable
progress might be made therein, whilst the French were on their way, and enough
to do after they were come. The Legates desired their Demands in Writing, and
the Ambassadors presented them Memorials, wherein the King in ample manner
approved all that had been done, as to the Decisions about matters of Faith,
but withal declared that he could not be satisfied that they proceeded with so
much earnestness and precipitation in matters of less importance, and did not
mind that which was most necessary, to wit, the Reformation of Manners and
Discipline; which was the only means of remedying the present Troubles of the
Church; that these Decisions of Points of Faith were, on the one hand, more
than needless in respect of Catholics, because they were matters not
controverted amongst them; and, on the other hand, they did only more and more
alienate the minds of those who were separated from the Church, whom to reduce
by such means, was a ridiculous fancy. After all, because the manner of
proceeding in the Council was no way consistent with the Liberty of the Ancient
Councils, where all had freedom to propose what they thought good for the
Benefit of the Church; the King demanded that the same Liberty might be
restored to the Council, and particularly to Kings and Princes who sent their
Ambassadors thither; and that so the Clause Proponentibus Legatis should be
struck out. The Emperor's Ambassadors presented Memorials which demanded the
same things, to wit, that they should set about the work of Reformation with
diligence; and that every Nation might have the Liberty to commissionate two
Deputies to propose to the Council what might be thought necessary for the good
of the Church. The Legates made the same answer to both, that they could not
break off the Method that had been all along observed, in handling matters of
Faith and Doctrine, at the same time that they treated of Reformation; and that
the manner of proposing to the Legates what any one desired might be handled,
had been found so good, that it was not fit it should be altered. The French
expressed great dissatisfaction at this Answer. They spoke openly of these new
recruits of Italians, which were every foot sent to the Council to thwart the
designs of the Cardinal of Lorrain. However the Pope did not lay so much stress
on his Italians, but that he used all the other means he could to divert the
Cardinal of Lorrain from coming to the Council. He ordered his Legate in
France, the Cardinal of Ferrara, to speak to him, and gave him intimation by
other hands, that his coming to the Council would procure him no great
Reputation, because he would find all things there done to his hand.

The matter of the Sacrament of Orders is handled.
All the Arts that the French and Germans could use to thwart and prolong the
Council, were no hinderance to the Legates, who spurred them on to the handling
of the Point of the Sacrament of Orders; which they had reduced into Eight
Articles. For examination of that matter, they appointed four distinct
Congregations of Divines, which were as so many Chambers, giving each Chamber
Commission to examine two of them: and these are the Articles that were
proposed. 1. Whether Orders be a true Sacrament instituted by Jesus Christ. 2.
Whether Orders be one or more Sacraments. 3. Whether the Hierarchy consisting
of Bishops, Archbishops, etc. be lawful; whether all Christians be
Mass-Priests, whether the Gall of the People and Magistrate be necessary for
the Confirmation of the Ministry, and whether a Priest may become a Layman. 4.
Whether under the New Testament there be a visible Sacrifice, and a Power to
offer up the Body of our Lord. 5. Whether Ordination confers the Holy Ghost,
and imprints a Character. 6. Whether Unction and the other Ceremonies be
essential to the Sacrament of Orders. 7. Whether the Priest be properly
inferior to the Bishop; whether the Power of ordaining and confirming belongs
not to the Bishop alone excluding the Priest, and whether they who thrust
themselves into the Ministry without Canonical Ordination are true Ministers.
8. Whether Bishops established and installed by the Pope's Authority be
lawful, or whether it be necessary that they be established in a Canonical
manner.
The Congregations about these Points began the twenty third of September, and
were continued until the second of October.

The first of the four Congregations examined the first two Articles: And all
the Divines unanimously agreed, that Orders is a true Sacrament. For proof of
this they brought the Text of St. Paul in the thirteenth Chapter of the Epistle
to the Romans, and first Verse, (let every Soul be subject unto the higher
Powers,) quae sunt a Deo, ordinata sunt. This Argument is somewhat odd, as any
man may see. But yet it is much odder, if you will take notice that the stress of
it rests upon the distinction that was marked in the vulgar Latin, by a Comma,
betwixt these words, quae sunt a Deo, and those other, ordinata sunt. The
Powers that are of God, are ordained, that is to say, according to the Gloss of
these Gentlemen, have received the Sacrament of Orders. For all that Gloss, a
man must be very sharp-sighted to see into the force of that Argument, and,
indeed, to make good sense of it. The opinions were not so uniform as to the
second Article, to wit, whether Orders be one or more Sacraments. Peter Soto a
Jacobin held that there were as many distinct Sacraments in Orders, as there
are different Orders, to wit, seven; and for proof of that, he found in the
Gospel that our Savior Jesus Christ before he came to the Office of Priest or
Sacrificer, had gone through all the Inferior Orders, as of Chanter, Acolite,
Porter, Reader, Deacon and Subdeacon, and that he had discharged all these
several Employments. But the History seemed somewhat uncouth to those who had
not read the Gospel with so much attention as that honest Monk had. Another
Jacobin called Girolamo Bravo was not of that opinion, but after a long
discourse concluded that it ought not to be decided, that the seven Orders make
so many distinct Sacraments, because of the great diversity of opinions that
occur on that Subject amongst the Divines and the ancient and modern Pontifical
Doctors; he alleged it would be impossible to fix a solid Judgment,
concerning the nature of Inferior Orders, not excepting even the Deaconship,
and Subdeaconship, because of that variety of opinions. He farther added that
the common opinion that the lesser Orders are steps to ascend to Priesthood,
was not very sure, and brought several instances from Antiquity of some who had
discharged the Office of a Priest, without passing through the inferior Orders.

The Germans and Spaniards unite to set forward the work of Reformation.
When this Congregation was up, and the Prelates who had been present in it were
gone, the Bishop of the five Churches stayed behind in the Chamber, with some
Hungarian, Polish, and Spanish Prelates. He entertained them in discourse, and
earnestly exhorted them to join together in the design of Reformation, to which
the Legates would not hearken. The Archbishop of Granada then present made
answer, and thanking the Bishop of the five Churches for his exhortation, said
that he would assemble the Spaniards to consult about it. In effect the Spanish
Prelates did meet, and concluded that they ought zealously to bestir themselves
for that Reformation, and that it was necessary to begin at the Court of Rome,
the corruption whereof was spread over all the rest of the Church. They
discoursed angrily of the attempts that were daily committed upon the Authority
of Bishops; and Den Bartholome Archbishop of Braganza added, that the Cardinals
must be brought back to their primitive institution; that until the tenth
Century, they had been no more than ordinary Priests; that afterward they had
risen by degrees, though in the twelfth Century they had been still inferior
to Bishops; but that at present the Cardinals were so far above them, that they
thought they did Bishops a great deal of honor, to admit them amongst their
domestic Servants. But above all things it was resolved at that meeting that
they should urge Episcopacy to be declared of Divine Right, and cause it to be
defined that Bishops held their Authority immediately from Jesus Christ, and
not from the Pope. They found occasion by the seventh of the Articles that had
been proposed, to enter upon that question: Because the intent of that Article
being to define that the Bishop is Superior to the Priest; it must be known by
what Right he is Superior, whether Divine or Humane. They were in hopes to get
it defined that the Bishop is Superior to the Priest by Divine Right, and then
they imagined that by degrees they might proceed to more important
Propositions. They therefore chose six of their number, Archbishops and
Bishops, to digest into Order the Heads of Reformation which they ought to
press. Martin of Cordova Bishop of Tortosa, had almost spoilt all their
measures, because he kept intelligence with the Pope's Party, and gave them
notice of the intentions of the Spaniards. But for all that, the Archbishops of
Granada and Braganza made a Proposal to the Legates that the Question of the
Authority of Bishops and their Superiority over Priests might be brought upon
the Stage again; a question that had been heretofore proposed in the same
Council under Julius III. and decided in the affirmative that a Bishop is of
Divine Right; but because of the Rupture of the Council, left among the Decrees
not published. The Legates rejected that Proposition, and said that it was not
a Controversy betwixt the Heretics and Catholics; and so that it ought not
to be meddled with. The Archbishop of Granada answered, that it was the very
thing which the Lutherans denied, that that difference which is betwixt a
Bishop and a Priest is of Divine Right, and derived from Jesus Christ, they
pretending that it is a mere Humane Institution. In this Debate, the Legates
and Archbishop came to pretty high words, but he got no ground by it. The
Spaniards therefore, resolved to have the Proposal made by their Divines; but
on the other hand the Legates slyly raised a report amongst the Divines, that
that question was laid aside as not to be meddled with.

Whilst things proceeded in this manner, the second Congregation consisting of
Divines and Doctors of the Canon Law, examined the two next Articles, one
whereof related to the Hierarchy, to wit, whether it be lawful and holy, and
whether the People and Magistrates have right to give their Votes for the
Ordination of their Pastors. A Canon of Valentia called Thomas Dassio spoke
much, and used his utmost endeavors to prove. 1. That without gross ignorance
in Antiquity it could not be doubted but that the Hierarchy was most holy and
good. 2. That Episcopacy was an Order different from Priesthood, because the
Bishop has Characters essentially different from the Priest, as the Power to
confirm, to confer Orders, and to make other Consecrations which are peculiar
to him, as that of the Oil, the Crimson, and several others. He farther said
that it was ridiculous to make a Sacrament of the Office of a Porter, which was
only to shut a door, and might be very well performed by a Layman, and to
deny that honor to the Character of him who alone has the Power of
consecrating Priests, and confirming Christians. 3. That the simple Tonsure
ought to be placed as the lowest, and Episcopacy as the highest of Orders. 4.
That heretofore the People had had a hand in choosing the Members of the Clergy,
but that it was by a Privilege from the Pope, who had afterward taken it from
the Laics, because they had made bad use of it.
In find, he concluded that Ordination was solely in the Power of him that
confers Orders: And therefore it was his Judgment that they should not only
condemn the opinion of the Lutherans as Heretical, who will have the People to
have a share in the Call of Pastors, but that those places in the Pontifical
which mention the Suffrages of the People in the Ordination of the Members of
the Clergy, should be left out; and amongst the rest this place, which expressly
says, That it is not without reason that the Fathers thought fit that the
Suffrage of the People should intervene in the Ordination of the Ministers of
the Altar, to the end the People may be obedient to him who has received
Orders, because they themselves have given their consent to the Ordination. It
would be very tedious to reckon up all the Disputes that were debated in that
Congregation; every one would needs give him opinion, and every one thought it
a piece of honor to allege something that was singular; especially about the
Question, whether Episcopacy be a different Order from Priesthood, many words
were profusely spent. For all were not of the opinion of Thomas Dassio. On the
contrary there were a great many who maintained that it is only a Dignity
superior to that of a Priest, that gives a Jurisdiction, and not a different
Order; and they backed their opinion by the Authority of Thomas Aquinas, and
Bonaventure. The Schoolmen have made two Powers; one which they call Potestas
Ordinis the Power of Orders; which, in their opinion, comprehends the Power of
pardoning sins, offering the body of Jesus Christ in Sacrifice, and of
administering the other Sacraments, except Confirmation; and another, which is
called, Potestas Jurisdictionis, the Power of Jurisdiction, which consists in
the Power of inflicting Censures, and the Execise of Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction. It was very difficult to define in which Power the Hierarchy
consisted. Some placed it only in the Power of Orders, and thereby they
excluded from the Hierarchy Archbishops, Bishops, Patriarchs, and the Pope
himself, who are notwithstanding the Principal Members therefore; for if the
Power of Orders make up the essence of the Hierarchy, it is manifest that these
Dignities are not of the essence of the Hierarchy, because they constitute not
different Orders according to the Judgment of Divines. Others placed the
Hierarchy in the Power of Jurisdiction; but by that means the Pope, Patriarchs,
Bishops and Archbishops were the only Members of the Hierarchy, and the
Priests excluded. A third opinion struck in, which established the Hierarchy in
the one and the other Power, both in that of Orders, and that of Jurisdiction;
and this, as being the most commodious was submitted to by all the rest.

They had no less trouble to agree upon that which makes the form of the
Hierarchy; that is to say, what is the essential ground upon which the
Character of the Sacrament of Orders, of the Hierarchical dignity subsists, so
that without this a man cannot be a capable Subject neither of Priests Orders,
nor of Episcopal, Archiepiscopal, or Papal dignity. Some said it was Charity;
but this opinion was clogged with a great difficulty, that a Priest losing
Charity, must be excluded from the Hierarchy, and lose his Authority and Right
of governing Christian People, and opinion attributed to Wicliff. Others would
have it to be Faith unformed or destitute of Charity. But to this it was
objected, that it was not impossible but that a Prelate might be without that
Faith unformed, and be inwardly an Infidel; that in that case all the acts
which he did, and all the Sacraments he administered would be of no effect, an
opinion that might raise great Scruples, and put men's Consciences into great
perplexities. And therefore a third sort, placed this form in Baptism; but
neither did that salve all difficulties, because the intention of the Minister
in Baptism is necessary, and that that intention is more hid than either Faith
or Charity. So many difficulties appeared every way, that they could not tell
what to six upon. The fourth Article which contained the questions, whether all
Christians be Sacrificators, whether a Priest may become a Laick, and whether
the Minister of the Gospel has no other office but to Preach, was not handled
by way of examination; but only by Invectives against the Lutherans.

The third Congregation which had the examination of the fifth and sixth
Articles met not with so great difficulties. The question was to know whether
the Holy Ghost be given in Ordination. All agreed upon it; only some said,
that the very Person of the Holy Ghost was conferred, and others maintained
that it was only by the gift of Grace. Some would have the Grace that is
conferred is Orders to be the gift of Justification. Others said, that it was a
peculiar gift, having a relation to the Office that was to be discharged. All
agreed likewise that Orders did imprint a Character; but some maintained that
it was only imprinted in the higher Orders, and others would have every one of
the seven Orders to be effectual in stamping a Character. Some there were who
made use of the distinction of Durandus, and said that if by the Character were
meant a power to do a spiritual and supernatural action, that then that
Character was only imprinted in the Priesthood: but if by the Character they
meant a Deputation of a particular Office, that it that sense all the Orders
might have their Character. But that distinction was looked upon to be
dangerous, because it favored the Lutherans; for that is really their opinion,
that the Character consists in the Deputation of a man to a certain charge, in
such manner that the man being no longer deputed to that Office, his Character
is extinct. There was much more difficulty on the Subject of Episcopacy; for
the question was brought about again, to wit, whether it be a particular Order,
and whether it stamps its Character: many were for the Affirmative, because he
has two great spiritual actions to perform; that is, to Confirm and to give
Orders, and that therefore the stands in need of a peculiar Gift and
Character. These Points were handled in so dry, knotty, and tedious a manner,
that the Prelates who were present at the Disputations were quite sick of them;
and that made them resolve to be short about these differences, and to define
nothing but in general terms. The sixth Article concerned the Unctions and the
other Ceremonies of Ordination, to know whether they were essential to that
Sacrament. That was not so easily agreed upon. All the Divines were satisfied
indeed, to make a distinction betwixt those which were of absolute necessity,
and those which were less necessary: but when it came to be determined which
were the less necessary Ceremonies, opinions varied extremely. A Portuguese
Divine, Doctor of the Canon Law, called Melchior Cornelio, showed that the
Imposition of hands was the only Ceremony that could be termed essential,
because the Apostles made use of it, and never gave Ordination without that
Imposition. He went a little farther, and proved that that Ceremony was not of
absolute necessity; because the most famous Doctors of the Canon Law, such as
Hostiensis, Johannes Andreas, and others do affirm, that the Pope can confer
Orders by saying only, Be thou a Priest. Innocent IV. Who is reckoned the
Father of all the Canonists, and who has made an Apparatus upon the Decretals,
says the same, that a Priest may be made Priest by a word of him that gives
Orders. From all which he concluded that it ought not to be defined that these
Ceremonies are necessary, because the degree of the necessity cannot be
limited, and that it ought to be enough to condemn those who affirm that they
are Superfluous or Pernicious.

During these Conferences of the Divines, the Prelates were busy about the
matter of Reformation, and had many Conferences among themselves concerning it.
Every day Assemblies were held upon that Subject at the Solicitation of the
Ambassadors of Princes. The Imperialists and French were loud in representing
their Grievances, and spoke of them to so many, that it was the whole town-talk
in Trent. This gave the Legates a great deal of trouble, but on the other hand
also, The Presidents make a Collection of the Demands of the French and Germans
for a Reformation, and send it to the Pope.
it did them some good; for they were ashamed to see that they were the only
men who opposed that Reformation which all Europe so passionately desired.
Wherefore, at length, as if they had resolved to make some steps toward a
Reformation, they made a Collection of all the Proposals of the Imperialists
and French, and sent it to Rome, that the Pope might give them Orders what to
doc about it. The Pope was vexed to see the Instructions which the King of
France had sent his Ambassadors; he designed to put an end to the Council at
least with the year, and by these instructions, he found that not only they
demanded of him a delay, but also that they intended still to cut out work for
the Council for a long time. He had many long Conferences upon that Subject
with the Ambassador of France residing at his Court. He told him that when he
desired the least compliance from the Fathers of the Council, immediately they
cried out that he oppressed their Liberty; that therefore he could not oblige
the Prelates to a delay, to which they had a deadly aversion, because they were
weary of the long stay that they had already made at Trent. At the same time he
cunningly struck at the Cardinal of Lorrain, saying that there was no necessity
to wait for him, for handling Points of Doctrine which he did not in the least
scruple at as being a good Catholic, but that it was proper for him to be
present at the Reformation, that he might come in for his share as being a
second Pope, who enjoyed near a Million of Livres a year in Church Livings, and
possessed several Benefices, whilst he himself being Pope enjoyed but one,
wherewith he was content; that for his part he had not been wanting to reform
himself and his Officers; that he would do more still, but that such
Reformations would sink his Revenues, and that the smaller Rents he had, the
less he would be in a condition to defend the Church against Heretics. He
father said, that he wished with all his heart that they might come to
particulars concerning those abuses of which a Reformation was desired, and
that then experience would show that most of them come from Princes; because
the abuses of the Court of Rome which men kept so great a stir about, consisted
chiefly in the promotions of undeserving men to great Benefices, to which they
were presented by Kings, and in Dispensations that were extorted from him by
the violent solicitations of Princes. That the other abuses which were not in
the Court of Rome, but in the several Provinces of the Church sprung from the
same source, to wit, the had use that Princes made of their Authority, in their
Presentations to great Benefices.

The Spaniards find means of having the question examined, whether Episcopacy
be of Divine Right, and thereupon violent debates arise.
The fourth Congregation of Divines had in charge to examine the Superiority of
the Bishop over the Priest. At first they made a distinction betwixt the power
of Consecrating and Celebrating the Sacrifice, and the power of pardoning sins.
According to the Doctrine of St. Thomas and Bonaventure they said, that the
power of Consecrating was alike in the Bishop and Priest, because in that
properly consists the power of Orders; but that the power of pardoning sins was
greater in the Bishop than in the Priest, because that power consists not
barely in that which is called the power of Orders, but is made up also of the
power of Jurisdiction. They made several reflections thereupon which were of no
great importance, nor occasioned much debate; for they all unanimously agreed
upon that Superiority of the Bishop over the Priest. But the Spaniards had
pitched upon this Article as the most proper to bring in the Question which they
intended should be defined in spite of the Legates, to wit, whether Episcopacy
be of Divine Right or not: that is to say, whether Bishops hold their Authority
immediately of Jesus Christ, or only of the Pope. They proposed to themselves
great advantages from the decision of that Controversy, because by having it
determined that the Bishop is of Divine Institution, and that he derives his
Authority from Jesus Christ and not from the Pope, they pretended to render
their Character more considerable, and secure it from the attempts of the Court
of Rome. For if the Authority of Bishops proceeds immediately from Jesus
Christ, it follows clearly that men can do nothing to the prejudice of it. And
if the Pope be not the Original of that Authority, it is evident that he has
no power to lessen it, nor to exempt from under it those that are subjected
thereunto, as he daily does. The Legates at first, were not sensible of these
Consequences, and therefore they could not devise from whence sprung that
eagerness of the Spaniards upon this Point, but they soon smelt it out, and
vigorously withstood it. So then the Spaniards according to their project put
their Divines upon the breaking of the Ice, and beginning the Dispute. Michael
Oroncuspe Divine to the Bishop of Pampelona, was the first that proposed the
matter; he alleged that in the design of condemning the Lutherans, the
question moved properly upon this hinge, by what Right Bishops were Superior to
Priests; that as to the Superiority, the Lutherans could not deny it, but yet
maintained it to be a mere Humane Constitution; that if then it were true that
that Superiority was a Humane Establishment, it would be unreasonable to make
it Heresy in the Lutherans, that they abolished an Order which was not
appointed immediately by God; that for his own part, he looked upon it as a most
certain truth, that a Bishop is Superior to a Priest by Divine Right, but that
he could proceed no farther, because he was prohibited by the Legates. John
Fonseca a Divine of the Archbishop of Granada observed not so strict measures.
He said in the beginning of his discourse, that he did not conceive why that
question was not allowed to be spoken to, and for what reason it could be
prohibited. He laid open the importance of the matter, and proved by Reason, by
the Fathers and by the Scriptures, that Bishops are the Successors of the
Apostles, as the Pope is of St. Peter; that both the one and the other have
immediately received their Authority from Jesus Christ, as Supreme Courts and
Inferior Judicatures have been alike established by the Prince, whence it is
that Supreme Courts cannot encroach upon the Authority of Inferior Judges,
because the Authority of both flows from the Prince who has set proper Limits
to those several Tribunals. Cardinal Simoneta with extreme impatience listened
to this discourse, which was delivered with as great earnestness. He turned
several times about to his Colleagues, and was ready to have interrupted the
Divine; but he durst not, because he saw that all the Prelates heard him with
extraordinary attention. Anthony Grass^t, a Jacobin Monk, enforced this truth
with new Arguments, and carried it farther on. He affirmed that Bishops were
not obliged to give an account of their Administration but to Jesus Christ
alone. He urged the exhortation of St. Paul to the Bishops of Ephesus, that
they should feed the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers.
If it be by the Holy Ghost, said he, it is not by the Pope. He could not
forbear to lash out against those who in former Conferences had said, that the
Pope divides the Flock among the Bishops, and said it was to open a door to a
kind of Schism which St. Paul found fault with in the Church of Corinth, where
they said, I am of Peter, and I am of Paul, affirming that all Bishops had
right to say with St. Paul, for me I am of Jesus Christ. He said that the Pope
was only the Minister and Instrument of Jesus Christ, and therefore what is
done in the Church ought not to be attributed to him, but to Jesus Christ who
is the Principal Efficient Cause. He perceived that his Discourse had been a
little too bold, and fearing that the Legates might enjoin him silence, and
bring him into trouble; he therefore made a kind of Apology, and said that he
had gone farther than he thought to have done, and that he had forgot that it
had been prohibited to speak to that Point. But the Legates saw into the
Intrigue, and knew it to be a design laid by the Spaniards, and particularly
the Archbishop of Granada; but finding that the discourses that were made had
left a deep Impression upon the minds of those that were concerned; they
thought it necessary to refute reasons by reasons, since matters were gone so
far. Therefore they enjoined the four Divines who were still to speak, to
refute the Spaniards, and to prove that Bishops hold all their Authority from
the Pope, and not from Jesus Christ; that the only Episcopacy of Divine Right,
is that of the Pope; who has received Orders to place Bishops in several
Churches; and who has also power to enlarge or restrain their Authority, and
to depose, suspend, or translate them to other places.

When the Disputes of the Divines were over, the Legates had a mind to propose
the matter of Reformation, but they knew not how to set about it. They durst
not offer at Trifles, as had been done in former Sessions, and it was very
difficult for them to propose important Points, there being none wherewith some
body would not be displeased. The Reformation of the Bishops and Clergy
exceedingly pleased the Ambassadors, but that displeased the Bishops: that
which pleased the Bishops and Clergy, could not give content to the
Ambassadors; for that tended to lessen the Power that Princes had acquired
over the Clergy, by the abolishing of Canonical Elections, and by the Right of
Nomination to great Benefices. And, in fine, that which might please the
Ambassadors and Bishops, at the same time displeased the Pope, for that tended
to the Diminution of the Greatness of the Court of Rome. So that being
overwhelmed by these Perplexities they wrote to the Pope, giving him notice, at
the same time, that the Spaniards pressed hard, to have Episcopacy to be
declared of Divine Right. They put the Pope also in mind that, this was the
place where they had promised to state again the Point of the Divine Right of
Residence; to wit, when they treated of the Sacrament of Orders. They
acquainted him that having sounded the Prelates, they found threescore steadfast
for the Divine Right of Residence, and that there was nothing to be got of
them: that the Marquess of Pescara had done all that lay in his Power to
persuade the Spanish Bishops, but without any effect: that the Spaniards
murmured that there should be a design of referring that Article of Residence
to his Holiness, as the Point of the Cup had been, and said if they intended to
go on in that manner, it was very needless to call a Council at a great charge
for deciding matters of small importance, and refer the great affairs to the
Pope.

This advice that came to the Pope from Trent, with the news which he received
from other places gave him great disturbance. For he had certain intelligence
from several parts that the Cardinal of Lorrain was coming to the Council with
design to have the Election of the Popes so regulated, The Cardinal of Lorrain
prepares to go to the Council, and the Pope is allarmed at it.
that the Prelates beyond the Alps might have a share in that Dignity, and be
chosen in their turn. He was allarmed at this news, wrote of it to all the
Italian Princes, and laid before them what a prejudice it would be to suffer
other Nations to share in that advantage with them. He thought it also
expedient for preventing the designs of the Cardinal of Lorrain to renew the
Publication of the Canons, which had been heretofore made against the Abuses
committed in the Election of Popes. He therefore published a Bull to that
effect, bearing date the Ninth of October 1562. He received also vexatious news
from the Court of Spain, though that was the Court in Christendom most at his
Devotion; for he was informed that the King of Spain held Congregations about
matters of Reformation; that he prepared new Proposals, and designed the Count
de Luna in quality of a new Ambassador to carry his Propositions to the
Council. The Court of Rome in the mean time being very well satisfied with the
Marquess of Pescara, because he was wholly devoted to the Pope, was not willing
that he should either have a Colleague or a Successor.

About the same time the Abbot of Mante was sent to Rome to acquaint the Pope
in name of the King of France, that the Cardinal of Lorrain with a good number
of French Bishops were setting out on their Journey to the Council. The news
did not at all please him, because he always dreaded the Union of the French
and Spaniards in the matter of Reformation. However he must dissemble and pay
Complements with Complements. The Pope therefore professed that he expected great
assistance from the Cardinal, who was the second Ecclesiastic Person in
Europe, and little inferior to the Pope; but for all that, he said he was
obliged to hasten the Conclusion of the Council; because it was so chargeable
to him, that if it continued, he could not be able to furnish the King the
money that he had promised him for the War. But to give a hint that he was
resolved to stand his ground against the French, and to maintain himself in his
Sovereign Authority over the Council, he concluded with this, that for his own
part he had no other Authority in the Council, but to approve or reject its
Decrees, seeing without his Confirmation they could have no force. By the same
Envoy the Pope received very Civil Letters from the Cardinal of Lorrain: he
endeavored to get out of the Abbot of Mante what it was that the Cardinal had
to propose to the Council, but the Abbot answered him only in general terms.

The Pope had established a Congregation of Cardinals for consulting about and
examining the business of the last intelligence that he had received from
Trent: and it was the opinion of this Congregation that the Point of Residence
ought to be concluded before the arrival of the French; that the Legates should
use their utmost endeavors to get the matter referred to the Pope, that if
there was no way to take the Prelates off from handling that Point, the next
thing to be done was, to decree the necessity of Residence under Penalties and
Prospect of reward, but that they must have a special care not to declare it of
Divine Right. The same course was agreed upon as to the Divine Right of
Episcopacy, that the Council must by no means be suffered to declare that the
Authority of Bishops is derived immediately from Jesus Christ. As to what
concerned the Reformation of the Court of Rome, that his Holiness must write to
the Legates not to offer to meddle with it, and that for other parts of
Reformation he should leave it wholly to the Council: that the Legates should
pick out of the Proposals of the Imperialists, and the Reformations which the
French had made at the Conference of Poissy what they judged most convenient,
and let them pass by Vote in the Council By this means they thought the Pope
might perform the promise which he had often made to the King of France, to
cause the Decrees of the Assembly of Poissy to be confirmed by the Council. But
this Congregation of Cardinals found it a harder matter what to determine as to
the Conclusion of the Council. The Court of Rome passionately desired it; but
they could not see how it could be so soon accomplished. They foresaw that the
Cardinal of Lorrain who was shortly to be there would certainly find ways to
appose it, by proposing a great many new matters to be discussed: For besides
the design he had of reforming the Abuses committed in the Election of Popes,
he had many things to offer about the manner of Collation of Benefices, the
Plurality of Livings, the Communion in both kinds, the Marriage of Priests, and
the Divine Service in the vulgar Tongue. Some were of opinion that the Cardinal
of Ferrara Legate in France should be recalled, and the Legation given to the
Cardinal of Lorrain, hoping that that might work two good effects; first that
this Commission would retain him in France, and then that the honor of it
would satisfy that Ambitious Soul who was accused of having made parties to
get himself chosen Patriarch in France. Others were for sending a fresh supply
of Cardinals to Trent, to counterbalance the interest and credit of Lorrain. So
all things well considered, the Court of Rome thought it not fit to give the
Legates precise Orders as to the Conclusion of the Council; but only to exhort
them to carry on things with all possible diligence, not to suffer the matter
of the Election of the Pope to be touched; but rather to break up the Council
and to return to Rome. Whilst these resolutions were taking at Rome, the
Council named Prelates for framing the Chapters of Doctrine, and the Anathema's
concerning the Sacrament of Orders: the chief of the Deputies were the
Archbishop of Zara, and the Bishop of Conimbre both Spaniards. They made a
Minute of the Decree, wherein they inserted that the Bishop is Superior to the
Priest by Divine Right: but the Legates opposed that, and would not present the
Decree in that form, under pretext that no Decision ought to be inserted, but
such as regarded the Articles that had been proposed, and that this was none of
those eight which had been submitted to the Examination of the Divines. So that
they not only struck out that Clause, but resolved amongst themselves that if
any Spanish Prelate in the Congregations demanded that Article to be inferted,
the Cardinal of Warmia should interrupt him, and assert that that was not a
question to be handled in the Council, because there was no Controversy about
it betwixt the Catholics and Heretics. The first Congregation of Prelates
after that of the Divines, was hold the thirteenth of October; there the Canons
concerning Doctrine were read as they had been amended by the Legates. The
Patriarchs and Bishops who spoke first, approved the Decrees; The Discourse of
the Archbishop of Granada, to prove Episcopacy to be of Divine Right seconded
by the Spaniards and many others, and oppugned by the Pope's Party.
but when it came to the Archbishop of Granada's turn to speak, he stuck at the
seventh Article, wherein the Superiority of the Bishop over the Priest was
mentioned, and demanded that it might be declared to be of Divine Right. And
then he vigorously proved that Bishops hold their Authority from Jesus Christ.
He brought a great many Arguments from Antiquity, to evince that Bishops
heretofore did not carry themselves toward the Pope as to a Sovereign Master,
that they called him their Brother and Colleague, and for instance alleged the
Letters of St. Cyprian and St. Austin to the Bishops of Rome. He refuted
smartly and in way of Raillery what the Divines of the Pope's Party said, that
either the Apostles were made by St. Peter, or if they were made by Jesus
Christ, it was a personal Privilege, and ought not to descend to Bishops, as
the Successors of the Apostles. He maintained and explained the opinion of St.
Cyprian touching the Episcopat, that it is one, but that it is divided amongst
all Bishops, of which every one has an entire share. He said that the Pope was
a Bishop as he and all others were, because they were all Brethren: that the
Pope, indeed, was Chief of the College of Bishops, but that notwithstanding
that Headship he was still their Colleague, having received his Authority from
one and the same Master. The Cardinal of Warmia according to the design that
was laid, interrupted the Archbishop of Granada, telling him that they had no
Controversy about that matter with the Lutherans. To which the Archbishop
replied, that it was not so; that they had Controversy concerning that with
the Lutherans; seeing the Confession of Ausburg puts no difference betwixt a
Bishop and a Priest, but what was a Humane Constitution. And so the Legates
could not carry the point of imposing silence on the Prelates; for the Bishops
insisted upon the same Subject, and the Archbishops of Zara, and Braganza stood
stiffly up for the Proposition of Granada, that it should be inserted in the
seventh Article, that the Superiority of the Bishop over the Priest is of
Divine Right: and maintained this Thesis by several Authorities, that the Power
of Bishops proceeds immediately from Jesus Christ. Nine and fifty Prelates were
of the same opinion, and the number, in all appearance, had been much greater,
had not a great many been absent; some because they were really sick, and
others because they pretended to be so, that they might not be concerned in a
Dispute that would produce nothing but trouble to those that should speak their
mind freely, as it had happened in the Debate about Residence. The Bishop of
the five Churches joined with the rest in the opinion of the Divine Right of
Episcopacy. But above all, an Hungarian Prelate a Cordelier called George
Zischovid Bishop of Seigna delivered his Judgment on that particular, in such a
manner astunn'd all the Pope's Party. For he said, that it could never have
entered his thoughts, that a Council would have called in question whether
Bishops were of Divine Institution or not, and it was the same thing as if the
Council it self should question the Divine Right of its own Authority. For if
Bishops, said he, be not of Divine Right, the Council is only an Assembly of
Secular men, wherein Jesus Christ presides not. No man gives that which he has
not, the whole is of the same nature with its parts; and so by consequence it
cannot be said that Councils derive their Authority from God. He proceeded and
said farther, that the Bishops who made up this Council had been very bold to
pronounce Anathema's, if they thought their Authority to be only from a man.
He prosecuted his Argument with so much vigor, and made the truth of it so
perspicuous, that the Assembly was surprised at his Discourse. The Legates
found now that no means were to be neglected on this occasion; they did not at
first perceive what was drove at; but they quickly came to understand that no
less was thereby aimed at, than the wresting the Keys out of the Pope's hands,
and the giving them to all Bishops in General: they saw that the design was to
make Bishops equal to the Pope, only allowing him the Dignity of Precedence.
This put them to their shifts how to ward that blow. They set their usual
Engines to work; and solicited the Pope's Creatures to the end they might carry
it by Faction and Parties. And at the same time to quiet the Spaniards they
resolved to grant them somewhat, by framing a Canon in these terms, that
Bishops have from God the Power of Orders, without mentioning the Power of
Jurisdiction; and sent Father Soto to solicit the Spaniards to be satisfied
with that; but there was nothing to be done with them. This method not
succeeding, the Legates essayed to employ the Fathers about other matters, to
take their thoughts off from this; and, at length, endeavored to have the
Decision of that Point referred to the Pope. Nothing could be done in this,
unless they could bring over a considerable number of Votes; and therefore to
persuade some, and to give a fair pretext of retractation to others who might
be gained by tampering, they set on Father Lainez General of the Jesuits. This
Orator appeared in the lists with a premeditated Speech, and if the truth were
known, composed by the four Jesuits who were at the Council, and especially by
Caviglione. The Harangue of Lainez General of the Jesuits against the Bishops,
and the Divine Right of Episcopacy, and what it produced.
That he might have leisure enough to enlarge, the Legates designed him the
whole time of a Congregation: And therefore they made him absent himself from
the last Congregation which was to be held upon that Subject, and wherein he
was to speak the last of all, and held a Congregation on purpose to give him a
hearing. He spoke very handsomely for the space of two hours, with a great deal
of Rhetoric and Vehemence. He laid down for his Point, that in the Pope alone
all the Power of the Church resides; and this he endeavored to prove by
Scripture, by the Fathers and by Reason. He forgot not the Testimony of St.
Cyprian who says that there is but one only Episcopat, but he turned it into
a quite different sense to that which the Archbishop of Granada had given it.
For he pretended that according to the Judgment of that Saint, there is but one
Bishop as one Episcopacy, and that the Pope is that one Bishop who gives the
Administration of the Power wherewith he is invested to others under him, as he
thinks good. He maintained that Jesus Christ gave St. Peter alone the
Commission of seeding his sheep, when he said to him, feed my Lambs, and that
St. Peter gave it to the rest in these words which are to be read in the fifth
Chapter of his first Epistle, feed the Flock which is among you; that all
Authority proceeds from the Pope; that though Jesus Christ himself sent out the
Apostles, yet in that he did the Office of St. Peter; that Bishops in all their
Actions are no more but the Delegates and Substitutes of the Holy See, so that
their Charge is but in Commission, and if they be called Ordinaries, it is
only because their Commission is perpetual, and that they may have
Successors; that the Council derived no Authority from the Bishops, but only
from the Pope, and that a Council cannot be reckoned General without the
Authority of the Holy See: That fifty Prelates who decided important matters in
the first Convocation of the Council under Paul III. could not, without the
Pope, be called a General Council, nor in that Quality make Decisions which
should oblige the Conscience; that when the Pope was present at a Council, he
alone made the Decrees, and the Council interposed in no more but their
Approbation: wherefore on such occasions, it is only said sacro approbante
Concilio. He farther said that in matters of great importance, the Pope needed
not the Approbation of the Council, which appeared by the Deposition of
Frederick II. in the General Council of Lions: where Innocent IV. refused the
Approbation of the Council, lest it might have been thought necessary, and
thought it enough to say sacro present Concilio. In a word, that General
broached the Maxims of Italian Theology in savor of the Pope, beyond all
imagination. This extravagant zealous discourse produced very different
effects, for it ravished the Faction of the Court of Rome, but disgusted and
offended most of the rest to the highest Degree. And particularly, the Bishop
of Paris protested that in the first Congregation when it should come to his
turn to speak, he would openly and boldly speak against that Doctrine. He said
in all places, that it was invented by Thomas de Vio Cajetan that he might
merit a Cardinals Cap for the good Service; that ever since he was born, it had
been censured by the Sorbonne, that the Government of the Church was
degenerated into Tyranny, and that the Spouse of Jesus Christ was become a
slave, and in a manner prostituted to the lust of one man. That he could no
longer endure these Invasions of Episcopal Authority, which was encroached upon
by every new Order of Monks that start up in the World; that it had received a
great blow by the planting of those two Seminaries of Clugny and the
Cistertians; that since the Mendicant Orders appeared in the World, the
Authority of Bishops was almost wholly suppressed; and that in fine, to ruin
the Church totally, that new Society of Jesus which was neither Secular nor
Regular, was more Pragmatical than all the rest in attempting against Episcopal
Authority. These discourses which the Bishop of Paris had in all Companies with
extraordinary eagerness and zeal, rouzed up the drouzy, and blew the coals in
those who were already all in a flame; insomuch that there was a murmuring, and
universal discontent over the whole Council against the Harangue of the General
of the Jesuits; and therefore the Legate perceiving that it had wrought an
effect quite contrary to what they expected, discharged him from publishing it,
as he had intended. But notwithstanding, he dispersed several Copies of it,
partly to get himself Reputation, and partly to soften some hasty words that he
had let slip in speaking. In the mean time the Legates gave not over their
tamperings to make a Party against the Spaniards, and their Canvassing was so
open and apparent, that Lansac Ambassador of France, a man of wit, and who was
free enough in this discourse, could not forbear to play upon them. One day at
a great entertainment, there was a discourse started about the form of Ancient
Councils, wherein Princes by themselves or by their Ambassadors, and the
Presidents of the Council gave their suffrages, whereas neither one nor other
gave their Votes in that of Trent. It is true, for Ambassadors, said Lansac,
they have no Vote here, but for our Presidents the Legates, they give vota
auricularia, and whisper their opinions softly in the ear.

About this time the Legates met with some satisfaction, but of short
continuance, for a certain Spanish Doctor named Zanel, betraying his Party,
presented them with thirteen Articles of Reformation relating to the Spaniards,
which he was of opinion ought to be set on foot to stop the mouths of those who
appeared to be such Zealous Reformers. These Articles struck at some Abuses
whereof the Reformation would have been very severe to the Spaniards, and
mortified them extremely. But this Counterbatterie could not do all the
execution they desired; because these Articles of Reformation depended upon a
great many others which related to the Court of Rome: and the Legates were not
of the mind to Sacrifice their own interest and that of their Master to a
little revenge on their Enemies. After all they had enough to do to defend
themselves, they were not in a condition of assaulting others, for the
Spaniards, French, and Germans, gave them continually the allarm. The Bishop of
the five Churches received Letters from the Emperor for the Legates, to
procure of them that nothing but Reformation should be handled, which was a
fresh Persecution. But they stood this brunt, and had no regard to the demand.
They were somewhat indeed pleased that the Ambassador of Poland of whom they
had no apprehension, and who was come to pay them homage from afar, was arrived
at the Council. The five and twentieth of October a Congregation was held to
receive that Ambassador whose name was Valentine Herbut, Bishop of Premissa.
But that was not enough to charm away the fear that the coming of the Cardinal
of Lorrain put them in; he drew nearer and nearer daily, and so did the
Jealousies and Apprehensions of the Court of Rome and of their Party at Trent.
The Cardinal pleased himself in his Journey, to give it out that he was going
to employ a good many Engines for lessening the Grandeur and Revenues of the
Court of Rome. They therefore sought out means to break his measures, and spoil
his designs. Some Proposed that the surest way to put a stop to the French was,
to take them on their weak side, and to demand the Reformation of their own
abuses. For they who are most eager in Reforming of others, are unwilling to be
Reformed themselves. The Pope who on his Part, thought on all the ways that
might prevent the attempts that were levelled against his Authority, gave the
Legates Order to curb the boldness of the Prelates in a far other manner, than
they had hitherto done. Nay, and there were some who advised the Pope to remove
to Bologna, that so he might be near, and keep the Council in awe. But the
Legates found out a much better Expedient to get out of harms way, and that was
to transfer, suspend, or break up the Council; the difficulty consisted in the
execution of this design; and because that was a remedy which they could not
make use of, they cast about for another. They at first thought it most
convenient to give time to the tumult to settle, which the Tempest of General
Lainez discourse had raised; and so they interrupted the Congregations. But
this Remedy augmented the Disease, and occasioned complainings against the
Legates, and many private Assemblies, where new measures were daily taken
against the interests of the Court of Rome. After seven days had been spent
without any Congregation, the Spaniards lost all Patience; they went to the
Legates who were met at Council, and demanded Audience for making new Instances
that Episcopacy might be declared to be of Divine Right. This they did in a
stately grave manner according to the humor of that Nation; protesting if that
were refused them, they would appear no more in any Congregation or Session. To
Counterpoise this Party, the Legates solicited eighteen or twenty Prelates to
demand with the same earnestness that no Decision might pass upon that matter.
They looked upon this as an excellent Sally-port to get out at. For, said they,
some would have it, others oppose it, what course can be taken to please both
Parties? But this fetch of the Legates did not take; for that made the contrary
Party fortify themselves and to keep private Assemblies in greater number, to
find out means for supporting the Interest of their Cause. The Pope's Party did
the like; so that the Council was broken and divided into a great many little
Conventicles, which made so great Tumult, that at length, the Legates feared
some disorder. The Cardinal Simoneta was most concerned in the allarm, because
he saw himself alone exposed to the shock of so many contradictions. He
complained that he was not seconded by the Cardinals of Mantua and Seripando,
and that they had still some secret inclination for the Party that opposed the
Interests of the Court of Rome. The Presidents had likewise procured Letters
from the Marquess of Pescara, wherein he pressed the Spaniards to condescend,
and not to offer at any thing that might be opposite to the Interests of the
Holy See. But they had no regard to the Instances of the Marquess; they made
Protestations, indeed, that they had no intentions of proposing any thing
contrary to the Interest of his Holiness; nevertheless they declared that they
could not abandon the truth which they had espoused; and that they doubted not
to find easy means to Justify their Conduct to the King: that they were sent
to act according to their Consciences, and that they could do nothing to the
contrary. And, in effect, they sent one of their number to Spain, to Justify
all their Proceedings to the King.

At length the Congregations began again the third of November, and the Legates
proposed afresh, the Articles of Doctrine concerning the Sacrament of Orders.
The matter of Residence is again proposed afresh.
This was handled three days, that is, the same things that had been said
before were said over again. In fine, the Legates after so long delay, being
overcome by the instances that were made to them to keep their promise they had
made of bringing the Point of Residence again under Deliberation, resolved now
to propose it. They labored to make a Decision that might give content to all,
but found it a difficult task to cast it in such a mould as might satisfy both
the Pope and the different Parties that were in the Council. For the Council
was divided into three almost equal parts; the first were for referring the
matter to the Pope; the second would have it decided in the Council; and the
third that it should be handled in the Council, but with the consent of his
Holiness. There were four different opinions concerning the manner of framing
the Decree about Residence. Some were for having the Necessity of Residence
only decreed under such Penalties and Rewards as might keep Bishops from
violating that Law. Others were of opinion that the Decree should be a bare
Decree of Reference to the Pope. But some desired that that Reference might be
demanded by the Prelates, and others that it should be demanded by the
Presidents; so that this second Party branched out into two. The third and last
were of the Judgment, that the Pope without consulting the Council should
anticipate its Decisions, and emit a Bull commanding Residence; and then the
Council would press the matter no more, it beng already done to their hands.
But the Legates found Difficulties in all these opinions. It is true that the
Bishop of Mazara a Town in Sicily had by canvassing and caballing brought over
seven Bishops from the Spanish Faction, and perhaps that was the thing that
brought them to a determination. For, at length, they resolved to strike in
with the first opinion, and to frame the Decree, without deciding whether
Residence were of Divine Right or not, but only enjoining it as necessary
under Penalties and Rewards. The Cardinal of Mantua proposed it to the
Congregation in that form, and did it with all the Address he could. He gave
them to understand that all that could be required was only a punctual
performance of that which every one judged necessary, and that it was not
convenient to deviate from that by needless Questions; that the matter was not
great, of what Right Residence were, provided it were duly observed; and added
that it was the opinion of M. de Lansac the French Ambassador. In the Decree,
which was read, among other things it was enacted that Resident Bishops should
not be obliged to pay Tenths to their Princes. And this Clause was very
grateful to the Bishops; but it startled all the Ambassadors, and engaged
them to oppose the Decree. Lansac the French Ambassador took notice of two
particular wrongs in the Conduct of the Cardinal of Mantua; the one was, that
in the Decree the Catholic King was named before the most Christian King; and
the other, that the Cardinal had abused his Confidence. For though he had in
Discourse let slip a word, and said, that it signified not much whether
Residence were of Divine Right, provided it were observed; what he spoke as a
private Person in a familiar Conversation, ought not, in his opinion, to have
been mentioned in Council as the opinion and advice of an Ambassador. The
satisfaction which the Prelates received in that the Council had exempted them
from Tenths, lasted not long: their eyes were immediately opened, and were let
see that it was a snare laid for them, and a plausible wheedle to make them the
better digest the refusal of declaring the Divine Right of Residence, which was
obstinately made them. And indeed, they well perceived, that the Council
intended to grant them a Privilege which they could not put them in possession
of, because Princes would never give way to it: nay the Italians themselves
were made sensible that even in the Ecclesiastic State, matters would go as
they had gone before, and that they would be still made to pay, by virtue of a
fair, non obstantibus, etc.

They come again to the question whether Episcopacy be of Divine Right.
In the Congregation the day after, they came to speak again of the Sacrament of
Orders, and the Bishop of Segovia revived the question of the Divine Right of
Episcopacy. This Bishop had been a Member of the Council held under Julius III.
wherein Episcopacy was said to have been defined to be of Divine Right. The
Legates and Pensioners of the Court of Rome maintained that no such thing had
been done in that Council. And the Bishop of Segovia who had a very fresh
Memory, averred that it had, and mentioned the hour and day when it was so
decided. The Cardinal of Mantua seemed to be very incredulous, and ordered the
Acts of Council to be brought out. Which being done, these words were found in
the third Chapter of Doctrine concerning the Sacrament of Orders. Besides that,
the holy Council teaches, that Bishops have been instituted by Divine Right,
seeing it is evident in the Gospel, that our Lord Jesus Christ himself called
the Apostles, and promoted them to the Degree of Apostleship; and in their
places the Bishops have succeeded. It ought not then to enter into the thoughts
of any one, that that so eminent and necessary a Degree has been brought into
the Church by Humane Institution. And the eighth Canon said, that whosoever
shall say that Bishops are not instituted by Divine Right, etc. Let him be
Anathema. This was positive and downright: and therefore the Cardinal of Mantua
was suspected to have caused this Piece to have been produced, purposely to
favor an opinion which he held, and durst not openly declare and own. For all
that, the Pope's Party would not yield; but they durst not say that the Council
had erred, for the Decree had been framed by the same men that had made the
rest, which past for Articles of Faith; and for want of the Formality of
Publication, it was no less the Act of a Council to which Infallibility was
ascribed. They therefore stood their ground, and maintained that these words
ought to be interpreted of the Power of Orders, and not of Jurisdiction; so
that the Congregation was spent in Janglings about the Sense of the Decree.

At length the Cardinal of Lorrain, having been long expected, entered Italy,
and the Pope could not but cause the Session to be put off, The Cardinal of
Lorrain arrives in Italy, and the Pope sends to sound him.
that the Cardinal might be present at it. But he ordered that it should not be
delayed beyond the Month of November; and we shall see in the sequel what
accidents occasioned its delay until the Month of July in the year following.
The Cardinal was received at Trent with great Ceremony; He arrives at Trent.
he made his Entry on Horseback betwixt the Cardinals of Mantua and Seripando,
who were the two chief Legates. The same day he visited the Cardinal of Mantua,
and next day had Audience of the Presidents. This Audience past in Civilities,
and mutual Protestations of Services; only the Cardinal said, that the Council
must not be taken up about nice and needless questions; that the Debates which
had divided it about the questions of the Divine Right of Residence and
Episcopacy had done great injury to its reputation, that it ought to be their
whole business to reclaim to the Church the Members who were separated from
her; that for his own part he did not think it an impossible matter, and that
many of them, and amongst the rest the Duke of Wirtemberg had a design to come
to the Council; and that it was necessary for bringing them nearer to set about
a good Reformation, without which, whereas the King his Sovereign at present
had only to do with Huguenots, he would very suddenly find work enough with
Catholics. To conclude, he told them that he had brought new Instructions to
the Ambassadors of France, that he desired to speak in name of the King in the
next Congregation, and that afterward he should do no more but give his
opinion freely, as an Archbishop. They made him answer in General terms,
commending his Piety and Devotion toward the Holy See, and excused themselves
that the Council had spent so much time about matters of so small importance,
laying the blame on the License that the Prelates took to themselves in giving
their opinions. They added that they hoped for the future things would go
better, and that his presence would contribute much to it. After several other
matters had been discoursed, it was concluded that on Monday following the
Cardinal should appear in a General Congregation, to declare the reasons of his
coming, and present the King's Letters. Though they had stood only upon
General terms, yet the Party of the Court of Rome conceived some Umbrage at the
Cardinal's Speech, because all his Actions were suspected. Some Discourses that
the French Abbots had had at Milan increased the suspicions; for they had been
heard to say, that they were going to the Council with design to join with the
Spaniards against the Court of Rome, and that they were resolved to have
Annates, Preventions, Plurality of Benefices, and other Abuses abolished;
threatening that if they were refused what they had to demand, they would make
but little noise, but return and order their own business at home. Besides
that, it was known that the Cardinal entertained a very strict Correspondence
with the Emperor, of whom the Court of Rome was not very sure, and likewise
with Maximilian King of Bohemia, who was more suspected by them than his
Father. The Pope's Party relished very ill what the Cardinal of Lorrain had
told them of the Duke of Wirtemberg coming to the Council, because of the
Conference that he had heretofore had with that Duke, and they feared that some
agreement might have been made betwixt the King of France, the Emperor and the
Germans, to force the Council to do more than the Court of Rome was willing
they should. They were even afraid that the King of Spain might enter into that
League, because after the Departure of the Count de Luna whom he sent
Ambassador to Trent, he had dispatched after him Martin Gazdellun heretofore
Secretary to the Emperor Charles the fith, with instructions which he was not
willing to trust to Letters. They immediately acquainted the Pope with all that
had past, and gave their observations accordingly. But that the French might
take no Umbrage at it, they made the Courier set out privately, and wrote to
Rome that when he came back, he should have orders to steal into Trent without
any noise.

The Cardinal of Lorrain could not come to Mundays Congregation, because of a
sit of a Fever, that obliged him for some days to keep his Chamber. The
Congregation, notwithstanding* was held, but nothing was done in it, only a
General Review made of all the Members of the Council, who upon occasion of the
French who were just come, had their several places assigned them anew. In this
Review they found the number of the Prelates to amount to two hundred and
eighteen. The Council was extremely well satisfied to see they were so
numerous; and yet that number comes far short of most part of the Ancient
Councils. None of the French spoke, neither in this nor in the following
Congregation, because they waited for the Cardinal of Lorrain. The Party of the
Court of Rome looked upon these new-comers, as a powerful reinforcement come
to the assistance of their Enemies: and therefore they doubled their vigilance,
and thought it best to fortify themselves by new Councils. The Archbishop of
Otranto was one of the leading men of that Party, and one of the most zealous
sticklers for the Grandeur of the Pope. He had a mind to assemble all those who
were linked with him in the same Interests, but so as it might not appear to be
done with intention to treat of business: and for that purpose on the
nineteenth of November, he made a great Entertainment for the Prelates who were
called the well affected. He that invited them told them that for the sake and
service of the Holy See they should not fail to come. It was not doubted but
that design was laid, for making a League against the French, and they had
certain notice given them, that there had been long Conferences about the
Subject, in that Assembly. An action that M. de l'Isle the French Ambassador
had done at Rome, increased these Umbrages against the French; for during an
indisposition which by some accident had happened to the Pope, that had almost
cost him his life, he began to tamper and carry on a kind of Negotiation, that
if the Pope should chance to die, the next Pope might be chosen at Trent by
Nations, and that the Sea might remain Vacant, until the Reformation should be
completed, that so the Council might be free, and that the Pope Elect might
accept of that Reformation, according as he should find it settled. This vexed
the Pope to purpose; for besides that these designs did not at all please him,
men do not like that way of counting before the Host, and framing of Designs in
prospect of their death. All these things together allarmed him mightily, so
that he held several Congregations of Cardinals, wherein he desired them to
find out some sure means to secure him from the Enterprises of the Council,
which, as he said, he considered as his greatest Enemy. He was certainly very
faithfully served by his Pensioners; and yet it was not altogether to his mind;
for he complained that all the Bishops whom he entertained were against him,
and that he sed an Army of Enemies at Trent. Notwithstanding he continued still
to multiply these Enemies; for he sent away all the Italian Bishops that were
at Rome, even to the Bishop of Aosta Ambassador there from the Duke of Savoy.
But he discharged the Archbishop of Torre from going thither, because in the
time of Paul III. he had maintained the Divine Right of Residence with some
Zeal and Fervor. He made the same prohibition to the Bishop of Cesana, because
he was the intimate friend of the Cardinal of Naples, whose two Uncles the
Carraffa's the Pope had put to death by the hand of the common Executioner,
besides the Persecutions wherewith he had afflicted himself, and so had reason
to consider him as an Enemy. About the same time he dispatched into France,
Sebastiano Gualtero Bishop of Viterbo, a thorough paced Zealot for the
Interests of the Court of Rome. The pretext of this Embassy was, the carrying
of forty thousand Crowns to the King, being part of an hundred thousand which
the Pope had promised him for the War against the Huguenots; but the true
reason was, that he might be a Spy over the Actions of the Council of France.

The Cardinal of Lorrain is received in Congregation; he speaks, and after him
du Ferrier, who offends the Council.
At length the Cardinal of Lorrain resolved to appear in Congregation the twenty
third of November. The French and he had agreed, that he should first make a
Speech, and then the Ambassador Du Ferrier. At first the Legates opposed this
Resolution, saying that in this Council, neither under Paul nor Julius it had
been allowed that Ambassadors should speak publicly in Congregation, but
only on the day of their Reception. But at length they suffered themselves to
be over persuaded by the Cardinal of Lorrain, and permitted Du Ferrier to
speak. The King's Letters to the Council were then read, which contained only
Prayers, and general Exhortations to set about a Reformation of the Church. The
Letters being read; the Cardinal spoke, and began with a long and pathetick
description of the miseries which the Wars about Religion caused in France, and
prayed the Council to remedy them. He insisted upon what he had already said to
the Legates, that they should avoid all unnecessary questions; and then
demanded two things in the name of the King of France; first that they might
have some respect to those who were separated from the Church, in granting them
all that might be allowed without doing prejudice to the Faith; and that they
would consider them as Brethren as far as might be. Next he demanded in name of
the King, a Reformation in the Church, whereof he laid open the extraordinary
Corruptions, and there took an occasion to make an ingenious Application to the
Clergy of the History of Jonas. We, we are the cause of the Storm, said he,
throw us into the Sea, and the Tempest will cease. The Cardinal of Mantua made
a civil answer to that Harangue, protesting that the Council had always been
extremely concerned for the miseries of France, and would do all that was
possible to clear the truth, confirm the true Service of God, and rectify the
manners and the disorders in Discipline.

The Ambassador Du Ferrier had leave to speak next, and spoke very smartly. He
told them that his Master demanded that the Church might be restored to its
Ancient Luster, and that the good and holy Laws which the Devil had stole away
and hid, might be brought back from Bondage into the City of God. He made use
of an Allusion that pricked to the quick the Adorers of the Court of Rome. If
you ask me, said he, why France is not in peace, and whence proceed those
horrible divisions that rend it in pieces. I shall answer as Jehu did to Joram
when he asked, is it peace, Jehu? What peace so long as, etc. answered he; here
he stopped, saying ye know the rest. And indeed they all supplied what was
wanting in the Citation by the rest of the Text: What peace, so long as the
Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel, and her Witchcrafts are so many. He concluded,
that if they endeavored not that Reformation, all the Blood that should be
spilt, would be demanded at their hands. This Liberty did exceedingly displease
the Pope's Party, but they Legates dissembled their discontent, because they
were afraid of the French.

The Cardinal of Lorrain holds private Congregations in his house, which
allarms the Legates, and Court of Rome.
It was the Cardinal of Lorrain's custom afterward to hold Congregations in his
house of French Prelates and Divines: And the Legates looked upon this as an
encroachment, fearing that if the Spaniards did the same, the Council would at
last be crumbled into a great many Caballs. However seeing they durst not
openly oppose it, they gained two Traitors, one amongst the Spaniards called
Bartholome Sabastiani Bishop of Pati in Sicily, and the other amongst the
French named James Hugonis a Cordelier, Doctor of the Sorbonne, and Divine to
the Cardinal of Lorrain. This last Spy gave them a faithful account of all
that past in their Assemblies, and discovered to them the Mysteries of the
Court of France. Amongst other things he told them, that most of the evils of
France were occasioned by the Queen-Mothers favoring the Heretics; that the
Ambassadors who, were at Trent, were corrupted also: that the Cardinal of
Lorrain was in reality a good Catholic; but that his head run upon some
impertinent Reformations, as the restoring the Chalice to the People, the
taking away of Images, and the bringing the Vulgar Tongue into use in Divine
Service; wherein he was seconded by the Duke of Guise, and his other Relations;
but that of all the rest the Bishop of Valence ought to be most suspected,
because he sided with the Queen for favoring the Heretics. The Bishop of
Vintimiglia to whom he imparted every thing that past, gave him fifty Crowns of
Gold, which after some Ceremonious refusal he accepted.

The Session was to have been held the six and twentieth of November. But there
was nothing in readiness, and it was to little purpose for the Legates to
complain of the tediousness of the Prelates in giving their opinions, the
Session must of necessity be deferred sinedie, because they could not tell when
matters would be ready. During all this, the Spaniards abated nothing of their
Zeal, for having Episcopacy to be declared of Divine Right. The Senator Molinez
being sent by the Marquess of Pescara from Milan came to Trent, to deal with
the Spamards that they would condescend; but that was to no purpose. The
Cardinal of Lorrain in one of the private Congregations that were held at his
house, desired the French Prelates and Divines to give their opinions about
that question: And they unanimously agreed that Episcopacy was of Divine Right.
However they were not so eager upon it as the Spaniards, to have the Point
decided by the Council. On the contrary they would have been very well
satisfied that the Council should have waved those curious questions, as they
called them, and applied themselves to the matter of Reformation, which in
their opinion was of far greater Consequence, and that they also moved in the
public Congregations, and many times warmly urged it. In the Congregation of
the twenty sixth of November the Bishop of Nimes moved that they should not
concern themselves so much about a Controversy of so little Importance,
wherein there was no more but a strife of words, but that some regard ought to
be had for other Prelates, and for time which was thereby sadly misspent. Don
Diego Covarruvias Bishop of Rodrigo replied, that they had been obliged to give
their opinions upon that Subject, since the matter had been proposed by the
Legates. The Cardinals Seripando and Simoneta rose up, and denied that the
Legates had made the Proposition, and because they sound themselves backed by
the French, they spoke bitterly against the Liberty that the Spaniards took to
themselves. This matter grew so high, that it disgusted the Cardinal of
Lorrain, who was vexed that he had been the cause of the harsh usage of the
Spaniards.

Whilst they were casting about for means to make dispatch in Business, some
proposed the deputing of Committees to determine several matters, whilst the
Council should be taken up about others. But this was not embraced by the
Italians, because it was proposed that these Committees should consist of an
equal number of Deputies from every Nation; and the Italians who were most
numerous in the Council would not lose their advantage, but insisted to have
proportionably more Deputies in those Congregations: which being disliked by
the rest, the Proposition went no farther.

In the Congregation of the first of December there happened a scuffle that
made great noise Melchior Avosmediano Bishop of Guadix a Spaniard, reasoning
about the Canons which the Legates had minuted and presented to the Council,
The Bishop of Guadix basely used for having spoken with some liberty in favor
of the Bishops.
made some reflections upon a Clause of the last Chapter, which imported, That
Bishops who are called by the Pope are true and lawful. He observed that that
kind of expression was Ambiguous, that it expressed not what was intended it
should, seeing all that was intended was, to assert that Bishops who are
promoted to that Dignity by the Pope without Election, and without being
inaugurated by other Bishops, are notwithstanding true and lawful Bishops:
whereas as the Canon stood worded, it would seem to insinuate that a Bishop
could not be a lawful Bishop without being called and confirmed by the Pope,
which was not true. To prove this he alleged the instance of the four
Suffragans of the Archbishop of Saltzburg, who took no confirmation from the
Pope, and were nevertheless owned to be lawful Bishops. Cardinal Simoneta
interrupting him solved the difficulty thus; that if the Archbishop of
Saltzburg and other Primats confirmed Bishops, they did it by Authority from
the Pope. But Tomaso Cassello Bishop della Cava in the Kingdom of Naples, a
slave to the Pope, and one whom the Legates employed to raise stirs, rested not
there: for starting up, he cried out that the Bishop of Guadix ought to be
turned out as a Schismatic. Two or three Bishops of the same Faction seconded
him; and immediately followed a fearful noise of Tongues, Hands, and Feet in
the Assembly, some for the Bishop who was accused of Schism, and some against
him. This exceedingly displeased the Bishops beyond the Alps, who thereby saw
what they were to expect, when they should offer to speak with any freedom.
When the noise was over, the Cardinal of Lorrain could not forbear to say, that
it was an insolent Procedure; that the Bishop of Guadix had not spoken amiss,
and if he had been a French Prelate, that he himself would have appealed to a
freer Council: that if such things were suffered, the French would depart and
hold a National Synod in France. In effect, this poor Bishop had so much reason
in what he said, that the Council was obliged to alter the Canon according to
his advice, and instead of Bishops called, they said, that Bishops promoted by
the Pope are lawful.

The Congregation met again next day, and appointed the Session to be held the
seventeenth of the same Month of December. The Cardinal of Mantua severely
Censured the Tumult which happened the day before: the Bishop della Cava would
not submit, but Justified himself, affirming that he had reason to say what he
said, his Carriage was looked upon to be insolent and proud; but it was born
with, because he was of the darling Faction.

The Spaniards again bring about the question of the Divine Right of Episcopacy.
None of those difficulties could dishearten the Spaniards; they stood their
ground still; and Gilberto de Nogueras Bishop of Aliphe started the question
again about the Divine Right of Episcopacy. He confirmed his opinion by strong
Arguments, and then proved it to be false that the power of the Church was put
into the hands of a single Person; he went on and said, that the Popes power
did not extend to the annulling of Canons, and abolishing of Laws; and
thereupon began to quote the Canons alleged die Gratian, wherein the Ancient
Popes acknowledged themselves subject to the Decrees of the Fathers, and of
their Predecessors. But the Cardinal of Warmia one of the Legates interrupted
him, saying that the question was about the Superiority of Bishops over
Priests, and that he digressed. The Bishop of Aliphe made answer that since
they were treating of the Authority of Bishops, it was no digression to speak
of the power of the Pope, who was a Bishop. The Archbishop of Granada rose up,
and made answer in a higher strain; he said, that others had talked enough of
the Pope's Authority, and spoke things which were not only superfluous but
pernicious. He glanced at the Speech of the General Lainez who had struck down
the Bishops and Council under the Pope's Feet. The Bishop della Cava, the
hottest always of the Romish Faction, made answer, that they who had spoken of
it, spoke as became them, and not as the Bishop of Aliphe. Cardinal Simoneta
made a sign to the Bishop della Cava to hold his peace, and silence being made,
the Bishop of Aliphe began again But when they perceived that he persisted to
cite Canons to prove that the Pope is subject to the Laws, the Legate of Warmia
interrupted him a second time, and so he was forced to hold his tongue, and
give place to Antonio Maria Salviati Bishop of St. Paul in France; who by an
exhortation to meekness and peace endeavored to allay the heats of those
Commotions.

In the Congregation of the fourth of December the Cardinal of Lorrain
delivered his opinion concerning the question, whether Episcopacy be of Divine
or Humane Right. He proved by diverse passages of the Ancients, which made them
admire his Memory, that it is of Divine Right. But on the other hand he
alleged several instances of Bishops who had owned, that they held all their
Authority from the Holy See; so that his discourse was so wavering, and so full
of uncertainty and ambiguity, that it was manifest enough he had no mind to
declare his positive opinion concerning that Point. But the French Prelates who
spoke after him, were far more sincere and bold; for they declared frankly for
the Divine Right; nevertheless they concluded with the Cardinal, that according
to their Judgment it was not absolutely necessary to determine that question in
the Council. So that the first part of their discourse displeased the Legates,
and Pope's Pensioners, and the latter part, the Spaniards. The truth is, the
Spaniards and French drove at the same end, to wit, the maintaining the
Authority of Bishops against the ambitious enterprises, and covetous
self-interessed Practices of the Court of Rome. But they took different ways to
do this, according to the different humors of their Country. The Spaniards
who are close and cunning, were for striking at the root of the Pope's
Authority by hidden Mines, and were persuaded that if it were one declared that
Episcopacy and Residence are of Divine Right, the Episcopal Order would
retrieve its Credit with the People, and so they might with success withstand
the attempts made by the Court of Rome upon the Persons and Rights of the
Bishops. But the French, on the other hand, who are brisk and forward, have not
commonly such distant Views, nor are they very skillful in those Politic
fetches, which are proper to the Italians and Spaniards: they shoot straight at
the mark, and sometimes offend by too great sincerity, or, to word it better,
they many times hinder the success of their own designs, by imprudent
discoveries. They judged it therefore necessary, without farther Mystery, to
have it defined, that a Council is Superior to the Pope, or at least, to have
it enacted, that the Pope may not dispense with, nor derogate from the Canons.
The Spaniards wished with all their hearts that these Decisions could have been
obtained from the Council; but they thought it impossible, nor could they find
a fair occasion to state the Question, nor any Pretext to quarrel with the
Pope's Authority, since they admit of the Council of Florence, whereas the
French receive the Council of Basil, which has placed a Council above the
Pope, and reject that of Florence.

The Cardinal of Lorrain essays means to compose the Controversy about the
Divine Right of Episcopacy but is slighted, and the Cardinal is angry.
The Cardinal of Lorrain proposed a new form of Decree, to try if he could put
an end to that Controversy; these words established by Divine Right, were not
in it, but in place of them he put, instituted by Jesus Christ. The Legates
dispatched a Courier to Rome with a Copy of the Cardinal's Draught, and the
observations of some Doctors of the Canon Law upon it. The Cardinal complained
of that procedure, that having given them the project of a Decree, before it
had been proposed in Congregation, they had so far abused his Confidence; and
thereupon took occasion to expostulate with them for the unjust Jealousies
which the Italians conceived of the French, and for the impertinent Proverb
that was often in their mouth, from the Spanish Scab we are fallen into the
French Disease; for so they call that foul Distemper, which the French call the
Neapolitan Disease. The French being netled at these Railleries, and besides,
intending to prosecute their design of bringing the Pope under the Power of a
Council, resolved among themselves to speak more boldly in the Congregation of
the seventeenth of December. Lansac who set them upon it being unwilling that
the Legates should be surprised, gave them a hint of it, by telling the Bishop
of Avranches who was to speak, that he should deliver his opinion freely, A
free Discourse of the Bishop of Avranches.
and that the King his Master was powerful enough to bear him out in it. The
Bishop spoke, and not only proved Episcopacy to be of Divine Right, but that
the Authority of the Pope differed only in Degree from that of Bishops; that
it is circumscribed by the Boundaries of Canons; and praised the Custom of the
Parliaments of France, which declare Bulls that are contrary to the Canons to
be abusive, and prohibit the Execution of them. This Discourse was impatiently
heard; but it was winked at, and the Pope's Party took care for the future to
speak with greater moderation.

The Cardinal of Lorrain, as it had been concerted, came not to that
Congregation, wherein the Bishop of Avranches had spoken with so much Liberty:
and the Pretext he took for his absence, was the death of the King of Navarre,
of which he had the news the same day. The death of this Prince was like to
have changed the Countenance of the Council; for the Cardinal of Lorrain was
tempted to return to France, because there was like to be a great alteration of
Assairs in that Kingdom, and he could have been willing to have been there, to
take a share in the Government. The following Congregation was taken up in
Ceremonies of Thanksgiving for the Election of Maximilian King of Bohemia, who
was chosen King of the Romans. That was the thing the Emperor had been driving
at for a long time; and so soon as it was accomplished, he entered into
Conference with the Protestant Princes, to persuade them to submit to the
Council. They met about it, and having consulted together in common, they
presented to the Emperor the answer which they promised some twenty months
before in the Assembly of Naumburg. In that answer they declared, that from all
that was done in the Council of Trent, they appealed to a free Council, and
proposed ten Conditions which they knew well enough would not be granted them,
upon which they promised to come to the Council, and submit to it. For instance
they demanded that it might not be called by the Pope, that he should not
preside in it, that he should be subject to it, that all things should be
decided in it by the word of God alone, that the Divines of the Ausburg
Confession might have a Decisive Vote in it; that matters should not always be
carried by Plurality of Votes, but by those which were most consonant to truth,
etc. The Emperor received the Writing, and in General Terms promised to
endeavor the settling of Peace.

The Decree of Residence is completed, and it is not decided whether it he of
Divine Right or not.
After so much time and so many words spent about the Article of the Divine
Right of Episcopacy, nothing was ye concluded, because the Legates expected the
Decision from Rome. Whilst this was expecting they published the Chapter of
Residence, wherein without deciding whether it be of Divine Right or not, it
was commanded under Penalties and Reward. The Cardinal of Lorrain who was
Archbishop of Reims, and who in all appearance had no design to reside there,
gave his opinion about the necessity of Residence, in his ordinary manner,
overturning in one period what he had set up in another. At the same time the
Legates communicated to the Ambassadors of Princes, some Articles of
Reformation which related to several Abuses about the Sacrament of Orders,
against the next Session. But the Ambassadors, and particularly these of the
Emperor, and Germans valued them but very little, because they sound none of
the Heads which they had proposed amongst them. Reasons that show it impossible
that the Demands which all made for a Reformation should have any Success.
They complained that they were still amused with Trifles, and that the more
weighty matters were neglected. It was, really, a rare and edifying reflection
to consider with what fervor and zeal the Ambassadors and most of the
Prelates demanded Reformation: It may be said that the Pope, Princes and
Bishops all of them demanded it, and agreed to the Point in General. But when
it came to particulars, they could not jump together in any one thing, because
of the prodigious diversity of interests, and because every one was for
reforming his Neighbor, but would not be meddled with himself. The Court of
Rome consented cordially to the Reformation of the Bishops and Princes,
provided it might be let alone. The Bishops desired the Reformation of the
Court of Rome, and of Princes, to get themselves out of the reach of the
attempts of the Secular Power and of the Pope, but they could not endure that
their own Coppy-hold should be touched, either as to their Authority, or the
Diminution of their Revenues. Princes and Kings demanded the Reformation of the
Clergy both in the Head and Members, but they would in no terms let go the
means they had in their hands of oppressing the Church, hindering Canonical
Elections, and conferring Benefices upon whom they thought sit. The People who,
alone, as being disinteressed, could labor most effectually in that
Reformation, had neither Vote nor Credit in the Council. And therefore all that
great design of Reformation must needs vanish in smoke.

Since the Legates had made way for falling again upon the Point of Residence,
by causing the Chapter to be read, which they had framed for decreeing it, the
Prelates began to speak again upon the same Subject. The Cardinal of Lorrain
assembled all the French at his house, and would hear them speak to that Point,
where they all with one consent concluded Residence to be of Divine Right. In
one of the subsequent Congregations, Alberto Duimio Bishop of Veglia, and
Island of Scavonia, delivered his opinion with much force, he demonstrated the
same thing by a great many Reasons and Arguments; which none before him had
done, but barely declared their Judgment upon the Point, without insisting in
the probation of it. He laid great stress upon the saying of our Savior, that
the good shepherd goes before his sheep, and the sheep follow him: for they
know his Voice. He could not thoroughly handle nor dive to the bottom of that
Subject, without hinting at many things contrary to the Interests of the Court
of Rome and the Pope's Authority: and Cardinal Simoneta durst not interrupt
him, because of the Scuffle that some days before happened upon occasion of the
Bishop of Guadix, who had been interrupted; but he took him up privately and
rebuked him sharply, for having spoken against the Pope. The Bishop made the
best excuse he could, and some days after desired leave to be gone upon Pretext
of indisposition, which was very willingly granted him.

About that time, the Controversy concerning Residence changed Countenance,
there was now no bringing of Arguments and Testimonies to prove it to be of
Divine Right, and they who judged it to be of Humane Right took no more pains
to find out reasons to confirm their Sentiment. They thought it enough to
overcome the contrary Party, by the Consequences of their Doctrine; for, said
they, that opinion tends directly to the Ruin of the Authority of the Pope:
because, by asserting the Divine Right of Residence, it takes from him the
Power of transferring, diminishing, dividing, uniting and changing Episcopal
Sees; and indeed that was the design of the Spaniards. But they dissembled it,
and wanted not reasons to prove that the Divine Right of Residence would
advance the Papal Dignity, and render it more considerable, because when
Bishops did reside; the Revenue toward the Clergy would increase, and by
consequence the Authority of the Pope, as being the Chief of Bishops. And so
from that time forward the Greatness of the Pope was the only hinge upon which
moved that Controversy about Residence.

A Minute of a Decree is made at Rome concerning the Authority of the Pope and
Bishops, which was rejected by the Bishops in Council.
The Pope was so much afflicted for the death of his Nephew Frederico Borromeo,
that he fell dangerously sick considering his great age. And yet the troubles
he received from the Council vexed him more than the death of his Kinsman. He
held frequent Congregations of Cardinals for determining those two
Controversies which made so much noise, about the Institution of Episcopacy,
and Residence As to that of Institution, he gave his answer at last, that it
was an erroneous opinion, that Episcopacy as to the Power of Jurisdiction was
of Divine Right, and instituted by Jesus Christ; unless it were in this Sense,
that Jesus Christ does all that the Pope does, and concluded that these words
of Divine Right ought to be wholly left out, or that the Decree must be made in
this form, That Jesus Christ has instituted Bishops to be made by the Pope
with such Authority as he should think fit to give them for the good of the
Church, it being still in his Power to enlarge or restrain it. As to the Point
of Residence he gave Orders that it should not be declared of Divine Right,
because he would retain to himself the Power of dispensing with it; so that
whatsoever they did, they should have a care that nothing were enacted contrary
to his Authority. As to the Prorogation of the Session, he wrote in General
Terms, that it should not be put off above a Fortnight, nor yet held unless all
matters were in a readiness. The Legates thought that the Decree about the
Institution of Episcopacy, and of the Pope's Power over Bishops, in the form
that it was sent from Rome, would never be admitted in the Council; and
therefore they found themselves obliged to write a second time, and send the
Bishop of Vintimiglia to the Pope.

Because the matter of Cup was referred to the Pope, the Duke of Bavaria having
no more to demand of the Council as to that Point, sent a solemn Embassy to
Rome for obtaining of it. This Embassy went by Trent, and the Ambassadors had
Conferences with the Legates and Cardinal of Lorrain. That allarmed the
Spaniards who always opposed the Restitution of the Cup. At the same time the
news of the Battle of Dreux came to Trent, which was fought the seventeenth of
December. The Catholics gave out that they had obtained the Victory, though
they lost in it almost double the number that the Protestants had lost; for
they lost five thousand men, and the Protestants but three. But they alleged
that they continued Masters of the Field. The two Generals were taken
Prisoners, the Prince of Conde on the side of the Protestants, and the
Constable on the Catholics side. This was a fatal Year for the terrible
Divisions that rent France in pieces: no less that fourteen Armies at one time
on foot, which on both sides committed fearful disorders. Admiral Coligny
after that Battle, notwithstanding the taking of the Prince of Conde, kept his
Army together, and made even some progress. Nevertheless, there was a
Thanksgiving at Trent for the Victory, as if it had been real, when, indeed, it
was but imaginary. They were persuaded at Rome that the Huguenots were totally
routed, and that so there was no more need of a Council, wherefore some were of
opinion that it should either be dissolved or suspended. But the Pope had
better news than the rest, and saw very well, that it was not yet time to
dissolve the Council. He thought he did enough if he could retain the Power and
Authority that he had got over it. The Emperor's design of coming to Inspruck
in the Neighborhood of Trent, filled him with new Jealousies. He made no
doubt, but that he had secret intelligences with Spain and France, and he could
not see into the Bottom of it. So much he knew in General, that these
intelligences tended to the lessening of his Authority, and the Reformation of
the Abuses of his Court. And therefore to prevent Reformations from those hands
through which the Court of Rome had not mind to pass, he published a Brief
dated the twenty seventh of December, whereby he reformed some Corruptions of
the Rota; and made also some other slight Reformations of his Court. This, in
the main, came to nothing at all, but however it was useful to his Legates and
Pensioners at Trent; for they made answer to those who demanded the Reformation
of the Court of Rome, that seeing the Pope made it his business to reform
himself, the Council might very well spare themselves the trouble. The year one
thousand five hundred sixty and two was concluded with a Congregation held the
thirtieth of December, wherein it was resolved to put off the Session for a
Fortnight.

1563. The French present their Memoires containing 34 Demands. They are sent
to Rome, and the Pope is allarmed at them.
To begin the New Year one thousand five hundred and sixty three, the French
presented four and thirty Articles concerning the Reformation which they
desired. Most part of them regarded the Reformation of the Clergy, and the
abuses in Ordination, and in preferring undeserving men both as to manners and
learning. Some of them also related to the Court of Rome, and tended to the
diminution of its Revenues. The fourteenth of these Articles demanded a
prohibition of the Plurality of Benefices, the sixteenth, that the Sacraments
might be administered gratis. In the seventeeth they demanded Divine Service in
the Vulgar Tongue; that is to say, that the chief Prayers should be said in
French as well as in Latin. The eighteenth proposed the Communion in both
kinds, and required the revival of the Decree of Gelasus. The twenty sixth
demanded the Restitution of the Jurisdiction of Bishops in all their Dioceses
over all that lived within them, not excepting Monasteries; unless the Chiefs
of Orders, and the Monasteries where the Generals of Orders did reside. The
nine and twentieth desired Reformation of the abuse which the People made of
Images, the abuse of Pilgrimages, Fraternities, Relics, and Indulgences. The
thirtieth demanded restitution of the custom of public Penance, as it had
been in the primitive Church. The Legates and Pope's Party disliked these
demands, and the manner wherein they were presented; for that was with the
usual Threat, that if they had not satisfaction in admitting their Proposals,
they would provide for themselves by a National Council. The Legates sent these
Articles to the Pope, being very sure that he could not read them but with
extraordinary trouble, especially seeing one of the Propositions demanded the
abolition of Annates, and of all the other means, which are used at Rome for
hooking in Money from the Provinces. They commissioned the Bishop of Viterbo to
carry these Memoires to the Pope; and the Cardinal of Lorrain loaded him with
Complements for his Holiness, desiring him that he would beseech his Holiness
not to take it ill that the King, and they by Orders from him, did demand
things which they judged necessary for the welfare of France, and at the same
time and by the same hand offered the Pope his Mediation for taking up the
differences about the Institution of Bishops and Residence. These Memoires of
the French Ambassadors were given to the Legates, without the hearty
condescension of the Prelates of that Nation. For there were some Articles
amongst them, that tended to the Diminution both of the Authority and Revenues
of the Bishops, which went against the Hair. But they consented that they might
be presented to the Council, in hopes that the Spanish Bishops who are Great
Lords, and jealous of their Grandeur would have opposed them. When they saw
that the Memoires were sent to Rome, they perceived that it would fall to the
Pope's share, to cut and carve in them, as he had done in all the rest, and
they were afraid that he might compound with the King of France to their Cost;
in sacrificing to him the interest of the Bishops, to make him spare the Court
of Rome; as it had been done betwixt Francis the First and Leo X. when they
made the Concordat. And therefore they began to make secret Cabals to get the
Articles that concerned them struck out of the Memoires. But Lansac perceiving
it, called them together, and rebuked them severely for daring to oppose the
Will of the King.

There were now two Bishops in Deputation at Rome, the Bishops of Vintimiglia
and Viterbo. The first was employed to make fresh Remonstrances about the
Subject of the Institution of Bishops, and their Residence, that the Pope might
put the Decree into another form than that which he had formerly sent. He
arrived the first of January, having made his Journey in seven days. He gave
the Pope an account of all that past in the Council, and of the different
dispositions of the Members of it. The Pope immediately held a Congregation of
Cardinals about the Point of the Institution of Bishops, which was most urgent.
And it was there resolved that the Decision should be sent to the Legates, in
this form. That Bishops hold the chief rank in the Church dependant on the
Bishop of Rome; by whom they are admitted and received in partem solicitudinis.
It was upon the main the same with the former, but the form a little softer:
and the Pope for a recompense of the qualification which he had suffered to be
made in the Canon of the Institution of Bishops, would have the Canon that
related to his own Authority to run in these terms. That the Pope has
Authority to feed and to govern the Church Universal in place of Jesus Christ,
who has imparted to him, as his Vicar General, all his Authority. And ordered
his Legates that in the Chapter of Doctrine they should enlarge more upon the
matter, and make use of the Terms of the Council of Florence; which says that
the Holy See, that is to say the Pope, has the Primacy over all the Church,
that he is the Successor of St. Peter, who was Prince of the Apostles; that he
is the true Vicar of Jesus Christ, the Head of all the Churches; the Father and
Master of all Christians, to whom the Lord has given full power to govern the
Church Universal. He enjoined the Legates not to deviate from that form which
had been authorized by a General Council. At the same time, that he might
prevent the designs of the French, who would have had a Pope elected by the
Council, in case the present Pope had died, he published a Bull wherein he
declared that having intention to go to Bologna, in case he should die in his
Journey, he ordained that his Successor should not be chosen but at Rome.

The Bishop of Viterbo, who was charged with the Memoires of the French,
arrived a little time after the instructions of the Bishop of Vintimiglia had
been dispatched. The Pope very impatiently heard the Memoires read; but the
Bishop of Viterbo pacified him a little, by giving him hopes that if he
condescended to some of these Articles, a part might be cut off, and the rest
moderated; but particularly he gave him ease when he assured him that the
greatest part of the French Bishops disliked those Reformations, and that they
were ready to oppose them. The Pope held a Congregation upon that Subject: and
it was therein resolved that the Articles should be committed to Doctors of
the Canon Law, to make their observations upon them. At the same time the Pope
sent Orders to the Cardinal of Ferrara his Legate in France, to represent to
the King, that some of these Propositions tended to the Diminution of the Royal
Authority, because they deprived the King of the Collation of Benefices, and
amongst others of Abbeys; that the disposal of Benefices was a very commodious
Privilege to him for rewarding his faithful Servants: that to raise the
Authority of Bishops was not the way to strengthen the Authority of the King;
and that the more powerful Bishops were, the more troublesome they were to
Princes. He sent his Legate likewise Orders to give the King the forty thousand
Crowns remaining unpay'd of the hundred thousand which he had obliged himself
to furnish him; but with all that he should not part from them but upon the
Condition that he had till them required, I mean, the abolition of the
Pragmatick Sanction in all the Parliaments. He prayed also the King to consider
that by diminishing the Revenues of the Holy See, he would be deprived of means
to procure Respect and Obedience; that the Tithes of Tithes were by the Law due
to the chief Priest, and that they had been wisely converted into Annats: and
concluded with an exhortation to the King that he would sent new Instructions
to his Ambassadors. He sent likewise to Trent the Censures and Observations
which the Canonists and Divines had made upon the Memoires of the French.

The Minute of the Decree concerning the Pope's Authoritycomes from Rome, and
meets with much contradiction, especially from the French.
The Courier who brought to Trent the Answer to the Remonstrances which the
Bishop of Vintimiglia had been charged with, arrived on the fourteenth of
January: and next day was the time appointed for perfixing the day of the
Session. A Congregation General was held; and it was therein resolved that that
deliberation should be put off till the fourth of February, because they could
not as yet certainly tell when matters might be in a readiness. The Legates
distributed Copies of the Minute of the Decree which was sent from Rome
touching the Institution of Bishops, and declared that they would begin the
Congregations again for consulting about it. These Minutes had the approbation
of the Patriarchs and oldest Archbishops who gave their opinions first. But
when it came to the turn of the Spaniards and French speak, many difficulties
were started against the Decrees as they had been conceived by the Cardinals.
First this Clause was objected against, that Bishops hold a chief rank
depending on the Bishop of Rome; that was thought to be an ambiguous
expression; but after some debate they who made the objection consented to have
it said, a chief rank under the Pope. Some also did not like that it should be
said, that Bishops are admitted by the Pope in partem solicitudinis; because
that signified clearly enough, that Bishops are appointed by the Pope, and not
by our Lord Jesus Christ: but above all they stumbled at the Article of the
Pope's Authority, and that the Canon gave him the Pope to govern the Church
Universal. The French thought that by these words the Pope had a design to
establish a Superiority over the Council. They were nevertheless willing it
should be said that he has the power to rule all the Churches, ecclesias
universas; but not the Church Universal, ecclesiam universalem. Most part
fansied that to be a very nice distinction, and of little solidity. But the
rest maintained that by giving the Pope power to govern the Church Universal,
they exalted his Tribunal above the Church, whereas the Tribunal of the Church
is exalted above that of the Pope. They alleged that there was a great
difference betwixt being exalted above all Churches, that is to say, above
every Particular Church, and being exalted above the Church Universal, that is,
whole Church taken together and assembled in a Council. This occasioned great
debate: the Pope's Party alleged the Authority of the Council of Florence
which had made use of these terms; and that did a little puzzle the Spaniards,
because their Country own the Council of Florence for a General Council. But
the French set light by that Authority, and opposed to it the Councils of
Constance and Basil, which have defined the Superiority of a Council over the
Pope. Upon this occasion there arose a great contest betwixt the Italians and
French; for the Italians maintained that the Council of Florence was a General
Council, that that of Basil was Schismatical, and the other of Constance partly
approved, and partly rejected. But the French, on the contrary, denied the
Council of Florence to have been a lawful Council, and said that the others of
Constance and Basil were lawful and General. The Legates well perceived that
no good would come of these contests; and therefore that they might have time
to sent to Rome the Censures which the Bishops on the other side of the Alps,
had made upon the Decree composed by the Pope, touching the Institution of
Bishops, and the Authority of the Holy See, they employed the Congregations
about the Point of Residence. The Cardinals of Lorrain and Madruccio the day
before, had mode a Project of Decision concerning the Controversy of
Residence, which displeased not the Legates. But the Presidents having had time
to reflect upon it, observed a Clause that gave them Umbrage; which was, that
Bishops are obliged by the Command of God to guide their Flocks, and to watch
in Person over them. They knew very well that the Pope would make a sinister
interpretation of these words, and think that they favored the opinion of the
Divine Right of Residence: and therefore they left it out, of their own heads,
and presented in the Congregation the Minute corrected after their own way.
That action choked the Cardinals of Lorrain and Madruccio: Lorrain protested
that for the future he would not meddle in any thing, and Cardinal Madruccio
said, that in the Council there was another secret Council, which took all the
Authority to it self. The Legates finding that they gained no ground, put a
stop to the Congregations, in expectation of an answer from Rome, and the
Pope's Party began to make Factions that they might break up the Council for
good and all. At this the Cardinal of Lorrain broke out and acted with less
reserve than he had formerly done. He complained that there was a design of
breaking up the Council; he spoke to the Ambassadors of Princes, that their
Masters might intercede with the Pope, not only for the Continuation of the
Council; but especially that it might be left to its liberty, saying that
nothing could be proposed or resolved upon but what pleased the Legates, that
the Legates did nothing but what the Pope thought fit, and that Decisions even
about the smallest matters must be expected from Rome: that if matters went on
still in that manner, they would make a pacification in France, whereby all
should have liberty to live as they thought good, until the holding of a free
Council: that for his own part, he would have patience until the next Session;
but that if affairs went no better, he would protest and withdraw, and carry
all the French along with him, that they might celebrate a National Council at
Home. The French Ambassador residing at Rome made the same Expostulations and
Menaces, that the Cardinal did at Trent. But the Pope began to be accustomed to
that noise, and was not a whit startled at these Bugbears of National Synods.
He made answer, that the Council was more than free, that it was even
licentious; that if the Italians made any Factions and Cabals, he knew nothing
of it, but that yet they were forced upon it, if they did so, by the violence
of the Bishops beyond the Alps, who endeavored to trample under foot the
Authority of the Holy See. The Bishop of the five Churches the Emperor's
Ambassador for the Kingdom of Hungary, went about the same time to wait on his
Master, and to inform him of the Factions and Conduct of the Italians. The
Archbishop of Granada and those of his Party entreated him to procure from the
Emperor a Letter to the King of Spain, praying him to solicit a Reformation.
The Legates were informed of this, and looked upon all that Conduct, as an
effect of the Councils of the Cardinal of Lorrain; and to Countermine that
League, they deputed John Francisco Commendone Bishop of Zante to the Emperor,
under pretext of Justifying the Council in that they had not as yet proposed
the Articles of Reformation which his Imperial Majesty had presented b his
Ambassadors. Seeing these misunderstandings grew daily greater and greater,
the Legates sufficiently perplexed sent a writing to all the Ambassadors,
begging the Assistance of their Councils in the present Junctures. The French
slipped not that occasion to tell their minds freely; and therefore said that the
Council was made use of to increase corruptions, instead of lessening them;
that a stop ought to be put to those shameful underhand dealings which were
continually practiced, that they ought not to labor to raise the Pope above
the Church Universal, that the best way was to follow the Decrees of the
Council of Constance. And farther added that one cause of disagreement was that
the Clark of the Council did not faithfully set down the opinions, and that
therefore he ought to have an Assistant. The Imperialists made Remonstrances
much of the same nature, and particularly pressed the necessity of Joining an
Assistant to the Clark of the Council. The other mean low spirited Ambassadors
made answer in general terms, that they must continue the Council, and
endeavor an Union amongst the Members.

Whilst affairs were in this condition, the Council being under a kind of
suspension, and no Congregation held, the Bishop of Vintimiglia returned from
Rome fraighted with Civilities and Complements from the Pope to all the
Prelates, and provisions also of Employments and Pensions which the Pope gave
to some of the Council. The Bishop of Aosta Ambassador of the Duke of Savoy
arrived, and the Legates perceiving that they gained nothing by interrupting
the Congregations, and that it gave ground for murmurings and private
Assemblies, where the spirit of discord and faction grew daily stronger and
stronger, resolved to begin Congregations again, and to take the occasion of
receiving the Ambassador of Savoy. They therefore sent the Bishop of
Sinigaglia to the Cardinal of Lorrain, to know of him if there were no means to
satisfy the Bishops of France, and to tell him that the terms of governing the
Church Universal, whereat they took so great offense, are used by St. Bernard
an Author which the Cardinal very much approved of. The Cardinal answered
steadfastly, that the French Bishops did their Duty, that all France fixed
their eyes upon them to observe their Conduct: that the French would never
suffer that kind of expression which gives the Pope the Power of governing the
Universal Church; and that if it were again proposed, the Ambassadors would
not fail to protest in name of the King and of sixscore Bishops; because it
would overthrow the received opinion in France, that the Pope ought to be
subject to a Council. When the Legates had received this answer, they lost all
hopes of gaining the French: the Spaniards also grew more and more inflexible,
and Martin Gazdellun, whom we mentioned before, being lately come from Spain,
confirmed them in their steadfastness: for having examined how all things went,
he said, that he evidently perceived that the Council was not free, and
commending the Archbishop of Granada for his vigor and constancy, he assured
him that the King was extremely well satisfied with his Conduct, and that if
the Archbishopric of Toledo came to be void, his Majesty would bestow it upon
him. For all that, they began to hold Congregations again, and in one of the
last of January the Ambassador of Savoy was publicly received, where he made
and received the usual Complements. The Congregations continued, and so did
their Divisions also. The Pope's Party were closely lincked together, and those
who were not so favorable to the Sea of Rome, on the other hand, stood firm in
their design of having the institution of Episcopacy and Residence declared to
be of Divine Right. The Legates and the rest of the Pope's Party saw that it
was no time to carry it by open force; they resolved therefore to let the heats
cool, and to tire out some, so as to make them depart, and to blunt the edge of
others by long attendance and delay, and so they took a resolution of putting
off the Session. They got the Cardinal of Lorrain to condescend to that delay,
but very aukwardly; for he still complained of the Factions and private Cabals
of the Italians, protested that he consented to that delay only out of
complaisance. The business was proposed in Congregation the third of February
by the Cardinal of Mantua. It was opposed, but the Legates at length carried
it, that the Session should be Prorogued till the two and twentieth of April
after Easter. The Cardinal of Lorrain was nor vexed at that resolution, though
he seemed to take it ill. For he was glad that matters might be protracted,
that he might see what became of the Pope who was old and always valitudinary.
He desired also to know how the affairs of France went, that he might
accordingly adjust his measures. During this Interval the Legates resolved to
bring under examination the matter of Marriage; and though the French
Ambassadors instantly urged that they might treat of Reformation, they could
not obtain it: for the Presidents were resolved to spin out the time, about
matters that sew were any way concerned in.

Eight Articles concerning Marriage were proposed. First, whether Marriage be a
Sacrament instituted by God, or a humane Constitution. They enter upon the
matter of Marriage, and reduce it to eight Articles.
2. Whether Parents can annull the Clandestine Marriages of the Children. 3.
Whether it be lawful after a man has divorced his Wife for the Cause of
Fornication, to take another, whilst the first is alive. 4. Whether Polygamy be
allowed to Christians, and whether the Prohibition of Marrying at certain times
be Tyrannical. 5. Whether Marriage ought to he preferred before a single life,
or the single life before Marriage. 6. Whether the Priests in the West may
lawfully contract Marriage, notwithstanding the Vow of Celibat, or the
Ecclesiastic Law. 7. Whether Marriage ought not to be contracted within the
Degrees of Consanguinity, which are forbidden in the eighteenth Chapter of
Leviticus, without diminishing or adding any thin, thereunto. 8. Whether
impotency, and ignorance of what one does in contracting, are the only Causes
that can dissolve a Marriage contracted, and whether the Cognizance of
Matrimonial Causes belongs to Secular Princes.
These eight Articles were divided amongst four Chambers of Doctors, as those
of the Sacrament of Order had been.

Whilst this was in agitation. The Cardinal of Lorrain prepared to go and wait
on the Emperor at Inspruck.

The Bishop of Reims the most Christian King's Ambassador at the Court of his
Imperial Majesty, cane to Trent to accompany the Cardinal to that Court, and
this Journey renewed and increased the Suspicions against France. The Court of
Rome was sensible that the Cardinal was very ill satisfied with the Council;
and when he parted from Trent he wrote as much to the Pope himself, and
complained to him of the Factions and Conduct of the Council, telling his
Holiness, with all, that if things continued to be carried after that rate, all
that he could do was to pray that God Almighty would inspire the Council. It
was very well known likewise that the Emperor's intentions were as far from
favoring the Pope as those of the French were, and that was another allarm.
The Spaniards also feared that the Cardinal of Lorrain might have a design of
conferring with the Emperor, and King of the Romans about means for obtaining
the Concession of the Cup; for they had good intelligence that the German
Princes and French Ambassadors intended to make new instances to the Council
about it. The Suspicions of the Spaniards seemed to have ground enough, because
the Duke of Bavaria, the Archbishop of Saltsburg, and the Arch Duke Ferdinand
were to be at Inspruck with the Emperor, and his Son Maximilian: now all these
Princes desired that the Cup might be rendered to the People.

February the ninth the Legates held the first Congregation about the Doctrine
of Marriage. The Divines of the first Chamber examined the first two Articles;
and Father Salmeron a Jesuit spoke with much Pomp, and for all that, said but
very ordinary things. Having concluded that Marriage is a true Sacrament; he
past to the second Article that relates to Clandestine Marriages, and alleged
in favor of them, the Authority of the Council of Florence, which declares
that the Validity of Marriages depends solely upon the Consent of the Parties
who contract, and this Orator concluded, that the opinion of those who assert
that Fathers and Mothers may annull them ought to be condemned as an Heresy:
but allowed the Church the Power of rescinding such Marriages because she is
the Mistress of the Sacraments, and that it is expedient to annull them to
prevent the disorders which those unfortunate Marriages cause in Families. Next
day Maillard Dean of the Faculty of Paris made a long discourse, and concluded
with Salmeron that Marriage is a true Sacrament; but as to Clandestine
Marriages he was not of Salmeron's opinion. For he maintained that the Church
had not that Power over the Sacraments as to make a Sacrament that was lawful
at one time, to become unlawful at another. He alleged. for proof the
Consecration of the Eucharist, saying that the Church could not make a
Consecrated Wafer cease to be a Real Sacrament, after that it had been some
time kept; since it was so at first. He went through all the Sacraments,
proving that the Church has not power to invalidate a Sacrament lawfully
administered. He showed that in all times private Marriages had been valid, and
that no man ever thought of annulling them. His opinion took extremely well;
but especially the Pope's Party took great pleasure to hear the French Doctor
speaking of the Pope, call him, the Directour and Moderatour of the Roman, that
is to say the Universal Church. They drew great advantage from that Confession,
and said that it ought to be observed against the Cavils which the Prelates of
the same Nation made upon occasion of the Canon about the Authority of the
Pope, wherein they would not suffer it to be said, that he has Power to rule
the Church Universal. The French said that there was a great difference betwixt
these expressions, rule the Universal Church absolutely, and rule the Roman,
that is to say, the Universal Church, because the term Universal is only
employed to explain that of Roman, and that so it ought to extend no farther.
It cannot be denied, but that the distinction is very nice and fine spun, and
that the difference betwixt those two expressions is not very, sensible; it had
been as well, perhaps, if Maillard had frankly confessed, that it dropped from him
before he was aware. In the Congregation of the Eleventh of February the French
presented a Letter from their King, wherein he acquainted the, Council with the
Victory that he had obtained over the Enemies of the Catholic Religion, and at
the same time demanded Reformation. After the Letters were read, the
Ambassador Du Ferrier made a Speech: The King of France his Letter to the
Council, followed by a Speech of du Ferrier.
and having represented the Calamities of the Kingdom of France, and the
necessity of doing somewhat to remedy them, he said that the proper remedy
depended on the Council, and that the Council in endeavoring that, ought to
turn their Eyes toward the Holy Scripture, that Christians nowadays were
like the Samaritanes of the Town of Sichar, who would believe because they saw,
and not barely upon the report of a Woman, that every body at present studied
the Scriptures. That they should not think it strange if in their Proposition
they had omitted the most necessary Points, that they had begun with the
smallest, but that they had more important matters to propose: that if they
intended to set about the Work of Reformation, they must do it in good earnest,
and that the Fathers who were assembled ought to consider what was the Success
of those slight and weak Reformations of the Council of Constance, and that
which came after, which he was not willing to name, for fear of offending their
ears. He meant the Council of Basil, whereof the name is odious to all the
Favorers of the Court of Rome. He laid before them also that the Councils of
Florence, Lateran, and the first of Trent had done nothing for the Church, and
in that they did nothing, they had done a great deal of hurt, and given
occasion to a Schism of so many People as are separated from it. They gave the
French Ambassador a civil answer, though in his Speech he had given several
nips which touched the Pope's Party to the quick. He said that he presented the
Articles of Reformation principally to the Council. These words offended them
extremely, because they did insinuate that the Ambassador made far less
reckoning of the Pope, than he did of the Council. Besides, they found that by
that expression he designed to have a lash at the Clause proponentibus Legatis:
as intending to intimate that in Quality of Ambassador he pretended to propose
his Articles to the Council himself, and not by the Lagates; and this persuaded
them that France entertained terrible intentions against the Authority of the
Pope, and they were the more allarmed because Du Ferrier had said that the
French had still far more important Proposals to make, and that they ought to
make greater advances in the work of Reformation than the Councils of Constance
and Basil had done. The day following the Cardinal of Lorrain parted for
Inspruck, taking with him nine Prelates and four Divides; but he got a promise
from the Legates that during his absence they should not treat of the Marriage
of Priests.

In the mean time they continued the Congregations about the matter of
Doctrine. The first Chamber of Divines which we have already mentioned, having
heard Salmeron and Maillard, unanimously condemned as Heretical the opinion
that denies Marriage to be a Sacrament, and in like manner declared Clandestine
Marriages to be true Sacraments, and lawful Marriages. But there was some
diversity of opinion about the Sentiments of Salmeron and Maillard, in relation
to the Power of the Church in annulling secret Marriages: some were of
Salmeron's opinion; and others with Maillard, thought that the Power of the
Church did not reach so far, as to make a Marriage become unlawful, which was
lawful a very little before. Amongst those who maintained that the Church had
Power to annull Clandestine Marriages, some disputed another Point, to wit,
whether it be convenient and profitable to make use of that Power in the
present time. But most part thought it best, that all secret Marriages should
be invalidated; and some went farther still, and were for declaring null and
void all Marriages contracted by the Children of Persons of Honor and Quality,
without the Consent of their Parents, as well for strengthening Paternal
Authority, as for preventing the Mischiefs which many times attend such
Marriages.

The Divines of the second Chamber examined the third and fourth Articles,
which concerned Divorce, Polygamy, and the Prohibition to marry in certain
times. Father Soto a Spanish Jacobin maintained that it was not lawful to
dissolve a Marriage, nay not for the Cause of Adultery. He confessed that
married Folks might be separated from bed and board; but not so as to allow
those who are so separated to marry with others; he alleged that to be the
meaning of St. Paul, when he permits married Believers to remain separated, in
case their unbelieving Wives will not live with them. He gave several
interpretations to the words of Jesus Christ, which seem to allow a Divorce for
the Cause of Adultery, but stuck to none of them, which was a great Argument
that he was not so clear in that Point, as he would have seemed to be. As to
Polygamy, he proved is to be contrary to the Law of Nature; and for the
Prohibitions to marry in certain times, he said there was no need to make a
grievance of that, seeing it was easy to obtain a Dispensation from the Bishop
to marry in prohibited times. About the substance of the question there was no
great dispute: but the Spanish Divines caught hold of that occasion to speak of
the necessity of the Residence of Bishops, that they might be able to give
Dispensations with Prudence, Wisdom, and with Knowledge of the Cause. Upon
naming the Tie that is betwixt a Husband and a Wife, which is like to that
whereby a Bishop is united to his Church; a Cordelier named John Ramirez took
occasion to speak again about Residence, and showed that it was no more in the
Pope's Power to draw a Bishop from his See, and translate him into another,
than to snatch a Husband from his Wife. The Pope's Party, on the contrary, took
occasion to speak of the Sovereign Authority of the Holy See, upon account that
the two Articles which were under Debate, stand condemned in the Decretals of
Popes. They magnified that Authority beyond all bounds, and stretched it even
to the dispensing against Canons, against the Ordinances of the Apostles, and
against all the Laws of God. They alleged the Canon Si Papa, which runs in
these terms. If one surprise the Pope neglecting his own Salvation, and that of
his Brethren, unfruitful and remiss in his works, concealing the good; which
does most hurt to his own and the Salvation of others; though he lead to Hell
innumerable crowds of People, there to be eternally punished with him. Decret.
Great. Did. 40.
Nevertheless no man ought to undertake to reprove him, or punish him for his
faults, because he who ought to judge all the World, ought not to be judged by
any, unless it be found that he errs in the Faith. A Decision attributed to one
Boniface a Martyr, and Archbishop of Mentz.

When the second Chamber had spoken, the Legates past by the third, and came to
the fourth, because they had promised the Cardinal of Lorrain not to meddle
with the Celibat of Priests, the Examination whereof was committed to the third
Chamber. The business of the fourth Chamber was to treat of the Degrees of
Consanguinity: and John de Verdun a French Benedictine, giving his opinion upon
the matter, took in hand to refute what had been said in favor of the Pope,
about Dispensations, and spoke all that he durst to weaken the Papal Authority.
He acknowledged that in Humane Laws there was occasion for Dispensations,
because Legislatours cannot foresee all Cases; but he absolutely denied that
the Law of God could be dispensed with. The Pope, said he, is not Master, and
the Church is not his Servant; and Dispensations ought only to be the
Explanations of Laws, and by Consequence ought not to overthrow them; so that
the Pope by dispensing cannot take off the obligation that lies upon men to
obey the Law. James Alain a Divine of the Bishop of Vannes spoke with the same
vigor, and sunk the Authority of the Pope below a Council, affirming that the
Power of dispensing was properly given to the Church, The Emperor much
dissatisfied with the Council and the Pope, consults about important Points
which concerned the Authority of the Pope, and the Liberty of the Council.
and not immediately to the Pope.

Whilst these questions were debated amongst the Divines, the Prelates minded
other Affairs. Commendene Bishop of Zante whom the Legates had sent to the
Emperor returned to Trent without any Success in his Negotiation, for the
Emperor desired time to answer the Propositions which the Legates had made to
him. However this Deputy found, that the Emperor was extremely dissatisfied
with the Council, and that he was resolved to take some Course to remedy the
Disorders that reigned in it; that he intended to demand a very considerable
Reformation, and to settle it so firmly, that none should be able to shake it.
He told the Presidents also that he made no doubt but that the Spaniards had
intelligence with the Emperor; because the Count de Luna, designed for the
Embassy of Trent, had answered those who complained of the boldness of the
Spanish Bishops, that he could not meddle in it, and that these Prelates spoke
according to their Conscience. They were therefore satisfied in General that
the Emperor aimed at great matters, but could not precisely tell what they
might be. These Secrets were not long shrouded under the veil of secrecy; for
one Father Camisco a Jesuit, and another Father Nattale sent from Trent to
Inspruck by General Lainez sounded the bottom of these Mysteries. They found
that the Emperor had proposed seventeen Articles to be consulted by his
Divines and Counselors. For instance, Whether it was convenient that the Pope
should be so much Master of the Council as he was, so that nothing should be
proposed, nor concluded but what the Court of Rome pleased. Whether the Pope
happening to die, the Election of his Successor did not belong to the Council.
What is the Power of the Emperor when the Sea is vacant, and the Council open.
Whether Ambassadors ought not to have a deliberative Vote in Council, when
they treat of matters that regard the Peace of Christendom. Whether the Pope
could dissolve or suspend the Council without the Consent of the Emperor and
Christian Princes. Whether it ought to be suffered that the Legates alone
should have the Power of proposing. What means ought to be used to set the
Council at Liberty, and to prevent all violence and fraud therein. What Course
ought to be taken to repress the insolence of the Italians who stopped all
deliberations, and to prevent their private Cabals. By what means ought the
Court of Rome to be hindered from ordering what is to be done in the Council.
And whether it would consist with the Majesty of the Emperor to be present at
the Council. These Articles were communicated to the Cardinal of Lorrain; to
the French and Spaniards. But the Conferences held on that subject produced no
other effect, than to disgust the Pope who was informed of all by his Spies,
and was offended that the Emperor took the Liberty to consult about Points
that were so prejudicial to his Authority. He was advised to show his
Resentment by a severe and smart Brief. Such as Paul III. had written to
Charles the Fifth, upon occasion of the Conferences of Spire. But having well
considered that, he thought it better to wink at the matter. In the mean time
the Cardinals had long Consultations at Rome about the Articles of the French,
whether they ought to be proposed in the Council or not; and it was concluded
in the Negative. It was alleged that seeing the French had new matters and of
greater importance to propose, it was to be feared that if they appeared to be
so easy in admitting these, it might give them the boldness to go on with the
rest. About the (...) In relation to the second question, whether it was
expedient at present to dispense with the Law of a single life in favor of the
Priests, or even to abolish it; there were some Divines, who maintained that it
would be expedient, because of the horrid disorders of the Lives of Priests;
and they failed not to quote that famous saying of Aeneas Sylvius, who was
afterward Pope Pius II. That for good reasons the Church had prohibited
Marriage to Priests: but that for other and better reasons it ought to be
allowed them. It was carried by Plurality of Votes, that a Priest might be
dispensed with to marry. However it was not the Pope's mind that that opinion
should pass: and therefore the Legates were blamed at Rome, for having suffered
that question to be disputed. They excused themselves, saying, that they were
obliged to have that Deference for the Ambassadors of the Emperor and Duke of
Bavaria, who had instantly solicited it. The French perceiving that most part
were of opinion that a Priest might be dispensed with to marry, had some design
to demand a dispensation for the Cardinal of Bourbon. But the Cardinal of
Lorrain was not of that mind, perhaps it was not much his desire that the Heirs
of the Family of Bourbon should multiply. The reason that he gave why he was
not for it, was the difficulty of obtaining it, because such Dispensations
cannot be granted but upon very urgent occasions, which was not to be alleged
in this Case, seeing there were a great many Princes of the blood.

The Pope received the news of the death of the Cardinal of Mantua, and if one
may judge by appearances, he was not very much troubled at it, The Pope names
two Legates in place of the Cardinal of Mantua. He will not name the Cardinal
of Lorrain for President.
for he did not look upon him as too much addicted to the interests of the Holy
See. He would not follow the advice of Cardinal Simoneta, who could have
heartily wished that no new Legate had been sent to Trent; for instead of one
he named two. But that he might not be contradicted in that Election, he made
the nomination when no body expected it: and it fell upon Cardinal Giovanni
Morone, and Cardinal Navagiero. He kept that nomination secret, more especially
to avoid the Persecution of the French, who pretended that that Dignity
belonged to the Cardinal of Lorrain. The Cardinal de la Bourdaisiere a French
man who was at Rome moved it to the Pope, who answered him briskly, that the
Cardinal of Lorrain was at Trent as head of a Party, and that a disinteressed
Person must be set at the head of the Council. About the same time the Cardinal
of Lorrain received at Trent the news of the death of his Brother, who was
assassinated before Orleans by a Pistol shot, of which he died six days after.
The Murderer accused Admiral Coligny and Theodore Beza as his Accomplices; but
he varied so much at his death and upon the Rack, that he left not the least
suspicion of it in the minds of honest men. Both of them offered to purge
themselves of that accusation before any Judges that should be appointed them.
This blow allarmed the Cardinal, and made him double his Guards: and seeing he
offered at every thing, Wit and Devotion, as well as state Policy, he wrote to
his Sister-in-Law a long consolatory Letter; of which his Servants to do their
Master honor, dispersed a great many Copies. The news of the death of this
Person was received with much grief at the Court of Rome and at Trent, for that
Duke was looked upon as the main Prop of the Catholic Party in France.

Some time before the Bishop of the five Churches had gone to wait upon the
Emperor; and now he returned with a Letter to the Council, which exhorted the
Fathers to labor for a Reformation; he brought with him also the Copy of
another Letter, which the Emperor at the same time wrote to the Pope. The
Emperor writes to the Council and to the Pope in a very high strain against
the Disorders of the Council.
This last Letter was very high; the Emperor therein earnestly exhorted the
Pope not to dissolve the Council, because it would prove a great Scandal to
Catholics, and give Heretics occasion to scoff at the Church and its
Assemblies. He told him that if things went no better for the time to come, the
World would be assured that the Pope intended no Reformation, and that every
Country would hold its own National Synod to reform themselves. But above all
things he solicited him in very pressing terms to render that liberty to the
Council which was wholly taken from it. He told him that it was no free
Council. 1. Because before any thing was proposed they expected Orders from the
Court of Rome. 2. Because it was not permitted to every one to propose, and
that the Legates had reserved that Power to themselves by the Clause
Proponentibus Legatis. 3. Because the Bishops of the Pope's Parry carried all
by powerful Factions. 4. And lastly, because that after much and long
Deliberation, things must be carried contrary to the Votes of the Council, just
as the Legates please, according to the Consultations which they receive from
the Pope.
This Letter gave offense to the Pope and surprise to all. It was wondered at,
that the Emperor durst offer to speak with more liberty, than any of his
Predecessors ever had done, not excepting Charles the Fifth, who with all his
Power and Greatness, had never ventured to be so bold: and the Pope was the
more vexed, that the Emperor having sent a Copy of that Letter to the Cardinal
of Lorrain, the French had made it public. At the same time the Emperor's
Chancellor plainly told the Nuncio residing at the Imperial Court, that the
words Universalem Ecclesiam must be left out of the Decree that we mentioned
before; because they defined the Superiority of the Pope over a Council. All
those things together incensed the Pope against the Emperor. He answered him
in the same strain, and let him know, that he alone had the Power of calling
Councils; that the Council of Trent was free enough; but that in all times the
Popes had sent their Instructions to Councils; that the Pope and his Legates,
had the sole Power of proposing; that the disorders came from those who kept
Conventicles and Cabals for encroaching upon the Authority of the Holy See;
that he himself solicited also a Reformation, but that it was fit that they who
were so pressing with others for Reformation, would begin with themselves; That
the Emperor had taken pains to observe very well the disorders of the Council,
but that he had forgot the greatest; and that was, that they who ought to
receive the Law from the Council, would needs give it, and that if Princes
would have imitated the Constantins and Theodosius's, there would have been no
Division. Besides that Letter, the Pope sent the Emperor a Paper containing
many passages to warrant the Clause of the Decree which he had formed, wherein
he attributed to the Bishops of Rome the right of governing Universam
Ecclesiam, the Church Universal. The Emperor, on the other hand, sent to Rome
a Collection of other passages, which overthrew those of the Pope, and oppugned
the Clause which he had* undertaken to defend. By this Conduct of the Emperor,
the Pope found that it was impossible that ever they could join in interests,
and therefore he abandoned both him and the French, and turned all his hopes
and prospects toward Spain. The Pope's Letter to the Emperor having been
divulged, it displeased the French: and the Cardinal of Lorrain assembled his
Prelates several times, to examine and refute the passages which the Pope
alleged in his Writing for asserting the Clause regens Universalem Ecclesiam.
The Germans did the like, but the Spaniards would not join with them in this
particular, because they receive the Council of Florence. Nevertheless the
Archbishop of Granada kept them from writing to the Pope, to give him
assurances of their Fidelity; it is enough, said he, that the Pope knows we are
not against him, The death of Cardinal Seripando.
though we do not fawn with Italian Flattery. Cardinal Seripando died the
seventeenth of March, and that gave a new Pretext for putting off the Actions
of the Council. The French Ambassadors next day after the death of that
Cardinal went to move again for Reformation; but the Legates made answer that
they were not able alone to undertake so weighty an affair, and therefore
prayed them to expect the coming of the Cardinals Morone and Navagiero their
Colleagues. They were forced to acquiesce, and the Germans were not angry at the
delay, because the Emperor's Ambassadors were at Rome, where Don Lewis
d'Avila was arrived on the part of the King of Spain. The instructions of these
Ambassadors were, to treat with the Pope in name of their Masters about
Reformation, and to demand that the Council might be free, so as that all
should have freedom to propose. Now the Germans desired to know what that might
produce before they proceeded farther. The Pope who now reposed all his
Confidence on the King of Spain, made extraordinary much of Don Lewis d'Avila;
and at the same time by the Solicitations of his Nuncio obtained a Letter from
the King of Spain to the Count de Luna, which ordered him to repress the
boldness of the Spanish Prelates. In compliance with this Letter the Count de
Luna, who was at that time at the Emperor's Court, wrote to Martin Gazdellun
Secretary of the Embassy, and to the Archbishops and Bishops of Granada, Leon
and Segovia, that they should take care, that the Prelates of Spain did favor
the interests of the Pope. In the mean while the Conference of the Ambassadors
with the Pope had no effect, partly because he had no real intention to
satisfy them, and partly because what the one desired the others withstood.
The Imperialists demanded the Cup, and the Marriage of Priests, but the
Spaniards opposed it. The Pope waved the Propositions that they made to him
about Reformation, and answered in general terms, that he left the Council to
their liberty, and that the Clause proponentibus legatis should be interpreted,
so as to give all content. In effect he wrote to his Legates at Trent, that
they should not hinder the Prelates to propose what they thought fit: but in
the mean time, Cardinal Morone, as was well known, had instructions quite
contrary to these fair promises.

The twentieth of March the Congregations of Divines about the point of
Marriage concluded; and the Legates met to consult with the Prelates of the
Pope's Faction, whether they should begin the Congregations of Prelates. The
Cardinal of Warmia was not against it; but was even of opinion that they should
endeavor to put an end to one or other of the six difficulties which had been
started, and had so long puzzled the Council, that so the sticklers might have
patience as to the rest. These six difficulties were: First about the Clause
proponentibus legatis, which was desired might be recalled and expunged.
Secondly, concerning Residence. Thirdly, about the question whether Episcopacy
be of Divine Right. Fourthly, concerning the Authority of the Pope. Fifthly,
touching the proposition of giving an Assistant to the Clark of the Council;
And Sixthly, about the demand of a general Reformation. Cardinal Simoneta who
was afraid of the easiness of the Cardinal of Warmia, and who would not expose
himself singly to the Torrent of so much contradiction, was of the opinion that
they should expect the Legates who were to come from Rome, and his advice
carried it. So all things were in suspense, and the Cardinal of Lorrain took
this opportunity to go and take his Recreations at Venice, to comfort himself
for the death of his two Brothers; for since the death of the Duke, he had
received news of the death of the Grand Prior.

The Pope absolutely rejects the Propositions of the French.
The Pope, in the mean while, thought of means how he might rid his hands of the
Propositions, and repeated instances that were made to him about the business
of Reformation. Hitherto he seemed undetermined in relation to the Propositions
of the French; he had neither admitted nor rejected them: in general terms he
had promised to consider of them, and that they should be proposed in time and
place convenient. He seemed to have some inclination to grant such things as
struck not at the diminution of the Authority of the Holy See; as the Marriage
of Priests, the Communion in both kinds, and the Service in the vulgar Tongue.
But after he had weighed all things well, he found that he could not make any
step toward such a Reformation which would not prove fatal; that when once a
breach should be made in received Doctrines, the Adversaries would crowd in
apace at it, and that would give occasion to new Demands. And so he resolved to
give an absolute refusal to the Propositions of the French, and that he might
make it the stronger, he thought fit, once again to make an essay of dividing
the Emperor from the French. For that effect, he ordered Cardinal Morone
Legate Elect for the Council of Trent, not to stay there but to go to the
Emperor's Court: and at the same time; because the Cardinal of Lorrain had
dropped some words that did insinuate, as if the Emperor should have some design
to come to Bologna, and to be Crowned there by the Pope, he resolved to sound
the Cardinal as to that Point, and to endeavor to engage him in that
Negotiation. The Bishop of Vintimiglia, under pretext of visiting one of his
Nephews that lay sick at Padua, went to meet the Cardinal of Lorrain in that
Town, as he was upon his Journey to Venice. The Cardinal confirmed what he had
said of the Emperor; but when ho found that they had a design to engage him to
be concerned in the business of bringing the Emperor to Bologna, there to
receive the Crown from the hands of the Pope, he wavered, and said that when he
came back to Trent, he would endeavor to pry into the Intentions of his
Imperial Majesty; but that he did not believe that the Princes of the Empire
would approve that design, and that the Emperor would do nothing that might
displease them. Having said so, he turned the discourse, and told the Bishop of
Vintimiglia, that his design was to press the Reformation when the new Legates
were come, saying that he doubted not but that they came fully informed of the
intentions of the Pope, and that then it would clearly appear whether his
Holiness in good earnest desired that Reformation; that upon the whole, if they
intended that matters should go better, there were fifty Bishops in the
Council who were to be turned out, because they were sworn to oppose all good
resolutions. After these Conferences the Bishop of Vintimiglia perceived that
the Cardinal of Lorrain had only pretended that the Emperor had a design to
be Crowned by the Pope, that he might discover the thoughts of the Court of
Rome in relation to that matter.

The Pope obliges the Tribunal of the Inquisition to proceed against several
French Bishops accused of Heresy.
About the same time news came to Trent of the peace of Orleans which the King
of France had granted the Huguenots: and it was insinuated to the Pope that
that peace had been procured by the French Bishops who were Heretics at the
Heart. The Pope resolved to find them out, and be revenged upon them; and
therefore in a Congregation of Cardinals held the last of March, he spoke of
the disorders of France, saying that they ought to be imputed to the Cardinal
of Chatillon who had quitted the name of Bishop of Beauvais, and taken the
Title of Count, to the Archbishop of Aix, and to the Bishop of Valence, and
that he commanded the Cardinals commissionated for the Inquisition to proceed
against them. He published also a Bull dated the seventh of April; and in
pursuance of that Ordinance the Tribunal of the Inquisition cited before them
as suspected of Heresy, Odet de Coligny Cardinal of Chatillon, St. Romain
Archbishop of Aix, John de Monluc Bishop of Valence, John Anthony Caracciol
Bishop of Troy, John Barbancon Bishop of Pamiers, and Charles Guillard Bishop
of Chartres.

All things were at a stand at Trent in expectation of Cardinal Morone who
arrived on Saturday in Easter week. He was received in great state under a
Canopy; Cardinal Morone appointed chief Legate to preside in the Council, comes
to Trent, and went to the Emperor at Inspruck.
all the Council went out to meet him, and he walked betwixt the Imperial and
French Ambassadors. Next day after the Count de Luna the King of Spain's
Ambassador arrived also, and made his entry in great Pomp, walking in the same
manner betwixt the Imperial and French Anbassadours. April the thirteenth,
Cardinal Morone was received in a Congregation, wherein he made a Speech, and
within a few days after parted to go and wait on the Emperor at Inspruck. His
business was to divide the Emperor from the French, to take him off of his
design of coming to Trent, to persuade him to come to Bologna, and suffer the
Council to be transported thither; to oblige him to maintain the Authority of
the Pope, to condescend to the Clause proponentibus legatis, and not to press
that the Reformation of the Court of Rome should be handled in the Council. At
the same time the Legates who were at Trent to ease themselves of some that
were troublesome, gave them leave to be gone, after they had tired them out
with long delays, or vexed them with harsh usage. So, many departed; and
amongst others the French, being assured that nothing could be obtained in the
Council, because of the Italians, thought of returning home. The French
Ambassadors not only consented, but forced them to it, by cutting the French
Divines short of the Pensions that the King allotted them; but John de
Cartougne and John de Verdun two Benedictins stayed till the last, and so did
the Cordelier Hugonis, because he was maintained by the Pope's Party, who
ordered him his entertainment in the Convent of the Cordeliers at Trent, and
gave him fifty Crowns of Gold a quarter to discover the designs of the French.

The Council is very ill satisfied with the Peace of Orleans, that the King of
France made with the Huguenots.
The twentieth of April the Cardinal of Lorrain came back, to Trent from Venice,
and shortly after he received the Articles of the peace of Orleans that was
concluded with the Protestants. By that peace it was allowed to Gentlemen who
had high Jurisdiction, and the privilege which the French call fief de Haubert,
to have the free exercise of the reformed Religion in their Houses; that the
Huguenots should have a place for Worship in every Baily-wick, in the Suburbs
of a City, and in all places where it had been exercised before the seventh of
March. The Protestants were not altogether satisfied with that peace, because
they had not obtained all that they demanded; but they were far less satisfied
at Trent, for the Bishops blamed that Edict of Pacification, as a condescension
enough to ruin the Catholic Religion. The King of France wrote to the
Cardinal and his Ambassadors, ordering them to represent to the Council that
his only intent in making that peace, was that he might with more ease reclaim
all his Subjects to their obedience to the Church: that that his design might
prosper he demanded a Reformation, and that he resolved to send Birague as a
new Ambassador, more earnestly to solicit it. To this the Ambassadors added
the deplorable state to which France was reduced by the Civil Wars, and
justified the making of the peace by the necessity of the times, which admits
of no Law. But these excuses satisfied not the Council; and particularly the
Bishops could not digest that the King in the Preface of the Edict of that
Pacification, did say, that he had hopes that either a General or National
Council would speedily compose all the public troubles; for that did
insinuate, as if he distrusted the success of the Council of Trent, and
tacitly threatened the calling of a National Assembly.

The two and twentieth of April had been pitched upon for holding of the
Session: and the day before, a General Congregation was called, wherein the
Legates were of opinion that it should be deferred until the third of June.
But the Cardinal of Lorrain objected, that it was a shame to assign so often
the day of the Session and never to hold it, that therefore it was not fit any
more to prefix a day, but that the twentieth of May following the Council might
meet and consider of a day when it could be held. This advice carried it by
unanimous consent; and though it seemed to be a deliberation of very little
consequence; nevertheless the Bishops of the Pope's Party conceived Jealousies,
because the opinion of the Cardinal had been so generally followed. They said
that the Pope had a great deal of reason to call him, the Head of a Party; that
he alone obstructed the expedition of affairs in Council, and the Translation
of it to Bologna. But as to the prolongation of the Council, and delay of the
Session, the Legates concurred in that as freely as any, in hopes that the more
Zealous would either be gone, or abate their fervor.

During this intermission of Synodal actions, the Spanish Bishops were not
negligent in their affairs. Their heads ran still upon the design of having
Residence and the Institution of Bishops declared to be of Divine Right: and at
the same time an accident happened that confirmed them in this fond opinion. A
Jacobin called Peter Soto died at Trent, upon his deathbed be wrote a Letter to
the Pope by way of Confession, and therein as a dying than took the freedom to
solicit the Pope that he would suf^er Residence and the Institution of Bishops
to be declared of Divine Right. Another Monk of the same Order, and in all
likelihood his Kinsman, since his name was Louis Soto, dispersed Copies of that
Letter for the Credit and Reputation of the Deceased. One would think, that the
Authority of a single man and a simple Monk should not be of very great weight;
but the words of dying men are armed with a Natural Authority, that cannot be
resisted, because they are looked upon as the Sentiments of a Conscience stripped
of all Hypocrisy discharging it self toward men, that it may be able to
appear and render a faithful account before the Tribunal of God. And the
Spaniards reckoned them so; for that Letter of Soto's revived their Zeal. They
used all means to gain the Count de Luna: the Archbishop of Granada informed
him of all that was done in the Council, and made him sensible of the slavery
it lay under. Discoursing one day of the Bishops of Liria and Palti, both
Spaniards, who had fallen over to the Party of the Court of Rome, he said, they
are naughty men who suffer themselves to be loaded like beasts, and are good
(...) of force and eloquence. He succeeded very well in his design of netling
the Pope's Party; and they, on the other hand, did not spare him; for Cardinal
Morone set him off in his Colors, and labored to persuade the Emperor, that
Lorrain and his French were the Cause of all the Disorders of the Council. This
Intrigue came to the Cardinal's Knowledge, and increased his Discontents.

Cardinal Morone comes back to Trent from Inspruck; and the Emperor consents
to the Conclusion of the Council, without any thing dome about Reformation.
At length Cardinal Morone was dispatched by the Emperor, and had no more from
him but some general answers. The Emperor told him that he would defend the
Pope's Authority against Heretics, if need required; that he would not go
beyond Inspruck, that the Translation of the Council to Bologna was impossible,
that he could not take his Coronation from the Pope without consulting the
Diet, that he wished a Reformation might be made at Trent, and that all might
have liberty to propose there. This was the answer that was published; but they
who knew better the Secret Transactions of that Conference affirmed for a
certain, that Cardinal Morone had brought the Emperor and King of the Romans
to consent to the separation of the Council. He made them sensible that it was
impossible to obtain any Reformation; because every thing that could be
proposed, would always find some whose interests would oblige them to oppose
it, and hinder all resolutions, because all men are willing to continue in the
Condition they are in. It was therefore said, that there Princes yielded to his
reasons, and consented that the Council might have an honorable Funeral, that
is, that it should be suffered to disperse it self by little and little, for
avoiding a scandalous Rupture. And indeed, it is more than probable, that they
lost all hopes of obtaining any thing in that Council; for their instances
ceased or at least diminished, and if they made any, it was only because they
thought it not prudent by falling off all of a sudden to give occasion of being
taken notice of. They chose rather to retreat without noise, because they were
somewhat ashamed that they had not believed that noted Saying of St. Gregory
Nazianzen; That the troubles of the Church are always increased by the
Assemblies of Bishops: and they were unwilling to make open Confession that
they were deceived in the Hopes that they had conceived of a Reformation.

THE HISTORY OF THE Council of TRENT.
BOOK VIII.
PIUS IV.
CArdinal Morone Legate nominated by the Pope to succeed the Cardinal of
Mantua, returned from Inspruck where he had been to confer with the Emperor
about the affairs of the Council, and came to Trent the seventeenth of May. The
twentieth of the same Month being appointed for prefixing the day of the
following Session, they began to treat about that; but because nothing was yet
in a readiness, and that differences were still in fermentation, the Legates
perceived that it was not convenient to appoint a certain day for the Session.
Therefore in the Congregation of the nineteenth, it was resolved to defer the
choice of the day till the tenth of June.

The Count de Luna Ambassador of Spain had his public reception in the
Congregation of the one and twentieth of May; and them broke out to purpose the
difference betwixt the Ambassadors of France and Spain, A Contest betwixt the
French and Spaniards about Precedence.
in relation to Precedence; the Spaniards upon the most unjust pretensions in
the World challenging place before the French. Charles the fifth and his
Predecessors as well by Father side as Mother side had by Successions and
Alliances united a great many Territories; and these lesses States joined in
one made a vast Dominion in the Person of Charles, fortified by the Dignity of
Emperor, which that Prince had obtained by Election. In that last quality his
Ambassadors without any Dispute went before those of France. After the
Resignation of Charles, Philip his Son inherited all his haughtiness, though he
succeeded but to a part of his Grandeur. He remained King of Spain, Naples and
Sicily, and Master of the Low Countries, that is to say, he succeeded to all
the Rights of the Kings of Castille, Arragon and Naples, and of the Dukes of
Burgundy. None of his Predecessors ever thought of disputing the Precedence
with the Kings of France, and some of them had even been their Vassals.
Nevertheless Philip finding himself Master of so many Countries, and having
swelled his Titles with American Kingdoms, thought himself in a Condition of
disputing a Dignity with France, whereof it had always been in possession
without any opposition. This quarrel was begun at Rome before it appeared at
Trent, but however we will begin with that which happened at Trent.

For a long time means had been essayed both a Trent and at Rome for preventing
this Scuffle, which they well foresaw would happen. The Marquess of Pescara
Governor of Milan came not to the Council when the French Ambassadors
arrived. He retired to Milan leaving the Secretary of his Embassy at Trent,
because he was not willing to engage in a Contest, where he foresaw he could
not come off with Honor to his Master. He was discharged of that Embassy, and
the Count de Luna named to succeed in his place. The King of Spain at first,
had a design of sending the Count to the Council with the Title of Ambassador
of the Emperor, that so he might have Precedence without any difficulty. But
the Execution of this design was pestered with so many encumbrances which were
hard to be avoided; that at length, the Count de Luna wrote to the Legates
about the end of November 1562. that he would come to Trent as Ambassador of
Spain, and not of the Emperor; but that he desired to know before he set out
what place would be given him. The Legates communicated the affair to the
French Ambassadors, who answered coldly, that they were not sent to Trent to
take up differences, but to take the place that was their due; that if that
place were denied them, they would protest against all the Acts of the Council
and immediately be gone. The Cardinal of Mantua proposed to give the Spaniards
a place apart from the other Ambassadors, opposite to the Legates; but they
withstood that, and said that they would have him placed below them* The Count
de Luna being come to Trent continued there forty days without appearing in
Congregation, being hindered by the same difficulty. At length, after the
return of Cardinal Morone from Inspruck, the Actions of the Council being about
to begin again, and to proceed with greater diligence than ever, there was a
necessity of passing over all Considerations. During these forty days the
French were earnestly solicited to allow the Count de Luna a place apart, which
should neither be above nor below them; but they would by no means consent to
it. The Count had a mind to stan^ in that first Congregation, until the
Harangues and Ceremonies of his Reception were over, and immediately after to
withdraw and return home. But the Spaniards thought not that expedient
sufficient to save the Honor of their King. He also endeavored to obtain that
at least, the French would not come to the Congregation the day of his
Reception, and that they likewise refused. Afterward he bethought himself of
another means, and that was to dispute the Right of Ambassadors assisting at
Congregation, alleging that it was contrary to the Custom of Ancient
Councils. But besides that that was false, he durst not insist upon it, because
that did a general prejudice to all Princes who had Ambassadors there. He cast
about so many ways, that at length he hit upon one that succeeded, and which
obliged the French to yield; and that was, that he obtained of the Legates, and
some Prelates that in the Congregation where he should be received, they might
treat of some affairs wherein the French might be considered as a Party, and
for that reason could not assist at the Deliberations. The Subject that was
chosen was, the prejudice that might befall Christendom by the Peace concluded
in France with the Huguenots. The Cardinal of Lorrain was informed of that
resolution; and thereupon assembled the French, to acquaint them, that there
was ground to fear, lest in these Deliberations, which were only held for
Formality, to hinder them from assisting at the Reception of the Spanish
Ambassador, some things might however be spoken, and resolutions taken
contrary to the interests of their Prince; and upon that Consideration he made
them resolve to yield, and suffer the Count de Luna to have a place out of the
rank of Ambassadors. The French at Rome were not at all satisfied with that
easiness and condescension of the Cardinal of Lorrain. However it went so, and
on the second of May the Count de Luna took his place in the middle of the
Assembly; in a seat by himself apart from all the rest, and over against the
Legates. For all that, he made his Protestations, saying, that the next place
to the Ambassadors of the Emperor belonged to him, but that he was not
willing to dispute it, lest he might thereby give hinderance to the affairs of
the Church and of the Council; that he pretended and declared that all that was
done should not be prejudicial to the rank which his Master ought to hold. On
the other side, the French made their Protestations also, and proved that the
Ambassadors of the Kings of France, had always had place immediately after the
Ambassadors of the Emperor, as might appear by what was done in the Councils
of Constance, and Lateran. They added if the distinct place apart from the rest
which was assigned to the Ambassador of Spain, did prejudice to the Rights of
their Master, they demanded, that forthwith the Fathers of the Council would
oblige the Ambassadors of the King of Spain to sit below them: they required
that, at least, it should be declared that all was done without prejudice to
the Possession of the King of France, which had been perpetual, and without
interruption; and promised to be content with that at present, provided they
had an Act thereupon given them and recorded.

Some time before this matter was thus managed at Trent, they had been in the
same straits at Rome. The Pope having often promised the French Ambassador to
give him on Whitsunday following the place that belonged to him, he assembled
the Cardinals to consult about means for satisfying the Spaniards; and many
Expedients were offered. Some proposed that the Spanish Ambassador should have
the first place after the Cardinal Deacon who was on the left hand; others,
that he should have a seat at the lower end of the Bench of the Cardinal
Deacons. But that accommodation did not remove difficulties, no more than that
which had been made at Trent. For the Ambassadors could not avoid Competition,
when the Pope's Train was to be carried, and water presented him to wash his
hands on the days when he did celebrate Pontifically. For commonly the Chief of
Ambassadors carry up the Train, and present water: the same Competition must
happen also when they were to receive the Incense and the Pax. It was proposed
to give the Incense and the Pax to all those who sat on the Ambassadour's
side, even to the Ambassador of Florence who was the last, before they went to
the left where the Ambassador of Spain was. That did not please the Spanish
Ambassador, nor was it accepted by the French, who declared that either the
Spanish Ambassador should absent himself, or that he should sit below him, and
if otherwise he would instantly leave Rome. The Pope seeing that he could not
content them by that means, resolved to let the Spanish Ambassador know, that
he would continue the King of France in the Privilege of Precedence, which he
had enjoyed time out of mind. The Spanish Ambassador desired leave to protest,
and did so. He was introduced into the Pope's Chamber with four Witnesses, and
kneeling before his Holiness, he made his Protestation, wherein he told his
Holiness that the King his Master ought to go before the King of France,
because of the Antiquity and Greatness of his Kingdom of Spain, and for the
many other Kingdoms whereof he was Sovereign, and especially because he had so
succesfully defended the Catholic Faith; and that therefore he opposed all
Declaration of Precedence or Parity, which might be made in favor of the King
of France, as being null, and contrary to the Right of the King his Master. The
Pope answered him, that he had done nothing, but preserved to the Crown of
France the Right whereof it was in possession, that nevertheless he would refer
the matter to the College of Cardinals, and that he was ready on all occasions
to serve the Catholic King. The Pope persisted not long in the humor of
doing the French Justice, but was quickly overswayed by the Ambassador Vargas.

This is the account of what was done at Rome: let us now return to what was
done in the Council. They had found a Place for the Count de Luna, that he
might be present at the Congregations; but that inferred nothing for the day of
the Session, which is properly the day of Ceremony, when all the Actions and
Persons ought to be placed in their Order. The French were therefore resolved
to make new Instances to oblige the Count de Luna to take his place after them
that day. Besides that, there was a necessity that one or other must be first
when the Council should hold a Chapel, and when the Incense and the Pax were to
be given, and the French could not imagine that they would give them to the
Spaniards before them. The Pope to adjust that difficulty, at the Instance of
the Spanish Ambassador at Rome, wrote to the Legates, that in the next Session
they should give the Count de Luna a Place apart from the other Ambassadors,
as had already been done in the Congregations, and that the first time they
should hold a Chapel, for avoiding Competition in giving the Incense and the
Pax, they should have two Censers, and that they should cense the two
Ambassadors of France and Spain at the same time; that the like should be done
as to the Pax, that they should have two Paxes presented severally to the two
Ambassadors to be kissed at the same moment of time; and for preventing of
underhand dealings and intrigues that might be practiced to hinder the effect
of that resolution, he ordered the Legates to keep it secret. In effect
Cardinal Morone, according to the Pope's Instructions, kept the thing so
secret, that the French had not the least notice of it. And on the nine and
twentieth of June when all were assembled in the Chapel or Dome to hear Mass,
Service being begun, on the sudden a Purple Velvet-Chair was brought out of the
Vestry, and placed in the rank opposite to that of the Ambassadors, betwixt the
youngest Cardinal and eldest Patriarch, and at the same time the Count de Luna
came and placed himself in that seat. The French immediately complained of it,
and the Cardinal of Lorrain took it exceedingly ill, that such a thing should
have been offered to be done, without acquainting him: The French Ambassadors
sent the Master of the Ceremonies to make the same Complaint on their Parts,
and at the same time protested that they would receive the Incense and the Pax
first. They told them that it should be remedied by two Censers and two Paxes.
But they opposed that, and declared that they would admit of no Parity, and
that they would retain the Possession of Precedence. This bustle of coming and
going and loud whisperings, caused a dull and confused noise that hindered the
hearing of the Epistle and Gospel read. But when Sermon was begun, the Legates
called into the Vestry, the Cardinals, Imperial Ambassadors and Du Ferrier
Ambassador of France. And all the Sermon-time was spent in Debates, without
any Conclusion. At length the Bishop of the five Churches and the Ambassador
of Poland came out, and prayed the Count de Luna in name of the Legates, that
he would condescend that for that day there should be no giving neither of the
Incense nor Pax; promising that the first convenient day, and upon the first
Demand that he should make of it, they should give him that satisfaction which
the Pope had promised; but that they had need of some time to consult how they
might avoid Trouble and Confusion. The Count de Luna consented, and so soon as
the Ite missa est was said, whereas in all the Congregations he used to go out
last of all, he went out the first even before the Cross, followed by a great
many Spanish Prelates, and Italians of his Master's Subjects. The Legates to
justify what they had done, showed the Commission which they had received from
the Pope. Du Ferrier fell into a Passion, and said that had it not been for the
respect he bore to the Holy Action they were about, he would have then
protested; and declared that for the future he would do it, if they did not
give him the Incense and the Pax according to the Order of Precedence that
belonged to him. The Cardinal of Lorrain wrote a very smart Letter about it to
the Pope, and complained in high terms, that the Pope having promised to do
nothing without first acquainting him, they made notwithstanding a Mystery even
of things wherein he had a particular interest. The Count de Luna, on his part,
complained of the Obstinacy of the French, and pressed the Legates, that on
Sunday following the Ceremonies might be performed with a Parity to both,
according to the Orders of the Pope. Next day after this Scuffle he called
together the Spanish Prelates, and Italians of his Master's Subjects, and
represented to them the Necessity of showing themselves vigorous on this
occasion; that the French would not fail to protest, either against the
Legates, or against the King his Master, or against him as Ambassador, and
that they ought to be in a readiness for every thing; which they promised to
do. In the mean time the Ambassadors of the other Princes besought the
Legates, to find out some way of accommodation; but they made answer that they
had express Orders from his Holiness, to make the Ceremonies equal, that they
had past their promise thereupon to the Count de Luna, and that it could not be
otherwise. Hereupon the Cardinal of Lorrain protested to the Legates, that if
they made such an Attempt upon the Privileges of his Master, he would take the
Pulpit and speak in name of all the French, that he would complain to the whole
Assembly of the injury that was done them, and that having laid open the
Disorders that that would cause in Christendom, he would come down, take a
Crucifix in his hand, and go out of the Church crying Misericordia, that he
would persuade the Fathers of the Council to follow him out of the Church, that
they might not be Spectatours of so Scandalous a Schism; and that he was sure
of bringing over a great many to his Party. That Menace frightened the Legates,
they doubted he might be in the humor to do as he said, at least they were
afraid to put it to the risque. And therefore they obtained of the Count de
Luna, that no procession might be made on Sunday, nor Chapel held, till they
had informed the Pope of all that had happened. The French Ambassadors, on
their part, made great noise, and declared that they were resolved to protest,
not against the Legates who followed their Commission; not against the
Catholic King who maintained his Rights as he thought best; not against the
Count de Luna who obeyed his Master's Orders; not, in fine, against the Holy
See, for which they had a great Veneration; but against Pius IV. who called
himself Pope, and was not; adding that they would prove him to be no lawful
Pope, because he had insinuated himself into the Holy See by the way of Simony:
And for proof of this they produced two Scedules or Notes for considerable
Sums; one which Cardinal Caraffa had from the Duke of Florence for favoring
the Election of the Cardinal of Medicis, which Scedule Cardinal Caraffa had
since sent to the King of France; the other Scedule was under the Pope's own
hand to the Cardinal of Naples; and though that last Writing was not in the
hands of the French; yet it was a thing notoriously known, and past for a
certain truth. Besides the Protestation, the President Du Ferrier had prepared
a most bitter Latin Harangue, which was not spoken, though it was afterward
Printed. In that Speech, having asserted the Rights of Precedence of the Kings
of France by a Long and Uninterrupted Possession, he declared that he did not
attribute the trouble that was given him, neither to the Council, nor to the
Catholic King but to the Person of Pius IV. who sowed Seeds of Discord amongst
confederated Kings; and with damnable ingratitude forgot the Obligations which
the Holy See had to Pepin, Charlemain, and Lewis his Son Kings of France, who
had raised it to all its Grandeur. He protested that he owned him not for the
true Vicar of Jesus Christ; and that for the Council, since all that was done
in it came from Rome, ready concluded and determined, he could not look upon
the Decrees of that Assembly, as of a General Council. In Conclusion he
commanded, in his Master's name, all French Prelates to retire, until a
lawful and free Council should be called. The Protestation and Harangue were
not made; because at length means were found to compose in some manner the
Difference; and that was, the Count de Luna after much Solicitation, consented
that until he had received an answer from the King of Spain his Master,
neither the one nor the other should receive the Incense and the Pax. A great
many were offended at this Agreement; and the Pope himself did not approve of
it. However most of the Prelates would have been glad that that Debate had
lasted much longer, because they were in good hopes that it would have been a
means of dissolving the Council, of which they were sufficiently weary.

We have been somewhat the longer in relating the History of this Difference,
because it was the Cause of the great Quarrel that has been betwixt two of the
most considerable Crowns in Christendom. And we were not willing to interrupt
the Series of that Contest, by interweaving the other affairs of the Council,
to which at present we return. The Count de Luna having made his public entry
into the Council, The Count de Luna makes his entry into the Council. His
Divine by his Speech offends the Ambassadors of the other Princes.
in the General Congregation held the one and twentieth of May; he ordered
Pietro Fontidonio a Spanish Divine to speak in his name. This Divine spoke in a
strain that was very agreeable to the Party which stood up for the Interests of
the Pope. For he told the Council that there was no way to deal with the
Protestants but by the Severity of Punishments. He made an Invective against
Trimmers who were for indulging any thing in their favor: and to prove this,
he instanced the happy Success of the Severity which his Master had employed in
suppressing of Heresy. The Council made a very favorable answer to this
Discourse; but the Ambassadors took it very impatiently, looking upon that
Harangue as an open Censure of all other Princes, who had not imitated the
Conduct of the King of Spain. They complained to the Count de Luna of the
boldness of his Spokesman; who disowned it, assuring them that he had ordered
him to leave out that part of his Discourse, and promising to reprove him for
not following his Directions.

A few days after, the Cardinal of Lorrain went to meet the Cardinal of
Ferrara, who was upon his return from his Legation in France. He made some stay
in Piedmont, and labored to compose the Affairs of Religion, which were in no
very good condition there; for notwithstanding all the care the Duke of Savoy
had used, the Huguenot Party grew very strong; and several made open profession
of that Religion even in the Duke's Court. These two Cardinals had their
interview at Hostia in the Veronese the four and twentieth of May; where the
Cardinal of Ferrara used all his ondeavours to persuade Lorrain to return to
France, showing him that the Interest of his Family required it, because of the
death of his two Brothers the Duke and Grand Prior. He dealt earnestly with him
also to employ his credit with the French Prelates, that they would desist from
pressing that the Institution of Bishops and their Residence should be declared
of Divine Right. But the Cardinal would not hear of it; he continued steadfast
in his design of staying at the Council; and as he said, of having matters
concluded according to truth and reason. Upon his return to Trent, he bragged
much how he had resisted the solicitations of the Cardinal of Ferrara: but that
was the last act of constancy and vigor that came from him; for after that
time, he made so visible and considerable a compliance, that he became the
chief instrument which the Court of Rome employed for shaking and baffling the
vigor of others. However he seemed still to retain a little stedfastness in a
Conference that he had with Cardinal Morone after his return from Hostia.
Cardinal Morone to sooth and flatter him, told him that he wished he were at
the helm of affairs, and that he had the same Authority as the Legates had,
that farther more the Pope desired a Reformation, and would set about it; that
none of the Articles which had been proposed by the several Nations were
desired to be left out, but those which related to the Court of Rome, because
the Pope would have the honor of Reforming himself. The Cardinal was not
caught in that trap, but made answer, that saving the respect which was due to
the Holy See, what concerned the Reformation of the Cardinals, and of the Court
of Rome, might be very well proposed in the Council. But he continued not long
in that style, for the Cardinal received Letters from the Queen, informing him
that his presence would be far more necessary in France than at Trent: she told
him that there was no more good to be expected from the Council for France;
that all that could have been obtained from it, would only have been in order
to reunite the French Protestants to the Church: but that that was a thing not
to be hoped for now, since the peace with the Huguenots held good; and that
therefore the Pope was to be contented. She wrote also to the Pope, that she
would order the French Prelates to concur in any thing that might tend to the
speedy Conclusion of the Council, and not to dispute his Authority any more.
From that time forward the Cardinal thought of nothing but of returning to
France; he was troubled to understand, that the peace with the Protestants was
like to hold, for he mortally hated the Huguenots, and feared the growth of the
Party, not so much out of Zeal for Religion, as because he knew that that Party
could not be Established but upon the ruins of his Family, by reason of the
irreconcilable hatred that was betwixt the Princes of the House of Guise, and
the Great men that were engaged in the interests of the Protestants. He
considered with himself, that to support him against a Party which was like to
gather new strength by a Peace, he stood in need of the favor of the Pope; and
therefore he bent all his thoughts for the future, to incline him to espouse
his Interests by appearing to be wholly at his devotion.

A new Ambassador from France comes.
About the same time the President de Birague the new French Ambassador
arrived, and was received in the Congregation of the second of June: But
because in his Credentials he was not called Ambassador, all the Ambassadors
of Princes, who commonly come after those of France did not appear, that they
might not be obliged to take their places after him. Birague presented to the
Council a Letter from the King, wherein he gave once more reasons for the Peace
which he had concluded with the Huguenots, still protesting that it was done in
prospect of reclaiming to the Church those that were gone astray, by a surer
way than that of Arms: that farther, he expected, that they would aid and
assist him in that design, by the Reformation which he had demanded, and still
did demand from the Council. Birague's Harangue contained only the same things
somewhat more amplified: and seeing the Legates knew what Birague was to say
before they had heard him in the Council, they were prepared to make an answer
to his Speech, by complements of condoleing, that the King had been in a manner
forced to make Peace with the Huguenots. They farther added that they
disapproved not what he had done, exhorting him nevertheless, that so soon as
his Kingdom were in Peace, he would endeavor all he could to cure the wound
that Heresy had made in his Territories. This answer was communicated to the
Cardinal of Lorrain before it was given; but he opposed it, objecting that the
Council ought not to approve the Peace which the King had made with the
Huguenots, seeing it was so prejudicial to the Church; and that therefore they
ought to take time to answer. This advice was taken, and the Legates made
answer to Birague, that the matters which he had proposed were so weighty, that
the Council desired time to give an answer to them; but the French Ambassadors
were extremely vexed with the Cardinal for this action. They were about to have
written to the Court concerning it; but because Lansac was speedily to return,
they gave it him in Commission to make a report thereof to the King.

In the mean time the Congregations continued for Examining matters touching
the Sacrament of Orders; and the Prelates did not stick so closely to the
point, but that many times they purposely flew out into digressions. In one of
these Congregations the Bishop of Nimes discoursed freely enough against
Annats, and against several abuses of the Court of Rome; amongst the rest,
against the Ordination of Priests, who were admitted without examination or
capacity. In another Congregation, the Bishop of Cadix a Spaniard showed the
needlesness of Titulary Bishops, whom he called figmenta humana, an invention
of the Court of Rome, and what disorders these Bishops without Bishoprics
caused in the exercise of the Discipline of the Church. But seeing all the
abuses introduced by Papal Authority found instantly Protectors among the
Italians, the Bishop of Sarzana a Tuscan rose up and defended the Cause of
those Titular Bishops. Another Spaniard, Bishop of Lugo in Gallicia spoke
against Dispensations, and affirmed, that it was not necessary to set Bounds to
the Court of Rome as to that matter, and to declare the invalidity of those
Dispensations, or rather that it is impossible to give Dispensations about most
things that are so freely dispensed with. About this time Angelo Massarelo
Bishop of Tilesio in Abruzzo, Clark of the Council, being grievously tormented
with the Stone, resolved to be cut of it, and desisted from officiating in
Person as Clark: and this removed one of the difficulties that have been
mentioned; which was, that the Ambassadors of France and Spain having made
great instances that he should be assigned an Assistant for collecting the
Acts, because they questioned his fidelity; they gave him for a Substitute
another Italian, the Bishop of Campagna in the Kingdom of Naples. The first
business that he did as Clark, was to read the answer which was to be given to
Birague, of which the Legates had presented a Draught to the Council. It was
long and perplexed, and it did not therein appear whether the Fathers commended
or blamed the action of the King of France in making Peace with the Huguenots.
The Prelates gave their Votes, and the dark and ambiguous strain that it was
framed in, was cause of diversity of opinions. The Cardinal of Lorrain approved
it not, which was a surprising matter, because Cardinal Morone having showed it
him, he seemed to have been satisfied therewith. In sine, the matter was
referred to the Legates, and the two Cardinals Madruccio and Lorrain, with
power to frame that answer, as they should judge most convenient.

A Clashing betwixt the Cardinal of Lorrain and the Archbishop of Otranto.
June the eleventh, the Legates had a solemn consultation for finding out
Expedients to settle the differences about the question of the Divine Right of
the Institution of Bishops. This gave the Cardinal of Lorrain, who was present
at the Consultation, occasion to speak of the Authority of the Pope, a question
that depends naturally on that of the Institution of Bishops. He touched by the
bye the opinion of the French, that the Pope is Inferior to a Council,
declaring that it was not his desire that the Council should Pronounce in
favor of that opinion; but withal, he wished that they would not decide any
thing to the contrary. The Archbishop of Otranto took him up sharply, and spoke
bitterly not only against that opinion, but against the Cardinal himself, even
so far as to accuse him of being the cause of all the troubles which had arisen
about that Subject, by proposing a project of decision that had given occasion
to the debates. The matter went so far, that the Count de Luna told the
Archbishop, who was a Subject of the King of Spain, that if his Catholic
Majesty knew that he had fallen into that ill-timed passion, he would not take
it well. A French Prelate hereupon gave the Legates advice not to call the
Archbishop of Otranto any more to Consultations with the Cardinal of Lorrain,
because the Cardinal was informed that the Archbishop spoke ill of him on all
occasions, and spared not to call him a man full of Venom. Cardinal Morone
gave no heed to that advice; but answered that he had orders from the Pope to
do nothing without the Archbishop, that he had the disposal of forty Votes,
and that therefore he must not be disobliged. The Cardinal of Lorrain was
sufficiently vexed both with Cardinal Morone, and the Archbishop of Otranto;
but the design he had of getting into the Pope's favor obliged him to
dissemble.

President Birague having stayed for the Councils Answer as long as became his
character, went to wait on the Emperor at Inspruck, according as he was
enjoined by his Commission. And his chief business was to confer with the
Emperor about the means of transferring the Council unto a place where it
might enjoy full liberty. The Queen of France had written of that to the King
of Spain, who disliked the proposition; but he wrote to the Count de Luna his
Ambassador, that according to the Instructions which he had given him, he
should press the revocation of the Clause proponentibus legatis, for setting
the Council at liberty.

The Count de Luna having declared his Commission to the Legates, they answered
that the Clause had past with consent of the Council, and that it could not be
revoked. At the same time the Pope was earnestly solicited at Rome, to dispense
with that Clause, and, at length, to case himself of the trouble that was given
him upon that account; he wrote to Cardinal Morone that they should Supersede
the execution of it; but Morone, without consulting his Colleagues, answered
plainly, that he could not, and that he had rather his Holiness would recall
them. In the Congregation of the fifteenth of June, the Prelates pitched upon
the fifteenth of July for the day of the next Session, and in the Congregation
next day after, Another Discourse of General Lainez in favor of the Court of
Rome.
Lainez the General of the Jesuits speaking in his turn, undertook to censure
and refute all that had been said by others against the Court of Rome. And he
did it so vehemently and with so much zeal, as if he had been treating of
matters whereupon the Salvation of mankind depended. He made an Apology for
Dispensations, Annats, the Wealth of the Court of Rome, and for every thing
that others called Abuses. He proved the Pope's Superiority over a Council, and
advanced his Authority not only over Bishops, but the whole Church, as far as
could be imagined, in the same manner as he had done in his former Harangue.
The French were disgusted at this discourse, nor were the Spaniards better
satisfied: they were persuaded that the Legates had chosen him as their mouth
to speak their thoughts; for it was observed that they affected to show a
particular respect for him. When he spoke they made him come out of his place,
and sit in the middle of the Assembly, whereas the other Generals spoke
standing, and kept themselves in their own places. Lainez was never tedious,
though he had taken up the whole time of Congregations; but the others were
never short enough. This Jesuit sent his excuses to the Cardinal of Lorrain,
and the French Prelates, pretending that he had not the least design of
offending them; but that he only aimed at the Sorbonne Doctors, whose opinions
were not agreeable to the sentiment of the Church. This excuse gave a new
offense to the French, and particularly to the Divines. John de Verdun a
Benedictine Monk, desired leave from the Cardinal to refute Lainez, nay even
the Cordelier Hugonis, though bought by the Pope's Pension, offered himself to
prove, that the proposition which Lainez had asserted, that the Tribunal of the
Pope is the same as that of Jesus Christ, is an Impious and Scandalous
Proposition. But the Cardinal of Lorrain who had his private views and
interests, qualified the heat of their Zeal. All these Difficulties and
Janglings arose upon the Points of Residence and the Institution of Bishops
being of Divine Right; and therefore the Legates to stop up the Spring of the
Divisions, labored incessantly to form a Decree concerning these matters,
which by its Ambiguity and by clearing nothing at all, might give all content.
They did the Jobb, and the Cardinal of Lorrain was satisfied with it; but the
Pope's Divines, and Pensionary Prelates who outdid the Legates in the matter of
Zeal for the interests of the Court of Rome, found a thousand difficulties in
it. The draught of it was sent to Rome, where they Judged, as the Canonists of
Trent had done, that the Authority of the Pope over Bishops was not raised high
enough; insomuch that the diligence and pains of the Legates had no success at
this time. About this time the Court of Rome was in no little perplexity, upon
occasion of Maximilian lately Elected King of the Romans, who had no great
kindness for that Court. He resolved to send Ambassadors to the Pope, to
acquaint him with his Election, but he would not do it in the form that some
of his Predecessors had done, who had promised and sworn to the Pope whatever
he pleased. He therefore desired to know what terms he should make use of. The
matter was taken into deliberation, and the Cardinals concluded, that he ought
to demand Confirmation from the Pope, and promise him all obedience, as they
who had gone before him had done. He refused it, declaring that his Ambassador
should promise no more in his name, but all devotion, reverence and
complaisance for his Holiness, and the Holy See. There were great Negotiations
about this affair; and at length it ended so, as that the Ambassador neither
demanded Confirmation, nor promised Obedience; and yet the Pope in his Answer
gave the Confirmation which was not required of him, and accepted the Obedience
that was not offered. This was a Comedy that diverted no body, neither the Pope
himself nor his Cardinals.

In the Congregation of the one and twentieth of June, the answer which was to
be given to President Birague was read, and because he was not there, it was
sent to him in writing. About the same time, the Council appointed Adamo Fumamo
Assistant to the Bishop of Tilesio, who continued still ill of the Stone, in
the Office of Clark of the Council. The following Congregations were spent in
cavillings, about those questions so often canvas'd concerning Residence, and
the Institution of Bishops. And indeed, it was all the talk in private
Conversations; but the Bishops began at length to be weary of it. The Spaniards
made a great deal to do about it, but most of the rest being cloyed with such
debates, were of opinion, that these Points should be laid aside. This opinion
prevailed at length, but not without great opposition. There were likewise
great disputes about a certain Article of Reformation, by which the more severe
sort would have had a Decree to tie up the hands of those who had the right of
Nomination to Bishoprics, and oblige them to choose always the worthiest. The
Ambassadors of Kings, and the Pope's Party opposed this, alleging, that it
was too severe an imposition upon Princes, that it was sufficient that they
conferred not Bishoprics but upon deserving persons, without obliging them to
choose always the worthiest; and that it was not Just to deprive the Pope, and
Kings of the Power of gratifying their faithful Servants; that it was enough
that they did not abuse the Power which the Council left them, and never put
into Bishoprics but deserving men. They farther alleged, that the Overture
that was proposed, was absolutely impracticable: for these Reformers desired,
that when a Bishopric fell to be vacant, the Metropolitan should acquaint the
Chapter with the name of him that was Nominated; that his name should be
published in all the Parish Churches of the Town, and affixt on the Doors; and
that afterward, the Metropolitan should go to the Episcopal Town, and make a
very strict inquiry into the Learning, Life, and Manners of him that had been
Nominated, and that all who had any thing to object might be heard. Lainez the
Jesuit among others represented, that this method would be found so difficult
and perplexing, that it would be impossible to reduce it into practice. The
Council found out an Expedient for this affair, as they did for all others,
which we shall speak of hereafter. The Legates suffered also some Propositions
to be made for the Reformation of the Cardinals; for the Pope being informed of
all that was talked of at Trent, and in the Courts of Princes, thought it was
his policy and interest not to appear averse from that Reformation. He brought
it therefore under deliberation both at Trent and at Rome, whether that
Reformation should be made at Rome, or in the Council. The Legates and
Cardinals who were present, as well as those who aspired to a Hat, brought
matters so about, that this point was not meddled with: so that it went no
farther, and was no so much as proposed. The Pope had also some thoughts of
having Bishops discharged from meddling in the management of worldly affairs;
but Cardinal Simoneta represented to him, that the Churchmen of France, and of
other Countries would thereby sustain great prejudice, because they were
employed in all the Offices of State. And thus all the Propositions of
Reformation were stifled in the birth. The Emperor disgusted at this Conduct,
and losing all hopes of procuring any benefit from the Council, The Emperor
loses all hopes of obtaining any good of the Council, and leaves Inspruck.
left Inspruck, and at parting wrote to the Cardinal of Lorrain, that expecting
no good from that Assembly, he thought it better to suffer the present
Calamities, than to occasion greater, by applying of Remedies that would not be
taken. And now we have the Germans, as well as the French, overcome and
disheartened. There were none now but the Spaniards, who stood their ground a
little; for the Emperor wrote to his Ambassadors, that they should urge no
more the Decision of the question about the Power of the Pope, because he well
foresaw, that to speak of it would be the way to enlarge it; and that must be
avoided, for fear of alienating more and more the minds of the German
Protestants. The Ambassadors acquainted the Legates with the Emperor's
intentions; and that came in very pat to confirm the opinion of the Cardinal of
Lorrain, who was clearly of the mind, that they should speak no more of the
Institution of Bishops, and of the Authority of the Pope.

The last Debates about the Decrees of the Residence and Institution of
Bishops. And the last Point is wholly laid aside.
The Legates, at length, that they might essay to put an end to these long
Debates, resolved to hold private Assemblies, into which all the most
considerable Members of the Council should be admitted, to the end that matters
being adjusted and resolved upon by the leading men, they might be carried
without noise and difficulty in the General Congregations. In these Assemblies
the Legates proposed the Decrees that were framed for the Reformation of
Abuses. The first ordained that the Metropolitan should examine those who were
nominated to Bishoprics, that so none but the more deserving should be
admitted; but the Ambassadors started Objections again, grounded on the
Interests of Princes from whom the Right of Nomination to Bishoprics was
taken, by giving Power to Metropolitans to thwart these Nominations under
Pretext of the unworthiness of those who were nominated. After much Contest, it
was agreed that that Article should be left for the following Session. The like
was done with the last Article which contained a Confession of Faith, and the
Form of an Oath. In that Oath were contained all the Doctrines and Articles of
Faith, which distinguish the Roman Catholic Belief from that of the
Protestants; such as are the Superiority of the Pope, the Authority of
Councils, the Truth of Traditions, the Number of Seven Sacraments, the Real
Presence, Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Mass. It was not only
projected that all who should be received into Ecclesiastic Dignities should
swear that they believed all those things, but likewise that Princes should
admit of no man to any Office whatsoever, till first they took that Oath, and
swore to that Confession. Having resolved to lay that Article aside till
another time, they framed the Decree about Residence, leaving out all that
might displease those who held it to be of Divine Right, and the others who
affirmed it only of Positive Constitution. The Cardinal of Lorrain upon this
occasion did the Pope great Service. He had not long before received a very
obliging Letter from him; and the Pope had invited him to come to Rome, that he
might confer with him, which the Cardinal had in a manner promised to do. But
he durst not absolutely declare himself, before he was informed what the Court
of France thought of that Journey. He did therefore all he could to dispatch
business, that so the next Session might be held on the prefixed day; and that
the Council proceeding apace, he might make his Journey to Rome, see a speedy
Conclusion of the Council, and then return to France. This being his aim, he
drove at Expedition, and was the Cause of stiffing a great Process, which was
occasioned by a matter of very small importance. And that was in relation to
the Functions of the Inferior Orders from the Deacon even to the Porter, about
which the Divines kept a great Clutter. The Custom had been for a long time
discontinued, of having consecrated Persons to perform the Functions of these
Lower Orders, as shutting Doors, lighting Candles, ringing Bells, and even
Reading; these Offices being discharged by Laics Now the Council thought it
necessary to restore the Order, and to cause those Functions to be performed by
Consecrated Persons according to the Ceremonies of the Roman Pontifical: and
that with design to silence Libertines, who maintained that these Offices were
not Sacraments. But when the Bishops were about to come to a Conclusion, and to
frame the Decree, they were stopped by a difficulty, which is obvious to any man;
for they who were not of opinion that these Functions should be restored to
those who had received Orders, asked what Necessity there was of a Spiritual
Character, for performing of Actions merely Corporeal, as shutting of Doors and
ringing of Bells. The Cardinal of Lorrain gave his opinion that that matter
should be left to the Disposal of the Bishops; which prevailed. All were now
for condescending that they might come to an end: Nevertheless the Spaniards
held out still, and persisted to have Residence declared to be of Divine Right,
as well as the Institution of Bishops. The Cardinal of Lorrain brought over
several, but a great many resisted his Solicitations. On the other hand the
Archbishop of Otranto and his Adherents, who were afraid of the least shadow
that might entrench upon the Authority of the Pope, would not consent to the
Decree, that the Legates had drawn up concerning Residence; because it said,
that all who have care of Souls; are obliged by the Command of God to look to
their Flocks. They said, that it was impossible to look to their Flocks without
residing. If one be obliged to look to his Flock by the Command of God, he is
by Consequence obliged by the Command of God to reside, and so Residence must
be of Divine Right. Nor would they approve of the sixth Canon, which faith that
the Hierarchy has been established by Divine Ordinance. They were afraid that
it might from thence be concluded, that all the Orders of that Hierarchy are of
Divine and not Papal Institution. They said, that by that means Episcopacy was
declared to be of Divine Right. These Minutes had been an hundred times over
consulted at Rome, the Legates approved of them, since they had framed them;
the Pope's Canonists and Divines were very well satisfied with them; but all
that was nothing, they would needs be more zealous for the Pope, than the Pope
was for himself. Nevertheless in spite of the opposition of that Archbishop on
the one hand, and of the Archbishop of Granada, and Bishop of Segovia on the
other, the Assembly went on, and concluded that the Decrees must pass in that
form. And now the Consultations being ended, and the Decrees framed, the
General Congregations were begun again the ninth of July, for reading and
examining the Decrees. The Spaniards would not yield yet. They made a noise in
the Congregation and said that they were abused, since that now after so long
delaying to form the Chapter of the Institution of Bishops; there was no notice
at all taken of it. They renewed their instances to have it declared to be of
Divine Right, and made the same Complaints and Demands about the Article of
Residence: But at length the Count de Luna dashed their Constancy; for he
called them together several times at his house, and after many Skirmishes he
obtained of the Archbishop of Granada, the Bishop of Segovia and the rest of
the most forward Prelates, that they would be satisfied to deliver their
opinions without Passion and insisting in their Oppositions. And so on the
fourteenth of July, which was the Eve of the Session, the Legates held the last
General Congregation, wherein a hundred fourscore and twelve gave their Vote
for holding the Session next day, and only twenty eight were against it. The
Presidents obliged the Spaniards to be silent, promising the Count de Luna that
so soon as they had defined the Power of the Pope, according as it was done by
the Council of Florence, they should make no more Difficulty to declare the
Institution of Bishops to be of Divine Right.

The twenty third Session the fifteenth of July.
At length the fifteenth of July came, on which was held that Session, which had
been so many times prorogued, and the Decrees whereof were so impatiently
expected. The matter of Doctrine was digested into four Chapters, and eight
Canons with Anathema's. In them the Council declared, that Orders are a
Sacrament; that there is a visible Sacrifice under the Gospel, for offering up
of the very body and very blood of our Lord; that there are greater and lesser
Orders, by which one mounts as by steps to a greater Order, which is that of
Priesthood; that Orders do imprint a Character, and confer the Holy Ghost; that
Unction is necessary in the Sacrament; that the Hierarchy is of Divine
Institution; that Bishops are superior to Priests; that the Consent either of
the People, or of the Magistrate, is not necessary to render valid the
Ordination of Priests and Bishops; and that Bishops made and promoted by the
Pope are true Bishops.

After that, they read eighteen Chapters of Reformation: the first concerned
Residence, which had caused so much Debate. That Decree declares that every
Pastor is obliged by the Command of God to look to, and feed his Flock. It
prohibits long absence under great Penalties, but it makes no reckoning of an
absence that does not last above three Months. It somewhat aggravates the
Penalties that were imposed in the sixth Session of the first Convocation of
the Council, which was held under Paul III. and to say the truth, it is not
easy to judge of what advantage this new Decree is for Residence, since it
adds little or nothing to the former. Nay more, a Clause was inserted into
this, which rendered it altogether useless, unless the Service and Benefit of
the Church, or State require it; for what Bishop is there who neglects
Residence, that will not say that he designs the good of the Church or State?
The rest of the Chapters of this Decree contain nothing that is considerable:
only some regulations about the Collation of Orders, and the Functions of
these Orders, that no undeserving Person be received into them, and that those
who are received, do their Duty. The last appoints Seminaries for breeding of
those who are designed to the Priesthood in every Diocese. Matters were carried
on very calmly, because all the Prelates were prevailed with to keep silence.
The Spaniards had a Quarrel with the Cardinal of Lorrain for that, and
complained highly of him, that he had abandoned them in the Point of Residence,
after that he had many times promised them to bestir himself vigorously for
having it declared to be of Divine Right; but the Legates could not
sufficiently commend him.

All Europe was in great expectation of this Session, which had been the
business of ten whole Months, and which was more, of two or three hundred
Prelates and Divines. Never were People more surprised, than when they saw the
little effects of so much pains; for they found nothing in the Decrees, but
what a single man of sense might have easily gone through within a few weeks:
and that rejoiced the Protestants; who picked matter enough for their Sermons
out of the Contradictions, and weak passages that they found in those
Decisions. Especially Vergerio, a Minister in the Valtoline in the Country of
the Grisons, heretofore Nuncio for the Pope in Germany, applied all his might
to lay open the faults which he pretended the Council had committed. And he
failed not to expose to the Eyes of his People the Debates and Clashings of the
Bishops, which he charged upon them as a great Scandal. He wrote of them also
to the Protestant Ministers on all hands, because being near to Trent, he was
able to inform those who lived at a greater Distance. The Pope and Cardinal
Morone did all they could to rid themselves of that man, and to terrify him at
least, that he might be gone somewhat farther off, attempts were even made
against his life; but for all that he could not be made to forsake his Post.

The Legates seek out means of concluding the Council speedily; and the Count
de Luna opposes it.
So soon as the Session was over, the Legates who greatly desired to see an end
of the Council, proposed means for the speedy Expedition of the matters that
remained to be examined: which were the Points of Indulgences, Invocation of
Saints, Images and Purgatory; for as to the matter of Marriage, it had been
sufficiently examined in the Congregations of Divines. The Legates chose only
ten Divines, to wit, two Generals of Orders, two of the Pope's Divines, two
French, two Spanish, and two Portuguese, to whom they gave Commission to
consult amongst themselves how the opinions of Protestants concerning these
Controversies might briefly be confuted: telling them that so soon as they had
digested their opinions they should be proposed in a General Congregation, to
be formed into Canons. At the same time that the Decrees about Marriage were
framing, the Legates summed up the Articles which related to Reformation, and
got the Ambassadors to consent, that they should set about the compiling of
those also which concerned the Reformation of Princes; for it was their
Intention to dispatch all that remained in one Session more. But this design
was opposed; for the Count de Luna did not think that that suited with the
Interests of his Master, or the good of Christendom. He told them that it was
not convenient to precipitate in Affairs, but that time should be taken to work
upon the Protestants, that they might be brought to come and submit to the
Council: that his Holiness, indeed, had had the goodness to send Nuncio's to
them; but that they ought not to rest there, seeing it was to no purpose to
have called a Council, if the Lutherans received not its Decrees; in a word,
that they ought to be invited to come, no more in name of the Pope for whom
they had an Aversion, but in name of the Council, which was not so hateful to
them. He therefore demanded that the Divines might be heard publicly about the
matter of Indulgences, and what other Points remained to be handled; and that
they should be examined in the same manner, and with as much leisure, as the
rest had been before. The Pope whom one could not disoblige more, than by
hindering the Conclusion of the Council, complained to the Spanish Ambassador
at Rome, of the Conduct of the Count de Luna, and wrote about it to the King of
Spain himself. He took it extremely ill that he should have mentioned the
inviting of the Protestants again, considering with what an outrageous Contempt
they had received the Invitations and Civilities that had been already offered
them. Nor was he at all satisfied that the Ambassador should have attempted to
Prescribe to the Legates the manner how they ought to handle matters; but the
thing that most of all vexed him, was the design of retarding the Conclusion of
the Council, to which all these Propositions tended. But for all the Chafe the
Pope was in, the Count bestirred himself to make a Party at Trent; for there
were a great many of the mind that the Controversies which the Legates intended
to huddle up and decide without examination were of as much or more importance,
than those which had cost so much labor and pains. The Cardinal of Lorrain was
altogether now for the ways of quickest Dispatch; and therefore he concurred in
opinion with the Legates, especially since he formed a design of going to Rome
as the Pope had invited him. He had received Letters from France, where in he
was advised to comply with the Pope's desire, and give him that satisfaction.
So that being ready for his Journey, he only expected the sitting of the next
Session that he might be gone.

They set about forming the Decrees and Canons concerning the Matter of
Marriage, against the next Session.
In the Congregation of the two and twentieth of July, the Legates produced the
Canons concerning the matter of Marriage, much in the same form as they stand
in at present. There was no Difficulty about Marriage, and the single life of
Priests. The Emperor, King of France, and Duke of Bavaria had, indeed, desired
that Priests might be allowed to marry; but when the Bishop of the five
Churches the Emperor's Ambassador, and the Archbishop of Prague, moved the
Council to make some more reflection upon that Point, they were scarcely heard.
Nevertheless the Pope had but very lately before given fresh Promises to the
Duke of Bavaria, to give him satisfaction as to that matter; because the People
of his Country had made an Insurrection that they might obtain from their
Prince the Restitution of the Cup, and Permission for married men to Preach.
The greatest Debates were about Clandestine Marriages. The French Ambassadors
demanded that they should be declared null. An hundred and thirty fix Votes
were for it, fifty six opposed it, and ten would not declare for either side.
At length the Prelates agreed to Reform the Canon in the manner as now it goes,
that is, that Clandestine Marriages are true Marriages, and real Sacraments,
whilst the Church does not annull them; that the Church has always detested
them, and for the future declares, that all who are Married or Betrothed
without the presence of two or three Witnesses at least, are incapable of
contracting, and that by Consequence the Marriage shall be null. In the same
Congregation the Canons and Anathema's were read; the fifth of which Canons
pronounces Anathema against those who maintain the Divorces which are permitted
by the Code of Justinian to be lawful; that is to say, such as are made upon
the account of Heresy, and refusal of Cohabitation. The Cardinal of Lorrain
got this Canon added, to give a blow to the Calvinists, who teach that the
refusal of Cohabitation is a lawful reason for a man to divorce from his Wife.
The seventh Canon condemns those who assert, that Adultery dissolves Marriage.
At first it was proposed without Anathema, out of some respect that still
remained for the opinion of St. Ambrose and the Greek Fathers; but
notwithstanding that Consideration, it was thought fit to add the Anathema. In
the following Congregations there was much Discourse about the Obstacles of
contracting Marriage, which spring from the Prohibition of marrying within
certain remote Degrees, not only of natural, but spiritual kindred, such as
Gossipships, or the Relations betwixt Godfathers and Godmothers. It was
represented that in some places twenty Godfathers and as many Godmothers were
sometimes invited, and that it many times happens that such not knowing one
another for Godfathers and Godmothers, marry together without Dispensation, and
run into the Guilt of Sin. Others said upon occasion of the Prohibition of
Marriage within remote Degrees, that People have not always by them Books of
Genealogy, so that having forgot their distant Kindred, they marry within the
Degrees, and engage themselves into bonds, which by the Laws of the Church, are
unlawful. They therefore demanded that all these Prohibitions might be
abolished, or at least that Bishops might have Power to dispense with them,
that so People might not be put to the trouble of writing or sending to the
Court of Rome about matters of so small importance. The Council had no great
regard to these Remonstrances, only prohibited the multiplying of Godfathers
and Godmothers. But the Sticklers for the Court of Rome, would not yield an
Inch in Relation to Prohibited Degrees, lest such Condescension might be looked
upon by the Lutherans, as a gaining of the Cause, and might diminish the
Revenues of the Pope. And, indeed, it may be said that they made the Yoke of
Dispensations heavier, for it was ordained that no more Dispensations should be
granted in Prohibited Degrees, how remote soever they might be, unless very
pressing reasons required the contrary.

The Legates propose the Decree of the Reformation of Princes. The Ambassadors
oppose it.
This being done the Legates were obliged to propose the Articles of
Reformation. They offered thirty eight of them, which related both to the
Abuses committed by Princes in invading the Rights of the Church, and the
several Abuses that were crept into the Clergy. The Cardinal of Lorrain who
made it all his business to please the Pope, and hasten the Conclusion of the
Council, advised the Legates to cut off the most part of these Articles, and
especially those that might meet with greatest Difficulty. This Overture
surprised the Cardinal of Warmia; he could not conceive what was become of that
great Zeal which the Cardinal of Lorrain in the beginning pretended for
Reformation. The Cardinal who perceived his Surprise, told him, that he ought
not to look upon his Condescension as strange, that he still retained the same
Zeal, and the same Intentions; but that he had learnt by Experience, that
nothing was to be expected from the Council concerning Reformation. These
Articles were communicated to the Ambassadors of Princes, and all of them made
their several additions and observations according to the interests of the
Masters. Most of the Ambassadors observations tended to the curbing of the
Pope's Authority, and putting a stop to the Attempts upon the Ordinaries;
others drove at the lessening the Authority of Bishops, and opposing the
Encroachment of the Clergy upon the Civil Jurisdiction. The observations of the
French Ambassadors were the highest of all; for they demanded that the number
of Cardinals should not exceed twenty four; that the Nephews of the Pope in
being, or of a Cardinal should not be promoted to a Hat; that Cardinals should
not possess Bishoprics; that all Pretexts of holding several Benefices should
be taken away; that Criminal Causes of Bishops should not be judged out of the
Kingdom; that Bishops should have Power to absolve in all Cases; that
Preventions, Resignations in favor, Mandates or Mandamus's, Reversions, and
all other unlawful ways of obtaining Benefices should be abolished; that
Churchmen should meddle no more in Secular Affairs; and that nothing should be
done to the prejudice of the Laws of France, and Liberties of the Gallican
Church. But all the Ambassadors agreed to demand a forbearance of handling the
Articles of the Reformation of Princes until another Session.

The Legates having gathered together all these observations assembled
themselves with the two Cardinals Madruccio and Lorrain, to consult what they
should do about them. The Cardinal of Lorrain was still of opinion that all
such Articles as might occasion Debate should be left out, and particularly
such as were like to be opposed by the Ambassadors. The Legates sent to Rome
the Articles which they had proposed to the Council, with the Observations of
the Ambassadors: and whilst they waited for an answer, on the Eleventh of
August they began the Congregations for finishing and completing the Canons of
Marriage. The matter of Marriage is pitched upon.
In these Conferences fresh Debates arose about Clandestine Marriages. The
French demanded that all Marriages of Children in the Family contracted without
the Consent of their Parents should be declared null. The Cardinal of Lorrain
seconded that Demand, and showed the Justice of it by many reasons, and
Authorities. But the Archbishop of Otranto, who was always opposite to the
Cardinal of Lorrain withstood it, alleging that it was to give Laymen Power
over Sacraments though most of those who spoke in this Congregation were of
opinion that the whole matter should be laid aside. About the end of the
Congregation the Ambassadors of Venice came in, and represented that the
Kingdoms of Cyprus and Candia, with the Islands of Zante, Corfeu and Cephalonia
were under the Dominion of their Republic, and that it was the Custom of the
People of those Countries who were of the Greek Church, to repudiate their
Wives when they were guilty of Adultery; they therefore prayed the Council so
to frame their Decree, that it might do no prejudice to the Custom of those
People. In the following Congregation the Demand of the Venetians was taken
into Consideration; and many thought it reasonable, especially because the
Greeks had not been cited, and that it was not just to condemn People without
being heard. Others thought that the Greeks were sufficiently cited by the
Publication and General Convocation of the Council. But the Party that favored
the Venetians Demand grew stronger by the Conjunction of those who could not
digest the Anathematising of the opinion, That Adultery dissolves a former, and
gives the innocent party Power to contract a new Marriage, because it had been
the opinion of St. Ambrose, and the Greeks Fathers. The Council therefore found
out a mean, they did not pronounce Anathema against those who say, that
Adultery dissolves Marriage; but against those who say that the Church errs in
affirming, That Adultery dissolves not Marriage. This was found afterward to
be a pretty pleasant distinction.

The Council then returned to the Demand of the French about Clandestine
Marriages, and this head was as warmly disputed, as if nothing had been as yet
said to it. Cardinal Madruccio, and two Legates the Cardinals of Warmia and
Simoneta held that they could not be annulled, and seemed as if they intended
to oppose any resolution to the contrary. Lainez General of the Jesuits
scattered abroad Copies of a Writing that maintained the Validity of these
Clandestine Marriages, and proved that they could not be annulled: This Debate
took up several Congregations; and to increase the Difficulty, the Bishop of
Sulmona maintained that it was a matter of Doctrine, because the question was
about the Nature of Clandestine Marriages, to know whether they be Sacraments:
and that the Authority of the Church was likewise concerned in it, to wit,
whether she have Power to rescind Marriages, and annull a Sacrament, and that
by Consequence that Point could not be handled amongst the Chapters of
Reformation. His design was to put the French to new straits, because, as it
has been observed before, many more Votes are required for forming a Decree
about Doctrine, than making a Decision concerning Reformation. Others opposed
this opinion of the Bishop of Sulmona and that not without Passion, saying that
the Power of the Church ought never to be brought into question; but that it
ought always to be supposed; and that opinion carried it, so that it was
concluded that that Chapter should remain amongst the Articles of Reformation.
Opinions varying, and each Party maintaining their Sentiments with heats,
Francis de Beaucaire Bishop of Mets had the honor of finding a form of a
Decree, which satisfied the different Parties: And that was it which is in
force at present. All were almost content with it, because it is ambiguous, and
every one finds his Sentiment therein; for it Anathematises those who say, that
Clandestine Marriages are not true Sacraments; and yet it prohibits such,
affirming that the Church has always detested them. An hundred thirty and five
Votes were for the opinion of the Bishop of Mets, and fifty six against it.

About this time the Council was in some trouble, by reason that the King of
Spain declared that he had a design of settling the Inquisition in the State of
Milan. This news allarmed all the Prelates of Lombardy, and Naples also, who
concluded that if the Inquisition were once established in the Milanese,
without doubt it would likewise be introduced into Naples. The City of Milan
sent Deputies to the Pope, to the King of Spain, and to the Council for
preventing of that blow. The Envoys declared, that many of the chief Citizens
were ready to leave the Country; because they knew very well that the Design
of the Spanish Inquisition is not always the Preservation of the Faith; but
that its chief Aim is to drain those that are rich, and has no other prospect
for most part but worldly advantage. This put the Council to some trouble,
because of the great number of People concerned. The Duke of Sessa Governor of
Milan, finding so great opposition, and having had some Information, that the
Milanese hatched a design of doing what the People of the Low Countries had
done, who turned Protestants to avoid the Inquisition, abandoned the Enterprise.

In the mean time, the Pope to whom the Observations, and Additions which the
Ambassadors had made as to the thirty eight Articles of Reformation proposed
by the Legates, were sent, found them not at all to his mind. He perceived
amongst them Demands that were grievous both to himself and his Court, and that
made him more ardently desire that a Period might be put to the Council, which
obliged him to write to his Nuncio's that resided in the Courts of Europe, that
they would press the Princes to assist him in bringing of it to a Conclusion.
He wrote also to the Legates that by any means they should make an end, and
that in order thereunto they should grant every thing that they could not
refuse. But the Count de Luna stood always in the way, and used endeavors to
cross that speedy Conclusion; he backed the Spaniards and Italians who were
scandalized that Assemblies were so often kept at the Houses of the Legates,
where none were admitted but Cardinals, the Archbishop of Otranto, and some
Favorites: but that hindered not the Legates from keeping such Assemblies
still. Of the thirty eight articles of Reformation, they had already left out
six, at the desire of the Ambassadors; and moreover, the Emperor's
Ambassadors by new Orders from their Master, and being seconded by the Count
de Luna made fresh instances, that the Reformation of Princes should not be
proposed that Session, which at length was granted; so that the Articles were
reduced to twenty one. And Cardinal Simoneta and the Pope's Adherents took all
the pains they could to shape them into such a form as might not in the least
encroach upon the Authority of the Pope, and yet give some satisfaction to
those who so urgently demanded Reformation.

The Legates are willing to satisfy the Bishops by passing the Decree of the
Reformation of Princes: but that causes great noise.
The chief Design of the Legates was to please the Bishops, because without them
there was no concluding of the Council. The principal Aim of the Bishops, was
to enlarge their Power, and for accomplishing of that design they demanded
three things. First, that they should have the absolute Collation of all
Benefices that had Cure of Souls, that so the Curats might depend on them.
Secondly, that the Council would abolish all the Exemptions of Chapters, of
privileged Churches, and of Monks or Regulars, who by certain Privileges
obtained from the Court of Rome, had found a way to decline the Power of their
Bishops: And thirdly, that all those hindrances might be removed, which
Princes and Secular Magistrates bring to Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, calling
that an invasion of Princes, when they strive what they can to hinder the
Clergy from challenging and taking to themselves the Trials of civil Causes,
and temporal Jurisdiction.
The Legates were very well disposed to satisfy the Bishops as to the third
Point of their Demand, because none but Princes must pay for that, whose
interest they did not at all consider. And therefore in the Articles which they
proposed, they failed not to insert every thing that could contribute to the
retrieving of the Jurisdiction of Bishops to the same State that the Invasions
of the Clergy had formerly brought it to. And upon these three heads chiefly
the Articles of Reformation run, for the satisfaction of the Bishops. But as to
the second Point which concerns the Exemptions of the Regulars or Monks, the
Legates had no mind to comply too much with the Bishops, because that could not
be done without Diminution of the Authority and Profits of the Court of Rome,
of which all the Monks hold immediately: And if the Bishops made instances on
their side for obtaining that Demand, the Generals of Orders who were present
in the Council, on the other hand, vehemently opposed it. The Legates had
appointed a particular Congregation for the Reformation of Monks, and in that
Congregation diverse good Regulations were made, to which the Generals of Orders
had submitted, because that Monks are pretty well satisfied, that the Rules to
which they are obliged should be severe and hard, that being the thing that
appears outwardly to the World, and which gains them a great Reputation of
Sanctity and Austerity. But, after all, since they are the Masters of the
Monasteries within doors, and of the manner how these Rules are observed, the
Severity of Orders incommodes them no more than they please themselves. But for
the matter of Exemptions, they would by no means have that meddled with. They
liked it much better to depend on a Master that lived at a distance, who could
not watch over their Conduct, than on a Bishop who would always have his Eyes
upon them. Nevertheless the reason that they alleged for their refusal was the
remisness and relaxation that Bishops allowed themselves in their Conduct and
Conversation, and franckly said, that when Prelates were Masters of
Monasteries, Bishops lived under a far more severe Discipline, than they did at
present; and that times were changed. The Ambassadors also favored the Monks
for the interest sake of Princes, who desire not that Bishops should have too
much power, because they many times abuse it.

Martin Royas Pontal Rouge Ambassador from the Great Master and Knights of
Malta, was received in Congregation the seventh of September. Seeing every one
minded their Interests, his chief demand was, that the Council would Ordain,
that the Possessions and Commendaries, which had been taken from them should be
restored. The Legates acquainted the Pope with the demand of the Ambassadors
of Malta, and the Pope answered, that it was the business of the Council, who
ought not to neglect it. In that, and the following Congregations the Articles
of Reformation were again treated of, which had been so many times altered and
corrected by the Legates; and they afforded no important Debates. The third
Article regarded the Authority of Metropolitans or Archbishops. Those of that
Character and such of them as were present, were for having the Ancient Canons
reestablished, according to which, Bishops were subject to visitation,
correction, and to the Government of Metropolitans, as Curates are subject to
the Bishops. Particularly Giovanni Trevisano Patriarch of Venice was mightily
for the restitution of those privileges; but the Archbishops were not strong
enough to gain their Cause. The Bishops who were far the (...) Sedition of the
Bishops; they were forced to propose in Congregation the Decree of the
Reformation of Princes, which was sometime before laid aside, and referred to
another Session. Abstract of the Decree of the Reformation of Princes.
It will not be amiss to give an Abstract of it, that it may appear what the
temper of the Bishops was, and how far the Clergy would have carried on their
Usurpations upon the Temporal Right of Princes and Magistrates. That Decree
contained a Preface, thirteen Chapters and a Conclusion. The Preface mentioned,
that the Council had a design to prevent the enterprises of Seculars upon the
Immunities of the Church, and that for that end it revived the Decrees and Holy
Canons which were to be observed under pain of Anathema. It ordained then, that
the persons of Churchmen should not be Judged by a Secular Court, upon any
pretext whatsoever, though they should even consent to it; that Secular Judges
should not offer to meddle with Matrimonial Causes, Causes of Heresy, Tithes,
Rights of Patronage, Benefices, nor with other Causes wherein any thing of the
Spirituality is concerned, whether they be Civil or Criminal; that Secular
Princes cannot Establish Judges in Ecclesiastic affairs; that Secular
Magistrates must not prohibit an Ecclesiastic Judge to proceed against any by
Excommunication; that neither Emperor, Kings, nor Princes can make any Edicts
or Ordinances concerning the Affairs, Goods and Possessions of Churchmen; that
Churchmen should be maintained in their Temporal Right of high, middle, and low
Jurisdiction; that Ecclesasticks should not be obliged to pay any Taxes,
Imposts, Tenths or Subsidies; that Princes and Magistrates should not have
Power to quarter their Officers, Soldiers or Horses, in the Houses of
Churchmen. There were a great many more Articles of the same force, and that
tended to the same end. So the Clergy shook off the lawful Yoke of Obedience
which they owed to their Sovereigns, and erected to themselves within their
States, a temporal Jurisdiction over Christians, parallel to that of Kings, and
wholly independent of their Authority. The Conclusion contained an earnest
Exhortation to the Observation of these Decrees under the pain of Anathema.
This was the Piece against which the Ambassadors of France had orders to
protest, if they intended to pass it, which they failed not to do. The
Emperor wrote also to Cardinal Morone, that he would never suffer, neither as
Emperor nor Archduke, that the Council should offer to make such a Reformation
to the prejudice of the Jurisdiction of Princes. But the Conduct of the French
upon that occasion was much more vigorous. In the Congregation of the two and
twentieth of November, they had the patience to hear a long Harangue, wherein
one of the Prelates strove to prove, that the disorders of the Church proceeded
from Princes, and that Care must be taken to reform them; Du Ferrier protests
against that Decree, and makes a Speech that cuts the Prelates to the quick.
that since the Acts concerning that were ready, there was no more to be done
but to produce them. The President Du Ferrier started up, and made his
Protestation by word of mouth, in a long and witty discourse, delivered briskly
in words that cut to the heart. He laughed at all the petty Reformations which
the Council had made for the Clergy, made a Comparison betwixt the Canons of
the Council, and the Ancient Canons of the Discipline of the Primitive Church;
wherein it was not permitted to Bishops to be absent from their Flocks three
months of the year, as the present Council allowed: wherein Beneficiaries had
not the liberty, which the Council granted, to dispose of the Revenues of their
Benefices to the prejudice of the Poor, to whom properly they belong. And so
went over all the Abuses, authorized by the Council of Trent, comparing them
with the Severity of the Ancient Discipline. He alleged that the Reformation
of Princes which was proposed, tended directly to the Ruin of the Liberties of
the Gallican Church; but that the King knew very well how to maintain them,
that he would make use of his Right in laying hold on the goods of the Church
when his occasions did require it: that it was an intolerable Attempt to
excommunicate Kings, even without a hearing, as that Decree ordained; that they
should concern themselves with spiritual matters, and not with the Affairs of
Princes, with which they had nothing to do; that the Kings of France had made
Ordinances in Ecclesiastic matters, and that the Church of France had been
governed according to its Laws, above four hundred years before the Compilation
of the Decretals; that Kings held their Power only of God, and that it belongs
not to Churchmen to reform them: that if they had a mind to reform Princes,
they should first think of reforming themselves, and become like St. Ambrose,
St. Austin and St. Chrysostom, and that that would be the way to make Princes
imitate the Examples of the Theodosius's, of Honorius, Arcadius, and the
Valentinians. This Harangue put the Council out of all patience, and even the
French Prelates themselves: there arose a murmuring and confused Noise amongst
them, which was like to have broken out into some scandalous Transport, had not
the Legates to prevent it dismissed the Assembly. The Bishops spoke all the
Evil they could devise against his Speech, to make it pass for Heretical: and
Nicolas Pelue Archbishop of Sens, and Jerome de la Souchieres Abbot of
Clervaux, had big words with Du Ferrier about it. They reported every where
that that Protestation was made without Orders from the King, that Du Ferrier
was a Creature of the King of Navarre, that he was suspected of Heresy, and
that he ought to be put into the Inquisition. Others had scraped together some
Notes of that Harangue; but because Du Ferrier found them false, he published
it himself, and sent a copy of it to the Cardinal of Lorrain, with a Letter
wherein he told him that he could not abandon the Royal Authority, which for
the space of four hundred years had been attempted upon by the Court of Rome;
that as a Frenchman and a Member of Parliament, he was obliged to assert the
Rights of his King, and the opinions of his Faculty: And that it was not just,
that the Council, made up of the slaves of the Court of Rome, should be Judge
in its own Cause. So soon as Du Ferrier's Speech appeared in public, the
Council caused it to be refuted by a nameless Author. Du Ferrier made his
defense, and instead of recanting, he confirmed all that he had said, or
written. These Writings increased the Provocation, and the Bishops revenged
themselves by reviling, not so much the Ambassadors, as the Court of France.
They accused the Queen Mother of openly favoring the Heretics. They affirmed
that she was governed by the Chatillons who were declared Heretics, by the
Chancellor de l'Hopital, and the Bishop of Valence who were suspected of
Heresy. After that Protestation the Ambassadors of France, The French
Ambassadors go to Venice.
having staid a Fourtnight longer at Trent, retired to Venice, according to the
Orders they had from Court. Before they went away they declared to the few
French Prelates that remained, that it was the King's Intention they should
oppose the fifth and sixth Articles of Reformation, which were proposed;
because these Articles drew the Causes and Persons of Bishops out of the
Kingdom; whereas according to the Liberties of the Gallican Church, the Members
of the Clergy ought to be judged prima instantia upon the place, and by their
immediate Superiors.

When the news of the French Ambassadour's Protestation came to Rome, it caused
great heart-burnings in the Pope's Court. No man was so much afflicted as the
Cardinal of Lorrain, because it was an unlucky accident that brought great
Prejudice to the Negotiation that he was a managing with the Pope for the
Grandeur of himself and Family. He pacified the Pope the best he could, blaming
the Ambassadors, and promising to write to the King that he might procure
reparation of that Scandal. He did, indeed, write, and in such terms as well
discovered that he had sacrificed the Interests of his King, and the opinions
of his Country, to the design of pleasing the Pope, whom he would engage in
his private concerns. The Pope wrote also to Trent, that they should still go
on, and that if the French Ambassadors had a mind to be gone, they should not
hinder them, but withal, give them no occasion of withdrawing; that after all,
they should prepare to hold the Session immediately upon the return of the
Cardinal of Lorrain, and put an end to the Council; that now he had got the
better of the Germans and French, and that none but the Spaniards remained to
be overcome.

The truth is, the Count de Luna, not only crossed the Pope's design of
shortning the Council, but also made it his business to obtain an Alteration of
the Clause proponentibus legatis. He continually charged a fresh, and never
left off soliciting Cardinal Morone even amidst the troubles that were
occasioned by the Protestation of the French, till, at length, the Cardinal was
fain to promise that they should endeavor to give him satisfaction in the
ensuing Session; what this satisfaction was we shall see hereafter. The Legates
being pressed by the Bishops, who were not baulked by the Protestation of the
French Ambassadors, proposed again the Decree of the Reformation of Princes:
but all the other Ambassadors opposed it, so that the Council was obliged to
refer it to the following Session.

The Pope being incensed at the Protestation of the French Ambassadors had a
mind to be revenged upon the faction, from which he thought it came. He
therefore resolved to pursue the affair that had been commenced against the
five French Bishops, The Pope has a mind to proceed against five French Bishops
suspected of Heresy, and against the Queen of Navarre. The King of France
opposes it.
whom he had caused to be cited before the Tribunal of the Inquisition. He was
likewise for continuing the Procedures against the Queen of Navarre: and
therefore on the thirteenth of October he caused Sentence to be published
against the five Bishops, and a severe Monitory affixed on public places
against Jean Queen of Navarre, the Widow of Anthony of Bourbon, for depriving
her of her Dignities, States and Dominions. The Cardinal of Lorrain told the
Pope, that these Procedures were absolutely contrary to the Maxims of France,
the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and that therefore the King would take it
ill that he had proceeded to sentence against Bishops prima instantia, and far
worse, that he deprived a Queen and his Allye of her Dominions; but the
Cardinal represented this faintly and only for fashion, that he might not be
accused of combining with the Court of Rome in so evident an Invasion of the
Liberties of the Gallican Church. As the Cardinal had no design to persuade, so
neither did he persuade, and they proceeded notwithstanding his Remonstrances.
But the King of France employed more prevalent Instruments; for the Sieur
d'Oysel the French Ambassador at Rome by Orders from his Master spoke to the
Pope about those two affairs with a great deal of resolution. He told him, that
the King would never suffer, that contrary to the Prerogatives of the Majesty
of Kings, he should proceed to the spoiling and excommunicating a Widow-Queen,
whose Husband was killed in the Wars against the Huguenots, who was his Allye,
and who had most of her Lands in France; that if he went on any farther, the
King his Master would take the Course his Ancestors had done. And as to the
business of the five Bishops, that the way of proceeding against them was
absolutely repugnant to the Customs of France, which suffer not that Bishops
should be judged any where but upon the place, and by their immediate
Superiors. D'Oysel succeeded so well in his Negotiation, that he obtained the
Pope's word that there should be no more talk, neither of the Queen of Navarre,
nor of the five Bishops. The Cardinal of Lorrain got no great Satisfaction by
his writing to the King about Du Ferrier's Speech, and the Protestation of the
Ambassadors; for the Court of France approved the Conduct of the Ambassadors
in all they had done, and ordered them to stay at Venice until new orders. The
King wrote also to the Cardinal of Lorrain, and let him know that he did not
take it well that he had written to him as he did; and to make it appear upon
the spot how much the King slighted the Enterprises of the Council, he
proceeded to the Alienation of Church Livings, without staying for the Pope's
consent. He caused a Sale of them to be made to the Value of two Millions five
hundred thousand Livres, and at a very cheap rate. Amongst others the Temporal
Jurisdiction, which till then the Archbishop of Lions had over that City, was
purchased to the King for thirty thousand Livres.

All this while the Legates continued the Synodal Actions at Trent. They
removed some difficulties which the Spaniards still made about the Articles of
Reformation: for the Spanish Bishops insisted particularly on that which
related to the Exemption of Chapters, whereby they pretended not to be subject
to the Authority of the Ordinaries. The Chapters of the Churches of Spain had
an Agent at the Council, who solicited the Preservation of their Privileges.
The Legates favored them for the Interest of the Court of Rome, because the
Bishops of Spain depend much less on the Pope, than the Canons do; for, most
part of the Bishoprics are in the Nomination of the King, whereas the Disposal
of the Canonships is almost wholly in the Power of the Pope. The Count de Luna
declared openly against the Chapters, and threatened that if the Bishops had not
satisfaction given them as to those and some other Articles, and their Demands
granted; he would stop their coming to the Session. This menace obliged the
Legates to refer that Article to the following Session, and, in the mean time,
the Count de Luna commanded the Deputies of the Chapters instantly to be gone.
No more difficulty remained, but about the Clause proponentibus legatis against
which the Count de Luna declared open War. The Legates referred it to himself,
and told him that he should alter that Clause in what manner he pleased; but he
refusing to take it upon him, the Cardinal of Lorrain came from Rome in the
very nick of time, and cleared all the Scruples: for he hit upon a way of
satisfying the Count by this canting Explication, that by the Clause
proponentibus legatis, it was not the design to make any Innovation in the
manner of proceeding in Ancient Councils. And a Chapter was thereupon made at
the end of the Decree of General Reformation. This difficulty being taken away,
all consented to the Decrees; and the Session was held.

The twenty fourth Session, Eleventh of November. 1563.
On the Eleventh of November, when after the usual Ceremonies, and the reading
of some Letters from Princes, and Ambassadors Commissions, the Chapters of
Doctrine about Marriage, with the Anathema's that were tackt to them, were
read. The Article concerning Clandestine Marriages, was again contested, and
put to the Vote; but most part of the Votes were, for leaving it as they had
found it. The Chapter of Reformation of the Abuses in Marriage being read, next
came the Chapter of General Reformation. So soon as it was read over, the
Cardinal of Lorrain reiterated the Declaration which he had made in the
Congregation the day before, that he approved the Decrees, provided they did no
prejudice to the Privileges, Rights and Constitutions of the Kings of France.
He said farther, that the French Nation accepted them not as a perfect
Reformation; but as a Progress to a more ample Reformation which they expected
from the Pope. These Decrees are too long to be inserted into this History.
They contain twelve Anathema's against Errors in Doctrine concerning Marriage,
ten Chapters of a particular Reformation about the same matter of Marriage,
twenty Chapters relating to General Reformation, and an one and twentieth,
which was added for the interpretation of the Clause proponentibus legatis.
There is nothing to be found in all these Articles that tends to a General
Reformation, such as the People demanded; but rather the Pope's Yoke upon the
Clergy, and the Clergy's upon the People was made heavier. In the fifth Chapter
of the General Reformation, the Pope reserves to himself the Cognizance of all
Criminal Causes of Bishops, which are called the greater, taking them from the
Metropolitans, and Provincial Synods. The Decree ordains, that when the Pope
shall give any one a Commission in partibus, that Commission shall only extend
to the taking of Informations. In the twelfth Canon about Marriage; the Council
pronounces Anathema against those who shall deny that the Trial of Matrimonial
Causes belongs to the Church. Some who pretend to a little skill in Antiquity,
could not but observe, that from the beginning it was not so; that all Laws
concerning Marriage had been made by Emperors; and that the Causes which did
arise from those Laws were tried by the secular Magistrates. Nay, more, its
known that some Gothic Kings gave Dispensations for forbidden Degrees; and in
the Formularies of Cassiodorus the style of these Dispensations is still to be
seen. There were some who expected some good from the fourteenth Chapter of the
General Reformation, which revokes, cancells, and annuls and Constitutions or
Customs, of paying any thing for the purchase of Titles and the possession of
Benefices: they were in hopes that that Article, if rightly interpreted, would
overthrow the Annats which are paid to the Pope, for the taking possession of
Benefices; but experience has evinced that that was the wrong way of
interpreting the Decree. The Eighth Chapter ordains, that they who have sinned
publicly, should make public repentance, and it was hoped that that would be
an advance toward the ancient Discipline. But there is a Clause rarely well
put in, ni aliter Episcopo videatur, for it has not as yet seemed good to the
Bishops, to do any thing in Execution of that Decree. They who are jealous of
the rights of Princes, and secular Magistrates, besides what we have already
observed, did not take it well that the Council in the sixth Chapter of the
Reformation of Marriage, should ordain, that he who deflowers a Woman shall
give her a Portion whether he Marry her or not; for they looked upon that as a
mere civil Constitution, that cannot come under the Cognizance of an
Ecclesiastic Judge. Those who had no great kindness for the Council, and
sought to make themselves merry at its cost, laughed a little at the Canon
which prohibits Clandestine Marriages; because it pronounces an Anathema
against those who deny that these Marriages are true Sacraments, and yet
subjoins, that the Church has always detested them. This seemed to be an odd
Clinch; that the Church should declare, she detested true Sacraments. The one
and twentieth Chapter about the Clause proponentibus legatis made sport also
for a great many. The Chapter declared, that by that Clause there was no design
of changing any thing in the manner that had been observed in ancient Councils,
nor of giving or taking from any one any right contrary to ancient
Constitutions. When all was done, the Council at a conclusion, and that the
Legates had drawn all the advantage from this Clause, that they could expect,
they come in at last with a Declaration, that it was not their intention,
forsooth, to do prejudice to any body. This could not pass without a remark,
that it looked very like the man's excuse, who having given another a box on
the Ear, said that he had not done it with an intention to offend him. It was
observed that for the future the Pope had found out an excellent way to keep
Councils in Bondage; that there was no more to be done, but in the beginning to
make such a Clause as this, let the Members quarrel about it during the whole
sitting of the Council, and then declare in the end, when the business is done,
that it was not thereby designed to restrain any man's Liberty.

The Council precipitates to its end, the Count de Luna and the Spaniards
oppose it.
We are now at length come to the actions which immediately went before the last
Session. The countenance of affairs is now much to be altered: no more of those
long delays, that held all Europe in suspense; the Council joggs not on fair
and soft to its end, it runs post, precipitates, and all conspire to a
conclusion. The Pope stoops under the Burden of the Council; he intends upon
any terms to shake it off: the French who expect no more from that Assembly,
follow the Cardinal of Lorrain, that has struck in with the Pope. The Germans
abandon the Council, as a Patient past hopes of recovery: and none remain but
the Spaniards, who would march on gravely, and step by step in the rest, as
they had done all along till then. But they are not able of themselves alone
not resist that torrent of impatience which hurried the Council to its end.
There remained still to be handled the matters of Indulgences, Worship of
Saints, Purgatory, Images and Fasts: and that was enough to have employed the
Council for several years, after the rate that the former Points were managed.
The matter of Indulgences alone, would have taken up the Council for several
Months, if it had been examined, as the Point of Justification was, but all was
dispatched in a fortnights time.

That they might attain to this speedy Expedition, the Legates and Cardinal of
Lorrain agreed together, that all which remained should be dispatched in one
Session. The Cardinal of Lorrain and Imperial Ambassadors undertook to prepare
the Members for it, by spreading of Reports that the Emperor desired that it
might be concluded before Christmas, and that the French were to depart in the
Month of December; that therefore matters ought to be so ordered, that all
things should be expeded before their departure. They who were weary of their
stay at Trent, received the news with all imaginable Joy: and on the fifteenth
of November Cardinal Morone assembled at his house a Cabal of the Council, and
desired the Prelates to give their opinions as to the Conclusion of it that was
so wished for. All consented to it, except the Count de Luna Ambassador of
Spain; but the Legates were resolved to step over all difficulties. The Decree
which was minuted by the Clergy for the Reformation of Princes, and against
which the French Ambassadors had protested, was one of the most ticklish
Points. The Legates therefore resolved to let that alone, and yet to do
somewhat for the satisfaction of the Clergy; which was, that reviving the
ancient Canons without specifying them, they should put in an exhortation to
Princes to preserve the Church in her privileges, and even to make restitution
of the rights which had been usurped upon the Clergy by secular Judges. But no
Anathema's nor threatenings were added, they only made use of terms full of
respect to Sovereigns. The Pope having well consulted the matter of Rome,
ordered it to pass so. The Council held daily two Congregations; and the
Legates obliged the Members to be very short in giving their opinions. But the
Spaniards who desired not the conclusion, took their full swing, they did not
put themselves to the rack, but even enlarged their discourses with design to
gain time, and to prolong the Council, until they might have Orders from the
King of Spain. The sixth Article of Reformation proposed before the former
Session, had been referred to this: and that Article concerned the exemption of
the Chapters of Spain. The Spanish Ambassador and the Bishops of that Nation
were their Parties, and their Deputy after he had been ordered by the Count de
Luna, was forced to be gone. But the Legates were good Advocates for them, and
being assured of the assistance of the Italians, they were in a fair way of
gaining their Cause, notwithstanding they were absent. Yet the Council found
out a means by giving some augmentation to the Bishops Authority over the
Chapters, but a great deal less than they demanded.

The resolution of demanding the Confirmation of the Council from the Pope.
In the Congregation of the twentieth of November the question was debated,
whether they should demand of the Pope the Confirmation of the Decrees of the
Council. The Archbishop of Granada maintained, that it was not necessary,
saying that the Fathers in the sixteenth Session, which was the last held under
Julius III. demanded not the Pope's Confirmation, that if they did not imitate
their Conduct, it would be thought they condemned them. The Archbishop of
Otranto, who had always his eyes in his head for the preservation of the
Authority of the Pope, replied that the Fathers of the Council at that time
made it sufficiently appear, that they held the Confirmation of the Pope to be
necessary, because they commanded not the observation of the Canons which they
had made; but only exhorted to it. That opinion prevailed without difficulty:
but there remained still a scruple, to wit, whether they should stay for the
Pope's Answer at Trent, after they had demanded his Confirmation, or otherwise
whether upon concluding the Council it should be demanded of the Pope, and so
break up immediately, without expecting an Answer. The Cardinal of Lorrain
whose two Predominant Passions were, to dispatch, and to please the Pope, was
of the last opinion: and there is nothing more clear, than that this Cardinal
and the French who were of the mind that the Confirmation of the Decrees of the
Council should be demanded of the Pope, did exceedingly forget themselves. They
had kept a great clutter to hinder that the Pope should be declared Superior
to a Council, and yet all of a sudden they betray their own Cause by the
greatest weakness in the World. For to demand the Pope's Confirmation of the
Council, is a Declaration plain enough that it is inferior to him; no
Superior Court ever demanding the Confirmation of its Decrees from an
inferior. The Cardinal of Lorrain, who would have all things make for the
greater honor of the Council, or rather for the greater satisfaction of the
Pope, essayed to bring back to Trent, the French Ambassadors that were at
Venice: but they would not, because that though the Chapter of the Reformation
of Princes was revoked, yet many other things had passed in the Council to the
prejudice of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and the President du Ferrier
would not by his presence countenance those bad Regulations. When the matter of
Reformation was digested into the Method that they intended to have it in, the
Legates applied themselves to the Doctrine; and the Council appointed the
Cardinal of Warmia, and eight other Prelates to frame the Decree concerning
Purgatory, the Invocation of Saints, Relics and Images; they all jumpt in one
design, not to start any Controversy that might retard them. Nevertheless,
they found themselves a little puzzled about the Article of Purgatory; for some
were for having the place determined, where this Purgatory is, as the Council
of Florence had done, and that it should be defined that the Pains which are
suffered there are the Torments of Fire. Others objected that all Divines
agreed not as to that, and that if they should offer to make a Decision
thereupon, they could not avoid falling into debates which they were willing to
shun: so that they were of opinion to make use of general terms, and to enjoin
Bishops to see that that Doctrine should be carefully taught; and this opinion
was followed. There was no difficulty about the Point of the Invocation of
Saints; there was somewhat more in relation to Images, touching the nature of
the Worship that is due to them, but it went not far.

The Decree of the Reformation of Monks is revised.
Some Prelates were likewise deputed to revise the Reformation of Monks and
Nuns, and these Deputies joined with the Congregation, which had been appointed
a long time before for that Reformation. In that Revisal there were but a few
matters altered: By the third Chapter of this Reformation, all the Monasteries
of Mendicant Friars were allowed to enjoy Lands and immovable Possessions,
notwithstanding the Rule of their Institution, which forbids them to possess
any thing in proper. The General of the Order of the Minims, who was a
Spaniard, demanded that his Order might be excepted out of that indulgence,
because they would exactly follow the Rule of St. Francis; the General of the
Capuchins demanded the same, and it was granted to both. Lainez General of the
Jesuits made the same demand, but distinguished their Colleges from their
houses of Profession, saying (...) Bishops and other Beneficiaries, to make
good use of the Revenues of the Church, used these words, that they are
appointed faithful Stewards of these Revenues for the good of the Poor. That
Clause displeased the Bishop of Sulmona, and a great many others; it is easy
to guess at the reason; but what ever it was, the Clause was struck out. In
fine, it was proposed in the same Congregation to anticipate the day of the
Session, and to hold it next day, and if al could not be dispatched in one day,
to continue it the day following, that so the Acts might be signed on Sunday
after and all the Prelates have Liberty to depart. Fourteen Spanish Bishops
opposed it; but the Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Imperial Ambassadors dealt
earnestly with the Count de Luna to make him condescend to it. At length he was
willing, but upon two Conditions; first that the Pope would regulate the
matters that remained still to be done; and then that it should be inserted in
the Chapters of Indulgences, that they should not be given Gratis, lest that
might be prejudicial to the Croisadoes of Spain.

The five and twentieth and last Session, the 3. December. 1563.
All difficulties being surmounted, on Friday the third of December, the
Prelates and Ambassadors went to Church with the usual Ceremonies. Jerome
Ragazzone Titular Bishop of Nazianzo, made the Sermon in praise of the Council,
and recapitulated the good Laws and Ordinances which were made in it. After the
Ceremonies were over, they read the Decrees concerning Purgatory, the
Intercession and Invocation of Saints, Images and their Worship. They also read
the Decree for Reformation of Monks, containing twenty Chapters, to which they
added an one and twentieth for a shield to the Pope's Authority, lest by
inadvertency, it might be wounded in some of the Canons of Reformation, and to
leave him in full liberty to dispense with all the Canons. The Council
therefore declares in it, that all the Decrees have been made with intention,
that the Authority of the Holy See should remain safe and inviolate without the
least encroachment upon it. When this was done, because it was very late, the
rest was deferred till next day. In this second day they read the Decrees
concerning Indulgences, the Choice of Meats, Fasts and Holy days. They made and
Act of Reference to the Pope, about the Index Expurgatorius, Missals,
Breviaries, Ceremonials and the Care of making a Catechism. At length the
Council caused and Act to be read, which declared that the Places that had been
assigned to Ambassadors, ought not to be any ways prejudicial to the Rights
and Privileges of Kings, Princes and States, whom the Council pretended to
leave in the same condition as they were before.

The Assembly was concluded with Volleys of Acclamations to the Praise of the
Pope, Emperor, Kings, Legates, and the Fathers. Heretofore in Ancient
Councils, these Acclamations or Benedictions, were made in a humming confused
manner, with a low Voice. But at Trent they would have the matter performed in
its Formalities. It was written down, read, and sung after the manner of
Antiphones. The Cardinal of Lorrain pronounced the Acclamations, and the
Prelates answered. This action of the Cardinal was extremely played upon. It
could not be imagined that he with all his Dignities, A mean Action of the
Cardinal of Lorrain.
and large Characters, would have condescended to discharge the Office of a
Deacon or Chanter. It was looked upon as a low and mean Carriage: but the French
had a worse opinion of it; for besides the baseness of the action, they looked
upon it as a Crime of State, because in the Acclamations, there was no express
mention made of the King of France; for which the Cardinal was severely checked
upon his return. At length, all was summed up with an Anathema, pronounced
against Heretics in General. The Council consulted whether they should not
expressly Anathematise Luther, Zuinglius, and the other Heads of Parties, as had
heretofore been practiced in the Case of Nestorius and other Heretics. But the
Spanish and Imperial Ambassadors opposed that, representing that the Princes
were rather the Heads of the Parties in that affair, than the Teachers; that it
would offend them, and oblige them to make Leagues together against the
Catholic Religion. The Council acquiesced to that reason, and rested satisfied
with a General Anathema. All the Prelates were commanded under pain of
Excommunication to sign the Decrees before they went away, which was done on
Sunday. They were signed by two hundred fifty and five Hands, four Legates, two
Cardinals, three Patriarchs, five and twenty Archbishops, an hundred fifty and
eight Bishops, seven Abbots, thirty nine Proxies for Absents, and seven
Generals of Orders. The Ambassadors had been enjoined to sign also; but
because those of France were not there, and their Hands not being amongst the
rest, it would have been a Declaration that they refused to acknowledge the
Council: all the rest were therefore dispensed with no to sign, upon Pretext
that it had not been the Custom of Ancient Councils.

This last Session of the Council gave as little satisfaction as the rest hand
done; for after all the fair promises of setting about a Reformation, there was
nothing found that could answer the Expectations of People. The nineteenth
Chapter of General Reformation contained a very Christian Decree, against
Duels, which were prohibited under very severe Penalties. Nevertheless, it was
observed, that the Council herein encroached upon the Right of Kings; for it
declared the Emperor, all Kings, Princes and Lords, who should countenance
Duels, to be excommunicated, and deprived of the Dominion of the Place holding
of the Church, wherein Duels should be fought. It was not thought in the Power
of a mere Ecclesiastic Judicature, to deprive Sovereign Princes of their
Territories and Temporal Possessions, nor to lay Commands upon them under pain
of Excommunication. The Permission which the Council granted to Mendicants to
enjoy Lands and Real Estates, was so far from passing for an Article of
Reformation, that it was looked upon as a great Corruption, and as a fair means
put into the hands of Monks to hook in the remainder of the Estates of
Christendom, whereof they already enjoyed the largest share. In general, few
were satisfied with the Acts of the Council. The Spaniards were displeased at
the precipitant manner and hurry of concluding it, without acquainting their
King, and expecting his answer. But France more than all others, because they
found therein many things which overthrew the Liberties of the Gallican Church.
President Du Ferrier during his stay at Venice, made it his business to make a
Collection of them; and upon the return of the Cardinal of Lorrain into France,
the Cardinal was severely censured for having suffered so many things to pass
contrary to the Sentiments, and Customs of the Church of France. It was
objected to him, that after he had vigorously asserted the Superiority of a
Council over the Pope, yet at length he had basely betrayed the Cause, seeing
he had subscribed to the first Chapter of the General Reformation, which grants
the Pope Administrationem Ecclesiae, the Administration of the Church
Universal. It was also thought, that the opinion of the Pope's Superiority over
a Council, was sufficiently established by the last Chapter, which declares
that all things have been decreed, without prejudice to the Authority of the
Pope, which is an evident raising of the Authority of the Holy See, above that
of the Decrees. And above all, it was thought that by demanding from the Pope
the Confirmation of the Council, they had placed his Holiness above a Council.
It was likewise objected as a fault to the Cardinal of Lorrain, that in the one
and twentieth Chapter of the General Reformation, he had suffered the present
Council to be declared the same with that which was held under Julius and Paul
III. after that France had taken so much pains, to have that Assembly called a
new Council. But the Parliament of Paris, in a particular manner complained
that he had suffered the Authority of the King's Judges to be trampled under
foot; seeing the Council had so far enlarged the Power of Churchmen as made a
considerable breach in the Civil Jurisdiction. As for instance, it allows
Bishops to proceed against Laics by Pecuniary Fines, and Imprisonments. These
oppositions that the Council met with in France, were every delightful to
those who were separated from the Church of Rome; and Catholics themselves
took Liberty to speak. The whole Discourse both of Catholics and Protestants,
was about the Debates and Factions in managing of Affairs, especially the
matter of Reformation. And according to the French way of raillery, it was
presently in every body's mouth; that the Council of Trent had far more
Authority than that of the Apostles; for whereas the Apostles said, It seems
good to the Holy Ghost and to us: the Fathers of Trent said barely, It has
seemed good to us, quite excluding the Holy Ghost.

Germany slighted the Council to the highest Degree; for the Prelates of that
Nation had not been present in this last Convocation, which notwithstanding was
the most Solemn of all. Very few Bishops were there for the Kingdoms if Hungary
and Poland; none at all from England, Swedeland, Danemark, and the low
Countries. The French Prelates came onley at the latter end, and reckoning them
all together with the Spaniards, they did not exceed the number of forty
Bishops; all the rest were Italians: of a few more than two hundred Prelates,
which made up the Council, there were above an hundred and fifty from Italy.
And therefore it had the Name of the Council of the Pope and Italians.

The Pope confirms the Council by a Bull.
The Court of Rome was very glad that the Council was ended; they mattered not
much what Decrees it had made, provided it could make no more. The Pope died
not then of his sickness, and had double Cause of rejoicing at the same time,
both that he had recovered his health, and was also discharged of the burden
of the Council. He was so overjoyed, that without boggling, he declared that he
would confirm it, and even add some new Reformations. That Declaration allarmed
the Court of Rome, though the Reformations of the Council went not very far;
however no body was willing to part from any of their Rents and Profits: and
that nevertheless they must have done, had the Decrees of the Council been
religiously observed. Most of the Cardinals were of opinion, that the Pope
should moderate the Articles which might incommode the Court of Rome, before he
confirmed them; and alleged that that would serve for two ends. First, it
would, as we have said, ease them of several incommodious Regulations: and then
it would confirm the Pope in his Superiority over the Council by reforming it.
But, in fine, after that a great many Congregations of Cardinals had been held
upon that Subject, the opinion of confirming it without any alteration
prevailed. Some persuaded the Pope to it, by Arguments of Piety, Honor and
Sincerity to his word. But the deciding Cast was put in by Hugo Boncompagno
Bishop of Vieste in Apulia. He alleged that the Confirmation of the Council,
was so far from diminishing the Authority of the Pope, and the Grandeur of the
Court of Rome, that it would much advance it, provided a Barriere were set to
put a stop to the Rashness of Doctors, and hinder them from interpreting the
Council, according to their several Fancies, and Interests. It was his advice
then, that the Judges themselves should be prohibited from meddling with the
Interpretation of the Sense of the Council, and that it should be ordained that
in all doubtful matters, recourse should be had to the Holy See, and its
Interpretations submitted to. And thus he made it appear, that by so doing,
the Court of Rome would always have the absolute Disposal of every thing that
pinched them, because in confirming the Council, the Holy See reserved to it
self the Power of interpreting it. He said, that there was no Law so plain and
express, nor so rigorous, which might not be turned to a commodious and a
favorable Sense, by means of Exceptions and Qualifications. If there be any
thing then, in the Council, that pinches the Holy See, and Court of Rome, it
will be a very easy matter to avoid it by expounding it, as one pleases. But
the Council cannot be made use of, said he, to the Prejudice of the Court of
Rome, because all the force of its Execution will depend on the Holy See, to
which recourse must be had for Interpretation. This Overture was worth a
Cardinals Cap to the Bishop, and it appeared so convenient and good, that all
agreed to it. Thus the matter was resolved upon, and the Pope on the six and
twentieth of December gave the Bull of Confirmation, wherein he forbids under
pain of Excommunication, the publishing of any Commentaries, or Observations
upon the Council; ordaining in all doubtful Cases, Recourse to be had to the
Holy See. Within some Months after the Pope made a Promotion of Nineteen
Cardinals, to reward those who had faithfully served him in the Council; and
neither Marco Antonio Colonna Archbishop of Taranto, nor the Bishop of Vieste
were forgotten.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Historical Reflections.
Page 20. line 5. read if according. p. 37. l. 26. for of r. from. p. 60. l.
20. r. exalting. p. 102. l. 6. r. sufficiently. p. 113. l. 9. for prompted r.
permitted.
In the History.
Page. 1. l. 1. for fifteenth r. sixteenth. p. 60. l. 28. for Madoncio r.
Madruccio. p. 148. l. 3. r. actu. p. 193. l. 3. for had bred, r. and bred. p.
200. l. 16. betwixt the words (sort) and (made) add who. p. 245. in the
Marginal Note, for 19. Session r. 16. p. 251. l. 7. for Dominions r. Dominion.
p. 275. l. 23. dele it. p. 457. l. 8. for Revenue r. Reverence. p. 575. l. 3.
for means r. mean.
A TABLE of the most remarkable matters contained in this History.
A.
ADRIAN succeeds to Leo. Page 11 Desires to reform the Church. ibid. But cannot
succeed in that design of Reformation. Page 13 Sends a Letter into Germany
confessing that the Church and Court of Rome are corrupted. Page 14 He dies
Page 16
Altemps, Cardinal, Nephew of Pope Pius IV. a zealous Protector of the rights
and pretensions of the Sea of Rome. Page 305 Ambassadors. Danes Ambassador of
France comes to the Council. Page 106 The Emperor's Ambassador present to the
Council five demands in Writing. Page 318. The French Ambassadors are received
in Council, make Speeches, and receive no Answer. Page 339 They receive new
Instructions from France. Page 398 Protest against the Decree of the
Reformation of Princes, and have Orders to withdraw. Page 556 They go to
Venice. Page 564
Ambrosio Catarino maintains the Opinion of St. Austin, and of the Protestants,
about Works that precede Grace. Page 118 And about the certainty that one may
have of being in the state of Grace. Page 123 His strange Opinion about
Predestination. Page 132 What his judgment is of the Priests intention in
administering Sacraments. Page 151
Amiot Bishop of Auxerre protests in Council in name of his Master Henry II. of
France. Page 198 Arembold of a Genoese Merchant being made a Bishop, (...)
chosen for the distribution of Indulgences in Germany. p. 3 He gives that
charge to the Jacobins, which offends the Augustins, who had formerly
discharged that Office. p. 4
Ascanio ella DCorna Nephew to Pope Julius III. sent into France to hinder the
King from protecting the Duke of Parma, and to break off the design of a
National Council. p. 195 Assembly of the Catholic Princes of Ratisbonne, were
a Decree passed against Luther. [Vid. Diet.] Of the Protestants at Smalcalde.
p. 37 At Fountain-bleau, where it is resolved that a National Council shall be
called in France, and severities in the mean time cease. p. 288 Of the States
of France at Orleans. p. 291 At St. Germains, which makes the Edict of January
in favor of the Protestants. [Vid. Diet.] p. 312
Ataide a Portuguese Divine overthrows all the Arguments drawn by the others
from the Scripture to prove the Sacrifice of the Mass, and departs. p. 371,
etc. Ausbourg, the place of a Diet where the Protestants present their
Confessions, and depart without any accommodation, though attempted. p. 32
Another Diet of Ausbourg, where the Protestants promise to submit to the
Council. p. 171 A third Diet at Ausbourg for composing the Troubles about
Religion. p. 257 In the Diet an Edict of Liberty is made which highly offends
the Pope. p. 261

B.
BAptism, what was concluded about the necessity of it. p. 152 Baptista
Castello Promooter of the Council refutes Gropper about the subject of
Immediate Appeals to the Pope. p. 211 Basil and Berne, embrace the Religion of
Zuinglius. p. 28 Battle of Dreux. p. 458 Benefices. The abuse of the plurality
of Benefices, and the various sources from whence it proceeds. p. 156 Berne and
Basil embrace the Religion of Zuinglius. p. 28 Beza assists at the Conference
of Poissy. p. 300 Birague the French Ambassador arrives at Trent, and was
received in congregation. p. 254 Bishops not allowed by the Pope to appear in
Council by Proxy. p. 64 Money ordered to be given to the poor Bishops. p. 66
The Sermon of the Bishop of Bitonto is disliked by many. p. 69 The Bishop of
Guadix basely used for having spoken with some liberty in favor of the
Bishops. p. 447 Bologna, the place of the first Interview betwixt the Emperor
and the Pope p. 31 Books Canonical. [Vix. Scripture.] Bucer and Pistorius
chosen with Melancthon to speak for the Protestants. p. 50 Bull published by
Leo X. for Indulgences. p. 6 Ball of Excommunication against Henry VIII. King
of England. p. 47
C.
CAjetan the Cardinal has two Conferences with Luther, but without effect. p. 6
Caraffa. Cardinal Nephew Legate in France under Paul IV. p. 267 The Cardinal
Legate of Santa-Croce forms Decrees so ambiguously, that all Parties find their
Opinions in them. p. 133 The Cardinal of Lorrain arrives in Italy, and is
received at Trent. p. 437 He makes a Speech in Congregation, and after him du
Ferrier the French Ambassador, who offends the Council p. 442 Holds private
Congregations at his House, which alarms the Legates and Court of Rome. p. 444
He essays to compose Controversy about the Divine Right of Episcopacy, but is
slighted, and therefore vexed. p. 451 Has great Conferences with the Emperor
at Inspruck. and fol. p. 484 The Pope will not name him for a President in the
Council, upon the death of the Cardinal of Mantua. p. 489 A clashing betwixt
the Cardinal and the Archbishop of Otranto. p. 527 The Cardinal goes to Rome,
and enters into a strict Alliance with the Pope. p. 557 A low and mean Action
of that Prelate in the conclusion of the Council. p. 584.
[Look other Cardinals under their proper names.] Castello. Vid. Baptista
Castello. Catarino. Vid. Ambrosio Catarino. Celibat of Priests. Vid. Priests.
Censure of the Decrees by the Malcontents. p. 141 Charles V. cites Luther to
appear before him at Worms. p. 8 Is dissatisfied with the Diet of Nuremberg;
and thereupon writes sharply to the States of Germany. p. 19
Clashes with Clement VII. p. 21 Provides work enough for the Pope within Rome,
by means of the Colonna's, who enter the City in a hostile manner, and plunder
the Vatican. p. 22 Has an Interview with, and is crowned by the Pope at
Bologna. p. 31 The Pope is dissatisfied with him, and the Protestant Princes
despise his rigorous Edicts. p. 34
Charles presses a Council, and not obtaining it, makes his first Edict in
favor of Protestants. p. 36 Obtains at length a Bull for convocation of a
Council. p. 44 Has an Interview with the Pope and King of France. p. 47 Grants
in the Diet of Spire a new Edict of liberty, till the next Council. p. 54 Gives
intimation to the Protestants of the convocation of a Council, and upon their
refusing to submit to it, concludes a League with the Pope against them. p. 61
Consents to the opening of the Council conditionally, and the Pope is angry. p.
68 Gets great advantages in the War against the Protestants, and deceives the
Pope. p. 107 Obtains a great Victory over the Protestants. p. 169 Condemns the
Elector of Saxony to death. ibid. His treachery toward the Landgrave of Hesse.
ibid. He protests at Rome and Bologna against the Pope, and his Council of
Bologna. p. 174 Makes the Interim and a Decree of Reformation in the Diet of
Ausbourg. p. 176 Having sent to Rome Louis D'avila to complement Poe Julius
III. upon his Exaltation, with orders to press the reestablishment of the
Council of Trent, he obtains it. p. 185 He dare's not at first propose the Bull
of Convocation to the Protestants, because it was too high and lofty. p. 189 He
resigns his Dignities, and betakes himself to a solitary life. p. 270
Charles of Bourbon with the Imperial Army takes Rome, is killed in the
attempt, and the Pope made prisoner. p. 24 Church of Rome, in what state it was
about the beginning of the sixteenth century. p. 1 Clement VII. succeeds to
Adrian. p. 16 Sends a Legate into Germany to the Diet at Nuremberg. ibid.
Clashes with the Emperor, and absolves Francis I. from the Oaths he had taken
in prison. p. 21 Is made prisoner in Rome. p. 24 Makes Peace with the Emperor.
p. 28 Refuses him a Council, unless upon conditions that the Protestants would
not accept. p. 36 Being dissatisfied with him, enters into a League with the
King of France. p. 38 He dies, and Paul III. succeeds to him. p. 41
The Colonna's at the solicitation of the Emperor, enter Rome by force, and
plunder the Vatican. p. 22 Commendums and their original. p. 157 Communion of
Children, and in both kinds. p. 342 The Conception of Blessed Virgin occasions
a Dispute betwixt the Jacobins and Cordeliers. p. 102 The Conclave divided into
three Factions after the death of Paul III. p. 183 Conference amicable
appointed betwixt the Catholics and Protestants of Germany. p. 48 Another at
Worms, which has as little success as the rest. p. 50 Another at Ratisbonne
without effect. p. 8
A Conference appointed at Poissy in France betwixt the Roman Catholics and
Protestants. p. 298 Confirmation, and who ought to administer it. p. 152
Conspiracy of Amboise. p. 283 A Council denied to the Emperor, unless upon
conditions which the Protestants would not accept. p. 36 But afterward granted
upon conditions that are rejected by the Protestants. p. 37 Called, but in
vain, at Mantua and Vicenza. p. 42 and 46 And then at Trent. p. 52 Where with
ten Bishops that were arrived the Congregation began to handle Preliminaries.
p. 65 The form of the Council of Trent, and what had been that of ancient
Councils. p. 71 A Debate concerning the Title of the Council. p. 74 About the
Order. p. 77 About the Seal to be used for Letters. p. 78 To amuse the Council
the Creed is published. p. 79 But three moderate Divines at the Council, p. 116
The Council is puzzled in forming Decrees, and essays by their ambiguity to
give all content. p. 133 It is transported to Bologna, under pretext of bad Air
at Trent. p. 166 And divided; part of the Prelates removing to Bologna, and
part staying at Trent. p. 167, etc. It is opened again at Trent for the second
Convocation. p. 192 And suspended because of the War of Germany. p. 245 The
Pope has enough of Councils, neither does the Emperor care for them. p. 249
The Council opened again at Trent under Pope Pius IV. p. 311 It begins with the
Books to be prohibited and the Indices Expurgatorii. p. 313 It is publicly
said that the Council is not the Council of the Universal Church, but of the
Pope. p. 357 The Bishops complain that the Council is taken up about trifles.
p. 386 Some Bishops apparently ill satisfied with the Infallibility of the
Council. p. 393 A Letter from the Emperor to the Pope and Council about the
Disorders of the Council. p. 490 The Council ill satisfied with the Peace of
Orleans that the King of France had made with the Huguenots. p. 499 The Legates
seek out means of concluding the Council speedily, and the Count de Luna
opposes it. p. 441 New troubles are started. p. 551 The Council precipitates to
its end, the Spaniards oppose it. p. 572 Confirmation of the Council demanded
of the Pope; but all are not of that mind. p. 575 The Council is confirmed by a
Bull of Pius IV. p. 588
Croisades: their Original. p. 3 The Cup demanded by the French. p. 304 And by
the Germans, about which the Divines give their Opinions. p. 347 Both join in
that point. p. 355 The restoring of it to the Germans is moved. p. 380 It is
referred to the Pope. p. 385
Cruelties practiced in several Kingdoms against Protestants. p. 256
D.
DAnes, Ambassador of France, comes to the Council and makes a long Harangue.
p. 106 Decrees made with a great deal of difficulty, and affected Ambiguity, to
give all content. p. 133 The Decrees concerning Penance opposed by the Divines.
p. 221 The Decree about the Reformation of Princes cause great Trouble. v.
Legates. An abstract of that Decree. p. 560
Degradations, their Original and Progress. p. 212 Diet of Nuremberg, where the
hundred Grievances were presented. p. 17 Diet of Ratisbonne, where a Decree
past against Luther. p. 18 Diet of Spire, where Attempts were made to divide
the Protestants. p. 29 Diet of Ausburg, where the Protestants present their
Confessions, and depart without accommodation, though attempted. p. 32 Another
Diet as Spire, where the Emperor gives a new Edict of Liberty, till the next
Council. p. 54 Another at Ausburg, where the Protestants promise to submit to
the Council. p. 171 There the Emperor makes the Interim and a Decree of
Reformation. p. 176
A Third Diet at Ausburg for composing the troubles of Religion. p. 257 Where
an Edict of Liberty is made which offends the Pope. p. 261
A Diet at Naumburg in Saxony. p. 293 Daily Distributions. p. 332 Dominico a
Soto, and Luigi di Catanea both Jacobins and Thomists differ about the Point of
Grace. p. 128
E.
EDict of Worms against Luther. p. 9. Edict of January in favor of the
Protestants made at St. Germains en Lay. p. 312 Edward King of England dies,
and Mary his Sister succeeds to him, who restores the Catholic Religion. p.
252 The Electorate of Saxony transferred to the Branch of Maurice. p. 171 The
Electour of Brandenburg sends his Ambassadors to the Council p. 215 Elizabeth
Queen of England succeeds Mary her Sister, and reestablishes the Reformation.
p. 274 Emperor, v. Charles. V. England during the Reign of Henry VIII. shakes
off the Pope's Authority, without any innovation in Religion. p. 39 The
Catholic Religion is maintained there by Queen Mary, (...) the death of Edward
her Brother to whom she succeeded. p. 252 Episcopacy and Vehement Contests
about the Point. p. 413, etc. 422, etc. 435, etc. 448. and elsewhere. The
Eucharist serves for matter to be treated in the tenth Session. p. 170
Exemptions granted by the Pope in prejudice of Ordinaries. p. 138 Extreme
Unction and Penance handled in the fourteenth Session. p. 218
F.
FArnese, v. Paul III. and Octavio Farnese. Du Ferrier Ambassador of France
learned in Antiquity. p. 356 He speaks in Congregation after the Cardinal of
Lorrain, and his Speech nettles the Council. p. 442 Another Speech of his,
after the reading of the French King's Letters in Council, which acquainted the
Fathers with his Victory over the Protestants. p. 476 He protests against the
Decree of the Reformation of Princes, and makes a Speech which pricks the
Prelates to the quick. p. 561
Francis. I. absolved by Pope Clement VII. from the Oaths which he had taken in
Prison. p. 21 He dies. p. 167
Francis II. dies and Katherine of Medicis his Mother assembles the States at
Orleans. p. 291 The French present their Memoires, containing thirty four
Demands. p. 460 Frederick Electour of Saxony is made Prisoner, wounded, and
condemned to death by the Emperor Charles. V. p. 169 Can neither be moved by
Prayers nor threats. p. 171
Frederick Nauseus Bishop of Vienna, sent to the Council with Paolo Gregoriani
Bishop of Zagabria in Sclavonia by the King of the Romans. p. 198 Free will
handled in the VI. Session. p. 125
G.
GIacomo Cocco Archbishop of Corsou is of the mind that no opinion which could
be interpreted in a sound sense, should be condemned. p. 133 Grace serves for
matter to the Council in the VI. Session. p. 113 Catarino's opinion about works
that precede Grace. p. 118 A Dispute about the Preparations to Grace, and the
Merit of Congruity. p. 119 A Debate about the certainty that one may have of
being in the State of Grace. p. 123 The Thomists are divided about the matter
of Grace ^il ^a p. 128
The hundred Grievances proposed to the Pope at the Diet of Nuremberg. p. 17
The Grisons recall Thomas Planta Bishop of Coire. p. 220 Gropper a Divine and
Lawyer votes for the abolition of Episcopal Jurisdiction, and Ecclesiastic
Tribunals. p. 210 He is refuted by Baptista Castello, Promooter of the Council,
about the Subject of immediate appeal to the Pope. p. 211

H.
HEnry VIII. King of England writes against Luther. p. 9. Shakes off the Pope's
Authority without any innovation in Religion. p. 39 Is excommunicated by Pope
Paul III. p. 47
Henry II. King of France succeeds to Francis I. p. 167 He clashes with the
Pope, and sends not his Prelates to the Council. p. 193 Causes Amiot his
Ambassador to protest against the Council. p. 198 Then publishes a Manifesto
against the Pope. p. 200 Does all that lies in his Power to ruin the
Protestants in his Kingdom. p. 278 His death. p. 279
Herman Archbishop of Cologne is excommunicated by the Pope, and obliged to
resign his Archbishopric. p. 90 Of the Hierarchy of the Church. p. 405
I.
James Lainez General of the Jesuits creates no small trouble to the Council
about Precedence. p. 377 His Speech against the Divine Right of Episcopacy, and
what it produced. p. 426 Another Discourse of his in favor of the Court of
Rome. p. 529
The Imperialists leave the City of Rome. p. 28 Indices Expurgatorii, and their
Original. p. 313 The Inquisition settled at Naples, and causes a great Sedition.
p. 170 The Intention of the Priest in administering the Sacraments, according to
the Judgment of Ambrosio Cararino. p. 151 The Interim made by the Emperor at
the Diet of Ausburg. p. 176 Much opposition made to the Establishment of it. p.
179
Interviews betwixt the Emperor and the Pope, the first. the second 37. the
third. p. 44 An Interview of the Pope, Emperor and King of France. p. 47 A
fourth Interview betwixt the Pope and the Emperor. p. 52 A fifth. p. 53
Julius II. Excommunicated Lewis XII. King of France. p. 2 He dies. ibid.
Julius III. formerly named John Maria di Monte succeeds to Paul III. p. 182 He
clashes with the King of France. p. 193 Sends into France Ascamo della Corna
his Nephew to hinder the King from protecting the Duke of Parma, and from
calling a national Council. p. 195 At one dash creates fourteen Italian
Cardinals. p. 232 His Death and Successor. p. 257
The Jurisdiction of Bishops is the matter, as to Reformation, for the
thirteenth Session. p. 201 The Jurisdiction of the Tribunals of the Church,
their Original and Progress. p. 206 Gropper votes for its abolition. p. 210
Diverse Regulations concerning Episcopal Jurisdiction. p. 225
Justification and Imputed Righteousness p. 121
K.
KAtherine of Medicis Queen Regent of France assembles the States at Orleans.
p. 291 Her designs for Reformation. p. 299 and 312

L.
LAinez. v. James Lainez. The Landgrave of Hesse attempts an Agreement betwixt
Luther and Zuinglius, but without Success. p. 30 Is made Prisoner by the
Emperor. p. 169
The Legates complain that there appeared Division in the very Session, and
pretend to enter upon business. p. 76 Oppose the beginning with Reformation. p.
78 Make a Translation of the Council upon Pretext of bad Air. p. 164 Propose
the Decree of the Reformation of Princes, and the Ambassadors oppose it. p.
546 The more they press the matter, the greater noise it makes. p. 553 The
Protestation of the French Ambassadors against that Decree. p. 556
The Legates press the Conclusion of the Council. p. 572 Leo. X. created Pope,
and his Character. p. 2 Causes Indulgences to be published in Germany, by the
advice of Cardinal Santiquatro, and gives a great part of the profit of them to
his Sister. p. 3 Publishes a Bull for the Indulgences. p. 6 Thunders a Bull
against Luther and his Doctrine. p. 7
Lewis XII. King of France excommunicated by Pope Julius II. p. 2 Forms a Party
against Julius II. and gets the Cardinals to assemble at Pisa for Election of
another Pope. ibid.
Lewis d'Avila sent by the Emperor to Rome to solicit the Re-establishment of
the Council. p. 183 Luigi di Catanea and Dominico a Soto differ about the Point
of Grace. p. 128 Luther publishes Theses against the Doctrine of Indulgences,
which are answered by other Theses, set out by John setzel a Jacobin who caused
the Theses of Luther to he burnt. p. 5 He is cited to appear at Ausburg before
Cardinal Cajetan. p. 6 Has two Conferences with the Cardinal, without success,
and appeals to a Council. ibid. He burns the Pope's Bull, and Book of
Decretals. p. 8 Is cited to Worms before the Emperor Charles V. ibid. But
would neither recant nor condemn his Doctrine. p. 9 An Edict past against him
at Worms. ibid. Confirmed by a Decree at Ratisbonne. p. 18
Abstracts are made of Lutheran Writings. p. 145
M.
THE Malcontents pass a severe censure upon the Decrees of the Council. p. 141
Mantua chosen by Paul III. for the place of holding the Council. p. 44 The
Cardinal of Mantua Legate dies at Trent. p. 486 Marcello II. created Pope will
not change his Name according to the Custom of other Popes, and whence what
Custom has arisen. p. 257 His Character, and death that happened by an
Apoplexy two and twenty days after his Exaltation. p. 258
Marriage is reduced to eight Articles. p. 473 Decrees and Canons are formed
concerning that matter. p. 544 Clandestine Marriages occasion fresh Debates. p.
548
Mary succeeds her Brother Edward to the Crown of England, and restores the
Catholic Religion. p. 252 She is rigorous against the Protestants. p. 256 Her
death. p. 274
Marinier a Carmelite is not of opinion that Traditions should be made a Point
of Faith. p. 83 Will have the Name of Justifying Faith only given to that
which works by Charity. p. 117 Defends with Ambrosio Catarino the opinion that
one may be certain of being in the State of Grace. p. 123
Mass. v. Sacrifice. Maurice invested by the Emperor in the Electorate of
Saxony whereof his Cousin Frederick had been dispossessed. p. 171 Takes up Arms
for the Liberty of Germany, and of Religion. p. 243
Maximilian King of Bohemia and of the Romans suspected of Lutheranism. p. 286
Melancthon named with Bucer and Pistorius to speak for the Protestants. p. 50
Is one of twelve who were opposed to a like number of Catholic Doctors in the
Conference of Worms. p. 273
Mendicant Friars raise a great Debate upon occasion of Preaching, and the
Pulpits which they had seized. p. 91 Misunderstanding betwixt the Pope and the
Council, and amongst the Fathers of the Council themselves. p. 337 Morone
Cardinal Legate in Spain under Julius III. p. 257 Is appointed first President
of the Council by Pius IV. p. 489 Comes to Trent and went to the Emperor at
Inspruck. p. 448 Returns to the Council. p. 506

N.
NAvagiero Cardinal named Legate for presiding in the Council, arrives at
Trent, with orders to endeavor a strict Reformation. p. 502 Naumburg a Town of
upper Saxony where the Protestant Princes held an Assembly. p. 293 Nuncio's ill
received by the Protestants in Germany. p. 244 Nuremberg the Place of the Diet,
where the Hundred Grievances were presented. p. 17
O.
OCtavio Farnese Duke of Parma General of the Pope's Forces. p. 111 Offerings
and Oblations in what manner they may be permitted. p. 154 Opinions about
Canonical Books. p. 83 Free Ordinations. p. 330 The Sacrament of Orders handled
and reduced to eight Articles. p. 400
P.
PAcieco a Spanish Cardinal with all the Imperialists oppose the Legates in the
treating of the matter of Original Sin. p. 95 Paul III. succeeds to Clement
VII. p. 41 Having made some ineffectual Propositions of a Reformation, he
resolves upon a Council to be held at Mantua. p. 42 His fruitless attempts for
the Reformation of the Court of Rome. p. 46 He thunders a Bull of
Excommunication against Henry VIII. King of England. p. 47 Declares that he
will call the Council at Trent, but is retarded by the War betwixt the Emperor
and King of France. p. 52 Appoints Legates to preside in the Council, and sends
them to Trent. p. 57 He will not have the Bishops appear in Council by Proxy.
p. 64 Seeks an opportunity of breaking up the Council. p. 122 Fearing the
Spaniards he resolves to remove the Council to Bologna. p. 161 His Death and
Successor. p. 182
Paul IV. of the Family of the Caraffa's succeeds to Marcello II. p. 258 He is
insolent and proud to the highest Degree. p. 259 Erects Ireland into a Kingdom
by a fetch of State Policy. ibid. He is offended at the Diet of Ausburg. p. 260
Listens to the persuasion of using Carnal Arms for supporting his Authority. p.
262 Creates seven Cardinals, notwithstanding the opposition of the
Imperialists, and the sacred College. p. 264 He proposes a Reformations of the
Church, but it has no Success. p. 265 He falls into a rage upon occasion of
some Demands made to him by the Ambassador of Poland. p. 266 Sends Cardinal
Caraffa his Nephew Legate into France. p. 267 He breaks with the Emperor, and
undertakes a War, which proved fatal to him. p. 268 Being overcome he makes
Peace like a Conguerour. p. 271 He revenges himself on his Nephews, for the bad
success of his Enterprises. p. 272 Will not acknowledge Ferdinand for Emperor.
p. 274 His death attended with ignominious marks of the hatred that the People
bore toward him. p. 279
Paul Gregoriani Bishop of Zagabria in Sclavonia, sent to the Council with
Frederick Nausens Bishop of Vienna, by the King of the Romans. p. 198 Peace
betwixt the Emperor and King of France revives the Proposals of a Council. p.
56 A Peace concluded betwixt the Emperor and King of France, is broken off by
Pope Paul IV. p. 267
Penance and Extreme Unction handled in the fourteenth Session. p. 218
Opposition of the Divines to the Decrees concerning Penance, of which the
President takes no notice. p. 221
Philip II. King of Spain labors to settle the Inquisition in the Low
Countries. p. 277 Erects three Archbishopricks, and several Bishoprics. ibid.
Uses great Cruelties in Spain against Protestants. p. 280
Pius IV. called before, Giovanni Angelo de Medicis mounts the Pontifical
Chair. p. 281 Reconciles himself to the Emperor, to whom he acknowledges his
Predecessor had done wrong. ibid. Declares his design of restoring the
Council. p. 282 Solicites the King of France to take Geneva. p. 284 Being
afraid of a National Council, he resolves to call a General Council. p. 285
Forms the Bull of Convocation, and again chooses the City of Trent. p. 290 He
sends Nuncio's to the Protestants to invite them to the Council. p. 293 Names
the Legates who were to preside in the Council, and sends them away. p. 295
After many delays, at length will have the Council opened. p. 305 Is allarmed
at the Attempts of the Spaniards, and is distrustful of his Legates. p. 334 Is
amazed at the Demands of the Germans proposed to the Council about Reformation,
and thinks of providing for his own Security. p. 343 Receives an abstract of
the Demands of the Germans and French concerning Reformation. p. 411 Is
allarmed that the King of France sends the Cardinal of Lorrain to the Council.
p. 419 Proceeds against five French Bishops suspected of Heresy, and against
the Queen of Navarre. The King of France opposes it. p. 566 The Confirmation of
the Council is demanded of him. All are not agreed in that. p. 575 He falls
dangerously sick, which hastens the Conclusion of the Council. p. 580 The
Council demands his Confirmation, about which some Prelates disagree. ibid. He
confirms it by a Bull. p. 588 Some months after makes a Promotion of nineteen
Cardinals, to reward those who had best served him in the Council. p. 590
Pool Cardinal who had been Legate in the first Convocation of the Council, is
sent Legate into England. p. 252 He gives the Parliament of England Absolution
p. 255 Is made Archbishop of Canterbury. p. 264 He dies the same day that Queen
Mary died. p. 275
The Pope will not permit the Bishops to appear in Council by Proxy. p. 64
Popes have an aversion to any thing that bears the Name of Conference. p. 257
Have a Custom of changing their Names upon their Promotion to the Papacy. ibid.
The Abbot Preval speaks freely as to the Popes Authority. What happened to him
thereupon. p. 383 The Pope's Supremacy over other Bishops disputed. p. 423 The
Minute of a Decree made at Rome concerning the Authority of the Pope and
Bishops, rejected by the Bishops in Council. p. 457 and 465 The Emperor
consults about important points relating to the Pope, and the Liberty of the
Council. p. 481 The Pope absolutely rejects the Propositions of the French. p.
495 He obliges the Tribunal of the Inquisition to proceed against several
French Bishops accused of Heresy. p. 497
Vid. Adrian. VI. Clement VII. Julius III. Leo X. Marcel II. Paul IV. and Pius
IV. Predestination is handled, and the Council finding nothing to be censured
among the Lutherans, condemns seven Propositions of the Zuinglians. p. 130 A
strange opinion of Catarino about Predestination. p. 132
Precedence causes a Contest betwixt the French and Spaniards p. 509, etc. and
516, etc. Priests whether inferior to Bishops. v Episcopacy. Single Life of
Priests. p. 486 Protestants, whence they have that Name. p. 30 They present
their Confession at Ausburg, and depart without any accommodation, though
attempted. p. 32 Despise Decrees of the Imperial Chamber of Spire. p. 34
Assemble at Smalcalde. ibid. Nine Articles of Doctrine touching Original sin,
which were imputed to them, are debated in the IV. Session p. 98 They have a
War with the Emperor and Pope. p. 107 Their Army commanded by the Electour of
Saxony, and Landgrave of Hesse. p. 110 They revenge themselves on the Pope. p.
111 Promise to submit to the Council at the Diet of Ausburg. p. 171 Prepare to
send their Deputies to the Council. p. 196 Find a Contradiction in what was
concluded about the Eucharist. p. 217 The Council will not hear them, though
the Emperor had past his word for it. p. 230 Cruelties used against them in
England by Queen Mary, in France by Henry II. and in Germany by Ferdinand King
of the Romans. p. 256 and 257 They held their first National Synod in France.
p. 278 Edict of July against them. p. 298
Protestations of Amiot Bishop of Auxerre, and Ambassador of France, made in
Council in Name of his Master. p. 198 Of the Spanish Ambassador at Rome, made
to the Pope against the Precedence of the King of France. p. 514 Of the French,
against the Decree of the Reformation of Princes. p. 561

R.
RAtisbonne a Diet held there, where sentence past against Luther p. 18
Reformation advances in Germany. p. 80 The Spanish Bishops vigorously bestir
themselves for a Reformation, but without Success. p. 159 Reformation in
Religion had probably advanced in Spain, had it not been for the care of Philip
II. p. 281 The Execution of the Edict of Reformation in Germany causes great
Troubles. p. 180 Twelve Articles tending to Reformation proposed by the
Legates. p. 323 Nine Chapters of Reformation. p. 361 The Germans and Spaniards
unite to set forward the work of Reformation. p. 403 The Presidents make a
Collection of the Demands of the French and Germans for a Reformation, and send
it to the Pope. p. 411 13 Articles of Reformation presented to the Council by
Zavel a Spanish Doctor, against those of his own Nation. p. 429 Reasons
showing it impossible that the Demands which all made for a Reformation, should
have any Success. p. 454 18 Articles of Reformation past in the twenty third
Session. p. 539 The Decree of Reformation of Monks is reviewed. p. 577
Regulations made in several Points which are not liked at Rome. p. 177
Residence of Bishops proposed as a Point of Reformation. p. 113 A Dispute of
the Divines upon that Subject. p. 137 In the third Convocation the Council
enters upon the Point of Residence. p. 324 It is debated with extraordinary
heat, whether it be of Divine Right. ibid. The Legates will not form the Decree
of Residence according to the Plurality of Votes, and the Spaniards make a
great bustle about it. p. 327 The Controversy about Residence is revived. p.
374 It is proposed again. p. 433 The Decree of Residence is framed, wherein it
is not decided whether it be of Divine Right or not. p. 454 The last Debates
about the Decrees of Residence and the Institution of Bishops, and the last
Point is wholly laid aside. p. 534

S.
SAcraments in general, Baptism and Extreme unction in particular, are chosen
for Points to be examined in the seventh Session. p. 144 A Dispute about the
difference of the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament. p. 149
Sacrifice of the Mass. p. 366 Proofs to confirm it from Scripture are
overthrown by Ataide a Portuguese Divine. p. 371 etc. Great Debates about the
Question, whether Jesus Christ offered himself, when he instituted the
Eucharist. p. 369
Salmeron the Jesuit speaks with great ostentation. p. 474 Safe Conduct granted
the Protestants, but in such terms as did not satisfy them. p. 218 A New
Safe Conduct ampler than the former is granted them. p. 239
The Duke of Savoy gives Peace to Piedmont. p. 296 Saxony. v. Elector and
Frederick. The Ambassadors of the Electour come to the Council, and speak
higher than the rest. p. 233 They have Audience of the Council. p. 238
The Scriptures chosen for the first matter to be examined in the Council of
Trent. p. 81 Four Opinions about the Canonical Books. p. 83
Sebastiano Pighino Auditour of the Rota makes a considerable Overture for
contenting the Bishops, without diminishing the Authority of the Holy See. p.
94 Seripando Cardinal dies at Trent, in the last Convocation of the Council. p.
492 Sessions of the Council. The First, 69. Second, 75. Third, 80. Fourth, 89
Fifth, 104. Sixth, 141. Seventh, 163. Eighth, 166. Ninth, 168. Tenth, 170.
Eleventh, 192. Twelth, 196. Thirteenth, 214. Fourteenth, 229. Fifteenth, 239.
Sixteenth, 245. Seventeenth, 311. Eighteenth, 320. Nineteenth, 337. Twentieth,
341. One and Twentieth, 361. Two and Twentieth, 391. Twenty third, 539. Twenty
fourth, 569. Twenty fifth and last. p. 582 Simoneta Cardinal an able man in the
Canon Law. p. 305 His way to break up Congregations, when matters went contrary
to his Intentions. p. 353
Original Sin is handled in Council. p. 95 Nine Articles concerning that Point
imputed to Protestants, are censured. p. 98 The Prelates understand not the
Point, and know not how to make Decrees about it. p. 101
Soto. v. Dominico a Soto. Spaniards ignorant in matter of Antiquity. p. 356
Spire, the Place of the Diet wherein Attempts were used to divide the
Protestants. p. 29 Sultacan a Patriarch of the East comes to Rome to render
Homage to the Pope. p. 251 Suspicions entertained by the Court of Rome against
the French. p. 304 The Switzers receive a Nuncio from the Pope, to invite them
to the Council. p. 294 Synod. The first National Synod held by the Protestants
in France. p. 278
T.
THeodore Beza. v. Beza. The Thomists are divided about the Point of Grace. p.
128 Traditions no Point of Faith according to the Opinion of Anthony Marinier.
p. 83 Trent named by Pope Paul III. for holding of a Council. p. 52 He sends
Legates thither. p. 57 They arrive and stay there a long while alone. p. 59
Trivulcio Bishop of Thoulon sent Nuncio into France p. 186 Troubles that put a
stop to all thoughts of holding a Council. p. 20 They are over, and
Negotiations concerning matters of Religion begin again. ibid.

V.
VErgerio the Pope's Nuncio has several Conferences with Luther, and can
neither prevail with him by reasons nor by promises. p. 43 Being drawn over by
the Lutherans, at length declares himself, and turns Minister amongst the
Grisons p. 84 He writes against the Decrees of the Council. p. 541
A famous Victory obtained by the Emperor over the Protestants. p. 169
W.
WAR for Religion in Suisserland wherein Zuinglius is killed. p. 35 War
declared by the Pope and Emperor against the Protestants: the Emperor gets
great advantages, and deceives the Pope. p. 107 The Duke of Wirtemberg sends
Ambassadors to the Council, who cannot have Audience. p. 228 Works that
precede Grace examined, and Catarino's opinion concerning them. p. 118 Worms a
City upon the Rhine chosen for the Place of a Conference betwixt twelve
Doctors of the Roman Church, and as many Protestants. p. 273
Z.
ZAvel a Spanish Doctor presents 13 Articles of Reformation to the Council,
against those of his own Nation. p. 429 Zuinglius stands up against the
Collectours of Zurich in Suisserland. p. 7 His Reformation gains ground in
Suisserland. Berne and Basil embrace it. p. 28 He is killed in the War for
Religion in Suisserland. p. 35
Seven Propositions of the Zuinglians concerning Predestination condemned. p.
130 Zurich receives the Reformation of Zuinglius. p. 10
FINIS.

