(...).

OR A TREATISE OF Holy Dedication, BOTH PERSONAL and DOMESTIC.

The Latter of which, is (in Special) recommended to the Citizens of London,
upon their Entering into their New Habitations.

By Tho. Jacomb, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith and Samuel Gellibrand, MDCLXVIII.

To the Citizens and Inhabitants of the (once famous) City of London,
especially to those amongst them, who are Builders of Houses, and Masters or
Governors of Families: Grace, Mercy, and Peace, etc.
Dearly Beloved in our Lord Jesus,
THis Treatise (such as it is,) I dedicate to you; I judging it most proper, to
dedicate that to you, the great design of which, is (in special) to excite you,
to dedicate your Persons, your Houses, your All, to God. Had I gone by favors
received, by Personal obligations, (the usual measures by which writers
proceed, in making their Dedications,) (in which they take the opportunity, of
acknowledging favors received, and of expressing their gratitude for them,) I
say, had I gone by these measures, (although I must ever acknowledge my self,
highly obliged to very many of you, yet) certainly I had elsewhere made this
Dedication; (viz.) to that (truly) Honorable Person, (with whom I have had the
happiness long to live,) to whom for her favors, to me and mine, I owe more
than to all the world besides. But the Rule, by which (at present) I go, is the
matter, here treated of and insisted upon: that therefore being most suitable
and applicable to you, and you being specially (though not exclusively)
concerned in it, and this discourse, being penned on purpose upon your
particular Case, (of Rebuilding your Houses,) I could not but judge it most
convenient, to present and dedicate it to you.

As to the Dedication I am right enough, but I wish, I could give my self and
others, as satisfactory an account, concerning the thing dedicated; but indeed
that I cannot do. I here tender to your public view, a very mean and
inconsiderable piece; a Discourse more plain, more unpolished, more ordinary
than this, has very seldom seen the light. And how I come to trouble you, or
the world, with such imperfect, worthless endeavors of mine, I do not well
know, and (to any that will be severe) can less justify. I cannot but look
upon my self as guilty of that, which I have censured in some, lamented in
others; namely, the burdening and overcharging the world with Books, many of
which are as empty, as the Cardinals Trunks once were; and which contain
nothing in them, but what is trite, common, almost trivial. Surely it should
not be thus, and it would not be thus, if men had either that prudence or that
modesty, which might well be expected: The plain threadbare suit, may do well
enough at home, but when persons go abroad, better clothes are required; it is
folly to open that shop, wherein there are no wares; for by this, the seller is
disparaged, and the buyer disappointed. I need not make the Application, others
will do that for me; and they (probably) will first begin with my self, who am
too much within the lash of these allusions. Well, if it fall out so, I must
submit; severe reflections upon what I have here done, are (I fear) too justly
deserved by me. All that I have to say, (for your satisfaction and my own
encouragement) is this, the subject (which I pursue) is very excellent, (in it
self,) and very seasonable, (for you,) (with respect to that great affair,
which now lies upon your hands:) the matter is weighty, though the manner of
handling it be weak; the former must make some amends and reparation for the
latter; had it not been for the excellency and seasonableness of what I insist
upon, I had stifled these Papers in the very birth, and the Sun should never
have shone upon them; but that being seriously considered by me, I am
encouraged to make them public; and I am not without hope, but that
(notwithstanding all my defects and infirmities) some good may be effected by
them. And in this hope, I commit them to God, and to his Benediction.

Now since I lay so great a stress upon the subject or argument here
prosecuted, it is requisite that I presently give you some account of that: it is
then (in a word,) Holy or Religious Dedication; the principal and main notion
of which, is the Devoting of Self and All to God: many other things (as you
will find,) are included in it, and are expressive of it, but this mentioned is
the main thing; as in holy dedication, you have the vitals of Religion, so in
this act of devoting All to God, you have the vitals of dedication. This (in
the general consideration of it) is a duty, 1. Very spiritual: 2. Very
comprehensive; for indeed all duty is contained in it, (either formally or
virtually and reductively:) Dedication to God through Christ, is the summary of
Law and Gospel; it is the Synopsis, Epitome, Abridgment of all Practical
Divinity: he that does this, does all, he that does not this, does nothing. 3.
Very necessary; both as to the truth of grace here, and also as to the
possession of glory hereafter. Baptismal dedication may make men Christians,
but it is only the dedication (which I speak of) which can make them real Saints
in this life, and happy Saints in the life to come. And 4. it is a most high,
raised, weighty, fundamental duty; it is the very Heart and Spirit of
Christianity, the marrow, pith, kernel, quintessence of Religion lies in it:
it is not only a spiritual duty, but it is the very spirit of duty. These things
you will find fully proved (as I hope) in this Treatise, here (that I may not
detain you too long in the Porch) I do but glance upon them. Since then I must
be printing, (notwithstanding that rooted averseness that is in me thereunto,)
could I have pitched upon a better Argument than this? O that the meanness of
the writer and of the writing, may not disparage the nobleness and excellency
of the subject!

Worthy friends, I set before you no lately upstart or novel doctrine; I come
not with nice and curious points, (tending more to speculation than real
profit,) or with what is abstruse and intricate, (to perplex your heads;) I put
no bone into your hands, (by which your teeth might be broken, rather than your
souls fed and nourished;) I do not present you with matters polemical and
controversial, about Doctrine, Discipline, or any other thing: I do not trouble
you, with what concerns party and party, so as to make it my business, to bring
you over to a side; neither do I lead you to things, which lie but in the
suburbs of Religion, and are a great way off from salvation: All these (or at
leastwise some of these,) I have designedly and industriously shunned: That
which I offer to you, is as ancient as the word of truth, very plain and
facile, intelligible to the meanest capacity, of a Practical Nature, tending
only to the advancement of piety and godliness, that wherein we all agree (as
to the Theory,) and which we must all practice, as we are Christians, that
which lies next to the very heart of Religion, and is absolutely necessary to
future blessedness: this is the true stating of what I pursue in this
Discourse, and all this is wrapped up, and to be found in Holy Dedication.

This is the Duty in general, which I branch out or reduce to two Heads, viz.
Dedication Personal and Domestic: the explication and enforcement of these
two, is the work and business of this little volume. I know, other species
might be assigned of this Genus, or other Parts of this whole, but these two
were as much, as I at present could grasp, and therefore I name no more. I did
intend indeed a Third Branch, but I will give you an account of that by and by.
Concerning this twofold Dedication, I will here say nothing; if you please to
peruse the Book, you will there find them distinctly opened, (in what is proper
to each of them,) and also practically urged, by several convincing and
powerful considerations.

That I ingraft a discourse (of the Dedication of the Person,) upon this stock,
(which only speaks of the dedication of the house,) is ( I confess) a breach of
the strict Rules of method: But I wish this was my greatest fault, I should
more easily then presume upon a pardon. The truth is, when I first fixed my
thoughts upon the Text, I intended only to speak of House Dedication; but when
I had waded a little into that point, I presently perceived, that it was
necessary for me, to premise something concerning the dedication of the
person; because this maxim offered it self to me, that Personal Dedication must
antecede Domestic Dedication, and that no man will dedicate his House to God,
unless he do first dedicate his self to God. Upon the evidence of this truth, I
could not but do, what I have done: If I have violated the laws of method, you
must excuse me; for I could not judge these so considerable, as the carrying on
of my great design, which was this, to give you an entire discourse upon a duty
so weighty and so necessary; and had I spoken of the one, and not of the other,
the Discourse would not have been entire. Had I foreseen, that I should have
been so large upon the Dedication of the Person, I would have pitched upon some
Scripture which had been more express and proper to it; but that was as much
beyond my imagination, as this is besides my Text. And when I had made up the
garment, I could not think it worth my time and trouble, to search out another
Body, which would exactly fit it. But I check my self, in writing thus much
about it, for may be less time would have done that, than what I spend in
writing this Apology.

This objection (as to the first branch of Holy Dedication,) is made against my
self, but (as to the second Branch,) there ( I fear) objections will be made
against the Thing: Personal Dedication cannot be denied, as a duty lying upon
all; but House Dedication (possibly) will not so easily be assented to, under
that notion. Some ('it is like) may argue against this, and that too, upon
different grounds and pretexts: for some may object, that it is Novel; others,
that it is Jewish and antiquated, and now under the Gospel out of date and
superannuated, and therefore not to be pressed as a duty.

It Is neither convenient nor necessary, to say much for the obviating or
answering of these objections; these blocks may soon be removed out of the way.
As to the first, I Am sure this is not New, to have the highest truths, and the
most important duties, charged with being New: all along Novelty has been
pleaded against matters of faith and practice. When Paul preached Christ and
the Resurrection, the Athenians branded his Doctrine with this; May we know,
what this New Doctrine whereof thou speak, is? Acts 17.19. As they, (though
upon a different account,) what New Doctrine is this? Mark 1.27. this is the
usual carriage of men, with respect to the great discoveries of the Gospel. But
to the business in hand: Is House-Dedication new? that which was practiced by
David himself, is that new? that which was enjoined by God, in the times of the
Law, is that new? (See Deuteronomy. 20.5.) that which was done by Abraham, by Joshuah,
and by diverse others, (recorded in the word) is that New? State
House-dedication aright, and in its full latitude, and you will find, ever
since Religion was in the world, that such as were seriously religious, did
always make conscience of it; and therefore is that New? O how apt is the
naughty heart of man, to catch at every thing, which may serve for a fence
against duty, and which may a little blunt the edge of conviction about it!
And as to the second objection, that this dedicating the House is a Jewish
thing, and not obligatory under the Gospel, that I absolutely deny. If it be
meant by Jewish, that the Jews practiced this duty, that I grant; but if that
be all, that is intended in the objection, then it ceases to be an objection:
Must we do nothing that the Jews did? must every thing be shunned by us, as
Jewish, which was done by that people? then we must part with much of our
Religion, even in things unquestionable. But if it be meant by Jewish, the
doing of something which was limited to the Jews, and to the Mosaical
dispensation, and which afterward was to vanish; then the objection is
grounded upon a falsehood, and upon a great mistake, House-dedication being no
such thing: I need say no more by way of Refutation, than just to open the
nature of the duty: take it in general, under the Title of House-dedication,
there may be some appearance of Judaism in it; but take it in its several parts
and branches, (as here I speak to it and urge it,) so it consists of nothing,
but what is moral, and what is of perpetual obligation: To enter upon the
Habitation, by Prayer and Praise, is this Jewish? To commit the House to Gods
protection, is this Jewish? To advance Religion, Piety, Godliness in the
Family, is this Jewish? To devote domestic mercies to God, is this Jewish?
Have not all these a moral stamp and signature upon them? and so are not
Christians under the Gospel, obliged to them? If the Jews dedication of their
Houses, had li'n only in some external, ceremonial, civil Rites, and I had
pressed them upon you, then the objection had been of some force; but when I
press nothing upon you, but what lies in Religious acts, (which are as proper
to us as they could be to them,) in the very substantial, or essential parts
of sanctification and godliness, Judaism cannot be alleged, to take you off
from the performance of it. I desire the Reader, not to pass judgment upon the
General Title, but first to peruse and weigh the particulars, by which it is
opened, and then let him tell me, whether House-dedication (as so stated) be a
Jewish, antiquated thing, or whether it be not rather a moral duty, and that
all persons whatsoever are now under the obligation of it.

Honored Citizens, I hope no objections, nor discouragements neither, (from
without or from within,) shall ever be able to keep you off from a due
performance of this blessed duty of House-dedication: You are now very busy,
in joining house to house, (but not in the Prophets sense, Isa. 5.8.) in the
repairing of your breaches, in the re-edifying of your wast and desolate
Habitations, (which for some time have been forsaken, and left like a
wilderness, and cut off through the fierce anger of the Lord, Isa. 27.10. Jer.
25.37.) and herein I pray the God of Heaven to prosper you. Now to present you
with some thing, that might be suitable and seasonable for this enterprise,
this is my principal aim and design. As to the late terrible Fire, (the saddest
Tragedy that Providence has acted (or permitted to be acted) upon the Stage of
the world, in these latter Ages,) as to that Fire I say, which in four days, by
four large swarths, mowed down so many thousands of your dwellings, this I
meddle not with, (farther than as the matter insisted upon in this Treatise,
does here and there lead me to it; you have had the pious labors of several
persons already upon that sad and dismal Argument, to which I shall add
nothing:) It Is the bright side of the cloud that my eye is upon, it is the
building not the burning of your Houses which I treat of: and what is it in
reference to this, which I urge? but that they may be consecrated and dedicated
to God, whenever they shall be built: And under this Head, I reduce all that I
have to say; and does not the duty speak for it self? Does it not carry its own
light and conviction along with it? Does not the late tremendous hand of God
call upon you for this? After such conflagrations, will you not enter upon your
Houses, and live in them, with a due sense of God? When God has been so
contending with you, shall things be just as they were before? Shall not the
voice of such a rod be heard, in some notable reformation? Has God overthrown
many of you, as he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as brands plucked
out of the burning, and will ye not yet return to the Lord? ( Amos 4.11.) Do ye
not yet perceive, that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God? Will you again provoke God, to return with the same judgment? I
beseech you, consider what God has done, what you have done, what you are now
to do; and carry it so, that breaches betwixt God and you may be healed, that
his anger (the worst of Fires) may be quenched, that all differences may be
comprimised, that you may be secured from all evils, and live in the enjoyment
of all blessings: And the most compendious way to this, is first to dedicate
your persons, and then your houses to God: O let God dwell where you dwell; let
God be entertained in your Habitations: O keep up his worship, promote his
interest, devote all to his service and glory; live under a continual
dependence upon him, and an universal devotedness to him, and let not sin find
any harbor, or have any reception in your Houses; thus do, and fear not, all
will be well; be you faithful in your dedication, and God will be faithful in
his protection and benediction: Persons and places dedicated, are under a
special providence, God will not have them to be touched.

There are very many things, which your present affairs and actings, might lead
me to speak to by way of advice: You are much taken up with building, O that
spiritual building may not be neglected by you. Pray mind the building of your
Ark, and do as Noah did, Heb. 11.7. In such threatening times as these are, it
concerns every man, to have his Ark ready made: it is better now to be without
an house, than without an Ark; we have seen several deluges of judgments, what
will be next we know not: Prove. 22.3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and
hides himself, but the simple pass on and are punished. You are erecting fair
and beautiful Houses, but are you your selves, the House, Building, Temple of
God, that he may dwell and inhabit in you? Heb. 3.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. 1 Cor. 3.9,
16. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.22. You are building for Earth, but what do you do for
Heaven? Do ye lay a good foundation against the time to come, that ye may lay
hold on eternal life? (as it is 1 Timothy 6.19.) Are you by a saving Faith built
upon Christ, that great and only foundation? 1 Cor. 3.11. What assurance have
ye, of a building of God, of an house not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens? (2 Cor. 5.1.) Thus from your external and material buildings, I might
take occasion, to suggest diverse things, which refer to inward, spiritual and
mystical Building, (for by this allusion, the spirit of God in Scripture, does
much delight to set forth the state and duty of Christians:) As also, I might
much enlarge in the exhorting of you to several duties, (upon another account,)
suitable to your present posture and concern: viz. That ye would for ever
humble your selves under that mighty hand of God, which has been so severely
lifted up against you: that the late judicial, amazing Providence of the most
High, may never be forgotten by you, but that they may, frequently be thought
of, and duly improved: that you would take heed of security, pride, vanity of
spirit, in slighting what is past, and in promising great things to your selves
for the time to come; so as not to say with them, The bricks are fallen down,
but we will build with hewn stones, the Sycomores are cut down, but we will
change them into Cedars, (Isa. 9.10.) That you would be sure, in Building-work
to take God along with you, and to keep down all carnal confidence: (That place
is remarkable, Mal. 1.4. Whereas Edom says, (O that this may never be the
language of London!) We are impoverished, but we will return and build the
desolate places; thus says the Lord of Hosts, they shall build, but I will
throw down; and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and the people
against whom the Lord has indignation for ever. A terrible word this is; the
Lord grant you may never speak so sinfully against God, and that he may never
speak so terribly against you!) That you would enter into your New houses with
New hearts; that as your houses are like to be better than before, so your
hearts and lives may be better also; that your old sins may never be admitted
into your New habitations; I say, I might be very large in the urging of these
things upon you, but I choose only to name them; some of them fall in, under
House-dedication, (to which I limit my self) and there I speak to them; the
others, I must pass over, that I may not offend with too much prolixitie.

You perceive in this Dedicatory discourse, I go no higher than to you, who
have Authority, in and over your own Private Houses: As to your Magistrates,
(who have a greater and a more extensive Authority,) I could not judge it so
convenient, (considering the present circumstances, wherein I stand,) to make
my Application to them; otherwise, I would 1. have been very earnest with
them, to come up to Holy Dedication: for who are more under the obligation of
this, than they? They have not only a single person or a bare house, but they
have also interest, power, authority to devote to and improve for God. O what
public blessings are Magistrates, when they do this! What abundance of good do
they do, by their pious example, and holy zeal: They being as Planets fixed in
a public Orb, how is their light and influence diffused amongst very many! If
they give themselves to God in an holy life, if they advance Religion,
Godliness, the worship of God in their families, how does their pattern provoke
and excite others to do the same. 2. I would humbly have recommended two things
to them; the first of which refers to the present attempts of rebuilding this
desolate City, and it is this; That they would endeavor (as their wisdom shall
direct them) to further and procure, the setting of a Day apart, for solemn
Prayer, in order to the obtaining of Gods blessing upon us, in this great
undertaking. Methinks so great a work should not be engaged in, without solemn
seeking of God; the foundation of all our Buildings should be first laid in
Prayer: The happy issue and success of such an enterprise, as the rebuilding of
a City, so much depending upon Gods blessing, (for except the Lord build the
House (and much more the City,) they labor in vain that build it, Psalm.
127.1.) Surely he should be sought unto for this, in a very solemn and serious
manner. I find this piece of Religion amongst the very Heathens, that whenever
they entered upon the building of their Cities and eminent places, they always
began with the invocation of their Deities; (of this many instances might be
given out of History if it was needful:) Shall Christians come short of
Heathens? Shall darkness outshine light? Shall Nature outstrip Grace? Shall
Idolaters carry it better to a false God, than we to the true God? This is the
first thing, and that which is proper to our entrance upon the work, (and we
are but there as yet:) But then secondly, in time ( I hope) it will be
finished; we are now but laying the foundation as it were, but I trust in some
years (the fewer the better,) the Top-stone will be laid, and we shall cry
Grace, Grace, ( Zech. 4.7.) we have as yet but the Embryo of a City, but I
hope, this will go on to a full and complete birth: If it so be, (which God
grant,) then I would humbly recommend this to the present Magistrates, (or to
those, who shall live to see the finishing of what is now but begun,) that this
City may be dedicated, (that is) in a public and solemn way committed to Gods
protection: Did Nehemiah thus dedicate the walls of Jerusalem? and why should
not we have for this City, (the Metropolis of our Nation, upon the safety and
welfare of which, the whole Nation both in Temporal's and Spiritual's does so
much depend, and which is always like to be environed with many dangers and
enemies,) I say, why should not we have for this City, as soon as it shall be
built, a general, express, solemn, religious Dedication, answerable to that of
Jerusalem in Nehemiahs time? of which you read, Nehem. 12.27. (ad sin. cap.)
But these are things only proper to our Magistrates; and I not presuming to
prefix their Names before this Dedication, it would be improper for me, to say
more upon them.

If I may not be so happy, as to prevail with them for a Day of Prayer, yet let
me prevail with you, to be much in private seeking the Lord, in order to your
particular, and the general concerns of this City: Building-work and
praying-work should always go together: where many hands are employed in the
one, many hearts should be employed in the other. In every business and
undertaking, God should be called upon; how much more, should this be done, in
so great and weighty a business as that is, wherein you are now engaging? I
trust God has gracious and merciful designs toward you, and toward the whole
City; that he will bless and prosper you in what you are about, (as it is said
of Judah, they built and prospered, 2 Chronicles. 14.7.) I hope, he has not said
that of London, which once he did of Tyrus, I will make thee like the top of a
rock, thou, shall be a place to spread Nets upon, [thou shall be built no
more,] Ezekiel. 26.14. And as the Prophet concerning Babylon, (according to some
Interpreters,) Thou have made of a City, an heap; of a defenced City, a ruin; a
palace of strangers, to be no City, [it shall never be built,] Isa. 25.2. But
now, if God has gracious designs toward us, they must have their effect and
accomplishment in the way of Prayer. That Scripture has been much upon my
thoughts, in Ezekiel. 36. verse 10. -- The Cities shall be inhabited, and the
wastes shall be builded: and ver. 33, etc. In the day that I shall have
cleansed you from all your iniquities (pray observe that) I will also cause you
to dwell in the Cities, and the wastes shall be builded: And the desolate land
shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by;
And they shall say, This land that was desolate, is become like the Garden of
Eden, and the waste and desolate, and ruined Cities are become fenced and
inhabited. Then the Heathen that are left round about you shall know, that I
the Lord build the ruinous places, and plant that that was desolate; I the Lord
have spoken it, and I will do it. Here are gracious promises made to Jerusalem,
(whose case and ours do too well agree, in the late judgment,) but how shall
they be made good? It follows, verse 37. I will yet for this be enquired of by
the House of Israel, to do it for them, etc. You see by this, that though God
designs mercy, (and that particular mercy too, which suits with your present
state,) yet he will not actually bestow that mercy, without prayer: so that
let Gods intentions and purposes be never so merciful toward us in this City,
(for the building up of the wastes thereof,) yet if he be not sought unto and
called upon, we cannot expect any gracious execution of them: And is not this
enough to quicken you to prayer? The Jews in the rebuilding of Jerusalem,
whenever they met with any dangers or difficulties, (and they met with many,)
still they applied themselves to Prayer, Nehem. 4.9. Nevertheless we made our
prayer unto our God, etc. If you be free from these dangers and difficulties,
yet the very nature and importance of the work it self, calls upon you to call
upon your God. O will you build and not pray? this is (in effect) to say, you
will build whether God will or not; and is not this highly sinful? He burnt
your Houses, whether you would or no, will you build them up again, whether he
will or no? O take God along with you, (as I said before,) and by humble prayer
engage him in the work, and then undoubtedly it shall go on and prosper: If he
be with you, and undertake for you, the business is done: I will build thee,
and thou shall be built, Jer. 31.4. I will work, and who shall let it, Isa.
43.13. The work may stick upon your hands, and miscarrie in your hands, but it
will go on smoothly, and shall certainly succeed in the hands of the Almighty.
Why may not we go now to God, and (with submission to his will, and with a due
consideration of the Nature of the mercy, and of different circumstances,)
plead with him old promises? Isa. 61.4. They shall build the old wastes, they
shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the waste Cities,
the desolations of many generations, Jer. 30.18. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I
will bring again the captivity of Jacobs tents, and have mercy on his dwelling
places; and the City shall be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall
remain after the manner thereof, etc. Amos 9.14. They shall build the waste
Cities and inhabit them. I say, why may not we, in the present juncture of
affairs, plead these promises to God, in the case of London?

Dear Citizens, Let us do our duty to God, and then let us be above all
discouragements, which may arise either from men, or from the work it self,
which lies before us. It would not be amiss, if (in your circumstances) you
would often read over the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah; where you have an
Historical account of the re-edifying of Jerusalem and of the Temple; in which,
you will meet with many things, that will exactly suit and parallel your
present case; (for this City (in many respects) is Jerusalems Counterpart:)
That famous City you know, was taken and burnt by the Babylonians, and so it
lay in its ashes and ruins for seventy years: (And I will not meddle with that
enquiry, (which is much more proper for persons far higher than I am,) whether
the Babylonians had not an hand in the firing of our City also.) Well, when
this time was expired, the Jews fall upon the rebuilding of Jerusalem: but good
Lord! what pauses, interruptions, oppositions, discouragements, difficulties
did they meet withal, in that undertaking? Ezra 4.4. The people of the land,
weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building; And
hired Counselors against them, etc. And several of them wrote a most malicious
letter to Artaxerxes the King of Persia, designing, by their cursed
insinuations to put a stop to the work; ( verse 12.) Be it known unto thee O
King, that the Jews which came up from thee to us, are come unto Jerusalem,
building [the rebellious and the bad City,] and have set up the walls thereof,
etc. These Samaritans and Others too, did all that ever they could to hinder
the progress of the Jews, in the repairing of Jerusalems breaches: Sometimes
they deride them, Nehem. 4.2. sometimes they conspire to fall upon them by
force of Arms, Nehem. 4.8. (and then Nehemiah set a watch against them night
and day) (verse 9.) Sometimes they endeavor to dishearten them, Nehem. 6.9.
For they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the
work, that it be not done. Besides all this (from enemies,) the Jews were much
discouraged, (as you read in the History in these Books,) from the work it
self: O it was so difficult, they should never be able to carry it on, Nehem.
4.10. Yet good Nehemiah (notwithstanding all this,) would not have the Jews
discouraged, but he animates them to the work, and in the work; Nehem. 2.17,
18. Ye see the distress that we are in, how Jerusalem lies waste, and the
Gates thereof are burnt with fire: Come and let us build up the wall of
Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach: Then I told them of the hand of my
God, which was good upon me, as also the Kings words, that he had spoken unto
me; And they said, [Let us rise up and build:] So they strengthened their hands
for this good work. I pass by other places, which refer to his encouraging of
them in the work: what the issue was, you know; notwithstanding all these
oppositions and difficulties the City was built and finished, to the grief and
consternation of all enemies, Nehem. 6.16. And it came to pass, that when all
our enemies heard thereof, and all the Heathen that were about us saw these
things, they were much cast down in their own eyes; for they perceived, that
this work was wrought of our God. The times, in which all this was done, were
full of distraction; yet the Jews were not dispirited; they set upon the
business and did it, even in these times; (according to what was prophesied in
Daniel) Chap. 9.25. The street shall be built again, and the wall, [even in
troublous times:] Now, (Gentlemen) some of these discouragements (or some
others,) I fear lie upon you, and I heartily lament it; but yet be not
disheartened; set upon your work; and say, The God of Heaven he will prosper
us, therefore we his servants will arise and build, ( Nehem. 2.20.) I rejoice
(with all my heart) to see that done which is done; but O that I could see our
Citizens more vigorously carrying on the rebuilding of this City! Jerusalems
wall went on apace, for the people had a mind to work, (so it is said, Nehem.
4.6.) Surely if persons amongst us, had but a mind to build, the City might be
finished in a few years: But some have got good Accommodations elsewhere, and
there they intend to fix; some are discouraged by the distractions of the
Times; some are taken off upon one account, some upon another, and so that
which was destroyed and ruined in three days, is not like to be raised up again
in many years. It Is not so proper for me, (a Minister of the Gospel,) to be
earnest with you, in stirring you up to build Houses, (a thing of a Civil
nature;) and if affection to the City, and your own interest do not lead you to
this, all that I can say will signify but little: but it would be the joy of
my soul, if I might see London to recover its pristine glory, and (in a word)
to be London again: And (I hope) you will excuse, my hinting of these things to
you, which is occasioned by my cordial affection to that place, the very dust
and ashes of which is precious to me. I return to that which I was upon, and I
shall add but this; Let us with fervent prayer apply our selves often to the
Throne of Grace, let us unfeignedly humble our selves before the Lord, let us
sincerely reform what is amiss, let us put away sin, (there, there is the
greatest discouragement;) let us thus do, and then let the work be never so
difficult, enemies never so malicious, the times never so bad, we may engage in
what lies before us, and God will bless us in it. Supplication, Humiliation and
Reformation will carry all before them.

As for me, I shall not cease to pray for you; it shall be my daily request to
God for you, that he will direct you to do that, which may most tend to his
glory, the good of this City, your own comfort, and the benefit of succeeding
Generations; and then, that he will be pleased, to encourage and prosper you
herein, and crown your undertakings with good success. The Lord bless every
one of you, in your persons, relations, estates, employments, habitations, in
all that concerns you: the Lord carry on the work now upon your hands, and then
hide and defend you continually. And as for thee (dear London) let my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I forget thee: O that thou (Phoenix-like)
may grow out of thy ashes more glorious than ever thou wast; that (as it is
with metals new cast) it may be better with thee than before; that (as it was
with the person of Job) thy latter end may be blessed more than thy beginning;
that (as it was with the Temple) the glory of second London may be greater
than the glory of the first. The Lord say concerning thee, Though I have
afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more, (Nehem. 1.12.) That it may be said
of thee, The Lord has taken away thy judgments, he has cast out thine
enemies; the King of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee, thou shall
not see evil any more, (Zeph. 5.15.) O let not God any more contend with thee
by Fire, Plague, or any other judgment: O Lord God cease I beseech thee, by
whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small, (Amos 7.4, 5.) O that the punishment
of thine iniquity may be accomplished, O daughter of Zion; and that God will
visit the iniquity of the daughter of Edom, and discover her sins, (Lam. 4.22.)
The Lord make thee, a quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken
down, that not one of thy stakes may be removed, nor one of thy cords broken,
(Isa. 33.20.) The Lord bless thee, and make thee an Habitation of Justice, and
Mountain of Holiness, (Jer. 31.23.) That thou may be called, the City of
righteousness, the faithful City, (Isa. 1.26.) That thou may be as mount
Zion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever: As the mountains are round
about Jerusalem, so let the Lord be round about thee, from henceforth even for
ever, (Psalm. 125.1, 2.) Amen, Amen.

I have now but a few words to add, concerning this mean Tractate, and I will
free you from the further trouble of a tedious Preface. If I should fall upon
Apologizing for my self and for it, many words would be requisite: It Is best
for me to forbear that, (though I acknowledge great need of it,) and without
more ado, humbly to cast it first upon Gods blessing, and then upon your candor
and kind acceptance. If it may please the Lord, by it to do good to any of you,
he, he only shall have the glory; and may I but see that, I shall not much
regard the censures, which it may please some to pass upon me. I tell you
beforehand, (that you may not expect and look for that, which is not here to be
found,) here is no high strains of Rhetoric or humane eloquence, no fine and
curious Metaphors, no count and florid expressions to gratify your fancy;
here is no Margent stuffed with Citations, (to give me the reputation of an hard
student or well-read person;) here is no New notions or Novel matter to satisfy
such as like nothing but what is so; here is something, which may suit with the
humble, serious, hungry Christian, and which I hope such an one may receive
benefit by; but as for others, (alas) here is nothing to answer their
expectations. The style and language is even as plain as your
fourth-rate-Buildings, (yet pray let not the Book be confined to Allies and
Lanes, but let it be admitted into your Streets also:) And the matter treated
of, is common and usual; that which several of our worthy Divines (under other
Heads, and in another method,) have very fully insisted upon: All therefore
that I can pretend to, to give you encouragement to peruse this Discourse, is
the seasonableness of it, with respect to your present affair of Building; upon
that I take the advantage of urging old and known Truths upon you; and had it
not been for that special occasion, I had not given you the trouble of Reading,
or my self the trouble of writing. I had no sooner resolved upon this work, and
made a little Provision for it, but it pleased the Sovereign disposer of all
things, to lay his afflictive hand upon me, in a very acute and dangerous
distemper. And O that I could say, I was yet freed from it! but for ought I can
see, this distemper is like to be to me, like Jacobs bruise upon his thigh, I
must halt of it all my days. As soon as my merciful Father gave me some
relaxation of my violent Pains, I began to pen what here I now publish; but God
knows, the remainders of my disease did very much unfit me for such an
undertaking; and I was fain to hasten over things, because I feared every day
(and so do yet,) the return of former Paroxisms: Had it not been for this,
possibly I might have tendered you this Treatise somewhat more elaborate; but
now you must accept of it as it is. I intended a Third Branch of Holy
Dedication, viz. the Dedication of Time; but I am prevented and hindered as to
that, at present. 1. The state of my body will not bear a studious and
sedentary course; and I am fain to spend the most of my Afternoon-time in
Motion and Exercise, for the recoverie of my Health. 2. That Is a subject
somewhat large, (according to the method that I have propounded to my self;)
and if I should annex that to these two, I fear it would make this Volume too
big and bulky. If God be pleased to continue Life, and to restore Health, and
if I find that this Piece be in any measure useful, I may hereafter publish
what I design upon that Argument.


And now Brethren, as to your Building-work, I commit it to God, and to his
Blessing; and as to your Selves, I commend you to God, and to the word of his
Grace, which is able to [build you up] and to give you an inheritance among all
them, which are sanctified. That you may heartily, sincerely dedicate and
devote, Person, House, Estate, All to God, is the Prayer, and (according to his
power) shall be the Endeavor of him,

Who desires to devote himself, first to God, and then to your service. THO.
JACOMB.

To the Afflicted Citizens OF LONDON, And to every READER.
THe mavelous industry of the Devil and his Angels in all generations, in
hindering the preaching and knowledge of that sacred truth, which God has
sealed for the sanctifying and saving of men's souls, would rise up in judgment
against the Ministers of Christ to their condemnation, if they should not with
resolution and unwearied industry, subserve the lover of truth and souls, in so
happy a work, which none but the fiends and friends of darkness do malign.
Therefore allow me to contribute this poor assistance for thy good, by putting
into thy hand this paper-Lanthorn, in which the Reverend Author has set up so
seasonable a light, for the use of the reedified houses of this City. The very
great number of excellent Books, which perished in the flames, does now make
some of us retract our repentance for scribbling so much; and may convince the
censurer, that it should not be taken as a needless work, to endeavor
something toward the reparation of so unvaluable a loss. The subject of this
Treatise is nothing Novel, indifferent, dark or doubtful; but the compendium or
sum of all Religion: the same thing which is proclaimed as necessary to
salvation, under various names and titles in the sacred Scripture: the very
title of Dedication to God methinks should command attention from the Reader,
and strike his heart with an holy awe; as speaking a thing so high and holy!
what is it but that reverend title, which is the mark of God on all that he
will own, and which he has commanded his servants to assume Holiness to the
Lord. The first part is of Self-Dedication; the second of House-Dedication, (in
which is comprehended the Dedicating of All that we have to God:) of which I
may say, alluding to Christ's words, the One is the first and great Commandment,
and the second is like to it. And it is all neither more nor less than the
exposition of our Baptismal Covenant, that is, of our Christianity it self, in
which we did all by a solemn Vow, Dedicate and give up our selves and all that
we should have to God.

I will not so far digress as to give you the reasons of all the other
appellations of this same act or state: it is called by the name of Vocation,
Repentance, Regeneration, the new birth, renewing, quickening, conversion or
turning unto God, the new creature, putting off the old man, and putting on the
new; sanctification, grace, the spirit, translation from death to life, the
Divine nature, life eternal, religion, godliness, the reconciling of man to
God, righteousness; and under most of these names it is ordinarily treated of
by Divines: but there is no name which more clearly informs man of the true
nature of this work, (as on his part,) than these three remaining, which all
are of the like importance; that is, Dedicating (our selves,) Devoting (our
selves) and Covenanting with God. And therefore I wish that hereafter Divines
will more frequently handle it, under these most plain and explicit notions,
which will need least exposition to the more ignorant sort, and contain in them
their proper perswasives to the work.

To Sanctify, or Consecrate, or Dedicate a person unto God, is to separate him
from all other common inconsistent uses, to the service of his Maker and
Redeemer. And as Gods service is either that which is common to all Christians,
or that which is proper to some office of Ministry; so there is a double
dedication and sanctification: one is our separation to God in a holy Christian
state of life, and the other is a separation to the sacred office of the
Gospel-ministery; which ought to presuppose the former, (for none should be
more personally holy, than those that have a holy office,) but yet they are too
often separated, (for he may have all that is essential to that office, which
is to promote the salvation of others, who yet shall never be saved himself.)
Holiness to the Lord was the mark of God, which Aaron was to wear on his
forehead, on the forefront of his Mitre, engraven on a plate of pure gold,
like the engravings of a Signet, Exodus 28.36. Holiness to the Lord was Gods
mark upon Israel as his sanctified separated people, Jer. 2.3. Holiness to the
Lord was the title of those things which were dedicated to his Temple-service,
Isa. 23.18. which signifies no more than Holy to the Lord: And Holiness to the
Lord is the mark of God on all the possessions and utensils of his servants in
the Kingdom of the Mediator, as is foretold in Zech. 14.20, 21. In that day
shall there be upon the bells (or bridles) of the horses, Holiness to the Lord:
Yea, every Pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be, Holiness to the Lord; and all
they that sacrifice, shall come and take of them and sees therein. All which
is but the same in sense with that which is said of true Believers in the
Gospel: As he which has called you is Holy, so be ye Holy in all manner of
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. An holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ: Ye are a chosen generation, a
royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth
the praises of him who has called you, 2 Pet, 2.5, 9. To the pure all things
are pure, Tit. 1.15. It is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer, 1 Timothy
4.5.

It is a sad case (and the greatest scandal to the Anabaptists,) that twenty,
or thirty, or forty years after persons are Baptized, and solemnly dedicated to
God in the holy Covenant, we must be fain to preach to them as the Ancients
were wont to do to the Catechumens; and must spend most of our time and labor,
in teaching them what this Covenant-dedication is, and in persuading them to a
true consent, and confuting their prejudice, and driving them from the
entanglements and security, which cause their unwillingness and delays: as if
we were but preparing them for Baptism! And O how happy should we think our
selves, if after all this, we could but find them in that case as all the
adult-expectants of baptism should be in; even truly penitent
believing-consenters to the covenant of God, (that is, true Christians.) If we
lived in a land where the greater part were Heathens, and should be so long in
preaching our preparatory Lectures to make them Christians, and when we had all
done could prevail but with a few to be baptized, how compassionately or
contemptuously would you speak of such wretched obdurate men? But sirs, would
you not thereby condemn your selves? Nay are you not under an aggravated
condemnation, who after you are solemnly listed to Christ in the sacred Vow and
Covenant, are yet no more persuaded to the thing it self which you have vowed,
than those Heathens and Infidels whom you disdain. What is it that you think
they are so hardly brought to? Is it only to be sprinkled or washed with water?
That is not it: do they not daily wash their hands and face? And would not any
of them be hired for a little, to bath themselves in a River in the heat of
Summer? and to speak as many words as are spoken for you in baptism? Alas, the
difficulty is not here! But, to take off a sensual sinner from the love of this
world, and fleshly pleasures; and to make him steadfastly believe, that there is
an endless blessedness in Heaven, for believing Saints, intended by God,
procured by Christ, and given in the Gospel Covenant; and to persuade him to
devote himself and all that he has entirely to God, and resolvedly to consent
to the terms of that Covenant, and to follow his suffering-Saviour to that
glory: This is the thing that is necessary to salvation; and this is it which
Heathens and Infidels are so hardly brought to. And is it not so, with all the
rabble of hypocrite-Christians, as well as with them? If a little water and a
few good words can make a man pass for a Christian with God, and can charm him
into Heaven, who either knows not what Christianity is, or never heartily
consented to it himself, nor never set his heart on Heaven, or denied his
fleshly pleasures to obtain it; then let the sensual hypocrite hope still to be
saved: If Christ had set up such a Religion as this, it had been no hard matter
for the Preachers of it to have procured better quarter with the world, and to
have brought the generality of drunkards, fornicators and worldlings to be
Christians in sensu composito: when not a hair of the heads of any of their
fleshly lusts should perish: and then vice versa as the rabble would have all
been Christians, the few that are now true Christians would have been the
enemies of such a Christianity.

Dedication to God does signify that which is more than ineffectual knowledge
and convictions: and more than delatory purposes to repent: and more than a
course of the easy outward duties of Religion: and more than a Religiousness
which stoopeth to worldly interest, and is subordinate to the pleasure and
prosperity of the flesh: and more than a frightened, unsettled resolution, to be
religious indeed: and more than a taking of Christ as upon trial, with a
reserve to leave him when he calls you to the cross. This Self-Dedication is
that act of a convinced, humbled, penitent sinner, by which he does
deliberately, soberly, and resolvedly consent to the Covenant of God,
(according to the tenor of baptism,) and dedicated and give up himself entirely
and absolutely to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as his Owner to be
disposed of by him; as his Ruler to obey him, and as his Benefactor and chief
Good, thankfully to depend upon him, and so Love him as his ultimate end.

A person thus Dedicated to God, has the highest preferment, the noblest and
the safest station; the Relation which he enters into is not an empty
unprofitable title: as on his part it engages him to duty, so on Gods part it
estateth him in mercy. And they shall be mine says the Lord of Hosts, in that
day when I make up my jewels, (or special treasure) and I will spare them as a
man spares his own son that serves him, Mal. 3.17. He will say, Touch not
mine anointed: And will be avenged on that sacrilegious violence, which laid
hands on them who were Dedicated to God. For the Lord is our defense, and the
holy one of Israel is our King, Psalm. 89.18. These vessels of mercy shall dwell
in his sanctuary; where they shall see Him and his goings, Psalm. 63.2. and
68.24. and shall worship him in the beauty of holiness, Psalm. 29.2. They shall
be clothed with white robes, and stand before the Throne of God, and before
the Lamb, Rev. 7.9. They shall be pillars in his Temple, and go out no more: He
will write upon them the name of God, and of the city of God, the new
Jerusalem, and his new name, Rev. 3.12. Their employment also shall be high and
holy; even with readiness to do his will; to attend him and adore him, to
praise him in his Sanctuary, for Holiness becomes his house for ever, Psalm.
93.5.

This entire Dedication of our selves to God, is virtually every duty and good
work: It is the beginning and spring of a holy life: it is the root and kernel
of Religion, and as One habit of every gracious act: it is a settled opposition
to every sin, and a preventing repulse of every temptation: the soul has one
answer for every tempter, I am Dedicated to God: and (though it is impossible
for creatures to merit commutatively of God, because they can give him nothing
but his own,) he takes this rendition of his own as acceptably, as if it were
a proper gift. And as his mark is engraven on the forehead of his consecrated
ones, Holiness to the Lord, this mark is the sum of all their ascertaining
evidences for salvation: it is their pledge and earnest for glory: and as God
himself speaks as Owning them by this mark, so by it they may certainly know
themselves to be his peculiars, 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands
sure, having this seal; The Lord knows them that are his: and, Let every one
that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity: and though the World and
the Church-visible be like a great house, where there are both vessels of
honor and of dishonor, yet if a man purge himself from these, he shall be a
vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the masters use, prepared unto
every good work, 2 Timothy 2.20, 21. For he that redeemed us from all iniquity,
does purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14.
Areal Devotedness to God, is a standing witness to the soul of its sincerity:
though we are conscious of many failings, yet if we are also conscious of this,
it proves them all to be pardoned faults, and proves our interest in Christ:
it is the proper mark to know what sins are truly venial, or pardoned
infirmities, when they consist with an unfeigned devotedness to God. And when
many other signs of grace seem dark, and wants and weaknesses cast us into
doubts, this one is the ordinary certain evidence, which may give a constant
quietness and comfort to an upright soul; when we can truly say, I am devoted
entirely unto God, and it is for his service that I live in the world. And if
we should deny him this, as it would be disingenuous injustice to alienate his
own, and blasphemous contempt to give our selves rather to a dirty world, or a
filthy lust, than to our Creator and Redeemer; so it would be the cruellest
enmity to our selves, to deny our souls so blessed a condition, and to cast
them into the sink of sin, instead of Dedicating them to God.

But let me here entreat the Reader, who seriously purposes this necessary
work, to be sure to take with him these three or four cautions: 1. Take heed
lest your dedication should not be unreserved and entire, but you should think
that resolving upon a religiousness, which always saves the flesh, is a true
devotedness to God. If it be but the hypocrites religion, dividing the heart
between God and the world, which you take for holiness, it is not any
dedication of your selves to this, that will prove a true dedication unto God.
2. Offer your selves to God only by the hand of the Mediator; there is no
coming to the Father but by the Son. 3. Understand what is the particular
course of service, which God is to employ you in; and resolve on that, and keep
an account of your daily performance of it; for it is hypocrisy to stick in
generals: An ungodly man will say, I devote my self to God, but when it comes
to the particular acts of service, he denies that which in the general he
affirmed. 4. Content not your selves with the first act of dedication or
devotion, be it never so serious and resolved: for if you keep not up the same
deep apprehensions which caused it, and live not in the faithful performance of
your covenant, your heart dedication will by degrees go down, and you will fall
from God before you know it. And this is the undoing of many a self-deceiver;
that they can remember that once some powerful Sermon or sharp affliction,
persuaded them to resolved for a holy life, and to say, Lord I will be wholly
thine, and therefore they conclude that once they were converted, and
consequently are still sincere and safe; when as that frightened passionate
resolution, has sunk down insensibly into a religion which gives a secret
precedence to the world, and a (covered) indulgence and gratification to the
flesh. And thus the remembrance of a change once made, and of a Covenant once
entered, with high and passionate resolutions, does make many an hypocrite go
smoothly and quietly to hell, as confidently taking himself for a Saint; when
it is only he that is entirely, unreservedly, habitually and setledly resolved
for God, and keeps up that resolution, and lives in the practice of it, who
is sanctified and dedicated to God indeed: The Saints, as Ambrose says, live
as those that know, Se non naturae praestantioris esse, sed observatiae
majoris, nec vitia nescisse, sed emendasse: And as Austin, Nullus sanctus and
justus caret peccato; nec tamen ex hoc desinit esse justus vel sanctus, cum
affectu teneat fanctitatem: that is, with such an affection as is aforesaid.

And the second part of this Treatise, is very aptly conjoined to the first:
For he that is truly devoted to God, does with himself also devote all that he
has: not to be all employed in one way, but all in that way which God
requires: for he that reserveth not himself, can reserve nothing; because it
is for himself that he is supposed to reserve it: O what hypocrisy is it, for
men to say, that they believe there is a God whom they are bound to serve, and
yet to fear being losers by him, and refuse his service as too dear? If you had
foreseen the flames which consumed your wealth and habitations, would you not
much rather have spent that mass of treasure, on works of piety and charity?
And had you not rather now that it had been so laid out? Or would you take it
for your loss? Why you know that all which is left must shortly be none of
yours? If those hundred thousand who died of the late Plague had foreseen that
death, would not most of them rather have desired to die in a holy martyrdom
for Christ? And would they have taken such a death for a loss? And yet all men
know that they must shortly die? I am glad that the Reverend Author has taken
this seasonable advantage to call you to the Dedication of your Houses to God:
Verily that Plague which emptied them first, and that Fire which did devour
them next, are so loud a call to this Dedication, that it is much to be feared,
that he that does not hear and feel it, has the Plague of hardness on his
heart, and is hastening to the place which will make him feel: It is not the
height and splendour of your buildings, which must restore the glory of this
famous City: but it must be the Holiness of the inhabitants, who devote
themselves and theirs to their Preserver: If I should persuade you all to write
over your doors, in capital letters of gold, HOLINESS TO THE LORD, to remember
you what your families must be, some would deride it as Pharisaical
ostentation, (who yet themselves have received the like mark of God in their
baptism;) and some would turn it into a formal ceremony, as they do their
baptism it self, and as the sign of the Cross is set upon doors among the
Papists: it is therefore the interior dedication, and not the outward
ostentation, which you are now persuaded to. As ever you would have God to be
the protector of your habitations, and his Angels to be your guards; as ever
you would have the comfort of the presence of your Redeemer, and would have him
dwell with you, as your daily safety, peace and joy; give him the Keys, and
resign up all to his will and interest, and make him the governor of your
hearts and houses, who has the Keys of Heaven and Hell, and is the rightful
governor of all the world. Deliver up your selves and families to Him, to whom
the Father has delivered all things, Joh. 17.2. Math. 28.18, 19. Romans 14.9. O
that men knew what an honor, what a joy, what a safety it is, to have God the
absolute master of their families, that his name might be there hallowed, and
his Kingdom there set up, and his will there obeyed, even with a desire to
imitate the pattern in Heaven? For ye are the Temples of the living God; as God
has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will be a father to you, and ye shall
be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty, verse 18.

And O that men knew how much the interest of knowledge and holiness upon
earth, must be kept up in holy families? The two great duties, of the wise and
holy education of Children, and of the right performance of
family-instructions, and Gods worship there, are such as can hardly be too much
insisted on: O that Ministers would preach of them an hundred times over to
you, till you were awakened or shamed out of your neglect! If you lived among
the enemies of Christ and Souls, yet there you might catechize and instruct
your children and servants, and might make your families as Churches of God.
And if every Parent and Master would do thus, the Preachers might be better
spared. But while families are neglected, alas, how is the Preachers work
obstructed? When people come to the Church, as if boys should come to the
Universities, who never were taught in the Country-Schools, so much as well to
read or write? And when the Pastor has the work of all the Parents and Masters
in his Parish to do, besides all that which is properly his own? It is a
self-condemnation and a shame to men, to exclaim against those that silence
Preachers, or against those Pastors who neglect their flocks, and at the same
time wilfully to silence your selves, from family worship, and catechizing and
counselling your little charge, and to neglect those few who are so near you,
and always almost in your sight.

O that men would look to the Eastern and Southern Nations of the Earth, that
once were famous Churches of Christ, and now are turned Mohammedan Infidels! And
to the poor Greeks and Papists, the Abassines, Armenians, and Muscovites, where
ignorance has set out Christianity as defiled, and clothed in rags! And that
they would soberly bethink them, whether the gross neglect of Parents and
Masters have not been a great cause of this calamity: but if you join the
wilful negligence of Pastors with that of Parents, alas, what ruins have they
wrought? even made many famous Churches of Christ more miserable than the
flames have made your City?

Good families are the nurseries, from whence most usually spring good
Magistrates, good Pastors, a good Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty! And if any
Nations have been undone by the contrary to any or all of these, enquire
whether ill or negligent education was not the cause. If you say that many such
unhappy plants come out of the most religious families; I answer, it is too
true, (and they are most miserable persons.) But it is not according to the
proportion of profane and negligent families. Though all good Parents are not
blessed in their children, they are much more commonly so blessed than others.
And I must add with grief, that even as many religious Parents do formally
baptize their Children, and think God must save them only for being theirs, and
do not consider how much is laid on their believing and serious dedicating them
to God, and thankful entering them by baptism into his Covenant: even so too
many of them do exercise so little of that holy prudence, and unwearied
diligence in the education of their children, which their dark and sinful state
requires, that they seem still to think, that God should make them all wise
and godly, merely because they are theirs; and that a few formal prayers, and
words of a Catechism never understood, with a few of Eli's gentle rebukes
should serve the turn to make them Saints. But grace does not use to encourage
laziness.

So some will tell you, that this Fire has showed, that religious houses speed
no better than the rest. O but truly religious persons speed better than the
rest: The Israelites burdens were a lighter suffering than the Egpytians
plagues: For at last they past safely through that Red Sea, where Pharaoh and
his Host were drowned. To lose your goods, and keep, yea and increase your
holiness, and save your souls, is much easier than to lose the Idols of your
hearts, by such flames as foreshew the endless flames; and to be turned out of
those houses which you loved better than Heaven, as to signify how you shall
be turned out of all your wealth, and delights, and hopes for ever. A Seneca,
or a Plutarch, much more a David can tell you of the folly of judging men's
happiness or misery by things temporal. It is an excellent saying of Socrates
which Valerius Maximus recites, viz. [Nil ultra petendum a Diis arbitrabatur,
quam ut Bona tribuerent: Quia ii demum scirent quid unicuique esset utile: Nos
autem plerumque id votis expetere, quod non impetrasse melius foret. Etenim
densissimis tenebris involuta mortalium men's, in quam late patentes errores
caecas precationes tuas spargis? Divitias appetis quae multis exitio fuerunt:
honores concupiscis qui complures pessundederunt: Regna tecum ipsa volvis
quorum exitus saepenumero miserabiles cernuntur. Splendidis conjugiis injicis
manus; ac haec ut aliquando illustrant, ita saepe funditus domos evertunt:
Desine igitur stulte futuris malorum tuorum causis quasi faelicissimis rebus
inhiare; teque totum caelestium arbitrio permit: Quia qui tribuere bona ex
facili solent, etiam eligere aptissima possunt. It is best to be nearest unto
God: and riches separate more hearts from him than poverty does. He that as
Hierom says, prefers holy clownishness before sinful eloquence, will do as
Gregory counsels Pastors; Not to be so much in the houses of great men, as
of good men. It is not the consecrated place which will cause God to love an
unhallowed soul. As Origin says, Sin separateth you from Saints, though you
dwell among them: for it is manners and not places which make men holy.

Now the Lord of mercy, when he repaireth your ruined Habitations, give you all
hearts to understand his Judgments, and cordially to Dedicate your selves and
your houses to his disposal, his government, and his holy worship: That they
who shall behold the increased splendour of your City, may be witnesses of your
increased wisdom, obedience, righteousness and serious piety: And that Holiness
to the Lord may be your mark and name: And that it may be said of London, The
Lord bless thee O habitation of Justice and mountain of Holiness, Jer. 31.23.
And upon all your Glory, there may be a sure defense, Isa. 4.5. Amen.

April 22. 1668. RICHARD BAXTER.

Temporis praeteriti fructus est Compunctio; futuri flos est Devotio.

Bernard.
ELENCHUS CAPITUM.
First Part.
CHapter 1. The Introduction: The words of the Text explained. From page 1. to
page 24. Chap.2. Dedication Personal or Domestic: The former opened. from p.
24. to p. 59. Chap.3. Personal Dedication applied. The Rarity of it lamented:
Enquiries about it as to our selves. from p. 59. to p. 74. Chap.4. Personal
Dedication pressed: First more Generally, and then Particularly in the six
Branches of it. from p. 75. to p. 167. Chap.5. Directions showing in what
manner Personal Dedication must be managed. from p. 167. to p. 188. Chap.6.
Helps to Personal Dedication. from p. 188. to p. 197. Chap.7. Some things in
special urged upon Gods People, in reference to their Dedication. from p. 197.
ad finem.
Second Part.
CHap. 1. Of Domestic Dedication in General. Some Things premised about it.
from p. 1. to 13. Chap. 2. The Nature of it opened in four Particulars. from p.
13. to p. 22. Chap. 3. The want of it bewailed. from p. 22. to p. 32. Chap. 4.
Domestic Dedication pressed more Generally. from p. 32. to p. 44. Chap. 5. The
Three first Branches of it urged. from p. 44. to p. 70. Chap. 6. The Third
Branch amplified in four Things. The First Particular enforced as to Religious
Members. from p. 70. to p. 83. Chap. 7. The Second Particular enforced
concerning the performance of Holy Duties in Families. from p. 83. to p. 135.
Chap. 8. The Third Particular enforced, (viz.) Religious Education and
Directions about it. from p. 135. to p. 220. Chap. 9. The Fourth Particular
enforced, to keep sin out of our Houses, and instead thereof to advance and
live Holiness. from p. 220. to 230. Chap. 10. The Last Branch of
House-Dedication urged. from p. 230. to p. 241. Chap. 11. The Conclusion of the
whole Discourse. p. 242. to the End.
ELENCHUS RERUM.
First Part.
THe Titles of the Psalms not to be neglected. Three Reasons given for this.
From p. 2. to p. 6. How Psalm and Song differ. p. 7. Of Dedication. p. 8. The
Words by which it is set forth. p. 9. It notes, 1. Initiation. 2. Restoration.
3. Setting apart or Entrance, by Religious Rites and Acts. 4. Consecration to
Holy Ends and Uses. These opened. from p. 10. to p. 14. Of the Dedication of
the Tabernacle, the Temple, the wall of Jerusalem, of Private Houses from p.
14. to p. 17. Whether the House ( which the Text speaks of) was David's Private
dwelling house? p. 17, 18, 19. When this Dedication of it was made by David? p.
19, 20. The Fathers Allegorical Glosses upon the Words. p. 21, 22.
Dedication-work done by the Heathens. p. 23. Dedication, Personal and
Domestic. Two Reasons why the former is here spoken to. p. 24, 25. A few
Scriptures mentioned, which speak the Thing, though Personal Dedication be not
Literally expressed in them. p. 26, 27. Personal Dedication explained in Six
Particulars: As it lies; 1. In the Actual Donation, or Giving of self to God.
2. In Self-surrender, or Self-Resignation to the will of God. 3. In firmness or
fixedness of Resolution for God. 4. In the setting apart of Self for God, and
in separation from the course of the world, and from everything that is against
God. 5. In Federal stipulation, or free and deliberat^^^ entering into Covenant
with God. 6. In a Persons addicting or devoting of Himself to the Glorifying of
God, as his supreme and ultimate End. p. 29.
The 1. of these opened. from p. 31. to p. 35. The 2. from p. 35. to p. 42. The
3. from p. 42. to p. 46. The 4. from p. 46. to p. 50. The 5. from p. 50. to p.
53. The 6. from p. 53. to p. 59. Use 1. Shows there are but few, who come up to
this Dedication; and this is lamented. from p. 59. to p. 66. Use 2. Enquiries
about it. from p. 66. to p. 75. Use 3. To exhort men to it. p. 75, etc. The
Exhortation pursued, 1. More generally, by 5. Motives. from p. 81. to p. 90. 2.
More Particularly in the several branches of it. The first Branch urged. from
p. 91. to p. 102. The second. from p. 102. to p. 126. The third. from p. 126.
to p. 134. The fourth. from p. 134. to p. 139. The fifth. from p. 139. to p.
155. The sixth. from p. 155. to p. 167.

Use 4. Directions given about it. p. 167, etc. 1. As to the Manner: It must
be, 1. Entire. from p. 167. to p. 179. 2. Constant. from p. 179. to p. 182. 3.
Free. from p. 182. to p. 184. 4. Speedy. from p. 185 to p. 188.
2. As to the Means. p. 188, etc. Three propounded, 1. Consideration. p. 189,
190. 2. Self-denial. p. 191, 192, 193, 194. 3. Prayer. p. 194, 195, 196.
Some things in special urged upon the people of God, with respect to their
Personal Dedication. p. 197, etc. As, 1. That they would often revive upon
their Thoughts their holy and solemn Dedication. p. 198, 199. 2. That they
would be true to it. p. 200. to p. 206. 3. That they would often Renew it. In
what Cases this is to be done, is shown. p. 206, 207, 208. 4. That they would
adore and admire the Goodness of God to them. p. 208, 209. 5. That they would
further this Personal Dedication in Others. p. 210, 211, 212. 6. That they
would take the Comfort of it as to Themselves. p. 213. ad fin^

Second Part.
THe Occasion of the penning this Discourse. p. 1, 2. Where the Person is
Dedicated, the House will be dedicated also. p. 3. Domestic Dedication a duty
incumbent upon All. p. 4, 5, 6, 7. Some things premised about it. from p. 7. to
p. 13. The Nature of it opened. p. 13. As it consists, 1. In a Religious
entrance upon Houses, by solem^ Prayer and Praise. 2. In an Humble Fiducial
Commitment of them to Gods Protection. 3. In the advancing of Religion in them.
4. In the devoting and improving of Domestic^ Mercies, to and for God.
Of the first of these. p. 14, 15, 16. Of the second. p. 16, 17, 18. Of the
third. p. 19, 20. Of the fourth. p. 21, 22. The want of Domestic Dedication
bewailed p. 22, etc 1. Amongst the Nobility and Gentry. p. 23. A^ humble
Application to Persons of that Rank about it p. 25, 26, 27. 2. Amongst
Countrymen. p. 28, 29. 3. Amongst Cizens. p. 30, 31.
Exhortation to it: ( more specially directed to the Citizens of London.) p.
32, etc. This pursued, 1. More Generally, by six Motives. from p. 35. to p. 44.
2. More Particularly: The 1. Branch urged. from p. 44. to p. 55 The 2. Branch.
from p. 55. to p. 60. The 3. Branch. from p. 60. Here, 1. The advancing of
Religion in Houses is enforced. from p. 60. to p. 70. 2. Four Directions
prosecuted about it.


Direction 1. As near as you can, take such into your Houses, who fear God, and
none but such. Of this, from p. 70. to p. 83. Dir. 2. Let God be worshipped,
and holy Duties be duly and daily performed in your Houses. p. 83, 84. As, 1.
Family Prayer. This urged, and 5. objections against it answered. from p. 84.
to p. 114. 2. Reading the holy Scriptures. from p. 115. to p. 123. 3. Singing
of Psalms. from p. 123. to p. 135.
Dir. 3. Let your Education of Children and others (under your Charge) be
Religious. p. 135, etc. Of Baptismal Dedication of Children in their
Infant-state. p. 136. to p. 140. Of Religious Education as they grow up. The
want of it lamented. p. 141, etc. Several Motives to further it. p. 144. to p.
160. Particular Directions about it. p. 160. to p. 220. Dir. 4. Keep sin out of
your Houses, and instead thereof let Holiness be there. p. 220: to p. 230. The
4. Branch. from p. 230. to p. 241. The Conclusion. from p. 242. to p. 252.
HOLY DEDICATION Opened and Applied.
The First Part.
PSALM 30. The Title of it. A Psalm and Song at the Dedication of the House of
David.


CHAP. 1. The Introduction: The words explained.
THis Psalm is (...) Psalmus praetitulatus; (so Divines call those, which have
Titles prefixed to them.) The Title thereof is that, upon which as the Basis or
Foundation, I intend to build this Discourse. There is sometimes that in the
Porch, before you enter the main and principal building, which may please and
profit a judicious Eye: Thus it is here; though the words I fix upon, be but a
bare Title, and so but as the porch or inlet into the Psalm it self; yet there
is that matter contained in them, which may be very useful, and may much
delight and profit a serious Christian. This I am sure of, they offer that,
which fully suits with my present design, and therefore here I will lay my
foundation.

Let me premise this, in General; the Titles of the Psalms are not to be
neglected, or slightly passed over; but but they are to be weighed and
considered, as well as the Psalm it self. Take three reasons to prove and back
this Assertion.

1. Because (according to the opinion generally received) they are of divine
inspiration; that spirit that dictated the Psalm, did dictate the Title also.
They are a part of the Scripture, and All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, 2 Timothy 3.16. In this blessed book of the Psalms, (which the Ancient
Fathers do very much magnify) there are the Contents (prefixed before them as
before other parts of Holy Writ) the Titles, the Psalm it self: The first are
confessedly of Man, merely of Humane invention and addition, (though I do not
deny the usefulness of them.) The two latter are of God, and have his stamp
upon them. And if so, then it is not without reason, that some have been
dissatisfied at the leaving out of these Titles, in some Editions of the Bible,
(as it is known they are;) for why should we lose any Iota or tittle of the word
of God? Some learned men conjecture, that the Psalms at the first penning of
them, were not put together, or put into that order wherein now we have them,
but that that was done afterward by Non est ignorandum, etc. -- Esdras ut
antiquae traditiones ferunt, in compositos eos, -- in unum volumen collegit and
retulit. Hilarious in Prolog. in Explan. Psalm. p. 334.
Ezra; and that he also (that the Church might be the better directed in the
use of them) set the Titles before them: Let this be granted, this makes not
against what here I have asserted, this Ezra being a Prophet, and
extraordinarily inspired in what he did.

2. Because they are of excellent use; for they are as a Quid est Titulus nisi
Clavis? Vt in domum non ingreditur nisi per clavem, ita and ut uniuscujusque
Psalmi intellectus per clavem (h. e.) per titulum intelligitur. Hieron. in
Proaem. ad Psalm. vid. Hilarium in Prologo in Psalm. explanat. p. 336. Quanquam
haec a nobis, etc.
key to open the whole Psalm; they contribute much light to the right
understanding of it. By the Significant Tituli aut rem gestam, quae carmini
dederit occasionem, aut Authorem, aut Argumentum, aut Genus carminis, aut
Musicum Instrumentum, aut Cantorem; aut horum modo plura, modo pauciora.
Castalio in Psalm. 4.
Titles we learn, who was the Author of it, when it was penned, upon what
occasion, what the drift and scope of it is; and the knowledge of these
conduces much to the clearing up of the Psalm it self. I am not willing to stay
upon this, otherwise it might easily be made out in several instances. Do but
take this very Title, which I have fixed upon; it shows, when the following
Psalm was composed, when it was used, upon what occasion; it was at the
Dedication of the House of David. And if you please to read it, you will find
it to be adapted and suited to such a time, and such an end; it consists of
Prayer and Praise; these two are intermingled through the whole Psalm (verse
1.) I will extol thee, O Lord, for thou have lifted me up, and have not made my
foes to rejoice over me: (verse 4.) Sing unto the Lord (O ye Saints) and give
thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness: (verse 11.) Thou have turned for me
my mourning into dancing, etc. To the end that my glory may sing praise to
thee, and not be silent; O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.
Here is praise. Verse 10. Hear O Lord, and have mercy upon me, Lord be thou my
helper. Here is prayer. And these were the two things, which were mainly used
in religious Dedications; and therefore though there be no literal or express
mention in the Psalm of Dedication, yet the matter of it is well enough suited
to the Title, it consisting of those two great things, which (I say) were most
in use in religious Dedications.

3. Because precious matter is often wrapped up in the very Title; taking it by
it self, apart from the body of the Psalm, before which it is placed. These are
not only as the key to open the Cabinet, but sometimes they are as the Cabinet
it self, in which many excellent and precious truths are locked up. The key
though it be made of iron, yet it is valued because of its use, (for the
iron-key will open the lock as well as any other:) But if it be made of gold,
then it is prized, not only for its use, but for its own intrinsic worth. It Is
thus in the Titles of the Psalms; and particularly in that which I am upon. It
speaks of House-dedication, that is an excellent subject, a very high and
weighty duty (as will hereafter appear.) This we learn out of it; out of this
Mine we dig this treasure: And in respect to this, the Jews in their dedicatory
Acts made use of it Ainsworth upon the words.
. So Maimonides tells us; who says, when the Israelites brought their baskets
of first fruits to the Sanctuary, and came thither in Companies, they sang by
the way the 122. Psalm; when they came to the Sanctuary, they sang the 150.
Psalm: and when they were come into the Courtyard, the Levites said this 30.
Psalm.

This I have premised, that I might both a little inform you as to the Titles
of the Psalms, and also that I might justify my self, in my grounding of the
ensuing discourse upon a bare Title. It will be convenient, before I come to
that which I aim at, to go over the words, and to give you the explication of
them, and that will take up some time.

They begin thus -- A Psalm and Song. The learned put a difference betwixt
these; Vid. Hilarium in Prol. in Explan. Psalm. p. 336. Psalmus est, cum, etc.
(...), and. Basil. in Psalm. 1. p. 160. Psalmus proprie est illud Carmen, quod
simul cum Psalterii instrumento suavi voce profertur; Ode seu Canticum vox
quaedam Musica est cum Harmonia solo ore prolata. Euthym. in Praef. ad Psalm.
they say they differ thus; when there was not only the voice but some Musical
instrument joined with it, then it was a Psalm; when there was only a voice
without any music, then it was a Song: when both went together, music and
voice, then it was a Psalm and Song. Nay Canticum Psalmi cum vox Humana
sequitur concentum Organi, Psalmus Cantici ubi contra. Hebraeorum Doctores
differentiae hujus rationem, se ignorare ingenue agnoscunt. Vaetabl. Where the
Musical instruments went before the voice, there 'tvvas a Psalm and Song:
Where the voices of men went before the Instruments, there a Song and Psalm:
But this observation concerning the different placing of the words, seems to
be a mere querk. English Annot.
some are so curious and critical, as to observe something from the Order; when
it is Psalm and Song, (as here, and Psalm. 65.) then the music went before the
voice; when it is Song and Psalm (as Psalm 60.) then the voice went before the
music. I assent to the difference put betwixt them. The Apostle brings them in
as distinct, Col. 3.16. (and he adds a third, viz. an Hymm.) But as to the
inferring of any thing from the order, that is a very nicety, a mere
speculation. But let this pass, I am not much concerned in this clause; that
which follows is that which I must abide upon.

( At the dedication of the House of David) Something here must be spoken, 1.
to the act, (Dedication) 2. to the object, or the Thing dedicated: (the House
of David.)

For the Act; doubtless this was no sinful, idolatrous, unwarrantable
dedication; but that rather which was lawful, nay religious and holy. You read
in Dan. 3.3. of a wicked, impious dedication: The Princes, the Governors, and
Captains, the Judges, the Treasurers, the Counselors, the Sheriffs, and all
the Rulers of the Provinces were gathered together, unto the [dedication] of
the Image, that Nebuchadnezzar the King had set up. This was very solemn, but
very sinful. After the dedication, then came the adoration (as you see verse
7.) -- But the dedication, which the Text speaks of, was of a quite other
nature; it was that which was done to the true God, in a right manner, upon
right ends; and so it was holy and praiseworthy.

It will be asked, what was this dedication that here David makes? wherein did
it consist? For answer to this, I shall not spend much time in the opening of
the word; which in the Hebr. is (...); from (...), which signifies to initiate
and dedicate -- The substantive is used, Nehem. 12.27. Numb. 7.10. the Verb in
several places -- The Greek word (which the LXX. use, and the Greek Fathers
generally) is (...) -- (which in sound as well as in sense, bears a great
vicinity to the Hebrew word) -- Joh. 10.22. you read of the Feast of the
dedication; there it is, ((...) --) But I told you I would not stay upon the
word, but rather come to the Thing.

Dedication then, (as it is applied to places or things) notes, 1. Initiation;
2. Restoration; 3. Setting apart, in a solemn manner, by some religious rites
and acts -- 4. Consecration, to holy ends and uses --
Each of these are included in dedication: And so when David is said to
dedicate his House, 'twas either his first entrance into it, or his restoring
of it to its first and primitive purity; or his setting of it apart, by
religious rites and acts; or his consecrating of it to holy ends and uses. To
open these briefly.

1. To dedicate a thing, it is to initiate it, to enter upon it, to take the
first possession of it -- Dedication (says Ainsworth) is then, when a new
thing is first employed, and put to that use for which it was made; as when a
man first enters upon his house, which he has either built or purchased, or
it is given to him, or descends to him, this is dedication. So it seems to be
taken, Deuteronomy. 20.5. What man is he that has built a new house, and has not
dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house, lest he dye in the battle,
and another man dedicate it -- (that is) enter upon it, and take possession of
it. This notion suits well enough with the word in the Original, (...),
Initiavit, dedicavit -- Aven. Pagn, etc. Bonae notae auctoribus, dedicare, idem
est, quod primum usurpare. Cocc. -- Tum homines initiare, (sive dedicare)
dicuntur domus, cum primum in eis, edere, bibere, and habitare incipiunt --
Hospin. de Orig. T^mpl. fol. 103. -- Encaenia, aedis sacrae initiationes
appellantur. Stuckius, Antiq. Conv. l. 1. c. 24, etc. An Encaenia purior sit
lectio, quippe (Suida interpret) sic dicebatur celebritas, quum novi quippiam
foret gestum. Cael. Rhodigni. lib. 22. c. 14. -- Suetonius speaking of Nero, of
that stately Palace which he had built, he adds, Ejusmodi domum cum absolutam
[dedicaret,] etc. (that is) First took possession of it -- lib. 6. c. 31. --
Dedicare non solum est (...), sed etiam auspicari usum alicujus rei -- Casaub.
Plin. ad Traj. Vel opus publicum [dedicant] (that is) enter upon public work
He that did first put on a new Garment, he was said, vestem encaniare, Aug.
in Joh. 10. Tract. 28. and lib. 7. in Joh. c. 9. --
which signifies to initiate, (as has been shown) and several learned men open
it by this; and so it is frequently used in Classical Authors. The meaning of
the words then is this; A Psalm and Song at the dedication of the House of
David; (that is) when David first entered upon his House, he made use of this
Psalm; or he penned this Psalm; for this use, and for this time, when he entered
upon his new habitation.

2. To dedicate, it is to restore a thing to its primitive use and purity. When
things were either not used at all, or abused, and turned to a wrong use, the
restoring of these to their proper use and purity, Encaeniorum nomen, Graecum
est, ab innovando deductum, quod res innovantur vel ex profano usu, vel ad eum
usum, in quem primitus erant institutae reducuntur. Hospin. de Orig. Fest.
Christian. f. 113. But Casaubone tells us, that the word, perpetuo apud 70.
Interpretes, and N. Testamenti auctores, de iis dicitur, quae Deo dedicantur,
and consecrantur; non quae obsoleta and abolita in usum revocantur.
was called dedication -- Thus the Temple was dedicated, by Judas Maccabaeus,
after Antiochus had so polluted it -- Thus David might dedicate his house,
after it had been so defiled by Absalom. But I shall have occasion to speak
more to this under the next head.

3. Dedication is the setting a thing or place apart, by some solemn and
religious rites and acts; or it is the entering upon the possession of a thing or
place, by some solemn, Dr. Hammond upon the Text. Dedicatio est initium
habitandi cum quadam solemnitate. Cajetan.
etc. -- Dedication is a solemn and religious entrance upon possession -- Thus
David dedicated his house, he entered upon it, by solemn prayer and praise, and
penned this Psalm, which is made up of these two, for this very end. This I
shall be large upon in the prosecution of this discourse.

4. Dedication is as much as Consecration. To dedicate a thing to God, it is to
consecrate it to holy ends and uses. Dedicated things were consecrated things;
for upon the dedication they became consecrated. See at your leisure, 1 Kings
13.13. 2 Samuel 8.11. 1 Chronicles. 18.11. -- The word which is rendered, by
dedication, (...).
Heb. 9.18. is rendered by consecration, Heb. 10.20. To dedicate the house then,
it is to consecrate it; what is that? to devote it to God, to set it apart for
God, and for holy uses, (for herein lies the nature of consecration:) It
reaches to persons, time, places, things. The Scripture speaks of the
Consecration of the Temple, (...) dicuntur, quae sacro usui veluti initiantur.
Beza in Joh. 10.22. Latini, Dedicationes and Consecrationes vocant, quod res ab
usu hominum prophano eximerentur, ut Deo usibusque sacris dedicarentur. Hospin.
de Orig. Fest. Christian. f. 115. Encaenia, A feast wherein something is
renewed; because those things only are reputed consecrated, which are
separated from their common use, and dedicated to some new and holy use --
Symps. Lexic. in D. 107. Godw. Jew. Antiq. l. 3. c. 11. -- The Lexicographers,
open Dedication, by (...), etc. Martin. Calcpin. etc. -- Tully puts
Consecration and Dedication together. Men's, Fides, Virtus, Concordia,
consecratae and public dedicatae sunt. De Mat. Deor. -- (...) dedicatio,
quando aliquid e censu rerum profanarum aut vulgarium eximitur, peculiaribusque
ceremoniis, consecratur Numini ad usus sacros. Geier. in Dan. 3.2. p. 241.
1 Kings 9.7. 2 Chronicles. 7.16, 20. of the Priests, Exodus 28.41. Exodus 29.22. 2 Chronicles. 26.18. of the sacrifices, 2 Chronicles. 29.33. of tithes, 2 Chronicles. 31.6.
Levit. 27.30. of houses, and fields, and of whatever was given to God, Levit.
27. (per tot.) of the Sabbath, the first fruits, etc. Wherein did the
consecration of all these lie? In their being set apart from common uses, and
in their being designed and destinated to holy ends and purposes. David's
dedication of his house, (in a great measure) came up to this; he consecrated
his house to and for God; and he resolved that his house should be Gods house;
where he dwelt God should dwell; his habitation should not be for sin, but for
piety and godliness: Thus he consecrated his house, and this was his dedication
of it. That I may not not be mistaken, I shall show you in what sense I speak
to the consecration of private houses, when I come to house-dedication.

Let this suffice for the nature of the act; I come to the object, or the thing
dedicated, that was David's house, (according to our reading of the words:) A
Psalm and Song at the dedication [of the house] of David. You find in Scripture
mention made of the dedication of several things and places -- The Tabernacle
(that Templum deambulatorium, August. calls it.
moving Temple, the seat of worship, till the erecting of the Temple) was
anointed and sanctified, that, and all the instruments thereof, the Altar and
the vessels thereof, Numb. 7.1. And of the Altar, it is said, ( verse 10.11.)
The Princes offered for dedicating of the altar, etc. They shall offer their
offering, each Prince on his day, for the dedicating of the altar -- (verse
84.) This was the dedication of the altar, (in the day when it was anointed,)
etc. (verse 88.) This was the dedication of the altar, after it was anointed --
The Temple, that was dedicated; and this passed under a three fold dedication
-- The first was, 2 Chronicles. 7.5.
at the first building of it by Solomon, 1 Kings 8.63. So the King and all the
children of Israel dedicated the house of the Lord. The second was, at the
rebuilding of it by Zorababel, and the rest, after the return out of captivity,
Ezra 6.16. And the children of Israel, the Priests and the Levites, and the
rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication of this house of God
with joy. The third was in the time of Judas Maccabaeus, after Antiochus had so
polluted and profaned it; (for he had set up the image of Jupiter in it,
destroyed the holy oil and the vessels thereof, committed horrid indignities
in it:) Three years after this, Of this vid. Joseph. Antiquit. Jud. l. 12. c.
11. -- I say, three years after, etc. (...) -- Joseph. ibid. -- Encaeniorum,
sive repurgarionum festivitates atque epulas, quae in Templi, quod Antiochus
polluerat, recuperati atque repurgati memoriam, agitatae fuerunt die 25. mensis
Cisleu, qui partim Novembri, partim Decembri nostro respondet. Stuck. Antiq.
Conviv. l. 1. c. 33. -- Bux-torf. Synag. Iud. c. 23. Hospin. de Orig. Templ. f.
103. -- The Feast of Dedication was a yearly festival, appointed by Judas
Maccabaeus, to be observed in the space of eight days, from the 25. etc. The
reason of this feast was to remember Gods mercy in delivering them from
Antiochus, who had set up the Idol of Jupiter in the Temple of God, and
abolished the true worship of God -- Godw. I^w. Antiq. l. 3. c. ult. --
Judas Maccabaeus being victorious over Antiochus, comes and dedicates the
Temple again, purges it from its defilements, and restores it to its former
use: the History of this you have, 1 Maccab. 4.36, 52, 53, 54, 56, 59. To this
dedication, the most of Divines refer those words, Ioh. 10.22. And it was at
Jerusalem, the feast of the dedication, and it was winter.

Besides the dedication of these places, which were impropriated to the worship
of God; you read of the dedication of common places. As of the wall at
Jerusalem, Nehem. 12.27. And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, they
sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, to keep
the dedication with gladness, etc. Of private houses, Deuteronomy. 20.5. And here it is
said, At the dedication of the house of David.

But Expositors do not agree in their interpretations concerning this house;
many will not have it to be understood of David's private house; Vid. Lorin. in
loc.
some make it to be the Tabernacle, into which David brought the Ark, when he
fetched it from the house of Obed Edom, 2 Samuel 6.12, etc. At that time they say
David penned this 30. Psalm: but this is only asserted not proved. It Is very
probable that the 68. Psalm was penned upon this occasion, but as to this we
have no such probability. Some make it to be the Temple; the Chaldee reads the
words thus, For the dedication of the house of the Sanctuary, an hymn of David.
In dedicatione domus, (i. e.) Templi, licet non sit mentio Templi: At the
dedication of the house, that is, of the Temple, though the Temple be not
mentioned: (says R. David) and most of the Jewish Interpreters go this way:
almost all of them understand by the dedication of the house, the dedication of
the Temple (as a Hebraei fere omnes, per Dedicationem domus, intelligunt
Dedicationem Templi. Muis in loc.
learned Expositor observes.)

The best and the most judicious Interpreters carry the words to David's private
house; to his ordinary dwelling house.

1. Because it is expressly said, ( at the dedication of the house of David) it is
not at the dedication of the house of God, but at the dedication of the house
of David. Thus the words run in the (...):
Hebrew, thus the -- (...) --
LXX render them: the Psalmus Cantici Dedicationis domus ipsius David. --
Lorin, in loc. Quae verba indicant ipsiusmet Davidis domum, non autem Dei, etc.
-- To evade the strength of this, Eugubinus and Genebrard bring in David in the
front of the Title -- reading the words thus -- A Psalm and Song of David, at
the dedication of the House. And Muis vvarns the Reader, by no means to join
David with House, but with Psalm and Song -- Cave referas (...) David, ad
nomen vox praecedens Domus, sed ad (...) Psalmus Cantici -- And his opinion as
to the words is very strange -- Venit mihi in mentem suspicari, Psalmum
Cantici Dedicationis Domus, nihil aliud esse, quam Psalmum decantandum, eo
Cantici and Musicae genere, cujus usus esset in Dedicatione Domus; vel iis
Instrumentis Musicis, quorum in eo festo usus esset -- Herein he is singular --
To evade the strength of the second reason, the Jevvish Doctors say, that this
was done by way of Prolepsis or anticipation -- The Temple was not yet
built, but David knevv by the message God sent him, it should be built in his
Sons Time; upon this he composed this Psalm, and ordered his Son, when the
work should be done, to make use of this Psalm, at the dedication of it. So
Kimchi, etc. But Aben Ezra understands it of David's private House.
Translation of the Aethiopick version is very express: (and much more might be
added upon this, if it was needful.)

2. It cannot be understood of the Temple, because in David's time that was not
built; he was dead before the Temple was built; it was in his heart to build an
house to God; it troubled him to dwell in an house of Cedar, when the ark of
God dwelt in Curtains, 2 Samuel 7.2. but God told him, he was a man of blood, and
he should not do it, but his Son should, 2 Samuel 7.13. He shall build an house
for my name, and I will establish the throne of his Kingdom for ever, etc. How
then can we suppose, that David should pen a Psalm for the dedication of that
which was not (as yet) in being.

This being concluded upon, that this House was David's private house, there is
another difficulty yet remaining, and that is, where to fasten this dedication;
to what especial time does it refer? when was it that David did thus dedicate
his House? Sic and David cum in Jerusalem novam aedificavit domum, etc.
Munster. Thus Apollinarius glosses upon the words -- (...), etc. (...) -- Thus
my reverend and worthy Friend (now with God) Mr. A. Jackson. Qualis fuit
illa dedicatio Fuit solennis consecratio propugnaculi Zionis, quod bactenus
Jebusitae tenuerant, and idololatriae culin faedaverant. Freid. lib. -- Vid.
Dr. Hamm. in loc.
some say this was done at the first building of his house, of which you read,
2 Samuel 5.11. He goes to Jerusalem, conquers the Jebusites, takes the strong
hold of Zion, Israel come in to him, and own him for their King; so he builds
him an house: (as there you may see.) -- Probabile est, Davidem hunc Psalmum
edidisse, quam in urbem regressus, domum suam incestu filii and aliis
sceleribus pollutam, vellet repurgare, and Deo quasi de integro consecrare.
Beza. Ideo de novo dedicabat, quia eum Absalom, foedissime incestis stupris
polluerat, Scultet. Cum David domum suam ab Absalomo faedatam repurgavit --
Grot. Calv. Iun. and Trem. Piscat. Fabric. Deodale, Lorin. all go this way,
and pitch upon this time. And the matter of the Psalm, and several expressions
in it, seem most to favor this interpretation, (as they tell us.)
Others say this was done when David returned to his House, after the rebellion
of his son Absalom, 2 Samuel 20.3. And David came to his house at Jerusalem; and
the King, etc. In the time of David's absence, his wicked Son had sadly defiled
his house, by incest and all manner of wickedness. Holy David, when he comes to
it again, oh, his House must be purged, cleansed from these horrid defilements;
and therefore he makes a fresh dedication of it to God. The most of
Interpreters fall in with this period of time; now was the dedication, which
the Text speaks of. I shall not be peremptory in fixing it, either here or
there, both will serve for my purpose, such a thing was done, David's house was
dedicated, though I cannot be positive as to the time, when in special this was
done.

I have done with the opening of the words, as to the act and object of it. And
by what I have laid down, I hope, the sense and meaning of them is sufficiently
cleared up. Yet before I conclude this, I cannot but set down some of the
Ancients Interpretations upon them. The Fathers generally do put a mystical and
Allegorical sense upon them. Thus Dedicatio domus David, resurrectio Salvatoris
intelligitur, in qua omnia corpora vitae dedicantur. David figuram Christi
tenet; domus David, domus Christi, (i.e.) Humanitas domus est Divinitatis. Tunc
aedificavit domum, quando Humanitatem carnis assumpsit; and tunc dedicavit,
quando a mortuis eam resurgere fecit. Et modo aedificatur domus David, i. e.
Christi, h. e. Ecclesia, usque in finem aedificatur, sed in resurrectione
dedicatur; quando immort alitatem acceptura est. Vocem redemptoris nostri
continet, qui perresurrectionem corporis sui, Ecclesiam (quae omnium matter est)
acquisitam, suo nomini dedicavit. Hieron. in Comment. ad Psalm. ( If he was
the Author of them, which Erasmus and Amorbachius deny.)
Hierome, The dedication of the house of David, is the resurrection of our
Savior, by which all our bodies are dedicated to life. David is a Type of
Christ; the house of David is the house of Christ, (that is) the humanity is
the house of divinity: then Christ built the house, when he took our flesh upon
him, then he dedicated it, when he raised it up from the dead: And now the
house of David, (that is) of Christ, is built, namely the Church; it is building
to the end, but at the resurrection it is dedicated, when it shall enter upon
immortality. [The Title] contains in it the voice of Christ, who by the
resurrection of his body, has dedicated the Church (the Mother of us all) to
his own name and glory. Thus August, Psalmus laetitiae resurrectionis, atque in
immortalem statum mutationis, atque innovationis corporis, etc. Nam superiori
Psalmo. Tabernaculum consummatum est, ubi habitamus belli tempore, nunc autem
domus dedicatur, quae in sempiternum pace permanebit -- Aug. in Psalm. t. 8.
A Psalm of joy upon the resurrection, and the changing of our bodies into an
immortal state; in the Psalm foregoing, the Tabernacle is finished, where we
live in the time of war. Here the house is dedicated, which shall abide in
everlasting peace. Thus Theodoret, (...). Theoder. 1.1. P. 504.
He calls (says he) the dedication of the house, the restoration of the Humane
Nature, which Christ perfected, when he died for us, and overcame death, and
gave us the hope of resurrection. Thus Cyrill, Nyssene, Basil do also
Allegorize upon the words; I will not further recite their words; for I shall
crave leave (with all submission to so great persons) rather to embrace and
pursue the literal, than the mystical and Allegorical sense.

And that leads me to speak of house-dedication, such as this of holy David
was. The poor Heathens had some blind notions of dedication-work; hence they
had their solemn days, which they dedicated to their Gods; their Temples, which
were for their Idolatrous worship, they were dedicated: their private houses
also passed under some kind of dedication; Multa alia sacrificia, locdque
sacris faciendis dedicavi. Live. 1. ab urbe -- Vid. 34. ab urbe, c. 52. Templum
pecunia mea extruxi, cujus dedicationem cum sit paratum, differ longius,
irreligiosum est. Plin. Ep. lib. 4. and passim -- of the dedication of private
Houses, see many things in Tull. Or at. pro domo sua (versus finem.)
but what was this to the dedication that David here makes, and to what others
of the people of God make in imitation of his example: this does not lie in
some foolish Rites and Ceremonies, (which was all the dedication of the poor
Heathens,) but it is an holy, solemn, religious dedication; (as will appear in
that which follows.)

CHAP. 2. Dedication Personal or Domestic: The former opened.
THese things being premised, in order to the Explication of the words, I shall
now fasten upon that which I design from them, (viz.) a little to treat of holy
dedication. Now this is twofold, personal and domestic; there is the dedicating
of a man's self to God, and the dedicating of a man's house to God. I know other
branches might be assigned, but these two wili be as much as I shall be able to
grasp, and therefore I name no more. And (in strictness of method) I should
only speak to domestic or house-dedication; (for the words only mention that)
but I shall desire the Readers pardon in the handling of personal and
self-dedication also. The excellency of the subject will be some Apology for
the violation of the strict rules of method. And indeed it is necessary that I
should speak to this, (before I come to the other) 1. because self-dedication
is the ground of house-dedication: I take this for an unquestionable maxim,
That he who does not dedicate himself to God, will never dedicate his house to
God; it is certain the dedication of the House, must begin with the dedication
of the Person. 2. Suppose a man should dedicate his House, (which yet cannot
well be imagined) yet if he does not dedicate himself, this would not profit
him; (as to Gods acceptance, and his own salvation:) Let him enter upon his
habitation in a religious manner, by prayer and praise, and let him set up the
worship of God in his Family, and make conscience of all religious exercises;
if withal he does not devote and dedicate his Person to God, he is but a gilded
hypocrite in Gods account, 1 Cor. 13.1. 2 Cor. 5.9. Heb. 6.9.
but as sounding brass or a tinkling Gimbal. So that that you may be accepted
of the Lord, and that you may come up to the (...), the things that have
salvation; it is necessary that I should urge upon you personal as well as
domestic dedication. The Text speaks of David's dedicating his House; else
where you find him dedicating his self to God. Psalm. 119.38. Stablish thy word
unto thy servant, who is devoted (so we fill it up in our translation) to thy
fear. (Verse 94.) I am thine, save me. Thine, not only as to Gods claim and
special interest in him, but also as to his own act of dedication; he had
solemnly dedicated himself to God, and so he was his. So (verse 25.) I am thy
servant, give me understanding that I may know thy testimonies. It Is as if he
had said, Blessed God, I have given up my self to thy service; let me but know
thy will and pleasure, and I will do it, for I have dedicated my self to thee.
I pass by other Scriptures that might be cited for this purpose.

I shall begin with this personal dedication, which is a great duty, and indeed
the great duty lying upon every man. You have it not, in so many letters and
syllables commanded or commended in the word; but you have the thing, or that
which is equivalent, very often; 2 Chronicles. 29.31. Now ye have consecrated your
selves unto the Lord, come near and bring sacrifices, Romans 12.1. I beseech you
brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. This,
in effect, Nihil est aliud quod dicit, corpora vestra, quam vos ipsos. Muscul.
is personal dedication; by Bodies, the Apostle means the whole Person; ('it is a
Synecdoche usual both amongst Jews and Greeks:) as in the following Chap. (
verse 1.) by soul he understands the person; so here by bodies he aims at the
same thing.

He alludes to the legal sacrifices, which believers under the Gospel must
exceed; then God took up with the bodies of Beasts that were sacrificed to him;
but now he will have the Saints to offer up themselves; then a dead sacrifice
was accepted, but now God stands upon living sacrifices: But ( I say) this
presenting of our bodies, Poter at propriis verbis dicere Rogo ut vos vitamque
vestram Deo consecretis -- Pareas. -- Vt nos Deo tetos ad ipsius voluntatem
dedamus. Muscul.
it is the dedicating or consecrating of the whole self to God. (So Pareus.) The
Apostle (says he) might have said plainly, I beseech you, that you will
consecrate your selves and your life to God. And (Musculus) the meaning of the
words is this, That we should give up our whole selves to the will of God: and
all Expositors speak to the same purpose.

That I may bring my discourse of this personal dedication, into as narrow a
compass as may be, I will do but two things: 1. Open the Nature of it: 2. Make
some plain and practical improvement of it.


For the Nature of it: If I would give the most exact and accurate explication
of it, then I should describe it, by opening, 1. The terminus ad quem, the
person to whom this dedication is made, namely God; considered in his Nature,
in the Relations wherein he stands to us, as our Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier;
as our Owner to dispose of us, our Ruler to govern us; as our chief good, in
whom our true and highest felicity does consist; as our Benefactor efficiently,
and finally as our end. 2. The matter of it, or the thing dedicated, and that
is, our selves, our persons, possessions, etc. whatever we are or have. 3. The
act of dedication, considered, 1. In its self, 2. In its properties or
qualifications: In it self, as it implies, 1. Resignation to God our owner, to
be disposed of by him. 2. Subjection to God our Ruler to obey him. 3. Firm
adherence to God, as our chief good, to thank him, to glorify, love and please
him.


In its properties; as 1. its sincerity, heartiness and unreservedness. 2. Its
intenseness, resolvedness. 3. Its integrity, as to all our powers and
possessions. 4. Its freeness and voluntariness.


I say, these are the several things that I should speak to, in the exact
opening of self-dedication: but because a shorter way may be more plain and
obvious to the most capacities, I shall rather choose to open it in these six
particulars. As it lies, 1. In the actual donation, and giving (or giving up)
of Self to God. 2. In Self-surrender, or Self-resignation to the will of God.
3. In firmness and fixedness of Resolution for God. 4. In the setting apart of
Self for God, and in separating from the course of the world, and from whatever
is against God. 5. In federal stipulation, or free and deliberate entering into
covenant with God. 6. In a persons addicting or devoting of himself, to the
glorifying of God, as his supreme and ultimate end.


All these are contained in self-dedication. Possibly some severe Methodist,
will not so well be satisfied with the enumeration of these Heads: the truth
is, it is the first thing ( viz. the giving of Self to God, that is the formalis
ratio, or the essential Act of personal dedication:) And all the other come in,
but as so many species under this Genus, or as so many several Branches
contained in this main Act. Yet for all this, I rather fix upon the method
propounded, because it is more easy and express. And I desire the judicious
Reader not to misunderstand me: When I instance in these six Particulars, (as
making up Personal dedication,) I do not lay them down, as so many Heads really
distinct, or really differing the one from the other, (if they be strictly
weighed, possibly some of them may be a little co-incident:) Nor do I propose
them, as being all of them the essential constitutive parts of this dedication
(for some of them are rather Adjuncts, or Modes, or Consequents, then Essential
parts:) I only make use of them, as so many explications or illustrations of
the duty in hand; and if the Heads (generally propounded) seem to be
co-incident, yet in the enlargements upon them, I shall pursue different
notions. I come to the particular and distinct opening of them.

1. Self-dedication, it is the actual giving or donation of a man's self to God.
Then a person may be said to dedicate himself to God, when he gives himself to
God; when he does (as it were) by a deed of gift, make over himself and his All
to God. Things dedicated in the time of the Law, (from whence we must borrow
our light, as to the true notion of Gospel-dedication) they were given to God;
there was in them an alienation of the property; the right was passed over from
the Owner, and God himself was made the Proprietary: Thus it is here in personal
dedication. O the poor creature, whatever his self. is, he entirely makes it
over to God. He goes to God, and says, Lord, here I tender my self to thee,
such as it is, if thou will please to accept of it; Lord, I am thine; not my
own, but thine; thou have a greater right to me, than I have or can have to my
self; and I own it, and therefore whatever I am, whatever I have, I give it all
to thee; take me, and make the best of me, for I am thine. This is personal
dedication. An instance of which the Apostle gives us, 2 Cor. 8.5. He speaks of
the Macedonians, Multo amplius, quam sperare audebamus. Erasm. -- Illi
superaverunt ejus expectationem, quia non suas tantum facultates habuerunt
exposit^s, sed seipsos impendere parati fuerunt. Calv.
and he says this of them; This they did, not as we hoped, (that is, they did
more then what we hoped for, they exceeded our hopes and expectations;
wherein?). First they gave their own selves to the Lord, and (then) unto us by
the will of God. This is a very great expression, an high commendation; the
Apostle puts a great emphasis upon it; they gave themselves, their own selves
to the Lord; their giving of some part of their estates toward the relief of
the poor Saints at Jerusalem, that was very well, (especially considering the
Macedonians were low enough themselves) but this was not all, there was
something higher than this, they gave themselves to the Lord. A man's self is a
great deal more then his estate, (especially then some part of it;) this was
that which was given by these believers. Photius (as he is cited by Oecumenius)
observes six things, (...), etc. Oecum. in loc.
which were highly commendable in these Macedonians; 1. They gave according to
their power. Nay, 2. They went beyond their power; (their charity was larger
then their ability.) 3. They were free to all this: (verse 3.) for to their
power, (I bear record) yea and beyond their power, they were willing of
themselves. 4. They were very earnest with Paul, that he would receive their
gift, and take upon him the fellowship of ministering to the Saints. (Verse 4.)
5. They went beyond what was expected from them. (...).
6. (which (says he) was the highest of all,) They gave themselves unto the
Lord.
What could they do more, then this? There could not be an higher expression of
their love to God, then to give themselves to him. Grotius in his exposition of
the words, Non solum res suas, sed semetipsos de derunt Domino, quasi
sacrificium immaculatum. Anselm, etc. Declarantes se totos esse Christi -- Est.
Haec est causa, cur super vires liberales fuerint Macedones, quia non sua
tantum, sed semetipses primum totos Domino consecraverunt. Jac. Capell. Adeo
fuit eorum voluntas ad pietatem propensa, ut non modo bona sua liberaliter ad
alendos pauperes effunderent, sed seipsos totos Deo dicarent. Justin. Non bona
tantum sua, sed and de numero suo polliciti sunt, se daturos, qui Corinthum
i^ent. Grot. So Dr. Hammond. And Calvines words (cited above) may also be
carried this way.


does much diminish and lessen this act; for he makes it to be but this; the
Macedonians did not only give their own Alms and benevolence, but they promised
to send some of their Body to the Corinthians, to stir them up to the same
liberality. This I judge to be a very cold and frigid interpretation, put upon
this glorious carriage of these persons: O that we had many of this Temper!
that the world might be full of such persons, that did give their own selves to
the Lord. This is rather paying a debt, then giving a gift, for we all owe our
selves to the Lord; and how do we gain by this giving; He loses nothing that
gives his All to God; God will return it him with advantage. But I will not
mingle the Applicatory and the Explicatory part together.

2. Self-dedication consists in self-surrender, or self-resignation to the will
of God. When I give my self to God, this speaks my due sense of his right to
me, and propriety in me; when I surrender my self to his will, this speaks my
due sense of his sovereignty and dominion over me. I give my self to God, to be
used, employed by him; I resign up my self to God, to be ruled, ordered,
disposed by him. In giving my self to God, I eye him as my Creator, Preserver,
Redeemer: In surrendering my self to his will, I eye him as my Legislator and
Sovereign. The latter follows upon the former; having given up my self to God,
I am now his; he may now do with me what he pleases, for Dominium transit cum
re, etc. (as the Lawyers tell us:) and upon this, I must surrender up my self
to his will. This (I say) is part of self-dedication.

Now this will of God, Divines distinguish into his Preceptive, and into his
Providential will. The Preceptive will of God is that, wherein he reveals and
enjoins our duty: The Providential will of God, is that, wherein he orders our
condition. The Preceptive will refers to what God will have us to do; the
Providential will refers to what God himself is pleased to do. When the Soul is
brought over to this twofold will of God, so, as to act subjection to the one,
and submission to the other, this is self-dedication.

1. It lies in subjection to Gods Preceptive will. This subjection is our
dedication; when we lie at Gods feet, study his will revealed in the word, and
resign up our selves to it, yield obedience to his commands, do not oppose or
quarrel at any thing that he enjoins; 1 Samuel 3.10. Acts 9 6.
but say, Speak Lord, thy servant hears; what will thou have us to do? What
thou will have us to do, that we will do, what thou will have us not to do,
that we will not do; when we once come to speak this heartily, so to speak and
so to do, then we have dedicated our selves to God. No subjection, no
dedication, the sinner has no further dedicated himself to God, then as he
lives in a blessed conformity and subjection to his will, and wholly resigns up
himself to it, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Be not stiff-necked as your fathers were, but
yield your selves unto the Lord: It Is an allusion to Servants, when they enter
into their Masters service, they yield themselves up to them, (in all lawful
things) to be subject to their will and commands; and so they may be said to
have dedicated themselves to them. So here, Yield your selves unto the Lord,
Romans 6.16. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, etc. And (verse 19.) As ye have yielded your
members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity, even so now
yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness. Oh, when men are
brought to this, to yield themselves to God, to be his servants, to be obedient
to his will, then self-dedication is arrived at. The Apostle exhorting to this
very thing, Romans 12.1. (as has been hinted) he sets it forth, by presenting
our bodies to God; now that ( Significat plusquam astare, praesto scilicet
semper, and paratum alicui assistere, ad mandata ejus excipienda and obeunda.
Gagn. vid. Steph. in Verb.
(...)) is as much as to live ad nutum Dei, to be at Gods beck and call,
readily to be ordered by his will. If this word will not prove that which I aim
at, that which follows will; having spoke of personal dedication, ( verse 1.)
he presently subjoyns, ( verse 2.) Be not conformed to this world, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good
and acceptable and perfect will of God. Then we have dedicated our selves to
God, when we do not symbolize, agree with the carnal world, but (upon
transformation and renovation going before) we do observe, approve of, and obey
the good will of God; when we say to God, as the Son to his Father; Tibi Pater
me dedo, quidvis oneris impone, impera. (Terent.) I give my self to thee; lay
on what thou please, I will bear it, enjoin what thou will, I will do it.
Till a man be brought out of the Natural state, he can never come to this; for,
The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7. Till there be conversion, there cannot be
subjection to Gods will; and till there be this subjection, there is no
self-dedication. Unless the heart be framed to this, it is a certain evidence of
Non-dedication. You know the will of God, you read it, you hear it, it is urged
upon you from time to time, but yet you will not be obedient to it, surely self
is not yet devoted to God.

2. It lies in submission to Gods providential will. This submission, points,
See the Whole Duty of Man. Part. 2. p 31. etc.
either to what is past or present, or to what is future and to come. Our
submission as to what is past or present, consists in the exercise of Patience,
under all the Lords dispensations: Our submission as to what is to come,
consists in our quiet, sedate, composed referring our selves to Gods wise
dispose; as believing, that he knows what is best, and will do nothing, but
what shall be for the best. These two are distinct, and I shall speak to them
as so, when I come to the use; here I will only touch upon submission to the
Providential will of God in general. A Christians self-dedication lies very
much in this; when I dedicate my self to God, I do either implicitly or
expressly say this, Lord, here I am, I throw my self down before thee, I resign
up my self to thee, do with me what seems good unto thee; not my will, but thy
will be done. Let my work be what it will, I Will submit: Let my rank and station
be what it will, I Will submit. Let my condition be what it will, I Will submit; Be
it health or sickness, fullness or want, relations or no relations, mercy or
affliction, this or that, I Will submit; I say, this we do in effect speak,
whenever we enter upon this dedication; and without this, either we are not
true in our dedication, or not true to our dedication. O the blessed examples
that we have in the word, of the excellent carriage of dedicated persons, in
this particular; (if the Lord would help us, who profess the same dedication,
to practice the same submission,) what a dreadful message was sent to good old
Eli? 1 Samuel 3.18.
but (says he) It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. What grievous
trials did holy Quanta adversus eum jacula missa? Quanta admota tormenta?
Iaclur a rei familla^ is infligitur, numerosae sobolis orbitas irrogatur, etc.
Nec Dcminus repent nec Paterest. Accedit vulnerum vastitas, etc. Nec tamen Job
gravibus and densi^ conflictationibus frangitur, quo minus inter illas
anguscias, and pressur as suas Dei benedictio victrice patientia praedicetur.
Cvpr de Bono Patient. -- Nihil in dcmo remanserat, etc. Certe pauper est, certe
nihil haber; si nihil remansit, de quo thesauro istae gemmae laudis Dei
proferuntur. O virum putrem and integram! O foedum and pulchrum, etc. Aug.
Sermon. 105. de Temp.
Job undergo? but how submissively, nay, how thankfully did he carry it. Job
1.21.
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
David had his smarting afflictions too; Psalm. 39 9.
but (says he) I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord did
it. When he fled from Absalom, 2 Samuel 15 25, 26.
he was in great straits; but, though his son rebels against him, he quietly
refers himself to God. And the King said unto Zadok, carry back the Ark of God
into the City; if I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and show me both it and his habitation; but if he thus say, I have no
delight in thee, (a sad word for God to speak; if he speaks this word, will not
David fret and murmur? O no,) Behold here am I, let him do to me as seems
good unto him. Isa 39. ult.
'Twas a dismal message, that the Prophet brought to Hezekiah; but he receives
it with much calmness; Good is the word of the Lord, which thou have spoken.
The highest of all was our precious Lord and Savior; 'twas a bitter Cup
indeed, that he was to drink of; and he prayed earnestly to be freed from it,
Matthew. 26.39.
Father if it be possible, etc. yet he submits his will to his Fathers will;
Nevertheless not my will, but thy will be done. Here are excellent copies, God
enables us to write after them. To close up this Head; subjection to Gods
preceptive will, submission to his providential will, are great ingredients
into self-dedication. Do you say to God, with respect to his preceptive will, 2
Kings 10.5.
what once the rulers of Jezreel, and the Elders said to Jehu? We are thy
servants, and will do all that thou shall bid us. And do you also say to God,
with respect to his providential will, what once Hezekiah said to the King of
Assyria? 2 Kings 18.14.
What thou put upon me I will bear: If this be the frame of your souls,
then surely you are sincere in your self-dedication; and know what it is to be
a people dedicated to God, and are not now to enter upon this great work.

3. Self-dedication, is the firmness and fixedness of resolution for God and
his ways. This act of the will is essentially requisite to it; the dedication
is false, when the resolution is not firm; when the soul is once come to this,
to be fixed, resolved for God, and holiness, against sin, the world, the flesh,
and all opposers, there is the truth of dedication. That subjection, (which I
spoke to under the former Head) is indeed the act of the will, and that is very
good; but that is not enough, there must be resolution also; here the will is
peremptory, here it acts with the greatest intenseness and vehemence; and this
is brought about by the understanding, this is the leading faculty; it lays
before the will such and such dictates, then the will resolves; O says the
understanding, God is good; then says the will, I Will love him, cleave to him,
pursue after him, never forsake him: The ways of God are good; then says the
will, I Will walk in them, and I will not depart from them; sin is evil, then
says the will, I Will shun it, I Will have nothing to do with it; (and so in other
things:) the intellective faculty presents its dictates, then the will frames
its practical and peremptory decrees: Now I say, this is our dedication to God,
when the will thus resolves for God; when we are set for God, and duty never to
be altered; our hearts are fixed, (as David said his was, Psalm. 57.7.
) let Satan and the world do what they can, to take us off from an holy God and
an holy course, yet they shall not do it; O happy souls, with whom it is thus!
Self-dedication makes a person unmovable; 1 Cor. 13.58.
he is not to be altered, his purpose and resolution is so high. Ruth would not
leave her mother Naomi, Ruth. 1.14, 16, 17.
whatever came on it; Orpah was soon taken off, she kisses her mother, and parts
from her, but Ruth clave to her; O says she, Entreat me not to leave thee,
whither thou go I will go, where thou lodgest I will lodge, where thou die
I will die, etc. All the Kings dainties were nothing to Daniel; Dan. 1.8.
He had purposed in his heart, that he would not defile himself with the
portion of the Kings meat, etc. Thus it is with a man, as to God and Christ and
godliness, when he has sincerely dedicated himself to God. Self-dedication is
always attended with firmness of resolution; nay indeed the very essence of it
lies in this. I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. Psalm. 17.3.
Psalm. 119.8, 106.
I will keep thy statutes, I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will
keep thy righteous judgments. Moses had dedicated himself to Christ, Hebr.
11.24, 26.
and therefore he was resolved for Christ; He refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches, than the
treasures in Egypt. All this is come upon us, Psalm. 44.17.
yet have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant. Here was
resolution; and where that is not, in opposition both to suspensiveness within,
and to Apostasy without, there is no self-dedication. Here dedicating work
begins, and it holds on with this to the end. Oh, this is the language of such
as are upright in it; when we first owned God, and closed with him, we weighed
and considered what we did, we traversed things to and fro, after mature and
serious deliberation, and casting up all accounts, we gave our selves to God,
and chose to walk in his ways; and we see nothing of weight to make us alter
our choice; no, we are confirmed in it more and more, and like it better every
day then other; we have chosen the way of truth, Psalm. 119.30, 31.
and we will stick to it; let us be hated, derided, reproached, persecuted, all
this shall not make us change our course, or alter our choice; here, here is
that precious, excellent, self-dedication which I am speaking of. O that it was
as easy to live it, and act it, as it is to describe it, and to talk or write
of it.

4. Self-dedication lies, in a man's setting of himself apart for God, and
separating from the course of the world. The Nature of dedication (or
consecration) consisted in the separation or setting apart of persons, places,
things, from common ends and uses, for holy ends and uses: (This I spoke
something to, when I was upon the opening of the words.) The Priests under the
Law, they were separated from other men, and from common employments, and
devoted to the worship of God. And the Levites also, they were thus set apart,
Numb. 16.9. Numb. 8.11. And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord. (So
we read it, but in the Hebrew it is wave or separate: and therefore the LXX.
render the word by (...)) in allusion to this, and also to the Theruma or
heave offering in the time of the Law, (which the Greeks set forth by (...),)
the Apostles and Gospel Ministers are said to be separated; and the same word
is used with respect to them; Acts 13.2. Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the
work whereunto I have called them. It Is ((...)) And Paul speaking of himself,
says, he was ((...)) separated unto the Gospel of God, Romans 1.1. I might (to
the same effect) insist upon holy time, holy places, and holy things; the
holiness of all which did lie in their separation; in opposition to which, that
is said to be common or unholy, which was not separated from common uses;
(...), Heb. 10.29. is translated [unholy] (but I will not stay upon this.) Now
to my present purpose; self-dedication is, when a person carries it as one, who
is separated or set apart for God; or as one, who in his life and conversation,
sets himself apart for holy ends and purposes. This setting apart, is either
Gods Act or our Act; as it is Gods Act, you find it in Psalm 4.4. Know that the
Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself. The words primarily refer to
the person of David, whom God had designed to, and set apart for the Kingdom:
but secondarily they are applicable to all the people of God: the Saints are a
people whom God has separated, called out of the world, set apart for himself,
Is. 43.21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my
praise. Thus the people of Israel, (upon Gods special favors indulged to them)
they are said to be separated by God, to be a special, peculiar people to him;
as you may see, 1 Kings 8.53. Deuteronomy. 7.6. Deuteronomy. 14.2. Deuteronomy. 26.18. Levit. 20.24,
26. As it is our Act, (or that which is done by our selves,) so this setting
apart or separating includes many things; it is our impropriating our selves to
the service of God; it is the taking off our affections from earthly things, and
setting them upon God; it is our abandoning of sin and lust; and many such
things might be instanced in, and enlarged upon: But I will pitch upon one
thing only, and that is our separating from the common course of the world.
Self-dedication consists, in our non-communion, or non-participation with
sinners, in their wicked and unholy practices; in our coming out from amongst
them, 2 Cor. 6.17.
and being separate; in our having no fellowship with them, Ephesians. 5.11.
in the unfruitful works of darkness; in the difference and singularity of our
conversations; in our carrying of it in the world, as a peculiar people to God,
Tit. 2.14.
zealous of good works. When we do this, (through the grace of God enabling of
us, and working in us,) this is to separate our selves, and to set our selves
apart for God, and so to be dedicated to him. He that lives a common life, and
does as others do, and prostitutes himself to the common lusts of men, he is
yet a stranger to self-dedication: If you have indeed come up to this, you will
say, O I Am a person dedicated to the Lord, I must be and live as one that is
separated; I must not walk as others do, nor live as others do; I must not live
a carnal common life, I must differ from the men of the world; let them be
vain, I must not be so; let them profane Sabbaths, omit duties, gratify the
flesh, I must not do so; I must be a man by my self, and bring forth
distinguishing fruit, to the praise of God; for I have dedicated my self to
God, and set my self apart, I must be a quite other person than what others
are: this is the fourth thing.

5. This self-dedication lies, in federal stipulation, or entering into Covenant
with God. I will here reassume that Scripture, which I touched upon, under a
former Head. 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Yield your selves unto the Lord. This yielding to
God is variously opened; some make it to be submission; Manus dare apud Latinos
significat se victum fateri, vel se dedere. Lavat. vid. Deod. in loc.
As if the meaning of Hezekiah in this advice was this; you see you are not
able to stand it out against God, you are no match for God, he is too strong for
you; and therefore yield, submit, throw down your weapons, beg mercy, as
Garrisons do, when there is too great a strength assaulting of them, they yield
and make no longer resistance. Some make it to be active obedience, Obtempe
rate Jehovae invitanti per nos. Vatabl. Subjicite vos Jehovae, praestantes
obedientiam, quam subjectionem testari solent subditi erga regem praebitisne
manus, in principio gubernationis. Piscat. 1 Chronicles. 29.24. And all the Princes
and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of King David, submitted ( in the
Hebr, gave the hand) unto Solomon the King.
subjection to the will of God. I humbly conceive, the proper import of these
words is that which I am upon; Yield your selves unto the Lord, (i. e.) enter
into covenant with him. 2 Chronicles. 29.10.
Hezekiah in the former Chapter, had been speaking of making a covenant with
the Lord God of Israel, that his fierce wrath might be turned away: Now he
presses this upon the people, and exhorts them to yield to God, to bind
themselves in covenant to him. It Is in the Original, (...) Which the LXX.
render (...) Had they rendered it, (...) it had been much better translated. The
Heathens were wont to confirm their Covenants by the giving of the hand. So
Josephus tells us of the Parthians. Antiq. Jud. l. 18 c. 12. And so Diodorus of
the Persians. Diodor. Sic. l. 16. Cur dextrae jungere dextram

Non datur? Virgil. Jura, fides ubi nunc, commissaque dextera dextrae. Ovid.


Give the hand to the Lord: this giving of the hand, was a gesture or rite
anciently used, in the making of and entering into covenants. It Is said of
Zedekiah, in reference to that covenant which he had made with the King of
Egypt, (the violation of which God took so hainously; Shall he prosper? Ezekiel.
17.1.
Shall he escape that does such things? Or shall he break the Covenant and be
delivered?) I say, at the making of this covenant, he is said, to give the
hand; (when lo, he had given his hand,) Ezekiel. 17.18. In Ezra's time, when the
Jews entered into Covenant, that they would put away their strange wives, they
gave their hands, Ezra 10.19. And the Israelites, in their great straits,
Supplices facti sumus eis, vel foedera sancivimus. Lavat.
they are said to give the hand to the Egyptians, (i. e.) to make a Covenant
with them: Lam. 5.6. To this purpose, is that of the Wise man, in his
dissuading from the bonds of suretiships; Prove. 22.26.
Be not thou one of them that strike hands. And to this, I conceive the words I
am upon, do mainly refer; Give the hand to the Lord; oh enter into covenant
with God, strike up a solemn federal compact with him; this is the way to turn
away his wrath from you. This is that, which is done by every one, who does in
a right manner dedicate himself to God, he gives the hand to God; he subscribes
with his hand to the Lord, (as it is expressed,) Isa. 44.5. He joins himself to
the Lord, (as it is Zach. 2.11.) he engages his heart to approach unto God, (as
it is Jer. 30.21.) and this is his dedication. He that enters into the bond of
the covenant, Ezekiel. 20.37.
binds himself to be the Lords, makes over himself to God, to be ruled by him,
and improved for him; he is the man, who comes up to that blessed act, which I
am describing. Divines that treat of the Heavenly calling, distinguish, of
vocatio ad munus, and vocatio ad foedus; so here, in dedication I may
distinguish; there is dedicatio respectu muneris, dedication in respect of
office, (thus the Priests in the time of the Law, and Ministers now under the
Gospel, may be said to be dedicated to God:) And there is dedicatio respectu
foederis, in respect of the covenant, that is, when the soul does indent,
stipulate with God, and solemnly engage to him, to make good every duty that it
stands obliged unto; this is a great part of our personal dedication, (or at
lestwise the mode or manner of this dedication,) and the more explicit and
express this stipulation is, the higher and fuller is the dedication. But as to
the explicitness of it, I shall speak more of that, when I come to the Use.

6. In the last place; Self-dedication, is a persons addicting and devoting
himself to the glory of God, as his supreme and ultimate end. So that in his
place and sphere, to his utmost he does mind, and endeavor to promote it in
the world: This glory of God, is very dear to himself: there is nothing God so
much stands upon as his glory; and take a man that is hearty in his dedication,
the glory of God is very dear to him also; his heart is set for the advancement
of it, (according to his ability,) he devotes himself to Gods honor and glory.
Which he may be said to do in these three respects.

1. He will do nothing (so far as humane frailty, and the imperfection of the
present state will admit,) that may strike at Gods glory, or which has not a
direct tendency to it: (understand me aright, I speak of weighty and momentous
acts:) Sin is that cursed thing, which strikes at Gods glory: and therein lies
the evil and maglignity of it: it reflects dishonor upon God, in the holiness
of his nature, in the purity of his law, in the righteousness of his
government; and in what not? Therefore the self-dedicating Christian, he will
not sin, ( willingly and out of choice.) He shuns, resists, dreads, hates sin,
as it is an offense to God, and as it casts dishonor upon God. O when
temptation comes, he thrusts it of with defiance; How shall I do this and sin
against God? Gen 39.9.
And so reflect dishonor upon him; I can suffer for God, (for by that he has
glory from me, and that is but my suffering,) but I must not sin against God,
for by that he is disparaged, and by it his glory suffers. And then (I say) he
will do nothing, but what has a direct tendency to Gods glory. There Is nothing
done in the world, but God has glory by it; even sin it self, Prove. 16.4.
God so disposes it, and overrules it, that it shall be subservient and
contribute to his honor: Even by Pharaohs obstinacy God was glorified. Exodus
9.16.
The crucifixion of our Lord, (the greatest sin that ever was committed) God
advanced his glory by it, let the ingredients be what they will, yet the wise
God knows how to make an extract out of all of them, of glory to himself, and
of good to his people: And surely, Potentius and melius esse judicavit, etiam
de malis benefacere, quam mala esse non sinere. August. de Civit. Dei, l. 22.
c. 2.
he would never suffer sin to be in the world, if he did not know how to make
it pay a tribute to his glory. But there are things, which directly tend to
this; they are not only disposed and overruled to the furtherance of it, but
they have a direct natural tendency thereunto; such are holiness, Matthew: 5.16.
Fruitfulness, Joh. 15.8. Philip. 1.11. Thankfulness, Psalm. 50. ult. (with many
others, that might be mentioned.) These now are the things, which are in the
godly man's eye; he that has dedicated himself to God, he is for that, and only
for that, which has a straight and direct tendency to this glory.

2. He makes God and his glory, the great end of life; this is that which he
aims at, and propounds to himself in living, that God may be glorified; he
says, Scopus vitae Christus, (which was the Motto of the Emperor Jovinian,)
Christ is the scope, the end of my life. Where the dedication is hearty, the
end is high; grace raises and heightens a man's end; the natural man, what poor
low ends does he act by; he centers in self, and goes no higher than self. And
no wonder, that his ends are low, when his principles are low; the end always
answers to the principle; water will not ascend higher, then the spring from
which it flows: Men's ends will not rise higher than their principles; they that
act only from self, will act only for self. Natural men therefore go no higher
than this; but Saints, dedicated persons, they have higher principles, and they
have higher ends; in their course of life, they aim at nothing below God and
his glory, as their supreme and ultimate end: Romans 14 7 8. Christo, qui nos
suos fecit, and vitam and vitae omnia, and ipsam mortem consecrare debemus, and
parati sumus. Grot. in loc. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself; for whether we
live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we live therefore or die, we are the
Lords. The love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one
died for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which
live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for
them, and rose again. Paul, Philip. 1.20.
was for the magnifying of Christ, whether it was by life or death. And he
exhorts the Hebrews, to follow the faith of their rulers, Heb. 13.7, 8.
considering the end of their conversation; what was that? He tells you, Jesus
Christ, the same yesterday, and to day and for ever. Instead of a Full-point,
make but a Comma or Colon, at those words, (Considering the end of their
conversation,) and the sense will run very smoothly to my purpose, (though may
be in this exposition I am alone.)

3. As in his general course, so in particular actions, he intends and aims at
the glory of God; be they natural, civil, or religious, whether he eats, or
drinks, or trades, or prays, or hears, he does all to the glory of God, (as the
Apostle directs, 1 Cor. 10.31.) This is the white which he aims at; every arrow
is levelled at this mark; this is the Card by which he sails, the Compass by
which he stears his course, and the Port or Haven toward which he makes. Thus
he stands devoted to the glory of God, and herein lies his dedication.

And thus I have in these six particulars opened the Nature of Personal or
Self-dedication; and I will add no more upon this Head, (I mean the
Explication,) because I shall go over these things again more fully in the
Application.

CHAP. 3. Personal Dedication Applied. The rarity of it lamented. Enquiries
about it, as to our selves.
HAving shown you, what it is, it remains, that now I should make some
Application of it.

And 1. Let me lament and bewail the rarity of this self-dedication. rivers of
waters might run down my eyes, because of this: Psalm. 119.136.
O that every serious Christian would be much affected and inwardly afflicted,
upon this consideration, that there are but few, very few, who do sincerely,
heartily, entirely dedicate themselves, and their All to God. O that O could
feel my self in an holy agony of spirit, now I am writing, and whenever I think
of this heart-cutting, heart-piercing truth. Sometimes, as I walk in the
Streets, where I see so many faces, meet so many persons running up and down
about their secular affairs, have in my eye such shoals and multitudes of men
and women; sometimes, when I go into the Assemblies, where God is worshipped,
and there see the places thronged with great numbers of people, attending upon
holy ordinances, I cannot but sadly consider and cry out, O how few of all
these, have in good earnest dedicated themselves to the Lord! O that there
should be so many Creatures, and so few New-creatures. O that so many should be
so busied about the world, who yet live in a total neglect of God; O that so
many, should seem externally to own religion, who yet make no conscience of
self-dedication; (which is the very soul and spirit of religion:) Surely this
is a lamentation, Ezekiel. 19.14.
and shall be for a lamentation.

Blessed be God, (through the efficacious operations of his grace,) there are
some in the world, who do give up themselves to him; who act and live
self-dedication, in all the parts and branches of it; let the world be what it
will, God will have a people in it, and Christ shall have a seed in it: Isa. 53
10.
and if so, then there shall be always some self-devoting souls to God. I do
not question, but even now, in this City, in this Nation, there are many
thousands, who have solemnly dedicated themselves* they are the Lords, and they
will be so; and it is well for us it is so, for, Except the Lord of Hosts had
left unto us a very small remnant, Isa. 1.9.
we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.
There is a cluster that has new wine in it, Isa. 65.8.
upon which there is a blessing, to secure the whole land from ruin and
desolation. But these (comparatively) are but a remnant, a small remnant; but
as one cluster in the Vine; they are a very little flock: Luke 12.32.
it is but here and there, one of a City, two of a family, Jer. 3.14.
a very few, who thus dedicate themselves to God: As it is in the City at
present, here and there you have an House built, but the far greatest part of
it, lies in ruins and rubbish: so here, here and there you may meet with a
person, who has done that, which I am speaking of, but the most lie in the
rubbish, in the misery of the fallen and non-dedicated state. True indeed, if the
external form and profession would serve the turn, then this dedication would
not be so rare, but this will not do it. There Is a great difference 'twixt the
form and the truth; betwixt what appears and what is. As there is ((...)) a
form of knowledge, ( Romans 2.20.) And ((...)) a form of godliness, (2 Timothy 3.5.)
So there is ((...)) a form of dedication. All profess, that in Baptism, they
have dedicated themselves to God, and so they have; the dedication must not be
denied, only it must be made good; if it be not, I make it but a form, and it
will not profit me. The first baptismal dedication, without subsequent,
personal, actual dedication, is not sufficient; nay, the former without the
latter will rather do us hurt than good. And yet here is the all of most men's
dedication. O if personal dedication be such a thing, as has been opened, (and
certainly it is so) then there are but few, that are acquainted with it; this
makes the number of self-devoting Christians, to sink and fall like the
soldiers of Gideon. God speaks to the Jews, Jer. 5.1.
to run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, to seek in the broad
places thereof, to see, if they could find a man, that did execute judgment,
and sought the truth, and he would pardon it. May not we run to and fro, to
find out a man, who does entirely give up himself to God, who lives in a
blessed surrender of himself to the will of God, who is fixed and resolved for
God, (and so I might go over all the other branches of self-dedication,) and
scarce be able to find such an one. Every man in the world dedicates himself to
something; but O it is the sin and folly of men, they mis-object and mis-place
their dedication: it is self, sin, the world, that the generality dedicate
themselves to; it is but here and there a man, who does this, to the holy, ever
living, ever blessed God. O that the practices of men did not too visibly
proclaim this: O that this sad truth was not too legible in the courses and
conversations of besotted sinners! Even where they have made their
renunciation, even there they make their dedication: instead of renouncing the
world, the flesh, the Devil, they devote themselves to these. No tears are
sufficient to bewail this folly and wickedness, that is so manifest to every
observing eye. Pray lay it to heart, and mourn much over it before the Lord,
you that have any sense of Gods honor, of the value and preciousness of
immortal souls.

Did I not fear, that this discourse would too much swell upon my Hands, as I
would speak much more to further Humiliation, upon the account of such as are
unregenerate; so I would also speak something to further humiliation, in the
Saints themselves, upon their own account. I hope many such may happen to read,
what here in the sincerity of my heart, I offer to their serious consideration:
thus then very briefly: You have dedicated your selves to God; but was there
not a time, when you were just as others are? when you did just as others do?
when you walked according to the course of this world? E^h 2 2.
when you lay in the common state, and lived the common life? was there not a
time, when you your selves also, were foolish, disobedient, Tit. 3 3.
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures? Did you not spend many years,
Romans 8.7.
under the power of the natural enmity to God? Was it not long before you would
be persuaded to yield up your selves to him? Did you not long withstand Gods
claim and title? Was not God fain to put forth his Almighty power, Ephesians. 1.19.
to conquer the renitency and reluctance of corruption? If God had left you to
your selves, had ye to this very day, given up your selves to him? Did you not
side with Satan and Sin and the world for many years against God? And now you
have dedicated your selves to the Lord, (being over-powred by the holy violence
of his grace, Ne arbitreris istam asperam, molestdmque violentiam, dulcis est,
suavis est, ipsa suavitas te trahit. Aug. (...). Chrysostom. Non cogit nolentem
sed volentem trahit. Aug.
) is your dedication so full, so entire, so ingenious, so Evangelical, so
fixed, as it should be? Have you been true to it, and walked answerably to it?
Ask your selves these questions, and deal in secret with your own souls, and I
assure you, you will find matter of deep humiliation, even as to your selves,
as well as to others, who yet stand it out against God, and have done, nothing
in personal dedication.

Secondly, he be in the number of these few; whether he be one of the Herd, or
one of the little flock; whether he has passed under this Holy Dedication, or
not. O call your selves ad scrutinium, enter upon the most solemn and serious
enquiry about this; let there be self-examination about self-dedication; Gal.
6.4.
let every man prove his own work, (and so too, his own dedication,) then shall
he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another: This is a question
worthy of the most serious thoughts of men professing the Gospel, Have I
dedicated my self to God? Have I in good earnest dedicated my self to God? Am I
not mistaken in this, upon which all Religion here, and salvation hereafter
does depend? I am a Christian no farther, than as this is done by me; and
therefore is it in reality done by me? I beseech you, look your faces a little
in the glass of the word, and suffer conscience to bring in its verdict, and
judge accordingly.

Methinks it might be easy to convince some, (and these some are too many, the
Lord knows,) that they have not dedicated themselves to God: As to them, it is
not a doubtful case, there is scarce any ground of examination, for it is as
clear as the light of the Sun at midday, that they are altogether strangers to
this Act: I speak to you, who give up your selves to the fancies, humors,
opinions, examples, lusts of men; who care not how you displease God, if you
may but please man; who can dispense with the commands of God, if you may but
gratify the lusts of men; nay, who can add sin to sin, if you see it does but
please man; (this was Herod's case, Acts 12.3.) Have you dedicated your selves
to God? To you, that are temporizers; who are what the times are, when they are
good, you are good, when they are bad, you are bad; you that calculate your
Religion by the times wherein you live, and set your Watch, not by the Sun,
(the divine and infallible rule of the word,) but by the fashions of the Age,
upon which you are cast; you that have a fides Ephemeris, (as Tertullian calls
it) a Religion for every day, which you can put on and off, as you do your
clothes; you that are mere Polypusses in the things of God, Polypus mutat
colorem ad similitudinem loci. Plin. Hist. Not. l. 9. c. 29.
to receive the color and tincture of what is next, let it be what it will;
you that are of a Samaritane spirit, to be Jews, and allied to them, when they
flourish, and enemies to them when they are low; you that are like to those, of
whom our Histories report; they were Protestants in King Edwards days, Papists
in Queen Mary's days, and Protestants again in Queen Elizabeth's days; you that
can sail and turn with every wind, mere Weather-cocks in Religion, surviving
Ecebolii; Have you dedicated your selves to God? To you, who are all for self,
for self ease, self love, self pleasing, self interest, self advancement; you
that terminate all in self, and make that your center; you that instead of
making self the matter of your dedication, make it the term and object of your
dedication; instead of the dedicating of it to God, you dedicate all to it;
Have you dedicated your selves to God? To you, that readily prostitute your
selves to a course of sin, to all vicious and unholy practices; 1 King. 21.20.
you that sell your selves to wickedness; Ephesians. 4.19.
that give your selves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness; you that do in effect say to sin, we are thine; you that are
drunkards, swearers, cursers, Adulterers, Sabbath-profaners, etc. Have you
dedicated your selves to God? To you, who are immersed in the world; you that
steep your selves in pleasures and sensual delights; who mind nothing but
eating, drinking, gaming, etc. and withold not your heart from any joy, (let
it be what it will: Eccles. 2.10.
) you that mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19.
that let the fervor of your spirits, the torrent of your desires, the strength
of your endeavors run out after riches, profits, honors, preferments, worldly
accomodations; you that instead of forsaking the world for God, can forsake God
for the world, (as Demas did; 2 Timothy 4.10.
) you that place your happiness in these sublunary things; Have you dedicated
your selves to God? To you, who give up your selves to Satan; may be you are
not by the Church given up to Satan, (which is usually interpreted of
excommunication,) 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1. ult. But, which is much worse, (as the
disease is worse than the remedy,) you give up your selves to him; you readily
obey this Prince of the power of the air, Ephesians. 2.2.
that rules in the chidren of disobedience; 2 Timothy 2.26.
you are taken captive by him at his will; he bids you go and you go, come and
you come, no sooner does he tempt, but you fall in with the temptation, all the
day long you are doing his work, and promoting his interest in the world; Have
you dedicated your selves to God? To you, who go to the Church on the Lords
day, and attend upon the worship of God on the Lords day; Non est vera Religio,
quae cum Templo relinquitur. Lactant.
and all the week after neglect God, scarce a word of God, (unless it be in
taking his name in vain,) scarce a secret prayer, scarce the reading of one
Chapter in the Bible, all the week after; Have you dedicated your selves to
God? Away, away, for shame do not pretend to this high and holy Dedication;
your case is so evident, that you scarce are within the verge or compass of
self-examination; it is notorious, you have not dedicated your selves; pray
never pretend to it.

But there are others, who are spun of a finer thread, who bid fairer for
Heaven; they are free from those works of the flesh, which are ((...))
manifest, Gal. 5.19.
and which proclaim to all the world Non-dedication; they make a fair
profession, are unblamable in their conversation, make Conscience of performing
holy duties; and many good things are done by them; surely these have dedicated
themselves to God: O that it was so indeed! O that all, who carry it fairly in
the sight of men, were sincere in their self-dedication to God! But are there
not thousands, that come up to this, and are professors, and live under
Church Priviledges, and are well thought of by the people of God; and yet for
all this, their dedication is not hearty and thorough, and upon this defect,
they shall miscarry to all eternity. How should this awaken all plausible,
out-side-Christians, with the utmost diligence, to search, how things stand
betwixt God and them, as to this matter.

As to evidences, (for the help of such as shall desire to fall upon
examination,) I shall not need to expatiate upon that Argument; having shown
what self-dedication is, by that every man may know, whether he be come up to
it, yea or no. Read over the particulars, in which it lies, and as you go
along, make such reflections as these are. O my soul tell me, have I given my
self to God? Have I ever by a deed of gift, signed and sealed, made over my
self to God? Have I given him my heart? my love, joy, delight, desires, ah, and
my life too? Is my will melted into his will? Is there an obediential,
submissive frame of spirit in me? Am I upon serious deliberation, come to an
issue, to resolve for God? Is my resolution, like the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, Esth. 1.19.
never to be altered? Do I carry it as a person, who is impropriated, set apart
for God and his service? Have I entered into covenant with God, and bound my
self to the performance of all the conditions thereof? Is the glory of God dear
to me? ^s this the great end of my life, that the great God may be honored by
such a worm as I am? O my soul, farther I ask thee; do I value God more than
all, and set an higher rate upon him, than upon all the world besides? Is his
favor more to me, than life, do I dread his anger more than death? Is this my
greatest ambition, to live in the fruition of God, and in constant communion
with him? And for other things, can I be content to have them or to want them,
as God shall see best? Do I fear every sin, be it never so little? Do I baulk
no duty, be it never so hard? Do I shun no cross, be it never so heavy? (when
God calls me to it:) Is it the will of God, that has the regency and
superiority in me? Will I suffer nothing to stand in competition with my Lord
and Master? Have I got victory over all my spiritual enemies? Is sin mortified,
self dethroned, the world laid low in my heart? Can I be, do, suffer any thing
for God and my dear Redeemer? Do I like salvation in Gods way, and upon his
terms? Do I cleave to God with full purpose of heart? Do I love whatever I see
of God, and all that belong to God? Have I been savingly convinced of the
excellency of God and of his ways? Have I made over my self to him personally
considered, to the Father, to be commanded, governed by him; to the Son to be
redeemed, justified, saved by him, (in the way of faith and obedience:) to the
Holy Ghost, to be renewed, sanctified, guided, led, acted by him? I say, thus
deal with your souls upon these interrogatories, and by the answer of
Conscience, you will be able to say something, 1 Pet. 3.21.
as to the thing enquired after, whether you have indeed dedicated your selves
to God? I beg pardon, that I pass over these things, thus briefly; and may be
too, I have not spoke so distinctly to them as I should have done; as to the
first, I would fain shorten this works as much as I can, and I shall have
occasion more to enlarge in some other Heads: as to the second, the enquiring,
serious, awakened Christian, minds matter more than Method.

CHAP. 4. Personal Dedication pressed; first more generally, and then more
particularly, in the several branches of it.
THirdly, I come to fall upon that, exhort, persuade, urge men, entirely,
heartily, sincerely to devote and dedicate themselves to God: this I would
press upon all, be they high or low, rich or poor noble or ignoble, learned or
unlearned, young or old; for God requires it of all, and none are exempted from
this self-dedication. Shall I not prevail with some amongst these many, to come
in to God, and to give up themselves to him? Shall the net be cast in the midst
of so many, and shall none be caught? ^s the duty (which I am to press) in it
self, so reasonable, so unquestionable, so attractive, and yet shall I not
succeed in the pressing of it? May I gain but one soul to God, in the discharge
of this duty, that one soul would be a sufficient recompense for my pains in
this discourse; but surely I shall gain more; I would promise to my self, that
many will be wrought upon, did I not remember, that the old Adam was too hard
for young Melancthon. The old Adam, and the old Serpent are great opposers of
self-dedication; Rev. 12 9.
Satan sets himself with all his might to hinder it, if he might have his will,
not a soul should come up to it; 2 Cor. 4.4.
he is the God of this world, and therefore would have all dedications made
unto himself; he knows, the sinners dedication to God, is his dethroning; and
therefore no wonder, he is so much against it.

And besides this opposition ab extra, there is also abundance of opposition,
ab intra: the old Adam, the corrupt nature within, cannot brook or submit to
this, that a man should resign, devote himself to God: Self-dedication meets
with self-opposition: Men are not willing to alienate their estates to others;
naturally they are more averse to alienate, and make over themselves to God;
they say in their hearts to him, what Nabal said to David, Who is David, etc. 1 Samuel 25.10, 11.
Shall I take my bread and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my
Shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not, whence they be? Thus depraved
reason argues against God; who is the Lord? What? (says the poor unconverted
sinner) shall I take my self, my whole self, my heart, my estate, my parts, my
love, my life, and give it all to God, whom I do not know? Or so far as I do
know him, I do not like him? This is the entertainment that Gods gracious
messages, for self-resignation and self-dedication do find in the world. And
indeed, was it not for that Almighty grace, which it pleases the Lord sometimes
to exert, thereby to conquer all this opposition from Satan and self, there
would be no such thing as personal dedication; not a man would thus do. We
might Preach, Print, urge the duty with the most rational, convincing, pressing
considerations, and yet all be in vain. And therefore I must lay the stress of
my hopes, for success in the pursuing of this exhortation, wholly upon God, and
the efficacy of his grace. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. It being so, before I speak
to man, let me with all humility and holy fervor, thus speak to the divine
Majesty; O blessed God, accompany, bless, make effectual that word of advice,
that a poor worm is now to give; let thine own spirit, and the power of thy
grace, set it home upon the Conscience; and let the stubborn, hardened sinner
yield to it, and to thee by it; It is designed for thee, let it be blessed by
thee: O let the day of thy Psalm. 110.3.
power dawn upon men, that they may be willing to surrender up themselves to
thee: Give special grace to them, that they may give whole self to thee: Work
what thou requirest, and require what thou will: Destroy all hellish,
idolatrous, cursed Dedications, to sin, the flesh, the world, and bring the
soul to the Heavenly, Holy dedication of it self to thee: O so work upon the
wills of them, that shall read these lines, that they may immediately,
peremptorily resolve for thee: and say, others have had propriety in us, and
dominion over us, but now, Isa. 26.13.
from this day forward, for ever, we will be the Lords. O let not me press this
upon others, and yet be a stranger to it my own self. These are some of the
inward breathings of my soul, that God knows, to whom I here speak.

I come to the exhortation, Dedicate your selves to God. It Is requisite, that I
should open this, and then enforce it upon you.

Self-dedication, is either common and outward, or special and inward. The
first is done in Baptism; this is Baptismal dedication; all that are baptized,
visibly profess, that they have dedicated themselves to God: I am not to press
this upon you, because it is done already: The second, is either habitual or
actual; Habitual is that which is implanted in the soul in the work of
conversion, in the participation of the divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
in the New creature; 2 Cor. 5.17.
wherever grace is, and as soon as ever grace is wrought, the man does
habitually, or virtually dedicate himself to God. Much of the Nature of grace
lies in this; for what is grace, but personal dedication? Actual, is that which
results from the habit, as the branch from the root, or the stream from the
fountain* when that which was latent in the habit, is drawn forth into Act,
this is Actual self-dedication. And this further, is either more implicit, or
more explicit; implicit, which lies in the more inward and imminent acts of the
soul; as a man in the secret acts of his heart, devotes himself to God;
explicit, when a man in a more open and discernible manner, does thus do;
either by writing, or word of mouth, (or some such open way,) he dedicates
himself to the Lord. Now it is this Actual dedication, that I mainly drive at;
in order to which there must be habitual dedication: (for we cannot suppose the
act, without a previous habit, the act flowing from the habit.)

And I might too by several weighty Arguments, put you upon Actual explicit
self-dedication; but because I would not set things too high at first, I shall
go no higher than Actual, implicit, heart-dedication: ( I call it implicit,
only in contra-distinction to what is done by writing or word of mouth, for
otherwise it is explicit too.) This necessarily must be; the truth of grace
requires it: the grown Christian may be persuaded to the former, but whoever
will be a true Christian, he must come up to the latter. Though there be no
formal, overt-acts, yet in the inward actings of the heart, there must be this
devoting of self to God: this therefore is the lowest that I can go, and so
this however must be urged upon you.

This being premised, I will now fall upon the exhortation, which I shall speak
to, first more generally; and then, in the several particulars or branches,
which make up self-dedication.

In the general notion of it, I will enforce it upon you, by the ensuing
motives, which I judge to have much strength in them.

1. The truth of Christianity lies in this Personal Dedication. You are
Christians, but are you true Christians? You have the external Name and Title
and badge, but are you so indeed? Baptism makes you Christians, but it is
self-dedication that makes you true Christians; without this, you may be
accounted Christians by men, but you are no better than Heathens, than
Infidels, in the account of God. This is Christianity, for a man to devote
himself to God, to love and serve him, and to live to him, all the days of his
life; here is the very soul, and pith, and kernel, and spirit of Christianity;
this is the sum, quintessence, marrow of Religion. When I put you upon
self-dedication, I do but put you upon being true Christians; This and
Christianity are Termini convertibiles; the true Christian dedicates his self
to God, and he that does thus, is the true Christian; this is the
Characteristical note, of one that is truly what he professes himself to be.
Does it not concern you therefore to see that this be done? O take heed of the
name without the thing: Many a man stands much upon his Christianity, he cannot
bear, that any should so much as question his being a Christian: But let him be
who he will, if he has not dedicated himself to God, in an holy course, he may
be a nominal Christian, but he is no more: and at the great day, it will be
better for him, that he had not been so much, if he be no more. He that wears
Christ's livery, professes Christ to be his master, and knows what his masters
will is, and yet does it not, he shall be beaten with many stripes: Luke 12.47.
Profession without hearty and answerable practice will aggravate condemnation.
The Heathens shall mitius ardere, have a cooler fire, than such as are called
Christians, and yet do not sincerely dedicate themselves to God.

2. Besides the obligation of your general profession, your Baptism in special
binds you to this self-dedication. You own your Baptismal covenant, do you not?
I presume you will not deny it; then I beseech you consider, what is the
purport, intent, matter, end of this Covenant, is it not this? To renounce the
world, the flesh, the Devil, and all his works, and to dedicate your selves to
the service, work, will and glory of God? Was not this the first and principal
intent of that Covenant, namely, self-renunciation and self-dedication? Then if
you do not do this, you are false to your Baptismal Covenant, and to the
obligation that then you entered into. And is this a matter to be trifled with?
Are the Psalm. 56.12.
vows of God upon you, and will you not make them good? Prove. 20.25.
Is it dangerous to enquire after the making of a vow, what is it then to
falsify a vow? Will you not perform, what you have solemnly engaged your
selves to? Can you break Covenant with God and prosper? Ezekiel. 17 15.
Deceive not your selves, God is not mocked, he will not be mocked; Gal. 6.7.
he has your bonds by him, and he will sue them out, in his own time* and if
you perform not the conditions of them, God will have reparation some other
way; and that can only be in your eternal ruin: O how many will perish for
ever, for the violation of their Baptismal obligation! And is it not sad, that
that which puts a glory upon us here, (upon our nonperformance of conditions,)
should deprive us of glory hereafter, and expose us to the wrath of God to all
eternity? And yet thus it is, and thus too many will find it to be. Be serious
I beseech you, in the consideration of this, and certainly it will prevail with
you, to dedicate your selves to God. Is it I that put you upon this duty? Is
this something, that is but the fancy of some precise, or over-righteous
person? Is it some new thing, which a Minister would lay upon you? Is it not
that very thing, which you your selves have sworn to, in your Baptism? Is not
your obligation to it, very ancient, and yet in full force at this very day?
Can any time wear out this obligation? Though Baptism does not leave
characterem indelebilem, yet it does leave obligationem indispensabilem; though
there be no Of this controversy, vid. Chamier. t. 4. de Sacram. l. 2. c. 12.
Gerhard. t. 4. de Sacram. p. 335, etc. and many others.
indelible character (in the Popish sense) yet there is an indispensable
obligation: And further, have you not often owned and renewed this, at the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper? Nay, have you not heightened and superadded a
further obligation upon your selves, to be the Lords at that ordinance? Do you
not say in effect at every Sacrament you receive? Lord, I here dedicate my self
to thee, I here seal to be thine, I vouch thee for my God, and I will be thy
servant: And after all this, will you be false to God? I tremble at the
thoughts of this perfidiousness. Herod would rather be guilty of murder than of
perjury; Matthew. 14.9.
for his oaths sake, John Baptists Head must go off. Many a time thou have
sworn to God, and what does God require upon this, but the life of thy lusts,
the Romans 6.6.
destroying of the body of sin, the blood of thy bosome-corruptions; shall not
this be done for thy Oaths sake? O says David, I have sworn and I will perform
it, Psalm. 119.106*
that I will keep thy righteous judgments: Do you so speak and so do, as you
love your souls. 'Twas a great trial to Jepthah, to offer up his daughter,
Judge. 11.31, 35.
his only child; but he had made such a vow, and he could not recede;
whatsoever comes forth of the doors of my house to meet me, etc. shall surely
be the Lords, etc. Though it happened that his daughter met him, yet she must
be offered up, for (says he) I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot
go back. This is your case as to your selves, and as to your sins: In Baptism,
at the Lords Table, you have said, that you would be the Lords, that you would
offer up your beloved sins: having thus bound your selves to the Lord, you
cannot go back. Sacramental obligations call for self-dedication.

3. God is such a God, as that he deserves this at your hands. Look upon him,
as he is in himself; Infinite, incomprehensible, the supreme and absolute
being, holy, wise, gracious, merciful, unchangeable, just, righteous, etc. Will
you not dedicate your selves to such a God? What a base thing is sin, what a
vain thing is the world, in comparison of this God? What a shame is it, that
men should choose rather to give up themselves to these, than to the ever
blessed God! Something we must dedicate our selves to; does any object so
deserve our love, delight, service, zeal, as God does? And then look upon him,
in what he is to you; your Creator, the fountain of your beings, your
preserver, your benefactor, your Lord and Sovereign, your Judge, he in whose
hands your Dan. 5.23.
life, breath, and all your concerns are; he that protects you from all
dangers, supplies you in all wants, supports you under all burdens, directs you
in all straights, rewards you in all services; will you not dedicate your
selves to this God? He that alone can make you happy or miserable, he that
alone can save or damn, he that alone can give you satisfaction, inward peace
and joy; will you not be his? He that is your good God, your friend, that
desires your welfare, will you not surrender up your selves to him? I am not
pleading with you for dedition, but for dedication; the Damus amicis, dedimus
Hostibus. Stephan. Vrbem, agrum, aras, focos, seque, uti dederent. Plaut. in
Amphitr. Such as yielded upon the prevailing strength of their Enemy, were
called, Dedititii. Quum ex dedititiis Delgis complures Caesarem secuti. Caes.
Comm.
former is proper for an enemy, the latter for a friend. O it is men's ignorance
of God, that keeps them from dedicating themselves to him* surely did they but
know him, he should have their All.

4. Self-dedication to God, is the Creatures advancement; it puts an honor and
excellency upon a person; self is advanced and dignified, when it is thus
dedicated; as there passed a glory upon the first fruits, by their being
dedicated to God. And therefore the excellency of the Saints is set forth by
this allusion to the first fruits. Of his own will begat he us, Jam. 1.18.
with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his
Creatures. Jer. 2.3.
Israel was holiness unto the Lord, the first fruits of his increase. Rev. 14.4.
These were redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God. I say,
one thing intended in these expressions, is to hold forth the excellency of the
people of God, as they are dedicated to him: Self-dedication will make you as
first fruits, it will put a glory and excellency upon you; Psalm. 16.3.
dedicated persons are the excellent in the earth. Take the whole crop, there
was not much in it, but the first fruits, being set apart for God, there was an
excellency in them: take mankind in the lump and mass, there is no such great
worth in it, but take those few that are singled out of this mass, and set
apart for God, O they are excellent persons. The pride of man puts him upon the
affectation of excellency, and advancement; would you from an holy pride be
ambitious of true excellency and advancement, be a people separated for God,
devoted to him; no honor like to that.

5. I will add but one Consideration more, it is this, as grace, so glory, as
Christianity here, so felicity hereafter, depend upon self-dedication. Would
you not be saved? Do you not desire Heaven and blessedness? Would you not be
happy in the world to come? Surely you would; then pray, take the right way and
course, in order to this; what is that? Dedicate your selves to God; no
dedication, no salvation; self must be dedicated, or self cannot be saved:
Non-dedication must needs end in destruction. How can he expect, that God will
give himself in the beatifick vision to him, who is not willing to give his
self to God here, in holy dedication. Did ever any arrive at the sight of God,
who had not first devoted themselves to holiness; without holiness no man shall
see the Lord. Heb. 12.14.
O what a comfortable plea is this for a dying man, for Heaven: Lord I am thine
save me; Psalm. 119.94.
I have been a doer of thy will upon earth, let me now enter into the Kingdom;
Matthew. 7.21.
I have withheld nothing from thee, do not thou now withhold glory from me.
Psalm. 84.11.
Thus much I have said, to urge the Exhortation in general.

That I may yet further drive the nail to the very Head, that this advice may
be yet more piercing and effectual, I shall go over the particular branches of
self-dedication, and enforce each of them upon you, by those considerations,
which are respectively proper to them.

1. First therefore, Give your selves to God. Self is a gift, that is only fit
for a God; it is indeed too little for him, but it is too much for any thing
besides him; it is not good enough for God, it is too good for any thing else: O
whilst others give themselves to low, vain, undeserving, evil objects, let us
give our selves to the Lord. I shall desire the Reader, thoroughly to weigh a
few motives, to induce him unto this.

1. Nothing more equitable, than that the Creature should give himself to God.
The Apostle urges this very duty by this; he calls it a reasonable service:
Romans 12.1.
the (...)
word imports giving or dedicating to God: see Luke 2.22. Now this
self-presenting, (or self-giving to God) it is a thing that is most reasonable;
it is that which is grounded upon the highest reason: Reason it self will tell a
man, he ought to give himself to God; this Prove. 20.27.
candle of the Lord gives a light clear enough, to direct a creature to this. I
know depraved reason opposes it, but rectified reason furthers it. Your reason
will tell you, that you are bound to give to every one, what is his right and
due; this is one of the undoubted maxims and principles of reason: In the case
I am upon, reason lays down the proposition, Scripture-revelation sets in with
it, to make the assumption, and then grace makes the conclusion, and so the
syllogism is framed betwixt them. I must give to every one, what is his due;
(there is reason,) my person, my all is Gods due; (there is partly reason, and
partly revelation,) therefore I will give my self to God, (there is grace:) Let
me speak a little to that foundation, upon which the reasonableness of the duty
in hand is built, and that is, whatever I am or have, it is all Gods due; God
has a fuller, better right to a man, than he has to himself; he is Gods more
than he is or can be his own; in the fall of Adam we lost our right and title
to God, but he did not lose his right and title to us; this is eternal,
alteration, or any such thing. If you ask whence this results, ( viz. Gods
right to us,) I answer,

1. From Creation; he made us, therefore he has a right to us: As he that
builds an house, certainly has a right to it. It is he that has made us,
Psalm. 100.3.
and not we our selves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture. When
we lay in the womb of nothing, he gave a being to us; we are made up of soul
and body, both are of God; the sheath and the blade, the Jewel and the Cabinet,
both (I say) are of God. The soul, (the nobler part) it is immediately created
by him, he Eccles. 12.7.
gives this spirit, and infuses it into the body, when it is organized and
prepared for it. And upon this creation, the soul is Gods: All souls are mine,
(so he himself tells us,) Ezekiel. 18.4. The body, that is the workmanship of God;
Psalm. 139.14, etc.
by him we are fearfully and wonderfully made; by him we were curiously wrought
in the lower parts of the earth; in his book all our members were written, etc.
(as the Psalmist sets in forth.) This being so, surely God has an
unquestionable right and title to us.

2. From the subsequent acts of Providence. Facit, nam ser^nt, nec minor nunc
sumptus Omnipotentiae, quam in Exor dio n^stro. Eadem est opera, eadem cura. Si
omnipotens illa dextra excuteret nos in nost^um praecipites rueremus Nihilum.
Nieremb. Theopolit. p. 48.
It Is the Lord, who does preserve us, sustain us, support us, provide for us;
who does (as it were) make us anew every day; what is preservation, but a
continued creation? God does not only build the house at first, but he keeps it
up, by a continual succession of providential mercies; and was it not for this,
it would fall every moment. Acts 17.28.
In him we live, and move, and have our being. How soon would the poor candle
of life, be either wasted or blown out, if the 1 Pet. 4. ult.
faithful Creator did not supply it as to inward defects, and secure it as to
external violence. The beam lives by that Sun, from which it comes; and the
stream is maintained by that spring, from which it flows: The same dependence
is there in us, upon that God, from whom we derive our being. This heightens
Gods title.

3. From redemption, in which Christ has paid down a price, Matthew. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6.
a ransom for us; we are the Lords by purchase, he has bought us and paid a
dear rate for us: What a man purchases, it is his own; from that purchase there
results a propriety. In allusion to this, the Apostle tells us, we are not our
own, for we are bought with a price; 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
Know ye not, that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you,
which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price,
therefore glorify God in you body, and in your spirit, which are Gods; (not
only upon the first and original right of Creation, but also upon the
superadded and accumulated right of purchase:) Here is the highest foundation
of Gods claim and title to us.

You see then by this, whence Gods title to the creature does arise; we are his
by Creation, Providence, Redemption. He having then such an indubitable right
to us, is it not most reasonable, that we should give our selves to him? When
we so do, we do but give God that which is his own? Is this a gift? Indeed it is
rather the paying of a debt, than the giving of a gift, (as I said at the
first,) but the gracious God is pleased to own it so. He might make a seizure
upon us, and sue out his claim upon his own right; but he would rather have us,
by a free gift to give our selves to him. His we are by purchase, Vindic Piet.
p. 3. p. 307.
but he expects that we be his also by donation: his we are by conquest, but he
expects we should be his by consent also; though he may challenge us as his
right, yet the most acceptable claim is, when he has us by gift, (as one
expresses it.) It Is a great condescension in God, to take this for a gift:
Under the Law God would not have that which was his due before, to be given
unto him, because that was his already. Only the firstlings of the beasts,
Levit. 27.26.
which should be the Lords firstling, no man shall sanctify it, whether it be
Ox or Sheep, it is the Lords: The reason of this is plainly set down; such
things were not by vow to be dedicated to God, because he had expressly designed
them for sacrifice, and so they were his already. O what an act of grace is
this in the great God toward us; we are his already, and yet he owns it for a
gift, when we dedicate our selves to him. ^ am too long upon this, pray
consider Gods right, and and let him have it: Give unto Caesar that which is
Caesar's, Matthew. 22.21.
and unto God that which is Gods. You have too long detained from him that
which is his right; you do that to God, which the principles of common honesty
would not let you do to man: O be convinced of your unworthy dealings with him;
and now give your selves to him; what can be more just, equitable, reasonable
than this?

2. The giving of self, is but a due retribution; and so it becomes a duty, not
only upon Gods right, but also upon the creatures ingenuity. Grace brings an
holy ingenuity into the heart; no man so ingenuous as the gracious man: and
(methinks) every man, that professes any hope of interest in God, should be so
ingenuous, as to give himself to God. Par pari rependere, to return like for
like, this is ingenuity amongst men: O that we could persuade men to come up to
this, in their returns to God! Self is but a fit retribution for self; does God
give himself to us, (as he does to all in Covenant,) shall not we give our
selves to him? Did Christ give himself for us, Gal. 2.20.
and shall not we give our selves to him? And who can reckon up Gods mercies to
us, shall there be no return made for them? Who (that has the least spark of
holy ingenuity in him) will not be often asking that question of David? Psalm.
116.12.
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Do thou ask
this question? Then I say to thee, render thy self to the Lord, that is the best
retribution that it is possible for a creature to make. Do not put off God, with
something that is yours, but give him your self: as he does not put off you
with giving sua, but he gives se, so do you deal with him. When you have done
this, here may be some retribution, but here is no proportion or compensation.
Alas! what is our self to Gods self? What is that which we return, in
comparison of what we receive? It Is but a drop for an Ocean, it is but finite
for infinite, it is but emptiness for fullness, it is but Nothing for All. Go
however as far as you can; when you have gone the farthest, you come infinitely
short of what God deserves.

3. It Is a good evidence of the sincerity of love. Then we love God in
sincerity, when we give our selves to him: Ephesians. 6.24.
love it is a giving grace, and it is for the giving of self; nothing below this,
will satisfy love. The wife loves her Husband, and she gives her self to him:
take a friend (whose heart is a treasure of love,) his self, his all, is made
over to his friend. O where is our love to God? It Is sad, that love betwixt
creature and creature should exceed our love to God? Do you love God? Do you
love him indeed? Evidence the reality of your love, by giving your selves to
him: let not any fancy they love God, if this be not done. How does divine love
plead with the soul, to give all to God! O it thinks nothing enough, nothing
too much for God; self being the best, says holy love, God and Christ shall
have it.

4. This is the highest gratitude, the best thankfulness. The first fruits were
dedicated to God, partly to show Gods right to the whole crop, partly as an
expression of the peoples thankfulness for all the rest; self-dedication and
self-giving is the best expression of our thankfulness. Could you give
burnt-offerings, Calves of a year old, Mic. 6.7.
thousands of Rams, ten thousand rivers of Oil, the most costly sacrifices,
bags of gold and silver; or could you bring the most melting acknowledgments,
the highest verbal resentments of Gods goodness to you, all this would be
nothing, in comparison of dedicating and giving your selves to him: then we
praise God aright, when we devote our persons, our lives, our all to his
praise. Do you receive so many mercies, and shall God have no praise? What Is
all your praise, if self be not given to him? Higher than this you cannot,
lower than this you should not go: O the poor creature that falls down at the
feet of God in the sense of mercies, and says, Lord, thus and thus thou art
pleased to do for me; food, raiment, peace, liberty, the Gospel, Christ thou
give to me; for all this how shall I express and testify my gratitude?
Blessed God, I Will do it thus; here I give my self to thee: Quod unum reliquum
est, dono tibi, dono meipsum. Silver and Gold I have none, I cannot build
Hospitals or do any such thing; I have but little in the world, but I give thee
my self, to be thine for ever; here is the right thanking of God for mercies
received.

5. This is very pleasing and acceptable to God. Romans 12.1. Psalm. 51.17.
Self is the sacrifice acceptable to God; the sacrifice which God will not
despise: God stands upon the giver more than upon the gift. As the King of
Sodom said to Abram, Genesis 14.21.
Give me the persons and take the goods to thy self; so God speaks to us; do
not give your gifts to me, but give me your selves. 2 Corint. 8.5.
How did the Macedonians please him, when they gave themselves to him. Luther
observes of Cain, Cainistae sunt offerentes non personam sed opus personae.
Lutherus in Genesis
that he gave his offering to God, but he did not give his person to God: and
he calls those Cainists, who offer the sacrifice but not the person; upon this
God took no delight, either in him or in his offering. Abel offered both, and
so he pleased God. You cannot do a thing more acceptable to God, than to give
your selves to him. O (says God) here is a poor creature, that thinks not his
self too good for me; that is his best, his all, and yet that he gives to me;
I Will requite him, I have his self and he shall have mine: he thinks nothing too
good for me, and I will think nothing too good for him. This (I say) and
nothing below this, pleases God; he deals with men, just as the Saints deal
with him; how is that? They must have his self; they cannot take up with any
thing short of this; the mercies, gifts of God, will not satisfy them, unless
they have his self; and they can part with all for this: as August. said,
whatsoever God will bestow, August. in Psalm. 29.
let him take it all away, and give himself: so God deals with men; it is their
self that he minds and values: As nothing below Gods self should satisfy us,
so nothing below our self can satisfy God. These are the motives, to stir you
up, to give your selves to God, (which is the first thing in self-dedication.)

2. Secondly, Live in a constant surrender and resignation of your selves to
the will of God: This is a blessed frame and temper, and that which is of the
very essence of self-dedication. I will pursue this Exhortation, according to
the distinction laid down in the Explicatory part. The will of God, is either
his Preceptive or his Providential will; it is man's duty to surrender up himself
to both, so as to be subject to the one, and submissive to the other.

1. As to the preceptive will of God, which consists in those excellent laws,
commands, precepts, injunctions, which the holy God in his word has imposed
and laid upon his creatures, in order to the directing and obliging of them to
their duty. Surrender up your selves to this will: it is a very becoming thing
for the creature so to do: a creature (as a creature) is bound to be subject to
the will of his Creator and Sovereign: The law of obedience is written in our
very being; he that considers what God is, and what he himself is, cannot but
judge it a very reasonable thing, for him to resign up himself to the will of
God. And indeed the creature never acts according to the natural obligation
which lies upon him, neither is it ever right or well with him, till he comes
to say, O God, I entirely resign up my self to thy will and government; will thou have me to be holy? I will be so; will thou have me to deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12.
to live soberly, righteously, godly in this present world? I will do so; Is my
sanctification thy will? 1 These. 4.3.
I will endeavor to come up to it; I will not advance my own will, or oppose
my own will to thy will, but thy will shall carry it; what thou command I
will do, give me but strength to obey, Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis.
August.
and command what thou will, (as that holy Father once said.) This
self-resignation to Gods will, is a main part, and an infallible evidence also
of sanctification. When God sanctifies a person, what does he do? He does this,
he makes him willing to act in universal subjection to his holy will; this is
the vital act of grace, the proper and genuine effect of it. No unsanctified,
unregenerate man, can do this; before conversion the sinner is all for his own
will, he will not be subject to the law of God; he will have none upon the
throne but himself; O what a proud, stubborn, rebellious creature is man, in
his natural state! He says with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, that I should obey
his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go,
Exodus 5.2. And with them; Our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Psalm.
12.4. But after saving grace has fastened upon him, he is another man, then
it is the language of Paul, Lord, what will thou have me to do, Acts. 9.6. now
his will is melted into the will of God, now the law is written in the heart,
Psalm. 40.8.
and there is a principle within him, which suits with, and inclines him to,
the good will of God.

Observe me further, the sanctification of our will lies in the subjection of
it to Gods will. That great work of sanctification extends to all the
faculties, but principally it is terminated upon the will; that is the faculty
which renewing grace does most with; for of all the faculties, that is the most
depraved and vitiated; there is the very nest and seat of sins venom and
poison; and it is that which makes the greatest opposition to God; there is
Satan's strongest hold, when that is once taken, all do yield: the sinner is
gained, when the will is gained; when that is once made pliable, flexible,
obedient, the work is done. That which I infer from all that has been spoken,
is this, would you act as becomes you, (as you are creatures,) would you have
an evidence of sanctification, as to your persons and wills? Then surrender and
resign up your selves to the supreme, absolute, holy will of God. If you will
but dwell upon this in your Thoughts a little, and urge it home upon your
selves, it will be enough (the spirit of God setting it on) to prevail with
you, to do what I am urging upon you.

The work would be endless, If I should enlarge upon every Head, (according to
what the matter would bear,) otherwise I might further enforce this
self-resignation and subjection, from these particulars. Romans 12.3. Romans 7.12.
Deuteronomy. 10.13.
1. Gods will is an excellent will. 2. It Is the creatures advantage to
correspond with this will. Psalm. 81.11, 12.
3. Many are the mischiefs that rise from non-subjection. 4. God will have his
will, Romans 2*25.
one way or another; for volunt as Dei semper impletur aut a nobis aut de
nobis, (Aug.) It shall either be done by us or upon us. 5. External profession
without this is a mere vanity. Matthew. 7.21.
6. This is absolutely necessary to salvation. Heb. 10*36.

Here is full weight, measure pressed down; put all together, these
considerations must needs preponderate and weigh down all objections, that the
carnal heart of man can make against subjection to Gods will. But I shall pass
by these things, and rather insist upon something by way of direction, as to
the matter or the extent of the duty it self. And this I will reduce to two
general Heads.

1. Surrender up your selves to the will of God, as this refers to acts of
worship, or to holy duties; I mean prayer, hearing, receiving the Sacrament,
etc. The will of God reaches to these; and it calls for our subjection and
obedience, in our constant performance of all those holy duties, which the
great Lawgiver has stamped his command and institution upon. This is to be
religious; Religion (in its primary notion) points to the worship of God, (in
the matter and manner of it:) what is religion? Take it strictly, it is this, to
worship God, upon the consideration of his glorious excellencies and will, and
to do this according to his will. If you desire to be religious, (as surely you
either do, or ought to do, religion being both the duty, and also the
advancement of the creature,) then you must comply with Gods will, in attending
upon the several parts of sacred worship, doing all according to the mind of
God: there is no religion without this. That which I shall press upon you
therefore, is this; surrender up your selves to God, yield obedience to him, in
frequent, constant attendance upon, and performance of holy duties, whether
they be public or private. You have very strong reasons for this. (O that men's
corruptions were not stronger than all the reasons that can be alleged!) God
wills them; it is his will, that you should pray, hear, read, etc. Is not that
reason enough? Holy duties are that homage, which God requires, and which the
creature does indispensably owe to his Creator: and besides this, they are the
means, in and by which God does work; in them, the Lord vouchsafes his
presence, Exodus 20*24. Jam 4.8. and passim.
gives the soul communion with him, in his love and blessedness, displays his
grace, dispenses his blessings, and what not? By them God carries on the great
designs of his mercy, (for he sets in with them, and does great things by
them:) here it is, that he quickens the dead, softens the hard, tames the
stubborn, humbles the proud, enlightens the blind, cleanses the filthy,
comforts the sad, fills the empty, heals the wounded; here the sinner is
converted, the Saint edified; here the thirsty soul finds peace, joy, delight,
satisfaction, Isa. 56.7. Psalm. 63.1.5. Cant. 2*2, 3.
Assurance, etc. These are the pools, where the Angel of the Covenant moves, (
Joh. 9.4.) the wells of salvation, out of which the soul draws the water of
life, ( Isa. 12.3.) the breasts of heavenly consolation; the keys which unlock
the treasuries of mercy; the golden pipes through which mercy flows, ( Zech.
4.12.) the ladder by which we ascend to God, and he descends to us, ( Genesis
28.12.) the vehicula coeli, the wagons which carry Earth to Heaven, and Heaven
to Earth, ( Genesis 45.27.) the galleries, in which Christ delights to walk, Cant.
7.5. O the blessed effects of holy duties! by them, corruption is mortified,
grace wrought and strengthened, comfort increased, doubts resolved, evidences
cleared, etc. As duty goes up, grace goes up, and sin goes down; the more in
duty, the more of grace. Is not here enough, to engage every man, to fall in
with the will of God, in the performing of holy duties? David said, it was good
for him to draw near to God. Psalm. 73.28.
O that we did look upon duty as good! that it was good to hear, good to read,
good to pray, good to meditate, good to be at the Lords Table.

It Is greatly to be lamented, that there are so few, who do conform to the will
of God herein: look upon the practices of the most of men, God has but little
worship from them; they seldom pray, seldom come to the word, seldom read the
Scriptures: nay many live in a total neglect and omission of the service of
God: they are swallowed up in a sensual, brutish, worldly life; for religious
exercises, they seldom or never mind them: nay, O that there were not too many,
that did deride and scoff at these! what shall I say to these? Is this to be
Christians? Surely these are flat Atheists, not Christians: have these
dedicated themselves to God, that live as though they believed there was no
God? Have these resigned up themselves to his will, who act in such an open
contradiction to it? How will Heathens and Turks rise up in judgment against
these? The Heathens, when they had dedicated themselves to their Gods, they
would worship them, according to their light. The Sea Mr. Rycauts History of
the Ottoman, etc. B. 2. Chap. 1. p. 98. and Chap. 23. p. 158.
Turks pray five times every 24 hours: Mahomet (that villainous Impostor) in his
Alchoran, speaks honorably of prayer, he calls it the key of Paradise, the
pillar of religion, (and many such Elogiums he gives to it:) And he strictly
enjoined all his disciples to pray five times a day: and the Turks are very
careful in the observing of this injunction: they have five great fundamentals
in their religion, and this is one, to pray so often (as I have said) every
day. Lord, what a sort of men are we Christians! who have so many strict,
peremptory commands from our blessed Savior, for prayer and other holy
exercises, and yet we make no conscience of them. O that men would either alter
their course, or abandon their Title; they are a shame, a reproach to
Christianity; what? a Christian, and not pray, not read the Bible, etc. it is a
contradiction. Well, let these go, I beseech you, (whoever you are, that shall
cast your eyes upon these lines) to enter upon a constant course of duty;
comply with Gods will, be religious, pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17.
come up to all acts of worship; no time so well spent, as time thus spent; you
will never repent of time thus spent; you may (and you will) of that, which is
wasted in idleness, drunkenness, immoderate pleasures, worldly pursuits, but
your praying-time, hearing-time, meditating-time, Scripture-reading-time, you
will never repent of that, or wish you had spent it otherwise. And let me tell
you, there is that sweetness, delight, complacency, refreshment in holy duties
(duly managed) that if you did but experimentally feel it, you would never be
averse from them; you would prefer duty before all carnal delights. O let such
especially, who profess God, be much in these: let your hearts readily Echo to
Gods command, (as David's did,) Psalm. 27.8. When thou said, seek ye my face,
my heart said unto thee, (presently, immediately, as soon as ever the word was
out of Gods mouth,) Thy face (O Lord) I will seek: Do you, not only yield a
bare subjection to this will, but let it be a willing, cheerful, affectionate
subjection; pray and love prayer; hear and love hearing; receive the Sacrament,
and love receiving: Let holy duties be naturalized to you, so that you cannot
live without them: let them be to you more necessary than your daily food, (as
the word was to Job, Job 23.12.) or than any thing that sustains the natural
life: let nothing part you and duty, be not diverted or taken off from it.
Daniel would rather cease to live, than cease to pray, Dan. 6.10.

2. Surrender up your selves to the will of God, as this refers to the life,
and the whole life; so as to live in an obediential conformity to it;
(especially where it refers to things moral, that do eternally and
indispensably oblige the creature:) This is holiness: Complying with the will
of God under the former Head, is Religion, under this it is holiness: for the
nature of holiness, consists in conformity to the will of God; (the standard,
measure, rule of all righteousness.) O that you would act in an universal
compliance with this will! It Is a great piece of Gods goodness, that he has
given us, so full, so plain a revelation of his will in the word; how we are to
think, speak, live, what we are to do, what we are to shun, how to trade,
converse, eat, drink, how we are to order the whole conversation, we have clear
express discoveries of Gods will, for all these: now, if you would resign up
your selves to this will, to order thoughts, words, actions, the whole
conversation conformably to it, this would be self-dedication indeed, real
holiness. And what a blessed thing is holiness! let the world take heed how
they disparage or deride holiness; it is Gods own glory; he is glorious in
holiness, Exodus 15.11. and holiness is his glory, Joh. 12.41. These things said
Esaias, when he saw his glory: when was this? when he heard the Seraphims
crying one unto another, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth
is full of his glory, Isa. 6.3. It Is a beautiful thing, it is called the beauty
of holiness, Psalm. 110.3. Nothing puts such a beauty and glory upon the
creature, as holiness; It Is that which is necessary to the future glory;
without holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. But I must not lanch out
into so vast an Ocean: the sum of all is this; in your whole course consult
the will of God, and give obedience to it; walk by this rule, square all your
actions by it, and mercy and peace shall be upon you: Gal 6.16.
live not according to the Ephesians. 2.3. (...)
wills of the flesh, or the wills of men, but live according to the will of
God, 1 Pet. 4.1. etc. Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us, etc. That
he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of
men, but [to the will of God.] For the time past of our life may suffice us, to
have wrought [the will of the Gentiles, etc. In all your ways, ask this
question, what would God have me to do? And when you know this, O see that you
act accordingly. Ah, and like this will of God; say, just thus I would have it;
I would not have it otherwise; I do not desire a better will, or a better law,
only I desire a better heart. Do thus, and you are a people dedicated to God:
so much for self-surrender to the Preceptive will of God.

2. There Is the Providential will of God; you must resign up your selves to
this will also. A Christian carries it like himself, when in every condition,
and in all occurrences, he says, (with Paul's friends,) The will of the Lord be
done, Acts 21.14. when he is heartily willing, that God should have his will,
and there is a kind of annihilation or exinanition of his own will; when he
speaks to God, (as once the Martyr,) Lord, there shall be but one will betwixt
thee and me, and that shall be thy will. And the truth is, we are no farther
fit to live, than as we can surrender up our selves to God, and in all things
submit to his good pleasure.

I told you, this submission relates either to that which is past or present,
or to that which is to come; the former is Patience, the latter is an humble
referring our selves to Gods dispose.

1. You must resign up your selves to Gods will, as to what is past or present;
(that is) you must with an holy patience, bear whatever evils, trials,
troubles, afflictions it pleases him to lay upon you. This is included in
self-dedication, and is one of the most difficult parts of it. We are not so
obstinately set against Gods preceptive will, but we are as peevish, fretful,
discontented under his providential will. Now are you afflicted, (or may
affliction hereafter befall you?) Do you suffer for God, or from God? Does he
put any bitter cup into your hands, as sickness, want, loss of relations, etc.
look to this, Luke 21.19. Jam. 1.4.
that in patience you possess your souls: Let patience have its perfect work:
Be still, and quiet, and silent, however things go; take heed of murmuring,
repining, fretting under Gods hand; keep the heart Patientia est malorum cum
aequanimitate perlatio. Lact. l. 5. cap. 22. Est virtus conservans bonum
rationis contra tristitiam. Aquin. 22. Qu. 128.
sedate, calm, let your condition be what it will.

That I may help you on in this great duty of patience, I will only hint a few
things. Gods will is in every trial; affliction comes not forth of the dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the ground, ( Job 5.9.) it comes not by
chance, or (only) by second causes, but by Gods appointment and ordination; he
has an hand in the inflicting of all evils, who is the fountain of all good.
Is there any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. He that
measures out our comforts, does also measure out our crosses. Should not this
quiet us? It did so in those great examples of patience, which you read of in
the word: 1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: (says Ely.) I was dumb and
opened not my mouth, Psalm. 39.9.
because thou Lord did it, (says David:) The Lord gave, and the Lord has
taken away, Job. 1.21.
blessed be the name of the Lord, (says Job:) what a strange inference was
that, This evil is of the Lord, 1 Kings 6.33.
why should I wait on him any longer? When God was in the premises, that
impatience should be in the conclusion; nothing could be more absurd,, nothing
more sinful. If all our troubles be the issues of Gods will, there is all the
reason in the world, we should be patient under them: Considering farther what
a kind of will this will of God is It Is a sovereign, righteous, wise, faithful,
gracious will; shall not poor creatures submit to such a will? O the
sovereignty of God should awe us; who shall say unto him, what do thou? Job
9.12. Should it be according to thy mind? Job 34.33. Nay but O man, Nisi Deus
hominibus placuerit non erit Deus. Tertull.
who art thou that reply against God? Shall the thing formed, say to him
that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Romans 9.21. The righteousness of God
should keep down all passion and perturbation: Afflictions may be sharp, but
they are always just, and God is righteous in them: He will not lay upon man
more than right, that he should enter into judgment with God, Job 34.23. The
Lord is holy in all his works, and righteous in all his ways, Psalm. 145.17. The
wisdom of God should further patience; he never afflicts but it is in wisdom;
and he never acts his wisdom more, than when he is afflicting: he is a God of
judgment, Isa. 30.18. Let the trial be what it will, the faithfulness of God is
in it, Psalm. 119.75. In very faithfulness thou have afflicted me. Ah, and
there is mercy in it too; an afflicting God is a gracious God; Whom the Lord
loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives, Heb. 12.6. We
are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world, 1
Cor. 11.32. -- He for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness,
Heb. 12.10. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the
fruit to take away his sin, Isa. 27.9. If the will of God be not sufficient to
keep down all storms in the soul, then look into your afflictions, are they not
deserved? I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him, Mic. 7.9. Why does a living man complain, a man for the punishment
of his sins? Are they not less than what you deserve? Ezra 9.13. Could ye be
without them? 1 Pet. 1.6. Will they continue for ever? 2 Cor. 4.16. Will not
God do you good by them? Romans 8.28. Have they not been the common lot of all
the people of God, Joh. 16.33. O that men would Eccles. 7.14.
consider, when it is a day of adversity, and patiently rest in Gods will, and
quietly resign up themselves to it. What an Magna and praecipua virtus ^st
patientia. Lactant. Vid^ ^ypr. de Bono Patientiae. p. 362. etc.
excellent grace is this patience; there is a complication, connection of many
graces in it; speak patience, you speak faith, humility, self-denial, love, and
several others: It argues not only the truth of grace, but the strength of
grace. The Christian that has this, is perfect and entire, Jam. 1.4. It Is the
ballast of the mind, that which keeps a man steady in the greatest storms: it is
the soul at rest, it gives inward serenity under outward troubles: it shortens
and Leve fit, quod been fertur onus Ovid. Levius fit patientia, quod corrigere
est nefas. Vide Plutarch. Mor. (...).
lessens affliction; no affliction is great where patience is: nothing can much
trouble that man, who resolves to acquiesce in Gods will, what pleases God
shall please him. That which makes afflictions to be so heavy, is the clashing
and jarring of our wills against Gods will. These things (which I have here
hinted) might fill up a volume; the subject is vast, but I must take up: Will
you now endeavor to live this self-surrender to the will of God? Does not your
dedication to God call for this? Do you not in that profess the submitting of
your wills to the will of God? and that you will quietly undergo all crosses,
troubles, that he shall think good to lay upon you? that you will give no way
to the sin, folly, madness of impatience? or any entertainment to aestuations,
discomposures of spirit, mutinous thoughts against God? that sin only shall be
the object of your passion? O what O virum putrem and integrum; o foedum and
pulchrum; O vulneratum and sanum; O in stercore sedentem and in coelo
regnantem. Aug. of Job de Temp. Sermon. 105. Cesset voluntas propria non erit
infernum. Bernard. Romans 15 5. Colos. 1.11.
excellent persons should we be, what happy lives should we live, could we but
come up to, and make good this dedication! when the wind and tide go the same
way, the waters are smooth: what peace and serenity should we enjoy, if Gods
will and our wills might concur. Bernard says, Take away self will, and Hell
would not be Hell. The God of patience strengthen us with all might according
to his glorious power unto all patience, and long-suffering with joyfulness.

2. Surrender up your selves to the will of God, as to what is to come; my
meaning is this, refer all to Gods dispose; your persons, conditions,
relations, all your concerns, refer them to God. This is both the Christians
duty and privilege; he need not trouble himself with anxious thoughts about
what is future, but he may leave all with God, and cast all his care upon God,
1 Pet. 5.7.
and rest there. We must neither prescribe to God, (that is pride,) nor distrust
God, (that is unbelief:) it is the former that I drive at; O Christians do not
prescribe to God, or impose upon God, as to future mercies, or your future
conditions; but put your selves into his hands, and lie at his feet, and let
him do what he sees best. Thus the child carries it to his Father, and we have
a better Father in Heaven, to leave our selves and our all with. We love to be
directing providence, (as Joseph would tell his Father what he had to do, Genesis
48.17, 18.) or imposing upon Providence; such and such things we foresee, or
have them in our thoughts, and then we are selfish and hasty, and must order
God, both as to things and times. Is it not much better to refer all to God?
He Is a God of wisdom, and a God of mercy; and therefore we have the greatest
engagements and encouragements too, that are imaginable, to sit still and to
let God alone: God knows what is best, such is his wisdom, he will do nothing,
but what is for the best, such is his mercy. Had we a friend upon earth, of
whom we could have this assurance, we should refer all to him. God is willing
to take our affairs into his Psalm. 31.15.
hands, to engage all his wisdom and goodness in ordering of them for the best,
and yet we will not resign up our selves to him. It Is a great speech of Plato,
(...), God acts in all things like a Geometrician; he does all things by
measure, exactly; he orders all his providence concerning every particular
person in the world, Providentia ita curat omnia ut unum aliquid* ita singula,
ut si illud curaret unicum. Aug. Adjice ad utilissimam dulcissimae Providentiae
praesumptionem, de singulis sic curare Deum quasi singuli soli essemus in
mundo, quemadmodum Adam in Paradiso. Non distrabitur, non confunditur
multitudine divina procuratio. Nieremb. Theopolitic. p. 55.


according to the exact measures of wisdom and love: If so, have we not reason
then to submit to his dispose? O (says the Son in Plutarch) I Will refer my self
to my Father, for my Father will do nothing but what is best to be done: shall
not we speak thus to God? O man, (O believer especially) refer thy self to thy
God; say, He shall choose our inheritance for us, (as it is Psalm. 47.4.) Let God
choose for you; let it be life or death, liberty or restraint, service or no
service, what it pleases God to choose for us, we must submit to, and approve
of: what sad work should we make of it, might we be our own chusers, or at our
own dispose! What a strange creature would man be, if God should let him alone,
and leave him to himself? He would need nothing more to undo him, than to be
left to his own wisdom, and will. The self-chuser is the self-destroyer. If the
Pilot should let the unskilful passenger steer the Ship, he would split it
immediately. If the Physician should let the patient eat, drink, what he has a
mind to, he would soon bring his life to a period. This is our case. It does
not become us, as we are Creatures, to order our selves, it would destroy us as
we are Christians: Blessed be God, he will order us, as he sees cause. Well
then, upon the consideration of Gods wisdom, and your own folly, refer your
selves to him: As you that are Citizens, in the building of your Houses, you
have no skill in Architecture, and therefore you refer all to your workmen,
whom you judge to be skilful and faithful. Indeed we are very ignorant, we know
not what is best, we may pitch upon this or that as a great mercy, which would
be in truth a judgment: O we have a wise and faithful God, let us be willing to
be disposed of by him. This is a frame of spirit, highly pleasing to God, and
much to our own advantage: we are never so much in the way of a mercy, as when
we can refer our selves to God, for that mercy. So much for the enforcing of
submission to Gods Providential will: O that we could come up to this! so as
that in all things we could quietly refer our selves to the will of God, and
get our wills perfectly melted into that: Good Lord, how far did the (...).
Epictetus Enchirid. c. 77. etc. 79. (...). Vid. Senec. de tranq. Animi.
Stoics go in this, to their supposed Deities, without the light of the
Gospel, merely upon the improvement of rational principles: and how short do we
come in our actings toward the true God, under those higher advantages that we
enjoy, and those higher principles that we pretend to. But let this suffice for
the second branch.

3. In the third place, self-dedication consists, in the firmness and fixedness
of resolution for God and his ways; this is next to be spoken to: the nature of
it has been opened already; I am only now to stir you up to the practice of
it. If you would dedicate your selves to God, you must do these two things; you
must resolve for him, and you must be resolute for him: these are different
things, and I aim at the prosecuting of different things from them. To resolve
for God, it is to have the will fully determined, (or fully determining;) to
come to a positive, peremptory decision or purpose for God and duty. To be
resolute for God, it is to adhere to this determination and purpose, so as by
nothing to be moved or drawn from it: To resolve for God, is the act of the
will ad intra, and it is opposed to all doubting, hesitating, fluctuating,
irresolvedness within: To be resolute for God, it is a man's carriage ad extra;
it is to be steady, constant, courageous, (in that which is good) in opposition
to fickleness, levity, fear, cowardice, let the external dangers or
discouragements be what they will. The difference betwixt these two is plain
enough; I will speak something (yet very briefly) to each of them.

1. Resolve for God: Let me suppose this to be your case, (which is very
frequent and common;) you have been long parlying and debating within your
selves, whether you should be the Lords, yea or no; whether you should close
with holiness or not; you have traversed and argued things pro and con; such
and such considerations have been weighed by you very seriously: the balances
seem to go down on Gods side, Scripture reasons preponderate, the will is in a
great measure inclined to close with God, to embrace his ways: but it is not
yet come up to a full resolution; yet there is some hanging off, some suspense
and doubting in the matter; it is Acts 26.28.
almost persuaded, but it is not altogether persuaded. O now that you would
fully resolve, that you would bring things to a point, to an issue, and
positively determine for God against all opposers. That the almost might be
turned into altogether; shall there be such throws and strivings in the soul,
and nothing come of it? Shall the Isa. 66.9.
child be brought to the birth, and shall there not be a bringing forth? Shall
any come so near the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet come short of the Kingdom of
Heaven at last? After debates come resolves; you have been debating thus and
thus a long time, now resolve, that God shall have your heart and life: it is
good to deliberate, (they always prove the best Christians, that enter upon
Gods ways with the most deliberation,) but it is not good to continue under
uncertainties, and irresolvedness. O do not fluctuate or hang in suspense any
longer, but pass a final peremptory decree for God. As the Prophet argued with
the people of Israel; How long halt ye betwixt two opinions? If the Lord be
God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him, 1 Kings 18.21. so I would with
you; why are you so undetermined and unresolved? If God be better than sin,
then fall in with him; if sin be better than God, (but can the heart of man
imagine such a thing?) then take your course. The Prodigal, it is very likely,
in his great straits, had some debates in himself, what he should do; whether
it was not best for him to return to his Father again; when he had been
sufficiently pinched with his wants, then he resolves; I will arise and go unto
my Father, etc. Luke 15.18. O that sinners might have such a sight and sense of
sin and the sad effects of it, that they might immediately resolve to return to
God! That the spirit of God would come in with such a light, so illuminate the
understanding, that the will might be drawn to a peremptory resolution for God.
Here lies the work of grace, and the sincerity of self-dedication; we do but
deceive our selves, if we fancy that we have dedicated our selves to God, if
our wills be not fully, fixedly, resolved for him.

2. Be resolute for God. Having given up your selves to him, and engaged in a
good way, now be resolute, steadfast and unmovable, 1 Cor. 15.58. Stand fast in
the Lord, Phil. 4.1. (many such exhortations you meet with in the Scripture:)
Esther was resolute, she would venture into the Kings presence, though she
perished, Esth. 4.16. It Is the duty of such as profess God, to hold on in the
way of duty, resolving if they perish, to perish in that way. Job says of
himself, he held fast his righteousness, and he would not let it go, Job 27.6.
Paul's afflictions were nothing to him, he was resolved for God and Christ, Acts
20.24. Acts 21. 13. The three children could burn in the fiery furnace, but
they would not bow to the golden image, Dan. 3.18. Though all should forsake
Christ, Peter would never forsake him, Matthew. 26. 33. (his resolution was good,
but his self-confidence spoiled all:) O that we were thus resolute for God, his
ways, his truths, his ordinances, his glory; we should be so set for him, that
nothing should be able to make us quit our profession, or an holy course; we
should let men see, we are not to be moved or altered, we are so fixed and
resolute. This is an excellent frame of spirit, very well becoming such as have
dedicated themselves to God. Let the truth of your dedication appear in the
firmness of your resolution. Does the world smile? Mind it not, let all its
honors, pleasures, possessions be nothing, when they would draw you off from
God. Does the world frown? fear it not; its good is not much to be desired, its
evil is not much to be feared: There Is no evil like to the evil of sin, and of
Apostasy from God. Do the generality of men go another way? It Is no matter for
that; it is for the dead fish to swim down the stream; it is better to go to
Heaven with a few, Matthew. 7.14.
than to Hell with the crowd. Does the flesh interpose? say, Matthew. 16.23.
flesh get thee behind me, thou art an offense to me. Does the cross lie before
you? Luke 9.23.
take it up, and still follow Christ; say, you can take up the cross, but you
cannot lay down duty; you can suffer, but you cannot leave God. Are the times
had? let them not make you bad; do you make them better, let not them make you
worse. Does Satan assault? say, Satan let me alone, thou mistakest thy mark, I
am fixed for God, thou can not alter me. Do you meet with scorn and derision
from men? 2 Samuel 6.22.
tell them, If this be to be vile, you will be more vile still. Is your work
difficult? yet keep to it, God will help you in it, and reward you for it. Are
you set in dangerous places, where bullets fly about your ears continually? yet
keep your ground, God has ordered your station; you are his soldiers, and
therefore you must be men of courage and resolution. O that you would with full
purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord: This Barnabas exhorted the Christians of
Antioch to, Acts 11.23. How resolute are sinners against God, will not you be
as resolute for God? He may say, do what he pleases, yet they will sin: let the
law, judgment to come, Hell, be set before them, it is all one, they are set
upon their course, Jer. 8. 5. They hold fast deceit, they refuse to return,
Jer. 2.25. I have loved strangers, and after them I will go, Jer. 44. 16. As
for the word, that thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hearken to thee: But we will certainly, etc. Now (I say) are they so resolved
in their way to Hell, and will not you be as resolved in your way to Heaven:
And pray consider; can you mend your selves by leaving God? will it turn to a
good account, to exchange God for the creature, holiness for sin? Are the
things of time, to be weighed in the balance, with the things of eternity?
What is it to secure earth and to lose Heaven? Can you secure the soul, future
blessedness, unless you keep steady to God? Why will you forsake that God,
Hebr. 13.5.
who will never forsake you? Will you find any where a better master, a better
friend, a better portion, a better God? Till you can do this, pray keep where
you are, (if you be in Gods way,) and be fixed and resolute. Resolve for God,
and then act resolution in your whole course: Herein is your self-dedication.
He that is not resolved for God, come what will come, has not truly dedicated
himself to God: when a person upon mature deliberation determines for God, and
then is firm and steadfast, he is the person who has dedicated himself in a
right manner.

4. Fourthly, As you desire to dedicate your persons to God, set your selves
apart for God, and carry it as a people, who are separated from the world.
Dedication necessarily implies separation: this has been spoke to, (I will not
actum agere:) let me only persuade you, to live in the world, as becomes those,
who have passed under a solemn dedication or consecration: let it be seen, you
are no ordinary or common persons, but such as have separated, and set
themselves apart for spiritual purposes: Impropriate your selves to God;
self-dedicating persons, they profess themselves to be Gods Impropriation; they
give up themselves to God, to be appropriated to his use: O Christians, that
you would do thus: Do not prostitute your selves to common uses, (I do not
speak this, to take you off from your callings, or your lawful affairs in the
world,) but lay out your selves in special for God: you must not be as ordinary
vessels, that are put to any use, but you must be as the vessels of the
Sanctuary, 1 Chronicles. 22.19.
that were dedicated to the service of God. You are taken out of the common of
the world, and are as Gods enclosure, and therefore he expects some singular
fruit and service from you. But I run out upon a truth, which is not so much in
my eye: that which I aim at, is the notion of separation, to press that upon
you. And I shall only speak to one branch of it, and that is this, separation
from the sinful course and practices of evil men. Self-dedication calls upon
you for this: If you would indeed dedicate your selves, then you must separate
your selves from the ordinary ways, and courses of graceless men; you must not
live as they do, act as they do, be as they are, but you must carry it, as a
separated people. I meddle not with separation from Church Communion, (far be
it from me to urge that upon any,) it is only separation from men's vices and
sins that I am furthering; and surely the Scripture will bear me out in this, 2
Cor. 6.17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, (says the
Lord) and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, Ephesians. 5.11. Have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them,
Ephesians. 4.17. This I say therefore, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles
walk in the vanity of their mind, etc. Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this
world, etc. Christians must not walk according to the course of this world,
(Ephesians. 2.2.) Tertullian tells us of a soldier that was a Christian, when his
fellow soldiers, (who were Heathens) wore Laurel upon their Heads, he would
not do so: Being asked why; O (says he) I am a Christian, and therefore I must
in habit, in every thing differ from others. O Christians, where is your zeal
for God, in holy singularity? Would you dedicate your selves to God, and yet do
as others do? O that cannot be! Be singular therefore, and let there be a real
difference betwixt you and others: They are swearers, drunkards,
Sabbath-profaners, deriders of godliness, despisers of holy duties, etc. you
must be quite other men, of a different constitution and conversation.
Especially you who have really dedicated your selves, you must set your selves
apart, Eade nos faciemus quae caeteri? Nihilinter nos and illos intererit?
Plurimum. Senec. Ep. 5.
and differ from the course of the world: Shall there be no difference betwixt
Saints and sinners? Shall the two seeds be confounded? Shall the children of
God, live just as the children of Satan? God forbid! You have another spirit,
(as it is said of Caleb, Numb. 14.24.) and therefore you must live another life:
you have differing principles, profess to walk by a differing rule, are
invested with differing privileges, and all these call for differing
practices. You are children of light, and must walk as the children of light,
Ephesians. 5.8. You must be as the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye (should) shine as lights in the
world, Phil. 2.15. When others mind earthly things, your conversation must be
in Heaven, Phil. 3.19, 20. when others work all uncleanness with greediness,
you have not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4.19, 20. O let it appear to the world,
that you are persons of another make and constitution, that those that know not
God. You are to convince the world, 1 Pet. 3.16. to condemn the world, Heb.
11.7. how shall you do this, but by the holiness and singularity of your
conversations? Do not do the same which others do, (in that which is evil,) do
more than others do, (in that which is good,) for Christ expects a (...),
something more from you than he does from others, Matthew. 5.47. Christians,
dedicate your selves to God, and make good your dedication: evidence the
reality of it, by your being separated from the course of wicked men: he that
lives the common life, is but a common person, an unconsecrated person.
Wherever there is dedication, there must be impropriation and separation.

5. Fifthly, Enter into Covenant with God; Give the hand to the Lord, (as
Hezekiah expresses it.) This is a very weighty point; making of covenant, and
keeping of covenant with God, are the sum of all, the two poles upon which
all religion moves: You have many excellent Treatises written by our own
Divines upon these two Heads: I shall refer you to them, for the full and large
handling of them, for I must contract:) How shall I speak to men, to make them
willing to covenant with God? to enter into the Bond of the Covenant, Ezekiel.
20.37.
and so to bind themselves to the Lord for ever? This is the work that I have
now before me, the Lord prosper me in it: O that some poor souls might be
wrought upon by what I shall say, not only to give up themselves to God, but to
do this in a federal way; that there might be binding as well as giving, and
stipulation as well as resignation. Let me allude to that, in the 2 Kings 9.5.
you read there of a Prophet coming to the Captains of the Host, and he said, I
have an errand to thee O Captain: And Jehu said, unto which of all us? And he
said to thee, O Captain. I (a poor Minister) bring a message from the Lord to
sinners, (namely, that God would have them to enter into Covenant with him.)
Now will these ask me, To which of them, I bring this message? I answer, To
thee O sinner, whoever thou art, that have not yet engaged thy self to God.
This is every man's duty; and let men think what they please, till they have
done this, they have done just nothing in religion. The Scripture speaking of
the conversion of the Gentiles, sets it forth by this, Psalm. 68.31. Princes
shall come out of Egypt, Aethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God,
(h. e.) they shall enter into Covenant with God. Isa. 44.5. One shall say I am
the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord. Zech. 2.11. Many Nations shall be
joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people. O that in these days we
might see more of the accomplishment of these Prophesies! that the poor
Heathens might be brought to join themselves to the Lord; and that Christians
living under the Gospel, they also might subscribe with hand and heart to God,
and enter into the obligation of the Covenant. 'Twas prophesied of the Jews,
upon their coming out of Babylon, they should be so affected with this great
mercy, that they would renew and heighten their Covenant obligations: Jer.
50.5. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come
and let us join our selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant that shall not
be forgotten. Sinners, will you speak this (as to your selves,) and make it
good? will you join your selves to the Lord in an everlasting Covenant? God
incline your hearts thus to dedicate your selves to him. I will press this upon
you by a few Arguments.

1. It Is an unspeakable mercy, that God will deal with the Creature in the way
of a Covenant. As he is our Sovereign, he might have imposed a Law upon us, and
dealt with us only in that way: But such is his mercy and condescension, he
will deal with us also, by a covenant. A Law obliges the creature, whether he
consent to it or not; but now a covenant presupposes consent: Man being a free
and rational agent, God deals accordingly with him, and sets a covenant before
him, which if he will consent to, he shall be happy for ever. Does not this
hold forth infinite goodness in the great God, that he will thus treat with us?
And after all this, shall not we be willing to enter into covenant with him?
Besides this, consider the Nature of a Covenant. It Is (as the Pactum est duorum
pluriumve consensus in idem placitum.
Civilians define it) the consent of two or more, to something that is agreed
upon; (but this is a very imperfect description:) More fully therefore; A Vide
Zanch. in Hos. 2.21. Cloppenb. in Syntag. Disput. Selec. de Foedere. Coccei: de
Foedere. Camer. de Tripl. Foedere. Wendelin. Theolog Christ. l. 1. c. 19.
Tilenum p. 2. Disput. 54. Ames. Med. l. 1. c^ 38. and 39. (and quamplures
alios, de Foedere inter Deum and Creaturain t^ actantes.)
Covenant is a mutual stipulation or compact between two parties, as to
something wherein they do agree, upon which they are mutually obliged each to
the other. Such a Covenant there is betwixt God and the Creature; these two do
interchangeably indent and stipulate each to the other, the one for mercy, the
other for duty; and so there a mutual obligation passes upon both. Says God,
here is pardon, reconciliation, eternal life, which I offer upon such and such
terms, and I am willing upon those terms to engage to give out these mercies:
Says the Creature, I accept of those terms, and I solemnly bind my self to make
them good, (according to the utmost of my strength:) Then says God, it is a
Covenant betwixt us; I bind my self to thee, and thou bindest thy self to me;
be thou faithful to me, I will be faithful to thee. What an Ocean or Treasury
of love and goodness, does God manifest in this federal transacting of things!
that he should be willing to stipulate with us, and to enter into an obligation
to us, O the heights, bredths, depths, lengths of this love! Here Is another
difference betwixt a Law and a Covenant; a Law binds the subject, but it does
not bind the Lawgiver, ( quatenus Lawgiver,) the obligation there is but to one
party; but now a Covenant binds both: there the Mutua foederatarum partium
obligatio, est forma foederis: (so all express it.) Foedus propri^ obligationem
duarum partium, certis utrinque conditionibus complecti, certum est Gomar. Haec
est mutua and reciproca conventio foederis, ut homo intuitu promissae mercedis
alacrius operetur, and Deus intuitu operis det mercedem. Cloppenb, Disp. 1. Th.
7.
obligation is reciprocal. It has pleased God to deal with man this way, and
so he binds himself: As to his Law, we only are bound, but as to the Covenant
he (out of the riches of his grace) is willing to be bound as well as we: How
should the consideration of this immense love of God, engage the Creature to
Covenant with him.

2. The matter of the Covenant, on Gods part is very high, the terms or
conditions on our part, are very just and equitable. If this be so, surely then
men will be willing to enter into Covenant with God; one would think this
should carry it against all opposition and frivolous objections. In every
Covenant there is something promised, and something demanded, in order to the
making good of what is promised. In this Covenant, that which is promised, is
on Gods part, and this is the matter of it; what is that? No less, than that
God will be your God: O admirable, transcendent mercy! what can be higher than
this? I will open it under the next particular. The terms or conditions, are on
the Creatures part; what are they? That the sinner will break off all his
leagues, covenants, with sin and Satan and the world; and that he will enter
into a league of friendship with, and subjection to, the blessed God. Surely
these are very fair and reasonable terms: the sinner cannot well object against
them. God offers very high, he goes no lower than the making over of himself;
whatever I am, (says God) it shall be all yours: but the terms spoil all, God
stands upon too high conditions, and that keeps us of; does he so? that would
be something indeed, (for he that promises something, upon impossible and
unreasonable conditions, promises nothing:) But can you make good what you say?
Take heed of belying God: what does he require of you? Is it to burn in Hell a
thousand years? (or some such conditions as this?) O there is no such thing: All
that God requires is but this, that you will be his, as he is willing to be
yours; that you will own him for your God; that you will be subject to his laws
and government; that you will break off all your confederacies with his and
your own enemies; is not all this most reasonable? Are you not bound to this,
whether you enter into Covenant or not? what more high than this, that God will
be ours? what more equitable than this, that we should be his? The Covenant
holds forth the highest of mercies on Gods part, and lays them upon the fairest
conditions on our part; O therefore shall we not enter into it?

3. Upon your entering into Covenant with God, he enters into Covenant with you:
At the same moment of time, in which we cordially engage to him, he does
graciously engage to us. What is Gods covenanting with the Creature? It Is this;
he makes over his self, his whole self, to the Creature: gives him a special
interest and propriety in himself: God is as much and as truly the faithful
Covenanters, as any thing is his, that he has in the world: He has no sooner
entered into Covenant, but he has a real claim and title to God. Jer. 30.21.
Who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me? says the Lord;
(There Is entering into Covenant and then immediately it follows, verse 22.) And
ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. Deuteronomy. 26.17, etc. Thou have
avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, etc. And the
Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, etc. The Covenant
makes the interest reciprocal. Zech. 13.9. I will say, It is my people; and
they shall say, The Lord is my God. So also in Ezekiel. 11.20. Jer. 31.30. And
this interest in God is the very Anima foederis. Paraeus, in Gen 17. Substantia
foederis. Jun. Caput foederis. Musc.
soul and spirit of the Covenant; of all blessings it is the highest; it is
indeed the radical fundamental blessing, for all other grow upon this, and are
built upon this, I will be thy God. O who can express the greatness of this
mercy, when God makes over himself to a poor Creature! To have all God to be
mine? It Is mercy too big to be set forth by the tongue or pen of man. Psalm.
50.7. I am God even thy God: God cannot go higher than this. What an inducement
then is this to you, to enter into Covenant with God? As soon as you have done
this, God is yours: His All Sufficiency, wisdom, power, truth, holiness, mercy,
all is yours. Whatever God is, it is all yours. Deus quantus quantus est, totus
noster est, (says Luther:) O if I could open this to you, in the fullness,
comprehensiveness, glory of this privilege, it would make you to stand and
wonder at the infinite grace of God. Well, it is very great, but it is yours, if
you will but, in this Covenant-way, dedicate your selves, and bind your selves
to God. The wife upon the conjugal covenant, has an interest in the person,
estate, goods of her Husband; all is hers. This Covenant betwixt God and
believers is a Conjugal Covenant, ( Hos. 2.20.) and therefore upon this, they
have a right to all that God is, or has, or does. O blessed are the people
that have the Lord for their God. Psalm. 144 ult.
When they cannot say, Perdider at omnia illa quae dederat Deus, sed habebat
ipsum qui omnia dederat Deum. Aug. of Job 1. Sermon. de Temp. 105.
this or that is mine, all is made up in this, God is mine: Do they want the
Creature? they have all in God: Do they lose the Creature? their God they shall
never lose: Are they brought into great straits? they have their God to go to.
David encouraged himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. Might you have the
whole world, it is all nothing in comparison of my God. May you have this upon
engaging with God, and will you not do it? There Is little sweetness in a God,
but my God is inexpressibly sweet: The highest word that a Creature can speak,
is my God.

4. God deals with men according to their Covenant-state, or according to the
Covenant under which they stand. The rule that he goes by, is not particular
acts, but the Covenant-state: you may do many good things, but if you be not in
Covenant with God, they will not profit you. Would you be accepted by him, or
blessed by him? Then be a Vovenant People; for God judges of men, and gives out
his blessings to men, according to this: O says God, have they struck up a
Covenant with me? then here is my self, pardon, Heaven, all they can desire; but
without this, I have nothing for them. Here lies the misery of unbelievers;
they are strangers from the covenants of promise, and so, they have no hope,
and are without God in the world, (as it is set forth, Ephesians. 2.12.) They have no
plea for mercy, in their non-covenanting condition; they are excluded from all
happiness: He that will not consent to the covenant relation or obligation,
cannot expect the covenant-advantages: God dispensing his blessings by his
Covenant, till men enter into it they cannot expect them at Gods hand. All
depends upon this, and therefore, look that you do it.

5. Every man as he comes into the world, is under the covenant of works; (as
to the condemnation or penalty of it, though his case by Christ is made
remediable, and grace is offered in a better covenant:) The Covenant of works
and the Covenant of grace, divide all mankind; every man is under one of these
covenants. We are born under the first, and that is a dreadful covenant, for it
makes the condition of the Creature desperate; it lays mercy upon those terms,
(viz. personal, perfect, universal obedience,) which are now impossible: He
that is under this covenant, if he fail never so little, as to what the law
requires, he is undone: It Is here Do or Dye: there is no mercy upon the least
failure: not a dram of mercy can be found in that covenant. Who would live a
moment under this covenant? But let me tell you, Ita antiquatum est vetus
legale soedus operum, cum restipulatione vitae aeternae sancitum, ut soluta cum
Deo spirituali agglutinatione, and extincta spe vitae aeternae ex illo foe dear
acquirendae, maneat tamen sub lege obligatio, and nexus damnationem trahens,
donec Deo per Christum agglutinemur novo foedere. Cocceius de Foed. Disp. 7.
Th. 71.
till you enter into covenant with God, that new covenant of grace, (which
succeeds in the room of the covenant of works,) you are yet under that
covenant; till a new bond be made, and new conditions put in, the old remains
in force.

I might set several other motives before you: Enter into covenant with God,
and then you may look upon all your mercies as covenant mercies. How sweet is
it, when they are not only common mercies, but they are covenant mercies; the
bread is covenant-bread, the apparel is covenant-apparel; (and so in the rest:)
what a relish does this give to a mercy, when it flows upon us, through the
Covenant. Enter into covenant with God, your seed will reap the benefit of
this; upon your covenanting with God, God makes over himself to you, and to
your seed also, Genesis 17.7. In doing this, you do that, which may be a blessing
to your posterity when you are dead and gone. Enter into covenant with God,
till this be done, what have you to do with the Lords Supper? How dare
uncovenanting persons come to that ordinance? the end of which, is the sealing,
ratification, confirmation of the covenant of grace? They that have not come
into this covenant, surely the seal of it does not belong to them. O it is an
awakening consideration, till thou have struck up a covenant with God, every
time thou come to the Sacrament, thou make thy self guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, and thou eatest and drinkest damnation to thy self. 1 Cor.
11.27, 29.


I entreat you to consider these things, and let them prevail with you, to
yield up your selves by covenant to the Lord. Have you done this already? This
indeed you professed to do, in your Baptism, but have you done it in good
earnest? Are ye agreed with God upon the terms? In covenants the parties must
be agreed upon the terms, or else they will not proceed to covenant: Are God
and you agreed upon the terms? They are these; that you should put away your
sins, break your league with Hell, Isa. 28.15.
submit your selves to God, to be ruled by him, be holy, conform to his laws:
Do you like these terms? It cannot be expected, that ever you should enter into
covenant with God, till you approve of and assent to his terms and conditions.
Pray like them, they are very good; there is nothing to be said against them;
who should rule you but God? Who will rule you so well as God? Are not his laws
so excellent, that you may well be subject to them? Is not sin such an evil
thing, that you may well part with it? Have you any reason to be in league with
it, which will be the ruin of your souls for ever? Princes will make their
leagues with them, that may help them in a strait; O can sin, the world help
you in a time of affliction, under troubles of conscience, at the hour of
death, at the day of judgment? God will be a good confederate to help in all
these. Fall upon your sins, and so enter into Covenant with God. Anciently they
used to offer sacrifices, when they made their Covenants: Psalm. 50.5. Gather my
Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by sacrifice.
What Is the sacrifice, that you are now to offer up, in your covenanting with
God? Let it be first your selves, and then your sins; your selves as a living
sacrifice, your sins as a sacrifice slain. The Apostle speaks of (...), Romans
12.1.
a living sacrifice: give your persons to God, as a living sacrifice; but now
your sins, like the sacrifices in the law, they must be slain. O crucify the
flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5.24. Destroy the body of
sin, Romans 6.6. let out the very heart-blood of your bosom corruptions: This is
the way to enter aright into covenant with God: As he confirmed his Covenant in
the blood of his son, so we must begin our covenant in the blood of our sins.
But I will add no more upon this; wherein I have been so large because of the
great importance of the matter: Dr. Preston of the New Cov. Ball, Bulkely,
Ruther ford, Sedgw. etc.
and yet I must again refer you to our worthy Divines, who have pressed this
duty upon men, much more convincingly than I can do. I promised to speak
something touching the explicitness of our covenanting with God; but I have in
part prevented my self as to that, in what I have laid down concerning the
explicitness of our dedication: And if any desire to be further informed about
this, they may look into that excellent Treatise cited in the Margent, Vindic.
of Godliness. par. 1. p. 201. etc.
where they will find both motives and also directions about express, explicit
covenanting with God.

6. In the sixth and last place; (I have but one thing more to stir you up to,
and then I shall close this Use, and that is this;) Devote your selves to the
glory of God. David here pens this Psalm, in order to the dedicating of his
House; and he begins it thus; ( verse 1.) I will extol thee, O Lord, etc. and
he would thus extol God, not only by praise, but in the course of his life,
this should be his great design and business: To be set for the glorifying of
God, this is a great thing in our Dedication. He that truly dedicates himself
to God, devotes himself to the glory of God: I cannot deny, but that this is
included, in what has gone before; yet because it is not so plain and express
there as I would have it, (it being a point of so great consequence, and so
inseparable from personal Dedication,) therefore I will speak to it here,
distinctly and by it self. And I conceive, there is not such a coincidence and
coalition betwixt this and the foregoing Heads, but that there is some
difference. As for example; take subjection to the will of God; he that acts in
obedience to this, and fully resigns up himself to it, he may be said to devote
himself to the glory of God, (this being the true way of glorifying God:) But
here I bring in this, upon another account, which will somewhat diversifie it
from the other. There you have that, which does materially tend to the glory of
God, from the nature of the action, but here I am considering the aim, and the
intention of the person: He that obeys God, does that which brings glory to
him; he that devotes himself to the glory of God, does not only do that, but
this is that which he aims at and intends: There it is finis operis, here it is
finis operantis; As a worthy person speaks concerning holiness and godliness;
Dr. Manton upon Jude. p. 200.
This (says he) is the difference between them, holiness more properly
implies a conformity to the Law, and godliness an aim of the soul to exalt
God: so here I may distinguish as to that which I am upon: but why do I trouble
the Reader with niceties? To the business in hand. In general, let me desire
you, very much to eye Gods glory; let it be precious to you; and let your
hearts burn with an ardent zeal, to promote and advance it in the world. Does
he deserve the name of a Christian, whose soul is not set upon this? O friends,
does God set himself to further your good, and will not you set your selves to
further his glory? Shall so much mercy be received from him, and shall no glory
be returned to him? When Ahasuerus read in the Books, how instrumental Mordecai
had been to preserve his life, he asks, what honor and dignity has been done
to Mordecai for this? Esth 6.3.
Pray do you call for the Book of mercies, ('it is a vast volume, in every page
and line it is filled up with mercy,) read it a little; there you will find
creating mercy, preserving mercy, redeeming mercy, and the many great things
which God has done for you: Now ask, what glory has God had for all this? I
fear but very little; how should this fill us with shame and grief! O shall we
not pay God his Quit-rent, or his Rentcharge? Does he protect our persons,
estates, houses? etc. shall we withhold his Tribute and Customs? You know what
I mean by this. What a condescension is it, that the great God will receive any
honor from such poor worms as we are? How should this raise and heighten our
zeal? Do any lose by promoting his glory? In advancing God, (...) Arist. Rhetor.
we advance our selves; by this, we gain honor to our selves; this is a thing
that we are very ambitious of, it is a sweet morsel that we are very greedy of:
Now the best, the surest way to attain this, is for us to endeavor by all
means to honor God; for he tells us, He will honor them that honor him, 1 Samuel 2.30. The Romans so placed the Temple of honor, that there was no coming
at it, but through the Temple of virtue. Would you arrive at honor indeed?
never think to come to it, but by your endeavors to exalt God. To conclude
this; Do you expect to be glorified with God in Heaven, and shall not he be
glorified by you on earth? Does not that deserve all you are, or can do, in
order to the glorifying of God? O set your selves therefore to further this
glory of God: If you may do it any way, whether by doing or suffering, Philip.
1.20.
whether by life or death, if Christ may be but magnified, it is no matter what
it costs you; and though you decrease, and go down in the world, if Christ may
increase, Joh. 3.30.
and God may be honored, do you rejoice. How should we carry it, like Persons
indeed dedicated to God, if we were thus zealous for Gods glory; it is not
enough to talk of this, or to do something in a slighty, careless, perfunctory
manner, in order to it; but we must study, plot, contrive, act to our utmost,
devote our selves to the glory of God.

More particularly, I will leave two things with you:

1. Let your deportment and conversation be such, that God may be glorified.
Let your light so shine before men, Matthew. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven: (so Christ exhorts you.) The matter of our lives should be such, or our
lives (materially considered) should be such, as that glory to God might result
from them. This glory of God, lies in the displaying and manifesting of his
glorious Attributes and excellencies, to and before the world: (I speak of Gods
manifestative glory,) Joh. 17.4. compar. with verse 6. Numb. 14.21. Levit.
10.3. Psalm. 72.19. You that profess your selves a dedicated people, do you so
live, that you may display and manifest Gods infinite perfections, that you may
make them visible and conspicuous, to the world: live out the holiness, wisdom,
mercy, goodness of God; that those that see your conversations, may see much of
God in them: The Apostle speaks of holding forth the word of life, Phil. 2.16.
There is an holding forth of the God of life, as well as of the word of life.
And the Saints are said to be a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a
peculiar people, that they should [shew forth] the virtues of him, who has
called them out of darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. Dedicated
persons must show forth the excellencies of the blessed God, in their
deportment: it is not enough for them, in their own thoughts, to acknowledge and
admire them, but they must (...), show them forth to others. O let us often put
this enquiry to our selves, Do we so live, as that the Attributes of God are
made visible and conspicuous in our conversations?

2. Let the glory of God be your supreme and main end, both in the whole life,
and also in particular actions.

1. As to the whole life; take it in the lump and mass, this should be every
man's end in life, to exalt God. O Lord thou art my God, I will exalt thee, Isa.
25.1. We live, but what is the end which we propound to our selves in living?
Many carry it, as though they propounded no end at all to themselves; they come
into the world, and know not wherefore, and then go out of the world, they know
not whither. O that any should be so brutish! what a sad thing is it, when
there shall be an end to terminate life, that there is no end, to raise and
elevate life! The most have an end, but it is not this end: That which they aim
at, is to get wealth, to be great in the world, to please the flesh, to pamper
the sensual part, to make provision for posterity, etc. But as to the
glorifying of their Creator and Maker, that they never intend. This is sad; are
these ends fit for a man? Much more, are they fit for a Christian? O that men's
profession should be so high, and their ends so low! Let it be otherwise with
you; let the end of your life be Gods glory: An end makes the man, this end
makes the Saint. Here lies the excellency of a man above a beast, he propounds
an end to himself, and acts accordingly. Here lies the excellency of the Saint
above a man, his end is the glorifying of God; this is a blessed end indeed;
let it be yours. If you live, live to God, Rom 14.7.
if you dye, dye to God, in both eye God as your principal end: The person and
the life, are to be judged by the end; when the glory of God is the end, then
person and life are truly excellent. God judges not of men by particular acts,
but by their fixed and ultimate end. O as life is derived from God, let it be
devoted to God: As his mercy is the spring of life; let his glory be the end of
life. What unspeakable comfort and holy confidence will this give you, when you
come to die, if you be sincere in this. At the ending of life, it is the end of
life that is sweet. 'Twas so to Christ, I have glorified thee on the earth,
etc. And now, O Father, glorify thou me, etc. Joh. 17.4, 5. To Paul, To me to
live is Christ, and to die is gain, Phil. 1.21. Hic nobis proponitur, quis sit
praestantissimus vitae scopus. Scotan. Omnes vitae meae actiones ac
perpessiones ad Christi gloriam tendunt, and directae sunt. Piscat. Vitam meam
Christo and Evangelio consecravi. Esthius.
The words are variously interpreted, but the most of Interpreters put this
sense upon them; Paul lived Christ, Christ was the matter and the end of his
life; and upon this, death was gain to him. If you would be holy in life, happy
in death, aim at nothing in your general course, short of Gods glory.

2. Let this be your end in particular actions: these are of several kinds,
some are Natural, some Moral, some Spiritual; and the particular acts under
these are innumerable; well, let all be referred to the glory of God; whatever
you do, whether you eat, or drink, or trade, or converse, or pray or hear, in
every action intend and aim at this. It cannot be imagined, that a man in every
individual act, should formally and Non oportet ut semper aliquis cogitet de
ultimo fine, quandecunque aliquid appetit vel operatur: sed virtus primae
intentionis, quae est respectu ultimi finis manet in quolibet appetitu
cujuscunque rei, etiamsi de ultimo fine actu nen cogitetur, sicut non oportet,
quod qui vadit per viam, in quolibet passu cogitet de fine. Aquin. 1.2. Qu. 1.
Art. 6.
explicitly intend Gods glory; but this is the bent of the heart, and a
gracious person charges this upon himself, (as far as it is possible,)
explicitly to eye it; and where he does not come up to this, yet his main
tendency is that way. As the Traveller does not think of the place whither he
is going, every step of his way, but there is his aim, and therefore he keeps on
in his way, and often he revives upon his thoughts, whither he is going: Thus
it is here, in a believers eyeing of the glory of God, Duobus modis referri
aliquid ad Dei gloriam dicitur; jam formaliter and explicit, etc. Vossius,
These. Theolog. de Virt. Gentil. Th. 2 p. 559.
as his end in all his actions. Let this be done by you; In every thing that
God does, his glory is his end: In Creation, in Providential Acts, in special
Acts of Grace, still his glory is his end: I have created him for my glory,
Isa. 43.7. I wrought for my names sake, Ezekiel. 20.9. To the praise of the glory
of his grace, (or glorious grace,) Ephesians. 1.6. Should not we imitate God in this,
in every thing we do, to make his glory to be our end also? Take heed of other
ends, especially in religious acts: we are too apt to give way to bad ends, in
the best actions: How often do we make God the object of worship, when Self is
the end of it? What horrid hypocrisy is this! how is God provoked by it!
Sincerity and hypocrisy are best discovered by a man's ends in what he does: An
Hypocrite may do much, but he can never sincerely aim at Gods honor. And all
that he does, is all spoiled, because his end is naught. As in the case of
Jehu, he did that which was according to the will of God, Quicquid boni fit ab
homine, and non propter hoc fit, propter quod fieri debere vera sapientia
praecipit, etsi officio videatur bonum, ipso non recto fine peccatum est. Aug.
contra Julian. l. 4. c. 4.
but self was his end, he aimed at his own applause, ( Come see my zeal for the
Lord of Hosts, 2 Kings 10.16.) And therefore all that he did was evil in the
sight of God; he counted it but murder, Hos. 1.4. O how many men's preaching,
praying, etc. is turned into sin, because self is that, which they aim at in
all. It Is the end that specifies the action, and gives a goodness and rectitude
to it, (according to the known maxim in Philosophy:) A good end will not make a
bad action good, but a bad end will make a good action bad. It Is one thing to
do what is good, and another thing to do it well; it is never well done, but
when grace is the principle, the word the rule, and the glory of God the end.
God stands much upon this, he will be honored as men's end: He being the first
cause, he must be and will be, the last end, Romans 11.36. O it is one of the
greatest pieces of idolatry, to make self ones end. And therefore be very
careful here, that in all you eye Gods glory as your last end: do that which
may be seen, (Matthew. 5.16.) but take heed of doing any thing to be seen, Matthew.
6.5. In the whole course of life, in every action, say (with the holy Father)
Propter te Domine, Propter te Domine. I live, it is for thee, this and that I
do, it is for thee: As far as I can possibly go, in all things, it is thy glory
that I aim at. Thus let every one devote himself to Gods glory: Nothing short
of this will be Personal Dedication. And so I have done with this Use.

CHAP. 5. Directions, showing in what manner Personal Dedication must be
managed.
HAving thus fully urged the duty upon you, general and also in the several
branches of it,) my next work, is to give you some Directions about it; and I
will here, 1. Show you, after what manner you are to dedicate your selves to
God: 2. What you are to do, in order to the practice of it.


As to the first, I will lay before you a few Directions.

1. Let your Dedication be entire; (or) dedicate your selves entirely to the
Lord; for it is not sincere, if it be not entire: Many think they dedicate
themselves to God, when they do but deceive themselves, because they do not do
this entirely. I shall only instance in two Heads, unto which, that (which I am
upon) does mainly refer; and they are Donation and Subjection.

1. There is Donation, the giving of a man's self to God; this is a main thing
in Personal Dedication; now see that you do this entirely; that you give whole
self to God, without all base reserves: God will have all or nothing:
Reservations in this case are very dangerous: You know what befell Ananias and
Sapphira upon their reserves, in keeping back part of the price of the land,
Acts 5.3, 4, 5, etc. when you pretend to give your selves to God, take heed of
keeping back any thing from him; the life of your souls will be endangered by
it. The Deuteronomy. 33.10. Levit. 4.11, 12 Levit. 7.32. and 1 8, 9. Differentiam
Hostiarum and Holocaustorum in Levitico before discimus: Holocausta sunt, quae
super Altar integra concremantur. Victimae and Hostiae, quarum pars offertur
Altari, pars sacer dotibus traditur. Hieron. in c. 56. Psaiae. Vid. Gualtperium
in Marc. 12.33. de Holocaustis.
burnt-offering was to be offered up wholly; Head, and Body, and Legs, and
Entrals, all were to be burnt on the Altar: (therefore it was called (...)) and
in this, it differed from the peace offering and thank-offering, where part was
Gods, and part the Priests, and part the offerers. We must be as the
burnt-offering, all without us, within us, all that we are, or have, must be
dedicated to God; nothing must be kept for our selves, (but only in
subordination to God:) The Apostle (in that Scripture so often cited) bids us,
to present our selves a living sacrifice: Now (as Grotius observes) this (...),
the general word (sacrifice) per excellentiam dicitur de Holocausto: (so it is
often taken:) so that we must not only offer up our selves to God, but we must
offer our selves as an Holocaust: And this is that which I am driving at; our
giving of our selves to God must be entire. As for example; we are made up of
body and spirit, both are Gods, and both must be given to him, 1 Cor. 6.20. We
have an heart, that must be given too; that God in special calls for, Prove.
23.26. My son, give me thy My God, what is a Heart, That thou should it so
eye and woo, etc. Herb. Poem. p. 54.
Heart: All we give is nothing without this; God values not your estates, your
external services, if you withhold your heart from him; where is your love to
God, if you do not give him the heart? As Dalilah said to her Husband; Judge.
16.15. How can thou say, I love thee, when thine heart is not with me? Ah,
and God will have the whole heart too: He loves a broken heart, but not a
divided heart: It Is said of Josiah, He turned to the Lord with all his heart,
and with all his soul, 2 Kings 23.25. O if you dedicate your selves to God, let
him have all the heart and all the soul: The heart is the seat of the
affections; to give the heart, and all the heart to God, it is, to let all the
affections in their greatest fervor run out after him: How does the Creature
please God, when his love, delight, joy, desire, fear, are principally placed
upon himself: Again, you have parts, gifts, abilities, interests, estates, give
all to God. He gives to you, that you may give to him; whatever gifts or
endowments you have, you had them from God, let them be employed for God: May
be you are men of interest, O that you would improve it for God; or you have
full estates, honor God with your substance; you shall not lose by it, So
shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new
wine, Prove. 3.9, 10. you have them for this end; God does not give men riches,
that they may spend and gratify their lusts, that they may live high, wear
rich apparel, build magnificent Houses; but that they may do good, and serve
and honor the Donor with all they have. Give back your estates to God; that
is, resign them up to his will; employ them in his service, improve them for
his glory, be ready to part with them for his sake: O, that where God has
given these things, he would also give an heart, thus to return them to
himself. I beseech you consider what you have, within, without, and let God
have it all: This is to be entire in your giving, and so consequently in your
Dedication. In the Covenant of Grace, God entirely gives himself and his All to
us, in our Dedication we must do the same to him; as upon that I can say, Deus
meus and omnia, God is mine, and so all is mine; so upon this I must say, Ego
fuus and omnia, I am bis, and all that I have is His.

2. Secondly, There is subjection; in reference to this, your dedication must
be entire: According to the entireness of a man's subjection, so is the
entireness of his dedication; the entireness of the former, lies in the
universality of obedience to the whole will of God; when the heart is brought
obedientially to close with every command of the word, then its subjection is
entire and full. Thus then you must dedicate your selves, be willing to live in
an universal subjection to Gods will: As there must be no reserves in giving,
so there must be no reserves or partiality in doing: Give all and do all, then
the dedication is right and genuine. This is (in the phrase of the Apostle,)
(...), to fulfill obedience, 2 Cor. 10.6. to Vajemalle Achari. Perfecit post me:
Verse. Syriaca.
fulfill after God, (so it is in the Original,) ('it is spoken of Caleb,) Numb.
14.24. to be complete in all the will of God, Col. 4.12. to be righteous in all
the commandments of God, (as it is said of Zechary and Elizabeth,) Luke 1.6. O
let it be thus with you; whoever thou art, that professest thy self to be a
Christian, and that thou have dedicated thy self to God, look to the extent of
thy obedience, that it be adequate and commensurate to the whole will of God:
where the heart is sincere, it will be thus; as lines that are straight, put
them together, they will all along be contiguous; so where the heart is right,
it suits and joins with the whole law, when you bring it thereunto. David's
sincerity lay in this; 'twas a very high character that God gave of him, when
he styled him, A man after his own heart: now what was this grounded upon? upon
his integrity in his obedience: Acts 13.22. A man after my own heart, which
shall fulfill all my will. He that is for a full compliance with Gods will, he is
just such a person as God desires, he hits exactly with his heart. O sirs, that
you would come up to this; be not partial in your obedience, that is to be as a
cake baked on one-side: Ephraims partiality is set forth by that allusion, Hos.
7.8. Let me assure you, where your obedience is partial, your dedication is but
hypocritical. Many go very far, they do much, and they seem to come very near
the matter, and yet they fall short, Mr. Vines upon Numb. 14.24.
because here they are defective. There Is a great difference betwixt obeying in
part, and being partial in obedience: The first is from the imperfection of the
state, the other is from the hypocrisy of the heart: He that obeys in part,
would do more, and is troubled that he does no more: he that is partial in
obedience, thinks he does enough, and if he should do more he would do too
much: The best of Saints obey but in part, but it is your insincere professors
that are partial in their obedience. Take heed of this I beseech you: do not
pick and choose, to keep one command, and to break another, but carry an equal
respect to all, then you shall not be ashamed: Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be
ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments.

But that I may be more particular in this Head, let me say two things to you,
(and I pray that God will make them effectual:) Cherish no sin, Baulk no duty;
Do nothing, (I mean, willingly, allowedly, designedly,) that God forbids. Do
every thing (to the utmost of your strength) that God enjoins.

1. Let no sin be cherished by you, 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names the
name of Christ, depart from iniquity: The indefinite is equipollent to the
universal; he that names the name of Christ, and says, he has dedicated
himself to Christ, he must not allow himself in any one sin, he must depart
from all iniquity. The word is full of prohibitions against every sin, and of
commands, to part with every sin; (but I need not quote them in so known a
thing:) O if you would indeed dedicate your selves, mortify every corruption,
put away every sin, let not one Agag live, not one Dalilah or Herodias lie in
your bosoms; especially let the right eye be pulled out, and the right hand be
cut off; Matthew. 5 29.
the Delictum dilectum, (as Aug. calls it,) let that go. Thou have not given
thy self to God, so long as thou have a Peccatum in deliciis, entertained and
cherished by thee. O what subtle insinuations, and pleadings are there in our
hearts for sin, pray answer them with abhorrence and detestation. Their great
plea is the smalness of the sin; Genesis 19 20.
they say, as Lot of Zoar, Is it not a little one? O beloved, do not hearken to
your naughty hearts; can any sin be little, that is the violation of an holy
Law, and committed against a great God? Though it be but petty Treason, will
you make nothing of it? will not little sins leave much guilt, and so do you
much mischief? Many little sums make the account swell to a great sum; little
sands make the great mountains; and little drops make the great Ocean. Do not
little sins make way for great sins? Si curare parva negligimus, insensibiliter
seducti, audenter etiam major a perpetramur. Gregor. Mor. l. 10. c. 14.
He that allows himself in a little sin, will not long stay there; he will go on
to greater sins. If the little Thief get into the house, the great ones will
not be out long. Little sippings end in drunkenness, (if they be often
reiterated) as well as full draughts: the cloud that is very small at the
first, in a little time over-spreads the whole Heaven. The Sea Dr. Tailor of
Repent. p. 127.
less the sin, the higher the contempt, for this shows, that the soul can break
with God, for a very trifle: O do not stand mincing of the matter, if it be a
sin, have nothing to do with it.

2. Let no duty be baulked: To do all that God commands, and therefore because
God commands it, this is a most certain evidence of a gracious heart. And shall
it be so with you? O the time is hastening, when one good evidence of
sincerity, will be more to you, than all your Writings, Deeds, Evidences for
your worldly possessions: you cannot have a better than this, to conform to the
whole will of God, in doing all that he requires; and therefore labor after
it. Saul did something, but he did not all that was commanded, and that lost
him his Kingdom. How many lose Heaven by their being partial in the law of God:
As for duties that are easy and safe, they can submit to them, but as to
those, that have much of difficulty and danger in them, here they shrink, and
beg Gods excuse: As you love your souls, take heed of this; let the duty be
never so painful, let flesh and blood never so much oppose it, be it never so
contrary to your carnal interests and inclinations, does it expose you to never
so many hazards, losses, crosses in the world, yet if it has Gods stamp and
impress upon it, yield obedience to it: O this is dedication indeed! Suppose it
should be the offering up of an only son, suppose it should be pray and die, or
own a reproached, scorned, persecuted Christ, or taking up the cross of Christ,
and forsaking all for him; I say, suppose it should be this or that, will you
say, Lord, let it be what it will, I will do it, (according to my strength.)
this is to be a Christian. O consider, there is the same authority for all
duties, that God who enjoins the one, enjoins the other also: There is such a
connection betwixt them, that if you leave out one, you leave out all; He that
customarily, etc. breaks any one Commandment, ventures to violate that
Authority, which by one and the same ordination, made the whole Law equally
binding, and by consequence is habitually, and in praeparatione Animi, a
transgress^r of the whole Law. Reyn. Life of Christ. p. 507.
one allowed omission or commission is a violation of the whole law; so you
have it expressly, Jam. 2.10, 11. It Is a good speech of De Provid. L. 3.
Salvian, Non est justa causatio cur praeferantur aliqua, ubi facienda sunt
omnia; There can be no just reason, of preferring some duties before others,
when all is to be done: And again, Quando servus ex Domini sui jussis ea facit
tantummodo quae velit, jam non Dominicam implet voluntatem, sed suam; When the
servant picks and chooses, in his masters commands, and only does what he
himself has a mind to, he does not do his masters will, but his own. Many such
considerations might be alleged, but I must contract; O fulfill after God; let
the duty be what it will, it is good; the assistance of God shall make it easy,
and the recompense of God, shall make it gainful. This is the first thing, your
dedication must be entire, and I have shown, wherein the entireness of it
consists.

2. Secondly, Let your dedication be constant and perpetual, (or) let it be for
constancy and perpetuity. As it must be entire without reserves, so it must be
constant, (or for constancy) without limitation of time. This is further
requisite to the truth and reality of Personal Dedication; Perpetua ac solida
sunt, quae vera sunt, simulata non perseverant. Ambros. Officior. l. 2. c. 22.
what is true is lasting, what is feigned is not so: Paint soon washes off, but
the color that is natural abides, and is permanent. It Is perseverance and
constancy, which makes the difference betwixt professor and professor; and so
betwixt Dedication and Dedication. Do you desire to dedicate your selves to the
blessed God, and to do this to purpose? Then do it for for ever; let it be, for
all the days of your life, (Luke 1.75.) Thus David did, Psalm. 119.112. I have
inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes always even unto the end. And (verse
117.) I will have respect unto thy statutes continually. O blessed David! not
so much because a King, as because a sincere self-dedicating Saint.

I shall not need to speak much to this, by way of enforcement; do but look
into the nature of the act, and into the several parts of this dedication, and
they all call for this perpetuity: You do therein give your selves to God; and
will you give and take away again? We do not like that in our petty gifts, will
God like it? In dedication you make over your selves, as a free gift, and that
without all power of revocation: men sometimes give an estate, but they reserve
a power of revocation; and therefore they may alter, null, withdraw their gift,
as they see good: But it is not so in the creatures giving himself to God, for
this he does irrevocably, irreversibly: If you will dedicate your selves, you
must thus do; give your love, fear, service, obedience to God for ever; and if
so, then you must be constant. In dedication, you bind your selves to God, to
be his; for how long? for for ever. It Is not here, as it is in the case of a
Servant, or an Apprentice, who bind themselves to their masters for such a term
of years, and when they are expired, then they are free from their obligation,
and are at their own dispose again; I say it is not so here; but it is, as in the
conjugal bond 'twixt husband and wife, where the parties enter into a mutual
obligation, to bind so long as life shall last. In dedicating your selves to
the Lord, you enter into an everlasting obligation to him, to be his, world
without end: As it was with the servant that was bored, Exodus 21.5, 6. If the
servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children, I will
not go out free: Then his master shall bring him unto the Judges, etc. and his
master shall bore his ear through with an Aull, and he shall serve him for
ever: So here, O (says the self-dedicating Christian,) I love God, I like his
ways, I owe him all my service, I will not go from him, I will serve him whilst
I live; and therefore I here dedicate and bind my self to him to make this
good; can he now afterward recede from this, and leave God, when he has
entered into such an eternal obligation? I might also speak to the other
branches of self-dedication; as the fixedness of the resolution, Alienation for
Gods Use, Devotedness to his glory, they all include and connote stability,
constancy, perpetuity; so that without this, there can be no dedication. Oh, if
you would do this thoroughly, you must be Gods for ever. There must be no
conditions, no Ifs and Ands in the matter, your dedication must be absolute;
and there must be no changings or alterations or withdrawings in the matter,
your dedication must be permanent and everlasting.

3. Thirdly, Let it be free, voluntary, spontaneous: Do it (...), not by
constraint, but willingly, (as the Apostle exhorts Elders, with respect to the
feeding of the flock of God, 1 Pet. 5.2.) Self-dedication must not be a thing
extorted from you, but it must be the matter of your choice: Psalm. 119.30. I
have chosen the way of truth. He that offered a burnt sacrifice, he was to
offer it of his own voluntary will, (as it is expressed, Exodus 1.3.) And indeed
in all offerings God stood upon this willingness, Exodus 25.2. Of every man that
gives it willingly with his heart, ye shall take my offering: 'Twas the great
commendation of the Fathers and Princes of the Tribes of Israel, etc. they
offered willingly, 1 Chronicles. 29.6. And it is recorded to the honor of Amasiah,
He willingly offered himself unto the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 17.16. Dedication-work is
offering-work; God expects, that you should freely, willingly, cheerfully offer
up your selves to him. O be a willing people in the day of Gods power, Psalm.
110.3. Dedicating persons, they are to be Amminadib, a willing people, The
chariots of my willing people; In the Hebr. Ammi-Nadib, that is my voluntary,
free people. The Greek puts both words in one; make it a proper Name; The
Chariots of Aminadab; it rather denotes the people of Christ, which are
volunteers in the, etc. Ainsw. in Cant. 6.12.
Cant. 6.12. I say, be you such; let your dedication come off freely and
readily: you have no reason to stick at this: It Is never well with you, till
this be done; you never so much consult your own interest, or advance your own
good, as when you dedicate your selves to God. Are sinners so willing to resign
up themselves to sin and Satan, will not you be willing, to resign up your
selves to God? It Is true, you give away your selves in this act; but it is to
God; can self be better given than to him? Do you do more to God, than what he
does to you? Are you not better in his hands, than in your own? Is this any
thing more, than the paying of a debt, and will you not willingly pay your
debts? It Is true, in this you surrender up your selves, but it is to the will of
God; and is not this such an excellent will, that you may thus do, with the
greatest readiness? What is Gods will, but a draught or copy of his own
holiness? (which is his glory,) What do you do in this, but take the right way,
to live as God lives, and so (according to your measure,) to partake of his
glorious excellencies? And so I might go on to the rest; you have the highest
attractives, the most alluring arguments that are imaginable, to draw you to
this dedication; O therefore with all alacrity and readiness, come up to it. Do
not do it, because you must do it, but because you will do it: Devote your
selves to God, as the wife devotes her self to the person, whom she dearly
loves, in relation to whom, she places all her felicity.

4. Fourthly, Be speedy in your dedication; do not delay or procrastinate, but
fall upon the work presently: It Is the subtilty of Satan, to make men to delay
a duty, when they cannot deny it: Though there be but few that do actually
dedicate themselves to God, yet bring me a man, who has any thing to say
against it; the thing is so evident, that surely none dare deny the excellency,
the reasonableness of it, and their obligation to it; but yet they put it off
from time to time; they are convinced it must be done, and ought to be done;
but there is time enough for the doing of it. O (my brethren) take heed of this.
Pray answer me, will you dedicate your selves to God, or not? I must have your
answer, will you dedicate your selves to God, or not? We will, (I encourage my
self to take that for your answer;) then I go on; when will you do this? When
shall resolution be put into practice? do you say, to morrow, the next week,
the next year you will do it; then your answer, as to the main question signifies
nothing: He that says, he will dedicate himself to God, but not yet, does in
effect say, he will never do it: delays in this case are little better than
absolute denials: Gods delays to us, are not denials, but ours to him, are so:
O delay no longer; you say, to morrow, Quamdiu cras. quamdiu cras? quare non
modd, quare non hac hora finis turpitudinis meae. Aug. Conf. l. 8. c. 12.
hereafter, why not now? why not to day? why not presently? Have you not put
off God, and made him wait too long already? Do not delays make the dedication
to be more difficult? Poenitenti veniam spospondit, sed vivendi in crastinum
non spospondit. Id.
Are you sure of to morrow? can you assure your selves, of the gales of Grace
to blow to morrow? O let it be to day, while it is called to day, Heb. 3.13.
Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. David made
haste and delayed not, Psalm. 119.60. Possibly, some in the reading of these
Papers, may resolve to dedicate themselves, let such fall upon the duty
presently; it is good striking whilst the Iron is hot: it is good to hoist up the
sails whilst the wind serves: Ego a multis annis crastinum non novi.
'Twas a good speech of one, As to matters of duty, for many years he had known
no to morrow; (meaning, he always presently set upon duty;) let it be so with
you as to dedication: Seneca speaks of some, Male vivunt, qui semper vivere
incipiunt. Senec.
who are always beginning to live, these he says, live ill; so there are some,
who are always beginning to dedicate themselves, To day they say, it shall be
done to morrow, Caveamus hunc scopulum differ. Quot hominum millia vel hanc
unam ob causam male finierunt, quia distulerunt, minime differrenda. Quid
crastinum saluti tuae destinas? Crastinus dies tuus non est: Hodiernus est.
Hodie quaeso, huc hora, jam age quod agendum est: Gras aut perendie ubi tu eris?
and then they put it off to another morrow, and so the conviction is
smothered, and the work is not done. O what you find in your hearts to do, do
it speedily, without all further delays or procrastination. Thus I have
directed you as to the manner, how you are to dedicate your selves to God; you
must be entire in your Dedication, without all reserves; constant in your
Dedication, without all limitation as to time; free and willing in your
Dedication, without constraint and backwardness; and speedy and present in your
Dedication, without all delays.

CHAP. 6. Helps to further Personal Dedication.
THe second thing, in which I propounded to give you some direction, was to
show you, what are those means or helps, which are proper for the furtherance
of this self-dedication. O that some soul might be brought to an earnest desire
of some faithful advice about this: that some poor Creature might say; well, I
see what my duty is, I am convinced by what has been said, that I am bound to
dedicate, and thus to dedicate my self to God: But what shall I do, in order to
the bringing of my heart, to the real performance of it? In hopes that some may
herein desire satisfaction, I will lay down a few directions. And because I
intend to be very short upon this Head, I will only name three great helps
toward it.

1. The first is consideration: the first step to sincere dedication is serious
consideration; the reason, why so few come up to this, is the want of serious
weighing and considering of things; it is inconsideracy that keeps the most in
their non-dedicated estate; if men would but bethink themselves (as it is 1
Kings 8.47.) and dwell upon things in their most fixed and retired thoughts,
surely they would close with God, and give up themselves to him: This is the
foundation upon which all is built? 'Twas the Prodigals consideration, that
brought him home to his father: Luke 15.17. when he came to himself, he said,
How many hired, etc. first he came to himself, (and seriously considered what
his state was, and how it might be bettered,) and then, he came to his father.
Parallel to this, is that Hos. 2.7. She shall follow after her lovers, and
shall not overtake them, etc. then shall she say, I will go and return to my
first Husband, for then was it better with me than now. Here is Penitential
resolution grounded upon serious consideration. So David, Psalm. 119.59. I
thought on my ways and turned my feet to thy testimonies. O what a powerful
influence has this upon an holy course, and indeed upon all the duties of
Religion! And therefore this I would urge upon you, in order to Personal
Dedication: Do but consider, what God is, what a right he has to you, how you
cannot be happy but in him, what an excellency there is in his ways, what a
great nothing the world is in comparison of him, how sin debases you, whilst
holiness is your advancement, how necessary self-dedication is to the future
glory. Were these and other things duly weighed, certainly you would not
withhold your selves from God, or stand off from him a moment longer: Do but
fix your thoughts upon what has been laid down, to press the duty upon you,
and (by Gods blessing,) I trust something will be done in this great work. Some
sudden and transient thoughts will be ineffective, the bare reading of what I
have wrote, will signify but little; but if the Lord will give you an heart to
dwell upon things, and to be seriously considerative, then there will be some
good success.

2. Secondly, Another great help is self-denial: This, this, is the main:
self-denial must go before self-dedication; self must be denied, before self
will be dedicated: O how readily, how easily does self-dedication go on, upon
self-denial: It Is this self that keeps us from God, and sets us against God;
till that be dethroned, God will never be exalted. Self-dedication, as it
furthers self-denial, so it is furthered by it. Our Savior tells us, if any man
will come after him, he must deny himself, Luke 9.23. this is, not only the
condition of the person, (or laid upon the person that comes to Christ,) but
it is the condition of the act, or that which is requisite to the act of coming
to Christ; for without self-denial no man will come to Christ. And so it is in
the dedicating of our selves to God: As any man desires to do this, first he
must deny himself; and this is that which makes self-dedication so difficult;
it depends upon that, which is one of the hardest duties in the Gospel; he that
can deny self, can do any thing.

Now there is a double self, which must be denied, in order to Personal
Dedication; that which we call sinful self, and that which we call worldly
self, (I make use of it as a common distinction, but I know it is not a good and
accurate one, for worldly self is sinful self, and so the membra dividentia are
not opposita.)

1. Sinful self must be denied: Till the heart be disengaged and disintangled
from sin, and freed from the love and dominion of sin, a man will never give
himself to God; so long as there is any one lust predominant, (let it be what
it will,) there will be a keeping off from God: Never did any dedicate himself
to God, but first sin was subdued in him: after this is once done,
self-dedication follows in course. Therefore begin with the heart, see that the
power of sin be broken there; as the Priests in the cleansing of the Temple, 2 Chronicles 29.16.
they first began with the inner part of it, and fetched out all the
uncleanness that was there: So do you, if you would be the Lords, by donation
and resignation of your selves, look into the heart, purge out that sin that is
there, get every corruption mastered, put it away with detestation, and then
you are in your way: A man shall find, if at any time he does but think of
dedicating himself to God, if there be any one sin reigning in him, this will
make him hang off from God, and it will smother all inclinations in him to that
which I am upon. O therefore down with sinful self; as sin goes down, God goes
up in the soul.

2. Farther, worldly self must be denied: for the carnal worldly part in the
sinner, always sets it self against God: O what suggestions, reasonings,
solicitations, does this follow him with, to keep him off from God! Till a man
therefore be crucified to the world, Gal. 6.14.
and that earthly part, that is in him be removed, there is nothing to be done.
The young man in the Gospel, did seem to bid fair for this dedication, but his
heart being unmortified to the world, that spoiled all: Luke 18.22, 23. God and
the world cannot have the heart at the same time; the heart cannot be given to
God, if the world has the prepossession of it. O begin your work at the right
end, take a right method, that you may make something of it. Would you set upon
dedication-work? begin with crucifixion-work; Gal. 5.24.
let those earthly affections that are in you be crucified, get the Moon under
your feet; Rev. 12.1.
be dead to present things; Col. 3.3.
look upon all here below, Philip. 3.8.
as dross and dung; pull the world off from the throne; do this first, and then
you will certainly surrender up your selves to God. This is the second means: I
am the shorter in it, because you have so many helps elsewhere about it.

3. The third is Prayer: In consideration you plead with your selves, in Prayer
you plead with God; the former will not avail without the latter: A man may
think and think to eternity, and yet be but where he was, if God by his mighty
power does not do the work: Self-dedication is our act, but it is done in Gods
strength: Isa. 26.12. Thou have wrought all our works in us. The desire of it
is of God; the actual performance of it is of God; He works in us both to
will and to do of his good pleasure, Philip. 2.13. As none can come to the Son,
unless the Father draw him, (Joh. 6.44.) so none can dedicate himself to the
Father, without the efficacious, Almighty drawings and workings of the Spirit.
First the heart is framed to this by divine grace, and then the person gives
himself to God. The giving, self surrendering, resolving, separating,
covenanting, God-glorifying part of dedication, are each of them, all of them
of God; all brought about by a supernatural power: Reason may suggest much to
further this, but it will never produce it in the soul: O therefore pray, call
in Gods help, set your selves to beg this frame, and you shall prevail. The
work is as good as done, when your hearts in prayer are drawn out after it. Go
often to the throne of Grace, and plead thus with the God of all Grace: Blessed
Lord, I would fain dedicate my self to thee, the desire of my soul is, that I
may live and act that, of which here I have read so much; I have been my own
too long, now I would be thine, entirely thine, everlastingly thine; but I Am a
poor weak creature, and not only unable to come up to this, but naturally I Am
averse to it; O do thou help me, do thine own work in me; give to me, that I
may give my self to thee: draw me, and I will run: O illuminate my
understanding, bow my will, rectify my affections, work me up to self-denial,
set in with consideration, and fully convince me: O for Christ's sake do not
leave me in my natural nondedicated condition; incline mine heart to an
universal subjection to thee: Do that in me and for me, which all creatures in
Heaven and Earth cannot do: Let my condition in the world be what thou
please, but (Lord) let me be in the number of those few, who do sincerely
devote themselves to thee: O glorify the riches of thy grace toward me, and
let the day of thy power arise upon my soul: and in spite of all opposition,
do thy work in me, that Personal Dedication may end in eternal glorification.
Thus Pray and God will hear.

CHAP. 7. Some things in special urged upon the people of God, in reference to
their Dedication.
HItherto I have been speaking to men, as they lie in the general lump or mass;
I will now direct my discourse to the people of God, whom he has singled and
called out of this mass; I will leave a few things with them, and so close up
this first Head of Personal Dedication.

You therefore that are Saints, to be sure you have done that, which I have
been pressing upon others; for you are Saints, which you could not be without
Personal Dedication, (this being the very forma constituens, or that which
makes you to be so:) It Is observable how Gods people are described, and set
forth in Scripture, by those things which imply and connote Dedication: The
Temple was dedicated, the Saints are the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.17. 2 Cor.
6.16. The first fruits were dedicated, the Saints are first fruits, Jam. 1.18.
Revel. 14.4. The Priests were dedicated, the Saints (in a spiritual sense) are
such, 1 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 1.6. It being thus with you, that you are dedicated
persons, let me commend the ensuing particulars to you.

1. First, I would have you, often to revive upon your thoughts your holy and
solemn Dedication: It Is easier to think of it, than to do it; and it would be
of great use, and much to the advantage of the people of God, if they would
often think of this: How would this further Humiliation, when they come short
in their duty! How would this excite and quicken them to every thing that is
good, be it never so hard and difficult! How would this engage them to
universal holiness, this being nothing, but what is in the compass and tenor of
their dedication! How would this fortify against all the arguings, reasonings,
solicitations of the flesh! and make a person to say to the flesh, O let me
alone, I must not hearken to thee, for I have given my self to God. How would
this, (if it was but duly thought of,) make Christians to be above the world,
so as not to be allured by its good, nor affrighted by its evil: How would this
ennoble and greaten the spirits of such, did they but consider, who they are by
virtue of their Dedication. The Orator tells us, He that knows himself, Qui se
novit, primum aliquid se habere sentiet Divinum, ingenium in se suum sicut
simulachrum aliquod Dedicatum, putabit. Tull. de Leg. l. 2.
will perceive there is something divine in him; he will esteem his wit, parts,
to be like some Image under a solemn dedication. O if the Saints did but aright
know themselves, they would judge of themselves, as having something divine in
them, their persons, parts, graces, comforts, their All, being in a manner
sacred, because dedicated. O that you that are Saints, would often remember
your Dedication: this would produce excellent effects, many more than what I
can here mention. It Is not now to be made, but it is now to be thought of: Did
we but think of our dedication, we should not carry it as we do; (I speak it
with much confidence.) How does the power and obligation of the first
dedication insensibly abate in us, because we do so seldom revive it upon our
thoughts?

2. Secondly, Be true to your Dedication: You are true in it, you are not as
those, who flatter God with their mouth, and lie unto him with their tongue;
for their heart is not right with him, they are not steadfast in his covenant:
(as it is Psalm. 78.36, 37.) This is not a thing, that you speak of, or talk of,
or profess to come up to, but you have indeed, heartily, unfeignedly, dedicated
your selves to God: O as you are true in it, be true to it; as you are sincere
in your entrance, be so in your performance: Take heed of being false to God
and to your Dedication. It Is recorded of the persons, whom Hezekiah employed,
that they brought in the Offerings, the Tithes, and the Dedicate things
faithfully, 2 Chronicles. 31.12. I do but allude to it; you and yours are dedicate
things, O deal faithfully with God about them. Wherein? Answ. Do not go about
to rescind or recall your Dedication. Under the Law, things dedicated, or
devoted to the Lord, were not to be alienated. It Is very expressly prohibited,
Levit. 27.28.29. You are so devoted to God, will you go about to null, or
alter, or revoke this? Would you be free again, to prostitute your selves to
sin and to the world? Would you get off from the bonds that you have entered
into? I know you would not. Keep up your Dedication, and walk answerably to it.
As the Apostle exhorts the Philippians, Only (says he) let your conversation
be as becomes the Gospel, Philip. 1.27. So let me say to you, O let your
conversation be as becomes your Dedication: Let there be a suitableness 'twixt
your actings and it; often put this question to your selves, does this and that
become my dedication? This is that which I must order my actings by. Let the
consideration of this put you upon holiness, both in the negative and also in
the positive part thereof. What? Shall I sin? I that have given my self to God,
shall I sin? Shall sin be lodged in that heart, committed in that life, which I
have set apart for God? Shall I weaken and falsify my solemn dedication? O sin
thou have nothing to do with me, I will have nothing to do with thee, for I am
wholly the Lords; I h^ve too often made a breach upon my solemn engagements,
and have been too false to my God, but I will be so no more: I will rather
break with thee than with God, and therefore let me alone. O that we could
vigorously resist sin, and all temptations thereunto, because of our
Dedication. Deuteronomy. 27.9, 10. Take heed, and hearken, O Israel, this day thou art
become the people of the Lord thy God: Thou shall therefore obey the voice of
the Lord thy God, and do his commandments and his statutes, which I command
thee this day. Josh. 24.22, 23. And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are
witnesses against your selves, that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him: And
they said, we are witnesses; now therefore put away, said he, the strange Gods
which are amongst you, and incline your heart unto the Lord God of Israel. You
read of the sons of Athaliah, that they broke up the house of God, and also all
the dedicate things of the house of the Lord, they bestowed upon Baalim, 2 Chronicles. 24.7. was not this great wickedness? What will you do less, if you take
your dedicate persons, and employ them in the service of a base lust? If you
harbor any known sin, you are not true to your Baptismal and Actual
dedication. Can that woman be looked upon as true to her conjugal obligation,
that admits of corrivals and competitors with her Husband, and deflowers his
bed? Are you faithful to God, if you love any thing in comparison of him, or in
competition to him, and suffer some hellish lust to defile you? O put away sin,
keep close to God, be holy, then you act like your selves: a proud, sensual,
worldly, barren, sinful conversation, is very unbecoming such as you are. I
have plainly set before you, the things in which your dedication does consist,
will you live up to every one of them?

Let me add but this further: If you would be true to your dedication, stand to
it; be fixed and steadfast, as to what you have done; God is firm to you, be you
firm to him: Have you not made a good choice? O stick to it! Have you not put
your selves into good hands, and disposed very well of your selves, in giving
them to God? Can you be better than where you are? Can you mend your selves by
leaving God? Joh. 6.67, 68. Will ye also go away? Lord (says Peter) to whom
shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life. Have you met with any thing
in God, or in his ways, to give you any just occasion of repenting, as to what
you have done? Jer. 2.5. What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they
are gone far from me? Did you indent with God, for but such a time? and is that
expired, that you will call in your Indentures? or did you enter upon his ways,
as Actors come upon the Stage, to act a part for an hour or two, and then all
is over? or did you take him upon trial, as masters do their servants, that in
case you liked him not, you might put him off again? Will you turn Apostates?
Having laid your hands upon the Plough, Luke 9.62.
will you look back? Having begun in the spirit, Galat. 3.3.
will you end in the flesh? Will you draw back from God, to the perdition of
your precious souls? Hebr. 10.39.
I trust you will not. It Is observed, both by Papists and Turks also, (for the
latter have their religious Orders as well as the former,) that persons who
have once entered themselves into such Orders, (and so dedicated themselves to
God,) if they leave these, they never prosper. O Christians, have you dedicated
your selves, in a regular, scriptural way? If you relinquish your dedication,
do you think to prosper? Farewell peace, joy, Heaven, farewell all, when you
forsake God, and Apostatize from him.

That you may be thus faithful and constant, and in every thing make good your
dedication, be much in begging of God, the special assistance of his grace:
Praevenient grace made you true in your dedication, Subsequent grace, must make
you true to your dedication. O let none rely upon their own strength; we may
give, resolve, covenant, but if we be left to our selves, we shall soon leave
God, and undo (as much as in us lies) all that we have done: The heart is
deceitful, grace is weak, corruption strong, Voluntate sua cadit qui cadit,
voluntate Dei stat qui stat. Angust.
temptations impetuous, you need assisting and stablishing grace very much.
David joined prayer with his resolution: I will keep thy statutes, O forsake me
not utterly, Psalm. 119.8. You have given the hands to God in stipulation, lift
up the hands to God in supplication, for fidelity, for perseverance. The God of
all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by Jesus Christ, after
that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle
you, 1 Pet. 5.10. Self-dependance does much endanger self-dedication.

3. Thirdly, Often renew your dedication; though the first sufficiently obliges
you, yet all obligations are little enough, to bind these treacherous hearts of
ours: the oftener this is renewed, the greater awe it leaves upon conscience:
And though the command of God, and the nature of duty, are highly obligatory,
yet fresh and renewed dedications lay a farther, superadded obligation upon the
person: O tie the knot as fast as may be; many knots are not so easily
loosened: After repeated, reiterated dedications, you will be ashamed to be false
to God.

There are some special cases and seasons, wherein it is good for you to renew
your dedication. Do you fall into some great sin? Recover your selves by speedy
repentance, and renew your dedication. These make great wounds and gashes in
the soul, get them healed presently: These endanger the very vitals, and strike
at the foundation, there is no dallying in this case. Great breaches must
immediately be made up; great sins make a great breach upon conscience, upon
your dedication, and therefore make it up speedily. Doubtless, David that would
renew the dedication of his house, after Absaloms sins, would also renew the
dedication of his person, after his own gross and scandalous sins. Are you
afflicted? reduced into great straits? Renew your dedication; give all again to
God at such a time, for then you need him most to give to you. When Jacob was
in great straits, and knew not what to do, then he said; If God will be with me
in the way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so
that I come again to my Fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God,
Genesis 28.20, 21. O be so wise, as to renew your gift and your bond in a day of
trouble, and so ingenious, as to make all good in a day of comfort. Do you
receive some eminent mercy from God? Renew your dedication. Say, Lord thou have
renewed thy mercy, and therefore I here renew my duty; thou have given me a
very choice and seasonable mercy, here I give thee my self for it. Do you
attend upon the Sacrament? before and at and after that ordinance, solemnly
renew your dedication: that is a duty very proper at this time. Indeed in every
prayer, we virtually do this, but in sacramental work, we must do it in a more
solemn and explicit manner. Are you cast upon times wherein there is much
Apostasy, professors fall off from God, like leaves from the trees in Autumn?
Now renew your dedication, that you may bind your selves the faster to God: now
take up new and stronger resolutions for God; saying, Though all forsake God,
you will never forsake him. Other cases and seasons might be mentioned, but I
pass them by.

4. Fourthly, Adore and admire the infinite goodness of God: In your giving
your selves to God, you do not oblige him, but he obliges you: when you give
most, you receive most: first, grace is given to you, and then you are given to
God: you could not give, if first you did not receive. O have you devoted your
selves to the Lord? 'Twas he that framed your hearts to this, and wrought you
up to it: Time was, when you were just as others are, but God, who is rich in
mercy, Ephesians. 2.4, 7.
for his great love wherewith he loved you, (even when you wholly gave up your
selves to sin,) effectually drew you to himself, That in the ages to come he
might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward you
through Christ Jesus. O admire that distinguishing love of God, which has so
freely taken hold of you: And let this heighten your admiration, that the great
God is so willing to accept of that poor, pitiful self, which you tender to
him; it is but the paying of a debt, and yet God accepts of it as a gift. Were
you Angels, it would be a condescension in God, to accept of you, but Lord,
What is man, Psalm. 144.3.
that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou so regardest him.
And that which is highest of all, and which may put the soul into extatick
admiration, that for such a poor self given, such a glorious self should be
received; you give your self to God, and in lieu of this, God gives his self to
you: O Saints, what have you to do, but to lose your selves in the admiring of
God.

5. Fifthly, Further Personal Dedication in others: You have done it your
selves, do what in you lies, that others may do so too. Do not you rejoice in
your own act? Would you have it to do again for millions of worlds? Where then
is your zeal to further it in others, who have not yet dedicated themselves to
God? Do you not pity such in their state, and will you not endeavor to bring
them out of it? Can you be content, to go to Heaven alone? Shall the Devils
factors be more diligent for him, to the ruin of souls, than you for God, to
the salvation of souls? O do not let sinners alone, till you have been
instrumental for conversion and Personal Dedication to them. So live, that you
may win them to God: So instruct, exhort, persuade, convince, that they may
resolve, we also will give up our selves to God, as you have done. Bernard has
an expression; Major est in amore Dei, qui plures traxerit ad amorem Dei; He is
highest in the love of God, (you may understand it both of active, and also of
passive or objective love,) who has drawn most to the love of God. You cannot
in an higher way, manifest your love to God, or procure Gods love to you, than
by promoting this blessed self-dedication in others. O lay out your selves in
order to this; and let your endeavors extend to all, but especially to your
near and dear relations: do not suffer a child, a servant to continue in a
state of alienation from God. But this I shall have occasion more to dwell
upon, under the next Head of Domestic dedication. Let me conclude this, with
the words of that Divine Poet, Mr. Herbert, Page 96 97.
which are very apposite to my purpose.

My God, if writings may
Convey a Lordship any way
Whither the buyer and the seller please;
Let it not thee displease,
If this poor paper do as much as they.
On it my Heart does bleed
As many Lines, as there does need
To pass it self and all it has to thee:
To which I do agree,
And here present it as my special deed.
If that hereafter Pleasure
Cavil, and claim her part and measure,
As if this passed with a reservation
Or some such words in fashion,
I here exclude the wrangler from thy treasure.
Wherefore I all forego:
To one word only I say, No.
Where in the deed there was an intimation
Of a gift or donation,
Lord, let it now by way of purchase go.
He that will pass his land,
As I have mine, may set his hand
And heart unto this deed, when he has read:
And make the purchase spread
To both our goods, if he to it will stand.
How happy were my part
If some kind man would thrust his heart
Into these lines: till in Heavens Court of rolls
They were by winged souls
Entered for both, far above their desert!
6. Sixthly, I have but this farther to say, Let Saints take the comfort of
their Dedication. O what a rich mine of heavenly consolation am I fallen upon,
if I could but go to the bottom of it! but that I cannot do. Have you entirely
dedicated your selves to God? Can you go over all the branches of it, and say,
you find them all in your selves? What shall I say, what may I not say, for the
comforting of you? You have Grace, and Grace indeed, for (as has been said,)
what is grace, but Personal Dedication. You are sometimes much in the dark
about your spiritual state, you know not what to think of your selves, because
of the many discouragements, which you meet with, in the power and prevalency
of corruption, etc. Can you say this of your selves? You have entirely,
unreservedly, fixedly, heartily devoted and dedicated your selves to God; if
so, you may take the comfort of a saving work in you; when other evidences are
blotted and blurred, if this be legible, it is enough; this is an abiding
discovery of sincerity and the truth of grace. How dear and precious are you in
the sight of God! The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. (His, as by his
own Election, so by their own dedication:) The Lord knows such, not with a
bare, simple, intuitive knowledge, but with a knowledge of delight and special
approbation; God has your heart, and you have his. You say to God, we are
thine, (there is the sum of duty,) and God says to you, I am yours, (there is the
sum of mercy:) God has your drop, and you have his Ocean: You think nothing
enough for him, he thinks nothing too much for you; his Self, his Son, his
Spirit, his Heaven, his own glory, he gives it all to you. Surely God intends
you nothing but good, because he has so graciously accepted of your offering,
(which is your selves;) (I allude to that of Manoah to his wife, Judge. 13.23.)
You may take this, and plead it with God upon all occasions: Psalm. 119.94. I am
thine, save me. Are you in dangers? plead from this, for protection: Are you in
wants? plead from this, for provision: Lord, I have given my self to thee, will thou not give me food and raiment? (I desire no more;) Lord, here is the
Covenant on my part, I desire to make it good, here is the Covenant on thy part,
shall not that be made good? then give me bread, Psalm. 111.5. And so for higher
mercies: O it is a blessed thing, ingerere Deo suam syngrapham, (as Aug. says
his mother Monica used to do,) to in-mind God, and to argue with him from his
Covenant. Are you in straits? you may plead from this, for direction: But
(alas) I cannot speak out half of that blessedness, which belongs to you upon
this act: Let me conclude with that which is the Zenith of all; Personal
Dedication, shall most certainly end in Eternal Salvation: That self which is
here dedicated, shall be hereafter saved: and that which is a poor self here,
shall be a glorious self hereafter. If this be not enough for comfort, I know
not what is. And so let me end this first part of my Discourse, with that which
shall never end.

The End of the First Part.
Domestic Dedication. The Second Part.
CHAP. I. Of Domestic Dedication, in general: Some things premised about it.
I Have, at last, got over the Dedication of the Person; now the Dedication of
the House comes next to be spoken to: (which I must be the shorter upon,
because I have been so long in coming to it:) This is that, which was chiefly
(nay only) in my eye, when I first engaged my thoughts in this work: The Text
directed me to this, (for it speaks of House-Dedication only) and the present
posture, business, concern, of you (the Citizens of London) directed me to the
Text. You are very busy in re-building your Houses, which for some
considerable time have lay'n in ashes; (and I pray God to prosper and encourage
you therein): But my heart's desire is also, that you may dedicate, as well as
build; that as your Houses shall be finished for your use and service, they may
also be devoted to the use and service of God. I could not, when I have walked
in the Streets, (indeed since the dismal Fire, they may rather be called Roads
than Streets) and saw here and there a few Houses going up, but wish and pray,
Oh that these Houses, whenever they are built, whosoevers they are, might be
dedicated to God! My thoughts and desires working much this way, I resolved, by
God's assistance to do something that might further a thing, so excellent and
so desirable; and thereupon I entered upon this Work, (though with much
discouragement, partly from the sense of my inward unfitness for such an
undertaking, and partly from those bodily Infirmities, which a late have been
upon me, and have very much indisposed and disabled me for study.)

To come then to that, which was my principal Design, the opening and enforcing
of House-Dedication. Much has been said to further Personal-Dedication, and (I
hope) I was not out of my way when I was speaking to that; for in furthering
that, I further this; May I but prevail with Persons, to dedicate themselves, I
am sure then, such will not stick to dedicate their Houses to God; and without
the former I despair of the latter; but where the Dedication of the Person goes
before, I do not question, but the dedication of the House will follow after.
Oh (says Moses) he is my God, and I will prepare him an Habitation, Exodus
15.2. This is the language of the Self-dedicating Christian; God is my God, I
have an Interest in Him, I have given up my self to him, and I will also
dedicate my Habitation to Him; my House shall be his, where I dwell God shall
dwell: He has prepared an Habitation for me, and I will prepare mine for Him.
(Note by the way, that I do but allude to the words of Moses, I know they carry
another sense)

For this Domestic Dedication, we have here the example of holy David, the man
after God's own heart. (A Psalm and Song at the dedication of the House of
David.) This godly man, could not take up with a convenient House, with all
Domestic Accommodations; but these must pass under a solemn and religious
Dedication: Surely, his example calls for every man's imitation: who ever thou
art, thou art to write after this copy, to follow this pattern; may be, thou
have not such an House as David's was; his was a Palace, thine, but a very poor
and mean Cottage; yet an House it is, let it be dedicated: though thou have not
David's house, if thou have David's heart, let thy House be what it will, thou will do as he did. Hence I make House-Dedication to be a duty lying upon every
person, who is the Master and disposer of the House: I do not only commend it,
as a thing that is very good, (which yet men may do, or not do) or make it to
be such a thing, as the Romanists make those to be, which they place under
their Consilia Evangelica: but I set it before Masters of Families as a duty,
as that which they ought to do, and are bound to do, or else they sin. I would
be tender in grounding a positive duty upon a hare example, (for it is God's
precepts not Humane presidents, that are the foundation upon which Duty is
built): But when I meet with an example, lying in something that is moral and
obligatory to all, there the example and the nature of the thing (to which the
example referrs) is a sure foundation to build duty upon. That Is the case here;
David's example binds us (as to House-Dedication) because the thing in it self
is moral, and consists in that which is moral, (as will appear in the opening
of it;) and therefore it obliges all --.But over and above this example of
David (if that will not carry it) we have something that looks like a Precept,
Deuteronomy. 20.5. What man is there that has built a new House, and has not
dedicated it? let him go and return to his House, lest he die in the battle,
and another man dedicate it. You see the Dedication of the House is here
enjoined: Now, was this injunction laid only upon such as were going out to
war; were not others concerned in it, as well as they? surely they were: Though
it is true, the command comes in upon this particular case, yet it is very
probable, that it was of universal and general extent. All were to dedicate
their Houses, but especially (and without any further delay) such as were going
out to fight; (because of the great hazards, that they were to be exposed to:)
It would be no hard thing, from the Jewish Writers, and from latter Expositors,
to prove that this Precept was general, and that the Duty in hand was generally
practiced by the Jews. And if it be further said, that this Dedication (here
spoken of) was only initiation, or taking possession, (according to the import
of the word in the original) (as was shown in the beginning of this discourse);
I answer, suppose it to be so, yet this does not weaken that which I drive at,
because this possession was to be taken in a religious manner, (as all declare
who write upon the words): it was wont to be done with Solemnity, Feasting, and
singing Praise to God, as the Title of the 30th. Psalm shows. (So Ainsw. upon
the forementioned place.) Now this kind of initiation does not come short of
that religious Dedication, which I am to urge upon you as a duty. If you take
the words then, in their due latitude, and join the practice then, with the
precept; they reach to all of us, and show us, how we are to make our entrance
upon new habitations. House-Dedication is not only that, which has been
anciently used by good men, nor only that Moris erat, ut novis aedificiis
extructis, adhiberentur Ceremoniae, ad purgand and sanctificanda loca pro
inhabitantium usu. Jun. Imo aedes etiam privatae, si consummatae per Dei
gratiam fuerint, salubriter uptantur novis usibus per Hymnos atque preces
devotas. Geierus in Dan. 3. in Aphor. ex v. 2.
which is very fitting and commendable, but it is a duty, and all are under the
obligation of it. And this will more fully appear from those particular
branches of House-Dedication, all of which now under the Gospel, are matter of
duty, and obligatory to all Christians.

Before I come to open the Nature of it, it is necessary (for the clearing up of
my way, and for the obviating of all Cavils) that I premise a few things.

First, therefore observe, That it is only the Dedication of private Houses,
that I am concerned to speak to: As to the dedicating of Churches, (the places
of public Worship,) that is an Argument which does not properly fall within
the compass of the words I am upon: If they had spoken of the dedication of the
Temple, then they would have led me, to have said something concerning the
dedication of Churches, under the times of the Gospel; but they only speaking
of the dedication of David's House, I may confine my Discourse to the
dedication of Private Houses.

Secondly, When I speak of the dedicating and consecrating of the House, you
must not understand me, as if I carried it so high, as to have it wholly
impropriated to things of a Spiritual Nature. I would have Prayer, the Worship
of God, Religion, minded and advanced in your Houses; but yet withal, you may
eat, drink, trade, buy, sell, transact your Secular Affairs and businesses in
them. No man will think me so absurd, as to intend any Temple-Consecration of
Houses, when I mention the dedication or consecration of them. It Is one thing
to have the Worship of God in a Place, and another thing to have that place
impropriated, and wholly set apart for the Worship of God, so as that things of
a worldly nature may not there be managed: It Is the first thing only that I
design.

Thirdly. In the handling of House-dedication, I do not in the least mean such
a dedication as is attended with the alienation of the civil property. As the
civil use, so the civil property is not struck at by me. Pray, keep your Right
and Title to your Houses, and take the comfort of them; let them be yours
still: only let God be acknowledged, served, exalted in them. It Is true, in
some Dedications the Proprietary lost his Right; after he made them, he had
nothing further to do with what he had dedicated, (for by this act he passed
over his Right to God;) As in this particular case of Houses, you read Levit.
27.14. If a man did sanctify, (or dedicate by a vow or gift) his House to be
holy to the Lord; he had then no right to it till he had redeemed it, by paying
the price or rate, which the Priest did set upon it, and then it was to be his
own again. I do not urge the dedication of your Houses in this sense or notion;
so as that the civil property should be alienated, only let it be improved for
God.

Nor, fourthly, Do I put you upon House-dedication, in the setting up of
Family Worship, so as to take you off from Publick-worship, and from God's
Ordinances in the public Administration of them. Both have their proper use
and worth, and neither of them are to be omitted: God forbid, that the one
should jostle out the other. David here dedicates his House to God; but yet
withal, he was for Sanctuary-worship; and when he was deprived of this, how
passionately did he desire it. You may see this in Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3. (and in
several other places), It Is said, Psalm. 87.2. The Lord loves the gates of Zion
more than all the dwellings of Jacob. In the dwellings of Jacob the worship of
God was more confined, it was shut up in his Family; but in Zion, there the
worship of God was more open and public; and therefore God loved the gates of
Zion more than the dwellings of Jacob: O there are signal and extraordinary
Blessings attending Public Ordinances; and therefore when the people of God
have been deprived of these, it has been a great affliction to them,
(notwithstanding their Family-enjoyments:) you read of them that were sorrowful
for the solemn Assembly, Zeph. 3.18. The more there are in the Consort, the
sweeter is the Music; the Application is obvious. So that, when your Houses
are dedicated, (as to the setting up of Religion in them) I would not have them
to say, to the places of Publick-worship, what once they said to Moses and
Aaron, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are Holy;
wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord,
Numb. 16.3. So here, I would not have private Houses to say to places (where
the Worship of God is publicly and duly administered), We have Prayer as well
as you, and the Scriptures read as well as you; and therefore why do you take
so much upon you? O, though I would be earnest with you for Family-Religion,
yet I desire you to keep up high esteems of the Publick-Worship and Ordinances
of God.

Fifthly, In the present discourse, I do not only aim at the bare walls, the
external structure, the material building, (as though Dedication-work did only
refer to this); but, under the dedicating of the House, I take-in all the
Persons there inhabiting, the whole Family, Domestic mercies,
Creature-accommodations; all are to be dedicated to God.

Sixthly, The Persons upon whom the duty is incumbent, are those who stand in
the relation and capacity of Superiors, Masters, Parents, Householders,
Governors (or call them what you please): where Power and Authority is, there
House-Dedication-work lies. It Is true, such as are Inferiors, they must
dedicate themselves to the Lord; but as to the dedication of the House, that is
the duty of Superiors. And therefore my business in this discourse is mainly
with such.

Seventhly, In speaking to these, I will not so far enlarge, as to set before
them all the Relative duties that lie upon them, (that I leave to those, who
have gone thorough the body of Relative duties): I will limit my self to those
only, which have an immediate reference to the dedication of the House to God.

These things being premised (for the ends fore mentioned) I come now to show
you, What this House-Dedication is; A little will be sufficient for the opening
of the nature of it, but the applying of it will call for a more full Discourse.

CHAP. II. The Nature of Domestic Dedication opened.
THe great Question to be resolved is this, What is it to dedicate the House?
or, How are men (now under the Gospel) to dedicate their Houses? I will answer
this, in a few particulars.

I make this House-dedication to consist in four things:

1. In a religious entrance upon Houses, by solemn Prayer and Praise. 2. In an
humble and fiducial commitment of them to God's Protection. 3. In the setting
up and promoting of Religion in them. 4. In the devoting and improving of
Domestic Mercies, to and for God.
To some possibly, the duty, (as generally propounded) may seem novel and
strange, and not at all belonging now to Christians under the Gospel: but
surely as it is reduced to these Heads, it will appear to be a standing and
constant Duty, and that which in all Ages ever has, and ever will be a duty
incumbent upon men. A word, and but a word, to each of these Particulars.

First, To dedicate the House, it is to enter upon it, by solemn Prayer and
Praise: I spoke to this in the explication of the words, showing that
Dedication is the entering upon a place, or taking possession of it by solemn
religious rites or acts; it is a Religious entrance upon possession. Now what
are these religious rites or acts? They are, Prayer and Praise. And I call it
[solemn Prayer] because in House-dedication, there must be something more than
usual and ordinary Prayer, (such as is performed in the Family every day;)
there must be solemn and extraordinary prayer suited in special to this
occasion: But (I say) Prayer and Praise are those religious acts, which are to
be performed by persons, when they enter into their Houses in order to the
dedicating of them to God. That House-dedication was used amongst the Jews,
none does question; but what their particular V. Sed quibus Ceremomis dedioatio
illa fuerit peracta, nus. quam traditur Piscator. Tum Homines initiare Domus
dicuntur, cum primum in eis, edere, bibere, habitare incipiunt; Quod pii citra
preces and gratiarum actiones minime faciunt. Hospin. de Orig. Templ. f. 114.
Hoc genus exercitii veteri populo mandatum fuit, at agnoscerent, nullius rei
usum sine gratiarum action, purum and legitimum esse. Calv. Nunt quamvis
cessaverint Legis figurae, tenonda est tamen Pauli Doctrina, Quaecunque Deus in
nostrum usum destinat, fide and precibus sanctificari. Id.
rites were in this, or what the way and manner was, how they did this, that we
do not find either in Scripture or in common Authors; but Divines conclude,
that this was done by Prayer and Praisc. David here pen's a Psalm to be used at
the dedication of his House; and in this Psalm there is Prayer and Praise (as
has been showed). The Apostle tells us, that every Creature is sanctified by
the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. And so every place is sanctified by the
Word and Prayer. If you would dedicate your Houses, enter into them this way:
Seek God, and bless God; call upon him for mercies to be bestowed, thankefully
acknowledge mercies already received. An Consecratio nullum habet jus, Dedicatio
est religiosa. Quid ergo illa tua tum obtestatio, ^ibicinis, quid foculus, quid
Preces, quid prisca verba volnerunt? Tull. Pro Domo sua. At the (...), or
making of their Gods; the main thing which made the god, was the prayer that
the people used to him at that solemnity. So, that of Martial may be
understood, Qui fingit sacros Auro vel marmore vultus, Non facit ille Does; qui
rogat ille facit. Epigr. l. 8. c. 24.
The very Heathens in their Dedications, both of their Temples, and also of
private Houses, they used prayer (in their blind way): surely it is good for
Christians, when they are to enter upon their Houses, to do it by fervent and
solemn prayer, and so to dedicate them to God. This I shall speak more fully
to, when I come to the Application.

Secondly, To dedicate the House to God, it is humbly and fiducially to commit
it to his Divine Protection, and Benediction. You will say, this is the same
with the former; I conceive, it is not; I know, we usually express and manifest
this act by Prayer (for therein we profess that we do thus recommend our selves
and all our concerns to God), and in prayer, we ask of God this mercy, that he
will keep and bless us and our Habitations. But yet Prayer, and This, are
distinct; for, this is trust, dependence, or reliance upon God; and surely,
Trust and Prayer are different things. When I dedicate my House to God, I do
not only pray to him, that he will be pleased to secure it; but I cast my self
upon Him for this, and in a solemn, explicit manner, I commend it to his Holy
and Almighty Protection. This is the notion of Dedication, Nehem. 12.27. Where
it is said, At the [Dedication] of the wall of Jerusalem, they sought the
Levites. (a) Here was Dedication, and it was very solemn too, Et murorum
Civitatis, qui Deo ejusd^mque Protectioni certis precibus hymnisque
commendabantur, una etiam gratiis decenter actis pro consummatione operis.
Geierus in Dan. 3.3. Moenia nrbis Hierosolymae dedicata dicuntu^, quando
Sacerdotes and Populus de eo gratias agebant Deo, quod open ejus restaurata urbs
esset: tum orabant, ut sibi restituta Civitatis ac Libertatis fruitio,
tranquilla pacataque concederetur. Hospin. de Orig. Templor. fol. 103.
Dedicabantur (a): (h.e.) Deo ejusque protectioni commendabanmur. Ravan.. in v.
Dedicare.
(as you may see, by that which follows in the Chapter); The thing dedicated
was the wall of Jerusalem. What was this dedication? 'Twas that which I am
upon; Et Mnrorum Civitatis, etc.
Nehemiah and the People, in this solemn way committed this wall to God's
Protection. Here was their strength, (under God); this was to secure City and
Temple, which much depended upon it; and therefore they commend it thus to God,
that he would keep that, which must keep and secure all; that this Wall might
be continually before him, (as the phrase is, Isa. 49.16.) -- Thus every person
must dedicate his House to God, in the commending of it to his gracious
protection: And there is reason enough for this; for, to be sure, unless God
keep the House, and guard it by His especial Care and Providence, it can never
be safe. Many that write Books, dedicate them to such or such Persons; and what
do they aim at in this? This is one thing in their eye, that their Labors may
be protected by them, to whom they are dedicated. The Christian dedicates his
House to God, this is done by the acting of his Holy Trust upon God, that he
will defend it from all evil; I say this is one thing, that he does in this
dedication.

Thirdly, To dedicate the House to God, it is for a man, to set up and advance
and encourage Religion in it. Hoc ritu simul admonebantur, tunc rite and ordine
unumquemque domo sua frui, si quoddam esset Dei Sacrarium ubt vigeret pietas
and sincerus ejus cultus. Calv.
This (as Calvin observes) was one thing designed, in this Rite of
House-dedication, that men might know that they did, then, in a right manner
possess their Houses, when they did make them to be as Churches or Chapels,
where Piety and the sincere Worship of God might flourish. This is a great
thing in the dedicating of the House; and (indeed) if I would fasten it upon
any one head, I would do it upon this. To dedicate the House, it is to
consecrate it to the Lord; to set up in it Piety, Godliness, the Worship, Fear,
Knowledge of God; to keep down in it sin, wickedness, profaneness, whatsoever is
evil; All is included in that general and comprehensive word, (which I
therefore made use of), namely RELIGION. What did David do, when he dedicated
his House? O, he resolved upon this, That Religion should flourish in his
Family; that Holiness to the Lord should be written upon all in his Family,
that God should be duly worshipped and called upon in his Family, Quod ille,
non dese solo, verum de sua quoque familia voti istius sponsionem facit, in eo
exemplum vel maxim insigne nobis proponitur gubernandae familiae nostrae.
Masius, in loc
that he would not suffer sin to be in his Family; other Houses might be
Atheistical, profane, irreligious, but his should not be so. Thus Joshuah did
also, in a very eminent and exemplary way: As for me, and my House, we will
serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. And Abraham has a high commendation from God for
this; I know him (says God), that he will command his children, and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment, Genesis 18.19. And it is said of Cornelius, that he was a devout man, and
one that feared God with all his House, Act. 10.2. I might enlarge upon these
Scripture-Instances, and upon several Considerations, to enforce the same
practices upon ourselves, but that is not my present business; I am only now
showing you, what the Nature of this House-dedication is, or wherein it does
consist.

Fourthly, To dedicate the House, it is to carry it aright under Domestic, or
House-mercies; for House here, is not be limited to the bare habitation, or to
the persons therein residing, (who make up the Family); but it includes all
those blessings, mercies, comforts, accommodations, that there are enjoyed.
Now, where a person carries it aright under these mercies, so as to devote and
dedicate all to God, this is House-dedication A right carriage under mercies,
is an expression that takes in many things; when God is eyed in them, as the
Spring and fountain from which they flow; when they are all ascribed to God,
and to his Free Grace; when he is admired in them; when the possessor lives
under a deep sense of his unworthiness of them; when they are enjoyed in God;
when they are all resigned up to God's pleasure; All these particulars are
wrapped up in this general of carrying it aright under mercies. But that which is
proper, when we speak of the dedicating of our mercies to God, is this, The
devoting of all to him, and the improving of all for him. Would you dedicate
your Houses to him? Consider what your Domestic mercies are, (and they are
many and precious) and see that you dedicate these to God; how? devote them to
God, and improve them for God. David was as good at this piece of dedication,
as at any of the former; (as I shall make it out in its proper place): But I
will add nothing more at present.

Let not any think, I am too short upon this Head: further necessary
enlargements will better fall in, in the Applicatory part; and if I should
speak more here, I should but prevent and anticipate my self there. I say
again, my design in this Chapter has been but just to show you, what
House-dedication is, but all inlargements upon it, I refer to that which
follows.

CHAP. III. The want of Domestic Dedication, bewailed.
ANd is it such a Thing, described it? it is pity then, there is no more of it
in the World; There are but very few to be found, who tread in David's steps.
As I lamented the rarity of Personal-dedication, so I may lament also the
rarity of Domestic Dedication: I wish there was not as much cause for the one
as for the other: And the truth is, if that be so rare and seldom, no wonder
that this is so rare also; for it is certain (as I have said more than once),
that no man will devote his House to God, till he has first devoted Himself to
God. Ah, what do the most of men do in their Houses? there they eat, drink,
sleep, trade, reside; but there is no dedicating of them to God. This is a duty
so far from being practiced, that it is scarce thought of by the most of men,
they do not trouble their Heads about it; the most do not go so far as to know
or to believe that this is a duty: O that we had not too much cause, with
bitterness of soul to lament the general neglect of House-dedication!

Let me a little take notice of the Carriages of men, according to their
different ranks and orders: There Is our Great ones, (who are above others as
much as the tall Oaks and lofty Cedars are above the poor shrubs), our
Noblemen, and Gentlemen: Do they put their necks to this work of the Lord? (
Nehem. 3.5.) As 'twas said, Have any of the Rulers believed on Him? ( Joh.
7.48.); so may I say here, Have such amongst us dedicated Themselves and their
Houses to God? May not the Apostle's, Not many Mighty, not many Noble, be
applied to this? (I Cor. 1.26.) And that of the Prophet, Jer. 5.5. I will get
me unto the Great men --, but they have altogether broken the yoke, and burst
the bonds. Might I be so bold as to look into the Houses of these Persons,
should I find there religion advanced, the Worship and Service of God performed
and attended upon; sin and wickedness kept under, mercies improved for God,
piety and godliness encouraged? O that it were so! But instead of this, I fear
I should find cursing, swearing, taking Gods name in vain, drunkenness, gaming,
luxury, uncleanness, oppression, pride, contempt of godliness, gross neglect of
Religion? I say, I fear this is that which I should meet withal in the Houses
of too many of those whom God has exalted in the world. If I wrong them, I
have reason to beg their pardon; but I believe, they have infinitely more
reason to beg their pardon of God, than I have to beg my pardon of them.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Could I be so weak, as to think that ever this poor
despicable Book should be taken up by your hands, I would then (with all
Humility, yet with all faithfulness) thus apply my self to you -- Why do not
you dedicate your Persons, your Houses to God? Is this only the Poorman's Duty?
Does your Greatness exempt you from subjection to the Laws of that God, who is
infinitely more above you, than you are over the meanest man? Does not he
expect that from you, which he does from others? nay, does he not expect more
from you, (you having a greater share in his blessings, and being more obliged
by the good things which he heaps upon you)? Is not that day coming, which will
set you and us upon the same Level? in which all these distinctions, (that are
calculated only for this Meridian of Earth) shall all cease, and it is Piety
only then that shall make the difference? must you not then give an account of
the Talents (of Power, Wealth, Interest), that God here entrusts you with? will
not the Souls of your numerous Families be required at your hands? Has God
advanced you so high, and will you do nothing to advance him? Do you debase
ordisparage your selves, by being religious, and setting up Religion in your
Houses? Is not Religion your highest Honor? Here Is David, a King, (and
therefore above you), a King in the very Zenith of worldly grandeur, dedicating
his House to God; Is it below you to do thus? Is Moraligoodness any diminution
to your civil Greatness? Do you cease to be Noble by being truly Noble? Qui
majores terras possident minores census solvunt. Parisienfis. O quantus in
populo Christiano honor Christi, ubi Religio ignobilem facit; and mali
cogunturesse nobiles, ne viles habeantur. Salvia.
Is God better to you than to others, will you be worser than others to Him?
Shall the best Houses, and the worst Hearts, the fairest Estates, and the
foulest Life's go together? Have you so many rooms in your large Houses, and not
one for God? Is it wisdom, so to carry your selves in your Palaces here, as to
live in a Dungeon of eternal darkness hereafter? Is it not but a few days and
you will be laid in the Dust, and must bid farewell to those pleasures in which
now you are swallowed up? Are former Judgments which lay heavy upon you, quite
forgotten? Will not God smite again, if you prevent him not, by Personal and
Family-Reformation? Might not God be owned in your Houses, and you yet enjoy
enough of the sweetness of Temporal Comforts? If you would dedicate your Houses
to God, would not this have a great influence upon all about you to do the
same? How might you by your examples promote God's Honor, and the good of
Souls? Did your ancient Progenitors carry it as too many of you do? Will you
inherit their Lands, Houses, Honors, and their All, save only their Virtues?
But surely, my Zeal transports me: Some will say, this is a Digression; others
will say, this is Presumption; and I say, it is weakness to write to them, who
are never like to read what I write.

Come we to Persons, who move in a lower Orb; it is to be hoped, that they
dedicate their Houses to God. I wish they did so; but upon a very easy search,
you will find the contrary. There Is the poor Countryman, he has an House to live
in, and there he feeds when he is hungry; there he sleeps when he is weary;
thence he goes to his labors (which circulate upon him), and thither he
returns when he has done his work abroad; Here Is his course from day to day,
from year to year; But where is his Religion? He goes to Church upon the
Lord's Day, attends upon the Worship of God, hears a Sermon preached; when this
is done, (in a very pitiful way, God knows), home he comes, and thinks he has
done enough, and that which is very fair for one week; his religion now (like
his best Clothes) must be laid up till the next Sunday (as he calls it): But
what does he do in his House? how does he carry it in his Family? O very sadly.
Not a Prayer in his Family, not a Chapter read in his Family, all the week
long: He rises in the morning, dresses himself, immediately goes to his
business, but he does not first go to God, to beg his blessing upon him and
his. He calls up his Servants, hastens them to their several employments, but
there is no calling upon God: He feeds his sheep, fothers his cattle, but
starves his own soul, and the souls of those that are related to him: He goes
to Market, there he buys or sells, but drives no commerce or traffic with
Heaven. He minds his ground, but not his heart; the weeds must not grow in the
one, but sin may grow in the other. He loves to see his Grain and Cattle thrive
abroad, but he minds not how grace thrives at home, in himself and others: He
pays his Tithes to his Minister, but he gives not the thousandth part of his
time to God; his Rent to his Landlord, but no Rent to God for all his mercies;
when the night comes, he goes to bed, without any religious committing of
himself and Family to God's Protection; just as his weary beast lies down, so
does he. Here Is a short account of the poor Country-man's Religion, and is it
not a sad one? I speak not of all, (God forbid, it should be thus with all),
but indeed I fear it is so with the most; it is a very rare thing in
Country-Towns and Villages, to find a House dedicated to God, a praying Family.
O it would make a man's heart to ache, to consider how it is with the generality
in this respect.

But it is better with the Citizen; He Is a knowing person, has great
advantages, of being informed in his duty, and quickened to it; surely he is as
much above the Countryman in Religion, as he is above him in his external garb
and port: one may expect in his House to find a due observance of God. O you
that are Citizens, Is it thus with you? Do men think and speak of you as you
deserve, or not? Are your Houses dedicated to God? Has Religion a throne in
your Family? I speak it with great comfort, (to the glory of the grace of God),
that I believe, there are Thousands in this City, who desire unfeignedly to
dedicate Self, and House, and all to God; and they carry it accordingly. But is
it thus with All? Is it thus with the Most? Have we not even here many Houses,
where there is much trading, but no praying? many Masters of Families, who can
take up with a Sunday-Church-Religion, ( I speak not agianst the thing in it
self, nor would I cast any disparagement upon it), but doing nothing in their
Houses all the week after? And have we not some that profess God, and yet they
do but half it out in dedication-work; some will pray at night, but not in the
morning, then they are too busy; some will pray in the morning not at night,
then they are too weary. Surely though one meal a day be enough for the body,
yet one duty a day is not enough for the soul: Although we have no common
Supper at night, methinks we should have an Heavenly Breakfast every morning;
(but more of this hereafter). O that all such as do profess God, were sincere
in this! I might go over the particulars, and show under each of them, how few
(even amongst you) do dedicate their Houses to God; and I fear that has been
one ground of the Lord's late Controversy within this City. Upon the whole
matter then, it is too evident that House-dedication is very rare. The most of
men, whether they be High or Low, live in too manifest a neglect of it. O let
such as are in dedicated Houses, bless God for themselves, and pity others
which are not so.

CHAP. IV. The Duty pressed more generally.
WE see (by that which has been spoken) how things stand; there are but few,
who make Conscience of the Duty in hand: Well, what is now to be done? must we
let men alone, under this grand Omission? Are there no Endeavors to be used,
for the removal of this sad and sinful neglect? Surely it concerns the
Ministers of the Gospel, to put forth themselves with the greatest earnestness,
to make this their great work and business, (as far as it is possible) to
prevail with Masters and Governors to set upon House-dedication, that it may
not always be so rare a thing, as hitherto it has been. In order hereunto I
shall cast in my Mite, which ( I hope) God will accept and bless. And so I come
to Exhortation. In the managing of which, let me tell you, that though I design
to reach all Persons whatsoever, and that the Arguments used are of Universal
extent; yet in special I shall direct my Discourse to you the Inhabitants of
this City.

Many of you are yet in your old Habitations; For ever be the name of God
magnified, for his sparing of your Houses, when all about you was laid wast and
desolate; Amos 4.11.
you were as brands snatched out of the common burnings: As the shepherd takes
out of the mouth of the Lion two legs, or a piece of an ear, ( Amos 3.12.) So
God dealt with you: You read of God's bounding of the proud waves; Job 26.10.
Job 38.10, 11.
and saying to them, Thus far shall ye go and no farther: You have seen God's
bounding of the proud flames, when they were most fierce and raging: Now, did
you ever dedicate these Houses to God? if not, be entreated now to set upon the
duty: O it is sad, that you have neglected it thus long, be sure you neglect it
no longer; You are not now to enter upon new Houses, but yet you must enter
upon a new course; whether the House be new or old, that is all one, it must be
dedicated; As a late repentance, so a late dedication is better than none. May
not God well expect that Houses so eminently preserved by him, should
faithfully be dedicated to him?

There are others of you, upon whom the late judicial Providence did fall very
heavy; you were fired out of your Houses, but you are now full of the Hopes of
new Habitations. This poor City (for almost two years), has ly'ne as dead, and
buried in its own ruins; but there seems to be at present some hope of its
revival and resurrection; it begins to discover a little breathing, I trust in
God, it will come to it self again. I have sometimes fancyed to my self, when I
have seen the few new Buildings, that are scattered up and down in the Ruins,
that this is like to the fruits of the Earth, after a sharp and tedious Winter;
the Spring comes, and then here and there you may see a blade of Corn or Grass
growing up, which gives an encouragement to the beholder of a further growth:
So here, we have something (pardon the expression) like the springing up of a
City, here and there an House is finished; But I hope (if the Lord has so
great a mercy for us), in time all will be completed; as it is but a blade or
two at the first, but in a little time the whole field is covered all over.
This Summer (if God continue peace to us), we encourage our selves to expect a
good and considerable progress in the rebuilding of our desolate places; and if
so, then many of you will be Housed again. Now, if it shall please God to give
you your desires, to succeed you in your building work, and to put you into new
Houses, O this is that which I would earnestly press upon you, Dedicate them to
God.

This is the General Exhortation; in the enforcing of which I will offer a few
things. 1. Do this, (not only at your first entrance, but in the whole course
of your life, for this dedication is a continued act), and it will be a good
evidence of your Personal-dedication; if you have dedicated your self to God,
(which if you have not done, your condition is sad), you will certainly
dedicate your House to God: As no man can do the latter, unless he do the
former; so whoever does the former, he will do the latter. This will evidence
also the Truth of Grace, and the very power of godliness. O, where grace is in
the heart, God shall be in the House; where the person is converted, the House
shall be dedicated; and I scarce know any one thing, wherein you have a better
discovery of a man, whether he be gracious or not, godly or not, than his
carriage and deportment in, and toward his House and Family: Does he own God
there? advance God there? devote Persons, Estate, Interest, All to God? surely
he is a godly man. Abraham acted like himself, not only when he was willing to
offer up his Son, but also when he was commanding his Children, and his
Household to keep the way of the Lord. Genesis 18.19.


2. This is to do something that is singular; this is more than what others do,
(I mean such as have no supernatural work in them): To get a convenient House
to live in, and there to drive on a trade for the World, and to enjoy
Creature-blessings, this is ordinary; and this is all that the most do mind:
and therefore, if you carry it otherwise, viz. you no sooner have an House but
God shall have that House; you are no sooner served your selves, but God shall
be served by you; where you are gratified, God shall be glorified; This (I say)
is to do something that has a Blessed singularity in it.

3. This is the way, to enjoy the presence of God in your Houses, to have him
to dwell with you. I hope you will look after this: What Is the House if God be
not in it? What Is the most convenient habitation, the confluence of all
external comforts and accommodations, if God be absent? What difference would
there be betwixt the Palace and the Dungeon, if the Sun should withdraw, and so
all be covered in darkness? And so here; Make sure of God's Presence, and every
Habitation will be sweet. O do not take up with good rooms, good furniture,
good relations, good trading, but get a good God to dwell with you; and he will be
better than all. He says of his Church, that, Psalm. 132.1.1.
He has desired it for his Habitation; This is my rest for ever; here will I
dwell, for I have desired it. The name of the City is Jehovah-Shammah. Ezekiel.
48.3
Would you have the great God to own your habitations for his Habitation, to
take up his rest with you? Would you have your Houses, to be called
Jehovah-Shammah? then dedicate them to the Lord. As you desire the presence of
God in you, (in a special and gracious manner) dedicate your persons; (then you
shall be as the Temple of the living God, and God shall dwell in you, and walk
in you), (as it is (...).
emphatically expressed, 2 Cor. 6.16.) As you desire the presence of God with
you, (in a more common and providential way) dedicate your Houses.

4. Would you enjoy your Houses when you have built them, let them be
dedicated. It would be sad, after all your care, costs, pains, that you should
not possess, what you lay out so much upon. It Is a severe threatening, that in
Deuteronomy. 28.30. Thou shall build an House, and thou shall not dwell therein. So
also, Zeph. 1.13. Their Goods shall become a booty, and their Houses a
desolation: (that you have felt already; and it is further threatened), they
shall also build Houses, but not inhabit them: (O that this also, may not be
executed upon you). And, Amos 5.11. Ye have built Houses of hewn stone, but ye
shall not dwell in them. As you desire to be freed from this sharp affliction,
be faithful in the discharge of the duty, which I am upon; then you are in the
way of the Promise; Isa. 65.20, 21. They shall build Houses and inhabit them,
and they shall plant Vineyards, and cat the fruit of them: They shall not
build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant and another eat; for, as the
days of a tree are the days of my people; and mine elect shall long enjoy the
work of their hands: They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for
trouble. The good Lord accomplish this word to you in this City!

5. Life is very uncertain. He that was to go out to fight with the enemy, he
especially was to dedicate his House, because of the uncertainty of his Life,
Deuteronomy. 20.5. -- I hope this will not be be your case: but however, your Life is
very uncertain; you live to day, Can you say, that you shall live to morrow?
who knows, how soon this poor thread of Life may break in pieces? Every man at
his best state is altogether vanity. Psalm. 39.5.
Life and all the Comforts of it, are fluid, transitory, uncertain. Here we
have no abiding City, Hebr. 13.14. Nihil in hac vita possidemus, quod di, cere
possumus, futurum diu nostrum. Quae uolis videmur firmissime tenere, ea,
quoties Deo libuit, temporis momento nobis e manibus offluunt. Omnia nos
relinquunt vel a nobis relinquuntur. J. Capel. in Hebr. 13.14. Linquenda Tellus
and Domus, and placens Vxor. Horat,
but we seek one to come: O enter upon your Houses, as those who have death in
your eye: They are built of Brick and firm materials, and may stand long; but
you your selves, are made but of brittle things; you are but earthly
Tabernacles, a little breathing clay; you would fall every moment, if God did
not underprop you. Suppose it should please God, to send such a plague, as we
had a few years ago, (we have had a strange, unusual Winter, what it may
produce I know not), would you be impenetrable against the arrows that fly and
wast at noonday? ( Psalm. 91.5, 6.) Can you build your new Houses so, that the
destroying Angel shall not be able to get into them? If you can secure them
from Fire, cannot God kindle a fire in your Bodies, send a Fever upon you, that
shall consume you presently? O what an uncertain thing is Life! how many ways
has God to put a period to it! Surely therefore it lies upon us, to dedicate
our selves, our Houses to God; to advance him in our Hearts and Families; to
improve all we have to his glory; to be faithful in the matters of Religion;
for we know not how soon Death will come; and what shall we do in a dying hour,
if we have lived in the neglect of these things? Thou that have not given thy
House to God, and set it apart for him, Can thou expect, that he will give
thee that (...), that House which is not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens? (2 Cor. 5.1.)

6. House-dedication is the best Housesecurity. Would you have your Houses
safe? dedicate them to God; thereby you prevent God's Anger, and entitle what
is yours, to God's Protection. You have lived to see dreadful things, (God of
his infinite mercy grant you may never see the like again): A City burnt! this
City burnt! this City burnt with such Circumstances! Many Thousands of Houses,
in the space of three days, utterly consumed! O, What was it, that kindled this
fierce anger of God against us? What shall we do, that the like may never again
befall us? Surely these are two Questions, which with the greatest seriousness,
we are often to propound to our selves; I shall go no further than that which I
am upon, for an Answer to them. One cause (I fear) (I dare not be peremptory in
assigning the causes of a judgment so unsearchable), was, our not-dedicating of
our Houses to God: Non-dedication brings desolation; Had Religion, the power of
Godliness, been set up and kept up in your Houses, they might have stood to
this day, for ought I know. This, as to the first Question: As to the second, I
say only this, If you would not drink of this bitter cup again, dedicate your
Houses to God. Do not think your walls and bricks will secure you, if sin be
harbored, and God kept out of doors: If there should be no malicious men, (or
rather incarnate Devils) here upon earth, there is a just and jealous God in
Heaven. This duty will be your best security: Do you dedicate, and God will
protect. I always submit to God's Sovereignty, and to his secret Reserves,
(which are best known to Himself), (and how much there was of these as to the
dealings of God with many Families in this City, in the late judgment, I cannot
determine): But as to the ordinary methods of God, and as to his revealed will,
we have great encouragement to hope for Protection and Preservation, whilst we
sincerely desire, to come up to House-dedicating duty.

O (my Brethren) be not offended either at my largeness or plainness in this my
advice; you have not my Pen, but my heart in what I write. And I shall think,
(though I am sensible of many defects), that I have wrote well, if I may but
see you to do well. All that I aim at is success, in bringing you to
Dedication-work. Lib. 6. c. 31.
Vt se diceret quasi hominem tandem habitare coepisse.
Suetonius tells us a passage of Nero, which I shall make use of; When he had
built him a brave Palace, and had dedicated it, he said, Now he began to live
like a man. I allude not to his sense, (for that was naught), but to his words.
You are now preparing new Houses, and e're long you hope to dwell in them; Oh
when ever it shall be so, dedicate them to God, then you will live and act like
true Christians. It Is better to be without an House than without an Heart, to
dedicate it to God. It Is never right ordered and managed, till it be dedicated
(...) Cognationem habet cum (...), (Rectus): nam initiare aliquid, est illud
recte disponere. Aven.
This in General; but I must not leave the Exhortation thus; I will go over the
Particulars, that make up this Housededication, and press them upon you
distinctly.

CHAP. V. The Particular Branches of House-Dedication urged.
1. FIrst therefore, Enter upon your Houses by solemn Prayer and Praise. These
two are (as it were) the staple Duties of Religion; In the One, we acknowledge
what we want, in the other, what we have; In the one we testify our own
emptiness, in the other God's goodness; In the one we take from God, in the
other we give to God. But it is not for me to run out upon these, in the general
nature or notion of them; I am only to speak to them, according to the present
consideration. That which I have to do is this; to exhort you, (as the good
Providence of God shall fix you in New Habitations), that you would make your
Entrance by Solemn Prayer and Praise. (You know what I mean by Solemn Prayer
and Praise, that has been already opened): You must have the foundations of
your Houses twice laid; they are first laid by your workmen, in a common and
literal sense; then they must be laid by your selves again, in a spiritual and
religious sense, by Prayer and Praise: And indeed the first laying is not safe
or firm without this. In our entrings upon New Houses we have several civil
rites and customs; there are Many open House-Dedication by these Feastings. See
Mariana and others cited in Lorinus upon Deuteronomy. 20.5. Dedicari res dicitur,
quan. do cum solenni aliquo ritu, vel convivio rei usus inchoaatur Menoch.
Feastings, great Entertainments; Friends come and rejoice with us, and send in
their Provisions to be merry with us; and this they call House-airing, or
House-warming: I have nothing to say against this usage, provided, 1. That this
be soberly and temperately managed; 2. That the main duty to God be not
neglected. But the misery of it is this, we have these external expressions of
Love and Joy, when the religious part is omitted. This I find former Nos hodie
Conviviis Domos nostras Dedicamus, parum expenden. tes divinum beneficium.
Muscul. Nunc fere res tota versa est in luxum Conviviorum and plurimas
Helluationes. Moller.
Writers much lamenting. O let not your Dedications lie in eating and drinking,
(much less in intemperance and insobriety), but in Prayer and Praise. It Is
observed of the Hoc etiamnum fit a Judais, sed helluando, pergraecando,
ludendo, aliisque oblectamentis, potius festum agitant, quam seria ad Deum
gratiarum action, ob reportatam ab bostibus victoriam. Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic.
cap. 23.
Jews, that they yet keep the Feast of Dedication; but how do they keep it? In
swilling, drinking, immoderate use of the Creatures, and the like; but as for
the serious remembrance of God's mercy, vouchsafed to their Nation (upon which
that Feast was grounded), that is lost. O that it was not thus amongst
Christians, upon other Accounts! what feasting are we like to have in this
City, as persons shall come into their New Habitations? Pray take heed of
excess; do not so soon forget Gods punishing of you for this, (which I look
upon as one of the Cities sins); and withal make Conscience of the main. As
soon as you are settled in your Houses, dedicate them by Prayer and Praise.
David here as soon as his House was built, (for so I told you some Expositors
time the words), he falls upon the dedication of it by Prayer and Praise. I
beseech you, do you do as he did.

A word to each of these; First for Prayer. That Is a duty always seasonable but
in the present case very seasonable. Howshall our dwellings be Peccatis
polluuntur, precibus sanctificantur aedes. Scultet.
sanctified, but by Prayer? This is the Sanctifying Ordinance, 1 Timothy 4.5. As
sin defiles the House, Prayer sanctifies it: How will you testify your
dependence upon God, for mercy in your Houses but by Prayer? How will you own
God to be your Chief Landlord, Dei se inquilinos esse fatebantur. Calv.
that you hold all from him, that you are his, and your House is his, and your
All is his? I say, how will you own God thus, if you do not enter with Prayer?
Will you settle upon your Houses, and not ask God's leave? You will not enter
into your Neighbors House, but you will say first, By your leave; Is not your
House, Estate, Goods, All, the Lord's? and will you invade his Blessings
without his Leave? Do you expect Protection from God, that he will keep your
Houses day and night, and will you not in a solemn and special manner pray for
this? Can you look for any blessing, but in the way of Prayer? O set some time
apart for the solemn performance of this duty: Oh, let your Prayers enter
Heaven, as soon as you enter into your Houses; and plead with God, thus: Lord,
I justify thee in thy judicial dispensations; thou wast just in turning me out
of my former Habitation, for I did not pay thee my rent for it; I did not only
deserve to have my House in Flames, but to have my Soul to burn in Hell for
evermore: Notwithstanding former forfeitures, present unworthiness, thou have
provided another House for me and mine; Lord, I am less than the least of all
thy mercies; but since out of thy free mercy thou have made this provision for
me, help me to own thee in it, to carry it better than formerly I have done;
Let my House and Heart, and all be sanctified; let me live and walk in it with
a perfect heart,; Let me devote it, and all in it, to thy glory; let thy
special presence be with me, and thy special providence over me; Secure me from
all evil, and from mischievous men, who are set on fire with Hell; Let not my
House be good, and my Heart naught: As my House is new, let my Heart be new
also: Lord, I here dedicate my House to thee: I and my House will serve thee.
But I must break off from this; the Spirit of God will direct you and assist
you, when with sincerity you set upon the Duty.

And then, as to Praise. In ancient Dedications they used to give gifts and to
offer Sacrifices: In the dedicating of your Houses to God, let your Gift and
Sacrifices be Praise; this is more to God than all Legal, or Mosaical
Sacrifices, Psalm. 50.13.14. Psalm. 69.30, 31. It Is of great advantage, for men
to enter upon their Comforts with Thanksgiving; Non potest fieri, utqui Donum
Dei gratus agnoscit, illo abutatur. Muscul. Minemur hinc pro omnibus rebus, and
pracipue cum primum quid in usum venit, Gratias Deo agere: inde sane men's amore
Dei as ita ad oinnem magis pietatem accenditur; simulqueadmonemur, at De^^
Donis quam castissim? utatur; Quis enim re abutatur ad luxum, pro quo jam Deo
gratias egit. Bucer.
We do not so easily abuse mercies, which we solemnly bless God for Get such a
sense of the goodness of God upon your hearts, as to call upon your selves, to
bless God; Ah, and to call in others too, to bless God for you and with you;
This was David's practice, (as I might show you in several places); and in the
managing of this, I would have you in a special manner to fix upon those
mercies which have a more immediate reference to the occasion: As for example,
your Houses were burnt, but (as to the most of you), a considerable part of
your Estates was preserved; however your Life's were not touched. Indeed this
was admirable, that in so fierce, so terrible a fire the Life's of more were not
destroyed: It might have been with us as with Sodom, our persons as well as our
Houses and Estates might have bin consumed; but the merciful God ordered it
otherwise. Lot owned it as a singular mercy, (though he lost much) that his
Life was spared, (when Sodom was burnt), Genesis 19.19. 'Twas mercy that when we
were in flames, we were not in blood too; that 'twas not killing and murdering,
as well as burning; Blessed be God, Psalm. 76.10.
who restrained the remainder of wrath. 'Twas mercy, that he provided other
Habitations for you, in your great straights; That so much of the City was
spared, to be an Harbor to you: That many of you, who have been thrust into
very incommodious places, have yet enjoyed as much health as ever you did in
the midst of your best accommodations; that after a long and sad war, it has
pleased God to restore again the blessing of Peace to us, (without which this
poor City must yet have continued in its ashes): That so good and so full an
Act has been passed by the Supreme Authority of the Nation, to further the
repairing of our breaches: That God has blessed you with such a proportion of
estate, that you are in a capacity, either to build or to take new Houses; that
after a short ejectment out of your old Houses, God has provided others for
you, and brought you into them, (as your true Of the Roman's Domiducus Deus,
vid. Dempsterum Antiq. Romans C. 2. f. 187.
Domiducus Deus): There are many other mercies that I am sure do occur to your
thoughts: O let God in your Re-entrys have some solemn acknowledgment of these
signal blessings. And when you are upon this duty, I would commend three things
to you. 1. Seriously enquire whether in that great distress, that was upon you
in the late Fire, you did not make some solemn Vows and Promises to God, in
case he should do thus and thus for you; If so, be sure (without delay) you
make them good Sacrificium seu Hostiam Pacificorum. Hebraei vocant Se bach
Shelamim, Sacrificium Pacis ac Salutis; Eratque nunc spontaneum, quod exanimi
devotione, nulla urgente necessitate offerebatur; nunc Votivum, quod reddebatur
ex pacto, i. e. quod quis in periculis and I necessitatibus constitutus Deo se
in Ecclesia oblaturum siliberaretur promiserat. Gualt. in. Mar. 12.33.
. O do not forget the vows that you made in the day of your distress! Psalm.
76.11. Vow and pay unto the Lord your God. Psalm. 66.13, 14. I will go into thy
House with Burnt-offerings; I will pay thee my Vows, which my lips have
uttered, and my mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble. Eccles. 5.4, 5. When
thou vowest a Vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he has no pleasure in
Fools; pay that which thou have vowed: Better it is, that thou should not
vow, than that thou should vow and not pay. (My Friends), I leave it with you
in your own Consciences to consider, whether under the late amazing, terrible
Providence, you did not enter upon some solemn Vows and Promises to the great
God; if you did, do not forget, or falsify them; Sincerity in vowing, lies in
fidelity in performing: When the Emperor Sigismund, (being in a sore fit of
sickness, and making then high Promises of Reformation, in case he should
recover) asked his Confessor, how he might know, Whether he was sincere or not,
in his Repentance? the Confessor answered him, If (says he) you be as careful
to make good in your health, what you now promise, as you are forward now in
your extremity to promise; then your Repentance is right. So here I say, should
any of you ask me, (we had great convictions and terrors upon our spirits, when
the City was in flames, O we vowed and promised thus and thus to God, such sins
we would leave, such duties we would perform), Were we sincere in all this?
Ans. If you now make good, what then you engaged to do, then you were; but
otherwise not. Men are very forward to promise in a day of affliction, but very
backward to perform in a day of comfort. 'Twas Pliny's wish, Vtinam tales esse
sani perseveraremus, Epist. 26.1.7.
quales nos futuros profitemur infirmi; And it is mine; O that we were the same
under mercies, that we are under judgments! that we were as good at performing
under the former, as we are at promising under the later. I did not think, to
have said so much upon this, but I fearthere's need of all this, and of much
more: O do not think, that God will be put off with your Praise and Thanks
(when you enter into your new Houses) if you do not pay what you vowed when you
were in trouble.

2dly. When you are blessing God, for what is present, do not forget what is
past; whilst you acknowledge his goodness in your New Habitations, do not forget
his severitie, in what befell your Old Habitations. As Judgments must not
jostle out the remembrance of Mercies, so Mercies must not jostle out the
remembrance of Judgments. Israel's forgetfulness of the works of God, is often
charged upon them, Psalm. 106.13. They soon forgot his works; (and passim). Are
not we herein too guilty also? O the great things, that God has done in our
Age, (an Age made up of wonders)! but how soon are they forgotten by us. That
his gracious works should be forgotten, that is not so much to be wondered at,
(our cursed Natures being so apt to forget mercies); but that, judicial, and
such judicial works of God, should so presently be out of our thoughts and
memories, this is very strange. I will instance only, in the late Plague and
Fire. Good God! How many persons were swept away by the one, how many Houses
laid desolate by the other! and yet how soon are both forgot! These were
Judgments very hardly to be paralleled, either at Home or abroad; God (scarce
ever) did the like before, (and I trust will never do the like again); but they
are past and gone, and men scarce ever think of them. O that London' s Flames
that were so hardly extinguished, and put out with so much of difficulty,
should so easily be put out of the thoughts and memories of the most. It Is but
yesterday since this poor City, was nothing but a furnace of Fire and Smoke;
since this raging Element wasted all before it, ( scorning all checks and
controuls, laughing at our poor Ladders and Buckets); since it came upon us,
and went on with that fury, as if our Tides of Water had been turned into Tides
of Fire: O the beautiful Churches, the magnificent Buildings, the convenient
Houses, that it ( with the greatest impartiality) laid desolate in a few days!
O the many Families that were utterly undone! O the hurries and distractions
that it caused amongst us! O the dreadful prospects that I had then in my eye,
the dreadful noises that I had then in my ear, ( by the crackling of the Tiles,
the falling and blowing up of Houses), shall I ever forget them? O the ringing
of Hands, the paleness of Faces, the weeping eyes, the great distress of poor
Citizens that then I saw, shall I ever forget it? I believe, you saw the same
too, and yet we do forget? Ah, if London was built again, and the Ruins and
Rubbish but a little out of our eye, I fear all that God has done, would in a
little time be remembered no more. A Pyramid will not be enough to perpetuate
the memorials of this, if we be left to our selves. I therefore entreat, and
beseech you, (the Citizens of London) to keep fresh in your memories, the late
terrible outgoings of Providence, both against your selves in particular, and
against the City in general: and in the day of your Praises, and in the midst
of all your rejoycings for present mercies, O remember what is past. How that
should be remembered, and how the remembrance of it is to be improved, I cannot
here insist upon; I desire to shun prolixity, and yet I am guilty of it.

3dly. In your initial Thanksgivings, do this also; Where God has blessed you,
with considerable Estates, see that you set something apart for charitable
uses. Let your Thanksgiving be Thanks-doing; Do something toward the relief of
them that are in want, of them, that were great Sufferers by the late Fire; and
toward others too, who are great objects of Charity. Has God yet spared you
an Estate? O devote it to his glory, and the good of his poor necessitous
servants; Liberality to such, is an excellent concomitant to the duty of
Praise, and a very high Testimony of the reality of your Gratitude. I leave
this with you, and (for some reasons) I will not further enlarge upon it. So
much for the enforcing of the First Branch of House-Dedication.

Secondly, In the Dedication of your Houses to God, I advise, Fiducially commit
them to God. This implies, 1. A casting-off of all Creature-props and
dependancies for safety and Preservation. 2. A flying to God for his
Protection. 3. A resting or relying upon God, for this mercy.
Commit your Houses thus to God; and if you would do it, in a solemn explicit
way, when you enter into them, and then keep the impression of this upon your
Spirits all along, it would be of great use to you. The poor Heathens had their
Tutelar Gods, upon whom they relied, for the keeping of their Houses; (These
were the Lares, Penates, (...), Domestic Gods), (of whom the Philologers write
much). The True God must be by you owned and rested upon, for the preservation
of your Houses. Alas, where can we be safe, or our Houses be safe, but under
the shadow of the Almighty? ( Psalm. 91.1.) What can secure us but that
providence, that is always waking and watchful? Psalm. 121.4.
look to your persons, what a world of accidents are you liable to; each of
which is enough to make a speedy dispatch of you: When you are at home, it is
but the breaking of a beam, and you are gone; when you walk in the Streets,
it is but the falling of a Brick, or a Tile, or a wall, or the breaking of a
wheel (when you are just by a laden Cart), or an hundred such Casualties and
contingencies, and there is an end put to your Life. How many in this City,
every week are taken away by sad and sudden Accidents! and indeed I wonder it is
not more. We live environed and surrounded by Deaths, that may come upon us in
ways that we never dreamt of. Little did the Poet Aeschylus, when he was
sitting in his Yard, think that there he should receive his mortal wound; but
so it was, for (as the story goes) he sitting there, with his Hat off, an Engle
hovering over his bald head, and mistaking it for a stone, let fall an Oyster,
(hoping by the fall to break the shell), which falling upon this poor man's
head, pierced his skull, and so he died. And thus it happens in a thousand
cases. What need have we therefore, to live in a constant dependence upon God
for his Protection? And so as to our Houses; how many unseen dangers do hang
over them, if God do not keep them: All your care, preventions, signify
nothing without this; Set your Watches, build in Brick, look to your Fires and
Lights, this will not do your work, without God's keeping. Except the Lord
build the House, they labor in vain that build it: Except the Lord keep the
City, the watchman waketh but in vain, Psalm. 127.1. I would not take you off
from the use of means for your safety, but do not trust here; It Is God only
that makes you to dwell in safety, Psalm. 4.8. And therefore dedicate your
Houses to God, (that is) commit them to his vigilant and Holy Protection; and
then fear not. I know ( upon what is past) thousands in this City, rise up in
in the morning, lie down at night full of Fears; O that we could quiet our
hearts by holy Trust; what we put into the hands of God, is above the reach of
man; He that has the Protection of Heaven, needs not fear the malice of Hell.
Saints may encourage themselves in the midst of all dangers and enemies
whatsoever, from the consideration of that tender and gracious Providence,
which is over them, for the preserving of their Persons, Estates, Habitations,
and all that belongs to them, Ps. 121.3, 4. He that keeps thee will not
slumber. Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. The
Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand; The Sun shall
not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night; The Lord shall preserve thee from
all evil, he shall preserve thy Soul; The Lord shall preserve thy going out,
and thy coming in, from this time forth and even for evermore. Psalm. 145.20.
The Lord preserves all them that love him. Isa. 4.5. Upon all the glory shall
be a defense. Job 1.10. Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his
House, and about all that he has on every side? Prove. 12.7. The House of the
Righteous shall stand. Read Psalm 91. It Is an excellent Psalm for the support
of Faith, as to Personal and House-preservation. Now upon such encouragements
as these, be persuaded, to commit your Selves, and your All to God; Put all
into his Hands, fiducially rest upon him, and you engage him to take care of
you, and to secure you from all evil. Prove. 29.25. Whosoever puts his trust in
the Lord, shall be safe? Psalm. 17.7. Show thy mavelous loving kindness, O
thou that savest by thy right hand, them which put their trust in thee, from
those that rise up against them: If the Promises of Protection, and
preservation be not literally accomplished, as to the keeping off some
particular evils, they shall be made good some other way, which will be better
for you; O therefore trust God, and do not give way to Fear: when you first
enter upon your dwellings, commit all to God; and every morning, every night,
renew this act of trust, and it will be well. You may be called the
Housekeepers, but in truth God is the Housekeeper, (both as to Provision, and
also as to Protection): and they must needs be well kept, if the Almighty God
be the keeper of them. Men and Devils can neither touch an bair of your Heads,
nor a tile of your Houses, but first they must have his permission, which he
will never grant them, but upon very wise and weighty grounds.

Thirdly, Set up, and advance Religion in your Houses: This is the principal
thing in this House-dedication, and this I shall spend much time upon. I say,
set up Religion in your Houses; this is, To dedicate them to God. Some talk of
Religious Houses, (they do but talk of them, their practices are known well
enough); let yours be such in good earnest, let them be Religious Houses
indeed. What is the House without Religion? surely a very sad and dismal place!
it is better to be, where there is no light, no food, no external conveniences,
than where there is no sense or due owning of God. Homer speaking of an House,
where the Husband or the Wife, or the Master, or the Mistress is dead, he calls
it, (...), an House that is but half-perfect; because a principal member is
wanting: What is that House, where Religion is wanting? That Is indeed (...),
(for there the main thing, the one needful thing, is not). It Is said of
Constantine (that blessed Emperor), In every room in his House, he had the Name
and Title of his Savior, written in great Characters; to note, that his House,
and every part thereof, was dedicuted unto Christ: Would you thus do? do not
set up Names upon your walls, but set up Religion in your Families. And it is
recorded of that eminent Martyr, Bishop Hooper, that in every corner of his
House, there was some sent of Godliness: O that it might be so in yours!
Tremellius speaking of Famous Cranmer's House, he says, It was Schola and
palaestra Pietatis and Literarum; A School, a Nursery, a place set a part for
the exercise of Religion, and Literature: Might your Houses be such, what a
blessed thing would it be! then they would be Bethels, (as Jacob called that
place, where God appeared to him, Genesis 28.19.); not Beth-avens, (Houses of
vanity), but Bethels, the Houses of the Lord. Let me allude to that of David, 1 Chronicles. 29.1. The Palace is not for man, but for the Lord God. Your Houses are
not only for you to dwell in, but God must have a room, mansion, residence in
them; and how can that be, if Religion be not advanced there? -- What (says
the Apostle) have ye not Houses to eat and to drink in? 1 Cor. 11.22.
And (say I), have ye Houses only for this? that there you may eat and drink,
and trade, and mind your Secular affairs? surely, something more must be done;
they must be consecrated to God, Religion must have a throne in them, and be
set up in them.

This might be urged upon you, from several Considerations; Some might be
taken, from that intrinsic excellency, that is in Religion: O look upon it as
it is in it self, it is a glorious and excellent thing. It Is the Creatures due
respect to his Creator; it speaks a due sense of God, that the soul is in a
right frame and posture toward God. It Is the sum of all; All Graces, Duties,
are summed up in this one word, RELIGION. It Is Man's highest advancement; what
a poor thing is Man, if he be not a Saint; what is Reason without Religion! --
This is a point as vast as the Ocean, if I might launch out into it. It being
thus, Shall not Religion be promoted, advanced in your Houses? All speak well
of it in the General, but when it comes to particular practice and application,
there they discover but low thoughts of it. Besides this inherent excellency in
Religion, pray, consider the blessed advantages and benefits, that go along
with it, and flow from it. It Is the great prop and pillar, which sustains
Houses and Families; take away this, the House falls, (as that did, when Samson
had pulled away the pillars of it): Judge. 17.29.
Prove. 24.3, 4. Through wisdom is an House builded, and by understanding it is
established; and by knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all precious and
pleasant riches. Surely, the Wise man does not so much intend here moral, as
spiritual and religious wisdom: and by this, he tells us, the House is, 1.
erected; 2. established; 3. enriched.
What a gainful thing is Religion! It Is the very Nerves and Sinews, the bond
and ligament, the Cement of all Societies; Kingdoms, Cities, Families, are all
jointed, fastened, supported by this: It Is (...), (as Plutarch speaks); and (as
the Arist. Politic.
Philosopher tells us), the prosperity of all depends upon it. This is that
which lays the foundation of all Blessings; House-dedication (in the setting up
of Religion in it) is always accompanied with God's benediction: O, Religious
Houses are blessed Houses; God blessed Obed-Edom for the Ark's sake, I Chron.
13.14. His blessing upon Persons and Families, commences from the very day and
hour, in which Religion is set up. Hag. 2.18, 19. Consider now from this day,
and upward; from this day will I bless you. How exact and punctual is God, in
his rewarding of Piety. O mind the interest of Religion, you will never find
it, to be a vain or unprofitable thing; all blessings lie in the womb of it;
Mercies here, mercies hereafter; the Mercies of the Throne, and the mercies of
the Footstool, all grow upon this fruitful root, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is
profitable unto all things, having the promise of the Life that now is, and of
that which is to come. Will you not encourage, and mind, and promote Religion
in your Houses?

I might enter upon Particulars; Would you have your Habitations blessed? so as
to be secured from all evil, filled with all good? so as to be made delightful
and comfortable to you? Let Religion be there; would you have a blessing upon
your Children, your Posterity? Be religious your selves, and set up Religion in
your Houses, Psalm. 112.2. His seed shall be mighty upon the Earth; the
Generation of the Upright shall be blessed. Prove. 20.7. The just man walks in
his integrity, his Chilaren are blessed after him. Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there
were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, that it might be well with
them, and with their Children for ever. The Posterity of Obed-Edom, was blessed
for the Ark's sake. See it 1 Chronicles. 26.8. First, God blessed this Obed-Edom,
with a numerous Progeny; you read there of Threescore and two, who descended
from him. 2dly, These were all employed in the House of God. 3dly, They were
enabled to discharge their employment. 4ly, They were advanced to great
dignity; they were made Rulers and Commanders, through the House of their
Father. (These things are observed to my Hand, Bish. Brownrigge, Sermon. 1. p. 12.
by an Eminent Person). So that, as you love your Children, and would entail
God's blessing upon them, let Religion be regarded and promoted by you. Would
you have a blessing upon your Families? let Religion be there, 1 Chronicles. 13.14.
The Lord blessed the House of Obed-Edom, and all that he had: It Is more
express, 2 Samuel 6.11. The Lord blessed Obed-Edom, and all his Household. O who
would not entertain the Ark in his House! That precious O intment, that was
poured upon the head of Aaron, Psalm. 134.2.
it went down to the skirts of his Garments: If you be faithful in the business
of Religion, God will pour down his blessings upon your selves, and they shall
run down also upon all that belong to you. All in a Family fare the better for
Religion. Would you have a blessing upon your Estates? look to Religion. Piety,
the Fear and Worship of God, owned and farthered by you, are the best way, both
for keeping and increasing these outward enjoyments, Prove. 15.6. In the House
of the Righteous is much Treasure, but in the revenues of the Wicked is much
Trouble. Prove. 13.22. A good man leaves an inheritance, to his Children's
children; and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just. Holy Job, thus
dedicated his House, Job 1.10.
and therefore God made an hedge about him, and about all that he had on every
side, [and blessed the work of his hands, and increased his substance.] The
Jews have a saying, that Decimae are sepes Divitiarum; Tithes are a fence or
heag to guard and secure all that a man has. O, would you have your Estates
secured? do you secure and exalt Religion, and that will secure you and yours.
You see, here is blessing upon blessing, in the discharge of this weighty and
fundamental Duty: But what if men will yet neglect this? and suffer Atheism,
irreligion, profaneness, wickedness, to be in their Houses? what? O let such
know, they are under the curse of God; they and their Houses are liable to the
dreadful curses, which the Word denounces: And what are all Comforts in the
House, when the curse of God is upon it. God's blessing sweetens all, his curse
imbitters all; Woe to them whose Houses are under a Curse! Prove. 3.33. The curse
of the Lord, is in the house of the wicked: but he blesses the Habitation of
the just. Zach. 5.4. you read of the Curse entering into the house of the Thief;
it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with the
timber thereof, and the stones thereof. O let Atheistical Masters of Families,
that never mind Religion in themselves, or in their Houses, tremble upon the
consideration of that flying roll of Curses, that hangs over them. O you
Citizens, Merchants, Tradesmen, (whatever your rank or occupation is), if you
love God, if you love your Selves, your Children, your Servants, your Estates,
let this be the first thing you do, Set up Religion in your Houses. This was
kept up in the time of the Patriarchs, altogether by what they did in their
Families (for their Families then were as so many Domestick-Churches, Familiae
Patrum erant Domesticae Ecclesiae. Pareus in Genesis 18.19.
and all the Churches that were then in being). And Religion now rises or falls
in the world, as men regard it in their Families. How many might you bring in
to God, did you thus dedicate your Houses? how many might be converted, by
living in religious places? what a mercy would it be to poor Creatures, to live
under your roof, if you would but do your duty herein? whereas upon your
neglect of it, what a grievous thing is it, (to persons that have any sense of
God) to live with you? Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I
dwell in the Tents of Kedar. To be in your Houses, and there to see nothing but
Epicurism, Worldliness; u there to hear nothing but cursing, swearing,
scoffing, at the ways of God; nothing that has the face of Religion to be
found there, O it is an Hell upon earth to live with such. Be persuaded
therefore to do what I have spoke so much to; the fewer come up to this, the
more pleasing to God, will your zeal and obedience be: you may meet with scoffs
and derision from the world, but it is a poor thing to be derided of men, if you
may be approved of by God. Let all this (like oil cast upon the fire) make
your zeal more intense and fervent; and say, If this be to be vile, 2 Samuel 6.22.
you will be yet more vile. This in General, as to the Third Branch of
House-Dedication.

CHAP. VI. How Religion is to be set up in private Houses: The first Particular
opened, as to Religious Members.
THat I may be more distinct and clear in this Head, (under which
House-dedication chiefly lies), I will fall upon some Particulars; and therein,
both direct you, and also further quicken you, as to the advancing of Religion
in your Houses. Are there any workings in you, toward this? Are you in any
measure convinced of your Duty? and do you resolve to set upon it? Then let me
lay these Four Things before you.

1. (As near as you can) take such into your Houses, who fear God; and none but
such. 2. Set up the Worship of God in your Houses, and the Performance of Holy
Duties. 3. Let your Education (of such as are under you) be religious. 4. Keep
sin out of your Houses, and instead thereof, let there be an Holy course driven
on in them.
Give me leave to go over these Particulars, for I am now, at the very heart of
that which I mainly designed.

First, See Swinnocks Christian Calling, vol. 1. p. 523.
(As near as you can) Take such into your Houses, who fear God; and none but
such. I put in, (as near as you can), because sometimes there are such
Circumstances in the case, that a man cannot do what he desires; these must be
submitted to, (in that state of things); but our general aim and endeavor must
be this, To fill up our Houses, with persons fearing God He that dedicates his
House to God, must look to the matter of it, that it consist of such as are
religious. And this was one thing intended in House-dedication, or one thing,
that men were obliged to, upon House-dedication, Vt hac Dedicatione
admonerentur, quamlibet Domum debere esse quoddam Dei Sacrarium, nec
admittendos in contubernium Homines impuros and sceleratos, qui sua turpitudine
at que impietate, parietes Deo consecratos, rursus polluant. Moller.
(as one observes upon my Text): we have David here dedicating his House; and
upon this, you find him very zealous and resolute, as to that which I am
treating of, Psalm. 101.4. A froward heart shall depart from me, I will not know
a wicked person. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they
may dwell with me; he that dwells in a perfect way, he shall serve me. (v.
6.) He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my House. He that tells
lies shall not tarry in my sight, (v. 7.) This is an excellent Psalm for
Masters of Families, often to peruse: David, first sets down his holy
Resolution, as to his Personal carriage in his House; (v. 2.) I will behave
myself wisely in a perfect way, O when will thou come unto me? I will walk
within my House, with a perfect heart. And then he sets down his Resolution as
to the Member^* of his House; he would have such about him, as were godly; and
as for wicked and irreligious persons, he would have nothing to do with them,
they should not dwell in his House, nor tarry in his sight, (v. 7.) O that we
had more of David's spirit; to be for House-dedication, and thus to pursue and
make it good. But how few are there, that write after this Copy! The most are
altogether regardless of this; they take in any into their Houses; the precious
and the vile are all alike to them; let them be Swearers, Sabbath-profaners,
enemies to God and his ways, that is all one to them; if some poor worldly
Interest may be but served, if their work and business may be but done, they
are satisfied, and look no farther; whether the person have any sense or savor
of Religion, that they never regard. Nay, O that there were not some, who are
only shy of taking in such into their Houses, who make profession of God: the
worser the Servant is, the fitter he is for their turn. These are perfect
Antipodes to holy David: And, as their sin here is very great, so their account
hereafter will be very sad. I hope better things of the most of you in this
City; yet I think it necessary to stir you up to the greatest zeal and care,
and circumspection, (that is possible) in this matter. Assuredly, it will never
go well as to private Houses, and this Dedication-work will be altogether
insignificant, till men be more conscientious and careful about the several
Branches and Members of their Families. Let me be earnest with you, to fill up
your Houses with such as are religious: Let not your Houses be like Noah's Ark,
wherein the clean and the unclean were strangely jumbled together; but let them
be like little Churches, wherein there is no such mixture. O what a blessed
thing would it be, if every Family was as a little Church! It has been thus,
and might be so again, if men would but do their duty: There was a Church in
the House of Aquila and Priscilla, Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19. Salute the Brethren
which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church which is in his House, Col.
4.15. So Philem. 2. And to the Church in thy House. It may be asked, What were
these Churches in these Houses? Some make them to be the Saints, who (in those
times of Persecution) did there privately meet, Vid. Engl. Annot. upon Genesis
18.19.
for the Worship of their God. Others make them to be the Body of the Families
of these persons; which were called Churches, partly, for those holy Duties
that were there performed, and partly, for the religiousness and holiness of
the members thereof. Surely, this latter sense is not to be rejected, (though I
will not say, that it is primarily and mainly intended, in these expressions):
Now, will you endeavor in this respect, to have your Houses to be little
Churches? Will you fill up your Families with such as fear God? Will you in
taking persons into your Houses, steer your course by Religion and religious
considerations? Let me draw this out plainly in particular Instances.

Are you to Marry? to take an Husband or a Wife? Make your choice, and fix your
resolution by Religion; let piety have the decisive and casting voice in this
grand Affair: Other things may be eyed, and considered, in their proper place
and bounds, (as Birth, Parentage, comeliness of person, sweetness of Nature,
suitableness: (But the great thing that must weigh down the balance, is this,
Does he or she fear the Lord? -- This is that which must preponderate, and
which must chiefly be in your eye. Beauty and Portion, and Honor, are poor
things to go by; it is Religion, Grace, Piety, that must regulate and determine
the Choice. This is to marry in the Lord, (as the Apostle exhorts), 1 Cor.
7.39. When we do it, not upon any by-respects, or external motives, (as
preponderating, or being considered apart from the main), but the great
inducement, is something that is spiritual, this is Marrying in the Lord. O
that this might be the rule which you would go by: If Religion be any other
than a Cipher, how dare we not regard it, in our most important choice, (says
that Bishop. Hall Contempl. p. 1020.
excellent Bishop). Without this, all Matches are miserable, though they should
be made up with hoards of wealth and heaps of Gold as high as Heaven, crowned
with Honors transcendent to the Stars, Prepar. before Death, p. 47.
(says eminent Mr. Bolton). Let me a little argue with you; will you make those
the objects of your dearest Love, who have no share in the Love of God? will
you take those into intimate union and conjunction with your selves, who have
no union with Christ? will you lay those in your bosom, whom God will cast out
of his sight for ever? what agreement can there be 'twixt light and darkness? 2
Cor. 6.14.
In tanta morum discordia, Hieron. ad Nepot.
quae potest esse concordia? The one is for Holiness, the other for Sin; the
one draws one way, the other another, this is the bane of that oneness and
harmony that should be betwixt persons in this relation. O the mischiefs that
follow upon being unequally yoked! how does this imbitter all! To have a
religious David, and a scoffing Michal; a blessing Job, and a cursing Wife; a
good Sampson and a treacherous Dalilah, this must needs be very sad. It Is
possible, the unbelieving Husband may be sanctified by the believing Wife; 1
Cor. 7.14.
and so the unbelieving Wife by the believing Husband; but we must not run our
selves upon so great a snare, upon presumption of a possibility: See the Answer
in Just. Mart. to the 90 Quest. p. 447. (...).
They need much grace who will not rather (in this case) receive hurt, than do
good; the latter is but possible, but the former is too probable: Near
Relations have a great influence upon men; (No wonder that Ahab sold himself to
work wickedness, when Jezabel (his Wife) stirred him up thereunto, 1 King.
21.25. And this is rendered as the reason, why Jehoram did as the House of Ahab,
for the daughter of Ahab was his Wife, 2 King. 8.18.) And for the most part it
so falls out, that the good are rather prejudiced by the bad, than the bad
advantaged by the good. O you that are yet to dispose of your selves in
Marriage, look to your choice, as near as you can, pitch where the fear of God
is: Are not such to be found? Judge. 14*3.
Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy Brethren, or among all my
people, that thou go to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? It Is
sad so to marry in one day, as to repent of this all the days of your life. Are
you to take an Apprentice? go by Religion; I am not against prudence in your
considering of Parts, Capacity, Natural temper; but withal let your eye be much
(nay most) upon Religious Inclination, and Religious Education. You cannot
expect much, from Plants, that are of no further growth; but this you may
satisfy your selves in, how do they stand inclined? Are they pliable and
tractable, as to what is good? Have they been piously educated? Do not vicious
Habits already discover themselves, in lying, stealing, taking God's name in
vain, pride, vanity, averseness to Familyduties? O Citizens, do you not
sometimes smart upon your taking Apprentices, without having that respect to
Religion herein, which lies upon you? Such and such Friends mediate, thus much
you are offered, (and he that offers most carries it), the Youth is ingenious,
can write well, cast accounts well, is of good strength, and the like; Upon
this the business is concluded, you look no further; let his inclination (as to
the best things) be what it will, or his Education be what it will, that is
scarce thought of. Is this well? Surely no! Is not this a trespass committed
against House-dedication? do you not in a little time see cause to repent of
what you have done, when you have taken in one that proves a thorn, in your
foot, a spear in your side, a pest and a plague to your Family? Is not God
afterward much dishonored, and you your selves much wronged, by these
persons? Do not bad Apprentices often prove the bane of your own Children? And
does not infection spread from some one Apprentice to all the rest? The
mischievous consequences of this, are not to be reckoned up: O that therefore,
you would be very careful in this matter, to take in such, who either are
religious, or at least religiously inclined, and religiously educated. It Is
true, you may be deceived, and Youth may miscarry (after good Education), (the
more is the pity, and the greater is the grief of godly Parents): but it is good
to go as far as you may, to pitch upon the most probable means for your
security; and then if things fall out contrary to your Hopes, yet this will be
your comfort, you did your duty; you minded the main, though events do not
answer your desires. Are you to take an ordinary Servant? Let him be one that
fears God; such as serve God, are the best to serve you; Religion makes the
best in every relation: It is certainly the duty of every Ruler, to endeavor to
advance piety and godliness, among all those that are under his charge, and
that as well in this lesser dominion of a Family, as in the greater of a Realm
or Nation. Of this David wasso careful, so much he thought himself bound to
provide, that his Family might be a kind of Church, an Assembly of Godly
Persons: And if Masters would endeavor to have theirs so, they would besides
the eternal reward of it hereafter find a present benefit by it; their worldly
business would thrive much the better; for if their Servants were brought to
make conscience of their ways, they would then not dare to be either negligent
or false. Whole Duty of Man, p. 315.
None so diligent, so faithful in this relation, as those that have an inward
principle of Grace; certainly, that will make them to be what I say. I know
some make a Profession, and yet are none of the best Servants. I have much ado
to forbear from a sharp Digression, as to these; but I must. Well, it is but
some, and these do but profess, they do not walk answerably to their
profession. Think not the worse of Religion, because of the miscarriages of
some, who do profess it; for all this, get religious Servants into your Houses.
O they will be faithful to you; and they will bring a blessing with them, to the
place, where they come; God blesses the Master for such Servants sake. I have
learned by experience, that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake, (said Laban
to Jacob), Genesis 30.27. The Lord blessed the Aegyptian's House for Joseph's
sake, Genesis 39.5. They will not only work for you, but they will also pray for
you: and if you put them upon business, they will pray for success in it: So
Abraham's Servant did, Genesis 24.12. O what a Treasure, is a praying Servant!
Every man is to be valued by this: The praying Physician is the best Physician;
the praying Friend is the best Friend; the praying Parent is the best Parent;
the praying Servant is the best Servant. O the difference, betwixt a praying
Servant, and a cursing Servant. The one procures blessings upon the House, the
other judgments; the one is the Instrument of doing much good, the other of
doing much hurt. Take heed of wicked Servants, they are infectious, they carry
the Plague about with them. Will you let your Houses be as so many Pest-houses?
God forbid! O, the hurt that one bad Servant does in a Family! he may infect
all the rest; as one scab'd sheep infects the whole flock; and one rotten apple
spoils the whole heap. Eccles. 9.18. One sinner destroys much good. And do
you think, that they will ever be Frugi atque integer, Nemo vel, ipse sibi vel
aliis esse potest, qui proba Religione non tenetur. Masius in Josh. 24.15.
true to you, who are false to God? Be careful therefore also in this respect:
Now you are building your Houses, you strive to get the best materials; when
you furnish your Houses, you are for the best furniture; and why not the best
Wife, the best Servant also? When Pharaoh would pitch upon one for that great
employment, to be set over the land of Egypt; says he, Can we find such a one
as this is, a man in whom the spirit of God is? Genesis 41.38. So here, when you
are to make choice of persons, for such and such relations, can you find any
such, as they that have the Spirit of God in them? Let those dwell with you,
and be admitted into your Houses, who know and fear God: for, others either do
not take them in, or (if the nature of the Relation will bear it) presently
cast them out: This is to dedicate your Houses to God; and (if you do not look
to this) never speak of House-dedication, or of your desires to advance
Religion there.

CHAP. VII. The Second Branch enforced, concerning the Performance of Holy
Duties.
SEcondly, If you would set up Religion in your Houses, (and so dedicate them
to the Lord); see that God be Worshipped, and Holy Duties be duly and daily
performed in them: Religion (though it lie not only in these, yet it) lies very
much in these; No Worship, no Religion. Now therefore, let it be thus with you;
O that your Houses might be thus consecrated! that they might be as so many
little Temples or Sanctuaries, wherein God might be worshipped; as so many
Oratories, wherein God might be daily called upon. Houseworship, (or
Family Worship), is a duty incumbent upon every Master or Governor; he is to
take care of it, to see that the blessed God, in his House, have that Religious
respect and homage, which is due unto him: Indeed, this is the main, the first
thing, that he is to look after. The Jews, besides their Temple-worship, had
also their Family Worship, which the Master of the House was to perform. The
Paschal-Lamb was to be eaten in every Family, there was to be a Lamb for an
House, Exodus 12.3. this was Family Worship (in part): You read of David, 2 Samuel
6.20. He returned to bless his Household, Upon the bringing of the Ark into the
Tabernacle, O his heart was full of joy; and this he had made great discoveries
of, before the people; now he will go to his own Family, and bless them, and
spiritually rejoice with them, in Prayer and Praise, in the sense of this great
mercy. O that every day, your Households might be blessed by you, by the
administration and performance of Worship and Duty in them.

I will not any longer insist upon Generals, but presently come to those
particular Family Duties, which I would press upon you.

The first is Prayer, Family Prayer; (for I intend not to meddle with the other
kinds of Prayer, but only to limit my self to this); Set up Prayer in your
Houses, let your Families be praying Families. O (if it was the Lords will),
that we might not have in all this City, one Non-praying Family. God will have
his House to be an House of Prayer. Mat. 21.13. My House shall be called the
House of Prayer. Isa. 56.7. Even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and
make them joyful in my House of Prayer, u. Let it be so with you, let your
Houses be Houses of Prayer, then they will resemble the House of God. You must
enter upon them by Prayer, (that I have spoke to); but besides this, there must
be a constant course of Prayer, maintained and carried on in them. It Is true,
we have not any positive or express Command in the Word, in which this duty of
Family Prayer, is in so many Letters and Syllables enjoined; but we have enough
in it, to ground solid Inferences upon, which are sufficient to evince and
prove the duty. Ephesians. 6.18. we are commanded to pray with all Prayer and
Supplication, ( i. e. with all kinds of Prayer); Family Prayer is one kind of
Prayer, and therefore we are bound to the performance of it. The Prophet
imprecates wrath upon the Families that do not call upon God, Jer. 10.25.
Therefore it is a duty lying upon Families so to do; (for it can only be the
omission of an unquestionable duty, that exposes a person to wrath): Many such
things might be insisted upon, but I shall wave them, my business being rather
to exhort than to argue.

That I may prevail with you, to set up Prayer in your Houses, consider the
following Motives.

1. This is that which the people of God have always done. Where Grace has
been in the heart, prayer has been in the House; as Personal Prayer, so Family
Prayer, has always accompanied the work of regeneration. The Scripture sets
many examples before us, for the proof of this; Mention is often made of
Abraham's calling upon God, (as Genesis 12.8. Genesis 13.4. Genesis 21.33. and 26.25.)
We may well suppose, that this was done sometimes in conjunction with his
family, (they being with him in his intinerant posture): Esther the Queen,
fasted and prayed with her Maidens, Esth. 4.16. Job that offered Sacrifice
continually for his Children, (as it is Job 1.5); doubtless, he did not omit the
offering of Sacrifices with his Children. What was David's blessing of his
Household? (mentioned but now), but his praying and praising, with his family.
It Is said of Cornelius, He feared God with all his House; and he prayed to God
always, Act. 10.2. (The connection seems chiefly to refer to family prayer). If
these places of Scripture, and examples be not so convincing and cogent, (as to
the duty in hand, and its inseparable conjunction with the truth of Grace),
then you may add what your observation and experience does readily offer to
you. Look abroad a little into the world, observe how it is with men upon
Conversion; As soon as ever God has wrought a saving work in them, Behold they
pray; Acts 9.11.
and that in their Families too: Before this work, (alas) they prayed not in
their Houses, from week to week, from year to year; but no sooner did God seize
upon them in a saving manner, but immediately they set up Prayer in their
Houses. Universal experience offers it self for the proof of this. Well then,
let this quicken you to this practice; Pray in your Families; for if you be
gracious, renewed, sanctified, you will do thus; this is to carry it as
regenerate persons; this will be a good evidence, that you are really God's
people; whereas the neglect of this, will be a sad evidence, that you are none
of them. I will trust a godly man for Family Prayer; He may indeed for
sometime, (being under the power of some Temptation, or having taken in some
erroneous principle) omit this duty, but if he be a truly godly man, he will
come to it again.

2. Family Prayer has much excellency in it. Prayer in all the kinds of it, is
very excellent: There Is Secret-prayer, that is excellent; O for the Soul to be
with God alone, treating with him in private, about its everlasting
concernments, spreading its more special and particular wants, corruptions,
temptations, burdens before him, Genesis 32.24.
Jacob-like wrestling with him, for this and that blessing; surely this is
excellent. There Is public Prayer, when the Saints go together in a Coimus ad
Deum, quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus. Haec vis Deo grata est. Tertul.
Apolog c. 39.
body, and offer an holy violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, join all their
force and strength together, for the obtaining of mercy; this is excellent.
Family Prayer comes betwixt these, it is private, and yet (in part) it is
public; it is public, and yet (in part) it is private; this is excellent too:
In respect of its general Nature, it is excellent, (for it is Prayer, and all
Prayer has excellency stamped upon it); in respect of its usefulness, benefits,
precious effects, it is excellent; it procures mercies, keeps off judgments,
sanctifies all enjoyments, preserves an holy awe of God in the Soul, puts a
savor and relish upon all comforts, furthers Grace here, Glory hereafter; All
this is done by Family Prayer, (duly performed), is it not excellent? will you
live in your Houses without it? will you lose so great a part of Religion? and
that too which is so much to your own advantage, and to the advantage also, of
all that co-habit with you? Fire is good, you will have it; Food is good, you will
have it; Air is good, you will have it; Prayer is good too, (nay better than all
these), will you not have that also?

3. There are proper and peculiar Reasons for House-Prayer; you pray in secret,
not only because of the Command, but because of those special and peculiar
reasons, which attend that duty: Family Prayer has the same inducements; there
are such and such cases, circumstances, considerations, which this duty does
best hit, and meet with, and is best suited to; O therefore make conscience of
it: There are Family-sins to be bewailed, Family-miscarriages to be reformed,
Family-mercies to be acknowledged, Family-wants to be supplied,
Family-undertakings to be blessed, Family-afflictions to be sanctified,
Family-dangers to be prevented: Now are there so many cases proper to a Family
(as a Family), and shall there not be Family Prayer to reach to all these? O
that Masters of Families would consider what I say!

4. Mercy and Justice, Pity and Fidelity, call upon you, to call upon God, in
and with your Families. Have you precious souls committed to you, will you let
them perish? where is your mercy and pity? shall so many Children, so many
Servants, be lost for ever, for want of Prayer? be not so cruel for the Lords
sake: You feed their bodies, (it would be cruelty to let them starve for want
of food), but is not this worser cruelty to starve their souls? never to pray
with them? never to help them onwards in Heaven's way? O, though you have not
the Grace of a Christian, yet if you have but the bowels of a man, methinks you
should pray in your Families; to prevent the ruin of those precious souls,
that are under your roof. Besides this consideration (which is proper to
Mercy), Justice requires this of you: Family Prayer is a debt which you owe to
them who are under you; they owe subjection obedience and service to you, you
owe prayer to them. The Apostle having spoke to Masters to give unto their
Servants that which is just and equal; presently subjoins, Continue in prayer:
as if this was one thing, that Masters, in justice, are to give to their
Servants, Col. 4.1, 2. O it is a real wrong to your Servants when you do not
pray with them; you are not only unmerciful but unjust in so doing; not only
false to God, but injurious to them; you may better withhold their wages from
them, than the duties of Religion.

5. If this be nothing to you, let me add further, Self-love requires this of
you. I mean by this, not so much Self-love with respect to your selves, at the
great day of Account, (though that be the main); but I mean Self-love, with
respect to your present concerns; you would have your Families blessed, your
Houses secured, Self-love puts you upon this; and can you hope for this if you
neglect Family Prayer? Ah, you and yours lie open to judgments, so long as this
is neglected: Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen, and upon the
Families that call not upon thy Name. This imprecation is a kind of
commination; God will pour out his wrath upon Prayerless-families; Till Prayer
be set up in your Houses, judgment hangs over your heads; the curse of God is
over you, and all that belongs to you: you live in the midst of dangers every
moment; you lie down every night, liable to some sudden and sore evils; O, it is
not only thus with you, that you are out of God's care and tuition, but (so
long as Prayer is neglected), you are under his fierce displeasure, which is
continually ready to break out against you. O, where is your Self-love? If there
was nothing more than that, one would think, that should put you upon
Family Prayer. Do you love your Selves, your Houses, your Estates, your
Relations, and yet will you not fall upon the means which are proper to bring
down the blessing of God upon them? No Prayer, no Protection from evil, no
communication of Good (in a Covenant way): The unpraying Family, is the
unblessed Family.

And are these things so? what reason have I then to bewail the too general
omission of this duty; I speak of what is in this City: Is Family Prayer duly
performed in every House in this City? If one should go from House to House,
and ask at every House, Is God here called upon? Does the Master of this House
pray with his Family? Oh, I fear, it would be answered by too many; No, God is
not here sought unto; Here we live, here we feed, here we trade, here we rush
into the world as soon as we are up, and here we go to bed, as soon as our
business is over; but here is no Prayer. O Lord, how sad is this! that in a
City, where the Gospel has been so long, so powerfully preached; that in a
City, which has passed under such variety of remarkable judgments, there
should be so many Prayerless Houses. O it is a rocky heart, from which this
consideration does not fetch some sighs and tears! I beseech you, who have any
conviction or tenderness upon your Consciences, let it be otherwise with you;
Let the Arguments that have been used, prevail with you, forthwith to set up
Prayer in your Houses (if hitherto it has been omitted): How would it rejoice
my soul, might I but hear, (upon the reading of this), That some Citizen was
wrought upon to call his Family together, and to say, The Lord forgive me,
hitherto I have lived in the omission of Prayer with you, but now (the Grace of
God enabling me) I am resolved to fall upon it; morning and evening we will
call upon God together; we will not only eat and drink together, and work
together, but we will also pray together. The good Lord work this resolution in
many of you! O if it be not within your doors, Lord have mercy upon us, there
will be too much cause to write upon your doors, The Lord have mercy upon you,
Can you read such motives as have been set down, and yet not pray? Have you
lived to see and feel such terrible judgments (by Plague and Fire), and yet not
pray? Are you upon such uncertainties for the future, and yet not pray? I trust
in the Lord, some will be wrought upon. It Is your own advantage that I aim at;
it is only your own souls good, and your Families good, that I design; if you
will yet go on in an ungodly course, what is that to me? I have done my duty. Do
I come with things disputable to you? do I speak as one that pursues the
interest of a Party? Surely no: that which I urge upon you, is as clear as the
light of the day, and that which all parties agree in; and therefore let not
any reasonings or prejudices, keep you off from the practice of a duty, so
clear, so universally granted.

Especially, you that are Professors, do you pray in your Families; what? a
Professor, and not pray in thy House? what a shame is this? what a
contradiction to thy profession? what a demonstration of the unsoundness of thy
Profession? what mischief do thou do to others by this? how many loose and
carnal persons are hardened upon thy omission? what will men say? What need we
to trouble our selves about Prayer in our Houses, when such a neighbor, or
such a neighbor, (who go for Professors) omit it, as well as we? And will not
the sad effects of this, reach to thyself too? will not the fervor of thy
affections toward God, very much abate? will not grace insensibly decline?
will not the power of Godliness languish? will thou not be at a stand, nay,
will thou not go backwards in Heavens way? can thou do any thing more to
gratify Satan? Do but observe how it is with persons, who cast off
Family Prayer, (or perform it very seldom, and in a careless negligent manner),
and tell me then, whether I speak truth or not. We read of one Baldwyn,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Pope Urban writing to him, he styles him, Girald.
Itiner. Camb. L. 2. C. 14.
Monachum ferventissimum, Abbatem calidum, Episcopum tepidum, Archiepiscopum
remissum: He was, whilst a Monk, very fervent; when an Abbot, then but hot;
when a Bishop, then but lukewarm; when an Archbishop, then he was key-cold.
That effect, which preferment had upon this person, the neglect of secret and
Family Prayer, has upon Christians; it makes them by little and little to cool
in their spiritual heat, and in time, to come to just nothing; you that profess
God, do not you live (what ever others do) without this Heavenly duty. This in
General to urge Family Prayer.

It will be asked, How often are men to pray in their Families? I answer, Every
day, morning and evening. The Jews they offered burnt-offerings unto the Lord,
according to the custom, as the duty of every day required, Ezra. 3.4. (that
is) they offered burnt-offerings morning and evening; (See v. 3.) They had
their morning and their evening Sacrifice every day; that is clear from 2 Chronicles.
31.3. (and from several other Scriptures): So here, you that are Masters of
Families, See Whole Duty of Man, p. 110.
morning and evening, in your Houses, there must be Prayer; oftener if you
please, but to be sure not seldomer. This must be the Alpha and the Omega of
every day; you must begin and end all with God; Hinc omne Principium, huc refer
exitum. (Horat.) Prayer (as one expresses it) must be the key to open all in
the morning, and the Bar to shut up all at night. Sit oration Clavis Diei, and
Sera Noctis. It Is not enough now and then to give God a prayer, under some
sudden pang of devotion; but there must be a daily, constant performance of it.
As to * Morning Prayer, I cannot open mine eyes, But thou art ready there to
catch My morning soul and sacrifice, Then we must needs for that day make a
match. Herb. Poem. p. 54.
is it not sweet? Is it not good, when the body has been refreshed by sleep in
the night, to get by prayer in the morning some refreshment for the Soul? to
begin so as to get an heavenly tincture and savor upon the heart all the day
after? Have not mercies been received in the night? must they not be
acknowledged? Do not renewed mercies call for renewed praises? Do not you need
God in the day, in sundry respects? and will you not therefore go to him, and
plead with him? (...). V Ch rond. in Pythag. Fragm. p. 205.
Is it not reason that God should have the precedence? will you serve the world
before you serve God? what a preposterous thing is that! Is not this the way to
prosper in your enterprises, to be blessed in your undertakings all the day? Is
not this true, that work on earth is done best, when work with Heaven is done
first, (as one says). Psalm. 5.3.
O in the morning let God hear your voice, in the morning do you direct your
prayer to Him, (both alone, and also with your Family): It Is the custom of
some in this City, they pray in their Houses at Night, but not at the morning;
Surely this is an omission: God appointed the morning as well as the Evening
sacrifice; Is there not reason for the one, as well as the other? Shall we say
of Prayer, what bloody Gardener once said of the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, that it was good Supper-doctrine, but not so good to break fast on? I
say, shall we say this of Prayer? And then as to Prayer at Night; O do not dare
to lie down at night before you have sued out the pardon of the sins of the day
past, acknowledged mercies received, and solemnly put you and yours under God's
Almighty Protection. Who knows what a Night may bring forth? O how many amazing
Accidents may fall out before the morning? and therefore first commit your
selves to God by fervent prayer, and then lie down to take your rest. I put in,
Fervent prayer. for this indeed is the only prayer; God will not be put off
with dull, dead, sleepy devotions, he will have you pray in prayer: you do
nothing, if you do not pray with holy fervor: Jam. 5.17.
As neglects of Prayer are very evil, so negligences in prayer are very evil
also. When you are about God's work, take heed of doing it negligently, lest
you meet with a curse instead of a blessing, Jerem. 48.10.

I cannot dismiss this Exhortation to Family Prayer, (though I have been long
upon it) before I answer a few Objections, that many are too ready to make
against it.

1. Object. Say some, We pray in secret, for our selves and for our Families;
must we pray with them too? Ans. Yes; Secret prayer is very good, a great
evidence of sincerity, you do very well in making conscience of it; but withal,
you must make conscience too of Family Prayer: both are of divine Institution,
and the one must not thrust out the other. Indeed I can hardly believe that you
pray in secret, See Gu^n. Christ. Arm. 3d. part, chapter 40. page 421.
unless you pray in your Houses also: He that is sincere in one duty, will be
sincere in every duty: You may do your Relations much good, when you are alone
in praying for them; but probably, you will do them more good, when it is not
only praying for them, but praying for them and with them too; for now they too
are in God's way, and so more capable of Divine impressions, and Divine
blessings.

2. Obj. Others say, We go to Church on the Lord's day with our Families, and
there we pray; is not this enough? Ans. No; That-God, who requires public
prayer, requires Family Prayer also; and the whole will of God must be
observed. O how soon are men cloyed with duty! They never think they have
enough of the world, but they soon think they have enough of duty! You do not
give God all of his Sacred Time, will you give him no part of your Common Time?
Will you be Christians on the Lords day, and Heathens all the week after? And
wherein are you better than Heathens in your Families, if no religious
exercises be there performed? (therefore the Prophet joins together Heathens
and Families that do not call upon God, Jer. 10.25). The Scripture-word, by
which ungodly men are described, is (...); they are such as do not worship God:
and this is the character of such, They call not upon the Lord, Psalm. 14.4. You
may attend upon public Ordinances upon the Lord's day, but if you omit secret
and Family Prayer, you are but ungodly persons, in the account of God; you
defraud him of the Worship due to Him.

3. Obj. Others will ask me, What profit is there in this? (much like to them,
Mal. 3.14.) Do not we see that all things happen a like to all; As it is with
the Non-praying House, so it is with the praying House; we see no difference:
Did not the late Fire sweep away the one as well as the other? If the Fire had
passed over the Families where Prayer was, (as once the destroying Angel did,
over the Houses of the Israelites, when the Egyptians were smitten), Exodus 12
27.
then we should have been convinced, that it is good for men to be conscientious
herein; but now we are of another opinion. Ans. O take heed, take heed, of
drawing such inferences from the late tremendous judgment: I hope, the most of
you do tremble, at such a thought, as this objection does suggest; but yet I
fear it prevails in too many. The full answering of it would take up much time:
In short, how apt are men to pervert God's Ends in his judicial proceedings;
Surely in the late dreadful providence God's end was to further Reformation,
Piety, Religion, Prayer (in all the kinds of it) amongst us; and here men turn
it quite another way, and put a contrary construction upon it. But, O the
wickedness, as well as the weakness, that is in this objection! I would lay
before such persons as have this in their hearts (for I suppose few will speak
it out), to consider these few things.

1. The judgments of God are very often promiscuously inflicted: the Good and
the Bad are both equally involved in the same external calamities. As it fares
with the Sinner, so it fares with the Saint: Piety does certainly secure from
eternal evils, but not from temporal evils. God has an Eternity for the
punishing of the bad, and for the rewarding of the good; and as to that, there
shall be a difference indeed, but here, as as to temporal rewards and
punishments, there is no such discrimination. He has very wise ends in this,
which though at present we cannot fadom, in time we shall. And therefore let
none from the late judgment, (which was impartially and promiscuously executed)
be hardened against an holy course, or religious duties; for this is no new
thing, it is but that which has been in all Ages. God will have none to take up
religion ( mainly or chiefly) upon Temporal advantages; he will let the world
see he has better recompenses, than what lie in the bestowing of outward good,
or preservation from outward evil; As also, that he is not fond or partial in
his Government of the world, but very just and righteous; Insomuch that if his
People sin against him, it shall be so far from their being exempted from
corrective providence, that they shall be the first who shall smart under
them. See 1 Pet. 4.17. Ezekiel. 9.6.

2ly. God's judgments are often very mysterious; they are nunquam injusta, but
interdum occulta, (as Aug. speaks): Psalm. 36.6. Thy judgments are a great deep.
Psalm. 77.19. Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great Waters, and thy
footsteps are not known. Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are his Judgments and his
ways past finding out! Such was the late dismal Fire; O it was a very
mysterious, hid, dark dispensation; we felt it, but we do not yet understand
it. But, shall any from a mysterious judgment, argue against a clear and known
duty? (such as Family Prayer, and an holy life, is); what ever God's designs
were, or his reserves, that I cannot yet fadom; but surely this he never aimed
at, to take me off from Duty; and I greatly sin, if I put such an
interpretation upon what he has done.

3ly, Though the same judgments may befall God's people and others, (praying
and not praying ones), yet there is a vast difference. Consider them
materially, they are the same; but consider them in their ends and
circumstances, Isa. 27.7.
they are not the same. As it is in Mercies; Saints and Sinners have the same
Mercies, yet there is a great difference; for what the one have, it is in Love,
what the other have, is in Anger; So it is in judgments: what befalls the Wicked
befalls the Godly, but yet there is a great disparity; it is judgment, and in
judgment to the one; it is judgment, but it is judgment in mercy to the other;
it is Poison to the one, it is but Physic to the other: it is a Knife to kill, to
the one, it is but a Knife to cut, and so to cure, to the other: it is Punishment
to the one, it is but Chastisement to the other; there is the wrath of a Judge to
the one, it is but the anger of a Father to the other. Praying Houses ('it is
true) were burnt down as well as others, (there was no difference as to the
external stroke): Ah but in other respects the difference was great. Such as
desired in all things to approve themselves to God, to dedicate their Houses to
God, though they drank of the common cup, yet the case to them is altered. In
the Fire they had God's presence with them, to support, teach, sanctify,
comfort, to make up their losses in himself, to make up outward losses with
inward gain; to show them that House to which no Fire shall reach, (and the
like). I doubt not but many of the people of God have found this to be true.
Now it was not thus with others; Therefore let not any argue against Religion,
or a religious course, as being unprofitable: for that is false. Though it does
not keep off judgment, yet it keeps off the sting of judgment; it makes it to
be a quite other thing; so that it carries Honey with it in the midst of all
its gall and wormwood; it so circumstantiates the worst of common evils, that
they become wholesome and tolerable. Let Atheists then be silent, here is enough
to stop their mouths, though (in outward appearance) all things come alike to
all, Eccles. 9.2.

4ly, Where Prayer was performed, there were sins which incensed and provoked
God. O! God did put no difference betwixt praying families and others: for
though in this they did their duty, yet in other things they did not; O the
pride, the covetousness, etc: that was in praying Houses! and therefore no
wonder, that they shared in the common judgment; Were there no sins with them,
even with them? (as it is 2 Chronicles. 28.10.) Now let me tell you; You that neglect
Religion, Prayer in your Houses, God will punish you, because you do not pray:
They that do make conscience of these, if they sin other-ways, God will punish
them also, though they pray; I would not put you upon this duty, as if this
would secure you, do what you will in other respects; but, do you pray walk in
all things answerably to your prayers, and see if God does not (even visibly)
bless you in this world.

5ly, Though praying Houses are not always preserved from external and common
judgments, yet often they are. Polanus tells us of a Town in the Territory of
Bern, Out of Mr. Gurnal, 3d. Par. chapter 37: p. 413.
consisting of ninty Houses, which was in the year 1584 destroyed by an
Earthquake; all of it, except the half of one House, where the Master of the
Family was earnestly praying with his Wife and Children, upon their bended
knees to God; this was preserved. And I question not, but that many such
Instances might be found out, if I had time to make search. O, pray in your
Houses, peradventure God will secure them from outward evils; but however if
this be not done, you shall not lose by what you do; you your selves shall be
secured from Hell, entitled to spiritual and eternal blessings; you may lose
your Houses, but your Souls are safe: And why now should any say, What Profit
is there in serving God, and in setting up Prayer in our Houses? This objection
(though I have often had it in my thoughts) yet here it came in suddenly and
unexpectedly upon me; and taking me when I was in haste, I could not speak so
fully to it, as the nature of the thing requires: Truly I fear, the late
Judgment, instead of being improved to further Holiness, and the fear and
worship of God, it hardens many in Atheism and Irreligion.

4. Obj. I come to a fourth objection. Say Some; We would with all our hearts
pray in our Families, but our businesses are so many, we have no time for it.
Ans. No Time? a most pitiful pretense. I can scarce hear it with patience:
what? no time to serve your God, (who gives you all your time), to save your
own, and the souls of all the rest in your Families? what, no leisure for this?
Do you say no time? that is a mere pretense; indeed it is, No heart; if you had
but an heart for the duty, you would find time enough for it. O I beseech you,
set up Prayer in your Families, morning and evening, you have time enough for
it; Men Non exiguum Temporis habemus, sed multum perdimus. Senec. V Non inopes
ejus, sed prodigi sumus. Id.
prodigally throw away their time, and then they complain, they have too little
of it: They can spend so much in dressing, eating, recreation, sitting at an
Alehouse or a Tavern, and yet they want time for holy attendance upon God: As
if the Miller should pretend want of Water to make his Mill go, when he lets it
run wast. O will this excuse you at the great day, Lord, we would have prayed
in our Families, but we had no time for it? you will be ashamed to make use of
this excuse then; and yet how is Conscience baffled with it here! O, that I
might prevail with you, to lay aside this objection, and presently to set upon
the duty! what? has the world so many Hours from you every day, and do you
grudg God one? has God given you such a liberal proportion for the minding
your affairs, and will you not spare him a little, morning and night? what? so
much taken up with your Trade on Earth, as to neglect your Trade with Heaven?
Shall the particular calling swallow up all, and the general calling have
nothing? Shall the Servant shut the Master out of doors? Luke 10.41, 42.
Martha-like, will you be cumbred with many things, and neglect the one thing
needful? that which is of so great importance? Is there any business to be
compared with the Salvation of Souls? (and you have many Souls to mind); Will
that ever profit, either you or yours, which is gained by the neglect of God
and duty? It Is not an hinderance, but an help to you, to begin the day with
Prayer. Melch. Adam. in Vita Luth.
Luther used to say, Been orasse est been studuisse; To have prayed well, it is
to have studied well: And therefore it is said of him, That he spent three hours
every day in Prayer and Meditation; Easque studiis aptissimas. Your business
will go on the better for praying. A whet is no let, (is our Proverb); The
Traveller does not lose by his baiting. Bishop Bromrigge, Sermon. 1. p. 6.
In Gerson's time, the Friars had a foolish opinion, that no man was the older
for the time he spent at hearing of Mass: Nemo senescit pro tempore, quo quis
Missam audit. It Is true in my case, (though it is false in theirs); Time spent
in the service and worship of God, is no loss to a man. You pretend business;
what abundance of business did lie upon the hands of Job, (a person so rich
that had so vast an estate to manage, who also was a Magistrate), Job 1.5.
and yet every day he rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt-offerings
for his Children. And so Joshuah; he was a General, a Ruler, doubtless his
business was very great, yet this would not take him off from Family Worship,
Josh. 24.15.
( I and my House, etc). It Is but rising-early (as Job did), and you will get time
enough for Secret and Family Prayer: Why do we complain of the want of Time,
when we snort it away upon a bed of Idleness? O Sluggard, rise, and call upon
God; be at thy Closet, and House-devotions, betimes, The poor birds, are
chirping and singing their Mattens very early, and will thou sleep? and sleep
away thy praying time? O do not so. I Will shut up this Head with that advice of
the old Rabbis, Minue negotia ut vaces legi: O whoever thou art, if thy
businesses be indeed unmanageable with an holy course, lessen them, ut vaces
Deo, that thou may have the more time and leisure to wait upon thy God.

5 Obj. One Objection more, and I have done. Some plead inability; They would
pray, but (alas) they cannot, Ans. Cannot pray? that is a sad word indeed! But
is it so? Have thou lived so long in the world, and have thou not learned yet
to pray? Can thou govern thy Family, provide for thy Family, train them up in
their several Arts and occupations, and do all things that are proper? and is
this the only thing which thou can not do? thou can not pray? Can thou
tell the Physician how it is with thy self, and with thy relations? and can
thou not tell God humbly and reverently, how the case stands, as to thy self
and thine? Surely if this be so, it is very sad; and know that this inability is
thy sin, and therefore will be no excuse to thee. O labor after a praying
spirit for the time to come: And in order to this, fall upon the duty: The way
to pray, is to pray; Duty is the best preparative for duty. It Is better to use
Crutches than to stand still always; but use legs and have them, (so we use to
say): Do but set your selves to the duty, and the Spirit of God, Ezekiel. 12.10.
(that blessed Spirit of Grace and Supplication) will help you in it; It Is his
great office to help poor Creatures in their infirmities, as to prayer, Romans
8.26. Never did any heartily desire to pray, but this Spirit enabled them to
pray. Do not mistake the duty; it does not lie in words, in volubility of
expressions, in good language, (though it becomes us to speak becomingly to
Gods Majesty), in strains of Rhetoric, but in the inward pantings of the heart
after God: It Is not the elegant, but the fervent prayer that prevails: Jam.
5.16.
The key opens the lock, though it be made of plain metal: The Child is heard,
though he speaks but very brokenly and imperfectly; sighs and groans must do
your work: and surely, if you had but a sense of your personal and Family
wants, this you would come up to. You need not teach a Beggar how to beg, nor a
starving man how to ask bread: Be but sensible of your need of mercy, and you will
know how to speak to God. Optimus or andi magister, est Necessitas (says
Luther); Pinching necessity is the best Master to teach men to (...) Get but a
sense of this, and the ^'s asistance, and I Will secure you, this inability will
soon be removed. So much for the pressing of the First duty, which I would have
every man to set up in his House, viz. Family Prayer. Should I give you
Directions about it, I should be too tedious; It Is better to say nothing in so
weighty an Argument, than not to speak fully to it; and that I must not do at
present.

A Second Duty, that I would commend to you, is, the Frequent reading of the
Holy Scriptures in your Houses: It Is not enough to pray in your Families, but
the Scriptures must also be read in them. Aaron was to burn the Incense, and to
light up the Lamps too. Exodus 30.7, 8. The Incense was a resemblance of Prayer,
(Psalm. 141.2. Let my Prayer be set forth before thee as Incense); and the
Lamps, of the Word, ( Prove. 6.23. The Commandment is a lamp, and the Law is
light. Psalm. 119.105. Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my
path): Thus it must be with you, the Incense and the Lamp, Prayer and the Word,
must go together in your Houses. Prayer and Reading God's Word, are two duties
which do so well accord, and so mutually help each the other, that it is pity to
part them.

I would here speak something, to stir you up to read the Scriptures by your
selves; O when you are alone, let the Bible be much in your hands, let not a
day pass over you, in which you do not spend some time in this duty: The Jews
were to go out, and gather a certain rate of Manna, every day, Exodus 16.4. Do
you every day retire your selves from the world, for the reading of the
Scriptures, and gathering something out of them. May be, you look into them a
little upon the Sabbath day, but then they are laid aside all the week: surely
this should not be so. Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.
(...), etc. Hearken (says Chrysostom), you that are Tradesmen, get you Bibles,
get you Bibles, read the Scriptures, that the word of Christ may dwell richly
in you: The same do I say to you; O, shall the Shop-book be minded, and shall
Gods-book not be minded? shall that be altogether in your eye, in your hands,
and this be neglected? Shall News-books, Plays, Romances, Histories,
Philosophical Discourses* take up all your time? 'Twas a most blasphemous
speech that of Politian, that, There was more in one of Pindar's Odes, than in
all David's Psalms: (This was the person, who said, He had never spent his time
worse, than when he once read over the New Testament; and yet it is reported of
him, that he spent three years in studying this brave Criticism, Whether it
should be written Virgilius, or Vergilius: O the desperate folly and wickedness
of the man)! Do not many of you think, and interpretatively speak, that other
Books are better than the Bible, because you read the one so much, the other so
little? Hierome once heard a voice speaking to him, Ciceronianus es, non
Christianus: Thou art a Ciceronian, not a Christian: because Tully was much,
the Scriptures but seldom, perused by him. O, if such audible voices were now
in use, how many might expect to hear something every day, to upbraid them with
their great neglect of reading the Word, and spending their time in other
impertinent, unedifying, fleshpleasing, but not soul-saving Writings. I entreat
you to set upon daily, diligent, serious reading of the Scriptures: Has God in
them giben you so full, so plain, so excellent a Revelation of his Will; and
will you not look into them? Is such a revelation to be slighted? when God has
so condescended to give it, will you make nothing of it? They are your Rule for
Faith and Manners, Isa. 8.20. Gal. 6.16. They are the foundation, upon which
all is built, Ephesians. 2.20. They are as a Light hung out in a dark Night, to keep
you off from rocks and sands; the Star which must direct you to Christ; the
card or compass that you have to sail by; the glass in which you may see (not
what your faces, but) what your hearts are: (...) Athanas.
Are you blind? there is eye salve; (they are a glass that mends and cures the
eye, which no other glass does). Are ye assaulted with Enemies? there is an
Armory, a Magazine to furnish you with weapons, offensive and defensive. Are
you sick? there is that which is Medicinal. Are you hungry? there is Food. Are
you under wants? there is a Shop in which you may be furnished, with whatever
you need. Are you ready to faint? there are Cordials to revive and strengthen
you: O, who would not read the Scriptures! There the deep things of God, (the
whole platform and contrivance of God about man's Salvation), are revealed. 1
Cor. 2.10. They are able to make men wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. (that is
an high Elogium of the Scriptures; it is a commendation only proper to them; All
the Books that ever were penned, cannot do this): They are profitable for
Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, 2 Timothy
3.16. They are God's Quid est Scriptura Sacra, nisi quaedam Epstola
omnipotentis Dei ad Creaturam suam? Disce cor Dei, in verbis Dei. Gregor.
Letter, (indicted by his own Spirit, written (as it were) with his own hand),
which he has been graciously pleased to send to you; and will you not read it?
If an earthly King should send you a Letter, would you put it up in your
pockets, or throw it aside, and never look into it? or would you do thus to a
Friend that should write to you? And will you slight what the great God, your
best friend, in love to your souls, does send to you? The Scriptures are the
Touchstone for your Graces, the Test for your Evidences, the Magna Charta of
your Privileges, the foundation of your Hopes; by them you must stand or fall,
and be judged at the great day: Joh. 12 46.
Of all Writings they are the most delightful: O, that infinite sweetness and
delight that is to be found in them! will not all this prevail with you to be
much in reading of them? Let Alexander be so fond of his Homer, that he cannot
sleep unless Homer be under his pillow: Senec. L 8. Ep. 6. Cum ^egeris
Sexti^^^, etc. liber est supra hominem, dimit^ie ^e plenum ingentis fid^ ^iae,
etc.
Let * Seneca so much cry up the Books of his Sextius; and Tully the Book of
the Twelve Tables: Let your delight be in God's Word, to read it, to meditate
on it, night and day. (Psalm. 1.2). Cicero^ lib. 1. de Orat. Bibliothecas omnium
Philosophorum, (...) mihi videtur Duodecim Tabularum, si quis rerum fontes and
capin^ viderit, and authoritatis pondere, and utilitatis ubertate, liber
ssuperare.


Besides this, you must read the Scriptures in your Families; Dei verlium non
modo in Templis pub^ice praedicari, ssed in privatonum aedibu^ ^ectitari and
audiri oportet. Daven. in Col. 3.16.
if it be possible, let these be read whenever you pray; but though sometimes
you will be hindered, and you cannot be so constant in the one as in the other;
yet however read the Scriptures frequently in your Families, to your Children
and Servants: Would you have them perform their duty to God, to you? let them
know what it is, out of the Word. Ibi bellator reperit unde virtute animi
roboretur; Inde Princeps accipit, etc. Cassiod. Ep. 3.
There are particular directions, suited to all relations; such as will make
all relations good; O, therefore acquaint them with it. May be, they themselves
cannot read, or will not read, or they want time to read, the more does it lie
upon you to spend some time with them in this duty: Who knows, but that this
may be the means of conversion to them? God sometimes blesses this ordinance to
this end, and does that in an ordinary way, which he did to Austine, in that
extraordinary, Toll and lege. Blessed be God, In your Religion, you are not
interdicted the reading of the Scriptures, they are not to you as a fountain
sealed, or locked up from you; you may go to them when you please. The Papists
will not suffer their Proselytes so to do; without a specialdispensation, their
Laity must not meddle with the Bible: This (to me) is one of the most venomous
opinions, and most impious practices, in the whole Body of Popery. Sixtus
Senensis tells us, To suffer Laymen to read the Scriptures, is nothing but to
throw Pearls before dogs or swine. It Is Pope Innocent's allusion, A beast
(says he) was not to touch the Mount, neither are private persons to meddle
with the Scriptures. And Bellarmine says, Scripturae obscuriores sunt, quam ut
a Laicis possint intelligi. viz. Rivet, Chamier, Whittaker, Dr Fr. White, (with
very many others.
But our * Protestant Divines have sufficiently proved the plainness and
perspicuity of the Scriptures, in the Fundamentals of Faith and Practice. May
you then read the Scriptures, and will you not? Number Deus, and mentis and vocis
and Linguae Artifex, diserte loqui non potest? Imo vero summa Providentia
carere faco voluit ea quae divina sunt, ut omnesi^telligerent, quae ipse
omnibus loqueretur. Lactant. lib. 6. c. 21. (...) Chrysostom. in Ep. 2 ad These.
Hom. 3. August. de Doctr. Christ. l. 2. c 9. In his quae aperte in Scriptura
posita sunt, inveniunturilla omnia, quae continent fidem moresque vivendi.
(vid. etiam in Psalm. 8.) Fulgent: In verbo Dei abundat, quod perfectus comedat,
and quod parvulus fugat. Gregor. Divinus Sermo, sicut my^teriis prudentes
exercet, sic plerunque superficie simplices refovet; Habet in publico, unde
parvulos nutriat, servat in secreto unde mentes sublimium in admiratione
suspendat: Quasi quidam fluvius, plenus and altus, in quo and agnus ambulet,
and Elephas natet. Aug. Spiritus Sanctus it a Scriptur as modificavit, ut locis
apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus fastidia detergeret. This is in his
Treatise, De Doct. Christ. l 2 c. 6. Id. de Verb. Dom. Pascimur apertis,
exercemnr obscuris: hinc Fames pellitur, illinc Fastidium. Chrysostom. Hom. in
Mat. The Scriptures are easy to be understood, and exposed to the capacity of
every servant and plowman, and him that is most unwise. Therefore God penned
the Scriptures by the hands of Publicans, Fishermen, Tent-makers, etc. that
none of the simple might have any excuse to keep them from reading, that so
they might be easy to be understood of all men, the Artificer, the Householder,
etc. Ambros. Ep. 44. Mare est Scriptura divina, habens in se; etc. -- Cyril.
Nihil in Scripturis difficile est iis, qui in illis versantur ut decet.
O, your neglect will make your case worse than the case of Heathens, or
Papists; for the one have them not to read, the other have them, but they must
not read them. To conclude, to read a Chapter or two, would not take up so much
time, but what you may well part with in a work so necessary, so good as this
is. I Will say no more on it.

Thirdly, There is one Duty more, (which I cannot pass over without speaking
something to it; and that is, Singing of Psalms in your Families: That this is
no Jewish, Legal, antiquated Duty, but that which is Evangelical and incumbent
upon Christians under the Gospel; several (who have wrote upon that Argument)
do prove strongly and convincingly: You have the practice of our Savior, and
of the Apostles for it; At the closing up of the Lord's Supper, they sung an
Hymn, Mat. 26.30. The Jews used to conclude their Passover with the singing of
David's Psalms; particularly they sang, Psalm. 111. Psalm. 112. and so on to the
116. Psalm: In imitation of them, Christ and his Apostles after the Sacrament,
they sang an Hymn too; which (probably) was either the forementied Psalms, or
some other Psalm or Psalms of David. Act. 16.25. You read of Paul and Silas, At
midnight they prayed and sang praises to God. Besides Examples under the New
Testament, the Command is very express; (and indeed it is as express for
singing, as it is for praying, or hearing, or any other duty). Ephesians. 5.19.
Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and
making melody in your heart to the Lord. Parallel to which, is that, Col. 3.16.
Teaching and admonishing one another; in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs,
singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. Here are three words, Psalms,
Hymns, and Songs: concerning the vid. Gatak Adver. Sacra, l. 1: c. 10: p: 124.
difference or distinct notions of which Divines, do somewhat differ. Hierome
goes one way, Beza another, Grotius a third, Zanchy a fourth: He that pleases,
may look into them, or peruse Bodius, Davenant, and other Interpreters upon the
Places cited, (for it is not my intention to stay upon this). Clearly, the
Apostle alludes to the Hebrew Titles or Divisions of David's Psalms. They were
divided into Mizmorim, Tehillim, and Shirim; which Titles the Septuagint
render, by (...); These are the words used here by the Apostle; and therefore
the inference is good, that David's Psalms were in his eye, and that he directs
Christians under the Gospel, to the singing of David's Psalms, when he enjoines
them, to speak to themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Songs, (these being the
Titles commonly applied to those Psalms, and by which they were usually
understood): You have another Precept for the Duty, Jam. 5.13. Is any
afflicted? let him pray: Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. So that you see we
have an Institution to ground our practice upon; upon which the singing of
Psalms becomes not only a thing lawful, but also matter of duty: And what the
Affirmaba^^ hane fuisse summam vel culpae suae vel erroris, quod essent soliti
stato die ante lucem convenire, carmenque Christo, quafi Deo, dicere secum
invicem. Pliny, in that most remarkable Epist. Lib. 10. Epist. Ep. 97. Tertul.
speaks of Hymni antelucani. Apol. c. 2. etc. 39. Vt quisque de Scripturis
sanctis, vel de propri^ ingenio potest, provocatur in medium Deo canere. (
This, as to the manner, was something extraordinary) vid. Just. Mart. in
Quaest. and Resp. ad Orthod. Quaest. 107. p; 462.
practice of the Primitive Christians was in their Assemblies as to this, is
very well known out of Pliny, Tertullian, Justine Martyr, and others. I should
very much swell up this Discourse, should I fall upon the drawing out of the
full strength of the Scriptures alleged; upon the vindicating of them from all
those cavils by which some would evade them; upon the answering of all
objections made against the duty; and the explication of all difficulties about
it: for brevity sake, I will pass by all this, and only refer you for fuller
satisfaction in all these things, to those who have (to very good purpose)
written upon this Argument, as Mr. Cotton, Ford, Sydenham, Dr. Manton upon
James 5.13. (with several others): That this Singing of David's Psalms, was
used in the Temple-worship, cannot be denied; for, it is said, 2 Chronicles. 29.30.
Hezekiah commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the Lord, with the words of
David and Asaph the Seer. That it is now to be used in public Worship, (as a
part of it) cannot be denied neither: David in Psalm. 95. reckoning up the parts
of public Worship, he instances in Prayer, v. 6. in Hearing, v. 7. in Singing,
v. 1. etc. That it ought to be used in Family Worship also, cannot be denied
neither. Surely, they that grant the duty must grant also, that it is very
necessary, proper, useful, in private as well as in public; O therefore let me
desire you to setup this holy exercise in your Houses; Pray there, read the
Scriptures there, and sing Psalms too there. The general omission of this, is
much to be lamented; what through profaneness in some, and groundless scruples
in others, how few Families are there in this City, in which it is practiced?
How many Houses may a man pass by upon a Lord's day, before he come to one,
where he hears this Heavenly Music. You that are Masters of Families, be
persuaded to make Conscience of this duty; let the praises of the most High God
be sung in your Families. O what a blessed duty is this! how is Heaven
delighted with it, how is the (...), etc. And much he adds, touching the
excellent effects of this Ordinance. Just; Martyr, ut supra.
heart raised, the affections excited and warmed by it; how does it please God,
to come in upon the soul in this as well as in other ordinances; O the
sweetness, delight, that the sincere Christian finds in it; and the profit,
advantage, that he reaps by it. To my thinking (says one) there is not a more
lively resemblance of Heaven upon Earth, than a company of godly Christians
singing a Psalm together. You rejoice in God, you rejoice in those many
mercies, you receive from God; Singing is the best expression of your
rejoicing. Are you merry? let not your mirth run out in vain frothy things, but
in the singing of Psalms. Paul and Silas were full of joy, and they fall upon
singing. The Church upon the receipt of eminent Mercy, vented her joy this way:
Psalm. 126.2. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with
singing. Let it be thus with you. The holy Spirit of God puts men upon this
rejoicing. That of the Apostle in the connection is very observable; He had
dehorted from drunkenness with Wine, (Ephesians. 5.18), by way of opposition he
exhorts to be filled with the spirit; what will follow upon this? He tells you,
ver. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, etc. Where any are full
of the Holy Ghost, this will certainly put them upon holy expressions of their
joy, in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. Look as men that are full of
Wine, or Drink, they will be singing and venting their mirth in their carnal and
sinful way; so they that are full of God, they will be singing too, but it is
Psalms and spiritual Songs; it is not chanting to the viol, (Amos 3.5.) it is not
Songs that God will turn into lamentation, (as he threatens, Amos 8.10.) but
it is that which is spiritual, in which their holy joy does run out. It would
grieve a man, as he walks in your streets, by your Taverns, and Alehouses,
Lord! what tearing, ranting, cursing, singing, (in a scurrilous and filthy
manner), may he there hear from day to day: 'Pray, let something else be heard
in your Houses; you that profess God, and have any sense of Religion, O let men
hear you, singing of Psalms, and therein celebrating the memorials of God's
mercies to you: If you be filled with the spirit, you will as certainly do
this, as men that have drunk to excess do the other.

And especially upon the Lord's day, let this duty be performed in your Houses;
this is work very proper to to the Sabbath: See Psalm. 92. The title of it is, A
Psalm for the Sabbath day: And how does it begin? thus, It is a good thing to
give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O most High, etc.
Psalm. 100.2. Serve the Lord with gladness, come before his presence with
singing. O the admirable mercies that you are to commemorate upon this day!
That ever to be adored Work of your redemption by Christ, is to be fresh upon
your thoughts this day! should not this put you upon singing of Psalms? That
you enjoy the Gospel, are admitted into God's presence, sit under his
Ordinances, meet with God in them; these are signal mercies; do you rejoice in
them? and will you not by Singing, manifest your thankeful resentment of them?
I press you upon nothing, but what has been the custom of the people of God,
from age to age; they would not let a Sabbath pass without singing of Psalms in
their Families. Set up this duty I entreat you; it may possibly expose you to
some derision and scorn from your carnal Neighbors: but who will value the
scoffs of Michals, in the discharge of Duty? O, that as persons walk in the
streets, they might hear in many Houses in this City, praying, reading the
Word, repetition of Sermons, singing of Psalms! what a comfortable hearing
would that be! how does it rejoice my heart, when I hear this at any time!

When God has inclined you to the duty, then be careful that you perform it in
a right manner. I do not know any part of Worship, wherein men do more
generally miscarry, than in this, which I am upon; O let it be so managed that
you may please God, profit your selves, and edify one another; David's Psalms
must be sung with David's Spirit, (as it is usually expressed): See that the
heart be in the duty: Ephesians. 5.19. Making melody in your heart to the Lord.
There must be the external voice, but the main thing is the Heart. David would
have both, employed in this service: Psalm. 57.7. My heart is fixed, O God, my
heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise. (v. 8.) Awake up my glory, etc.
(He means his Tongue, and he calls it his glory, because that was the member by
which he praised, and so glorified God). So Psalm. 108.1. O God my heart is
fixed, I will sing and give praise even with my glory. And Psalm. 71.23. My lips
shall greatly rejoice, when I sing unto thee, and my soul which thou have
redeemed. I say, look to the Heart, that that be in the duty; without this, the
voice is but bodily exercise, and that profits not, 1 Timothy 4.8.) It Is the Heart
that God minds; the suavity, tune ableness, modulation of the voice is nothing
to him; it is the melody of the Heart, which pleases him. Let the Heart, and the
whole Heart be engaged in this work; See Psalm. 103.1. Luke 1.46. Mind what you
are about, attend to the matter that you sing: (so Chrysostom. opens that of the
Apostle, of making melody in the heart, by attending with understanding). Many
sing, but they do not mind what they sing; take heed of this; Cum in conspectu
Dei cantas Psalmos, hoc tract a in mente, quod cantas in voce, (...) modo been
vivendi. Sermon. 52.
(says Bernard): And let the Heart be affected, and wrought upon by this;
every duty should have some influence and impression upon the heart; and this
too, as well as any other should have this effect; Does the Psalm present me
with the glorious excellencies of God, the glorious works of God, the precious
mercies of God? all this should affect my heart. Is it a Psalm of Prayer, of
Praise? whatever the matter be, the Heart must be duly affected with it.
Understand what you sing; I will sing with understanding, (says Paul) 1 Cor.
14.15. (though I conceive he speaks there of understanding, rather in a Passive
than in an Active sense): Surely, we cannot be affected with that, which we do
not understand. And in an especial manner take heed that the carnal part (being
taken with the external melody), do not steal away the Heart from God in the
duty. O how apt are we to be overcome by this! the flesh is pleased and
gratified by melodious and musical suavities, and then the heart is lost, and
the spiritual part of the duty is lost. How fully and Pathetically does Ita
fluctuo inter periculum voluptatis, and salubritatis experimentum, etc. Quum
tamen mihi accidit, ut meam amplius cantus, quam res quae canitur, moveat,
poenaliter me peccare consiteor; and tum mallem non audire cantantem; Ecce ubi
sum! Elete me cum and pro me flete. etc. Aug. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 33.
Augustine bewail this, as to himself. But (that I may shut up this), See that
you sing with grace in your Hearts, (as the Apostle commands, Col. 3.16.)
Though you have not the faculty or skill, of ordering your voices in so
tuneable a manner; yet be sure, you sing with Grace in your Hearts. This some
do open by Thanksgiving or Thankfulness (so the word (...) is taken, 1 Cor.
15.57. 2 Cor. 2.14.) but the most by the exercise, the actual stirrings up and
excitations, of Grace in the Heart; or by gracious and holy dispositions of
Heart: O when you are singing, let Grace be up, as well as the voice; let the
one be stirred up, as the other is lifted up; let gracious affections, desire,
love, joy, godly sorrow, accompany you in the work; such as are proper and
suitable to the matter of the Psalm which is sung. These things I could not but
thus briefly hint to you. And so I have done with the enforcing of the Second
Branch of the Exhortation: If you would advance Religion in your Houses, (and
so dedicate them to God), then set up the Worship of God, the performance of
Holy duties in your Families, viz. Prayer, Reading the Scriptures, Singing of
Psalms. I hope none will be offended, because I have stayed so long upon so
common a subject; and gone over that which Hundreds wrote of before: It Is true,
the subject is common, but withal it is of such importance, that we cannot speak
too much of it: And as common as it is, I think it is very rare, (I mean in men's
practices): Let the thing be done, you shall hear no more of it from me; but if
not, I hope some other person will reassume this work, and go over it again,
much more effectually and convincingly, than I have done. We must never let you
alone, till we have brought you to the doing of your duty. And this, both
fidelity to our Master, and also love to your Souls, calls upon us for.

CHAP. VIII. The Third Branch of the Exhortation urged, viz. Religious
Education.
I Go on to the Third Branch of the Exhortation: As you desire to advance, and
set up Religion in your Houses, let your Education of Children and others (who
are under your charge) be religious: That House cannot be looked upon as
dedicated to God, where Religious Education is neglected.

Now the first step in this, is Baptismal Dedication: This concerns your
Children in their Infant-state; Does God bless you with such? dedicate them to
Him in Baptism; As soon as He has given them to you, do you ( Hannah-like, 1 Samuel 1.28.) give them back again to him; and let them be consecrated to the
Lord in this solemn way. As to Infant Baptism, I would advise you neither to
scruple it, nor to neglect it. Do not scruple it; to me, it is a truth, written
as with the beams of the Sun, (yet I know, that that may be clear to me which
is dark to another, and so vice versa); and God forbid, that I should be
uncharitable to those who differ from me herein; let them be as harsh and
severe, as they please to their Children, I would be tender toward themselves,
(many of them I verily believe dissenting upon conscientious grounds and
motives). But let persons go, I come to the Thing. Should I enter upon the
Controversy of Infant Baptism, I should either wrong the Cause by saying too
little, or the Reader by saying too much. The Arguments are commonly known,
several Books are written about it, (that one of Mr. * Baxters, Plain Scripture
Proof of Infants Church Membership and Baptism.
I should think was enough to give every man satisfaction), and therefore, if
you be dissatisfied, I remit you to them: For my own part, so long as I have
those Scriptures, Genesis 17.7. (compared with the 10. ver.) Act. 2.39. 1 Cor.
7.14. Act. 16.15, 33. (with many others); and these two Reasons, that the first
Covenant-Grant is unrepealed; that the privileges of Believers under the
Gospel are rather heightened, and amplified, then any way curtailed or
diminished; I say, so long as I have Scriptures and these Reasons, I hope I
shall never scruple Infant Baptism: But I suppose you to be satisfied as to
this; then I say, Do not neglect it, or omit it. Godly Parents have always made
Conscience of this, (I mean of bringing their Children under the seal of the
Covenant): when Circumcision was this seal, then they would have their Children
circumcised: You may read it in Abraham, Genesis 21.4. In Zechary and Elizabeth,
Luke 1.59. In Joseph and Mary, Luke 2.21, 22. Since Baptism was the seal (for
there has been a change as to the external seal, though there be none as to
the matter of the Covenant it self, to which this seal is annexed) as persons
were brought in, to the owning of Christ and of the Christian Faith, all along
they would have their children baptized; Look but into the New testament, and
you will find plenty of Instances; Will you then neglect it? Is it not an act
of singular Grace, that God has not only provided Ordinances for your selves,
who are adult, but also one for your Children, in their Infant-state, and will
you make nothing of it? Is it not admirable mercy that the Lord has taken your
seed into the Covenant too, and so will have them to pass under the seal of it?
Has God entailed Covenant-blessings upon them this way, and will you cut off
the entail? Is this the first visible Act of God's grace, whereby he receives
poor creatures into his favor and friendship, and the first visible means, by
which he applys Christ in the merits of his death and blood for sanctification
and the remission of sin? Does it please God effectually to work in and by this
Sacrament, so as to exhibit grace by it? (as he does, in the pursuance of his
own Purpose from everlasting), and will you withhold it from your Children?
Have you been the instruments of conveying the stain and filth, and pollution
of sin to your Children, and will you not bring them to this Heavenly Laver, in
order to the washing and cleasing of them? Is Church Membership a little thing
in your eye, that you will omit that Ordinance, in which your Children, are
enrolled, and admitted, as members of the Church? will you keep them (so far as
in you lies), in an estate little better than Heathenish, and make them only
Candidates of Christianity? Once more, are not delays, neglects, here very
dangerous? Genesis 17.14. The uncircumcised manchild, etc. that soul shall be cut
off from his people; he has broken my Covenant. Here the punishment is
denounced against the child, else where against the Parent, (upon whom indeed
the sin lies): Moses had almost lost his life upon his omitting to circumcise
his Child, (for the most lay it upon this) Exodus 4.24. And it came to pass by
the way in the Inn, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him. O upon this
(and all the foregoing considerations) do not make light of this Ordinance, or
neglect the administration of it. What if your Child should die unbaptised? Far
be it from me to conclude that therefore it is damned, (which was once Austin's
opinion, whence he was called Durus Infantum Pater); yet this I must say, this
is a very Nisi forte existimas Christianorum filios, si Baptisma non
receperint, ipsos tantum reos esse peccati, and non etiam scelu referri ad eos,
qui dare noluerint, maxim eo tempore, quo contradicere non poterant, qui
accepturi erant. Hieron. ad Laetam.
sinful omission, and you have been very unfaithful to your child, and this
will lie heavy upon Conscience under such an affliction; (though I hope, the
child it self shall not suffer as to its eternal state upon your omission).
This (lying in my way) I durst not bawk it, though it is not convenient, to make
any long stay upon it.

That which I have most in my eye, is Religions Education, when your Children
are grown up to the use of Reason; and this I will first stir you up unto, and
then direct you about it. Surely there is great need of the first, that men
should be quickened to the religious educating of those who are under their
charge. How Veru (Bone Deus) quam paucos hodie reperias, qui tam soluciti sunt
quomodo post se recte and honest vivant filii, quamcurant ut illis amplam
haereditatem relinquant, qua post obitum ipsorum splendide and otiose
delicientur. Muscul. in Genesis 18.19.
few look after this! Look into the most of Houses, where will you find Parents
or Masters, solicitous about good education of Children and Servants? Let me
come nearer to you in this City; Are you so careful in the Religious Education
of Children and Apprentices, as you ought to be? O the sad neglect of this even
amongst you! What is it that many (I fear, the most) of you do mind? to feed
and cloth those that belong to you, to learn them something of civility, and
good manners, ('it is well, if you go so far), to provide estates and portions
for them, to breed them up to some calling, (and therein, eying more a
subsistence for your Children, than the Glory of God); this is all that too
many of you trouble your selves about; and what Tears are sufficient to bewail
this! O, the rudeness of youth in this City; O, the cursing, swearing, taking
God's name in vain, that is to be heard from Children in this City; How does it
sometimes affect me, as I go along to hear young ones with Oaths and Curses in
their mouths; how soon are they pregnant in sin, and ripe for Hell; they can no
sooner speak almost, but they are venting wickedness; and when they arrive at
some further growth, how do they flock to Alehouses and Taverns! O the early
drunkards that London is full of! O the lying, gaming, drinking, scoffing at
what is good, etc. that our Youth is tainted with in this place! O Citizens,
does not this proclaim to the world, that good Education is too much neglected
by you: Is not that the cause of all this? Would Children, Servants, be so bad
abroad, if you did do your duty at home? Indeed I must charge that abundance of
sin that is amongst the Youth, chiefly upon the want of Religious Education.
And O that many, even of those who profess God and Godliness, were not herein
too remiss and careless! They pray in their Families, and keep up duties in
their Families, but as to constant and faithful endeavors, for the well
educating of those under them, therein they come very short. Surely Professors
are not now (as to strict, holy pious Education) what formerly Professors were;
one might with much more of comfort, have placed a child with old Professors
than he can with present Professors. It being thus, I cannot but speak
something, to excite you to a further care and faithfulness, in the
well-educating of those, who are under your Authority, (be they Children or
Apprentices).

The Commands of God are very express and positive. Prove. 22.6. Train up a
Child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it.
The Hebrew word is (...) the Root from which the Word in my Text, (rendered by
Dedication) is derived; Children must be initiated or dedicated, (for the
Septuagint translate it by (...)), how? by good and religious education; by
training them up in the way of Duty. So Ephesians. 6.4. And ye Fathers provoke not
your Children, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
Parents, you see what God requires of you; those that you have brought forth,
you must bring up in the nurture, etc. You must not only take care that your
Children be able to Non tantum curare deben^ Parents, us liberi sui vivant;
sedetiam ut Deo been vivant. Ames. Cas. Cons. l. 5. c 22.
live, (as to the world); but (...) that they may live well, fearing God, and
doing his will. The Scripture is very full both of Precepts, and also of
Presidents, for this religious Education, (if it was necessary here to enlarge)
but I will pass them by here, because they will better fall under the
Particular Directions that I shall give presently. Let me only use some
powerful motives and inducements, the better to excite you to the Duty.

First, Your Children (and others under you) they are a trust, which you must
give an account for to the great God; you stand entrusted with the Souls of
these, the care of their Souls lies upon you; and therefore you must be
accountable for them; (for wherever there is a trust, there will be an account
taken): Where you trust your Servants, you will expect an account: Has God
trusted you with precious souls, (so many Children, so many Servants, so many
Trusts), and will he not have an account, whether you are faithful to your
Trust? It Is a mistake to think that the Cura animarum does only lie upon
Ministers, (though indeed eminently it does, Ezekiel. 3.18, 19.) it lies also upon
you, who are Parents and Masters; if you let the Souls of Children and Servants
to perish, (for want of good Education) their blood shall be required at your
Hands. Let me allude to that of the Prophet to Ahab; 1 King. 20.39. Behold a
man turned aside, and brought a man unto me, and said, Keep this man; if by any
means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life: So here, God says
this to you; Here Is a child, keep this Child for me, if he miscarry and be lost
(through thy neglect), thy life shall go for his. If men did but consider this,
certainly they would be more careful and conscientious in their Education. You
must answer for the Souls, for the sins of those under your charge: Do not
think that I speak my own private thoughts (only to affright you) I say nothing
but what others have said before me: Omnia quae deliquerint filii a Parentibus
requirentur, qui non erudierint filios suos. Orig. in ^ob.
Origin tells us, That all the faults of Children shall be required of their
Parents, who have not instructed them. And we read in the (...) Constit. Ap.
Lib. 4. Cap. 10. in Zonaras page 909.
Constitutions (that go under the name of the Apostles) If Children through the
carelessness of Parents, shall fall into sinful courses, those Parents, should
be guilty of the souls of those Children; and that not only the children shall
be punished themselves, but the Parents also for their sake. That look as
children sometimes in this life are punished for the Parents sake; so Parents
in the life to come, shall be punished for the childrens sake: O what an
awakening consideration is this! It Is the affliction of many, that they have no
Children, they have none of these arrows in their quiver; Psalm. 127.4, 5.
'twill be the affliction of others at the great day, that ever they had
children; O when they shall come to witness against them, and say; Lord, here is
my Father, that let me lie, steal, swear, play away the Sabbath, and he never
regarded me; my sin was the fruit of his bad Education; will not this fall
heavy upon the negligent Parent? will not such a child be an arrow indeed to
pierce him to his very heart? Pray therefore think of this in time, that you
may prevent these tremendous consequences. You take delight in your children,
but do you consider? O I must answer for the soul of every child: You employ
your Servants about your business, but do you consider? I must answer for the
souls of these Servants: If you did, you would not carry it as you do.

Second. Religious Education carries much of Good along with it; you cannot
imagine how much good you do, when you do this: First, you do good to your
selves; for by this, you discharge your duty, and acquit your selves from the
guilt of souls; and however things go, libera it is animam, you have freed your
selves in the sight of God. What if after all your care, pains, prayers,
faithfulness, your children should yet miscarry? O this would be matter of
comfort to you, it is not upon your default or neglect: It Is as great an
affliction as can befall a godly man to see children (such as have been
religiously trained up by him) to take sinful courses; but if he can make
comfortable reflections upon his practice, that he has not been accessory to
this; that it proceeds from the child's wickedness, not from his omitting of
good education, this will much tend to his support, and to the alleviation of
his grief and burden. Many a good Parent had sunk under this cross, if he had
not had this to bear him up.

You also by this may do much good to your children. It Is the most effectual
and the most probable way to further their spiritual and eternal good. Good
Education is a great thing; In his excellent Treatise, (...). p. 5.
Plutarch says, It Is the E " (...); it is the first, the middle, the last, in
order to the setting of youth right; you cannot expect, either moral, or
spiritual goodness without this. O the power and virtue of Religious Education,
(when it is sanctified)! The earth often proves according to the seed that is
first cast into it; The vessel retains the tincture of that with which it is
first seasoned. Plutarch. in loco prius eitat.
Lycurgus set it forth by an allusion of two dogs; the one of which was bred
up to the Trencher, the other to Hunting, which made a very great difference in
them, (as he exemplified it before the Lacedaemonians, to show the power of
Education); Persons are very much, (when they are grown up) according to the
breeding, that they had in their tender Age: A child well educated makes a
goodman; and so e contra. What is imprinted upon one in his education, usually
it is very permanent: As in the place forecited, Train up a child in the way he
should go, Prove. 22.6.
and when he is old, he will not depart from it. What blessings might Parents
prove to their children, what excellent things might be effected by them, if
they did but take the advantage of their tender years, and then set themselves
to bring them into God. Mr. Baxter's Saints Everlasting Rest, Part 3. chapter 14.
Sect. 11. p. 350.
I do verily believe (says a Reverend Author) that if Parents did their duty
as they ought, the word publicly preached, would not be the ordinary means of
Regeneration in the Church, but only without the Church among Infidels, etc.
God would pour out his Grace so upon the children of his people, and hear
prayers for them, and bless such endeavors for their holy Education, that we
should see the Promises made good to our seed; and the unthankeful Anabaptists
that will not confess that the children of Saints are any nearer God, or more
beholden to him than Pagans* so much as for the favor to be visible
Church Members, should by sweet experience be convinced of their error, and be
taught better how to understand, that our children are holy.

Nay thirdly, by this, you would do much good to public Societies; (whether
they be Religious or Civil): Both Church and State are great gainers by good
Education; what excellent members would the Church have, if you did but do what
lies upon you in private? As the Orchard is according to what the nursery is,
(according to the usual similitude) So Churches are according to what Families
are. Good Families make good Churches; and good Education makes good Families;
How smoothly, readily would Church-work go on, if Masters of Families did but
do their duty; as the building goes on apace when the materials are prepared
before hand. Cities and Kingdoms too, gain by this: and it must needs be so,
for what are they, but the whole made up of these parts; The whole is such as
the parts are, of which it consists; and so Kingdoms and Cities are what
particular Houses are; therefore Aristotle defines the former thus. They are
Societies made up of many Families and Houses put together. Families are but
like the book in loose sheets, and Kingdoms like the book bound up; the one but
like Letters that are single, and apart, the other like Letters joined
together. Now if the sheets be not good, or the Letters not good, the book or
writing cannot be good neither. The Lacedaemonians made a Law, Charron of Wisd.
lib. 3. c. 14.
that when Children did amiss, their Parents should be punished; because they
judged their neglect of Education was the cause of this, which tended so much
to the detriment and prejudice of the Commonwealth. O if you neglect your duty,
you fill the Nation with corrupt and ulcerous and useless members: whereas upon
the doing of it, you make your Houses good Seminaries, both for Church and
State. Would you have a good Kingdom? make those good, who are under your
charge: Would you have a good City? look to the educating of those who are
related to you. The way to have the City clean is for every man to sweep before
his own door; and so it is in the matter I am upon. Let us have the best
Magistrates, let them make the best Laws, and back them with the best
execution; yet Societies will be naught, so long as Parents and Masters do not
do their duty in Religious Education.

Nay fourthly, By this you do good to Posterity; for hereby you keep up
Religion in the World, and propagate it from age to age: The Papists speak much
of their Oral Tradition, by which (they say) Truth has been conveyed
downwards, all along from the Apostles days, the present generation handing it
down to the next, and so on from generation to generation. Surely it is the duty
of Parents to perpetuate and convey Religion from age to age; and how shall
this be done, but by Religious Education. It Is said of Abel, Haec est vera
Cabbala, i. e. Traditio per manus (...), quando Patres filiis tradunt
admonitiones, etc. sed hujusmodi quae aedificent, etc. Pet. Mart. in Gen: 18.19.
Being dead he yet speaks, Heb. 11.4. O, if you would but rightly train up
your Children, being dead you would yet speaks you seasoned them, and they
season theirs, and so Religion is transmitted and kept up in the World by your
means, (although you your selves be dead and gone). Is not this glorious
service? upon your not minding of Education, you are the instruments of keeping
up Sin, Atheism, Ignorance, etc. in the world; but by your sincerity and
faithfulness in this, you are Instruments to continue and promote the fear of
God, Piety, Holiness, Faith from age to age.

Thirdly, Consider, the mischievous and sad effects that follow upon the
neglect of Education: They are so so many they cannot well be numbered up, and
so evil, they cannot sufficiently be bewailed. Good Lord! how are Children and
Servants spoiled and lost for want of this; as ground proves mossy and full of
weeds, for want of culture, and of being manured in time. The Tree that is not
kept straight at the first grows crooked till it be incurable: young ones, when
let alone, how soon does sin get strength in them, how naturally do they fall
into the way of wickedness; and then in time they are so hardened, that there is
no reclaiming of them. Would it not grieve you, to see your Children to prove
Drunkards, Swearers, Unclean persons, every way naught? What can you expect
better, if you do not at the first, principle them aright for God and duty? O
this is the bane of youth, that root upon which much evil grows, the omitting
of serious, early, pious Education. Daily experience is too sad a proof of what
I say.

Fourthly, will be highly pleasing to God; you cannot do a thing which he will
take more kindly, and more graciously accept of. A clear proof of this you have
in Abraham, Genesis 18.17. etc. And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that
thing which I do. Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty
Nation, and all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in him: Why will God
do all this for Abraham, and give out such eminent acts of Grace to him? you
have the reason of it, ( v. 19.) For I know him (says God) that he will
command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of
the Lord, to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that
which he has spoken of him. All the great favors designed and promised by God
to Abraham, were laid upon his zeal and religious care, as to those who were
under him; God would not hide Secrets from him because he would not hide the
ways of God from them; God will make him great in the world, because he would
make God great in his Family. O, how does it please God, when he sees Masters
and Parents, treading in the steps of Abraham, and what blessings does he heap
upon such! Holy Education will be a singular discovery of your love to God, and
if you discover your love to him, he will discover and act his love to you.

That I may shorten as much as may be, let me put things together. Will you
neglect the main? what are the things of the world in comparison of Grace? You
are industrious about worldly things for yours; to get wealth for them, to
leave them Estates, Portions, ample Possessions; you spare no costs, no pains
for their Preferment, the heightening of their parts, the enriching of them
with Natural knowledge, and the like; and will you do nothing for them, as to
that which is infinitely better than all this? Is not the fear of God, saving
grace better than all this? should not your love run out after the best things
for them you love? Will not Christ be better to your Children than the world?
Will the trial at the great day be this, whether you have made them rich and
knowing, and great; or whether you have made them religious, gracious, holy?
Did not the Heathen cry-out of the folly of Parents in this? O (says Crates),
that I could so speak as to be heard by all men: this I would then say to them;
(...) Charron, 3. B. Chapter 14. p. 437. of Wisd.
What do you mean in laying out all your endeavors and industry to get wealth,
and in the mean time neglecting the education of those to whom all is to be
left? This is, (says Charron) as if a man should take care of his shoo, but
not of his Foot: or (as an Dr. Reyn. Sermon upon Human Learning, p 7.
eminent Writer of our own has it), this is as great folly, as to be curious
for an handsome shoo, and then to put it upon a gouty foot.

O Parents are not your Children dear to you? Are not your souls knit to them
by the strongest bonds and ligaments of Love? and will you look on, and let
them perish for ever? Can you be content to see your own Image upon them
without God's Image? Shall they lie as the Devils fallow? Shall nothing but
weeds and briars grow upon them, for want of your mature cultivating of them?
Will you be cruel to the souls of these, who are so near to you? (the not
giving of good Education to them is unnaturalness; nay the highest cruelty):
Will you be worse than Dives in Hell? he would feign have had the damnation of
his Relations prevented, Luke 16.27. etc. and will you do nothing to prevent
this as to your Children? shall there be more of bowels in Pharoahs daughter
toward the child of another, (when she saw the poor babe floating upon the
waters) than in you toward your own Children? Shall the Heathens who had
nothing but moral light, (and yet were very careful and solicitous about the
Education of their Children) rise up in judgment against you, (who have an
higher light), and condemn you? O quanta damnatio, a damnatis damnari, (as one
says)! How great a condemnation is that, to be condemned by the Condemned. Will
you like it, when the wickedness of your Children will break your very hearts,
and you will not know how to help your selves? (nay your own Consciences will
tell you that all this is the fruit of your Neglect)? Will it not be sad, when
your Children shall curse the day that ever they knew you? and say, (as it is in
Cyprian.) Parents sensimus Parricidas; our Parents have been little better to
us than Murderers; and they that were the Instruments of our being, have also
been the occasions and means of our everlasting undoing: Aetas Parentum
pejoravis. etc. Horat.
Ista diligentius, etc. hoc tempore ubi videmus quantopere vires Diaboli in
valuerint, ut homines ad tanta flagitia and grandia scelera pertrabat. Fabric.
in Psalm. 30. Titu.
Are not the times you live in, very evil? Will you make them worse and worse?
Ah Lord, what will become of Religion in England, in a little time, if
Professors now do not mind the Education of Children! 'Twas promised, Isa.
58.12. They that shall be of thee, shall build the old wast places. O the sad
wastes and ruins of Religion that are now amongst us! and therefore, O that your
Children might be so brought up, that they who are of you might build the wastes
thereof. I beseech you, if you have any love to God, to your own souls, to your
children, to this poor Nation, to Posterity, make more Conscience of this duty,
than hitherto you have done: Believe it, Good Education is better than a great
Portion; Dr. Gouge of Family Duties, p. 537.
Do but cast into your Children the seeds of Virtue and Piety, for other things
you may trust God. I do too well know, that after the very best Education, some
may and do prove very bad; (as some ground, let it be never so well dressed,
tilled, manured, yet after all this, nothing but weeds and briars, and thorns
do grow upon it): I wish we had not too many Instances of this; (some of which
sometimes come very near unto our selves); Be it so, (though it is a thing much
to be lamented), yet it is good to do our duty, to go as far as we can, and then
to leave events and success to him, who does what he pleases. I had almost
forgot a passage of Mr. Herbert, Poems, p. 4.
let me bring it in here, and close with it.

This loss springs chiefly from our Education.
Some till their ground, but let weeds choke their Sun.
Some mark a Partridg, never their child's fashion.
Some ship them over, and the thing is done.
Study this Art, make it thy great design,
And if God's Image move thee not, let thine.
So much for the stirring of you up to this Religious Education; I proceed to
give you some Directions about it: I enter upon an Argument of great weight and
importance. What are Parents to do, in order to the religious educating of
their children? or, wherein are they to come up to this? It Is a very serious
Question, and that which deserves our most serious thoughts: As Socrates in
Plato, (...) Plato in Theag. fol. ^22.
speaks to Demodocus, There is nothing that a man can advise upon, more divine
and weighty, than how to educate well his Children and Servants. In answer to
the Question, I will not run out upon all the Duties of Parents and Masters,
toward Children and Servants, but confine my self to those only, which have a
more direct and immediate reference to Religion. And whereas the constant
performance of Family Duties, (as Prayer and Reading the Scriptures) is a great
part of Religious Education, they having been already spoken to, it will not be
requisite, that I should here further insist upon them. That which I have to
say, by way of Direction, I will give you, under the following Heads.

First, Be frequent in spiritual Instruction; for this is a very considerable
branch of Religious Education; this is like the setting or planting of the
Root, upon which all must grow; or like the laying of the foundation, upon
which all is to be built. Unquestionably this is the duty of Superiors toward
Inferiors: What the Preacher is in the Pulpit, that the Master of the Family is
in the House, (says Origin): Hom. 9. in Levitic.
This is a part of that (...) signifies Instruction as well as Correction. 2 Timothy 3.16. And (...) imports the same too.
(...) and (...), Nurture and Admonition, in which Fathers are to bring up
their Children, Ephesians. 6.4. Abraham was much in this duty, Genesis 18.19. And it is
said of him, Genesis 14.14. When he heard his Brother was taken captive, he armed
his trained Servants, born in his own House, etc. We read it, (his trained
servants), in the Hebrew it is, ((...)), initiatos suos his initiated, or
dedicated ones; or, (as it is noted in the margent; and as Armavit pueros suos,
nempe a se imbutos and institutos. Pagn. in Verb. (...)
Pagnine opens the word) his instructed ones: All in Abraham's Family were
instructed by him; O, those are blessed Families, where all in them are
instructed in the things of God. Hic locus indicat, priscos ilies Patres, gui
^gem Mosi^^, omnemque sacrum Divi^tium and Humana: um rerum Scripusram
pragressi sunt, solitos vi^^ voce and per Domesti^am institutionem and
Disciplinam, docere filios and posteros suos, quaecunque ad consequendam animi
salutem, after namque faelicitatem scire eos, id temporis, atque age ^porteret.
Perer. in Genesis 18.19.
This was David's practice; so his Son tells us; Prove. 4.4. He taught me also*
and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words* keep my Commandments and
live. And Bathsheba's too, Pro. 31.1. The Prophecy that his mother taught him.
And (says David), Psalm. 34.11. Come ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach
you the fear of the Lord. You read of Jehoash, He did that which was right in
the sight of the Lord all his days, wherein Jehoiada (who was instead of a
Father to him) the Priest instructed him. Now you that are Parents, do you thus
do? when shall I come to that duty which is not notoriously neglected? Sure
this must not be it; for it is too manifest, that this is generally neglected.
You converse much with your Children, spend much time with them, do you improve
your converse, or your time, in speaking to them of the things of God? You
teach them your Callings, learn them this and that; do you teach them to know
God and Jesus Christ? O that this Heavenly instruction might be more minded by
you! when you are with your Children, be instilling and dropping spiritual
things into them, (as their capacities will bear); be Cum eum in finem homines
condiderit Deus, ut Se cognoscant, celebrent and aeternum salventur, prima baec
sit parentum cura, ut a teneris, Dei and rerum ad salutem necessariarum
cognitionem liberis su, is instillent, etc. Quistorp. in Ephesians. c 6.4. Page
185. (...) tobaeus. Sermon. 1.
instructing of them, as to what they are to know and practice: Poor Creatures,
they come blind and ignorant into the world, let pity move you, to inform them,
and to give them an insight into the mysteries of Religion. Are not these the
things, that are most necessary to be known? Is not knowledge the way of God to
Salvation? (Joh. 17.3.) Is not ignorance a soul-destroying thing? O let these
things prevail with you, to do what the people of God all along before you,
have done: Let your Children be well taught, as well as well fed; let not a
servant go un-instructed, for he is a part of your charge; Nay, let not the
meanest servant be without this: As it is said of Lewis the Ninth, King of
France; he was found instructing his poor Skullion; and being asked why he did
so, he answered, I know the meanest in my Family has a Soul as precious as
mine is.

If you ask me, Wherein you are to instruct yours? Ans. There are two things,
that the Scripture in special directs you to; The Word of God, and the Works of
God: Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine
Heart; (Is that all? no:) And thou shall [diligently teach them unto thy
children], and shall talk of them, when thou sit in thine House, etc. To
the same effect, Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19. Timothy from a child knew the holy
Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15. How came this about? He had a good mother, and a good
grandmother, and they instructed him in the Scriptures. Officium pii
Patris-familias est, liberos and familiam educare, ad pietatem, docereque
quomodo opera Dei recte debeant conside rare Piscat. in Genesis 18.19. in Observe.
So for the works of God. Psalm. 78.4. etc. We will not hide them from their
children, showing to the generation to come, the Praises of the Lord, and his
strength, and [his wonderful works] that he has done; For he established a
testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our
Fathers, that they should make them known to their children: That the
generation to come might know them, even the children which should be born, who
should arise and declare them to their children: That they might set their hope
in God, and might not forget the works of God, but keep his Commandments. Deuteronomy.
4.9. Only take heed to thy self, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes
have seen, etc. but teach them thy Sons, and thy Son's Sons, Josh. 4.21, 22.
When your children shall ask their Fathers in time to come, saying, What mean
these Stones? Then ye shall let your children know, saying, Israel came over
this Jordan on dry land, etc. Exodus 12.26. And it shall come to pass, When your
children shall say unto you, what mean you by this service? That ye shall say,
It is the sacrifice of the Lord's Passover, who passed over the Houses of the
children of Israel in Egypt, etc. Menochius relates, That the Jews the night
before the Passover, They were wont to discourse with their children thus; Why
is it called the Passover? the Father answered, Because the Angel passed over
us, when it slew the Egyptians, and destroyed us not: Why do we eat unleavened
bread? the Father answered, Because we were forced to hasten out of Egypt: Why
do we eat sour grapes? To mind us of our afflictions in Egypt. So again, Psalm.
44.1. We have heard with our ears O God, Our Fathers have told us, what work
thou did in their days, in the times of old. You see how in special the
Scripture instances in these two things, (wherein Children are to be
instructed) God's word and works; and is not all comprehended under these two?
Is not here a large field for Instruction and Information? Let me entreat you
to be speaking much of these unto your Children. Do what in you lies to
acquaint them with the Holy Scriptures, and those great Truths which are
therein revealed; (especially those which do more nearly concern Salvation);
Tell them, what there you find, concerning God, Christ, man's fall and recovery,
the Covenant of Grace, the conditions thereof, Faith and Repentance, etc. Be
often opening these things to them: The Eagle carries her young ones to the
Sun; O bring your young ones to the Light of the Word, (...) Joseph. lib. 3.
contra Appion.
and help them to look upon it, and into it. The Children of the Jews were very
well versed in the Scriptures, even when they were young, because their Parents
did frequently herein instruct them; (so * Josephus tells us). What a shame is
it, that it is so long before the Children of Christians come to any
considerable knowledge of them! O do not only read the Scriptures to them, but
often be discoursing of Matters therein disclosed; and put them themselves upon
the reading of them also; and call them often to an account of what they read,
(as Hierome advised Laeta in order to the religious Education of her Daughter).
Reddat tibi pensum quotidie die Scripturarum floribus excerptum. Hieron. ad
Laetam.

Here, as an excellent way for the instructing of Children and Servants, let me
advise you to set up Catechizing in your Families: O set some time apart for
Catechizing; Prater publicam Doctrinam etiam privato Catechizatio Domesticorom
vigere debet inter nos ex Dei mandato. Parcus in Genesis 18.19.
it is one of the best means that I know, for the advancing of
Scripture-knowledg. In Catechisms you have a Summary of Divinity, (both
Doctrinal and Practical), in a plain and familiar way set before you; there
Matters of Faith and Practice are succinctly handled, and brought down to the
weakest capacity: There Is no such compendious way for the attaining of Heavenly
knowledge as this is. Whence is it, that persons are so ignorant when they are
men? but from this, they were not well Catechized when they were children! And
whence is it, that so many leave the way of Truth, and desert that true
Religion wherein they were bred, and turn Papists, and what not? but because
the foundation was not well laid at the first, in Catechetical exercises. The *
Greek word, (...) est imbuere, prima rudimenta dare, erudire; Frequens est apud
Doctores in Piel, pro instituere and paulatim assuefacere quod Graeci (...)
dicunt. Pagn. -- It nearly concerns every Parent, as they will free themselves
from the guilt of their Childrens undoing, that they be careful to see them
instructed in all necessary things. To which purpose it will be fit early, to
teach them some short Catechism: Whole Duty of Man, p. 49. But above all, the
best way of Institution, especially as to the younger sort, may be performed by
Catechisms, Platforms of sound words, by Question and Answer in a short and
compendious method; whose Terms being clear and distinct, might be phrased out
of Holy Scripture, and fitted to their Capacities, by a plain though solid
style, and to their memories by brief expressions. Morn. Lect. Sermon. 8. p. 196.
which signifies to Catechize, signifies also to teach and instruct; as in 1
Cor. 14.19. Luke 1.4. Act. 18.25. Gal. 6.6. Catechizing is the best way of
instructing. If I could but prevail with you once a week to call your Families
together, and to spend some time in this exercise, O how would Gospel knowledge
increase amongst us!

Secondly, To Spiritual instruction, add holy admonition, exhortation, good
advice and counsel. You must not only let them know (by instruction) what their
duty is, but you must press, urge, enforce this duty upon them, by admonition,
good counsel. O my child, thus and thus the word speaks, O do thou do
accordingly: O my child, do not lie, do not swear, do not profane the Lord's
day, do not associate with wicked persons; but fear God, walk in the good ways
of God, keep the commandments of God. I say, thus admonish, advise, counsel,
those that are under your charge: What abundance of good might you do by this!
what a prevailing influence, has good counsel, when it is duly applied! How
many are there now rejoicing in Heaven, and blessing God for good Parents and
Masters upon earth, who gave them pious admonitions from time to time: Whereas,
there are others burning in everlasting flames, who are cursing the day that
ever they had to do with those who altogether neglected this duty. This also is
included in that Proprie significat Admonitionem, non simpliciter, sed talem
quam in mentem pueri ponas, and ingeras quae sunt ad salutem, necessaria.
Zanch. in Ephesians. 6.4.
admonition, (which the Apostle speaks of in the forenamed place), Ephesians. 6.4.
(if you take the word in the active sense, for it may be taken passively).

In the further prosecution of this Direction, I might much enlarge upon such
Heads as these.

1. Be sure your admonition be holy and good: Take heed of giving bad advice,
of counselling Children to do what is evil; this is dreadful: Yet I wish that
some Parents were not guilty of it, they put their Children upon wicked acts
and courses; Athaliah (the mother of Ahaziah) is branded for this, 2 Chronicles.
22.3. His mother was his Counselor to do wickedly. Have we not some such
amongst us? Surely, this is the very height of wickedness; and God will sooner
or later find out such Parents, and severely punish them. Epiphanius has a
pretty observation upon Terah, (the Father of Abraham). For 3332. years,
Epiphan. in Panar. Sect. 6. cited in Bish. Taylor's Rule, etc. of dying. p. 32.
there was not (says he) one example of a Son, that died before his Father,
but the course of Nature was kept, that he who was first born did first die,
(you are to understand it of Natural death, and therefore Abel cannot be
opposed to this observation) till that Terah taught the people and his
Relations a new Religion, to make Images, and worship them; and concerning him
it was first remarked, that Haran died before his Father Terah in the land of
his Nativity: and so God punished him for his sinful counsel, by the untimely
death of his Son. Let Parents look for some unusual, remarkable judgment,
either upon themselves, or upon theirs, who counsel to sin.

2ly. Your Admonition being good, (for the matter of it) see that you back it
with Scripture, and with the most convincing Arguments you can think of; for
you will find all little enough; and good advice without these is but like a
bullet without powder.

3ly. Act Prudence as to the best timing of good counsel; If it be given
unseasonably, it will be taken unsuccessfully.

4ly. For the manner of it, let it be 1. hearty, 2. serious, 3. affectionate;
(for Love is like the oyling of the key, which makes it to open the lock more
easily; or like the greasing of the nail, which makes it to enter with more
facility); 4. frequent.
Good counsel must be often inculcated; if it prevails not at the first or a
second time, it must be set on, again and again. The Iron by often filing grows
smooth and bright at last: The nail that does not enter by one or two blows, by
the reiteration of them is driven to the very head; And thus it is in the case
I am upon: Deuteronomy. 6.7. Thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children,
Metaphora ducta a gladio, qui dum acuitur saepius impellitur ad co tem. Innuit
studium and diligentiam, qua pueris praecepta Dei inculcari debent. Vatabl. in
Deuteronomy. 6.7. Innuitstudium and diligentiam, qua pueris praecepta Dei inculcari
debent. P. Fagius in loc.
etc. In the Hebrew, it is, Thou shall whet them diligently, etc. Counsel is
blunt and ineffective, if by frequent repetition, it be not whetted and
sharpened. These are Things that admit of much enlargement, if I could dwell
upon them; but Travelers are loath to make any long stay, when they are almost
at the end of their journey; and so I hope I am.

Thirdly, Back Instruction and Admonition with the putting forth and due
improvement of your Paternal Authority. This religious Education calls for, as
well as for the former; you have not done all that lies upon you, when you have
instructed and exhorted; God has put Authority into your hands, and that must
be employed and improved, to back and second Instruction and Exhortation. It Is
not more commonly than truly said, (by those who write of Oeconomical Duties),
that a Master of a Family (in his House) is, King, Priest, and Prophet; he has
power and authority there, so he is King; he is to pray with and for his
Family, so he is Priest; he is to teach and instruct his Family, so he is
Prophet. Now if you would religiously educate those under you, you must exert
your Authority for religious ends and purposes. If you would know how, or
wherein, I will briefly open that to you: 1. You must lay your charge upon them
that are subject to you, that they do what is good. David did not only advise,
but he charged his Son Solomon, saying, etc. 1 King. 2.1. Prove. 4.4. Keep my
Commandments and live: 'Twas not bare counsel that he gave, but he laid his
commandments upon his Son. Genesis 18.19. I know him, that he will Vtitur verho
(praecipiet) ut Parents and Superiores intelligant, non segniter and obiter,
sed sedulo and cum Authoritate, inferiores ad Dei timorem and obedientiam
adducendo, faciendum esse officium. Pareus in Genesis 18.19.
command his Children, etc. Observe it, Abraham would not only persuade and
exhort, but he would command his Childrens and his Household after him, etc*
2ly. You must authoritatively restrain them from sin; (But of this restraining
from sin, I will speak more, under the fourth Head, in the next Chapter): 3ly.
You must act your Authority, to see that they duly sanctify the Sabbath; This
is expressly laid upon you in the fourth Commandment; Exodus 20.10. You are to
answer for Childrens and Servants spending the Lord's day; If they be idle,
frequent vain Houses, spend their time (or rather Gods time) in playing,
gamings, walking in the fields, recreations, (all of which are forbidden on
that day), you partake of their guilt, and must be accountable for it. O that
Masters in this City would better improve their Authority over their Servants,
in order to the better sanctification of the Sabbath! upon this neglect, the
Sabbath is greatly profaned; and that is no small sin. 4ly. Your power must be
employed to bring them to the means of Grace, to the Ordinances. You attend
upon them your selves, O look to this, that yours also attend upon them:
Possibly some of them may be backward enough to this; carnal hearts do not
delight in spiritual duties; Youth is more for Pleasure than for religious
attendance upon holy Ordinances; they like playing better than praying; their
foolish sports better than the serious exercises of Religion. Time was, when it
was just so with some of the best of your selves; but 'twas God's infinite
mercy to you, you had Parents who looked after you, who would have you to be
present at holy Ordinances; Do you not bless God for such Parents when ever you
think of them? And will not you do to yours according to what was done (with so
much advantage) to your selves? Odonot go alone to the means, but take your
Families, your Relations, along with you. It Is said of Elkanah, that he and all
his House went to offer to the Lord the yearly Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 1.12. Jess and
all his Sons must be at the Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 16.5. I meddle not with the
Coercive power of the Magistrate; but surely as to that which I am upon, the
Parent, the Governor of a Family, has a Coercive power; and he is bound to put
it forth. You cannot force your Children to be well, but you may command them
to take Physic: And so here, you cannot force them to believe, to repent, but
you may bring them to wait upon the means, in order to believing, and in order
to repenting. Is God present in them? does God work Illumination, Conversion by
them? and will you not cause yours to give their attendance? would you have
them healed, and will you not bring them to the Poolside, where this healing is
to be had? If you go to Ordinances your selves, but leave your Children and
Servants behind you, may it not be said to you, what Eliab once said to David,
With whom have thou left those few sheep in the Wilderness? 1 Samuel 17.28. Then
5ly. your Authority must be exercised as to Family Duties. See that those under
you do attend upon Prayer, reading the Word, Repetition of Sermons, and the
like: Have you Power in your Houses, and shall any absent themselves from these
things? Shall they eat with you who will not pray with you? shall they dwell in
your Houses who will not conform to the Religious Orders there observed? 6ly.
Often call Children and Servants to an account; (especially when there is cause
of jealousy and suspicion, that all is not well), how time is spent, what they
have been doing, what company they keep, what they have heard (after a Sermon),
what they remember, how they understand, etc. If such account was but oftener
taken, we should have better Children, and better Servants, than now we have.
You find the benefit of it as to your own concerns, surely it would be as
beneficial in higher Concerns. 7ly. When they do amiss, let them be reproved
and corrected. O when such are let alone in that which is evil, without reproof
and correction, how sad are the consequences! Connivance and Indulgence is the
bane of Youth. What a cross had Adonijah like to have proved to David? and it is
said of him, His Father had not displeased him at any time, in saying, Why have
thou done so? 1 King. 1.6. Be faithful in reproving what is amiss in those who
are under your charge: (...). Arist. Ethic. l. 10 c. 13.
This is very well consistent with love; nay, this is the best and the truest
love; nay indeed, you do not love, where you do not reprove. (See Levit.
19.17.) O the benefit of well managed reproofs both to young and old! Prove.
15.31. The ear that hears the reproof of life, abides among the wise, Prove.
6.23. Reproofs of instruction are the way of Life. And besides this, what you
do not reprove, (according to the nature of the Crime), In omnibus peccantihus
pecco, quando eos quos scio peccare, quadam crudelis animi malignitate non
increpo. Prosp. de vit. Contempl. 3.23.
you are accessory to, and bring the guilt of it upon your selves: So Ephesians.
5.11. And then for Correction; If fairer means will do the work, forbear this;
but if not, this must be used, as the last remedy: The word of Exhortation, and
the rod of Correction must not be parted; where God loves, he chastens, (Rev.
3.19.) and he that truly loves his child, will not let him be lost, for want of
Chastisement: Prove. 13.24. He that spares his rod, hates his Son; but he that
loves him, chastneth him betimes. Prove. 29.15. The rod and reproof give
Wisdom, but a child left to himself, brings his mother to shame: (verse. 17),
Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee rest, yea, he shall give delight unto
thy Soul. Prove. 19.18. Chasten thy Son, while there is Hope, and let not thy
soul spare for his crying. Prove. 22.15. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a
child, but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him. Prove. 23.13, 14.
Withold not correction from the child; for if thou beatest him with the rod,
he shall not die. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul
from Hell. What Arguments are there in these scriptures, to put Parents and
Masters upon due correction! This is an ordinance of God, which as he has
appointed, so he is pleased also to bless; You cannot take a speedier course to
ruin your Children, (...). Epictet. (...) Plutarch. (...). p. 9. (...).
Constit. Apost. l. 4. c. 10.
than not to correct them: If I do not punish my child, said Epictetus), he
will be stark naught. Impunity is peccandi illecebra: persons are hardened in
sin, and encouraged to sin by this: O that Indulgent Parents and Masters (all
are not so, some are severe enough) would think of these things! Their fond
over-loving makes them indeed not to love at all, (as Plutarch has expressed
it): Well, you have Authority in your hands, and so these two things, (
correption and correction) lie upon you; Pray do your duty in them: And as
Religion puts you upon them, so let Prudence regulate you in the managing of
them; (for I do not know any thing, wherein Prudence is more requisite than
that which is before me at present): Reprove and correct, but 1. Suit this to
the different ages of the persons, you have to do with. The Physician does not
give such strong Physic to a child, as to one that is grown up. 2. To the
different Tempers of them; some are mild, ingenuous, of a sweet and yielding
disposition; others are more rough, surly, dogged; gentle reproof and
correction is best for the first; for the others, rougher physic must be
applied. 3. To the nature of the offense, and the several Circumstances that go
along with it; the corrosive must be according to the quality of the sore. 4.
Keep within bounds; as there may be Indulgence in doing nothing, so there may
be cruelty, in doing too much. 5. Never do this without a cause; for then you
bring both your selves, and the duty also into contempt; and make it
insignificant at other times. 6. Qu^cquid exacerbato animo dixeris, punientis
est impetus, non charitas corrigentis. Aug. in comm. ad Galat.
Do nothing in Passion; Passionate reproofs and corrections never do good;
Physicians do not give their Potions scalding hot, only a little warm. The vid.
Plutarch. (...), etc. p. 10.
Heathen told his servant, He would have beaten him, but that he was in anger:
It Is bad to correct one fault with the commission of another: O it is your mild,
gentle, reproving and correcting, that soaks (like a mild rain), and does the
most good. 7. After this is done, return to your former kindness and serenity;
Do not keep up acerbity of spirit, for that is of bad consequence, either to
provoke or to discourage.
After bitter Pills let there be something to sweeten the mouth: It Is
Plutarch's similitude, Plut (...): etc. 1.9.
After the Nurse has made the Child cry, she falls a kissing of it. These are
some prudential hints, (and yet there is much of Religion in them too), which I
leave with you. So much for the exercise of your Authority, as it refers to
Religious Education.

Fourthly, Keep a watchfuleye, and astrict hand over those who are committed to
you: Here is great need of all possible care and vigilance; and you will find,
that all is little enough: How soon is the garden overgrown with weeds if the
keeper thereof does not tend it, and look to it every day; how soon is
Childhood and Youth tainted with sin, if it be not narrowly observed: The
Masters eye (in other things) does very much; and surely, it has its influence
in that, which I am treating of: your Instruction, Admonition, interposure of
Authority, will be ineffectual, (as to the attaining of your great end),
without this constant vigilance and inspection: How many Children and Servants
are irrecoverably lost for want of this, daily experience shows; and therefore
let me apply that of Solomon to you, Prove. 27.23. Be thou diligent to know the
state of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds. Now here I would commend two
or three things to you.

First, Be watchful in observing what the Natural Temper is, of those under
you: A wise man will be sure to satisfy himself in this, and to make the best
observations he can, in order to the finding out of this; for when this is
known he will the better be able to apply himself in advice, reproof,
correction, (or any other way); By the knowing of this he will the better also
be able to judge of the Inclinations, Propensions of those with whom he has to
do. How weakly and unsuccessfully do some manage their Education upon their not
understanding of this; (which certainly might with much ease be found out upon
a little observation). Satan will be sure to assault them with his Temptations,
according to their Natural Temper, (for he always takes the advantage of that),
and therefore if you do not know this, how will you be able to obviate and
countermine him in his Temptations?

Secondly, Be watchful in observing the first sproutings out, or buddings forth
of what is either good or evil. Are there some blossoms of what is good? O
encourage and cherish them, all that you can: Does the child sometimes go
aside, and begin to pray? Does he take the Bible, or some good Books into his
hands, and seem to desire to read them? Or does the Servant of riper years,
make some offers toward what is Religious? Pray, set in with this, and give
all encouragement to them. Far be it from any of you to check or discountenance
or hinder yours in what is good; this is to be an Elymas, Act. 13.10.
a child of the Devil, to act his part: If ever a man acts like a Devil, it is
when he sets himself against that which is good: To encourage, excite, animate,
any to wickedness; to discourage, hinder, check any, as to acts of Piety and
Godliness, this is to be a very Devil. When Moses would have had Pharaoh to let
Israel go, he (instead of doing this), gives this answer: Wherefore do ye let
the people from their works? get you unto your burdens. And the tale, etc. for
they be idle, therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God:
Let there be more work laid upon the men, that they may labor therein, Exodus
5.5.8, 9. O that we had not too many Masters and Parents of this spirit! Do
they see Servants and Children to begin to look Heavenward, and (especially) do
these desire a little time, some relaxation, in order to secret duties? how do
they snubbe and curb them, and frown upon them; and tell them, they are idle,
or Hypocritical, and they will turn melancholy; and twenty such replies are
made by them, to take them off from what is good. The Lord rebuke this spirit,
for it is a cursed spirit! I would not have these men's guilt upon me, for all
the world: What? to endeavor to blast the blossomings of Godliness? to put
back the throws of the New Birth? to give a check to the breathings of the Holy
Spirit? O it is a sin out of measure sinful. I warn you all of it, and I beseech
you, do you carry it quite otherwise: What ever is of God, or tends to God, let
it be helped on by you; let the buddings of Grace be furthered and ripened by
the beams of your influence: Do not discourage or despise the day of small
things in any of yours; Zach. 4.10. Math 12.20.
God does not do so, and will you do so? Do you observe, some putings forth of
what is good? cherish them. Do you observe some good? though it be but some
good; own it, and take notice of it. In Jeroboam's child, there was found some
good, 1 King. 14.13. and God observed it, so as to reward it. O, though
Children and Servants be not altogether what you desire, yet if there be some
good found in them, let that be taken notice of; you must so punish what is
evil, as also to observe what is good.

On the other hand, do ye see the sproutings out of that which is evil?
interpose presently for the prevention of their further growth, Do they begin
to take God's name in vain? to be careless in attending upon holy Duties? do
they nibble at a lie? does pride in apparel peep forth? set in with serious
counsel immediately, that these things may not grow upon them. It Is good to
suppress the very initials of sin; to kill the Viper or Serpent in the very
egg. The disease taken in time is easily cured, which by delays proves mortal:
the Fire at the first might be quenched with ease, which afterward will admit
of no stop; (O that we had not known this to be true!) The Vices and faults of
young ones, by timely applications might be prevented; but being let alone,
they take such a rooting in them, that their case is desperate. O that many
were not undone by Parents and Masters unfaithfulness, and invigilancy in this!
It Is good advice that which Hierome gave to Laeta, He bids her speedily to
reform whatever she should see amiss in her Daughter; for, Aegre reprehendas
quod sinis consuescere; difficulter eraditur quod rudes animi perbiberunt.

Thirdly, Watchfully observe what company they keep: If you do not look to
this, you do nothing: O be sure you keep (those under you) from bad society;
Plutarch (in his excellent Discourse upon the Education of Children), much
insists upon this, as a special direction to be practiced in order to good
Education. What more fatal, more dangerous than evil company: The Spartans
would rather suffer their City to be taken, than give their Children for
Hostages; for fear of their being corrupted in the Enemy's Camp. When Antipater
sent to them, demanding fifty Children for Hostages, they replied, They had
rather give him twice as many men at their ripest years. Charron of Wisdom, l.
3. p. 441.
How receptive is Youth of evil impressions from evil company; how soon are
they cast into the mould and likeness of those with whom they converse; how
quickly do they learn their ways, and so get a snare to their souls; (as it is
Prove. 22.25.) Let your Education be never so good at home, if you let yours
converse with idle, vain, dissolute, debaucht persons abroad, all your care and
pains will be lost. The meat that is fly-blown, taints presently; bad company
has this effect, upon them that are young. Would you be faithful to your own
Children, and to the Children of others (whom you have taken into your
Families, and in a manner adopted them for your own), take a special care of
the Company they keep: Bad Company may do more mischief in an hour, than you
can do good in a week; all that you have labored to imprint and fasten upon
them in a week will be obliterated and defaced, in one hours converse with vain
persons. We have a sort of men up and down in this Nation, who are the Devils
factors, and they do him eminent service; such I mean, who make it their
business to corrupt and debauch youth (by their infusing of cursed Principles
of Atheism, and Libertinism into them): Are not our Noblemen's and Gentlemen's
Houses, haunted with these vermin, these Setters for Hell? No wonder that so
many of their Sons prove as they do, ( Heroum filii Noxae, is now as true as
ever it was), when they have such admitted into their society, whose trade it
is to be drunk themselves, and to teach and egg on others to be drunk too: Do
not these Preachers of the Devil do that in a Cellar, over their Bottles, which
God's Ministers cannot undo again in the Pulpit with the Book of God? O, how
bitterly does Plutarch (in the forecited Treatise) inveigh against these Pests
and Plagues of Mankind! And are these, confined only to the Country, and to
great men's Houses? have not we these miscreants swarming even in this City? Are
not these (the worst of Spirits) amongst us, who would steal away our Children
from us, and carry them to Hell? These I say, who make it their trade to seduce
and corrupt Youth? How does it concern all of you, (O Parents and Masters), Nil
dictu foedum visuque haec limina taugat, Intra quae puer est. Juven. Sat. 14.
with the greatest care and vigilance to watch over all that belong to you,
least they should be drawn aside by these persons; or by any others, (who may
do the work as successfully, though perchance they do not do it so wickedly).

This for the First thing laid down in this Direction; wherein I have exhorted
you, to keep a watchful eye over those under your charge. Before I go off from
it, I will offer one thing to your serious consideration: It Is this, Whether
your Country Houses be so well consistent, with this so necessary duty of your
constant and vigilant inspection over Children and Servants? I dare not censure
you, for the keeping of them, or charge sin upon you for so doing; I know the
health of many, necessitates them to this; (and there may be other causes which
may very well be allowed of); But I desire you to consider, whether your
Families be not much prejudiced by this; by this means you are absent from them
a great part of your time, and where then is your constant watching over them?
Is not your flock endangered, by your (though but little) Non-residency? But I
will not press this too far; only I present this to such as are serious and
conscientious, as a thing worthy of Consideration: I shall only add this; where
this is done upon slighty grounds, (as merely the pleasure and delight, which a
Country House affords) there to divide the Family, and always to be absent from
some part of it, I think cannot well be justified; but where there are weighty
Reasons, and grounds for this, I submit to it; provided, that persons herein
concerned, go as far as ever they may, in the acting of their utmost care, for
the preventing of those inconvenien-which Servants left behind are exposed to,
upon their Misters absence from them. The Counsel that Hierome gave to Laeta,
was this, Si quando ad suburbanna pergis, domi filiam non relinquas. When thou
go into the Country, do not leave thy daughter at home behind thee. By a
little abscence, and the want of the Parents and Masters eye, Children and
Servants are much endangered.

I added further in the Direction, Keep a steady hand over those who are
committed to you: I am not for rigors and austerities, or any such things; but
I am for a prudent, strict Education: Remisness in Government is of very bad
consequence to Youth; A steady rein secures the rider; a steady Education
secures the child. Here also respect must be had to the different Tempers of
Children and Servants: Where the Horse is tender-mouth'd, a looser rein is
sufficient, but where he is resty* and not so easily checked, the rider cannot
hold him in too much; I need not apply it. This respect being had to the
difference of their Dispositions, doubtless a strict Education is the best: I
know, some (through the strength of corruption) are the worse for this, but
that is the fault of the person, not of the Education; and Bottles must be
closely stopped, though they are upon this the more apt to fly, when ever they
are opened. But I will not further enlarge upon this.

Fifthly, If you would give your Children Religious Education, see that you
breed them up to some Calling; A Calling (in the common notion of it), is a
civil thing; (we usually take it in contradistinction to the Ministry, that
Sacred Office); yet care about this, is a piece of Religious Education,
Religion being so much concerned in it. (And so it is, partly, because a
Calling is Gods institution, 1 Cor. 7.17.20. and partly, because it is a great
fence and antidote against sin and wickedness): Now therefore I say, in order
to this Education, train up your Children to some Calling: (I speak
indefinitely, for you your selves know what calling is most proper and
suitable, according to the particular Circumstances under which you and yours
do stand): If you be persons of that rank and quality, that you think it is
below you to bring up your Children to common and ordinary Trades, then there
are other employments which will better suit with your rank, for which they may
be fitted: If the Ministry, if the Law, and Physic, (in the ordinary Practice
of them), be not high enough for you; yet surely Learning is, and Magistracy
is, and some Public Employment is, (wherein they may eminently serve God and
their Country): You then who are such persons (as here is mentioned), pray
train up your Sons for these. Shall this be all the Education that you will
give them, to teach them, how to follow an Hawk, or a Dog, or how to demean
themselves in Company, or how to court a Lady, or how to manage an Estate, (or
some such thing as this is)? O that this was not the top, the utmost of the
Education, of too many of our Gentry! Is not this sad? what can be expected
from persons, thus educated? but only this, They may have an insight into
Games, make a fine leg, be very ready at a Complement, dress themselves very
exactly, tell a story of what they have seen at Paris, and be able just to cast
up an account with their Stewards: But as to any parts or endowments, to fit
them for service for God or their Country, alas, this is not to be looked for,
from them: you must not deny them to be Gentlemen, (unless you will venture the
hazard of a Duel), but when you have said that, you have said all. O you
Parents, whom God has advanced in the world with Titles of Honor, with great
Estates, be not offended with me, because I speak the Truth, (and that Truth
too, which is so necessary to be spoken, in order to your Conviction and
Reformation): Be pleased (I beseech you) to give better Education to your
Children. Do not content your selves with this, that you make your Sons to be
Gentlemen, that you convey a little better blood (than ordinary) into their
veins; Gratum est, quod patriae civem, populoque dedisti, Si facis ut Patriae
sit idoneus. -- J^van. Sat. 14.
that you leave them an estate to spend upon, (and may be to spend too in a
little time): but let this be your care, so to educate yours, that they may *
be useful and serviceable in their Generation, when you are laid in the dust;
that they be persons so accomplished, that they may be fit to be employed for
public Good; that they may not only be some body, as to their descent and
possessions, whilst (as to any real service or worth) they are but mere ciphers
and drones in the Commonwealth.

But it is time for me to come to you Citizens, (with whom my business mainly
lies); Do you breed up your Children to some Calling: Many of you God has
blessed with Estates, what then? will you not have your Children in a Calling?
Have you by God's blessing upon your diligence in your Callings got something
in the world, and must the Son (forsooth) be bred up as a Gentleman, (without a
Calling), that the Gentleman may spend, what the Tradesman has got? Without
this, will he not need all, that you can leave him, and is not this flat
poverty? (as Mr. Herbert expresses it). Poems, p. 4.
But higher than this; where is Religion in this Education? What hazards do you
expose your Children to, by leaving them in an idle, unimployed life? what a
mischievous thing is idleness! it is an inlet to all sin, it opens a gap to all
Temptations: It Is dangerous to your selves, and is it not so to your Children
also? The garment that is not used, is filled with moths, which eat it up; The
standing water gathers filth and mudd; The sitting bird is easily shot; What a
noisome thing would the Sea be, was it not preserved sweet and clean by
continual motion? How many bodies are ruined for want of exercise! These are
usual Similies to set forth the danger of idleness. Will you lay yours open to
this? Shall the Tempter have this advantage against them, to find them (as it
were) upon his ground? (as Tertullian speaking of one that was possessed by the
Devil, he being asked the reason, why he had so possessed that person, he
answered, Inveni in meo, I found him in my own ground; his meaning was, he
found him idle): O put them into Callings, that they may not live an idle life,
and so be exposed to the worst of Temptations. If Satan comes to them, Semper
inveniat eos occupatos; (which was Hierom's Antidote and prescription against
Temptations): A Calling will entitle them to God's protection, make way for
God's blessing, fit for service, and secure from Sin and Satan. He that has
nothing to do, is ready to do any thing. I find the Heathens making Conscience
of this: The Athenians had a Law, (which Nazianzene writing to Eudoxius, does
much commend), that all their Youth should be put to some Calling: And 'twas
one of Solon Legibus cavisse legitur, ut silius quem Parents nullam artem
docuissent, non cogeretur illos alere, senio con, fectos aut ad inopiam
redactos. Erasm:
Solon's Laws, That the Son should not be bound to nourish or relieve those
Parents in old age, (or, if they were reduced to poverty), who had not taught
him some Art or Calling, when he was young. And if you look into the Word, you
find there what was the practice of the Ancients; they used to breed up their
Children to some Calling; Adam had two Sons, the one, he bred up to be a keeper
of Sheep, the other to be a tiller of the ground, Genesis 4.2. Jacob bred up his
Sons under a painful employment, See Genesis 37.12. Laban would not have Rachel
her self to be idle, but she must look to her Father's sheep, Genesis 29.9. etc.
David himself was thus employed, 1 Samuel 16.11. Samuel trained up his Sons in
such a manner, that when he was old, they were fit to be made Judges over
Israel, 1 Samuel 8.1. Well, (that I may shut up this), be persuaded to have a
Calling in your eye for your Children: If they have parts for the Ministry, and
incline to that office, and some considerable discouragements do not intervene,
then devote them to God, and breed them up for the Ministry: God had given
Hannah a Child, and presently she thus devoted him to the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.28. It
was the usual saying, (and he acted accordingly), of my worthy, never to be
forgotten Friend, Mr. Whittacre, (now with God), Had I never so many Sons, they
should all be Ministers. O it is an high expression of your love to God, and
that which argues a great sense of the worth of Souls, when you can give up
your Children to the service of God, and the salvation of Souls, in this
excellent office. But if you do not do this, yet however put them into some
Calling; for my part I think that (in some respects) a Calling is better
without an Estate, than an Estate without a Calling.

Sixthly, Religious Education very much consists in the setting of a good and
holy example: (...), etc. vid. Plutarch. (...), etc. p. 14.
This Plutarch commends to Parents, in order to a good Education, above all the
other rules and directions which he had given: And surely this is a great
thing, in no case to be neglected. Parents and Masters must be exemplary,
patterns of Good to all under them: Good Instruction, good Admonition, good
Inspection will signify but little without a good Conversation: Holy Practices
must back and set on holy Counsels; Examples are very prevalent, and teach
best: Virtue or Vice are most effectually advanced in the world, by Example. O
the power and energy of this! especially upon such as are young, and upon those
who are in the state of Velocius and citius nos Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla
Domestica, magnis Cum subeant animo^ Autoribus, etc. Juven. Sat. 14.
inferiority and subjection. How apt are Children to imitate their Parents!
such as the Father is, such is the Child, (very often it is thus; I do not say
always, (for sometimes the Father is good, and the Child naught, or the Father
is naught, and the Child good) but commonly it is as I say); there is not a
greater likeness as to features than there is as to Manners; and whence is
this, but from the proneness that is in Children to imitate their Parents. And
(which is the misery of it), they are more most prone to imitate them in what
is evil, Dociles imitandis Turpibus ac pravis omnes sumus. Juven. ibid.
(through the prevalency of Natural Corruption). Proclivis est malorum
aemulatio, and quorum virtutes assequi nequeas, cito imitaris vitia. (Hieron.)
There is a great proclivity in persons, to imitate what is evil; and you will
soon follow their vices, whose graces you cannot so presently come up to. The
poor Children had heard their Fathers deride the Prophet, and they upon this
had learnt to call him Bald pate too, 2 King. 2.23. Just what Abraham had done
in his dissimulation, just the same his Son Isaac did, ( Genesis 26.7. compared
with Genesis 20.2). And further too, (the consideration of which should very much
work upon Parents to be very careful as to their Example), what Children learn
by imitation, when they are young, usually it sticks by them, and is very
hardly removed; Alexander in his youth had got the Gate of his Master Leonides,
and he could never leave it. All this holds true in Servants also; they will
tread in the steps, and follow the examples of their Governors, Prove. 29.12. If
a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked. Does it not therefore
highly concern Parents and Masters, to look to their carriage, in their
Families? that they set a good Example to all that are under them? This David's
eye was much upon, Psalm. 101.2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way,
O when will thou come unto me? I will walk within my House with a perfect
Heart. O that this might be the resolution of all Parents and Governors in this
City! Would you have yours not to sin? do not you sin your selves; The swearing
Father makes a swearing Child; the cursing Father makes a cursing Child; the
drunken Father makes a drunken Child; (and so in all cases). Look to your
selves, that you do nothing, that may be to yours, inductivum peccati. This was
Hieroms counsel to Loeta l (I cite that Epistle very often, Nihil in te and in
Patre suo videat, quod si fecerit peccet. Hieron.
because it is written wholly upon the Argument which I am upon): O 'twill be
matter of rejoicing to you, in case your Child should do evil, if you can say,
(as that Pope once did) Haec vitia me non commonstratore didicit: He never
learned this by my example. And so, Would you have them to be good, and to do
good? Be you so, and do you do so; than you may say what Gideon did to his
Soldiers, Judge. 7.17. Look on me and do likewise; as I do, so shall ye do. And
it will be so: If you pray, they will pray; if you be religious, they will be
religious; if you make Conscience of keeping the Sabbath, they will do the
same. O the advantage and benefit of good example! How are Children and
Servants undone by the want of it! How few do mind or regard it! How do the
most, first make over their sins, and then their estates; and before their
Children have from them, what is but imaginarily good, they have that from
them, (in their evil example), which is really evil, (as the Ante eorum
incipiunt nequitiam, quam substantiam possidere, etc. Ac antequam habent illa,
quae falso dicuntur hona, habent illa, quae vere probantur mala, Ad Eccles.
Cathol. l. 1. p. 346.
Author of the Epistle, ad Eccles. Cath. in Salvian expresses it).

O you my dear Friends in this City, let it be otherwise with you; order your
Conversations so, that they may be exemplary. You teach and instruct those
under you, and it is well; but do you set them a good Example? Do you not
unteach in your Life's, what you teach with your Tongues? Is not Practice (as
has been said), the most powerful and the most effectual way of teaching?
Precepts may teach, but examples lead and draw (according to the known saying);
You lose your Authority in good Counsel, Perdit authoritatem docendi cujus
sermo opere destraitur. Hier. ad Ocea.
if you do not second it with doing well your selves; Inferiors do not so much
mind what you say, as what you do; how shall it appear that you are in good
earnest, if you do not practice your selves, what you perswake others to? Will
not your bad example do more hurt than the best advice will do good? O so teach
and so live: The life of teaching, is the teaching of the Life; let your
actions be instructive, as well as your words; and let all your actions be so;
Vniversa sint vocalia, (as the Father speaks concerning the conversation of
Ministers): Teach at the Table by your Temperance, teach in the Shop by your
Honest dealing, teach in your closet by your performance of Secret duties, etc.
This is the way to win upon Relations. The Magistrates Laws are not so
prevalent as the Magistrates Life, (according to that of Claudian, -- Nec sic
inflectere sensus
Humanos edict a valent, quam vita regentis).


And so it is here, as to Parents and Masters of Families. You pray in your
Families, it is well, but do you set a good example after Prayer? It Is sad to
spoil good duties with a bad Conversation; Religious Orders in the House, and a
disorderly Conversation, do not well agree, (says one): O if you pray in your
Houses, and do not walk suitably in other things, you will bring Duty into
contempt, and harden the hearts of Children and Servants against it. Would you
feign have a good Family? He that lives a bad life can never expect a good
Family; his bad example will spoil all. Every thing in you is doubled; if you
do evil you sin twice, (for there is the sin of the act, and then the sin of bad
example); if you do well you do good twice, (for then there is the goodness of
the act, and the goodness of the example): O with what face will you be able to
reprove what is amiss in others, when your own guilt shall fly in your faces?
Let these things be thought of, and let the Duty (of setting a good example to
yours) be done by you.

Seventhly, To sum up all in one general Direction: Let it be your great design
and endeavor in Education, to promote and further the conversion and salvation
of them that belong to you: When the heart is set upon this, and all things are
carried on in subserviency to this, this is Religious Education. You have
Children, what is the great thing that you must pursue after in the educating of
them? it is this, that they may be Gods Children, as well as yours; that as they
are near to you, they may be near to God; that Gods Image may be where your
Image is; that where the First birth is, the Second birth may be also: In a
word, that they may have grace, This I say must be the main thing, which in
your Education you must desire and pursue. And so for Servants also. To move
you to mind this, and to lay out your selves with the greatest diligence and
ardency to attain this, very much might be spoken. O consider the misery of
your Children till they be converted. Are they born believers? Do they bring
grace with them into the world? Fiunt non nascuntur Christiant Hieron.
surely no! Are they not Children of wrath by Nature? Heirs of Hell? lying in
their blood? Ephesians. 2.3.
Will you not make it your first and principal endeavor to get them out of
this condition? (especially considering how accessory you have been to the
bringing of them into it). Have you conveyed sin and filth, and defilement to
them, and will you not do something, that you may convey Grace, Sanctification,
Renovation, to them? Have you done so much for their hurt, will you do nothing
for their good? you that know what the misery of the Natural state is, how can
you be quiet till you have got all yours out of it? You are to further the
Conversion of others; it is a blessed thing to be the Instrument of Coversion;
Dan. 12 3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars forever and
ever. Jam. 5.20. He which converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall
save a soul from death. Ezekiel. 18.32. wherefore turn others (so some read it),
and live ye. Grace is of a spreading, diffusive nature; ('it is set forth by
Light, Leaven, Oil, and such other resemblances, because of this). He that is
converted himself, he will be converting others: The Woman of Samaria being
wrought upon, she would feign bring in all the City to Christ, Joh. 4.28, 29.
The Lepers would not keep the good tidings of the Enemies flight to themselves,
but they must publish it, 2 King. 7.9. A gracious heart is for the Conversion
of All it comes near to; but in an especial manner, it is for the Conversion of
near and dear Relations: Andrew having found Christ, O he runs to his Brother
Peter, and tells him of it, Joh. 1.41. Cornelius calls together his Kinsmen and
his near Friends, Act. 10.24. The Apostle tells us, He that provides not for
his own, has denied the Faith, etc. 1 Timothy 5.8. What a monster in Religion he
is, that does not especially look after the souls of Relations, and endeavor
to bring them in to God! will not you then do this for your Children? they are
near to you, they are a part of your self, they are your self, (The Children
are but the Father in fractions, or, the Father multiplied): Shall they be near
to you, and afar off from God? Will you suffer any part of you to be in a state
of disunion from Christ? It Is (...). Arist. Polit. l. 1. c. 1
Natural to all Creatures to desire other things to be like to them; you are
gracious your selves, do you not desire, that all yours should be so too? you
have Grace, (...) Xenoph.
and you know the worth and excellency of it, you would not exchange it for the
world; Do you know so much of it, and will you let your Children be without it?
When Zacheus closed with Christ, Christ told him, This day Salvation is come to
thine House, Luke 19.9. Why so? why is it not to his Person, but to his House?
Ans. Not only because Christ and the Gospel bring Salvation to Families, where
they are entertained; but also because Zacheus now would make it his business,
to further the conversion, and so consequently the salvation of all in his
House. Christ is come, and Salvation is come to your selves; but are they come
to your Houses too? Are your Children, and Servants in a state of Grace, and so
consequently of Salvation? Can you better express your love to them, than by
helping on Grace in them? You are sollicitous about other things; alas, they
are all of them mere Trifles in comparison of this! The greatest estate is not
to be compared with the least Grace: If your Children may fear God here, and
enjoy God hereafter, they are happy; Though you can leave them but slender
portions, if you can leave them in a Covenant state, it is enough. How
unspeakably will this rejoice your souls at the great day, if you can take your
Children by the hand and say, Lord, here am I, Hebr. 2.13.
and the Children which thou have given me: Whereas, if Conversion-work be not
done, Will it not be a sad parting, (if that state will admit of sadness), when
the gracious Parent shall go to Heaven, and the graceless child shall go to
Hell? O dreadful parting indeed! I have told you, the souls of your Children
will be required at your hands; O if (through your neglect) they be found
unconverted, your Dt salute eorum, qui in domo tua sunt, sollicitus ac pervigil
existas quia pro omnibus tibi subject is rationem Domino reddes. August.
account will be very sad. Pray do not think that this Conversion-work is only
to be done by Ministers, it lies upon you as well as upon them, and in some
respects you may See this more fully made out in Dr. Gouge, Dom. Duties, Tract.
6. p. 546. Mr. Baxters Saint' everl. Rest, part. 3. p. 350. etc.
better do it than they; you better know your Childrens Temper, you can speak
more particularly to them, you have a greater share in their love, they have a
further dependence upon you, and so they will be the more attentive to what you
urge upon them. I know not how to get off from this Argument; Do not think me
tedious, when I am pleading with you, to secure and save the souls of your poor
Children. If you ask me, how this may be done? I answer, by that which has
been spoken to; Instruct them, admonish them, watch over them, win them by a
good Conversation, pray with them, pray for them; 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.
These are the ways which are proper to further their Conversion; and do but
make sure of that, and then question not their Salvation.

I have done with the opening of Religious Education, and have fully shown you
wherein it lies, or how it is to be managed. O that what I have written, may not
be in vain, to those Parents and Masters of Families to whom it is in special
directed. I will add but Three things further, by way of Direction, and so
dismiss this Particular.

1. Take the advantage of early Education; that you may educate well, begin
betimes. Do not put off, or delay Instruction, Admonition, (and whatever is
proper to Religious Education), but, as soon as ever you may, fall upon these;
As soon as the day of Reason dawns, be you at your work; It Is better here to be
much too soon, than a little too late. There are many inducements to this early
education: The younger they are with whom you have to do, the more pliable and
framable they are; Vdum and molle lutun es, etc. Pers. Sat. 2. (...), etc. p. 3.
is soft, it is capable of any impression, and therefore we immediately set the
seal upon it; The Tree in its first and tender growth, you may bow it, bend it,
which way you will; but when it is of some years growth, it is stubborn and
inflexible: so it is here; you may do with a child what you please, that Age is
tractable and flexible, receptive of any good impression; but if you let him
alone, till he can tell that he is fifteen, sixteen, seventeen years old, this
advantage is lost; now you will meet with a more resisting and obstinate Temper.

2. The younger they are, the more disengaged they are from vicious and sinful
Principles, and so you may do your work with more facility; (as it is easier
writing upon white Paper, than it is upon that which is blotted and blurred, and
written upon already; for all this must be scraped out and expunged, before you
can write): The child is Rasa Tabula, the youth is not. 3. The younger they
are, the more Recens Testa diu and saporem retinet, and odorem quo primum
imbuta est. Hieron. Natura tenacissimi sumus little, quae rudibus annis
percepimus, ut sapor, quo nova imbuas durat, nec Canarum colores, quibus,
simplex ille candor, etc. Quintil. lib 1. Instit. cap. 1. Adeo in teneris
consuescere mnitum est. Virg.
tenacious they will be, of what is imprinted upon them; The vessel retains the
savor of that with which it is seasoned at the first: you cannot easily fetch
out that color with which the wool is died at first. O if Parents would but
set upon Religious Education, whilst Children are young, they might (by the
blessing of God) fasten that upon them, which might abide with them for ever:
This is the way to Naturalize the ways of God to them, (...) Charondas in
ythag, Pragm. p. 207.
and so to make them more delightful, and also more durable. Things that were
set betimes, and have taken good rooting, are not so easily pulled up. 4. It Is
easier to prevent than to remove what is evil; (as with respect to Bodily
diseases, Prophylacticks are more easy than Therapeuticks). He that gains the
first possession, has great advantage: He that has the start, wins the race:
O that you would do whatever in you lies, to be before hand with the Devil; if
you do not mind your work, he will mind his; if you neglect your Education, he
will not neglect his Temptation; and if he first gets possession, it will be
very hard to cast him out. 5. What a blessed thing is it to see a child looking
Heaven-wards betimes, under an early work of Grace, sanctified from the womb,
(as John Baptist was); knowing the Scriptures betimes, (as Timothy did); It Is
said of Obadiah, Purvulae adhuc lingua bulbutiens, Christi Hallelujah
resonaret. Hier. ad Laeta:.19.
he feared God from his youth, 1 King. 18.12. The poor * little Children had
Hosanna in their mouths, Math. 21.15. (was not that better than the Childrens
Bald-pate? 2 King. 2.23.) How soon are young ones receptive of good or evil;
and how pleasing is it to God, when he sees persons betimes seasoned with
Grace! Under the Law, Lambs and Kids, and young Turtles were the Sacrifices
that he delighted in; when Parents dedicate their Children to God betimes, and
educate them so, that this dedication may be made good, this is highly
acceptable to the Lord. Shall not these things prevail with you, to put you
upon timely and early Education? Pray do as the Gardener does, as soon as ever
the Spring comes, he is digging, setting, sowing, planting, Inveterata
difficilius curantur. Senec. Elleborum frustra, cum jam cutis aegra tumebit
Poscentes vide as: venienti occurrite morbo. Pers. Sat 3.
he will by no means lose that season; O let that care and activeness be in
you, for your Children in reference to Spiritual things. Will it not wound and
pierce you to the very heart, when you shall see Relations, perverse,
obstinate, spurning at all counsels and reproofs? to consider, O time was, when
they were pliable, when they would have harkened and yielded to good advice,
when ye might have done with them what ye would; but now that time is over, now
your Children are incorrigible; and so by your not timely doing of your duty,
their souls are ruined. O Friends, it will come to this, if you do not take the
course here prescribed. The Horse that is not broken when he is young, will
never be mastered: The wildest Creatures taken in time, may be tamed and
cicurated, but upon the omission of that, what a fierceness and cruelty is
there fixed in them. I leave it to you to make the application; God grant you
may never know the Truth of it by experience, upon your delaying and deferring
of good Education.

Secondly, Back Religious Education, (in all the several parts of it) with
fervent Supplications. You may do your duty, but it is God that must give the
blessing; The best Education is fruitless and successless, if it be not
accompanied with this: The Gardener may set and plant, but there must be rain
from Heaven, and the warm influences of the Sun, or else there is no growth;
Ministers may preach in public, you may do much in private, but after all,
it is God that gives the increase and blessing. 1 Cor. 3.7.
You are upon greater disadvantages than the Gardener; for you sow and plant
upon very bad ground, upon a very bad stock, a very corrupt Nature. O, if God's
special Grace does not accompany and bless your endeavors, nothing but weeds
will grow upon this soil, nothing but luxuriant branches upon this stock. Often
therefore go to him in humble and hearty prayer; beseech him to set in with
your Education, to crown your endeavors with success, to make the means
effectual to the attaining of the end. Say, Lord, that my Child, my Servant may
be the better for all this; I instruct, Lord sanctify instruction; I exhort,
Lord do thou set Exhortation home upon the heart; Lord, I correct, let
Correction fetch out pride, etc. Let me ask you, Do you thus pray over your
Education? Do you pray over and for your Children? (as Abraham, Job, and others
used to do). Do you in secret pour out your Souls, your Sighs, your Tears, for
your poor Children? Do you sometimes, (nay often) plead their case at the
Throne of Grace? Lord, here is an Ishmael, O that he might live; Genesis 17.18.
here is a Child, O that Christ might be formed in him; Gal. 4.19.
here is a child of wrath, will thou make him an heir of Grace? shall my child
be thy child? thou have given him Feature, Limbs, Lineaments, Reason, Wit, will thou give him Grace too? it is not the things of the world, that I so much
design or desire for him, but it is Christ a Covenant Interest, a renewed Heart,
that I breathe after. I say, do you thus plead with God for your Children?
Surely if you do, God will hear. A child of Prayers and Tears shall not perish;
(as Ambrose comforted Monica concerning her Son Augustine). O Pray, pray thus
for them, this (...), (as Sophocles calls it), Sophocl. in Ajax.
this treasure, or this stock of Prayers, is the best portion, or estate that
you can leave them. And in special, when you are at praying-work, beg of God,
that holy Education may be blessed to them.

Thirdly, Complete your good Education at home, by your special care, when you
are to send them abroad, and to dispose of them in the world: Surely, such as
are Conscientious in the former, will be very careful in the latter. This is
like the laying of the Roof in a building; He that builds an House will not
only lay his foundation, and see that that be firm and strong, nor only carry
up the Superstructure; but he will also look to the laying of the roof, for
without this, the foundation it self will be endangered. That Is your case here;
I suppose, as to Education, you have laid the foundation well, and have built
well upon it, (whilst your Children were at home with you); Now that which
further lies upon you is the laying of the Roof; that you dispose well of them
abroad, which if you do not do, the foundation which you have laid, will be in
danger; and all that you have done with so much pains, will presently be undone
again. And therefore I earnestly commend this to Parents; not only to be
careful of theirs, whilst they are with them, and under their eye, but also to
be careful how they dispose of them upon their removal from them. Are Children
to to go to School? or to the University? or to a Trade? or are they to enter
upon a married state? First, beg direction of God, how and where to dispose of
them, (as Manoah did, Judge. 13.8. O my Lord, let the man of God, which thou
did send, come again unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the Child,
that shall be born). And then, steer your course by Religious Considerations;
As near as you can, place them with such as fear God; with such as will clench
the nail which you have driven in, (as one expresses it); with such who will
build upon that foundation which you have laid, and further that good work
which you have begun. This is a matter of great importance, and that which is
very necessary; we do too often see a good Education spoiled for want of care
in this; All that was gained at home, is lost abroad; all that was done by the
godly Parent, is undone by the careless Schoolmaster or Tutor, or Master, or
New Relation. Much here might be spoken, even from Scripture, (especially as to
that Branch of disposing of Children in Marriage, in which the Patriarchs, See
Genesis 24.3, 4. and 26.34, 35. and 27.46.
did exercise a singular care, as many places show us): but I will rather leave
further enlargements upon this, to your own thoughts. I have all along in this
tedious Discourse, directed my self to Parents and Masters; must nothing be
said to Children and Servants? to show them, how they are to carry it, with
respect to this Religious Education? Should I say something upon this, I am
sure it would not be unnecessary, and I hope it would not be unprofitable; But,
yet this being a Digression as to what I propounded at first, I shall pass it
by. The truth is, I have made so many Apologies already, that I am ashamed to
make more.

CHAP. IX. The Fourth Branch of the Exhortation urged.
THat which I have spent so much Time upon, is this, to excite such as are
Heads of Families, to be zealous for the advancing of Religion in their Houses:
In order to which I have urged three things upon them: 1. That they would (as
far as it is possible), fill up their Houses with such as fear God. 2ly. That
Holy Duties be in them daily duly performed. 3ly. That they would Religiously
educate those who are under their charge. There is yet one thing more to be
enforced, (viz.) That they would keep sin out of their Houses, and instead
thereof keep up piety, and holy walking with God. I might as much enlarge upon
this Head, as I have done upon any of the former: but I resolve to contract.
You then who have Houses, and are in Authority there, keep sin out of them;
shut the doors upon sin, bar it out, give it no admittance; let not sin dwell
where you dwell; it is the worst guest that you can harbor or give
entertainment to. You have excellent Promises made to them, who will not admit
of sin in their Houses. Job 22.23. If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall
be built up, [thou shall put iniquity far from thy Tabernacles;] Then shall
thou lay up Gold as the dust, etc. Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense, etc.
So Job 11.14. If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not
wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacle; Then shall thou lift up thy face without
spot.

Are you in your old Habitations? O remember how graciously they were
preserved, when the flames were just seizing upon them; The knife was laid to
the throat (as it were), and yet they were spared; You were saved from fire,
yet so as by fire, (if I may allude to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.15). that
is, with a great deal of danger and difficulty, (God knows). Now after such a
deliverance as this, shall sin be in your Houses? Ezra 9.13. Deuteronomy. 32.6.
will you thus requite the Lord for so eminent a mercy? Are your Habitations
continued to be Habitations of Sin? After such mercy to your selves, and such
judgment to your Neighbors, shall sin yet abide with you? God forbid! Are you
to enter into your New Habitations? let your great care be to keep sin out of
them. O that all the Inhabitants of London, might wisely consider of Gods
doings, (Psalm. 64.9.) that they would hear and fear, and do no more such
wickedness, (Deuteronomy. 13.11.) that all would set themselves against sin, with the
greatest dread and abhorrence of it. Give me leave to plead with you, for
surely God is pleading with you (to some purpose) about this very thing: After
such dreadful evils (as you have seen and felt) will you yet sin against God?
Has he so emptyed his quiver that he has no more judicial Arrows to shoot
against you? though he has punished you thus and thus, cannot he yet punish
you seven times more? (Levit. 26.21.) will you provoke the Lord afresh, and
force him to strike again? Will you lay in new fuel for another Fire? Is it
not enough to see the City once laid desolate? Have you sustained so much loss,
and caused God to do such terrible things against you, and yet shall Sin be
little in your eye? Has it cast you out of your Habitations, and will not you
cast it out of your Habitations? Can you build so strong, as to have your
Houses safe, if sin be in them? O, I beseech you take heed of this: Do not
carry your old sins into your new Houses; you will bring your goods to them again,
your Wares, your Selves, your Families bring what you please, but do not bring
your sins to them; your pride, your luxury, your covetousness, your extortion,
etc. If you would have your Habitations to be peaceable, safe, comfortable, let
not Sin be in them. Job. 5.24. Thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in
peace; (How shall this be brought about)? thou shall visit thy Habitation, and
shall not sin; (so it follows): O if you visit your Habitations and defile
them, God will visit your Habitations and consume them: If sin come in at one
door, judgment is ready to come in at another; Sin no more, least a worser
thing befall you; (...)
(there are mo^ser flames for your selves than those which lately laid your
Houses in ashes). Job 21.28. Where are the dwelling places of the wicked? Sin
will undermine all your Buildings, (...)
it is that Leprosy which will eat out the walls, the stone, the timber
thereof, and rot the foundation thereof. We read of Phocas, he built a very
strong wall about his Palace, and then he thought he was safe; but this voice
came from Heaven to him, Though thou buildest thy walls as high as Heaven, Sin
is within, and that will pluck it down. O do not flatter your selves with
foolish confidence, that now you build in Brick, and so you are not liable to
danger; for Brick and Timber are all alike to God; he can as easily fire the
one as the other; and if sin be in your Houses, they lie open to Gods judicial
hand; they are under that flying Roll, which Zachary speaks of, Zach. 5.2. etc.
Cuivis Patri Familias incumbit, ut operam det, quo puras habeat aedes. Scultet.
and this sooner or later will fall upon them. How therefore does it concern
you, the owners and masters of Houses, to keep sin out of them, to keep your
selves, and your Houses too, pure from Sin! And whereas there are some
particular and special sins, which you may be very liable to (through Satan's
temptations and the corruptions of your own hearts) when you enter upon your
New Houses, as Pride, Security, not eying of God, (and the like); be sure that
here you be very watchful. Deuteronomy. 8.11, 12, 13, 14 Beware that thou forget not
the Lord thy God, etc. Lest when thou have eaten and art full, [and have built
goodly Houses, and dwelt therein], etc. Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou
forget the Lord thy God.

And as you must not sin your selves, so you must not let others sin, (so far
as it lies in your power to prevent it). You have Children and Servants in your
Families, do not suffer them to sin, you must suffer for that sin which you may
hinder, and do not. You have a sad proof of this in Eli; 1 Samuel 3.13.
His Sons made them vile, and he restrained them not; O what dreadful judgments
did God inflict upon him for this! He did reprove his Sons, (as you may see, 1 Samuel 2.22, 23, etc.) but he did not do it with that sharpness, which the
hainousness of their crime deserved; and he did not interpose his Paternal
Authority for the restraining of them from sin, and therefore, (though he
himself was a good man), God threatened, he would do that, at which the ears of
every one that heard it, should tingle, 1 Samuel 3.11. (and what befell him and
his, you know very well). The Apostle dehorts Timothy from being a partaker of
other men's sins; 1 Timothy 5.22. This (...), lies in two things, either in the
committing of the same sins which others do, or else in bearing a part of their
guilt, in what they do: It Is the latter of these, that I meddle with; You that
are Parents and Masters take (...) heed how you involve your selves in the
guilt of your Childrens and Servants sins; may be, they lie, they curse, they
swear, they profane the Sabbath, keep bad company; Do you let them alone? Do
you not reprove them, Vitia aliorum si feras, facis tua.
correct them, restrain them? Alas, you sin in their sin; they commit the fact,
but the guilt of that lies upon you as well as upon them: Non-impedition is
interpretatively an allowance, or approbation of what they do, a consenting to
what they do; nay, it is a tacit command; (According to that known saying, Qui
non vetat, jubet; and according to that maxim in the Civil Law, See Tail. Duct:
Dub. B. 4. Chapter 1. Rule 2d. Ames. Cas. Cons. l. 5. c. 10.
In maleficio Ratihabitio mandato comparatur). This is agreed upon by all
Casuists, He that omits what is to be done for the preventing of sin, or does
that which is not to be done, upon which sin follows in another, this person is
accessory to the sin of others, and a partaker with them. Now think of this I
entreat you, and do not suffer those who are under your power, to sin against
God. Have you not sin enough upon your own account? have you any need to take
in the guilt of your Childrens and Servants sins too? where is your zeal for
God, if you may hinder sin, and yet do not? Do you love your Children, and yet
stand still, and look on, and let them damn their souls for ever? what Parent
would suffer his child to drink poison, or to run into the fire, and he
restrain him not? Are unquenchable flames nothing to you? Do you love your
selves, and yet contract and bring that guilt upon you, which will endanger you
for ever? Do you desire the prosperity of your Houses, your Families, and yet
connive at sin, and permit sin there? O let your souls be all on fire with an
holy zeal against sin! Do not suffer your nearest and dearest Relations to sin;
improve your Authority against sin; if you suffer it, you must suffer for it;
you may let it alone, but it will not let you alone; Omissions here are
Commissions.

Thus I would have you to keep sin out of your Houses; and instead thereof let
there be even, steady, fixed, Universal Holiness, kept up and practiced in
them; Holiness becomes God's House, (Psalm. 93.5). Ah, and it becomes your
Houses too: O that your Common Houses might be Holiness to the Lord, Zach.
14.21, 21. In that day shall there be upon the bells of the Horses, HOLINESS
UNTO THE LORD, and the pots in the Lords House shall be like the bowls before
the Altar. Yea every pot in Jerusalem, and in Judah, shall be Holiness unto the
Lord of Hosts, etc. That which I drive at is this, Let you and yours be Holy;
carry it in all things as a people consecrated to the Lord; Let Piety be lived
by your selves, and by all that belong to you: Let nothing be seen in your
Houses, but what becomes the Gospel, and savours of God and Religion. How are
Houses blessed, when a trade of Godliness is driven on in them! when Husbands
and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, all set themselves, as
with one shoulder to an Holy Course, it cannot go amiss with such Houses. But
no more of this.

CHAP. X. The last Branch of House-Dedication urged.
IN long Chases, Dogs are apt to lose the Scent; Reader, that thou may not
think in this long Discourse, we have lost our Matter and Method, let me tell
thee, where we are. The Dedication of the House, I made to consist in four
things; In a Religious Entrance upon it, by Prayer and Praise: In the solemn
commitment of it to God's Protection; In the setting up of Religion in it; In a
right carriage under Domestic mercies: Hitherto I have been speaking to the
Three first of these; and I have very largely insisted upon the Third Head,
because of its vastness and comprehensiveness, and also because of its special
reference to the Duty in hand, namely, House-Dedication. I come now to the
fourth and last thing to stir you up, to a right deportment and carriage under
Domestic mercies. I told you, that House here, is not to be limited to the
bare walls, to the external structure, but it is to be considered, as it
includes, those several blessings, mercies, comforts, accomodations, that are
enjoyed there; Now all these must be dedicated to God.

I need not tell yon, that a fixed Habitation, to have an House to dwell in, is
a great mercy: It Is that mercy which Christ himself had not, Math. 8.20. The
Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has
not where to lay his head; He that made the world, and was Lord of all things,
had not an House to be in; He that went to Heaven, Joh. 14.2, 3.
to prepare a place for us there, had not a place here on Earth prepared for
himself: It Is that mercy which the Apostles and Primitive Saints had not; for
they wandered about in sheep skins, and goat skins, being destitute, etc. Heb.
11.38. Even unto this present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked,
and are buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place, 1 Cor. 4.11. Blessed be
God, it is not thus with you; yon have your Houses to dwell in, (and some of
you very convenient, beautiful Houses too); Is not this mercy? I hope you do
not forget, how it was lately with you, when you had not an House to be in, (if
God had not in your straights graciously provided for you). And further, your
Houses are full of Mercy; God fills them with good things, (as it is Job 22.18).
they are richly furnished with all kinds of Mercies, Personal and Relative,
Spiritual and Temporal, etc. There Is good food to nourish you, good apparel to
cloth you, good beds to ease yon, good Relations in whom you take much
comfort: every day your Tables are spread; mercies are new upon you every
morning, Lam. 3.21. God loadeth you daily with his benefits, Psalm. 68.19. you
live under a constant succession of mercies.

My God, thou art all Love.
Not one poor minute escapes thy breast,
But brings a favor from above.
You have Mercies, not only ultra merita, Bernard.
but also supra vota; such as are not only undeserved, but undesired and
unexpected too. Your enjoyments are above what you could well have looked for;
As Jacob said to Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face, and lo, God has
showed me thy Seed also, Genesis 48.11. I appeal to many of you, when you first
came up to this City, did you then expect such Estates as God has now blessed
you with? your beginnings were very low, and now you are greatly advanced, (as
to wordly possessions). Shall not all now be dedicated to God? Shall not
Domestic mercies pass under this holy Dedication? If you ask me, How is this
to be done? Take a short account of that in three things.

1. Let God be owned and acknowledged in all your Mercies: Ascribe all to Him
as the proper Fountain from which all does flow; Thus David did, Psalm. 87.7.
All my springs are in thee. And so your All it is of God: The Wife that lies in
your bosom, (that is the desire of your eyes), Ezekiel. 24.16.
God gave her to you, Prove. 19.14. Houses and riches are the inheritance of
Fathers, and a prudent wife is from the Lord. The Children that are so dear to
you, are the gift of God, Psalm. 127.3. Lo, Children are an Heritage of the
Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward, Psalm. 128.2, 3, 4. The estate
you possess is not so much the fruit of your own industry, as of God's
blessing; Prove. 10.22. The blessing of the Lord, it makes rich. Instance in
what mercy you will, you may say of it, what Jacob said of his Children, this
is that which the Lord has graciously given to me, Genesis 33.5. O let your eye
be upon God in every comfort; it is the property of gracious persons to do this;
(as the bird has no sooner sipp'd a little water, but it looks upwards, and
falls a chirping). And here is one great difference betwixt a godly man, and a
wicked man; The latter looks no higher than Self, he ascribes all to Self, Dan.
4.30. Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the
Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? The former
ascribes all to God, and admires God in all. O the different language of David
from that of Nebuchadnezzar! 2 Samuel 7.18, 19. Who am I, O Lord God? and what is
my House that thou have brought me hitherto? etc. Show your selves therefore to
be gracious persons by this, let a mercy be no sooner received, but let God be
acknowledged and admired in it; whilst others look no further than the mere
Branch, do you look to the root of all. We lose our mercies, when we do not
duly own God, as the giver of them. Hos. 2.8, 9. She did not know that I gave
her corn and wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver, and her gold, which
they prepared for Baal. Therefore, will I return, and take away my corn in the
time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool, and
my flax, given to cover her nakedness. God would have the First Fruits from the
people of Israel, that in the giving of these, Munus Deo offerebaent Honorarium
de frugihus terrae, ut Auctorem eorum Deum esse testificarentur, and aliquam
gratitudinis significationem exhiherent. Gualtper in Marc. 12.33.
they might acknowledge God's right to the whole crop, and that it was of his
bounty, that they had all the rest: And it is observable, when this people had
made this acknowledgment, then it was lawful for them to take the comfort of
the residue: These First Fruits were either the (...), the First growth and
fruits of things, (of which you read, Levit. 19.23, 24.) or the (...), the
first fruits of every years increase; (of which, Levit. 23.10.) Now I say,
after the people of Israel, had in the payment of these acknowledged God, to be
the bestower of all, than it was lawful for them to take the comfort of the
residue. See Deuteronomy. 26.10, 11. and Levit. 19.23, 24, 25. That which I infer from
hence is this; first acknowledge God in your mercies, that he is the Donor of
them, and then you may take the sweetness of them; This is the order in which
God will have mercies enjoyed. O that we could keep up a constant sense of God
in the soul, as the Father and Fountain of all our Good; That we could say of
every mercy, this is that, which comes from above; the gracious hand of God is
in it.

2ly. Whatever mercies you enjoy, return them back again to God, improve them
for him, and devote them to his glory. This was the carriage of Hannah, no
sooner had God given her a child, but she gives it back again to him, 1 Samuel
1.28. And this we must do, as to all our Mercies; there must be returning,
where there is receiving, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render to the Lord, for
all his benefits toward me? It Is a sad thing, only to be upon the receiving
hand; an ingenuous spirit will not be guilty of this, it will return as well as
receive; and it will return what it receives: The Rivers come from the Sea, and
they all run into it again; the Vapors are exhaled from the earth, and they
fall upon it again; let that which bears Analogy and resemblance to this, be
done by you. Many mercies are received from God, O let all of them be returned
to God. Where can they be better than in the hands of him, who is the Father of
them? This is with Pharaohs daughter, to put the Child to be nursed by its own
mother, Exodus 2.8. And does any man lose by giving to God? does not this
procure him more of mercy? He that returns upon receiving, receives upon
returning. 1 Samuel 2.20. Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The Lord
give thee seed of this woman, for the loan which is lent to the Lord. And so it
fell out, for v. 21. The Lord visited Hannah, so that she conceived and bare
three Sons, and two Daughters. O how does mercy grow upon us, when we freely
and faithfully give back what we do receive!

But how may we return our mercies to God? I answer, Improve them for him, and
devote them to him. Are your Domestick-mercies and other mercies, improved for
God, and devoted to God? he does much for you, what do you do for him? what
service or glory has God, for health, daily bread, rest in the night,
preservation in the midst of so many dangers, Relative comforts, a plentiful
estate, good furniture, many accommodations (which others want)? Is so much
done for you, and is nothing done by you, in a way of real Gratitude? Are
mercies dedicated and devoted to God? Are they yielded up, set apart for his
use and service? (As it is prophesi'd, Isaiah 23.18. And her merchandise, and
her hire shall be Holiness to the Lord; it shall not be treasured nor laid up;
for her Merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat
sufficiently, and for durable clothing). This is but reasonable, that as they
are derived from him, they should be devoted to him; it is but that which he
expects, (for upon mercy he looks for Duty); it is but that which you stand
engaged to, for every Comfort is a Talent which you are entrusted with, in
order to service; and it is the best thankefulness; (a verbal wordy thanksgiving
is a poor thing, if it be not attended with something that is real in the
life); and will mercies be long continued, where they are not traded and
improved for God? What Landlord will let that Tenant hold his land that pays
him no rent, nor does him any service? The way to hold what you have, is to
improve what you have, for God and his glory. Serve him with your mercies, and
he will secure them to you; How kindly does he take it, when the sense of his
goodness, quickens a person to be doing for him! So it was with David, God had
done great things for him, and his; O he would build God an House for it; he
would some way or other testisie his resentment of God's favors to him. Thus
let mercies work upon you; you know they are very many, and very precious, O
dedicate them, devote them to God; where you have comfort, let God have glory;
Take heed, lest you again lose your Domestic mercies for want of this
Dedication.

3ly. And then thirdly, Be willing to resign up all to the will and good
pleasure of God: So as if he sees it good to continne them to you, you will be
thankeful; if he sees it good to remove them from you, you will submit, and say,
Let him do what seems him good. 2 Samuel 15.26.
Yet you have an House, and a comfortable Habitation, but if God will withdraw
this mercy, and turn you out of doors, you will quietly and patiently acquiesce
in his will; And so too, with respect to Relations, Estate, Liberty, all your
comforts, you resign them all to God; so enjoying them, as always to be willing
to part with them, (if it pleases him to call for them): This is a blessed
frame of spirit, and that which gives support and comfort under all the issues
and events of Providence. Many of you in this City are shortly to settle in
your new Houses, where you promise your selves much comfort, (I heartily wish
that all things may answer your expectation); but pray enter upon them with
this frame, of dedicating or resigning up all to God, to be improved for his
service, to be referred to his dispose. What if God should bring another dismal
Fire upon your Habitations? or, what if God some other way, should see it
necessary, to call in his blessings, are you willing to give up all to him? to
have all ordered by him? Can you lay your Comforts, Conveniences, Enjoyments
at his feet? (let me tell you, they are better placed, when they are laid at
God's feet, then when they are laid too near your own hearts): this is to carry
it aright under Domestic mercies, and to dedicate them to God: O be not
wanting in this Dedication; As you must commit your Houses to God's Protection,
so you must submit your Houses, (and all blessings belonging to them), to his
holy will, and wise dispose, and then you act like Christians indeed.

CHAP. XI. The Conclusion of the whole Discourse.
I Have brought you now just to the shore, where I will land you immediately. I
have (thorough God's gracious assistance) gone thorough what I propounded to
open and apply, viz. Holy Dedication, both Personal and Domestic: The nature
of both has been explained, and the Practice of both has been enforced by
those Arguments and Considerations which were proper to the matter in hand. And
so I have done, (though with much weakness), what was to be done on my part,
that which remains further to be done, is on your part. Shall this twofold
Dedication be acted by you? will you fall down before the light and evidence of
that Truth, which has been here set forth? and live in a blessed Conformity
and subjection to it? will you come up to what has been pressed upon you, in
your Personal and Relative Capacity? I say will you do this, or will you not?
Shall these poor Labors of mine have some fruit, or shall they be altogether
in vain? shall it fare with this inconsiderable piece, as it does with many
excellent Treatises? (whose price is asked, may be they are bought, nay, may be
they are perused; but in a little time they are thrown aside, never minded
more, nothing comes of them, and the Reader is but just where he was before). O
that this was not the entertainment which the worthy Labors of some did find
from too many! If mine (which are not worthy to be named with Theirs), do meet
with the same entertainment, it will much afflict me upon a double account;
first, that God will not use me as an instrument for the doing of that good
which I earnestly desire to do; Secondly, that means used prove ineffective and
successless, as to the promoting of the Salvation of your precious Souls. I
say, these two things will give me much trouble: but as for other things,
wherein credit, esteem, reputation are concerned, I hope I shall value them no
more than the dirt under my Feet. You may think of me, and say of me, and of
this poor Birth of mine, what you please; but know that the matter spoken to,
is of great weight and importance, and that which calls for your highest
respect, and most serious Consideration. Let but that be duly entertained by
you, and then for personal respects or disrespects, you have to do with one,
who is very indifferent and much unconcerned.

Dearly beloved Citizens, I renew my Advice to yon, and I beseech you in the
bowels of Christ, for God's sake, for your own souls sake,

1. That you will dedicate your persons to God, (as this Personal-Dedication
has been described). Hezekiah speaking to this very Argument, he presses it
upon the people of Israel by these Considerations; 2 Chronicles. 30.6. etc. Turn
again unto the Lord God, etc. and he will return to the remnant of you, that
are escaped out of the hand of the Kings of Assyria: And be not like your
Fathers, and like your Brethren, which trespassed against the Lord God of their
Fathers, who therefore gave them up to desolation, as ye see; Now therefore be
not stiff-necked as your Fathers were, but yield your selves unto the Lord,
etc. and serve the Lord your God, that the fierceness of his wrath, may turn
away from you. Are not these Considerations applicable to you in this City? you
are a remnant escaped out of terrible judgments; though Plague and Fire have
raged amongst you, yet you live; God has wrought dreadful desolations in your
City, as you see; what wrath yet remains, you cannot tell; how shall it be
prevented? O yield your selves to the Lord, dedicate your selves to him; that is
the way, to turn away the fierceness of Gods wrath. Providential dispensations
that are past, (some in the way of mercy, others in the way of judgment), the
present state and posture of things, (wherein further judgmensts seem to be
impendent over us), all call upon you for this. Does God use to begin in this
manner, and does he not go on, till he has atttained his end, one way or
another? How shall we put a stop to him in these judicial proceedings, but by
the yielding of our selves to him? Self-dedication, and House-dedication will
prevent City-desolation. O therefore let Self-love (if nothing else will
prevail) and love to this poor City, put you upon Self-dedication. And besides
this, pray consider what costly and glorious dedications, the great God has
brought about in Christ for you, Heb. 9.18. Whereupon neither was the first
Testament dedicated without blood. Heb. 10.20. By a new and living way, which
he has consecrated (or dedicated) for us, thorough the vail, that is to say,
his flesh. I meddle not with what is Controversial from this place, (for the
Romanists find here their Limbus Patrum); I only aim at this; here is costly
dedication and consecration for us; shall not we now dedicate and consecrate
our selves to God, in a way of thankfulness? (I touch upon these Motives here,
because I said nothing to them in the former Discourse, when I was urging the
duty upon you). O that I might prevail with some, (with many, if it be the
Lord's good pleasure), to dedicate themselves to God; so as to give up
themselves to Him, to surrender their wills to his Will, to resolve for God to
separate from a carnal course and a common conversation, to enter into Covenant
with God, and to devote themselves to his glory: What can lie nearer to the
heart of Christianity, than these things do?

2ly. When this is done, than I further entreat you, to dedicate your Houses to
God: Personal Dedication should not go without this, as this cannot be without
that. What a City should we have, if it might be made up of dedicated Houses!
Religion would put a greater beauty and glory upon it than all our new models
in building. O will you seriously weigh what has been presented to you? will
you make your Entrance into your Houses with Prayer and Praise? will you
solemnly commit them to Gods Almighty Protection? will you set up and advance,
Religion, Piety and Godliness in them? (and so consecrate them to God)? will
you devote all your Domestic mercies to God? I hope what has been said, may
have some good effect upon some of you, to bring you to the practicing of these
things. If you resolve upon them than I have but two things further to say to
you.

1. Do not only enter upon this House-Dedication, but renew it, as occasion and
special cases shall call for it. The Ancients would not have Temple-dedication
to be repeated or reiterated; Extat inter Canones Concilii Nicaeni conscriptos
a Gratiano, Canon qui pracipit, Ecclesias semel consecratas, non iterum
consecrari debere vid. Hosp. de Orig. Tem. fol. 701.
but surely House-dedication may be, and should be repeated; In three cases
especially: 1. Under some great turn or change of life. Suppose it to be
marriage; O then there is more of duty to be performed, more of comfort to be
enjoyed; then there is a greater need of God for the sanctifying and sweetening
of the relation; and therefore then it is good for persons, again solemnly and
explicitly to dedicate their House and their All to God. 2ly. After the
commission of some great sin, by which the House is much defiled. Dedication
some make to be nothing but Purification; to dedicate the House, it is to
purify the House; Surely after great pollutions by sin, the House should be
washed and purified again. Many Interpreters bring in the Dedication of the
Text, upon this; Absalom had greatly defiled David's House, upon his return
therefore he purified it, by a new dedication: Great pollutions call for new
dedications.
When Ahaz had defiled the Temple, Hezekiah consecrated it again, 2 Chronicles. 29.
The like was done by Judas Maccabeus after Antiochus his polluting of the
Temple. (as has been shown). Do you thus do, as to your private Houses; do not
suffer sin to lie upon them; of all filthiness let that be washed out; when
they have been defiled, let them be purified; How? By Fasting and Prayer.

3ly, After the receipt of some signal and eminent mercy: Some make that to be
the occasion of David's dedicating of his House (though they do not agree in
the specifying of the particular mercy). Gratias agit pro restitita valetudine
Bucer. Principale Argumentum bujus Psalmi videtur esse Gratiarum actio, pro
recuperata po^t infirmitatem salute. Munst. vid. Freidlib. Qu. 146. in Psalm.
Bucer and Munster make it to be, his recovery from some dangerous sickness:
The first and second verses in this thirty Psalm seem to point to that mercy. O
Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me: O Lord thou have
brought up my soul from the grave; thou have kept me alive, that I should not
go down to the pit. Magis credibile est, etc. in loc.
Calvin thinks this was rather his Restoration to his Kingdom, and his victory
over Absalom. Well, we cannot determine what the mercy was, but some great
mercy David had received, and upon this he does anew dedicate his House to God.
If it shall be thus with you at any time, do you do the same: Were you
preserved when so many Thousands fell by the late Plague? I think your Houses
then should have been anew devoted to God: Were they so miraculously kept in
the late fire? I think there should have been a fresh dedication of them. As
the dedication should be lasting for constant mercies, so it should be renewed
for new and signal mercies. This is the first thing.

Then secondly, I would say this to you, live under a due sense of this, that
your Houses are dedicated; and let this fill you with an holy awe, Dedicantur
Templa, ut eis invitetur adventus Angelorum; and Homines in eas intrantes,
etiam ab exili cogitatione se contineant. Alevin de Caen. Dom. ( citat. in
Gavant. These. Rit. p. 4. tit. 16. p. 293).
of committing, or permitting sin in them. Alcwin tells us, that the reason why
Churches were dedicated, was this, That men being in them, upon the
consideration of the Sacredness of the place, they might abstain from every
little vain thought. Surely if men did but revive this upon their thoughts,
that they and their Houses are dedicated, they would carry it better than they
do. O, shall I abuse the good Creatures of God, to luxury and excess, in that
House which is dedicated to God? shall I defraud, exact, deal dishonestly, in
that House which is dedicated to God? Shall I suffer Atheistical, irreligious
persons, or practices in that House, which is dedicated to God? I say, it would
be of great advantage to you, to live under a constant sense of this, that your
Houses are dedicated to the Lord.

I will add nothing more: Only I shall endeavor daily to second (what here I
have wrote) with the most ardent and earnest prayers, that God will be pleased
to bless that counsel which has been given; and to make it effectual toward
the attaining of that blessed end, for which it is intended; that these
endeavors of mine may not only be, a bare Testimony of my Affection to you,
(Dear Citizens), but that they may turn to a good account in the day of Jesus
Christ. O set upon your duty, and go as far in it as you can, and then whatever
events you may meet withal, as to your selves, your Relations, your Estates,
your Habitations, you will have comfort in God, in the Testimony of Conscience,
and in the tenure of the Covenant. Although my House be not so with God, yet he
has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; for
this is all my Salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow. 2 Samuel 23.5.

Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be Honor
and Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA corrigenda.
First Part.
PAge 19. for (...), make it (...) p. 42 lin. 4. enables for enable. p. 54.
maglignity for malignity. p. 99. Treasure for Treasury. p. 126. (...) for
(...). p. 143. lin. 3. read and so there passes a mutual obligation upon both.
p. 189. upon. which all is built.? dele?

Second Part.
Page: 18. in the margent, Et murorum Civitatis V. dele. p. 31. lin. 22. within
for with this City. p. 34. l. 25. an encouragement, dele an. p. 49. Gualt. in
Marc 12. read Gualtper. p. 69. l. 7. for u make an etc. p. 80. in the Citation
out of the Whole Duty of Man, at the words, was so careful, make an etc. p.
103. l. 17. to consider these few things, dele to consider. p. 112. l. 10. for
would not, make should not, or could not. p. 122. faco for fuco. p. 133. ut
meam amplius, for me amplius. p. 141. soluciti for soliciti. p. 167. Die
Scripturarum etc. for de etc. p. 168. (...) for (...) p. 191. l. 2.
Inconvenien- for Inconveniences, Suburbanna for Suburbana. abscence for
absence. p. 200. l. 4. more most prone, dele more. p. 211. lutun for lutum. p.
213. Purvulae for Parvulae.


