A PRESERVATIVE Against the CHANGE OF RELIGION: OR, A Just and true Idea of the
Roman Catholic Religion, opposed to the Flattering Portraictures made thereof,
and particularly to that of my Lord of Condom.

Translated out of the French Original, by CLAUDIUS GILBERT, Bachelor of
Divinity, and Minister of Belfast.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for Thomas Cockerill at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, 1683.

TO THE Worshipful Sovereign, AND THE BURGESSES OF THE Borough of Belfast, AND
To the Inhabitants thereof.
Christian Friends,
THis Learned Piece was lately brought to my Hand by a Signal Providence, in
its Native French Dress. By the renewed perusal thereof; I found it to be very
Substantial and Seasonable, which made me willing to render it more useful, by
Publishing it in our Vulgar Habit. It has been found to be of singular Service
in its Native Country, and may be so among us likewise, through God's Blessing.
Whilst so many Thousand of our Neighbors Houses are daily Fired, it is time for
All to awake. The multiplied Persecutions of the Protestants in France, so
causelessly renewed of late, should rowze up all Christians round about them.

In such Infectious Times, a Choice ANTIDOTE should be valued and desired of
All. Many Reasons might oblige me to recommend this Present to your View and
Improvement: The choice Ingredients thereof were very Skilfully Composed, and
Faithfully Dispensed by the Learned Author thereof. My Zealous Affections for
all Your Prosperous Welfare, chiefly in Spirituals, and for the Common Interest
of all Christians, have persuaded Me to this Publication, which I desire
cordially to commend to the Blessing of the Most High, as becomes the Function
and Relation of,

Your Faithfully Devoted in the Lord Jesus, for the best Service, CLAUDIUS
GILBERT.
Belfast, July 3. 1682.
THE CONTENTS OF THE ARTICLES Contained in this BOOK.
ARTICLE I. GEneral Reflections upon my Lord of Condom's Book, page 19 Article
II. A General Idea of both Religions, p. 36 Article III. That we agree not
about Fundamental Points, p. 45 Article IV. That the Worship forbidden of God,
cannot terminate in him, p. 53 Article V. Of the Invocation of the Saints, p.
56 Article VI. Of Images and Relics, p. 78 Article VII. Of Justification, and
Merit of Works, p. 87 Article VIII. Of Satisfactions, Indulgences, and
Purgatory, p. 101 Article IX. Of Sacraments in General, p. 115 Article X. Of
the Eucharist, of Real Presence, and of Transubstantiation, p. 120 Article XI.
Of the Adoration of the Host, p. 137 Article XII. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass,
p. 152 Article XIII. Of the Retranchment of the Cup, p. 165 Article XIV. Of
Holy Scripture, p. 176 Article XV. Of the Church, p. 182 Article XVI. Of the
Pope, and of his Authority, p. 189 Article XVII. Of the Points which Monsieur
de Condom has forgotten; Of the Worship in an Unknown Tongue; Of the Multitude
of Ceremonies; Of Masses without Communicants; Of forced Celibat, p. 198
A PRESERVATIVE Against the Change of Religion; OR, A just and true Idea of the
Catholic Roman Religion, opposed to the flattering Portraicture, which is made
thereof; and particularly to that of my Lord of Condom.
NEver were greater Efforts in France to effect what they call Conversions, and
never was the Truth attacked by so many Means, nor fought with so much Success.
We see nothing else every where, but Scandalous falls; therefore they that lay
to heart their Salvation* ought to be furnished beforehand against the
Contagion of this ill Air, that reigns at this day. It Is time to awake when the
house is burning; and one may say, that if the Zeal of our Reformed in France
be not kindled anew, they are next to the seeing the ruin of their whole
Party. The Book of my Lord of Condom is one of the Means which is used with
most Success, to delude those Spirits that are Wavering, and whereof the Piety
is ill fixed. These Gentlemen have so high an Opinion of that Work, and of what
it can do, that many Bishops cause it to be printed at their own Cost, and to
be distributed within their Diocese to all considerable Protestants there. The
Temptation is powerful, and the Method which my Lord of Condom has used is
dextrous, his Artifices are fine and delicate, and it is certain, that this
Book is able to Corrupt the hearts of those that are inclined toward the
World, and who are seeking out some Pretenses to quit a Religion so cruelly
attacked. It is then needful, that all the World should be taught, that every
one should keep his Guard well against such a Temptation. And as the Roman
Church labors to spread my Lord of Condom's Book through all Europe, by
causing it to be turned into all Languages, we must also disperse through them
all the Answers opposed thereto. And when the Public shall have found one,
best liked, every Particular Person should furnish himself with a Copy thereof,
that may be still at hand, and still read over, to be continually upheld
against such a Temptation, as is never at an end, but is uncessantly still
renewing.

Ever since that Loss, which the Roman Church had in the beginning of the last
Age of so many Millions of Souls, which did then separate from her Communion;
no Endeavors have been omitted to repair that Breach and no Means but have
been employed to bring back into her Bosom such as have gone away from it. We
must needs bear them this Witness, that never so much Ardor and Zeal was seen
in any Enterprise; never was a more serious and important Affair undertaken,
than this design they have laid to hinder the duration and progress of That,
which they call Schism and Heresy. It is indeed a design which cannot be
blamed. If these Gentlemen are well persuaded, that the Religion, which we have
abandoned, is the only One, that may conduct unto Salvation: We may not wonder,
if they labor to bring us back thereto, provided that they endeavor it in a
good way, honestly, and by a Principle of Charity and true Zeal. But as it
often happens, that in such a case Men prove the Cullies of their own hearts,
and that Self-love, the Interest of the Flesh, and that of the World, do delude
them; all should well examine themselves in that regard, and not take it ill,
that they that are concerned therein be willing to have their part in such an
Examination.

We should not imagine, that all that which is called Zeal for Religion, and a
design to convert Heretics, should necessarily flow from a good Principle. On
the contrary, God, for the Trial of the Faith of his Elect, has almost always
permitted, that false Religions have had more Zeal for the destruction of the
True, than the True Religion for the ruin of the Falser. When Christian
Religion became predominant, She did not do that for the ruin of Paganism,
which had been done against her during the Reign of Pagan Emperors. It Is true,
that true Zeal is always accompanied with Moderation, and false Zeal with
Violence. So that in the Eyes of Flesh, the true faithful Ones do appear
Lukewarm; and the Euemies of Truth do pass for true Zealots. When Human
Passions do mingle themselves in those Sentiments of Hearts called Religion,
there is no Excess that they are not capable of. In respect of other Objects,
in the midst of their greatest Transports they do reproach themselves secretly,
which stops their fury, and steal away some part of their Impetuousness; and
chiefly when they are allayed, and consider in cold blood their Conduct past,
they do often accuse their own selves. But contrarily here, Passions do
solicit and animate themselves, they make Merit of their Violence, and
believe that God and his Church are concerned in their Justification; because
they imagine, that they have labored for the Truth. This is one of the Reasons
why often Men believe, that they see but little Zeal in the true Church, while
there is so much Fire in the Conduct of Them, that endeavor her Ruin.

But we must needs grant, that there is something more. The Moderation of the
Faithful does not always proceed from that Sweet Spirit, which is the very
Genius of the Gospel: It comes often from the coldness of their Zeal; God
permits it to oblige us to adore in Silence the Mysteries of his Conduct, and
to confound at the same time the Pride of Man's heart. We have much less Love
for the Truth, than the World and the Devil have of Hatred against it. And
whilst we act in the Establishment of Religion by a Principle, of Self-love, we
have quite another kind of Ardor than when we have no other prospect than that
of the Glory of God. The Church does easily relent; the fervor of the Zeal,
which seeks the Conversion of Others, does not last long. It is so hard a thing
to seek for Salvation, that Men imagine they do enough to labor for their own,
without charging themselves with the Care of Others. And we easily fall into
those unhappy Thoughts, That God is good enough to do his own Business; that he
will have a care of his own Interest, and that he will not want Means to
Convert them whom he has destined to eternal Salvation. Whereas false Zeal
does hold it self up, does persevere, and finds it self often more capable to
endure greater Labors, than the true Devotion.

It is a thing that confounds us: I grant it is one of the great Temptations
which good Souls are to overcome. But truly, it is a Thing whereof it is
impossible to deny the Truth, if we have any thing of good Faith or Probity.
Our Lord Jesus Christ himself does teach us, that the Pharisees and the false
Doctors of Judaism did compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte; and all their
labors did conclude to render Him a Son of Hell, likes themselves. All those
things do make me conclude, That the Zeal to make Conversions, is not always a
certain Sign that the Truth is in that Party. It is a favorable Prejudice; but
after all it is but a Prejudice* and we should not suffer our selves to be
conducted by those kinds of Lights, which are often deceitful. We must be
permitted to examine, If the Zeal of Religion, which causes so many Emotions,
be a Divine fire, or a Passion merely Humane. Now we cannot better know the
Nature of that Zeal* which seeks for Conversions, than by the Means which it
employs: for it is an indubitable Principle, That true Piety never does any ill,
that good may come thereof. She seeks the Salvation of Men; but she seeks it by
ways that are just, lawful, and rational.

I. First, It is certain that true Zeal does never employ for Conversion the
Sword, Fire, Violence and Torments. Those are ill Commentators of the Words of
the Lord Jesus Christ, that make him to say, Compel them to come in, that is to
say, Constrain them by Violence, and by the fear of Death, to enter into the
Church, which is the Wedding Room. The Lord cannot suffer in that Wedding Room,
any but such as are clad with the Wedding Garment, and which have a true and
solid Piety: But those People which are brought into the Church by Fear and
Threatenings, are Hypocrites and Impious Persons, which disrobe their Impiety to
the sight of Men; Rebels, which feign their Submission, meditate a Revolt, and
which always bear the heart of an Enemy. The Church has suffered many
Persecutions, but never did execute any upon others. She overcame Paganism, as
Paganism had overcome her before; but she never did retaliate it. She did not
use the Authority of Constantine and Theodosius, to defile the Temples of the
False gods with the Blood of their Worshippers, as the Pagans had employed the
Swords of Nero's, Maximius, Decius and Diocletian's to bathe the Earth with the
Blood of Christians. One must be very ignorant in the History of the Church,
not to know, that in all the Contests She had with the Arrians, Eutychians, and
other Heretics, She used only Exhortations, Reasons, Councils, and other such
like Arms. Contrarily, the Heretics have carried on their Fury against the
living Temples of the Holy Ghost; they have employed Sword and Fire, and
established themselves, by the help of the Horror and of the fear of Death,
which their Arms did cast into Men's Souls. I know not if there be, at this day,
in the Church of Rome any honest People, that do not behold those horrid
Tragedies which have shed so much Blood in the Ages past; but as so many
Accesses of Fury and a phrentick Fever, during which, Christianity armed
against it self, made it a pleasure and a duty to shed its own Blood, and
thrust the cruel Sword into its own Bowels. If men's Souls be to be brought to
Christ Jesus by Fear, it must be by the fear of Hell, and by the dread of Gods
Judgments; Knowing, says St. Paul, the Terror of the Lord we persuade men to
the Faith, 2 Cor. 5.

II. Hope is also one of the Ways whereby the Souls of Men are more strongly
drawn. But to bring Men to Jesus Christ, no other Hope is to be given them, but
that which the Lord himself gives them. One must promise them exactly what he
has himself promised them, that is, Eternal life; these are the Rewards of
Heaven. Whosoever shall forsake Father, Mother, Children, Wife, goods or house,
he shall receive an hundred fold in eternal life. I find not that he has
presented any other Objects to Men to persuade them to come to him. All the
World agrees, that nothing is more base, than to betray the Truth and ones own
Conscience for Interest. Buy the Truth, and sell it not, says the Wise man. I
speak not only of those Truths which are of the highest import, and whereon
depends Salvation; I speak of Truth in general. It Is one of the richest
Presents of Heaven, seeing it is to the Soul what Light is to the World; and to
renounce it for a base Interest, it is to despise God that gave it us. It is to
prefer willingly Darkness to Light; it is to merit, that God should cast us into
a Reprobate sense, and deprive us of all knowledge of his Truth. Do what men
can, they cannot but esteem slightly such as change their Religion for carnal
Considerations, for a Charge, for a Pension, and for such like Preferments.
It Is then clear, that it is not honest to solicit men to commit base and
criminal Actions, for which they are afterward slighted. Father Mainbourg does
rationally commend Paul the Third, who forbad Cardinal Contarin to give or
promise any thing to the Protestant Divines, not willing that it might be said,
that he had corrupted them with Money, to bring them by so base a way to the
Belief of the Church, which employs Means much more noble to convert the
Strayers. It Is hard to believe, that this Author has not in view some Persons
nearer him, than Paul the Third, than Cardinal Contarin, and the Lutherans of
the time past. The Roman Catholic in France, the Protestant in Holland and in
England should never say, Your Religion is an invincible Obstacle to your
Fortune; nothing will be done for you whilst you are of that Religion. Methinks
the Devil has rendered this Conduct very suspicious, and Men should think it
their point of Honor not to imitate him, and not to say as he, I will give
thee the Kingdoms of the world, and their glory.

III. It seems also to me, that its but an ill Character in the Zeal that seeks
Conversions, to be so indifferent in the Choice of People. It Is true that the
Net of the Gospel Preaching gathers on the Sea-shoar all that is found within
its compass, Dirt, Stones and Pearls; but the Fisherman makes his Choice* he
takes the Pearls, and throws the rest into the Water. The true Church does
enclose indeed enough of Profane and ill Christians, whereof she cannot get
rid, because they are born in her bosom. She has no need to fortify the ill
Party, and increase it by receiving the Impious, the Libertines and worldly
Professors, which do cast themselves into her Arms, only to recover the
Reputation that they have lost, and upon design to procure themselves some
Protectors against the Party, which they have dishonored by their Crimes. The
Spirit that should conduct men to Jesus Christ, is a Spirit of Purity and of
Renunciation to the World; for the Lord says, If any will follow me, he must
deny himself. I think therefore, that the true Church should never open her
Arms unto such, who have always distinguished themselves by a life full of
Disorders, unless she may have good assurances that they will renounce Crime as
well as Error. And to be assured of that, there must be a long Trial. I know
well what is said and thought about it. It Is true, say they, that by these
sorts of Conversions we augment not the Number of the Saints, but we lessen
that of the Heretics: In diminishing their Number, they may happily be brought
one day to be ashamed of their Singularity. Their Multitude helps to make them
Heady; they persuade themselves to be in the right, because they see themselves
to be many, who report it so one to another. These ill Converts, say they
again, have Families to be saved, they have Children that may be made good
Christians; the Stock is naught, but the Branches may be sanctified. Whoever
Reasons after this manner, be he Catholic Roman or Protestant, assuredly
reasons but badly. Although these kinds of Reasoning were not altogether
delusions, yet must it needs be granted, that they are Maxims of a Politic
purely human; for indeed, the Spirit of Christianism does not commit a present
Evil for the prospect of a future Good. He abhors Vice and Crime; he would not
be beholding to it for the Salvation of many Souls, though it could be the very
occasion of saving some. The Church casts all those dead Carcasses on the
Shore, far enough from receiving them into her bosom, under whatsoever pretense.

IV. In fine, Sincerity and good Faith are, in my Judgment, an inseparable
quality of true Zeal. The Prince of Darkness often transforms himself into an
Angel of Light; but never does an Angel of Light take the form of the Prince of
Darkness. Falsehood often abuses the Truth to support it self; but Truth can
never make any good use of Falsehood. This is to borrow the Devils Weapons for
to fight for Jesus Christ, and that cannot have any good success; for there is
nothing common between Christ and Belial. It Is true, that pious Frauds are no
New things: Of a long time have Miracles been fained, Oracles supposed, and
Books published under the Names of Authors, who were known to have some weight
with those whom they had a design to convert. It Is that which has given birth
to the Oracles of the Sybils, to the Books of Mercurius Trismegistus, and to
the false Visions of the Pastor, and to so many other Deceits, contrived with a
good Intention. But this Conduct, though it be ancient* is not therefore become
better by growing old: Never will Deceit prescribe against Probity and good
Faith. It will always be true, That a Zeal which deceives Men to convert them,
is a Zeal that is false* ignorant, and misunderstood.

There is hardly any kind of Deceit which is not practiced to fortify ones own
Party, and to diminish the opposite Party: But here is that which is most
ordinarily used, and with less Secrecy. It Is that on one side, they paint out
the Religion, which they would combat, with colors most black and hideous;
they render it monstrous, that it may cause horror; they dissemble what Good
it has, they exaggerate what it has of Evil; they give a Criminal Character
to all its Expressions; they make Heresies of all Tenets; they ascribe to it
what it does not hold; they disguise, with the hue of Infidelity, what it
holds. On the other part, they fairly color the Religion, whereof they
undertake the defense; they draw the Curtain on that, which might scandalize
it; they give an air of Innocence to their most criminal Practices; they cover
with fair Names the foulest Things. It Is a kind of discredit whereof each Party
accuses the opposite Party: the Roman Catholic accuses the Protestant, and the
Protestant accuses the Roman Catholic. It Is a Process that one cannot decide,
but by examining to the bottom, to see who is in the wrong, and who it is that
imputes or imputes not. As I do not here pretend to be uninterest'd, being a
declared Protestant, I make no difficulty to pronounce, that our Side is alone
in the good Faith; yet will I not be believed upon my Word: But the thing is so
clear, and so well known of all the World, that I could suppose it, without
taking the pains to prove it. They have black'd Us with the most horrid
Imputations, and it is a case of so great notoriousness, that I know not whether
it be possible to deny it. There is no Heresy whereof they would not render us
guilty: They have said, that with Arrius we deny the Eternity of the Son and
his Deity; that with Nestorius we establish two Persons in Jesus Christ; that
with Eutyches we confound his two Natures. They are two opposite Heresies, and
which cannot subsist together. It matters not, all is well enough, if we be but
calumniated. Has not Bellarmine made a Preface to his Book de Christo,
expressly to prove, that we are Nestorians, Sabellians, Arrians and Eutychians?

Has not Gregory of Valencia made a thick Book, de Unitate and Trinitate, Cap.
8, and 9.
against the Lutherans and the Calvinists? asserting, that the Lutherans are
truly of the Opinion of Servetus, and that the Calvinists deny the Divinity of
Jesus Christ? And does not Father Cresset say but newly, That we Part 1. Tr. 1.
p. 4.
hate the Virgin, because we hate her Son? In regard of Free Will, they would
have Us to be in the Party of the Manichees, who said, That Men were by their
Nature determined to good or to evil, and that they are not carried thereto by
Choice and by Will. In regard of Good Works, they attribute to Us the horrid
Opinion of the Gnostics, that said, That the Spirital man may plunge himself
into the most abominable Crimes of the Flesh, without fear of the least
Pollution, or any Condemnation. They say, That we deny the necessity of Good
Works to Salvation; that we make a vile Sinner, after a small act of Faith and
Repentance, as just as the Holy Virgin; that we make Men to be Just by the
Righteousness of another, as if we should make a black Stuff to be white with
the whiteness of another Stuff; that we do cloth our Just man with an imputed
Justice, under which are hid the most horrid moral Impurities; that we lead men
to Salvation by the way of Crimes, Murders, and Adulteries; that we render the
effects of Predestination infallible, like the Mahumetans; so that a Man
Predestinate living like a Devil, cannot fail to become happy like an Angel.
That we would have an Adulterer, a Fornicator, yea a Man guilty of the Vilest
disorders, may be as assured of his Salvation as Jesus Christ; that our Lord
Jesus Christ despaired that he was damned; that we are Enemies to the Saints.
In fine, Who could number all the Calumnies wherewith they load us, to render
us odious? That is but a small part thereof. And the most terrible of all, it is
that though we justify our selves never so often, and tell them we abhor all
those Heresies, that we detest them, that we combat them; though we explain our
selves never so much, and declare that the Words so abused are taken in a
Counter-sense; though we cry out against the Calumny, protest our Innocence,
formally reject all the Consequences imputed to us; that comes to nothing, and
they still return to the like again. We must needs be Heretics at any rate,
and they repeat against Us this day all those Calamities, with the same air of
Confidence as if we had nothing to answer thereto, or had never answered the
same. We should more easily bear with those Excesses, if that we had none to
complain of, but those small Declaimers, who do harangue on Shop-boards, and
who preach in the Markets, from the Steps of a Cross. If those Outrages were
done Us, but by those little Scribes, who are void of Science, Name, Spirit,
Honor and Conscience, whereof the World is full. But it is impossible not to
lose our Patience, when we see Authors that are grave and able, learned and
famous, compose great Volumes* whereof all the Pages are soiled with those
black Slanders, whereto we have answered an hundred times. When we cannot blame
Ignorance and Insufficiency, we cannot but complain of unsincere dealings, and
say, that such a Course is not honest. It Is an inseparable Character of the
false Church; Heretics have always dealt thus with the Orthodox. They have
still calumniated them, and have disfigured by their Imputations the purest and
holiest Doctrines; we need but to have read a few of the Holy Fathers to be
assured thereof. But the true Church was always most tender of Sincerity; She
would never slander her Adversaries, and would never disjoyn Zeal from fair
dealing.

Here is another kind of foul dealing, that appears less Criminal; it is that
which flatters Religion, whereof she draws the Picture; which dissembles her
deformities and gives an air of Innocence and Purity to all. This Artifice
seems to be innocent, every one should be permitted to make himself known by
his best sorts, and show its fairest side. And this is a Method, that has been
extremely used for some years of late for to defend the Roman Church. There are
two ways of defending her; one is, in rejecting the Manage of Policy, in using
the most ordinary Vid. Bellarmine de Sanctorum beat. l. 1. cap. 18. Enchirid.
c. 12. prop. 4.
and common Expressions: In saying, for Example, That part of Religious Worship
is due to Saints, that they may be invoked as Intercessours with God, as they
to whom God has given under himself the Government of the World; that Temples
may be built, Fasts appointed, celebrate the Sacrifice of the Mass to their
Honor, make Vows to them, and yield to them part of all that which may be
called Religion; So speaks Vasquez; that Vasquez in 3. part. Thom. Tom. 1.
disp. 97.
the Sense of the Catholic Church, confirmed by Tradition and perpetual Use,
is, that there is due to Saints a Sacred Adoration. In saying, that one may ask
of them whatever is asked of God, Health, Protection, Remission of Sins,
Salvation, Grace and Glory: So that we pray not to them, as to the first
Authors of these Graces. In saying, that one must reverence, adore and salute
the Images Concilium Nicen. 2. Can. 2. in Epist. ad Constable. and Iren.
of the most holy Virgin Mother of God, of the glorious Angels, and of all the
Saints; and that all those that are not of that mind ought to be Anathematized.
In saying, That the Sacrifice of the Mass is a true Sacrifice, and so called
properly; that it is not a simple Commemoration Council. Trident. Sess. 22. Can.
1. and 3.
of the Sacrifice of the Cross, but a Propitiatory Sacrifice, which is offered
for the Pains, for the Satisfactions, and for other Necessities of the
Faithful. In thundering out which Anathema's against all that would not receive
those Propositions and all others in the very Sense of the Church.

There is a second Manner of defending the Opinions and Practices of the Roman
Church, that is, in sweetning them: In saying, for Example, That the Worship of
Saints is Nothing, at the bottom; that Invocations addressed to them are not of
another Natnre, but such as are made to living Saints, when we recommend our
selves to their Prayers: That the Scandal taken from the Worship of Images is a
Scandal ill taken; that at the bottom, they are set in the Church but for the
use of Commemoration; that human Satisfactions are no prejudice to those of
Jesus Christ; because they serve only to apply the Satisfaction of Jesus
Christ. The first Method was in this regard in the way of very fair dealing;
but at this day things are very much altered; the first Method has not been
found significant, therefore the second is now taken up; yet have they not
universally renounced the former. Italy, Spain, and most part of Germany, and
even of France, either know not or relish not these Sweetnings.

Those that are grown old in the old Opinions, do also respect the ancient
Expressions as Consecrated, and find it not difficult to use the Politicians as
Prevaricators. I wish they would observe these considerable Words of Father
Mainbourg in his History of Lutheranism: These pretended Expositions of the
Faith which suppress or dissemble, or express in ambiguous Terms only, or too
much sweetened, a part of the Doctrine of the Church, do satisfy neither the
one nor the other, which do equally complain, that Men do mince it in an affair
so delicate as Faith is, where Men cannot fail in one point, but that they must
fail in all. We understand well what he would say, and whom he aims at; it is
neither at Cardinal Contaren, nor at the Authors of ancient Enoticks; it is to
those that do Bias it at this day* in their Expositions of the Catholic
Faith. Father Mainbourg writes like an honest Man; he is most able, and has
the right Sense of things. There are then able and honest Men in the Roman
Church, who disapprove these ways of Sweetning, and dare to say and to print
it: But there are others that think to prosper better in the Conversion of
those whom they call Heretics, in stripping the Roman Church of all those
terrible Images wherewith others have clothed it. Happily they may be of the
same Apprehension with the others, but they judge it good to express themselves
otherwise, to bring nearer again those Spirits, which they had scared by their
hard Manners. Yet would I believe, that among those moderate Persons, there are
many that do deal fairly, that would willingly have things as they express
them; who, if they were believed, would reduce the Worship of Images to a
little matter, and would accommodate themselves in diverse respects to the
Weakness of those, whom they consider as separate from the Church. I believe
the Author of the Saving Advises of the Virgin Mary to her indiscreet Devotes,
is of this Order; and I doubt not but he has many Approbators. But though he
had infinitely more, that alters nothing at the bottom. The Roman Church
remains still the same in her Worship, in her Canons, and in her Dogma's.

Among all those Works, which have for their aim the Sweetning of things, and
to lead Christians into a Spirit of Reconciliation, there is none more famous
than the little Book of my Lord of Condom, that has for Title, Exposition of
the Catholic Doctrine about Matters of Controversy. There was never any Work,
whereof the Author and his Party have made more boast, especially since it is
fortified with the Approbations of Rome. They look thereon, as on the triumph
of the Roman Church, and they pretend that those changes of Religion, that are
at this day sufficiently ordinary, and which they call Numerous Conversions,
are the effects of my Lord of Condom's Method. I grant that I am not able
enough to enter into the Merit of that piece; I see nothing therein but what
was written long ago. My Lord of Condom has not been the first, who has
essayed to disguise the Doctrine of the Roman Church. It Is more than fity years
since that this Method of Sweetning has been used to draw Men; and though it
had not been printed, it is certain that it has been used an hundred times by
word of Mouth, and face to face. Except the delicate Dress, the sweet and
insinuating Manners of my Lord of Condom, and some bold Propositions in the
Subject of Images; I see nothing there of his own, nor that should have gained
him so many Approbations. Notwithstanding men's Spirits are so affected, till
labor be taken to recover them from it. The Roman Catholic considers this
Book as the Buckler of his Faith, and the mighty Instrument of Conversions; and
the Protestant looks thereon, as on a Ghost, whereof he dreads the Illusions. I
am deceived if it be so dreadful as men imagine. All its St eagth consists in
disguising things from us, and making us to behold them in another face.
Therefore there is need only to make that appear in its Natural state, which he
does represent through a Veil to us.

That Work has been Answered most learnedly and solidly, and if I had no other
design but that of Answering it, I believe I should not trouble my Pen about
it; but here I much less purpose to Answer my Lord of Condom, than to make a
Book opposite to his. All that Art and dexterity can imagine to engage those of
our Religion to embrace his own, is sprinkled through his Book; and I will put
into mine what I believe most capable to preserve them from the peril whereinto
he would cast them. My Lord of Condom presents his Religion to us under a Veil,
which he has composed by an extraordinary effort of Spirit. He would have Us
to behold her only through that Veil. But he may take it well, though we have
not that complaisance for him, because it might be fatal to our Salvation. I
will therefore draw this Veil, paint out the Roman Religion according to Truth,
whereto nothing can be reproached, and show it in its Natural complexion. This
is, in my mind, the best Preservative that we can give our People; and
particularly it is of absolute necessity to ruinate the Design of my Lord of
Condom. Without having precisely a design to combat him, yet will I fight him
every where; because I shall meet him every where, and will be obliged to take
off the Veil which he has spread upon the Worship and the Dogma's of his
Church; I will bind my self also to follow his Order, because he has nothing
but what is natural enough.

One may easily judge, that the Affairs whereinto I choose to enter, is a
question of Fact purely; I will not engage my self to the discussion of the
Right. I do not enquire here, which has best Reason, whether the Roman Church,
or the Protestant; it is enough to know what is taught both in the one and in
the other Religion, and not at all whether it be ill for either of them to
teach so. Therefore will I forbear proving, and will not so much as touch those
Proofs that my Lord of Condom brings in for his own Party. But before we enter
into the particulars, I believe it fit we should make some general Reflections.

ARTICLE I. General Reflections upon my Lord of Condom's Book.
FIrst, To know a Book well, we must enter, if possible, into the Spirit of it,
and see within what prospect it has been composed. The Work, now in hand, is
one of those that has been produced by the design of reuniting the two
Religions in France, a design which some great Ones had busied their Head
about. All the World knows the several Advances that have been made thereto by
some particular Persons. They of the Protestant Party, which have entered into
this Proposition, had concluded that it might be done, either by way of
Accommodation, in obliging each of the Parties to yield some things; or by way
of mutual Toleration; that is to say, That without leaving their places, they
might consider one another with Charity, and should not damn one another with
full authority, as is done. These two Methods did not at all please the Roman
Church; that is not it which She demanded. She could not take the first way,
which is that of Accommodation, and of mutual Relaxation; for according to her
Principles, being Infallible, she could not relax any thing, but she must relax
some Truths, which thing Honor and Religion permitted not. The second Party
did please her much less; by that Way all things had remained in the state
wherein they are, both the Religions would hay joined hands, but would not
have been confounded nor reunited: The Protestant would have considered the
Roman Catholic as his Brother, serving one God in a manner somewhat different;
but yet would have continued Protestant. I cannot blame those Gentlemen for
despising that Proposition that cannot accord with Piety.

But I find it a surprising thing that rejecting these two Ways of Reunion,
they have proposed us another, which is much more strange. For to reunite, say
they, we must necessarily return to make up One and the same Body, to have the
same Assemblies, participate of the same Sacraments, and live under the same
Pastors. But toward that, it is not necessary to change any thing in the
Religion and Worship of the Catholics; We must only make the Protestants
comprehend, that they were to blame to regard the Dogma 's and the Worship of
the Church, in that sort, wherewith they have regarded it hitherto. We must
persuade them that those great Spaces, that divide the Catholic from the
Protestant, are the only effects of mistaken Imagination, that at the Bottom we
are all near one another; that there are only some Mistakes; that we teach not
what they believe us to teach; that our Worship, which seems so opposite in the
Service of one only God, is nothing of what it appears to be; that those
Appearances, though they seem to be so cross one to another, are nevertheless
at the bottom the most innocent in the World. And that being done, those
Gentlemen must reunite in returning to the Church; there is nothing more
facile. This is a strange manner of Reuniting. When two opposite Parties are
reunited, Composition is made, each one* yields of its Rights. Here they would
have Us to give all, and they would grant us nothing. Not that We had been
capable of suffering our selves to be tempted by Propositions of Accommodation,
and of mutual Relaxation. The Roman Church, on her Principles, will never make
such Propositions with sincere purpose. And though she should make them in
earnest, she would find them impossible in their Execution. The Gallican Church
has no right to treat for the Roman Church, nor to relax for her, while she
remains tied to the Chief of that Roman Church. That which We would ask in that
Treaty, is that which will never be granted Us; for we must not dissemble, we
would not have a Demy-Reformation; we would have them renounce that, which they
consider as Essential and Capital.

It Is true, that the manner of Reunion, which those Gentlemen have imagined, is
of all the most commodious thing for their Church; but we look on it, as the
worst of all Evil, for Ours. After all the Advertisements of my Lord of Condom,
I would fain know what is more safe now for Us in the Roman Church, than what
was when we first did come away from her? Do not all things persevere therein
in the same State? Do we see there the Temples filled with Images, and Men
prostrating themselves before them; their Vaults resounding with the Invocation
of Creatures, Adorations rendered to that which we know not to be God? Is it
then enough to say to us, That we did not understand our selves? You have
thought we should say that, and we would say quite another thing: Understand us
well, and come in again, and you shall see that at the Bottom we are not far
distanc'd one from the other. Surely, we must be very weak and very base to
fall into that Snare, to renounce that Grace, which has cost us so much Blood;
to forsake the Faith of our Ancestors, which they have established with so much
labor, so much sweat and watching, and whereto we have hitherto sacrificed our
Repose, our Fortune, and all our Worldly Interests. Either we had no reason to
come out forth from the Roman Church, or there is no reason to invite us to
return thither, without having brought in any change into the same. To change
Expressions and the manner of speaking of Things, is to change nothing at the
Bottom. Let them call the Service of Images, Invocation of Saints, the Worship
of Relics, with what Name they will, its still the same thing. Let them put
new Colors to the Adoration of the Eucharist, it will still be the Adoration
of that which we do call a Simple Creature. So that we must needs come to the
Bottom thereof to know whether we have reason.

I cannot forbear to add another Reflection to that former. The Sweetnings of
these Gentlemen do tend to make us see, that we deceive our selves when we were
persuaded, that we were far distanc'd one from another, and that our Debates
are grounded upon our misunderstanding; that we agree in the Foundations, and
that the rest are but few small things. It Is upon this Supposition, that they
exhort us to leave our Party to return to Theirs. But upon what Right do they
make this Proposition to us? I will suppose that what they insinuate be true,
that there be but a little Space between them and us; Might we not then say to
them, Well Sirs, Come to us, traverse those little Spaces; there is no further
distance from You to Us, than from Us to You. It cannot be more difficult for
you to pass this Way, than for us; Why must we our selves pass all the Advances?

Methinks I hear them cry out thereupon and say, What Insolence! Have we not
the Possession? We are the Church. You are gone out from the midst of us. It Is
your part to return. You are the Innovators. You are but a handful of People,
who have the boldness to oppose your selves to Millions of Men, and you would
have those Millions of Men to come to you? Is it not more just you should go to
them? There was no farther distance from the Donatists to the Catholics, than
from the Catholics to the Donatists: But suppose that the Heat which animated
both Parties had been quenched, that they cleared themselves, that they had
acknowledged, that the question was only but about matter of Fact, or their
Controversies but of little Importance. The Donatists, upon that discovery, had
but unhandsomly said to the Catholics, Return to us, that will be as
commodious as if we our selves should come to you.

I am very sensible that this will be their Thought. These Gentlemen say, that
they are in Possession. It Is true, among other things, they are in Possession
to suppose as certain that which is in dispute. They are the Church. It Is that
whereof we agree not. If they were the Church, and that Church sound and
entire, we would not be so unreasonable, to propose it them for to come to us.
The Church of St. Augustine was the true Church; that of the Donatists was in
Schism. If they had persuaded us, that which they assay to prove these many
years, that we are Schismatics and Heretics, they would then have reason to
invite us to make all these Advances, and we should be in the wrong to expect
them without moving our selves. We are not Innovators, we are Restorers of the
Apostles Religion. We have the advantage of Antiquity of Doctrines and Worship;
in comparison whereof, Antiquity of Churches, of Edifices, of Chairs and
Episcopal Seats, is nothing at all. We are in a perfect Conformity with the
Scripture, and the Church Apostolic; that is better, than Conformity with the
Church of the Tenth Age, and the following. The Question then here is only of
Fact thus, for if we hold the Apostles Doctrine, its certainly their part who
have forsaken it, to return to us. Time cannot prescribe against Truth. It Is in
vain to say, They have for Title a long Possession. The more ancient that such
Wanderings are, the worse they are. But that cannot take from us the right of
soliciting those People to return. Besides, it would be more easy for those
Gentlemen to return to us, than for us to join to them; for we should not
oblige them to any thing that would be against their Conscience, seeing we
adore only what they adore. But we cannot go to them, whilst they do serve that
which we cannot serve. If this Worship of Images, this Invocation of Saints,
this Adoration of the Eucharist, are so little a thing; and if that should not
hinder us from Joining to them, why do they not abandon that little Thing,
which scandalizes us so greatly, and which we reckon to be much? Is nothing to
be done for Charity? Should not Men renounce their own Interest, when its but
inconsiderable, for our Neighbors Salvation? I pretend not that these Reasons
will persuade those Gentlemen to abandon their Party and enter into ours; Nor
that they are capable of doing it. So great a Business is not dispatched in so
little time: But it may give us to understand, that we have as much right as
they to ask for a Reunion, without obligation to change any thing; and that all
those By-ways, which have been invented within this little time; some while
Ways of Prescription, then Ways of Prejudices or Prejudgments; then Ways of
Sweetning are all Ways of Illusion, which only hinder us from Treating of the
Business to the bottom, and from entering into the particulars of the
Controversies. Because those Gentlemen do not find it commodious to keep that
right Method, which has been used hitherto, they are searching indirect Ways.

I do not hope, that those Sweetnings of my Lord of Condom, and of his
Followers, will do any great thing for the general Peace of Christianism, and
for the Repose of particular Persons. Yet I cannot but. Essay, to get some
little Advantage from it by the by Assuredly, we should be thankful to my Lord
of Condom for his Book. Though it should not produce that effect which he hopes
for from it, to wit, the Reunion of both Religions into one One; at least,
naturally it should produce some Peace between both Parties. Till now, the
Roman Catholic and the Protestant have almost considered one another, as the
two Antipodes of the World Christian. At this day they labor to make them
return from thence. To make our Spirits reapproach, they give us Explications
tending to make us see, that we are not at such a distance as Men were
persuaded of. These Explications of my Lord of Condom, that do reapproach in
some parts his Doctrine to ours, do also without doubt cause to reapproach our
Doctrine to his. If Disputes can be annihilated by the Explications of some
Terms; If our Doctrine be not far distant from that of the Roman Church, and do
not hurt the Foundation as is insinuated; Why then is it made a Phantasm to the
People, Why then are Men armed against us? Why so much abhorring for those Men,
that do not Sin, but in that they understand not the Doctrine of the Church?
Why are the Powers armed, and the Arm of Flesh? Why have heretofore Floods of
our Blood been drawn out? Why do they cast on us frightful Names of Heretics,
and Excommunicate, damned Synagogues of Satan, and Organs of the Devil?
Methinks, if Men do but deal in good earnest, after those Sweetnings men should
have a little Sweetness for us; or if they continue that rigorous and severe
Method against us, it seems to be a proof, that these Sweetnings were not made
with a Spirit of Sincerity, but only with a design to procure an Illusion to
the Ignorant, and to furnish Pretenses for those that do seek their
Conveniences in the World.

This is a little advantage, which might accrue to us from my Lord of Condoms
Book, if those of his Party would but be of his mind: but I will draw another
much more considerable. It Is, that at the bottom there was never a Book more
favorable to the Protestants. If we do but consider well the Shape, which my
Lord of Condom gives to all the controverted Articles, this is not a defense of
the Dogma's of the Roman Church, it is not an Apology, it is properly an Excuse;
it is a Palliative Book, if I may so speak. Now every man that excuses a Fact, a
Doctrine, or an accused Person, by that it self confesses there is some Evil;
he only tries to make good, that the Evil is tolerable. This is that whereto my
Lord of Condom does visibly lead us. With all his delicate Manners, and his
Spiritual modelling, every Person uninterest'd will conclude, that he has felt
some Evil to be within that Church, whereto he would have us Reunite; and that
his Design is only to insinuate, That this Evil is tolerable, and that it ought
not to hinder our Reunion. Methinks this appears therein easily, by a little
attention given thereto; for Example, if we believe my Lord of Condom, An Image
has no other virtue, but that of recalling the Memory of the Original; there
is properly no kind of Homage rendered to it, only Men do serve the Original in
the presence of the Image. Is not that neatly enough to confess, That they that
go beyond it are most guilty; that there is no reason to say, That Men must
adore Images; that there is no reason to fasten any virtue thereto; to imagine,
that an Image of our Lady does more Miracles than another; that its blame
worthy to carry them about in pomp, to prostrate ones self before them, to
place them on Altars, to make Vows and Pilgrimages to them, and to bu^n Incense
to them, as formerly they did to the false Gods? If Invocation of Saints be
done in the same Spirit, as the Prayers which we present to the Faithful alive
to pray for us: It Is to accuse all those who do Invocate the Saints in another
Spirit.

After all that, I demand of those Gentlemen, Why they do seek for an
Extraordinary Turn? That which they had used hitherto, either was good,
reasonable, and proper to give just Idea's of the Doctrine of the Roman Church;
or it was not so. If it was not, reason it is they should take another. But how
can it be, that for so many years they have defended the Roman Church, by so
many Works, without finding the proper Turn, to give a just Idea of her
Doctrine? It Is a blindness of the preceding Doctors hardly to be conceived.
It Is a good hap for my Lord of Condom to have first found out the true sense of
the Doctrine of the Church, whereof one cannot suspect the cause. But if the
Turn, which my Lord of Condom has found out, is different; in that thing it
self that it is different from others, does it not condemn them? If that which
he says to us be the only true Sense of the Church, all other The Jesuits
Doctrine of Probability will salve that.
Senses which Doctors have given it are false Senses, and consequently he
condemns all those that have not spoken like him. Without doubt, my Lord of
Condom will say, It was not his design to say any thing new; that his
Explications of the Doctrine of the Church are the Sense of the Canons, of the
Councils, and of the decisions of the Doctors. But if he pretended not to say
any thing Extraordinary, whence then comes the great Noise which those
Gentlemen have made of that Work? Can they look for so great Honor from a
Thing, that should have been said by all other Authors? Whence is it, that they
have begged Approbations from all parts of the World? That they put amongst
those Approbators, Cardinals, Bishops, yea the Pope himself? For a thing which
all the World had said, should there be need of so money Props, seeing it could
not be combated nor questioned? Why does my Lord of Condom, at the end of his
Work, show, that he would not have us examine the different Means, which the
Catholic Theologues have used to establish, or to clea^ up the Doctrine of the
Council of Trent? If he be agreed with the Doctors of his fide, has he cause
to fear lest we should compare his Senses with theirs? And is it not clear,
that he confesses thereby, that he stands in great opposition to them? If my
Lord of Condom has brought to light but the true and ancient Sense of the
Church, why does he say at the end of his Book, that he has ruined all
Disputes? for that is it which these words signify, [For to s y on this
Treatise something solid, etc. they must show that this Explication leaves all
Disputes in their entire state.] He pretends then, that his Explication must
make all Disputes to cease. I do not believe, that he pretends thereto by the
force of the Reasons, whereby he has upheld his cause. For a little Book that
only explains, and which does not prove, cannot cause Disputes to cease by way
of Discussion. If it were true, that the Sense which my Lord of Condom does
give, is the Sense of the Roman Catholic Church, that it should be received by
both Parties, and that it would not leave Disputes in their whole state; it
were true also, that it would be some thing which the gravest Authors had not
yet perceived. For hitherto, all the Divines of the Roman Catholic Church have
verily believed, that the Controversies about Images, Invocation of Saints,
Indulgences, Satisfactions, were entire Disputes and most real. The Council of
Trent has without doubt believed so; for if their Sense had been that which my
Lord of Condom gives, and that it is a Sense which leaves not Disputes whole,
why has it pronounced Anathema's against the Lutherans and Zuinglians, about
things, whereof it is decisions made all Disputes to vanish? Let Us deal truly;
Did not the Council fulminate and condemn those People? They did not then
believe, that the Sense of their Canons could easily be reconciled with the
Doctrine of Zuinglius and of Luther. Besides that, I do not well conceive how
my Lord of Condom can defend himself, for having brought to light a Sense that
was unknown to all that have Written, and to the Prelates of the Council of
Trent themselves. Without doubt those Prelates pronounced Oracles without
understanding them, and more than an Age after an Interpreter is come, who has
discovered that which the Holy Spirit had hitherto kept secret. But it imports
not, whether my Lord of Condom be the first or only Man that has understood
the Council of Trent, to the Exclusion of the Council it self, he cannot hinder
us from concluding, That in establishing his Sense as the only good, and as the
Doctrine of his Church, he condemns all others which the Doctors have given
hitherto; and therefore he acts for us, and favors our Cause, as much as it
can be favored.

Although the Explications of my Lord of Condom should terminate some
different, we should not be obliged to believe upon his Word, that his Sense
should be that of the Council of Trent. It has reproached to these Gentlemen,
that these Explications were against the Bull of Pius the Fourth, which
expressly forbids all Explications of that Council. These be its own words; [To
avoid the Confusions and Disorders that might arise, if it were permitted to
every One to bring to light their Commentaries and Interpretations upon the
Decrees of the Council; by Authority Apostolical we forbid all Persons
Ecclesiastic or Laick, of whatsoever Dignity, Condition, Honor or Power
whatsoever; and all Prelates, under pain of being Interdicted the Entrance of
the Church, and others under pain of Excommunication, to undertake, without our
Authority, Commentaries, Glosses, Annotations, Observations, or any other kind
of Interpretations under whatsoever Name; neither under the very pretense of
maintaining the Decrees better, or Executing, or any other Color. And if any
find there is any thing obscure, less clear, needing Interpretation, we
Ordain he should ascend to the place which the Lord has chosen, that is to the
Apostolic Seat, which is the Master of all the Faithful, and whereof the Holy
Council it self has acknowledged the Authority in a manner so full of
respect.] After that, should it be permitted to any private Man to give to the
Council a Sense unknown to the whole Earth, unknown even to the Fathers, who
made up the Council? To that those Gentlemen say, Advertisement, p. 99.
Its one thing to interpret what is obscure and doubtful, another thing to
propound what is clear, and use it to destroy false Impressions. It seems to
me, that those Words signify that it is not true, that Glosses have been made
on the Council of Trent; they have only related its Terms so clear, that they
are capable of destroying all the false Idea's that Men had of its Doctrine.
Can that be said in Conscience, that they have related only the very Words of
the Council? It Is said, about the Invocation of Saints; That Advertism. page
50. Explic. p. 24.
we pray to them in that same Spirit that we pray to our Brethren, which are on
the Earth, to pray for us and with us to our Common Master, in the Name of our
Common Mediator, who is Jesus Christ.

Are those the Words of the Council? Does it say, They should not be invoked,
but in that manner and in the same Spirit, that we pray the Saints that are on
Earth to pray for us? I would make Judges thereof, such as have Eyes and can
but read; for these be the Words of the Council, according to my Lord of Condom
's Version; [Because Sess. 25. de Invocatione Sanctorum.
that the Saints, who reign with Jesus Christ, do offer to God their Prayers for
Men, it is good and useful to invoke them, in a Suppliant manner, and to have
recourse to their Aid and to their Succor, to impetrate of God his Blessing,
by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who alone is our Savior and our Redeemer.]
About Satisfactions, my Lord of Condom says, Advert sement, p. ^7.
That which is called Satisfaction, is after all but the Application of the
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ. And the Council of Trent says, That in suffering
and satisfying for our sins, we are made conformable to our Sess. 22. Can. 3.
Lord Jesus Christ, who also has satisfied for our Sins.] Upon the Subject of
Images, the Advertisement says, That we serve not Images, but serve our selves
of Images to raise up our selves to the Originals. And the Council says, That
Men must render to Images the Respect and Veneration which is due to them; that
they must be kissed, men's Heads be uncovered, and prostrate themselves before
them]

These three Examples may suffice to show, that those Gentlemen do not deal
fairly when they say, That they go not against the Intention of Pius the Fourth
his Bull, and that they make no Gl^ss upon the Conncil of Trent.

But I am not minded, that we should draw a Process against them about it. Let
them avoid the Ordinance of Pius the Fourth, I consent: Let them interpret the
Council against the Intention of the Bull. I do not think we have any right to
oppose it. Those Gentlemen do make Rules, and have such regard to them as they
think good. That is not our business. And after all, that Prohibition of Pius
the Fourth has taken but little place. A thousand Controversies have been
raised or continued since that Council, and every one of the Parties has
explained it to his own favor. But what we say, and have right to say, is,
That we are not obliged to receive the Interpretations of the Council of Trent,
opposite to those that have been given us by all the Doctors of the School,
which we daily read in the universal Practice and constant Use of the Roman
Church. The Author Page 56.
of the Advertisement may well say, That we will not believe neither the
Council, nor its Catechism, nor their Confession of Faith, nor the Bishops, nor
the Pope himself. We believe our Eyes, we believe what we read and what we see.
Though at this day all the Roman Church should Advertisement p. 62.
tell us, as this Author does, We do not serve Images, God forbid; but we serve
our selves of Images to raise us up to the Originals. We would not believe it,
and would not be obliged to believe it, seeing we see every day the contrary.

What Obstinacy! say they; the Bishops, Cardinals, and the Pope himself approve
all these Explications of my Lord of Condom, and that of the Author of the
Advertisement; and you will believe that Persons of so great a Character, are
either Cheats, that dissemble their Sentiments or Ignaro's, that know not their
Religion. I wish they would not press us about that. We do not believe those
Gentlemen to be ignorant, they know their Religion well enough; but prudently
men may often say of what they know, that only which they think capable of
leading them to the End that they aim at. They would diminish the Aversion we
have for the Worship and the Doctrines of the Roman Church. Prudence therefore
would have them to keep from our sight that which offends us, and that a
Curtain be drawn thereon.

Let Us do those Gentlemen as much Honor as they can ask, to my understanding.
Let Us believe that they deal fairly, that is, that sincerely they would have
things to be as they express them. Really, we no ways doubt, but there are at
this day in the Roman Church many Persons, who disapprove the Excesses which
are practiced in that Church, about devotion to the Creatures. They willingly
wish, That Images were not served with Religious Worship, they would bring a
great allay to the Invocation of Saints, if they m ght be believed; yea,
happily they might go further. I grant, that my Lord of Condom, and the
Archbishops and Bishops, his Approvers, may have this Sentiment; and that we
may put into the same rank the Cardinals de Bona and Sigismund of Chigy, the
most Reverend P. Hyacinth. Lib^lli, Archbishop of Avignions, the most R. F.
Capi Su^^^i, Master of the Sacred Palace, my Lord Michael Ange Ricci, Secretary
to the holy Congregation of Indulgences; the Father M* Laurent Bran^ari de
Laurea; the Abbot Gradi; the Bishop and Princes of Munster, and the Pope
himself Innocent the Eleventh, now sitting. What does all that but confirm us
in the Thoughts, that we have reason to condemn the Excesses that are now
condemned by Persons, which had a great interest to justify them? Put can that
oblige us not to believe our Eyes, not to believe what we see and what we read?
Before they can have any right to press us thereabout, things should be put
into that state wherein they say that they are.

I hope, that entering into the particulars we shall clearly show, that things
are in that state wherein we conceive them; and not in that wherein they would
have us regard them. Mean while, I will say, that the Providence of God permits
for our Justification, that in an Age wherein they would persuade us that White
is black, there arise from time to time some Father Cressets, that do revive
all that Alexis of Salo, the Bernardine de Bustis, and the Salazars, have said
most excessively and hainously upon this matter. Those Works are printed in the
Capital of the Kingdom with Approbation, with Privilege, and with all the
marks of Honor, that might possibly be given, in the very front thereof.
Whilst they fell under cover, the Saving Advices of the Virgin to her
indiscreet Devoti, and the Works done for the maintaining thereof. Add thereto,
that they send Post through all Europe under the name of the fournal of the
Learned, the Praise of those Books which are transported with so much Violence
against Moderate Persons.

It Is true* that the Book of my Lord of Condom, and the Advertisement, which
serves for a Preface, are also upheld by splendid Approbations. But to what
purpose? That Book enters not into the Particulars, it Condemns nothing, it
Justifies all, it Explains. It Is true that he grants, that there are Practices
of Devotion which he does not approve too much: It Is that which is signified by
these Words, [It Advertisement, p. 101.
nothing avails to object against us, neither those Practices which they
pretend to be general, nor the Sense of particular Doctors; for without
examining those useless Facts, it suffices to say, in one word, that those
Practices and, Opinions, such as they be, which will not be conformed to the
Spirit and Decrees of the Council, are nothing to the Religion, nor to the Body
of the Catholic Church.] They are lost blows, which touch nothing, because
they aim at too many things. Those Gentlemen, who disapprove in general the
Practices which are not conform to the Spirit of the Council of Trent, would
find work enough, if they were obliged to open their mind and to speak clearly.
They would fear the same Lot, with the Saving Advices of the Virgin to her
indiscreet Devoti, viz. That Rome, which has given its Approbation to that
disavowing of some indiscreet Devotions, conceived in general terms, might
nevertheless censure those Censors, if they would enter into Particulars, and
openly condemn what they approve not. It Is known, in some measure, how Jealous
the Roman Church is of those Practices which are condemned by honest Men, and
by moderate Spirits. One may judge thereof by the Welcome given to the Bull,
which the Pope has published to suppress an Office of the immaculate
Conception of the Conception of the Virgin, and of many Indulgences. That is
too public not to have come to our knowledge. It Is certain, that if there were
a Tribunal Superior to that of Rome, this Tentative had been there vigorously
repulsed. The Roman Church, that could not censure it, has at least despised
it. This Example may let us see, that it is not sufficient that the Pope should
approve or disapprove any thing, to make it to be or not to be. Though Innocent
the Eleventh had approved the Explications of my Lord of Condom, it will not be
necessarily true, that they should be conformed to the Sense of the Roman
Church. Those Gentlemen grant; that Popes are often but particular Persons, and
that do not always act under the Character of public Persons. And we may say,
with some kind of assurance, that what was approved by the Pope of this day; if
Times change but a little, might come to be condemned by one of his Successors.
There want no Examples of the like Contrarieties in the Pieces that flow from
this See.

ARTICLE II. A General Idea of both Religions.
It Is time to enter into the Book of my Lord of Condom. At his entrance he does
discover his Intention. He hopes (says he) that his Exposition shall produce
two good effects; [First, That many Disputes Expos. p. 4.
shall vanish altogether, because they are founded upon false Explications of
our Creed. The Second, That the Disputes which shall remain, shall not appear
like the Principles of the pretended Reformed, so Capital, as they at first
would make them to be believed; and that according to those very Principles
they have nothing that hurts the foundations of the Faith.] That is to say, To
express the things by other Words, that my Lord of Condom will cause both
Religions so to reapproach to that Point* that one may pass from the Protestant
Religion to the Roman without endangering his Salvation in any way, although
the Protestants do teach nothing but Verities. Because that the Controversies,
that separate the Protestant from the Catholic Roman, either are not real, or
else regard not the foundations of the Faith. If that be not the sense of his
Words, I grant that I see none therein. I must ask my Lord of Condom pardon,
but I cannot forbear to tell him, that I find not this design to be honest; it
is to lead Men to betray Truth and their Consciences. The Principle, which he
lays, is of good use for his Church in France, where Roman Religion is
predominant, which has on her side all Worldly advantages. But it is to be
feared, that he will carry on his Catholic to renounce easily their Religion
in England, Holland, Denmark, Swedland, and in other places, where Charges and
Advantages are distributed by the Protestants: For one needs not be extremely
turned to the side of Libertinism, for to say, If Men can pass without Risk
from the Protestant Religion, though they believe it to be true, to the
Catholic Religion, acknowledging therein some defects; one may also without
danger pass from the Catholic Religion to the Protestant Religion, in
believing this moderately bad. We must tell the Truth, it is a dangerous Snare
that is laid for Us.

The Author of the Advertisement does conjure Protestants by Charity, which is
God himself; and by the Name of Christians, Advertisement, p. 73.
which is common to us, to judge no more of the Catholic Doctrine by what is
told them in their Sermons, but by this Exposition. But I conjure them, by the
Care they ought to have of their Salvation, to beware of the Illusions that are
prepared for them, and not to feek here for Pretenses, when they shall be
tempted to quit a Religion hated and disfavoured, to follow that which opens
the Way to all Preferments. There is no less Concerns in this affair than
Eternal damnation. God, who will prove all false Doctrines by the Fire of his
Word, and those that shall have followed them by that of his terrible Judgment,
cannot be deceived by Equivocations, nor by imperfect Expositions. I demand of
them a little Sincerity, a little Love for their Salvation, and a moderate good
Sense; with those, one may easily judge, whether both Religions be so near to
each other, that they differ not but by Disputes, which may be caused to vanish
in explaining some Terms; or by Opinions, that hurt not the foundations of
Faith. I will first give a general Idea both of the One and of the other.

I Will suppose an Infidel, who seeks for Religion in the several Sects, which
are among the Christians. He enters into the Churches of the Roman Catholics,
he sees them filled with Pictures, and those Images themselves magnificently
adorned, put into the most Sacred places, having at their feet many Suppliants,
Persons prostrate before them, kissing them, embracing their knees, burning
Torches before them, or Wax Candles, incensing them and carrying them about in
pompous Processions. In those Churches also does he see Altars, and thereon a
Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of a God-man, who every day, after some
Mystical Ceremonies descends from Heaven, and comes to place himself really
under the Accidents of the Consecrated Bread and Wine. He sees, I say, a
Sacrifice of Human Flesh, but invisible, which is done with a great Show and
Attendance of Ceremonies, for the Propitiation of the Sins of the Dead, and for
all the Necessities of the Living. He sees an Object, which appears to be mere
Bread, which he must be made to adore as his God, his Redeemer and Master. He
sees Men, that make their Prayers, and that sing Sacred Hymns; but he meets
with the Veil of a Language strange and unknown, which is diffused through all
this Worship, and does conceal it quite from Vulgar Eyes. By the favor of an
Interpreter he penetrates through this Veil, and under it he sees Prayers and
Invocations addressed to Creatures, whereto are given the magnificent Names of
Mediators, Mother of Mercifulness, Queen of Heaven, Refuge of Sinners, Gate of
Paradise, etc. from whom Men do request to be delivered from Maladies, recovery
of Health, to be cured of the Languors of their Souls, to be loosed from the
Bonds of their Sins, to receive increase of Virtues, to be delivered from Hell,
and to be put into the possession of the Glory of Heaven, by their Merits and
by their Intercession. He sees a Religion abounding in Ceremonies; whereof the
Ministers are clothed with Habits extraordinary and mystical: He sees their
Crosses, Holy Water, and a great external Show altogether pompous and
compounded with an incredible Number of different Parts. Piercing yet further,
he sees Men set upon their Tribunals, at the feet whereof they show him other
Men, on their Knees, confessing their Sins to them, and expect Remission from
them; and he hears those Spiritual Judges on those Tribunals, who impose on
Sinners, Penitences, Fastings, Pilgrimages, Hair-Cloth, Cilices, rough Shifts,
to satisfy thereby God and the Church, who preach to them, That all the Sins
committed before Baptism are expiated solely and entirely by the Blood of Jesus
Christ; but that every Man must satisfy for his Sins committed after Baptism.
That tell them That Men must labor to merit Eternal life by good Works: That
teach them, That the good Works, wherein God takes pleasure, are among other,
Devotions for the Saints, Pilgrimages, Vows, tedious Tautologies of certain
Prayers, observed in the Honor of some of those Saints, and of their Images.
Who give them to observe a long List of Ecclesiastical Laws, about Fasts,
distinctions of Meats, Corporal Mortifications. That declare to them, That the
Non-observance of those Laws of the Church will damn them, as much as the
violation of Gods Commands. Which tell them also, That after this life they
cannot hope to enter immediately into Heaven, but that they must pass through a
place of Torment, where they shall be examined, happily for many Ages, by a
cruel Fire, until they have entirely satisfied for those Sins, for which they
could not make Satisfaction during this life. He sees Priests upon those
Tribunals, to give, with a Tone of Authority and of Power, the Remission of
Sins to those Penitents, and to tell them, I absolve you. They hear them say,
That Men must receive their Orders, and those of the Church, as so many
Sentences from Heaven. That this Church is infallible, and exempt from Error;
that She is Judge, without Appeal, of all Debates. That the Holy Scripture, in
regard of us, holds her Authority but only from Her; that we could not know the
Divinity of the Word of God, but only by the Testimony of the Church; that She
is the Interpreter of her Sense, and that the Interpretations which she gives,
though they seem contrary to Sense, to Reason, and even to some places of this
very Scripture, ought to be received with a Sovereign Submission. Above those
Men, which are only called Priests, he sees several Dignities; but above all,
he sees a great Monarch Spiritual and Temporal, who calls himself Jesus Christ's
Lieutenant, the Vible Head of the Church, the Mouth of God, who pronounces
Oracles, and who can never Err; who is above Emperors and Kings; who can
establish them, and who can destroy them. Behold, what our Infidel may see in
the Roman Church. Neither he; nor I do pronounce any thing, we say not whether
it be good or bad.

Going out from thence, he enters into the Temples of the Protestants, wherein
he sees nothing of what he had seen in that place, whence he came forth. He
sees there no Images, no Altars, no Sacrifices, no Pomp, no Ceremony. They tell
him, for a reason of this difference, God is jealous of his Honor, he would
not have any Service done to Images, he has expressly forbidden it in the
Second Command of his Law. The Sacrifices of Christians are Praises and
Thanksgivings, Works of Mercy, Offerings and Alms; these are the Oblation of
the Heart and Affections, and their Perfumes are their Prayers. We have no
Altars; for since that Jesus Christ did Sacrifice his Sacred Person for our
Salvation, having no more Sacrifices, we need no more Altars. Our Infidel
lending his Ear to what is said, hears indeed nothing but Prayers and Hymns,
which are Sung; Sermons, Prayers addressed to God; no Angels, no Saints
invoak'd: They tell him, Prayer is the Principal of our Homages, and the first
act of our Adoration, therefore we reserve it for God. We believe that we
should offer a great Wrong to the Divinity, if we did divide his Honor between
Him and his Creatures. They show to this Infidel a small number of Sacraments,
administered with great simplicity. Nothing is disguised from him; They tell
him, What you see on* this Table is true Bread and true Wine; but it is Bread
and Wine mystical: It is the Sacrament of Jesus Christ crucified; it is the
Symbol of his Flesh and Blood, and the precious Pledge of the Love of God, the
Seal of our Justification, and One of the Means of our Sanctification. But the
Grace which is adjoined does not destroy Nature. Instead of causing him to
adore, what his Senses tell him to be Bread; They tell him, Take heed, lest
under any Pretense whatever, you render to the Creature that Honor which is
due only to the Creator; for he that said, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him alone shall thou serve, will not be paid with any Excuses; it will not
avail to say, I supposed that my Savior came under that appearance of Bread.
Our Infidel sees a Religion which keeps nothing secret from him, under pretense
of Mystery. They do not tell him, about the Word of God, Walk therein as in a
dangerous Way; either read not at all, or read with a Spirit of Submission, for
all that the Church has taught you: Do not believe what your Eyes will seem to
tell you about your Lectures; and whatsoever you may meet withal, conclude
nothing that may be opposite to the Faith of your Doctors. On the contrary,
They lay before him the Scripture on the Tribunal of the Church; They tell him,
Obey your Leaders, suffer not your selves to be conducted by the false Lights
of your own Reason. Submit to the Mysteries, but let not your Submission be
blind; consult the Scripture, read, instruct your selves, and believe nothing
upon the Witness of Men: Do not rest but upon the Testimony of God; His Word is
clear, solid, sufficient for your Instruction; His Authority is Sovereign and
Independent of any other. He sees not, in the Worship of that Religion, any
strange Language, which diffuses Darkness through all; which conceals Mysteries
from the Eyes of Ignorant Ones; all is naked, all is open, all is simple. He
sees, he hears all that is done, all that is said; every one Prays in the
Tongue he understands, and which is understood in the Country where he is. This
Infidel sees Preachers, which exhort him to Repentance, to Mortification, to
renouncing the Vanities and the Idols of the World; but they do not impose on
him the Necessity of declaring all the Motions of his Soul to a Man; they order
him to confess primarily to God; then they advise him to make choice of a wise
Director, to discover with Liberty to him the Wounds of his own Conscience, and
to ask his Advices. They tell him, That all Human Satisfactions are incapable
of paying the Justice of God; That our Lord Jesus Christ has paid for us
abundantly; That his Merit is granted to us by a gratuitous Mercy; and that the
true Satisfaction which God requires, is the Contrition of the Heart, Faith,
Charity and Amendment of Life. They do not charge him with the multitude of
External Observations, of Fasts, of Macerations, of Pilgrimages. They say to
the contrary, That bodily Exercise is profitable to little; but that solid
Piety has the Promises of this present life, and of that which is to come.
They labor to draw him out of the Security that the Worldlings are plunged in;
but they seek not to retain him in perpetual Terrors. They tell him, There is
no Salvation for the Sinner, that perseveres in Impenitency; but that the true
Penitent may be assured, that God will show him Mercy. They assure him, That if
his Sins be pardoned him in this life, they shall also be pardoned him in the
other too, and that there is no Purgatory, nor Torments, through which Men are
to pass, to arrive to Paradise. They confess to him, That they have not the
power to remit Sins; They tell him, that that appertains to God only; but they
tell him, That God never refuses that Grace, to those that ask it with the
Spirit of Humility. In fine, He sees nothing Pompous in the Government, or that
may relish of the Spirit of the World; No Monarchs, no Spiritual Sovereigns. He
sees none but Conductors, that are Men of an equal Authority; or if he sees, in
some places, within that Church some Bishops, and some Archbishops; He
understands that those Persons make Profession to have no other Head, for the
Spirituals, but Jesus Christ; and no other for their Temporals, than those
which God has established in the World, by his Providence. If this Infidel,
who has thus cast his Sight upon these two Religions, be wise, he will ask
time to think of his Choice, and will pronounce nothing upon what he has seen.
But in Conscience, can any Man believe, that this Man, who has no other light
but that of good Sense, can persuade himself that these two Parties make up but
one Religion; that it is the same thing, that their Differences are not
Essential? In one, He sees Altars and Sacrifices; in the other, he sees none.
In the one, he hears them invoke Saints and Angels; in the other, he sees they
content themselves to reverence their Name, and to invoke God. In the one, he
sees Images to be served; in the other, he sees a mortal aversion for that
Worship. In the one, he understands Nothing; in the other, he understands all.
If this Man suffers himself to be conducted by his Natural Lights, he will
without doubt believe, that these two Religions are absolutely different; and I
cannot imagine, that he could believe what my Lord of Condom says, That the
Disputes of these two Parties can be nullified by explaining some Terms; and
that what remains has nothing Capital, and that can hurt the foundations of
the Faith.

ARTICLE III. That we agree not about Fundamental Points.
BUt happily may some say, That this general Review of the two Religions is
proper only to make an Illusion; because, that in this Method, Men judge only
by appearances. Now its true, that they are in an Appearance of great distance;
whereas in examining things in particulars and at the bottom, it may be that
they would go near to accord about those things, and should only dispute about
Terms. That might happily be, and therefore I will not forbear entering into a
particular Examen of each Article.

First, My Lord of Condom says; That we all agree about the Foundations of the
Faith; that the Doctrines which we esteem Fundamental, are all believed and
professed in the Roman Church. He brings for Witness thereof Monsieur Daille,
who says Expos. p. 5.
in his Book entitled, Faith founded upon the Scriptures, That all Fundamental
Articles are without Contest, that the Roman Church professes to believe them;
That in Truth we do not hold all the Opinions of that Church; but that we hold
all their Beliefs, or Creances.

My Lord of Condom lays another Maxim, which he draws from our Principles:
It Is, That if one agrees with the Foundations, and then lays down Opinions
which does overthrow those Foundations by Consequences; we must not impute
those Consequences to him who disavows. The Opinion of the Lutherans, about the
real Presence of the Body of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, destroys the Human
Nature of our Lord Jesus Christ by a lawful Consequence; but the Lutherans
disavow that Consequence, therefore we will not impute it to them. He would
have us to have the same Equity for his Church. For Example, She establishes
the Sacrifices of the Mass, She lays down the Intercession of Saints, She
ordains Penances and Satisfactions: We say, That the first of them destroys the
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ; that the second prejudices his Mediation; that the
others are injurious to the Super-abounding fullness of his Merits. But they
say, they are only Consequences, which the Roman Church disowns; therefore we
may not impute the same to them without Calumny.

I might have many things to say thereabout, If I had designed to make a great
Book; but I will restrain my self within this. That this Consideration cannot
be a Means of Reunion, nor a Reason of our Re-entrance into the Roman Church:
First, Because it is not true, that both Parties agree about all the Protestants
esteem to be Fundamental. There are Three general Foundations in Religion:
First, That there is a God, who is to be adored. The Second, That there is but
one God, and we ought to serve and adore none but him. The Third, That this God
is to be served in Jesus Christ jointly with him, and according to the Religion
which he has taught. The first is the foundation of all Religion in general:
The second, the Foundation of the true Religion, in that it embraces the
Religion of Moses and that of Christ: And the Third is the Foundation of the
Christian Religion. The Roman Church receives the first Foundation, That God is
to be served and adored. She receives the Third but in Words, for she makes
indeed Profession to adore God, according to the Religion which Jesus Christ
has taught; but we pretend that her Worship is not suitable to her Profession.
They must not answer me, that we are to blame to pretend that. Happily may we
be to blame; but at present the Question is not to know, whether we have
reason; but only to know, if, in our Principles, the Roman Church destroys some
Foundation of the Faith. Now she destroys, according to us, this One; therefore
its impossible that we can join with her. But she destroys much more openly the
Second of those Foundations, in that she serves and adores that which is not
God, according to Protestants. We must adore a God: behold the first
Foundation, and the Roman Church receives it. We must adore none, but God:
behold the second Foundation, which is no less important than the first; and
that is it which the Roman Church absolutely destroys. She adores the
Sacraments of the Eucharist; Yea, say they, but it is in the Supposition, that
the Eucharist becomes the Humanity of Jesus Christ, that is to say, the
Humanity of God. But that is nothing to the present Question. It suffices me,
that it is most evident, that according to our Principles, the Roman Church
adores another, besides God, and by Consequence she also destroys, according to
us, one of the principal Foundations of the Faith.

My Lord of Condom will then permit me to tell him, That he has not read in
any of our Authors, that our Church agrees with his in the Foundations of the
Faith. Monsieur Daille has not said so; and if he had said it, I would make no
difficulty to say, That he was deceived. We only say, That we believe nothing
but what the Roman Church believes with us; but that we believe not all that
the Roman Church believes. We distingnish Affirmative Articles from the
Negative. We agree with the Roman Church about Affirmative Articles, viz. we
all believe that there is a God, that he is to be adored; that there is a Jesus
Christ, that he is dead, risen again, ascended to Heaven, God blessed for ever
with the Father; that he is the Redeemer of the World etc. But we agree not
about the Negative Articles, and among them, there are some that respect the
Foundations; such is that whereof we speak, Thou shall adore none but God. We
make no difficulty to say, That the Worship of Images and Invocation of Saints
do also destroy this Foundation; because there is no act of Religion that is
not an Adoration. So Men cannot serve religiously any Creature, without
violating this Command, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve.

2. I subjoyn, That the Fundamental Verities, wherein we agree with the Roman
Church, cannot be a Means of Reunion with her, because of the multitude of
Opinions which she has added to those Foundations; and that those Additions
are absolutely opposed to the purity of the Faith. I say, that in retaining the
Verities, which the Roman Church retains, and even some over and above, one
might make a monstrous Religion, and Sovereignty Idolatrous; for Example,
Suppose that some Men should believe that there is but One God, that we must
adore None but him; that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the World, that he is
truly God, and truly Man; that there is a Paradise and a Hell, etc. But who
should persuade himself, that all Creatures are united to God in so particular
a manner, that they ought to be worshipped with God; That the Sun, for Example,
is the Eye of the Divinity; that in that quality he ought to be worshipped;
that the Rivers are his Arms, whereby he embraces the Earth, and because of
that one may Sacrifice to them: Those People would say, I worship but one God,
I believe in Jesus Christ; but I believe that that God is every where, and that
God is All; and because of that, I adore that All, wherein he is. If the
Ubiquitans in the Supposition they make, That the Humanity of Christ is in all
the Spaces and in all the Bodies; should come to conclude, That Men must
worship all the Bodies of the World, would they not be Idolaters? Nevertheless
they would retain all the Foundations of the Faith, which the Roman Church
retains.

As for what they say, That one must not impute unto People the Consequences
which they disavow: I Answer, That the question is not here about Consequences
which arise from certain Errors which Men defend, but whereof they disown the
Results. The question is or Consequences owned, and that we may impute to them
that avow them. Jesus Christ est reellement dans l'Eucharistic. Behold the
Principle or Error: Then must we adore the Sacrament; behold the Consequence,
and a Consequence avowed. We must do all that the Church commands: Behold the
Principle. Therefore we must serve Images and invoke Saints; behold the
Consequences which are owned. I might produce an hundred more, but these
suffice me. I add thereto, That there are Consequences, which though they be
disowned, they cease not to subsist* Those are they that arise from the very
Actions and Practices. If a Man should give a Box on the Ear to another, and
say, that no wrong is done to another, but when one has no right to strike;
and therefore denies to have done him wrong, because it was not his Intention
to wrong him, or because he had right to strike him; because he denies the
Consequence, shall it be less true? The Roman Church invokes Saints, serves
Images, adores the Sacrament of the Eucharist. We tell her, She offers injury
to God, in imparting to Others a Worship which is due to him alone. Thereupon
she Answers, It Is a Consequence you draw, but what we deny; In Consciente is
such a Justification to be received? We must distinguish well between
Speculative Consequences, which arise from a Doctrine; and those that are
Practical, and which arise from Worship. It Is of the former that we must
understand this Rule of Equity; That we must not impute Consequences to those
that disavow them. But that cannot be applied to the Consequences of Practice.
In fine, When we accuse the Roman Church to do wrong to God, in imparting
Adoration to others; to the Sacrifice of the Cross, in adding another
Sacrifice; to the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, in establishing Human
Satisfactions: It Is not true that these things may be called Consquences, and
that we may be justified of that Accusation by denying them. That is clear by
this Example: If one divide the Authority of the Prince Sovereign, among his
Subjects, without his Permission; I maintain, That injury is done to him by
that very thing; and that one should not be received to say, I deny I do injury
to my Sovereign, in giving one part of his Sovereign Authority to Others.
That Is a Consequence which I disown. The Injury consists in the Act it self
that is done, and not in a Consequence which arises from the Action. So to give
a new Sacrifice, new Intercessours, and new Objects of a Religious Worship,
it is directly to offend God, the only Object of Religion. It Is to oppose the
Unity and Perfection of the Christian Sacrifice. It Is to do injury to the only
Intercessour; and that by the very Actions which are done, and not by
Consequences which arise from those Actions.

But at least, will they say, You are obliged to grant, that the most part of
the Errors of the Roman Church are not Capital. Thereupon I say Three things:
First, That it is enough if there be two or three Capital Errors, and even One
alone in a Religion, to render intolerable, that whith otherwise might have
been tolerable. The Second thing that I say, is, that the Errors, which every
one being apart might have been tolerated, if they were alone; cannot be born
with when they are in a great Number. A Life that should be wholly charged with
those Sins, which the Roman Church calls Venial, and that should have no good
Work at all, would undoubtedly lead to Eternal death; although every one of
those Sins taken apart would not destroy Grace. A Religion, that should gather
an infinite number of Practices, of Superstitions and Errors, whereof none
were Capital, could not be suffered nevertheless; for it is a Capital Affair to
bury the Truth in so great a number of Errors. In fine. I say, that the Roman
Church has rendered Capital those of her Errors; that would not otherwise be
such, since she has made Articles of Faith of them. She obliges, under pain of
Anathema, that is to say, Pain of Eternal damnation, to believe that the Books
of Maccabees are Canonical; that Concupiscence after Baptism is no more Sin;
that the involuntary Motions of that Concupiscence are not Sins* that Baptism
is of an absolute necessity; that Order is a true Sacrament; that Marriage is
not dissolved by Adultery, and an hundred things of this Nature. If she had
received those Opinions without obliging others to receive them* they might
have been tolerated; but as soon as she has made them Articles of Faith, they
become intolerable. For it is a mortal Sin, to receive Errors as Verities
Fundamental. It Is a horrid Crime to condemn to Hell Men that have but light
Errors: Now the Roman Church, by her Anathema's, obliges me to damn those who
have but light Errors. In fine, It Is a black baseness, to make Profession by
Oath, to believe as Capital Verities and necessary Ones, such Opinions as we
know to be Errors: And that is it the Roman Church would oblige us to. In a
word, I think to Reason justly in Reasoning thus. All the Articles of Faith are
Fundamental Points, because they cannot be rejected without being Anathema's.
The Roman Church, of those things which we might have considered as light
Errors, has made Articles of Faith, which may not be rejected without a
direful Anathema. Then has the Roman Church, in that regard, those Opinions
that could have passed for being of little importance, Fundamental Points; and
in our regard, Capital Errors. And from thence, it seems to me to be clear,
that after the decisions of the Council of Trent, all Reconciliation is
impossible with the Roman Church. Because the Question is no more of tolerating
light Errors; but to believe them, and make profession thereof, and of damning
all those that believe them not; and that is it, which an honest Man and a
Christian cannot do.

ARTICLE IV. That the Worship forbidden of God, cannot terminate in him.
BEhold the Second Principle of that Union, which my Lord of Condom propounds;
it is, That the Religious Worship in the Page 17. Church of Rome terminates in
God. If the Honor she gives to the Holy Virgin, and the Saints, may be called
Religious, it is because it relates necessarily to God. He would conclude
thence, That in retaining our Principle, that every Religious Honor is to be
related to God, we can, without hurt to our Conscience, partake of the Worship
of the Roman Church, seeing that she teaches, That every Religion^ Worship is
to be referred to God, as to its necessary End.

1. I wish that my Lord of Condom had cited to us some Text of the Council of
Trent, which might assure us, That all Religious Worship is terminated in God.
I see there, that we must invoke Saints, because they reign with Jesus Christ,
and because they intercede for us, etc. I read there no more. I conceive there
is a little difference between invoking a Saint for reference to God, and
terminate a Religious Worship to God. It Is true, that the Roman Chuch invokes
Saints by respect to God, that is to say, because they are the Saints of God,
because they govern under God, because they have merited with God* because they
intercede before God for Men. If those Saints should have no relation to God,
no doubt Men would not serve them. But is not this to impose visibly upon the
World, to say, That because of that all Religious Worship is terminated in God?
Because that a Favorite has the Princes Ear, that he disposes of the places
of the State, under his Authority, that he obtains of him what he will, he is
courted, a thousand Homages are done to him; do those Honors terminate in the
Prince because of that? Is he bound to own them and regard them, as if done to
himself? A Man that would say such a thing, would not he render himself
ridiculous? Who ever heard, that Worship does not terminate in that Person
which is the immediate Object thereof? Those Gentlemen conceive, that they have
right to say what they please, and that we are bound to believe them on their
Word.

2. But though it should be the Intention of those that invoke Saints to
terminate all their Worship in God, would that Intention suffice to effect the
thing? If it were so, there would never have been any Idolaters, that is to
say, Persons that had adored Images or Idols. For there was never any Religion
so brutish, as to terminate their Worship upon Brass or Wood, Silver or Gold,
whereof the Image is compounded. If any Person have done it, it must not be
imputed to the Religion. Those Idolaters referred their Worship to the Deity,
which was represented by the Idol. The Israelites had not offended God in the
Worship of the Golden Calf; for it is as certain, as any thing can be so, that
their Adoration was referred to that God, who had brought them out of Egypt,
whom they had design to adore under the Sign of that Calf. In fine; A Man that
should take a Tree, a Dog, a Horse, and should adore him, referring his Worship
to God in his Intention, would not be guilty, for his Worship would terminate
in God. We must know then, that to the end our Adoration may terminate in God,
it suffices not that it be the Intention of him that adores; but God must
accept that Adoration. Nothing terminates in God, but what God is willing to
receive. It Is useless to have an Intention to serve God by certain Actions, if
those Actions be condemned of God; they are against him, and not for him.

Methinks I have read, in the very Theology of those Gentlemen, That the
infinite Baseness of Sin arises from its establishing our last End different
from God. So every Sin, so far as in it lies, snatches away God from his
Throne, in taking away from him the Title of Ultimate End, to give it the
Creature; and that is an infinite Crime. But what shall we say to so many
Actions Criminal, that have God's Honor for their Object? Of those Bloody
Persecutions which have shed the Blood of the Faithful, with the Thought, That
they did therein Service to God? Of so many Superstitions, which have been
practiced to the Honor of the Deity? How can those Crimes be accused of
setting up another End, besides God, seeing they are done in honor to God? It Is
nevertheless certain, that those Actions do not terminate in God; and there is
no other reason for it, but that he abhors them, and has forbidden them. They
terminate then in the Vanity of their Imaginations, and in the Illusions of the
heart of those false Zealots, and of that bad Devotion, and do not reach God.
Semblably, the Worship that Men render to the Creatures, with Intention of
referring it to God, is carried out to the Creatures themselves, because that
God suffers it not to reach unto himself.

Here my Lord of Condom makes a Course into Antiquity, and will draw his
advantage from thence, in that we acknowledge, That Men began to invocate
Saints about the end of the Fourth Century. But that is a Proof, and not an
Explication. I have not obliged my self to follow him through all. I Will only
say, That then they did not invocate Saints, as they do at this day. They did
not pray to them in the Ordinary Service. They constrained none thereto, they
did not build Temples to them, they did not Sacrifice the Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ to their honor. Moreover, we profess, that we will only imitate
the Apostles and their immediate Successors.

ARTICLE V. Of the Invocation of the Saints.
ALL that is general. My Lord of Condom begins to descend to Particulars. The
Invocation and Worship of Saints, is assuredly one of the things that does most
separate us from the Roman Church. Mean while, if he be believed, the vain
Terrors that we conceive therein, proceed only from their having given an ill
Turn to an Action the most innocent of all. It Is nothing to see that Religious
Worship that should be entirely given to God, divided between Him and a
thousand Creatures. It Is nothing to hear Matins, Masses, Vespers, filled with
Litanies, Songs and Praises, that tend to the honor of those Creatures. It Is
nothing to see those Devoti, who having almost wholly neglected the Name of
God, do cause to resound in their Exercises of Piety only the Names of the holy
Mother of God, and of other Saints. It Is nothing to see the Calendar crowded
with an infinite number of Days dedicated to the honor of Saints, whilst that
God has appropriated to himself but fifty or fifty two. All Religion is to be
for God, all first Notions are for that. Pietas erga Parents, Religio erga
Deum, said the Pagans themselves. Yet it is nothing to give Religious Worship to
the Creatures, and to divide Religion between God and them. My Lord of Condom
has prevented that difficulty, telling us, That this Worship is called
Religious only, because it terminates in God. But I think also we have Answered
it sufficiently, and have well proved, That Worships forbidden of God cannot be
referred to him.

Behold another Color, which is diffused thereon. The Church in telling us,
[That it is useful to pray to Saints, teaches us to pray Exposit. page 19, 20.
to them with the same Spirit of Charity, and according to those Orders of
fraternal Charity, which carries us on to demand the Succor of our Brethren
living on the Earth. We pray to them in the same Spirit, that we pray to our
Brethren that are on Earth, to pray with us and for us to our Common Master, in
the Name of our Common Mediator Jesus Christ. Therefore, according to the
Catechism of the Council Advertisement, p. 50.
of Trent, we use two Forms of Prayer* very different; seeing that whereas in
praying to God, the proper manner is to say, Have mercy on us; Hear us: We are
content to say to the Saints, Pray for us.]. There is nothing more specious.
That is reduced to Two things: One, That they invoke Saints, but in saying to
them, Pray for us. The other, That this Prayer* is put up with the same Spirit,
that it is done to the Saints that are on Earth. Those Gentlemen should know,
that though all that were true, yet could not we be satisfied; for in matter of
Religion, we would have nothing but what is founded on Precept or Example. God
has not commanded us any where to invocate glorified Saints, in the same
Spirit, that we pray our Brethren that are on Earth to pray for us. Besides,
they being perfectly assured, that Souls separate from their Bodies do not
understand us, Reason would forbid us loading our Service with useless
Invocations.

But it is a strange thing, that they will still produce to us the same Facts,
with so much confidence, without having answered the Proofs that we bring to
the contrary. To see that air of Assurance, wherewith these Gentlemen say, we
say nothing else to the Saints, but Pray for us; would not one believe that
there is nothing more true? Yet let him but read the Books of Devotion of the
Roman Church, to be soon persuaded of the contrary. Why then in the Hymn, that
begins, Exultat Coelum laudibus, etc. do they say to the Apostles, [You that
shut up Heavens by your Word, and who open them at your Command, loosen us of
our Sins, we pray you for it: You that have power over H alth and Sickness of
all, heal us of our ill Manners, and inspire Virtues into us.] In the Hymn
which begins, Lux Mundi beatissima, do not they speak thus to the Virgin, [We
pray you with a Suppliant Voice, that you would please to be present with us?
Come sweet Lady, deliver us out of all our Evils, and bestow on us the Gifts of
Heaven.] In the Hymn called, Maris Stella, they say, [Oh singular Virgin,
Debonnair among all, defend us from our Guils, render us Chaste and Mild, give
us a pure Life, prepare us in the sure Way, to the end, that seeing Jesus, we
may enjoy an eternal Joy.] We have an hundred times reproached those Gentlemen,
that of Jure Matris impera, of the Old Missals, and the Monstra te esse Matrem;
but we shall still have right to reproach them therewith, till satisfaction be
given us by Reason for it. Instead thereof they renew the same, and publish
them in French, that none might be ignorant thereof; [Oh*bend, by thy power,
both of Mother and Queen, thy Son and our King:] That is Office of the Church
of Paris, with Petit. 1672. page 430.
but from the Year 1672. Methinks the Date is fresh enough, and that they should
not accuse us to have dug up Books buried in Oblivion, and old Excesses,
that are no more in use. One should Copy and Transcribe all the Missals,
Breviaries, and all other Books of Devotion, if one would relate all. Why then
do those Gentlemen say, They only pray the Exposit. page 22.
Saints to pray for us? [It's, say they, that in whatever Terms the Prayers are
conceived that we address to Saints, the Intention of the Church, and of her
Faithful Ones, still reduces them to that form.] Its long since Bellarmine had
advised us thereof. As for Words, De Beatitud. Sanctorum. lib. 1. cap. 17.
it is permitted to say, Oh St. Peter have mercy on me, save me, open me the Gate
of Heaven; give me health of Body, give me patience, give me Courage, etc. So
that we understand, Save us and show us Mercy, in praying for us. That might
surprise us indeed.

First, I would fain know, what would these Gentlemen say of a Man, that would
say in good earnest to St. Peter, Save me, and pardon my Sins; without reducing
them to this Form, St. Peter, pray for me. By those things which my Lord of
Condom says, I have cause to believe, he would look on him as an Idolater; for
he says, that the Exposit. page 14.
Church teaches, [That Men must cleave to God, as to Him who alone can make up
our felicity, by the Communication of an Infinite Good, which is himself.] But
is it not a terrible thing to put into the Mouth of the People such
Formularies, as do cast them every day into the peril of Idolatry? Where are
the Men that are not naturally carried to take Words in their Literal sense?
The Literal sense of these Words of St. Peter, Save me, Pardon me, carries Men
to believe, that St. Peter can Save and Pardon. Must a simple Man have still at
his Ear an Interpreter, to tell him, Take heed of taking these Words in their
Literal sense; you would commit an act of Idolatry; reduce these Prayers to the
Sense of the Church. In a word, I never could conceive what Prudence there can
be in hiding a pious and devout Sense under Expressions altogether Criminal; Is
it not to lay a Snare continually for the Souls of the Simple?

2. It Saints have no other Charge than that of Praying to God for us, why are
they made the Governors of the World under God? It Is a De Beatid. Sanct. lib.
1. cap. 18.
Thesis that Bellarmine maintains with diverse Proofs, and which is not
contested; That the Faithful alive are not only conducted and governed by
Angels, but also Coster. Enchirid. Contrevers. cap. 12. page 4.
by the blessed Spirits. Another Author says, [That if Kings destroy Armies of
Enemies, if the Rich relieve the Poor, if Physicians with their Art heal
Maladies; Saints can do the same thing, as well as the Angels, whereof one
killed 185000 in one Night; another restored Sight to Toby, and a third
delivered St. Peter from Prison.] Governors do not always go to the Prince to
present him the Requests of Suppliants; they act of themselves according to the
extent of their Commission.

3. If Saints have no Superintendency on Inferior things, why then are
Kingdoms, Towns, Families, and particular Persons put under their Protection?
Why have Men's several Conditions, differing Arts and differing Evils, their
particular Saints? St. Luke is Patron of Physicians, St. Yves of Advocates, St.
Crispin of Shoemakers. They that are in danger of Shipwreck invoke St.
Nicholas, Bishop of Mire. Women in labor pray to St. Margaret. St. Roch is
prayed to for the Plague; and St. Apollony for the Toothach. All that clearly
supposes, that the Saints have received Commission under God, to have care of
certain Persons, and to preside over certain things; for otherwise, the first
coming to hand of all the Saints would suffice to receive the Prayers of Men in
whatever place they were, and present them to God. They do then something by
themselves.

4. If all Devotion for Saints be reduced to saying to them, Pray for us; why
have they censured, the Saving Advices of the Virgin to her indiscreet Devoti?
For, in fine, that Author had no other Aim, but to bring thither the Prayers of
Devout ones. He would have them say, [Holy Mother of God, supply by your
Praises, near the Almighty, what our weakness cannot render to him, and obtain
for me, from your beloved, the Grace to know, etc.] Yet has that Book been
censured at Rome and in Preface to the Book of Father Cresset.
Spain, as containing Propositions suspected of Error, some Impieties and
abuses of Scripture, as withdrawing the Faithful from piety and Devotion to the
Mother of God, and from her Invocation. This last word is very remarkable: That
Book withdraws from the Invocation of the Virgin. He withdraws not from that
Invocation, Pray to God for us; on the contrary, he gives a Formulary express
to invoke her so. He withdraws then from the Invocation of the Virgin only,
because he would not have them to ask of her directly those things, as if she
were the Disposer thereof.

5. Finally, If the Sense of the Church be, That Men pray the Saints to pray
for us, and no more, why do they not censure so many Authors that tell us
neatly, That Saints give, forgive, save, and distribute Graces themselves?
C^sterus writing on the Hymn, Ave Maris Stella, and explaining these words,
Loosen the Bonds of the Guilty, thus Glosses thereon, Solve Precibus, Solve
Merito, Solve Auhoritate, Solve Imperio; Loosen with thy Prayers, Loosen by thy
Merit, Loosen by thine Authority, Loosen by thy Command. I am tempted to add
here all the like sayings of Bonaventure, Gerson, Cajetan, Albert, Ozorius,
Salazar, Bernardine de Bustis, and of Sienna, Driedo, Father Binet, Viega,
Gabriel Biel, Antonine, and an hundred others; that is to say, the Ancients and
Moderns, the lesser, the great and middle Authors. But I will not yield to that
Temptation, for it would be an infinite work, and we shall see anon that Father
Cresset has spared us that labor.

When they speak to us face to face, they tell us, Those are brave Authors
indeed: Must we judge of the Sense of the Church by little popular Books, which
ignorant Bigots put into the Peoples hands? They are fallen into those Excesses
which honest Men do condemn. Yet these brave Authors are Canonized Saints; they
are called St. Bonaventure, St. Antonine, St. Bernardine. They dare not
publicly condemn, what they privately censure. So all things do still remain;
and if any venture to publish any Writing against these Devouts, it is presently
censured and suppressed. After that, they would have us on the credit of four
Words, drawn out of a Catechism, which the Council of Trent never saw nor
approved, we should belie our Eyes against what we read, and what is daily done
before us.

We ask pardon of my Lord of Condom, and of the Author of the Advertisement;
but we are bound to believe, that their Church does not simply invocate Saints
as Intercessours, but as Governors and Directors, who distribute according to
Gods Orders all the Good and Evil that befall the World. We will believe, that
he and many others would fain have things to go otherwise. But in fine, they go
so, and apparently they will go so still, yet for a long time. The Archbishop,
and the Bishop of such and such a place* suffer not that to be done in their
Diocese, say they to us. That may be, but an Archbishop, and some Bishops, are
not all the Roman Church; and maugre the Care of some Prelates of France, the
Devotion of Convents and Monks fails not to carry it on upon their Instructors.
And freely what may be said of Father Cresset's Devoti, it is that they follow
the Principles of their Religion; they show it as clear as the day, and the
others forsake them.

Behold the second Excuse of my Lord of Condom; We pray to the Saints glorified
in the same Spirit, wherein we pray the faithful, which are on the Earth, to
pray for us. This is a thing that I admire. I had believed hitherto, that a
Cause remaining the same, should produce the same effects. If Men invoke the
Saints which are in Heaven, in the same Spirit wherein they pray the Saints
that are on Earth, why should not the same Spirit produce the same Effects? In
Conscience what would these Gentlemen say, should they see a Man invoke one of
his Friends, or of his Neighbors, of whose Sanctity he should have a good
Opinion, build Temples or Chapels to him, name them with his Name, erect
Altars to him, place him or his Images on those Altars, prostrate himself at
his feet, kiss them, and make devout Prayers to him, consecrate Holy Days to
him, place him in his Oratories, make long Pilgrimages to prostrate himself
before him, celebrate the Sacrifice of the Mass in his honor, and request his
Merits and his Mediation before God; it is not enough to say, That such a Man
would pass for a Mad man; I am assured he would pass for an Idolater. Yet would
he say, I invoke and I serve this living Saint, with the same Spirit wherewith
you serve the glorious Saints. I have no other End, but to oblige him to have
care of me in his Prayers, Must there be so many Mysteries to solicit the
Charity of Saints, who burn with Zeal for the Salvation of the whole Church?
How can Men say, that Conducts more different than day and night, should
proceed from one and the same Spirit?

The Illusion which these Gentlemen would put upon us consists then, in that
they represent this Service, which they render to Saints, not so much as an
Invocation, but simply as a Prayer, that we would present to a Friend to pray
for us. And they do not advertize us, That the Service, which is rendered to
Saints, is a Religious Service, which embraces all the species of Services
which are rendered to God, Prayer, Confidence, Love, Praises and Kneelings. We
cannot but complain, there is no fair dealing in comparing things that are so
different. Was there ever any Man, which has called the Prayer presented to a
Saint upon Earth for to pray for us, a Service, how much less a Religious
Service! My Lord of Condom grants, Exposit. page 15.
That the Honor rendered to the Holy Virgin, and to the Saints, may be called
Religious. Would he also grant the same thing of the honor that is done to a
Saint on Earth, when he is prayed to pray God for us? If those Gentlemen would
but say things as they know them, would they not grant, that the Worship that
Men render to Saints is a kind of Religious Adoration? and does not my Lord of
Condom grant it, when he says, That [in a sense Adoration Exposit. page 44.
belongs only to God and to Jesus Christ; and that one may, in regard of that
sense, abuse those terms to render their Doctrine odious: but if we reduce
sincerely those terms to the sense they give to them, Objections then lose all
their force.] Do they not distinguish Adoration and Worship, in that of Latria,
Hyperdulia, and Dulia? The first is for God, the second for the Virgin Mary,
the third for other Saints. When a Gender is divided into its Species, each of
the Species may have the Name of the Genus. If Religious Adoration be divided
into Latria and Dulia, then may Dulia retain the Name of Adoration. It Is
infinitely distant, say they, from the Adoration of Latria, which is given only
to God. We are not agreed about that infinite distance; but though there were
the greatest difference of the one to the other, that would not hinder, but
both the one and the other might bear the Name of Adoration. There is a great
distance between Man and Beast; nevertheless, does this merit to bear the Name
of Animal as well as that? Father Cresset has not scrupled that; for he says
freely, that there are three sorts of Religious Adoration, and that one must
not only honor the Saints, but that he must adore them.

Finally, To convince those Gentlemen, the little Equity they show, in
comparing the honor which we give to the Faithful, when we recommend our
selves to their Prayers, to that which is rendered to the Saints: I would pray
them to consider, what would be said of a Man, that of his own Authority should
Canonize a Dead man, should build Temples and Altars to him, and cause him to
be publicly served? I am assured, that there would not be Thunders enough in
the Vatican to strike him down, although he were well assured of the beatitude
of his Saint by a Revelation. For it is not permitted to set any Person in the
Calendar, nor make him to be served and invoked publicly, before a solemn
Canonization issuing from the Holy Seat. But I would also willingly know, if
Men have need of Patents from Rome, for permission to say in all occasions,
public or private, to a Faithful alive, Pray for me? There must be many
Mysteries toward the one, and none to the other. Who sees not then, that they
put a prodigious difference between Serving or Invoking a glorified Saint, and
recommending* One self to the Prayers of a living Saint? And that things so
different cannot be done in the same Spirit.

In fine, Either let them tell us no more of the Service of the Saints, as of a
little business, and as of a Worship that cannot damnifie Piety, or let them
give us satisfaction for Father Cresset 's Book, Tract. 1. page 2.
who says, [That God ordinarily imparts no Grace to Men, but by the
Intercession of his Mother; and that she prays ordinarily but for those that
invoke her, and are devout toward her.] And that so, all those that are not
devout toward the Virgin, cannot he ordinarily Pap. 23.
saved; because that God, besides the Prayers of his Son, would have our
Salvation to depend on his Mother. He approves what Salazar says, That God
Page 34.
has made a Decree, not to confer his Grace to any Man, but at the Intercession
Page 36.
of Mary. And what Suarez says, That she cooperates to our Salvation in three
manners, viz. That she has merited the Incarnation, That she prayed for us on
Earth, and That she Sacrificed her Son willingly for the Salvation of Men. He
likes it that Men should say, That all Power belongs to her in Heaven and on
Earth, that nothing is impossible to her, and that she can Page 28.
save the most desperate: That she approaches God's Tribunal, not only as a
Servant praying to her Lord, but as a Mother commanding her Son. That she has
a kind of Page 37, 38.
Jurisdiction upon the temporal Processions of the Holy Ghost, that the Spouse
has a right on the Goods of the Spouse; that the Virgin being the Spouse of
the Holy Ghost, she has right to the distribution of his Graces, and a part in
his Communication. So that no Creature Page 39, 54.
has received any Virtue or Grace from God, which has not been dispensed by
the hands of this Charitable Mother; that Devotion to the Virgin is a mark of
Predestination; that a Devoto of the Virgin cannot be damned; that a business
cannot fail when it is in the hand of the Virgin. That she can command Jesus
Christ by Page 58. 60.
Authority of a Mother; that she yet retains a kind Maternal Authority upon his
Person, his Goods, and all his Power. That one must say roundly and without
mincing, with Arnold of Chartres and Richard of Page 61.
St. Lawrence, That she can do all that her Son can do; because the Son and the
Mother having but one Flesh, they possess individually the same Power, the Son
by Nature, the Mother by Grace. That though the Virgin hate Page 86.
the Sin, yet she loves the Sinners engaged in the greatest Crimes, and has
tenderness for them; that there is no Man, though never so wicked, who whilst
he is on Earth is forsaken of her Mercy: That she gets Souls out of Hell, Page
100.
that is, she has kept from descending into Hell the Souls of Profligates and
Thieves, already severed from their Bodies, and has wrought Miracles to give
them time to do Penance after their death, because they had been devoted to
her. Its there they find the admirable History of that Thief, whose Head was
cut off, and whose Head severed from his Body began to cry, Confession,
Confession, Confession. After which they had time to send for a Priest of the
next Town, and to set the Head on the Body. The Thief reported, That as soon as
his Head was cut off, the Devils immediately cast themselves upon his Soul, but
that the Virgin saved her from their Claws, because he had fasted on Saturday
to her Honor. It Is there also that they find the Miracle wrought in the Person
of a Soldier, who had always been most devout to the Virgin. He was murdered,
and remained Page 104.
several years under a Bush; the flesh of his Karkass was eaten away, and the
Thorns had passed quite through his Body: Yet his Soul remained within, by the
Virgins favor, till that Corpse found means to confess himself. Another Man
fallen into the Danube, was three days in the bottom of the Water; but at last
he Page, 105.
heard a Voice, which said to him, O Man, thou meritest to lose thy life, and
to be damned for thy Crimes; but because thou art a Servant of the Mother of
God, thou shall be delivered from this danger, that thou may confess thy
self. It Is there also that Father Cresset assures us, That it cannot be denied,
without rashness, that many Children died without Baptism, many Idolaters dead
in their Idolatries, and consequently descended into Hell, have been raised up
by the favor of the Saints and of the Virgin, to receive Baptism and to do
Penance, that they might be received into Heaven. It Is that Father Cresset
that prays thus to the Virgin, Mother of Mercy have pity on me, etc. Preserve
me in your Family; if I wander, redress me; if I combat, defend me; if I be
wracked, save me, receive my Soul into your hands. It is he that says, That
the dignity of the Virgin is in some sort infinite. That Men must give a
Religious Adoration to the Saints and to the Angels; that all Adoration is a
kind of Honor, but that all Honor is not Adoration. That it is not enough to
honor the Saints, but that we must adore them too. That we owe to the Virgin
that kind of Adoration which is called Hyperdulia; that the quality of Mother
of God renders her worthy of Adoration; that the Angels adore the Virgin, and
have adored her even before she was in the World. That Temples must be built to
her, Feasts consecrated, and Vows made.

Methinks the least honor that can be done to a Religious man, of Father
Cressets Learning, who has above a thousand Citations of Authors ancient and
modern, is to believe, that he knows his Religion, the least thing that can be
granted to a Provincial of a famous Order, who has given Approbation to the
Examinators, appointed by the King to grant the Privileges to the Archbishop
of Paris, who thought fit that his Printer should attend this Work, is to
believe, that they knew their Religion: When should they know it, if they knew
it not in the Year 1679. after it has been so examined, so attacked, and so
defended? Whence is it that Father Cresset has not profited by the Expositions
of my Lord of Condom? How dares he expose to the view of all the Earth a Book
that carries its Condemnation in the Forehead, by the Opposition he has to the
Book of the Exposition of the Catholic Doctrine, approved by the Pope? We
cannot sufficiently admire the Providence of God, who labors for our
Justification, and uses the Roman Church her self to dissipate all the
Disguises, whereby they would steal from us the knowledge of their Worship and
of their Devotions. Would we have yet another Witness besides Father Cresset?
We have the Author of the Saving Advices of the Holy Virgin to her indiscreet
Devouts: It Is one of those moderate Catholics, who disapproves the Excesses of
the Virgins Devouts. That Author grants, That the People, the Prelates, the
Doctors and Preachers, do honor the Virgin as a Second Deity; that they render
her a Worship which is due to God only; that they put their whole trust in her;
that they lift her up above her Son; that they give her all the glory of our
Salvation. It Is Father Cresset himself that teaches us that. And when should we
have done, if we would cite all that Father Mainbourg, in his History of the
Icenoclastae; and what so many others have said lately to establish that
Worship of the Virgins and of the Saints. For in fine, Let any one visit the
Presses and Libraries of St. James' Street, or go to Michallet or all the
others, let him see if ever more Books were printed fit to nourish People in
the Worship of Saints, and entertain them in those Excesses, that Men fain to
condemn. It Is there, that Men shall find the Slavery of the Admirable Mother of
God; the Worship and Veneration which is due to the Nine Orders of the
Celestial Hierarchy; the Life of St. Josse, and that of St. Peter; the Chaplet,
or perpetual Adoration of the most Holy Sacrament; l'Abbriege del Indulgences;
the Statutes of the Brothers and Sisters of the Third Order of the Holy
Trinity, and Redemption of Captives; the Mysteries of the Virgin; the
Panegyricks of St. Rose by the Father Oliva, General of the Jesuits. All these
Books, and a thousand others are newly printed; and there we find a Theology
and Devotions, which should cause a true Grief to them that are truly jealous
of the Glory of God and of his Honor.

Nothing is more capable to make us see in what Spirit Men serve and invoke the
Saints, than the Sacrifice of the Mass, which they celebrate to their Honor.
My Lord of Condom makes an Article thereof, and turns the thing to the fairest
side; let him not take it ill, if we examine it in its Native state. That they
may not accuse us of Calumniating, I will represent here the very Words of the
Council of Trent: If any one maintain, that it is an abuse to celebrate Masses
to the honor of Sess. 22. Can. 5.
Saints, and to obtain their Intercession with God, as the Church understands,
let him be Anathema. Here is happily the strangest thing in the World, and
which has not been well considered of to this day.

They offer a Sacrifice to the honor of a Creature. It Is true that the Council
of Trent says formally, that they offer not Sacrifices to Saints. But these
Gentlemen will permit us to observe that in every Tongue, to do Service to some
Person, or to do it in honor of that Person, signify the same thing. We say,
The Pagans have built Temples to their False gods, and to the honor of their
False gods: They have established Feasts to the honor of Demons, and to
Demons; they have made Sacrifices to Idols, and to the honor of Idols. We
believe then, that we say by the second Expression the same thing as by the
first. Men do not speak otherwise in the World. They say, Men have erected a
Statue to the Prince, or to the honor of the Prince; they have put up this
Triumphers Ark to the King, or to the honor of the King. Those Gentlemen must
make us Vocabularies quite new, and advertize us, that they are not pleased to
speak like all Mankind. Let Us a little unravel this confused Idea. [They may
offer the Sacrifice of the Mass to the honor of a Saint, by the hand of a
Priest.] That is to say, They may offer a God to our God, to the honor of a
Creature by the hands of another Creature. The Victim is God the Son; he to
whom they offer him is God the Father; he to whose honor he is offered, it is a
Saint, a Creature; and he that offers is a Priest, that is to say, another
Creature. If that be not called, to go against the Order observed in all the
Religions of the World, I know not how it may be called. In every Religion, Men
observe in all their Sacrifices a certain gradation of Dignity among these
Three things; The Minister of the Sacrifice; the Oblation; and he to whose
Honor the Oblation is offered. The Oblation is always the least excellent; for
before time, they were only Animals. He that offered was much more excellent,
because it was a Man. But lastly, He to whose honor the Sacrifice was offered,
was infinitely greater than the Priest, seeing they considered him as God. And
even this Order is found in this admirable Sacrifice of the Cross, which seems
to be gone beyond all Rules. The Human Nature, which is the Victim, is in the
lowest degree of Dignity: The Lord Jesus Christ, as God and Man together, is
the Sacrificer, and under that regard he is more than the Victim. In fine, He
in whose honor this Sacrifice is offered, it is God, who is superior both to
the Victim and to the Sacrificer. For although the Lord Jesus Christ be equal
in all things to his Father, by his Divinity; yet considered as God and Man, he
is Inferior; and its in this regard, that he says, The Father is greater than
I. But in the Sacrifice* which they celebrate to the honor of Saints, this
Order is turned upside down. The Victim is infinitely more excellent than he to
whose Honor it is offered; for they offer the Body of Jesus Christ to the
honor of Saints.

Behold a thing which may yet seem more incomprehensible. The Council of Trent
says, That Jesus Christ, who offered himself on the Cross, is the same who
offers himself this day by the Ministry of the Priests; that is to say, that
Jesus Christ offers himself; he is then properly the Sacrificer. His Sacrifice
is celebrated to the honor of the Saints; thence it follows, that Jesus Christ
offers himself to his Father to the honor of the Saints. To offer to the
honor of the Saints, it is to honor and to serve them. So Jesus Christ, who
is the Master and the Creator, serves and honors the Saints, which are the
Creatures, in Sacrificing himself to their honor. Methinks this Consequence
comes not far, yet it appears to me terrible.

Here is another that is but little less. In all Sacrifices the Sacrificer is
the Suppliant, and he that demands favors. He to whose honor men offer, is
the Person of whom these favors are demanded; and the Victim is the Means, by
which the Suppliant inclines him, of whom he demands. Here, the end is to
implore the Protection of the Sess. 22. c. 3. and Can. 3.
Saints, and to obtain their Intercession with God. They are the very words of
the Council. He that labors to obtain this Grace is the Sacrificer, and this
Sacrificer is Jesus Christ, the Victim; by means whereof he essays to obtain
this Grace, it is his Body and Blood. Gather all these things together, and
say, The Son of God, God himself blessed for ever, offers to God the Sacrifice
of his Body and of his Blood, to obtain from a Saint his Protection and his
Intercession for the Faithful. According to that, is it not true, that Jesus
Christ renders himself Mediator and Intercessour with the Saints, sor to obtain
of those Saints the Grace of their Intercession for the Faithful? Can there be
any thing more opposite to the Rules of right Reason?

5. Here is a turn of Devotion to obtain something of God, which deserves to be
admired. They present to God a Sacrifice, for to obtain the Protection of
Saints and their Intercession with God. It Is that which is expressed by these
Words of the Mass: Reverencing the Memory of the glorious always Virgin Mary,
Mother of our God and Lord Jesus Christ; and also of thy blessed Apostles and
Martyrs, etc. by whose Prayers and by whose Names we pray thee, that we may be
furnished with the succor of thy Protection. Either I comprehend nothing
therein, or that signifies, That one goes first directly to God in offering
directly the Sacrifice to him; then God moved by the Sacrifice, must turn
himself toward the Saints, and being appeased by the Sacrifice, he obtains of
the Saints to intercede with Jesus Christ, to the intent, that in fine the Lord
Jesus Christ may intercede with him for them which have offered the Sacrifice.
Is it not true, that this course is a singular one? For if God be already moved
and appeased by the Sacrifice, why must he turn to the Saints, for to oblige
them to intercede for those People, toward whom he is already appeased? In a
word, what I conceive of it is, That the Roman Church offers to God their
Redeemer and Mediator Jesus Christ, that so God may render himself as
Mediator with the Saints, to oblige them to become Intercessours and
Mediators for Men, with him. I beseech these Gentlemen to regard that with an
uninterest'd Eye.

6. I cannot finish without returning again to the distinction, whereby they
believed they might disentangle themselves of all troubles and perplexities.
It Is, that they indeed offer the Sacrifice to the honor of Saints, but they
offer it to God alone. If those Sacrifices be offered only to God, I see not
what honor redounds thence to the Saint. I conceive well, that there is a
Sense wherein it is true to say, that in honoring the Master men honor the
Servant. It Is a great honor to a Servant to appertain to a puissant Master, to
whom all the World pays homage; and I consent, that we may say in this Sense,
that in adoring God we honor the Saints. But sincerely, is that the Sense
wherein they say, they offer to God the Sacrifice of the Mass to the honor of
Saints? If that were true, all the Prayers and all the Acts of Latria, that
those Gentlemen present to God, should be done to the honor of the Saints. Now
it is not so said: If the Sacrifice of the Mass were done in honor to the
Saints merely by way of reflection, because the Saints should receive Honor and
Joy to have a Master that is adored, all the Masses should equally honor all
the Saints: For they have equally Honor and Joy from all the Acts of Adoration
that are rendered to God. But this is not the thought of these Gentlemen; for
there are certain Masses which are offered to the honor of the Saints, and
others not. The Mass of St. Peter is not said to the honor of St. Roch, and
the Mass of St. Anthony does not honor St. Paul. This Consideration gives us
cause to believe, that besides the reflex honor which comes to the Saint from
the celebration of the Mass; there is also a direct Honor, that goes strait to
him. And consequently, my Lord of Condom must not think it strange, that we
look upon that as upon a Capital Affair; seeing that all Christians hold this
Principle, That the honor of Sacrifices is to be reserved to the Deity. After
this, if any be drawn into this Snare, That the Invocation of Saints is done in
the same Spirit, as the Prayers that we make to the Faithful upon Earth to pray
for us; I Will say without difficulty, that he designs to deceive himself.

I have been somewhat long upon this Chapter of the Invocation of Saints; yet I
cannot leave it without making two important reflections. The first is upon the
Council of Trent, which has used moderate Terms to establish this Invocation,
and which do not necessarily carry men to all the Excesses that we have blamed.
Thereupon I say two things: First, That the Council of Trent, which has
authorized this great Abuse, to offer the Sacrifice of the Body of Christ to
the honor of Saints, by that alone has authorized all the rest: for I esteem
all the rest are nothing in comparison thereof. The Second, That the Council of
Trent was assembled expressly to reform all Abuses; so that, it is judged to
have authorized all those, which he has not touched.

The other Reflection that I was willing to make, it is upon that saying of my
Lord of Expos. p. 45.
Condom, [That the Council of Trent contents it self to teach the Faithful, that
this practice of invoking Saints is good and useful, without saying any thing
more.] Men understand well what that signifies. Other Authors have expressed it
more clearly, and have said, [We make Henry Holden, de resolut. fidei, lib. 2.
cap. 7.
Profession to believe, that it is useless to invoke the Saints. But we teach not
as a Christian Verity, That all Catholics are obliged to an actual Exercise of
this Invocation. For one may be saved without it; and may be some Catholics
are saved, who never invoked any Canonized Saints in Heaven.] This is one of
the great Snares into which our People are caught; they tell them, If you like
not Invocation of Saints, let it alone. One may be saved well enough by
Invocation of God.

First, I say to that* How can one enter into a Church, wherein Saints are
invoked in the Public Service, without invoking them? One must first have
retrenched the Litanies, Hymns, and one half of the acts of the Public
Devotion. One must either deprive himself of the Public Service or partake of
the Invocation of Saints. That might have been said, if Saints were only
invoked in private. That is then a pure Illusion. Moreover do they conceive,
that it is but disowning the Worship in the Secret of one's Heart, for to have
no share therein! When a Man is, by choice of a Religion, not willing to take
another, he has a share in all the Devotions that are practiced, and which he
approves not. When the Public Minister prays, it is in the Name of all present,
and who make Profession external of adhering to the Worship performed though
they should reject it internally. In fine, I would ask those Gentlemen, If
Invocation of Saints be not necessary, why do they impose it on Christians? Why
must so many Faithful Ones be scandalized for a Point they can be without? Why,
not to be content with what all the World believes to be necessary, viz.
Invocation of God, without adding that which at least is Superfluous?

ARTICLE VI. Of Images and Relics.
WE pass to Images, which is the Fifth of my Lord of Condom's Articles. It is a
Chapter whereon no fewer things were to be said, than upon the preceding. But
in truth, one cannot resolve to say over always the same things. I will only
say, That one must not treat of it* as of a small business, nor imagine it to
be no obstacle to Reunion. The Worship of Images is a Practice of all most
opposite to the Spirit of Christianism, and the most contrary to the dignity of
Man. It Is to do great wrong to a Man, to oblige him to humble himself before
Wood and Stone, which are so far below him. Men should not flatter themselves:
It Is the great Scandal of the Jew, he has Images in abhorrence; and when he
looks on Christian Religion, on that side, he conceives a mortal aversion from
it. So we cannot imagine that to be a small Affair, an Article which retards
that great Work of the Conversion of the Jews, without which the Church will
never be perfect. But, say they, will Men never conceive, that it is a great
Wrong to compare or confound us with Idolatrous Pagans? It Is not true, that we
confound the Roman Church with the Pagans. Pagans adored the Images of wicked
Men, and even the Idols of Demons; the Roman Church serves the Images of
Saints, and of the Friends of God, viz. Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors. Those
Gentlemen will nevertheless permit us to tell them, That they put Pagans in
places, wherein they have not been, so to put an infinite distance between
those Pagans and themselves about the Service of Images, and suppose that
Pagans have adored their Images as gods. We should have a little better Opinion
of Men, who resembled us so much for ordinary use of Reason. They regarded
their Images, but as Pictures and Representations of their gods: If I could
here take the leisure, I would prove it with the clearest Evidence possible.

My Lord of Condom justifies his Church about Images, by these Words of the
Council of Trent, [Which forbid to believe any Expos. p. 34. Council. Trid.
Sess. 25.
Divinity or Virtue, for which it should be revered, have any Grace demanded
thereof, or fasten ones Confidence thereon.] I am surprised to see, that after
this Decree they suffer Prayers addressed to Images; and that Men should say to
the Cross, [O Cress, Breviary of the Roman Church by Order of the Council of
Trent, and Pius 5. May 3. Sept. 14.
more bright than all the Stars, famous in the World, amiable to all Men, holier
than all things; which alone have been worthy to bear the Talent of the World,
Sweet Wood that bear the Nails and the Sweet Weights, save this present
Assembly, that comes hither to celebrate thy Praises.] Every one knows the
solemn Prayer made to the Cross on great Feasts, particularly at Easter, in
Holy Week. [God save thee, our only Hope, in this time of the Passion, augment
the Righteousness of the Faithful, and grant Pardon to the Guilty,] I know well
what they say, That these Prayers are referred to Jesus Christ Crucified. It is
not the Sense of Thomas Aquinas, the Prince of the School; for he maintains,
That the Worship of Latria ought to be deferred to the Cross, and that Worship
to be distinct from that which is rendered to Jesus Christ. He proves it by the
Hymn, O Crux ave spes, etc. he concludes, [That the Cross, whereon Christ Jesus
has been Crucified, ought to be Sum. part. 3. q. 35. art. 4.
worshipped with Worship of Latria; both because of the representation, and that
it has touched the Members of Jesus Christ. As for the Images of the Cross, of
whatever matter they be, they must be adored with Latria, only of the first
sort, viz. with a Relative Latria.] He seems to have reason; for we cannot
conceive how they can have Intention to speak to Jesus Christ speaking to his
Cross, seeing they expressly distinguish Christ from his Cross; and that they
say to it, Arbor decora and fulgida, etc. Thou art a fair and bright Tree,
adorned with the Kings Purple, chosen cut of a precious Stock, to touch his
Holy Members.

I find that very good that the Council of Trent has declared, That there is
no virtue at all within the Image; but I cannot conceive how, after that, they
have left in the Roman Pontifical Prayers; which necessarily suppose, that
there is a Sanctifying virtue in the Images of the Cross: For Example, this
which the Bishop utters in blessing a new Cross, [Take then this Pontif. Roman.
Cross in thy hands, wherewith thou did formerly embrace it, and by the
Sanctity of that sanctify this; as by that, the World has been purged of his
Sins: so the Souls of thy Servants, that offer thee this Cross, by its Merit
may be preserved from all Sin.] After this Decree of the Council of Trent, I
know not why they tolerate the use of Agnus Dei, whereto they attribute, Libro
Sacr. Ceremon. tit. de Agn. Dei.
[Virtue of preserving from the Crafts of the Devil, and from the the Frauds of
the Evil Spirits, to keep from Shipwreck, to put under shelter from all
Adversity; to preserve from the Pest, from corrupt Air, the Falling Sickness,
Storm, Fires, Peril in Childbirth, and from all Iniquity.] I know not why they
go in Pilgrimage to an Image of our Lady more than to another. For in fine, If
Images have no other use than to recall the Memory of the Originals, they are
all alike. If the Spirit of the Council of Trent was opposite to these
Devotions, why were they not retrenched?

At the most, will they say, You cannot accuse the Church, but of Negligence
and Toleration; but you cannot oppose to the Council of Trent any thing that
may be of equal Authority. I oppose thereto Books little less authorized than
it, as the Pontifical and Roman Ceremonial, made by the Pope's Order, approved
and received by all the Roman Church* reviewed several times since the Council
of Trent. I oppose thereto, the general and constant practice of all the
Bishops, even of the most moderate. There is none of them that would bless a
Cross in other Terms, than those which are prescribed by the Pontifical. I
oppose thereto, the practice of the whole Roman Church; for if there be in
France and elsewhere, some honest persons, who have purer Sentiments, and which
are disingaged from Popular Errors; they make no Number in comparison of the
People of Italy, Spain, Germany and France it self, who are in this Practice.

My Lord of Condom, about this matter, goes farther than one could have
believed. He would fain persuade us, that in the Roman Church they do not serve
Images at all. [Our Intention is not so much to honor the Image, as to honor
the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image. We use Images but to lift up
our Spirit toward Heaven.] That is equivocal, and they say, That in Manuscript
Copies of this Work, which have ran through Men's hands long before it was
printed, my Lord of Condom spoke more strongly; but having seen the Success of
his Book, and seeing himself upheld by so great Approbation he is returned
thither, he goes freely through, Advertism. page 62.
and makes the Author of the Advertisement say, [We serve not Images, God
forbid, but we serve our selves of Images to raise us up to the Originals.]
These are things that will surprise, and which would never have been expected.
It Is good to observe, that the Advertisement was made after the Approbations.
One may say, with some assurance, that Italy would not have suffered this Word
to pass. However it be, my Lord of Condom may bless himself here, that he has
made an Example. He is the first that has dared to write that, and happily,
that has dared to say it. At least, I may assure never to have read it in any,
nor to have heard it from any person, though we see daily some of the most
moderate Doctors of the Roman Church.

It Is true, that most of these Gentlemen cannot endure to be accused of Adoring
Images. Thereupon we tell them; You are then more scrupulous than the most
Catholic Doctors, who say, That Vasquez. in 2. Thom. Tom. 1. disp. 108. cap.
1. Suarez. in 3. Thom. T. 1. disp. 45. and 5. Thom. qa. 25. art. 4. Bellarm. l.
4. c. 23.
all Catholics are agreed against Iconomacks, That some Worship and Adoration
is to be rendered to Images, but that there are diversities of Opinions among
them about the manner and nature of that Adoration. That though it be true,
That the Image is not to be adored, but because of the Original; yet must it be
adored in it self and properly, without adoring the Original. That the Images
of the Cross are to be adored with Adoration of relative Latria. That the Image
may be adored with that Adoration wherewith its Original is adored; properly in
truth, but by accicident; that we regard the Image as conjoined to the
Original, which is adored, and that because of that one may adore it by
Accident.] Behold already great Names in the Margin, and one might, without
hyperbole, add an hundred thereto. But we will go on, and say, You are more
scrupulous than the Writers of Port Royal, who are not accused to be
Superstitious, nor excessively Catholic. They make one of their Devouts speak
thus, [I kept my Miracle of the Thorn, page 7.
Bed for seven days, since that time, except that I rose thrice a day to go and
adore the Crucifix.] You are more Catholic than the Popes themselves, and than
the Books, whereof they are the Authors. More than the Roman Pontifical, which
in the Chapter of the Benediction of a new Cross, since that the Bishop bending
his knees before that Cross, adores it devoutly and kisses it. More than the
Missal, which on Holy Friday says of the Cross, Come and let us worship it. In
fine, we add, that this Scruple, of not being willing to use this Word of
Adoring, in speaking of the Service of Images, is a refined way unknown to the
Councils, which have established this Service; for the Second of Nice says
clearly, by the Mouth of Tarasius, That all those that will reverence Images,
and yet refuse Adoration to them, are accused of Hypocrisy by the Holy Father;
viz. by Anastasius, whose Testimony he was just then relating. This Council in
gross, writing to the Emperors Constantine and Irene, speaks thus to them, [We
believe, etc. that Men must adore and salute the venerable Images of our Lord
Jesus Christ, of the Virgin, pure Mother of God, and also of the glorious
Angels, and of all the Saints. And if any one be of another Spirit, and
questions whether Men must adore the holy Images, this holy and venerable
Coucil* does Anathematize him.]

We see some Authors, who being convinced sufficiently, that since 800 or 900
years no question has been made of using this term of Adoring to express the
Worship given to Images, are willing yet to use it; but they distinguish and
assure us, That they do not worship Images as gods. It Is that we willingly
believe. Happily among the Vulgar are found some stupid and simple Souls, that
do not well distinguish the Worship given to the Image from that, which is to
be rendered to God: We cannot forbear saying, That they who have established
this Service of Images, shall answer it to God for these Mistakes of the
Vulgar. But however, we impute it not to the Roman Church, that they worship
Images as gods: And I know not whether there ever were any People in the World,
to whom it may be attributed; for I can hardly believe, that there has been
any Religion brutish enough to give Divinity to Images of Wood, Stone, or
Metal.

These are the Colors that Men have hitherto diffused upon this Worship, to
render it tolerable to us. We serve Images by relation to Originals, said they.
We well know, that Figures of Wood, Stone, and Metal, have no Divinity at all,
and are in no way worthy to be served: What Service we give them is because of
Jesus Christ, the Holy Virgin, and other Saints, which they represent. My Lord
of Condom speaks not thus: We serve not Images, says he, God forbid. You are
not then of the Religion of the Second Council of Nice, nor of that of Sess. 25.
the Council of Trent, which confirms what was defined by the Decrees of
Councils, and particularly of the Second Council of Nice, against those that
opposed Images; which says expressly, That Men must have in the Churches the
Images of Jesus Christ, of the Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints, and
render to them the honor and Veneration due.] Which adds; in speaking of the
said Images, We kiss them, we salute them, we prostrate our selves before them.
All that is not to serve Images, if we believe my Lord of Condom. We see every
day before our eyes, that Images are clothed anew on Feast-days, that some are
carried in Pomp, that Men prostrate themselves before them, that they kiss
them, that they burn to their honor both Incense and Torches, that they place
them on Altars; and after all that they tell us, with an air of Assurance, We
serve not Images, God forbid. God be witness of the Justice of our Complaint,
and of the sincerity of this Justification.

My Lod of Condom says but one word of Relics, I will not say much more. He
may turn this Worship of Relics as pleases him; Expos. p. 39.
but he shall never make us relish the adoring of Ashes, Bones, Linnens, Wood,
and such other things. I would not pretend to be nicely quarreled about that
word of Adoring. I use it in the same sense that the Gentlemen of Port Royal,
who are exact enough in the choice of Terms. They say, in justifying the
Religious Nuns, That my Lord Bishop of Toul has thought good Answer to a
Writing about Holy Thorn, p. 7.
they should follow the Devotion of the People, and of many Persons of
Condition, which came, and are still coming to adore this Holy Thorn. They
relate of a Religious of Maisen Dieu at Vernon, That she would be carried to
Port Royal to adore that Holy Thorn. And of one Madam Durand, Page 14.
That she was cured of a Vomiting, which had troubled her for Two years Page 15.
Ten months, after having adored and kissed the Holy Thorn. They conclude at
last, It suffices to say, That if God did not make his help to be felt or
hoped, there are no Human Page 18.
Considerations that could carry so many Persons to come to the Towns end, to
adore this Holy Thorn in the Church of Port Royal. I dare assure, that no man
dare deny, that they should adore that Relick which is called, the Wood of the
true Cross. Yea, I know none to have condemned Thomas Aquinas, who would have
the true Cross to be adored with Latria. Indeed, we know not how else to call
the Action of a Person, that prostrates himself, that kneels and kisses a
Relick with Religious Devotion. We conceive not how my Lord of Condom can
imagine, that God takes well what is done when they lift up the Chaste of a
Saint, where we see a dreadful Concourse of People, which do humble and
prostrate themselves. Though Men say, that this Worship has its Source in God
himself, and returns thither. That which has not been commanded by God, has
not its Source in God; and what God disowns returns not to him.

Here, as in the matter of Invocation of Saints, they lay a Snare for them
which incline to change of Religion. They tell him, Well then, If the Worship
of Images and Relics displease you, let it alone. No body shall force you to
it, and you may well enough be saved without that Worship. But I conjure them
to remember what we have said. Men will not be acquitted, if leaving a good
Religion, and entering into a bad one, they only can say, I will hold me to that
which the bad Religion has of Good, and will leave what is not good. Men shall
answer before God for all the faults of the Church whereinto they have cast
themselves, and besides, the Crime of having partak'd of a false Worship, such
shall be guilty of the Crime of Hypocrisy.

ARTICLE VII. Of Justification and Merit of Works.
MY Lord of Condom passes to the matter of Justification and of the Merit of
Works. He pretends to draw a great Advantage from that, that this Dispute is
not now so heated as it was heretofore. He supposes it to have been a chief
Cause of our Separation. He adds, That our Learned Men contest not now so much
upon this Matter, as they did formerly; and that this important difficulty of
Justification is no more considered as Capital. Thence he concludes first, That
our Separation was rash. Secondly, That we ought to return to that Church out
of which we came forth, because of a Doctrine whereof we at this day
acknowledge the Innocence: That is it which these Words signify. [We must also
confess, That the Learned of their Side do no more contest so much upon that
matter, as they did at the beginning; and there are but few but will confess,
that they needed not have separated for that Point. But if this important
difficulty of Justification, whereof their first Authors made their Fort, is
not now any more considered as Capital by those who are most Judicious* among
them: We leave them to think what must be judged of their Separation, and what
might be hoped for toward Peace, if they did but get above Preoccupation, and
would but leave the Spirit of Disputes.] This is a reflection which infinitely
pleases those Gentlemen, they often repeat it. The Writers of Port Royal have
employed it in their Book of Prejudices; and Monsieur Arnaud makes a great Work
of it in his Book he has made against our Morals. As those two Books have been
answered with sufficient exactness, this Point was not then forgotten. Yet
seeing those Gentlemen think good to repeat often their Objections to us, they
must suffer us to let them see our Answers also. Behold then the Reflections
which we oppose to them of my Lord of Condom.

1. It Is not altogether true, that the difficulty of Justification has been
the Fort of our Reformers. It was not there they began. One may read a Bull of
Leo the Tenth, after the Year 1520, against Luther. That was the first
declaration of War, and it is thence that one may compute the beginning of our
Separation. That Bull condemus 35 Articles of Luther's Doctrine, there is none
of them that directly concerns Justification. In Conscience, though we were
agreed about that matter, would it be a great advance toward Reunion? What
would be done with Worship of Saints, Service of Images, Adoration of the
Eucharist, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and an hundred other things? People do
little understand matters of Justification and of Grace. And what is not
popular, is not to the People a cause of Separation, and can neither be for
them a way of Reunion, though it were agreed on. It would be unhandsom enough
and strange, if we should go and tell our People; The Doctrine of the Roman
Church is much more pure about Grace and Justification, than it was formerly;
make no more question hence forward to prostrate your selves before Images,
invoke Creatures, serve the Saints, believe that the Body of Christ is in the
Bread of the Eucharist, to adore that Bread as God, and to present every day
the Body of Christ in Sacrifice.

2. I agree nevertheless, That our Reformers have made of the Errors of the
Roman Church about Justification, a Capital Affair; and I maintain, that they
had reason for it, in the State wherein they found the Doctrine of the Roman
Church about this Point. One may see, without Exaggeration, that the Roman
School, before the Council of Trent, was Pelagian. She taught, [That Man,
without the help of Vasquez. in Tom. 1. disp. 91. cap. 20.
Grace can prepare himself to Justification by Works truly good; that Man by
the strength of Nature, may have a serious and a true grief for his Sins, by a
Principle of Love, which loves God better than all things else, and that this
is the last and next disposition to Grace habitual Justifying; that it is a
true Merit, not indeed of Condignity, but of Congruity; and that this
Contrition coming after to receive its form, by the reception of habitual Grace
becomes Merit of Condignity for the Kingdom of Heaven.] So Vasquez explains
this Sense, and attributes it to Scoto, to Gabriel Biel, and Cajetan, that is
to say, to the Princes of the School. Estius attributes it also to William of
Auxer, Durandus, St. Portien, Thomas d'Argentine and Almainus. It cannot be
denied, but that the Franciscans defended this Opinion in the Council of Trent
with the utmost Ardor. In Conscience, had not they reason to rise against such
a Sentiment? Lewis of Catanea, and the Dominicans of his side, who maintained
the Doctrine of Grace, according to St. Augustine, in the said Council, did
they not say, That they were not able enough to distinguish that Theology from
that of Pelagius? Those very Persons, did they not also go further; did they
not teach, That Man can do without Grace, and by the force of Nature, all that
he does by the succor of Grace? Viz. That he can love God more than all things
else; to have a true Grief for offending God, not only of Attrition, by the
fear of Pain; but of Contrition, by a chaste Fear, and by a Principle of Love?
To obey all Evangelical Commands, believe truly, to be filled with Charity, and
upheld by Hope? This was the Sense of Gabriel Biel, Occam, Cajetan, Dominicus a
Soto, who was in the Council of Trent; these are not Imputations. Molina
justifies himself in his Book de Concordia liberi arbitrii cum Gratiae donis,
in citing all these Authors for himself. Is there any thing more Pelagian, more
opposed to the Doctrine of St. Augustine, who supposes and proves so often,
That the best of Men's Actions, done without Grace, are but illustrious Sins?
Though it were true to day, that the Roman Church were returned from that, were
there any right to accuse our Reformers for calumniating her? And could they
say, That all our Reformation is founded on Calumny? Were they bound to have a
Spirit of Prophecy, and to foresee, that the School of Thomas, which then did
not make any figure in the World, would reform it self, would resume some
force, and would labor to reestablish part of the Doctrine of St. Augustine
about Grace?

But I add, That we have not the like cause to be content with the Council of
Trent, about the Doctrine of Justification, as they would persuade us. Why has
it kept measures with Pelagian Opinions? Why did they not condem them? And why
did they affect an Ambiguity, through which they save themselves that renew
Pelagianism? By that Ambiguity of the Canons of the Council of Trent, the
Author Page 85.
of the Advertisement would satisfy us in a word; [It's true, says he, there
are some Matters which the Council would not decide, and they were such whereof
the Tradition was not constant, and whereof they disputed in the Schools.]
What, the Matters of Grace against Pelagians were then but vain Disputes of the
School, about which it was not prudent to pronounce? Had it not been defined in
the Second Council of Orange, that it is a Gift of God, when we have good
Thoughts, that we turn away our feet from Error and Injustice: That as often
as we do good, God acts in us, that Council. Arausic. An. 529. Can. 9.
we may be able to act: That we cannot prevent Grace by any Merit; and that the
good Works that are done without Grace merit not any recompense: That the Grace
which is not due to us, prevents us, that we may do good Works. That it is the
Gift of Can. 18.
God to love him: That he gives us to Love, because he loves us before we love
him: That of our selves we have nothing but Sin and Lie. That God does in Man
many Can. 20.
good things without Man; but that Man does no good, but what God makes him to
do. That the Virtue of Pagans was a worldly Cupidity, but that of Christians is
the Charity Can. 17.
of God, which is shed abroad in our hearts, not by the force of Free Will,
which is in us; but by the Holy Ghost, which is given us. --

There can nothing be more opposite to the Opinions of the School of Scotus,
who teaches, That Man, of himself, may do all kind of good, keep all the
Commands in their substance, love God above all, do Acts of Contrition, of true
Faith, true Hope, and thereby prepare himself for Justification by a Proxime
preparation. Yea, will they say, but the Council of Trent has condemned those
lax Opinions which smelt of Pelagianism. If they condemned them, why are they
yet alive in the Roman Church? It Is an important Point, and that must be
proved. The School of Scotus, of Molina, and the Molinists, carries it by far,
and has still carried it, since the Council of Trent, against the School of
Thomas and the new Thomists. This School of Molina teaches formally, That all
the Acts of Faith, of Love, of Repentance, of Hope, which are necessary for the
Justification of an adult Infidel, may be produced as to the Substance of the
Concord. lib. Arbitr. disp. 7, 8. 13, 14.
Work, by a Man, in the state of Nature corrupt, with the only forces of Free
Will. That Divine Mysteries are indeed so high, that a Man without Revelation
could not find them out; but when they are revealed to him in a convenient
manner, without any other Grace, than an external Revelation and the Command of
God to believe, he may do Acts of true Faith, and receive those Mysteries with
full certitude. This School says the same of Contrition, of God's Love, etc.
and if Men will not believe us, let them believe Molina himself. Since the
Council of Trent have they not maintained, Preparations for Grace by the forces
of Nature only, with as much Estius in Sent. lib. 2. did. 26. par. 35.
Alphons. a Castr. de leg. Pen. lib. 2. ca. 14.
violence as before. Estius teaches us, that Alphonsus a Castro does teach,
That Man by the force of Nature and Free Will, in doing that which is in him
for observation of Nature's Law, in the same Moment receives the Grace of God;
because that Divine Bounty suffers not, that a Man that lives Morally well, be
deprived for a Moment of that Grace, which may render him* worthy of Eternal
life, though he be not instructed in the Faith of Christ, and do not yet put
his hope in him. We learn from the same Estius, that Dominicus a Soto, who was
present at the Council of Trent, and made there so much stir in the Disputes
about Grace. Melchior, Canus, Franciscus a Victoria, and many others, do
maintain Preparations for Grace under another form, and say, That Attrition,
which may be had by the only strength of Nature, is sufficient, with the
Sacrament, to obtain the Grace of Justification. Vasquez is our Witness, that
Ricard, Antony of Pantuse, and many others have held, since the Council of
Trent, That one may by the force of Nature, obtain the Succor which is needful
to pepare ones self immediately to the Grace of Justification. Ricardus
Tapperus and John Driedo, Professors in the University of Lovain, have taught,
That God fails not to come to him that makes a good use of his Natural
strength, by the practice of some Works morally good; and that he gives him the
Succor of his Grace for to dispose him to the remission of Sins. All that is
formally contrary to the Decisions of the Church against the Pelagians. Yet all
these Theologues have pretended to follow the Sense of the Council of Trent. I
demand then of these Gentlemen, who assure us, that the Canons of this Council
have no ambiguity, whence comes this diversity of Senses? If the Canons of the
Council are not ambiguous, why do they suffer Persons, who teach Pelagian
Errors condemned by Canons clear and precise? How can it be, that Alphonsus a
Castro, who is such a Catholic, should maintain Semi-Pelagianisme pure with
such a violence, that he accuses the contrary to his of Impurity and Heresy.
If it be true that this contrary Opinion be that of the Council of Trent.
Dominicus a Soto was present at the Council, he knew their Spirit, and should
have known it; yet, from the time of the Council of Trent, he put to light a
Book Natura and Gratia, wherein he maintains by the Canons of the Council all
his Semi-Pelagian Opinions. At the same time, Andrew Vega, a Franciscan, and
Ambrose Catharin, Bishop of Minori, made other Books, whereby they found
therein Opinions quite contrary. And Catharin also found in the Decisions of
the Council, the Opinion which he had defended in the Congregations; that is,
That Man may be assured of himself that he is in Grace. One cannot avoid it, as
pretends the Author of the Advertisement, in accusing the fair dealing of Fr.
Paolo, who has written the History of this Council. For the Works of Soto, of
Vega, and of Catharin, do subsist at this day. And though some of them were no
more to be found, it would be no less true, that they have been.

But do we need other Proofs, to prove the Ambiguity of the Canons of the
Council of Trent, than the Canons themselves? The Author of the Advertisement,
reproaches Anonymus, who has Answered my L. of Condom, That he could not cite
any one Canon of this Council, that is Ambiguous. In Truth, I know not whether
there be any that is not ambiguous in this matter of Justification, except
those which condemn the Lutherans. The first and second of these Canons say,
[That besides the Forces of Human Nature and the Doctrine of the Law, Grace is
necessary to Man to be justified, and for to deserve Eternal life.] Would not
Semi-Pelagians have signed these Canons? And will that hinder at this day
Thousands of People from teaching with the Semi-Pelagians, That Grace is not
efficacious of it self, but by the Liberty of Man; that it is not Grace that
determines Man at Conversion; that God gives every Man a certain sufficient
Grace, whereof the good and ill usage do absolutely depend on the Will of Man?
So that it is Man that distinguishes himself, and not Grace that distinguishes
Man, contrary to what St. Paul says so precisely, Who is he that puts a
distinction between thee and another? What have thou, that thou have not
received?

The Third Canon says, [That without the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost and his
Succors, a Man cannot Believe, Love or Repent, to obtain the Grace of
Justification.] That is good, but what need was there to thrust in a Sicut
oportet; Man cannot Believe, Hope and Love (as is needful) to receive the Grace
of Justification. By the favor of this had Word, the School of Molina
maintains its Pelagianism, That without the Grace and the Succor of the Holy
Ghost a Man may believe, and do true acts of Faith, of Hope, of Contrition, and
love God more than all things else. And when it is pressed with the Canon of
the Council of Trent, she saves her self by the Sicut oportet. She says, the
Canon says not absolutely, That without Grace Man cannot do true Acts of
Faith, of Love, and of Contrition; but it says, That he cannot do them in that
manner that is needful; that is to say, That those Acts of Contrition and of
Love, which are done without Grace, are not sufficient for Justification; there
must intervene some others, or that habitual Grace and that of the Sacrament be
diffused upon those. They that uphold the Doctrine of St. Augustine say to the
contrary, that the Sense of the Council of Trent is, That Man cannot do in any
manner those Acts of Love and Contrition without preventing Grace. Why did not
the Council declare it self about that? Methinks the Affair is important
enough; for the question is no less than for the establishing Pelagianism, or
for the destruction thereof. The Council of Trent, will they say, has followed
precisely the Sixth Canon of the Second Council of Orange, where the Sicut
oportet is also found. So the Canon of the Council of Trent is no more
ambiguous, than that of the Council of Orange. It Is true, but the difference
is, That the Ambiguity of the Canon of the Council of Orange is innocent, and
that of the Council of Trent is affected. The Council of Orange could not
foresee, that Men would abuse this Term, as they have done; but the Council of
Trent could not be ignorant, that they would abuse it, and put it in expressly,
that they might not condemn the School of Thomas, nor that of Scotus, seeing
they saw that the Scholasticks had abused that Word, which had slipped in
innocently into the decisions of the Church, they were not excusable in putting
it in again into a new Canon to give place to the same Abuses.

The Fifth Canon, which says, [That Free Will, after the Sin of Adam, is
neither lost nor quenched, or extinct, can have a good Sense; for we know well,
that by Sin Men are not become Marbles and Stones, Stocks and Stumps.] But who
sees not, that this may be explained in favor of those who maintain, That Man
in the state of Corruption may fulfill God's Law perfectly, and do Works that
are truly good? A Doctrine absolutely Pelagian, condemned by the Council of
Orange, which declares, That the Virtues of Pagans is but Cupidity and
Self-love. A Doctrine opposed to that Maxim of St. Augustine, Homo male
Enchirid. cap. 30.
utens libero Arbitrio perdidit se and liberum Arbitrium, etc. Ita cum libero
peccaretur Arbitrio, victore peccato, amissum est and liberum Arbitrium. Man in
making ill use of his Free Will, has been lost, and his Free Will also; In his
sinning freely Sin is become Victor, and Free Will was lost; that is to say,
that he is so deliberated, that without the help of God, he can no more turn to
the side of Good, neither of the good Moral, nor of the good Supernatural.

The Seventh Canon orders, That all the Works which are done before
Justification, in whatsoever manner they are done, are not truly Sins, and do
not merit the hatred of God. That is true, if by these Actions, which precede
Justification, they understand Acts of Repentance and of Faith, which ought to
precede Pardon of Sins, and which are done by the Succors of the Holy Ghost,
and of preventing Grace. But it is not clear that this Canon does favor those
that say, That the Works of the Infidels done without Grace, may be good Works,
and that their Virtues were true Virtues. A Doctrine as Pelagian, as any that
can be so. By those Works which precede Justification, it is as easy to
understand the Works done without Grace, as those that are done by preventing
Grace. I do not here make an Examen of the Council of Trent, therefore will I
not advance further this Chapter of Ambiguities. It Is not the hundred part of
Observations of this Nature, which might be made, and upon the Sixth Session,
where the Matter of Grace is treated, and upon all other Sessions. This would
be nevertheless enough to let Men see, that we have no reason to be satisfied
with the Council of Trent, about the Manner, wherewith they have explained
Justification.

4. But it is not the only Ambiguity of his Canons, which gives us a just
subject of Complaint, and will afford us a lawful reason to refuse eternally
the subscription of those Canons, which they have made about Justification. It
is for Example, the odious Term which they give unto Doctrines the most
innocent in the World.

The Seventh Canon is made, to persuade, That we look upon as very Sins the
motions of Faith and Contrition, that ought to precede Justification. Which is
not so. The Eighth supposes that we say, That every fear of Hell is a Sin, and
serves only to render Sinners more Criminal; which is far distant from our
Sentiments. The 9 th, the 19 th, the 21 th and the 27 th, condemn us, as if we
did teach, That for to be Justified we need only to have a naked Faith, simple
and destitute of the society of good Works: A Doctrine which we most abhor. The
10 th and the following, have given place to those Tragical Declamations
against Imputed Righteousness, whereof these Gentlemen acknowledge this day the
Truth Expos. p. 49.
and Innocence. So the Justice of Jesus Christ is not only imputed, but actually
communicated to his Faithful Ones, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, says my
Lord of Condom. The 13 th and 14 th impute an absurd Doctrine to us. That for
obtaining remission of Sins and Justification, we must believe that we have
already received it.

5. Behold yet another Reason of our refusal to Subscribe the Decrees of this
Council about Justification. It is, because it condemns for Heresies those
Opinions which we believe to be sound and true. The 12 th Canon, the 15 th and
16 th, in giving an odious and little faithful Turn to our Doctrine, upon the
Certainty that we may have, that we are in Grace, and that we are Predestinate,
would snatch away from us a Truth, which we believe to be of absolute necessity
for the tranquillity of the faithful Soul. It Is Confidence in God and in his
Promises, which renders us certain of our Salvation for so long a time as we
are in actual obedience to his Commands. The Canon 17 th and 23 th, which
impute unto us, to believe, That Men are Predestined to Evil, which we do
abhor, would at the same time take away from us a Truth clearly couched in the
Word of God and August. de Praedest. cap. 17.
which has been acknowledged by St. Augustine. It is, That God calls no others,
but those whom he has Predestined; and Justifies no others, but such as he
has so called; and will Glorify no others, but such as he has so Justified:
that is to say, That the Grace which God gives the Reprobate, is not a Grace
truly Justifying, and that Justification is never lost. The Canon 18 th and 25
th tend to ruin a very considerable Truth, viz. That in our best Works there
are some defects. A Sentiment which we account so important, that without it,
according to us, cannot be preserved our Christian Humility. And at the same
time those same Canons impute to us to say, That all the good Works of the
Faithful are mortal Sins; the which we abhor. The 28 th sets down a Doctrine
which we cannot receive; it is, That Faith without Charity, and without Works,
is a true Faith.

6. In fine, We cannot subscribe to the Doctrine of this Decree, because that
although the Canons thereof were in some places capable of receiving a good
Sense in the Theory, yet they give them a very bad one in the Practice. For
Example, the 18 th Canon, that says, That Man can fulfill the Law of God, when
he is upheld by his Grace: And the 38 th, which expounds in what manner our
Works are Merits, might be received with the Glosses of Monsieur de Condom; but
they cannot be suffered in that Sense, which the practice of the Vulgar gives
them. I maintain, that the Devouts of the Roman Church believe to be saved by
the Merit of their Works, and to gain Paradise by their Mortifications, as Men
gain a moderate Reward by the greatest of all Labors. Able Men among the
Moderns, do speak of this Matter like my Lord of Condom, I grant; but Vulgar
Predicators deliver this Doctrine in a most scandalous manner, and most
approaching to Pelagianisme. The Canons of the Council may receive this popular
Sense, which they give it in their Practice, as well as that, which Able Men of
the Church of Rome give thereto in their Theory. But are we obliged to receive
and prefer the Sense of Theory, which does nothing, and which is shut up among
a few Persons, to this Sense of Practice, which is diffused through the World?
Why have Men so much jealousy for this Term, Merit, which is proud and
opposite to Christian Humility? Though Men strive much, they will never blot
out of it those Idea's of Pride which Use has fastened thereto. Whilst it is
said to Men, that their Works merit Eternal life, they will always persuade
them selves, that those Works are of a great Perfection, and that there is a
proportion between what they give to God, and what God renders to them. Though
we were different but only in Terms, were it not better to speak with us,
seeing our style carries one necessarily to Humility; than with such Canons,
whose Expressions do carry one naturally to Pride? Whereupon are founded those
proud Opinions, that in shutting up themselves in a Convent; that in making
Vows of Celibate, Poverty and Chastity; in doing voluntary Mortifications, Men
have Righteousness and Merits to spare, so as to impart to such as have not
enough, and that Men can have Works of Supererogation? Whence comes all that, I
say, but from the Theology of this Council, and of that of its Interpreters?

In a word, to shorten, I say, there are at least Four Reasons, for which we
cannot yield to the Doctrine of Justification, in that manner wherein the
Council has explained it.

1. The first is, That by its Ambiguities and its uncertain Expressions, it
has left Semi-Pelagianisme entirely untouched, and even Pelagianisme it self
too. The Second, That it condemns us unjustly, attributing to us Opinions which
we do not hold at all. The Third, That it condemns such Truths, which we may
not, and ought not to forsake. The Fourth, That its Expressions do conduce
naturally to the Sense which we give it and do oppose, as appears by the
Practice of the People, and of its Devouts, and by the Books of the
Demi-Doctors of the Roman Church. My Expos. p. 61.
Lord of Condom may see presently, that without casting our selves upon
Questions of Subtilty, as he speaks, there are yet many things that separate us
from him about the Article of Justification.

ARTICLE VIII. Of Satisfactions, Indulgences, and Purgatory.
MY Lord of Condom has reason to treat of Indulgences and Satisfactions after
Justification; for Indulgences are the Justifications of Men, and Justification
is the Indulgence of God. But he must permit me to tell him, that he has no
reason to treat this Affair as a Controversy of Nothing, and that should not
separate us from the Roman Church. They say that Catholics teach, with a
common accord, That only Jesus Christ, God and Man together, was capable, by
the infinite Dignity of his Person, to offer to God a sufficient Satisfaction
for our Sins; but that He applies to us that infinite Satisfaction in two
manners; either in giving us an entire Absolution, without reserving any Pains,
which he does in Baptism; or else in commuting that Eternal pain into Temporal
pains; Pains whereof the Church remains Mistress, and when that is relaxed,
that is called Indulgence. Thence must we not conclude, say they, [Neither that
Jesus Christ did not entirely satisfy for us; nor that we satisfy for our
selves, for some part of the Pain which is due to our Sins; seeing that which
is called Satisfaction, is only, after all this, but the application of the
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ.] After this the Author of the Advertisement
Advertis. page 44.
cries out, with an air of Confidence, What will they say now? If those
Gentlemen please to hear us, they shall see that we have yet somewhat to say.

As they have represented their Doctrine about this, as they thought good, they
will permit us to represent it such as it is in effect; and that is it we are
going to do, when we shall have advertized, That they must not here recall us
to the Council of Trent, as they do upon other Matters, because the Council
says nothing about this. I say, Nothing, literally meant. They that have read
the History of that Council, know that the Prelates and the Theologians, that
made it up; the Ambassadors of Princes, which had perceived the uselessness
thereof; the Pope and the Council of Rome, who did maintain the Charges of it,
and who feared the Decisions thereof: All those Persons, I say, wearied with
the long Continuation of the Council, after they had finished the Matter of
Orders, which had held there Ten whole Months? and that of Marriage; which had
occupied them four Months more, resolved to end it at any rate. So that in
three Weeks time they strangled all the Business that remained, which might
have kept the Council at work as long as it had lasted already; and one of
those Matters was that of Indulgences, about which they contented themselves to
Pronounce, [That the use thereof was saving; that the distribution of them was
to be done by the Church; but that the Abuses thereof were to be retrenched.]
Behold in what manner was terminated in three Words, that which all Christendom
had conceived to be one of the greatest Affairs of the Council; which had been
the Scandal of all Europe, and the first occasion that caused a Banner to be
lifted up against the Roman Church. It Is true, that Ten or Twelve years before
the 14 th Session, held under Julius the Third, did treat of Satisfaction in
treating of Penitence, but it said nothing of Indulgences. So that they must
give us leave to search out the Opinion of the Roman Church, about this Affair,
in the Practice and Decisions of Doctors, adding thereto what the Council of
Trent has said of Satisfaction.

1. They say, That our Sins deserve two sorts of Pain, Eternal Pains and
Temporal Pains. 2. They grant, That the Merit of Jesus Christ is infinite, and
that, if God would, this Merit could could be applied to nullify Temporal
Pains, as well as Eternal Pains. 3. But they hold, That Jesus Christ would not
suffer for to exempt his Elect from Temporal Pains, or at least, that he leaves
absolutely to the Church the application of his infinite Satisfaction, with
respect to these Temporal Pains. 4. They distinguish the Guilt from the Pain,
and they say, That God forgives all the Guilt, and retains one part of the
Pain. [The Holy Council declares, That Council. Trident. Sess. 14. cap. 8.
it is false and contrary to the Word of God, that the Guilt can never be
pardoned, unless all the Pain be remitted.] 5. They say, That the Justice of
God requires this Reservation, That the Sins that follow Baptism be punished by
Temporal Pain. [Divine Justice seems to require, That they who Ibid.
have sinned after Baptism be received into Grace; otherwise then those who
have sinned through Ignorance, before Baptism.]

6. Behold the Uses which the Council finds in these Satisfactions. 1. It Is to
serve as a Bit and Bridle to Sinners. 2. To drive out the ill Habits by the
practice of opposite Virtues. 3. To turn away the Pains which might be sent
from God. 4. To render us conformable to Jesus Christ, in that we suffer to
satisfy our Sins, as Jesus Christ has suffered to satisfy for those very
Sins. 5. To chasten and punish Sinners for their preceding Sins. Is it not an
admirable thing, that the Council among those Reasons have forgotten none, but
that of my Lord of Condom, according to whom, [Satisfactions have no Expos. p.
57.
other use, but to make application of the Infinite Satisfactien of our Lord
Jesus Christ?] The Council, as well as he, pretends, That these Human
Satisfactions do no prejudice to the infinite Merit of Jesus Christ. [But it is
because, not being able of our selves, or sufficient to any thing, we receive
of Jesus Christ power to satisfy, and to bring forth Fruits worthy of
Repentance.] These are the Words of the Council. This Reason is not that of
Monsieur de Condom; and the Council might more briefly have said, if they had
been in the same Thought, The Satisfactions which the Church imposes, do no
prejudice to the Merit of Jesus Christ, because they are but Applications of
the infinite Merit of our Savior.

7. They say, That these Pains, which remain to be suffered after that the
Guilt and Eternal Pains have been remitted, are the same pain of Bellarm. lib.
4. de Poenitent. cap. 1. 55.
Sense, which the Sinners should have suffered in Hell, stripping it only of its
Eternity. 8. They say, That this Infernal Pain, being Temporal, may be redeemed
by Penal Works, and that those Works are truly and properly Satisfactory. [In
following the Sense of the whole Church, we Bellarm. ibid. c. 7. 55.
will labor to prove, That by the Penal Works, whereof we have spoken, Men
satisfy truly and properly to God for the Pain which remains to be paid, after
that the Guilt is remitted.] 9. They say, That the Church is Mistress of these
Satisfactory Pains, and that she has the Right of imposing or relaxing them;
and they are these Relaxations of Pains which they call Indulgences. 10. [That
there is a Treasure of these Indulgences, made up of the Satisfactions of Jesus
Christ, and of those of the Saints, which may be applied to them that are
obliged to bear the Pain Bellarm. lib. 1. de Indulg. cap. 2. 45. Bellarm. ib,
of their Sins, after that the Guilt has been remitted to them by the
Sacrament of Penitence.] 11. [That there is in all good Works of the Just a
double respect, the one of Merit, the other of Satisfaction; That that of Merit
cannot be applied to another, because God rewards Works beyond their Merits;
but that of Satisfaction may be applied to other.] And that, because a Man may
do of those painful Works much more than he has need of, or may suffer by the
Providence, Dispensation, Bellarm. ib. c. 2. Prop. 4.
or by the Persecution of Men, those Temporal Pains, which go far beyond what is
necessary for the satisfaction of his own Sins, which happened to the Blessed
Virgin, which having committed no Sins, has suffered so many Pains; and to the
Blessed Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, whose life having been most holy, has
yet been a continual Series of Crosses, voluntary and involuntary. 12. So in
that Treasure of the Church, with the Merits of Jesus Christ, are the
Sufferings of the Blessed Virgin, and of all the Saints, which have suffered
more than their Sins required. 13. By these superabundant Satisfactions of
Jesus Christ, and of the Saints, may be applied to others, by the Pastors of
the Church, both by way of Indulgences and by the Sacraments, with this
difference, That the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ may be applied both by the
Sacrament and by the Indulgences; but the Satisfactions of Saints cannot be
applied, but by way of Indulgences. 14. That the Pope is he, in whom
principally resides the Power of distributing these Indulgences; therefore he
may grant to the Faithful plenary Indulgences. 15. That the Treasure of these
Indulgences is opened by the Pope, not only in favor of the Living, but also
of those that are in Purgatory, for whom the Pope applies out of this Treasure
as much as is needful, to recompense the Pain which they should pay in
Purgatory. 16. For Distribution of Indulgences, the Roman Church has
established what she calls Jubilees; they are privileged Years, wherein they
grant Plenary Indulgences both of Guilt and Pain to them all, who being
contrite and confessed, shall do certain Works imposed on them. Boniface the 8
th, first Author of these Jubilees, about the Year 1300. Ordained that they
should return every Hundred year. About 45 after, Clement the 6 th Ordained,
that they should be celebrated from 50 to 50 Years. Urban the 6 th would have
them put to 33 Years, and published a Bull about it. But Paul the Second,
Sitting in 1464. Ordered them to 25 Years. It is good to remark, by the by, the
great Antiquity of these Jubilees, that they may not reproach us to have loaded
our Discourse with an useless Chronology. 17. Of these Indulgences, some are
for 1000, 10000, 150000; there are some for Sins past and Sins to come. To the
Augustines of Padua, they grant a plenary Indulgence for all Sins committed
after Baptism till the last Confession* with 18000 Years for the future. 18.
These Indulgences are fixed to certain Churches and Privileged Altars and
those Privileges last no longer than the Stones and Edifices; for if they be
ruined, the Indulgences perish also. 19. They obtain these Indulgences by the
Visits of certain Churches; of those of St. Peter and St. Paul, of St. Mary
Major, and of St. John of Lateran, at Rome. Every Saint rewards his Devouts at
the Concession of these Indulgences. At Rome, St. Cosme and St. Damian furnish
a Thousand Years Indulgences; Eusebius, 7454 Quarentines; St. Praxade, 1200;
St. Bibiane, 600000. 20. In fine, These Indulgences are gotten by repeating
many times Ave Maria, bearing blessed Grains, Rosaries, Meddals, St. Francis's
Cord, Scapularies, Holy Girdles, Kissing Relics, and Praying to Saints.

We must not oppose thereto the Bull published 1678. against Indulgences by
Order of Innocent the 11 th, now Sitting. For beside that, that Piece has
scandalized all the Roman Church, which we very well know, it abolishos only
False Indulgences. These are the Terms of the Bull: It Is meant of Indulgences
wholly false and supposititious, which are carried and published in diverse
parts of the World. For the rest, the Bull confirms what it does not condemn,
and for one that it abolishes, it leaves without hyperbole more than a
Thousand. Behold a sincere description both of the Doctrine and Practice of the
Roman Churches about Satisfactions and Indulgences.

Monsieur of Condom would have us to count that for Nothing. It is then nothing
that Men should be permitted to conceive this proud Opinion, that they can give
Satisfaction to God, Vere and proprie, truly and properly. It is nothing to
advance that Maxim so contrary to Humility, so far as to say, That they
satisfy to God beyond what they ought, and lend to those that have not Merit
enough, out of their own Overplus. It is that whereof we may see diverse
remarkable and new Examples in the Second Answer of Anonymus to Monsieur of
Condom. It Is nothing to make a Treasure, stored in such a surprising manner,
with the Merits of Christ and of Men. What Union can there be between the
Finite and Infinite? Can Men conceive, that this can be no prejudice to Jesus
Christ? It is nothing, to make the Saints enter into their part of that
Benefit, which delivers Men from a Pain, though not Eternal, yet altogether
like that of Hell. How can Men say, that these Human Satisfactions and
Indulgences are nothing, after all, but the application of the infinite Merit
of Jesus Christ? Had Men need, if it were so, of the Merits and superabundant
Sufferings of the Saints, to make application of the Satisfaction of Jesus
Christ? It is nothing of giving to the Pope power of dispensing the Merits of
Jesus Christ to whom he pleases. It is nothing, to put into his hands the Key
of those places, where the Dead suffer, to draw thence whom he pleases, in
paying for them those Richesses drawn out of his Treasures, and so to carry on
his Power to the very Empire of death it self. It is nothing that they estrange
and draw off the Spirits and Hearts of Men from the practice of the true Means,
which God has appointed for Application of the Merit of Jesus Christ, viz.
Sacraments and Contrition of Heart; to give them up to such Means, whereof
Scripture says not a word; as the Visitation of certain Churches, Invocations
of certain Saints, Scapularies and Relics. We must count it for Nothing, to
fill the Capacity of the Spirit and Heart of the Vulgar, which is but narrow,
with so many Trifles and things of Naught, which is the cause that there
remains no more room for Acts of true Devotion. It is nothing, that they
dishonor Christian Religion by a confused heap of Practices, which are
unworthy the Greatness of his Majesty, and of his Spiritualness; that they
carry out the Piety of the Faithful to be diffused upon Rosaries, Chapelets,
Scapularies, Cords, Girdles, Relics, Ashes, Churches, Stones, Altars, Images,
to obtain thereby Remission of Sins, which they should receive from God
immediately, and him alone. These Indulgences are nothing, which have given
place to so many Abuses, so many Simonies, whereby they have sold the most Holy
things, and made a Trade of the Remission of Sins. It is they which have given
birth to those Scandalous Books, like to that of the Roman Chancery, where
every Sin is taxed at a certain Rate. Yet it is the Court of Rome that had made
them, they were the Indulgences which had given place to them.

There is nothing in this most horrid relaxation of the Discipline of the
Church. Heretofore, she did Ordain for the chastisement of Scandalous sins, Ten
years, Twenty years, and Thirty years of Penitence. The Fear of being so long
separate from the use of Holy things was a Bridle, that restrained them from
the violence of Passions. These long Pennances were done in Public, and the
dread of making Crimes so public was another Bank, to stop the fury of Lust.
At this day, according to the Doctrine of Indulgences, a Man that shall have
committed in one day enormous Crimes enough to subject to Ten thousand years of
Penance, shall need but to visit a Church or an Altar privileged, to be quit
thereof. Let him return to his Crimes a while after, he may get out of the same
Abyss by the same Means. These Gentlemen, that reproach with words of so much
excess the ill Consequences, which they please to draw from our Doctrines
against the Moral of Jesus Christ, would they have us to consider as innocent a
point of Doctrine and of Practice, which pours upon the Moral, and upon all
Manners, such Malignant Influences? There are Indulgences for five or six
Hundred Thousand years, unto 1500000. Few do conceive the meaning thereof; for
Indulgences are designed to deliver Souls out of Purgatory, or to prevent the
Pains; now Purgatory is not to last 1500000, for it cannot last longer than the
World. This is the Case: The Ancient Church, during the Severity of its
Discipline, did impose for one Sin, Ten, Twenty, or Thirty years of Penitence,
according to the Nature of the Crime. For Example: Suppose we, that the Canons
did impose Ten years of Penitence for a Murder, a Man that should have
committed ten Murders, would be subject, according to these Canons, to a
Hundred years of public Penitence. He that should have committed an hundred
Crimes, Murders, Adulteries, and other of this Nature, would be obliged to
1000 years of Penitence. It may happen, that certain Men may have committed
Crimes enough to be obliged to many Thousand years of Penance. In the place of
Years of Penance, they have put the Years of Indulgences; so that every Year
of Indulgence, delivers from the obligation of a Year of Penance. So they to
whom are granted 1500000 years of Indulgence, are they which have need of
1500000 years of Penitence. It Is presently easy to see, how terrible the
Sequel of such a Theology is, for the Moral. It is to presuppose that a Man can
commit, without being a Reprobate, almost an infinite number of enormous
Crimes. When the Discipline of the Church began to relax of this extreme Rigor
wherein she was at first, instead of Ten years of Penance and Abstention, she
appointed but two. Suppose 1500000 Indulgence and Relaxation for the years of
Penitence; at that sort of account, you suppose a Man may have committed Seven
or Eight hundred Thousand Mortal Sins; for they impose no Penance for Venial
Sins. I grant that this Consequence frightens me; yet they would have me to
account it for nothing.

Before I finish this Article, I beseech those Gentlemen to conceive, that for
to know how much a Doctrine does estrange one Religion from another, we must
not consider it in that which is Speculative, because the People penetrate but
little into the Speculative part of a Doctrine. We must behold it, by that
which is reduced to practice. In speaking of Satisfactions and Indulgences,
Monsieur Condom will only consider what they have of Speculative, etc. viz. the
prejudice they can do to Jesus Christ, to his Merit, and to his Satisfaction.
If Men will, without prejudice reflect on what we have said, they shall see we
have reason to make this Complaint against Indulgences. But it is not that
Consideration wherewith the People are most entangled. Let them then take the
pains to behold the Practice which follows this Doctrine, and he shall see,
that there is nothing that separates us more from their Church, than these
Satisfactions and Indulgences. This is the Spring of that incredible multitude
of Ceremonies, of Corporal Mortifications, of Hair Shifts, Iron Bonds,
Cloisters, Monks, Vows, Pilgrimages, Jubilees, Stations, Church Visits, Prayers
for the Dead, Masses, Consecrated Gifts, Fraternities, Devotions for certain
Saints and Images; for all that is done either to satisfy God, or to obtain
Indulgences. So that we may say in truth, That this Article, which Monsieur de
Condom reckons almost as Nothing, does between his Church and ours put up a
Wall of Separation, which cannot be beaten down, but by the ruin of the one or
of the other Party.

Purgatory is naturally tied with Satisfactions and Indulgences. For Men do not
labor to Satisfy during this life, by Penal Works; and Men have recourse to
Indulgences then, to avoid the Temporal Pains of the other World; which,
omitting Eternity, are altogether like those of Hell. Monsieur de Condom says
nothing of it, or but a short word by the by. I conceive not the reason of
that, unless he has judged, that having no other Curtain to draw over this
Object so frightful and terrible, he ought at least cover himself with that of
Silence. Yet have we still made a great business thereof, and had good Reason
for it. I pray them who are tempted to change their Religion, to bethink
themselves well of what they have to do; and not to engage easily into one
Party that offers them some Pleasures and some Advantages in this World; but
promises them to pay well for it in the other.

Seeing that Monsieur de Condom was not willing to plead for Purgatory, I will
speak a word in its favor. Though all that is taught about it were not true,
what hurt can that do, and what Venom is there in that Doctrine, that could
hinder Reunion? Can we represent too much Terror to Sinners? And a Penitent,
that leaving this life, would think to go to Purgatory, would not he be very
glad to meet immediately with Paradise? It is a Bit, which may serve to
restrain the fierceness of Passions, and which after all can do no hurt, though
it were a bond of Straw, and an imaginary Object. To that I Answer, first, That
this Bit is indeed an Imaginary Bit, and which produces not any Sanctification.
We see not, that in the Communion, wherein they teach this Doctrine, there be a
lesser number of Sinners, Worldlings and Wicked men. It is an error to
conceive, that those which cannot be restrained by the Fear of Hell, shall be
so by that of Purgatory. On the contrary, Lust finds therein what to flatter it
self withal. Go to, says it, Let Us refuse our Senses nothing, we shall be quit
for some years in Purgatory the longer, and we will not lose any Pleasure: We
shall have all the pleasures of the Flesh in the World, and we will obtain
those of Heaven, after some years of Torment. We say besides, That there are
honester ways to retain Men in their Duty. It is certain, that in this the
Roman Religion has not the Character of an Evangelical Religion, in that to
bring Men to Sanctity, she makes too much use of Terror. The Spirit of the
Gospel is a Spirit of Sweetness. The Law of Moses had a hundred Threats for one
Promise; but the Gospel has a hundred Promises for one Threatening. Its
Character is that of Debonairty. Men's Souls must be drawn by Love, to oblige
them to Love God. That is the true Principle of Sanctification. Though it were
true, That Purgatory were capable of restraining Men, God has no need of a
Lie, for his help, to uphold his Truth, and to settle his Justice. But there is
something more* and we are engaged to regard this Controversy as a Capital
Affair, and for many Reasons.

1. We are obliged to nourish the peace of honest and pure Consciences, and of
Souls truly penitent. They accuse us of lulling them asleep, and plunging them
into Security. God is our Witness therein: We present to them just and lawful
Terrors, by the sight of the Pains of Hell; but when they have escaped those
Pains by a true Repentance, we would account a Cruelty to present to them other
Pains of the same Nature, and declare them to be unavoidable. If the Roman
Church should teach this Dogma in good earnest, and that it were so believed: I
maintain, it would be Impossible for their Faithful People to die without
unimaginable Auguishes. A Moment in Purgatory is something more cruel thau
whole Years of the Gout, or Gravel, Colic, and all other Pains gathered
together in some wretched Creature. How could a Man die with any tranquillity,
being assured to fall into Torments so horrible and of so long continuance? If
we must consider it as a Capital Crime, to make a poor Wretch suffer, without
the Magistrates Order, Racks and dolourous Torments; We cannot behold it as a
light thing to torment Souls so cruelly, without God's Order, by the fear of an
Imaginary Evil.

2. Although Purgatory should do no more hurt, at this day, it would deserve to
be banished for the Evil it has done. It is the Source, whence have sprung so
many shameful Productions, which dishonor the Christian Name; so many fabulous
Stories, false Miracles, returns of Souls, Visionary Apparitions, and a
Thousand other things of this sort. In a word, It Is the Father of Legends, and
the cause why the Christian People, in most places, is yet fed with those Windy
Meats, and with that Word, which may well be called the Antipodes of God's
Word. Shall that be counted for nothing, which has so often served a dishonest
Gain? And though it were possible to hinder these Abuses, why should we retain
a Doctrine, which exposes both the People, and the Conductors to so many
Spiritual Dangers?

3. I would entreat these Gentlemen, that they would well remember the
Principle which we have laid in the Subject of Satisfactions and Indulgences;
it is, that to judge well what distance a Doctrine does cause between one
Religion and another, it must be regarded by that which is reduced to Practice.
It Is Practice which is sensible to the People; and the People is that Party
properly, whose Reunion is in agitation. Upon that Fort, let them consider of
what importance is Purgatory in this Affair; it is the foundation of a great
part of the Worship of the Roman Church; it is the foundation of Satisfactions
and Indulgences whereof we have seen the Sequels to fill up all their Worship.
Purgatory is the foundation of Prayer for the Dead, the cause of the Sacrifice,
the occasion of so many Masses, of Prayers and of Services, of so many Travels,
of Pennances, of Vows, of Pilgrimages and Macerations. In a word, one may say,
that all is done for Purgatory and Nothing almost for Hell. For an Act of
Contrition, according to these Gentlemen, saves from Hell: But all the
Contrition of all the Penitents together, would do nothing against the Pains of
Purgatory. Men must pass through them, or redeem them by Penible Works, by
Prayers, by Alms, by Masses and Penances. So all the Strength of Devotion is
turned toward that side. It Is clear then, methinks, that we cannot tolerate a
Doctrine, whereupon is fastened a Worship whereof we cannot participate, though
our Life were laid thereon.

ARTICLE IX. Of Sacraments in General.
WE have met with so many things which separate us from the Roman Church, in
those Articles that we have now examined, that it is not very necessary to find
some in this present Matter, which is that of the Sacraments. Monsieur de
Condom passes it over lightly, hastening to that of the Eucharist, I will also
follow him, and pass by this place with the like swiftness. The Controversies
which regard Sacraments in general, their efficacy and their manner of acting,
are for the most part most Metaphysical, and therefore beyond the common
capacity of the Vulgar. That of the necessity of Intention in the Minister
thereof, is nevertheless of no small importance. It deserves well, that
Mousieur de Condom should speak a word of it. He did too much think of what he
was Writing, that she should forget it. It seems he did not find colors good
enough to cover that horrid uncertainty, wherein Christians must needs
continue, whilst they suppose the validity of the Sacrament, to depend of
necessity on the Intention of him that does administer it. For in fine, we
maintain, that on this Supposition one can nevet be assured, neither of having
been rightly Baptized, nor that what is adored in the Eucharist is no more
Bread; and so, Men are never out of the danger of Idolatry.

About Baptism, does only the absolute necessity of this Sacrament, and condemn
to death those little Children, whose unhappiness it is to die without
receiving of it; but he brings no proof for it. I will only say, That what
Monsieur de Condom Expos. p. 81.
adds is not very true, That we fear not to suffer willingly our Infants to die
like the Children of Infidels. I know none but do fear that, and that will not
do all that they can to hinder this mishap; yea, we make no scruple of
Baptizing them without our Churches, in case of necessity. But when the
Providence of God prevents our care, and suffers it not to succeed, we would be
very loath to damn to Eternity Creatures more often innocent than those, who
have given them birth; and which have the happiness to be born within the
Covenant of Grace.

About the Sacraments of Confirmation, Extreme Unction, Order and Marriage,
Monsieur de Condom leaves the part of Explication, and takes that of Probation.
Though the Proofs were worth any thing, I would not examine them; himself has
forbidden it us. [If any one, says he, shall think Exposit. page 213.
fit to answer this Tract, he is desired to consider, that for a meet Advancer
of the Business to purpose, he must not undertake to confute the Doctrine which
it contains,] I have submitted to this Law, and have conceived the Equity
thereof. But in truth, without it I should wrong my Lord of Condom, if I should
mispend time in refuting all the Reasons whereby he proves, that these four
Ceremonies are true Sacraments. For I should presuppose, that he has looked on
his Reflections as so many good Proofs, and thereby I should wrong his Judgment,
since he will permit me to say, They are but small Reasons. And so, to do
something that may be to purpose, I will only say in General upon these Four
Sacraments, That the Controversy of multiplying Sacraments is not so light, as
he thinks. First, They are Ceremonies, and when Ceremonies are useless; they
become very hurtful, and do load Religion in a most dangerous manner. But, as I
design to extend this Consideration further in the Sequel; I will not at
present insist thereon. I say then, Secondly, That Sacraments are the Seals of
the Covenant; or if those Gentlemen have an aversion for that Word, they are
Sacred Signs, whereby God does confer and confirm his Grace: Its then God's own
Affair to institute Sacraments, since it belongs to him, who makes the
Alliance, for to confirm it. It is his part, who gives Grace, to settle the
Means whereby he is willing to confer it; and we cannot keep our selves from
regarding it as a great rashness, that enterprise of giving Sacraments whereof
God is not the Author, and whereof he speaks nothing in his Word. What might we
not say about Marriage, to show how much Reason and Piety do suffer, when it is
made a Sacrament? But that were to prove, and that is it we would not do.

Monsieur de Condom passes with the same swiftness over the Sacrament of
Penitence. He tells us what it is, but he does nothing toward his design; for
he does not show us, that it is a little business, and that should not stop us.
Though he had undertaken it, he would find a hard task to effect it. It is a
great Article, and about which we might have many things to say. I will not
insist on the infinite Difficulties of that Theology, which makes of a
Christian Virtue a Sacrament; nor of the sore task they find, in assigning the
Matter and the Form thereof. But I will say something about the Four parts,
whereof they compose it, except about Satisfaction, because we have already
spoken of it.

Confession is a Yoke, which God has not imposed on the Church, and which she
is not obliged to receive. Let them not speak of the good uses thereof, for
that would oblige us to speak of the wicked Sequels of it, to dig up a thousand
Stories which would not please; and to represent the Questions which are made
in their Confessions, according to the Directions of Zanche's, Emmanuel Sa, and
other Authors yet more Authorized than those.

Contrition is an excellent thing, but it is a great Mishap, that they have put
in its place I know not what kind of Repentance, whereto they give the Name of
Attrition; It is a Grief that rises from the sight of the Pains of Hell,
without any part or motion of Love to God. That is to say, That this Grief
resembles very much that of the Desperate, who would wish that they had not
committed Crimes, when they see the cruel Issues thereof. They pretend, that
this Attrition is sufficient, with the Sacrament of Penitence, for to be
Justified and Saved by consequent. So a Man may be Justified and Saved without
having made ever any act of Love to God. They will tell me, That it is the
Sense of some particular Men: Yea, but those particular Men maintain, That it
is the Sense of the Council of Trent. And certainly, either we are not capable
of seeing any thing, or we see clearly that they have reason; for the Council
says, [That this imperfect Contrition; Sess. 14. c. 4.
which is called Attrition, because ordinarily it rises frem the Consideration
of the vileness of the Sin, or of the fear of the Pains of Hell; not only does
not make a man Hypocrite, but is a Gift of God and of the Holy Ghost; and
though it cannot conduct the Sinner to Justification, without the Sacrament of
Penitence, yet it disposes Man to receive the Grace of God in this Sacrament.]
Yet this Attrition, whereto the Council does so much honor, is according to
it, the fruit of the Holy Spirit, and of a Grace Supernatural. But others have
passed so far, as to say, [That it is Bull of Innocent XI. against 65. Propos.
Prop. 57,
probable, that it is sufficient that Attrition be natural, so it be honest.]
It is true, will they say, but you see also how this Moral is treated at Rome.
The Bull of Innocent the Eleventh fulminates it. I grant it; but I see also
that the Parliament of Paris have condemned the Book of Amedee, and his
detestable Moral; at Rome they censure the Censure of Paris, calling it, Rash,
presumptuous, and scandalous. And when they condemn that Moral at Rome, they
will not receive the Bulls thereof in France. These Gentlemen may agree, when
they please, about this Article, before they invite us to the Reunion. For
without evasion we declare, That we will never re-enter into a Church, where
they tolerate People to say; That Men may be saved, without having loved God in
their whole life at any time.

I come to Absolution. It is an Article that we will never pass the Tribunal of
the Church, according to us, ought to be occupied by Jesus Christ alone. They
shall never persuade us to receive any other Judges. And never will they make
us relish, that Crowned Heads should humble themselves at the feet of a Priest;
and that a Priest, who is but a Man, should undertake to say to other Men like
himself, I Pardon thee; I absolve thee. The Apostles themselves, with their
Apostolical Rod, did never use this Style of Empire and Sovereignty over
Consciences. They did proclaim Remission of Sins to the Penitent; but we do not
read, that they gave it with a Sovereign Power. Yea, our Lord himself was
content to say, Thy Sins are forgiven, Math. 9. 2.

ARTICLE X. Of the Eucharist, of Real Presence, and of Transubstantiation.
I Begin this Article, as Monsieur de Condom, We are at last arrived to the
Question of the Eucharist. But he must permit me not to continue like him; for
he forgets the Laws which he had imposed on himself. His Aim obliged him to
prove nothing, and to refute nothing. The Interest of his Cause and of his
Party lead him on another part, to say nothing, or to say very few things in
his Explications; because that to show the Dogma's of his Religion on their
fair side, they must show thereof but a little Corner. In explaining them at
large, a little, it would diswrap them and unfold them, and so discover their
feeble side. Yet was he willing to publish a Writing that should have the
extent of a little Book. Therefore, at every foot, he passes beyond the Bounds
which he had prescribed himself. In this place he enters in earnest into the
Dispute, to maintain the Real Presence; he stands on the Words of Institution,
This is my Body: He proves, that the figurative Sense is a By-way. He calls to
his help the Types of the Old Testament. He abridges what the Gentlemen of
Port Royal have said of the Laws and Rules of the Language, to prove that these
Words, This is my Body, cannot be taken in a figurative Sense. Yea, he refutes,
and he answers: he labors to elude the Proof which we draw from these Words,
Do this in remembrance of me; he expounds our Doctrine, and thence draws
Arguments for himself. I grant, that all these ways agree not with my designed
Method; and I should reckon my self to wander, if I should Monsieur of Condom
therein. I still remember his Prayer, which he makes to him that shall desire
to answer this Treatise, [He is entreated to consider, that if he would advance
any thing, he must not undertake to confute the Doctrine which it contains.]
Monsieur of Condom will permit me to tell him, That for to advance in his
design, he should not have undertaken to prove his Doctrine, which he had only
a design to explain. Between him and us, at present, the Question is not about
the Truth of Doctrines, but only about their importance. [The Question is,
Whether many Disputes may vanish away by the Explications of the Faith of
Exposit. 1. 5.
the Roman Church. And if the Disputes remaining be as Capital, as we would at
first have made Men to believe.] He had undertaken to prove, that these latter
Disputes, according to our Principles, do not hurt the foundations of the
Faith. These are his Words. Behold, what was his Business, and what he should
have done. But he changes quite; he puts an Illusion on us: He had promised us
one thing, and does another; for instead of proving, that the Doctrines of
Reality and Transubstantiation, according to our Principles, do not wound the
Foundations of the Faith, he proves that they are true. I confess that this
Turn is dextrous, having almost nothing to say to color a Doctrine of that
importance, and not willing to pass it by without speaking thereof, he has
taken the part of proving it. Without scruple, I will pass over his Proofs. Not
but that I would do Justice to Monsieur of Condom, and would aknowledge here,
as every where else, his Wit, his Delicateness, and his Dexterity, in turning
curiously his ways of Reasoning. But in fine, Methinks I have read nothing in
this place, but what has been said many times, and whereto sufficient Answers
have been often returned. It Is very hard to terminate so grand an Affair with
so short an Instruction, so short as we find here. I will content my self
therefore, to conjure those who have any care of their Salvation, to consult
such Authors as have written on this Matter, if the difficulties they may find
in this place do occasion any such Scruple to arise in them. I can hardly
believe, that such a thing may happen; and I think, that those who shall suffer
themselves to be taken thereby, shall have first designed to be deceived.

In all that Monsieur de Condom says about the Eucharist, there is nothing
that makes for his Subject, and tends to our purpose, but the Explication
which he giv s to our Doctrine, and what he calls Reflection on the Doctrine of
the Eucharist. There, first he confesses, that there is nothing wherein we are
so effectually opposite. So the Dispute cannot be nullified by the Explications
of our Beliefs. Very far from that, the more we explain to the bottom, our
selves, says he, the more we shall find our selves contrary. He also grants,
that it is an important Affair. There is nothing, says he, which appears more
important in our Controversies, since the Question is about the Presence of
Jesus Christ himself. So that Monsieur de Condom cannot yet do here what he had
at first proposed to do; that is, to show, That the remaining Disputes are not
so Capital, as we at first would have made Men believe. He goes yet beyond all
that. He pretends, that it is the only important Controversy; and that if we
can satisfy our selves about it, the rest shall vanish easily away. That is it
which these Words signify, One may wholly dissipate, or reduce to very Expos.
page 167.
few things, the others Subjects of their Complaints, so that things be
explained. About all that we have somewhat to say.

First, We would fain have Monsieur de Condom, and all those Gentlemen which do
solicit us to a Reunion, to discharge themselves of that Conceit, That this
the sole important Matter. I grant that Reality, with all its Attendants, is
the most important of our Controversies. And its Attendants are
Transubstantiation, Adoration, the Sacrifice, the Retranchment of the Cup, and
Masses, without Communicants. Yet, though they could satisfy us about them,
these Doctors may know, that the rest would suffice to retain us in the
Separation that we are in. We will never worship Creatures nor Images, under
whatsoever Pretense. It is not a business less Capital than that of the
Eucharist. We never will partake of a Worship composed of so many Ceremonies,
so opposite to the Spirit of Christian Religion. We never will suffer the Veil
of an Unknown Tongue to cover Divine Service. We never will yield to a
Discipline so relaxed, as is that, which settles Indulgences, and will never
receive that great Pomp of Human Satisfactions. We never will acknowledge an
Authority Superior to that of Gods Word, and will never receive any other
Universal Head of the Church but Jesus Christ. Let none be deceived; all that
appears Capital to us.

It is a great Illusion, which the Doctors of the Roman Church offer
continually to our People: They suppose to them, that Real Presence is the only
important Affair that we have with them; and that, to the end, they may
conclude that the rest is nothing, seeing this Point is tolerable, according to
us, seeing we tolerate it in the Lutherans. I therefore Advertize all, that
have a care of their Salvation, to keep well their Guard on that side; to
repulse this Temptation, holding for certain what I now declared, That besides
Real Presence, we have many more things than needs, to separate us from the
Communion of the Roman Church.

Another thing whereof Monsieur de Condom shall permit me to Advertize him, is,
That granting the importance of the Controversy of Reality, he considers
Reality in it self severed from its Attendants. He passes with an
unconceiveable swiftness, Transubstantiation and Adoration of the Eucharist, as
if it were nothing. He says not a word of Masses without Communicants, and
regards the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Retranchment of the Cup, as
Consequences, which do rise necessarily from the Doctrine of Reality, according
to our own Confession. So he makes his Fort of the Real Presence only; and all
this, because he thinks to have found about it a great advantage in that we
have done, in regard to the Lutherans. It is a Point, wherein we shall give
satisfaction anon to them that sincerely seek their Salvation and the Truth.
Mean while we declare, that Real Presence, precisely in it self and without its
Attendants, is the least of our Controversies about the Eucharist; that
Adoration, Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Retranchment of
the Cup, and Masses without Communicants, seem to us much more important. That
those Attendants are not, according to us, Natural Attendants of the Real
Presence, precisely in it self; they are false and evil Consequences, which Men
have drawn out of it. For it is but a bad Reasoning, in our Judgment, to say,
The Body of Jesus Christ is Spiritually and Invisibly under the Accidents of
Bread and Wine; therefore it must be Sacrificed, therefore it must be adored,
and we must retrench the Cup from the People. That is it which we shall
particularly demonstrate.

But before that, I shall give a Third Advice upon what Monsieur of Condom
says about the importance of the Controversy of the Real Presence. It is that
granting it to be important, he dissembles all the Importance thereof. [There
is nothing, says he, that appears more important in our Controversies, seeing
the question is of the Presence of Jesus Christ himself.] The Question is not
only of that; but,

1. The Question is, Whether we shall oppose all the Lights of our Senses,
which say, that the Signs of the Eucharist are Bread and Wine; and if we shall
believe, that God does continually offer Illusion to our Senses, which is
opposite to his Verity and to his Purity.

2. The Question is, Whether we must suppose, that God does every Moment, and
without necessity violate the Laws of Nature, that are most inviolable, which
is opposite to his Wisdom.

3. The Question is, Whether we shall receive a Theology, whereof the
Consequences destroy all Christian Religion; a Theology which confounds Body
and Soul, and takes away the Bounds that distinguish them. A Doctrine, which
supposing the Flesh of Christ becomes Spiritual, Invisible, subsisting under a
Point, confounds the Body with the Soul. For I know not how else we can define
the Properties of the Soul, but in saying, She is Invisible, without Extension,
without Space, and concluded under a Point. This Doctrine also confounds Human
Nature with the Divine; for it gives to the Flesh of Jesus Christ* that which
belongs only to his Divinity, that is, to be in many Places at once, and be
able to fill Heaven and Earth. It destroys the Article of Ascension, and robs
the Church of that Proof, which she made use of against those Heretics who
denied the Truth of the Human Nature of Jesus Christ; sor they opposed them by
a Proof drawn from thence, That during the Life of the Lord, Men had always
seen in him all the Actions, the Motions and Properties of Man. This Reasoning
will be nothing worth, if a Body can be without its Properties, and if the
Properties of a Body can be without a Body.

4. The Question is, Whether Men may settle such a manner of Interpreting
Scripture, which will overthrow all Scripture, and will give place to all
Heresies; if by one passage alone one must explain an hundred others, which
seem to say the contrary; or if by the hundred, one should explain that which
is alone. For, for one only passage that says, That that which we see in the
Eucharist is the Body of Jesus Christ, there are seven or eight others which
say formally, That it is Bread and Wine. The Bread that 1 Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 11.
we break. Whosoever shall eat this Bread. Whenever you eat of this Bread.
Let every one eat of this Bread.

5. The Question is to know, Whether we will belie our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and the Holy Ghost, who tells us, That we shall not have him always
with us; that he was going to Heaven; that the Heaven must hold him till the
restoration of all things.

6. The Question is, to know, Whether to avoid a Natural Figure in these Words,
This is my Body, we shall expose Christian Religion to the scandal of Infidels;
yea, to the greatest Scandal that can be imagined. For, in fine, whilst they
shall be able to reproach us, That we eat our own God, it is certain they will
never come to us.

7. The Question is, Whether we should ruin one of the Sacraments of the
Church, in destroying the Bread, in nullifying the Sign, and substituting in
its place the Thing signified.

8. The Question is, to know, Whether we should draw down the Lord of Glory
from the Throne of his Majesty, to nullify him a second time; but with an
Annihilation greater than that which he descended into after his Incarnation.
The Question is to know, If this be to respect Jesus Christ our Lord
sufficiently, to call him down back, by the help of three Words ill explained,
to place him in Impure places, to expose him to be trod under feet, to be eaten
by the Profane, to be mingled with Poison and with Death, and to a thousand
other Dangers that one dares not express.

9. The Question is to know, finally, If for a Corporal Communion, without
which one may be saved, and wherewith one may be damned, and which consequently
is not necessary to Salvation; we must overthrow all the Rules of Reason, of
good Sense, of Grace, and of Nature. I know not, if after all this any one
shall be able to say again, Reality and Transubstantiation, are not an Affair
that should retain you, nor hinder you from re-entring into the Roman Church.

Monsieur of Condom says thereupon Two things, which are to the purpose, and
which are to be examined. The first is, That we have shortened our selves those
great Spaces of Separation. They have approached nearer to us, says he, it is
because we admit a Presence real; It is because our Catechism says, That Jesus
Christ makes us partakers of his proper substance; and our Confession of Sunday
52.
Faith, That he nourishes us with the Substance of his Body and Blood. It is
because we say, That although Jesus Christ be truly communicated to to us by
Baptism, and by the Gospel; nevertheless it is but in part, and not fully.
Thereupon my Lord of Condom Reasons after his manner, and as Expos. page 117,
118, 119.
seems him good. Behold then, says he, the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ
present in our Mysteries, by the Grant of Calvinists. Behold, Jesus Christ
received in his proper Substance. Jesus Christ is given us in the Eucharist, in
a manner which suits neither Baptism nor the Gospel, and which is* wholly
proper to this Mystery. It follows then, that this Participation is not fixed
to the Faith, seeing that Faith Exp. 121.
being diffused generally through all the Actions of a Christian, is found in
the Preaching and in Baptism.

First, I would fain know, what Service all this does to the principal purpose
of Monsieur de Condom, which is to reapproach us to himself. Are we nearer
thereto because of some resemblance in the Terms? Though we had ill explained
our Doctrine, and by Incommodious Terms; have we then changed it at the bottom?
And does not he confess himself* That the more we explain our selves, the more
contrary we find our selves to be? So all the trouble he takes to convince us
by our Principles is more than useless. At the most, we should only be
convinced to have spoken in one manner, and to have thought in another. But we
will not yield him that very pleasure of believing that justly. We speak as we
think, and our Expressions are not, as they would persuade us, an effect of
that Politic, which is ordinary to such as estrange themselves from the Truth.
It is that retaining the Sense of the true Church, they keep as far as they can
possibly her own Expressions. We believe a Real Presence of the Body of Jesus
Christ in the Supper, as we believe a Real Presence of the Sun upon Earth. No
man mends to lie, nor does he lie at all when he says, That was done in the
presence of the Sun. When the Sun is risen, he is present to us. Yet no Man
hitherto has busied his Head, to cause the Sun to descend from Heaven, and to
shut him up substantially within one of his Beams. The Sun is really present by
his Light, by his Beams, and by his Virtue. Christ's Humanity is present by its
Virtue, by its Efficacy, by its Merit, which are as so many Beams. It is a
Presence most Real, though it be not Corporal. And I wonder how my Lord of
Condom has not learned it from his Scholasticks: They that speaking of the
manner wherein Causes do act, say, that some do act Immediatione Virtutis. by
an immediate Presence of Virtues, and others Immediatione suppositi, by an
immediate presence of Persons, of Suppost* or Substance. Who should say to
those Doctors of the School, That their immediate Presence of Virtue is a
Chimaera, and is not a real Presence? I believe they make stir enough about it,
being so much in love with wrangling.

We believe sincerely, as we speak it, that we are made partakers of the proper
Substance of Jesus Christ, because we are not made partakers of the Substance
of another; because we receive the efficacy and merit of that Flesh really. And
that is all that is important to our Salvation in that Flesh; for otherwise
it is Nerves, it is Fibers; it is Bones, as such, do not Sanctify nor Justify.
The Flesh profits nothing, it is the Spirit that gives life, If they will
repeat to Eternity, [That it is not possible to make Expos. page 181.
it to be understood, that a Body which is not communicated to us, but in
Spirit and by Faith, be really communicated to us, and in its proper
Substance.] We cannot help it otherwise, than to repeat always also, that the
Spiritual Actions of the Soul are as real and more real, than the Corporal
Actions of the Body. Though the Spirit alone, by Faith, do see the Humanity of
Christ Jesus in Heaven; we believe that that Sight is more real, amd less
subject to Illusion than that of Bodies, which shall see Jesus Christ with the
Eyes of Flesh; and I can hardly conceive, that Men can have their Comprehension
of so great hardness, as not to be able to comprehend that.

In fine, We believe that our Lord Jesus Christ is more fully communicated to
us in the Eucharist, than in Baptism; because we have in the Eucharist that
which we have in Baptism, what we have in the Word of God, and somewhat more.
It is not, that Jesus Christ and his Graces can be divided; he that receives
Jesus Christ, receives him whole, entirely. Yet the more that Grace is settled
in our Souls, the more Means God employs to sortifie it there, and the more so
far do we partake of Jesus Christ. Three are more than Two: When, after having
received the Grace of Baptism, and Instruction by the Word, God does also add
thereto the Sacrament of the Eucharist, it is certain that Grace is confirmed,
augmented and established thereby, and that we possess Jesus Christ more
closely still. Besides, that it is certain, that Jesus Christ has promised to
communicate to us his Graces in a particular manner, and more efficacious in a
Communion most devout, than in the Word; because the Word does propose Graces
but in general, and a devout Communion applies them to every particular.

I will not touch what Monsieur de Condom says upon these Words of our
Catechism, Sunday 52.
That the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, inasmuch as it has been once offered
in Sacrifice to reconcile us to God, is now given to us to certify us, that we
have a share in that Reconciliation. I find what he says thereon so fine, and
of so great Subtilty, that I am assured, that they for whom this principally
was written will hardly understand it; and that they who have a Spirit
Metaphysical enough to enter into these abstracted From p. 124. to p. 126.
Reflections, I believe they also will have penetration enough not to entangle
themselves therewith.

The other thing which Monsieur de Condom says, which is to the purpose that
we treat of, is, that we have offered Peace to the Lutherans, who believe the
Real Presence; and that we have declared, that this Doctrine has no Venom at
all; that it does not overthrow the Foundation of Expos. page 166.
Faith; and that it should not break Communion among Brethren. And thereupon
they tell us, That whatever Evil might be in the Opinion of the Real Presence,
we have taken from our selves the right of prevailing thereby. Seeing that you
tolerate it in the Lutherans, why should you not tolerate it in Catholics? We
oppose thereto, that they give Attendants to the Reality, which we cannot
tolerate. Monsieur de Condom Answers, [That no Subtilty of the Minesters Expos.
page, 168.
shall ever be able to persuade Men of good Sense, that bearing with the
Reality, which is the Point most important and difficult, they should not also
bear with the rest.] He adds, [That by a secret Providence it has happened
that Calvinists have agreed, that supposing that we should take literally these
Words, This is my Body, the Catholics do Reason better and more consequently
than the Lutherans.] It would be presently a great rashness to hope that we may
shut the Mouth of those Gentlemen about this Objection, which they have renewed
within these 50 years more than a Million of times, and whereto Answer has
been made as often, without being able to obtain from them a Moment of Equity*
It is not then to them that I will speak, since they are resolved not to hear
us; it is to them that seek their Salvation with a Spirit of Humility; and I
pray them to consider,

1. That what we have offered to the Lutherans, is infinitely different from
that which they demand of us at this day. We have offered to the Lutherans, to
tolerate them in the Doctrine of the Real Presence; and they demand of us to re
enter into the Roman Church to make Profession thereof. Have we offered to the
Lutherans, to re-enter into their Communion* to break our Assemblies to
incorporate them with Theirs* and to make Profession of the Real Presence? We
have offered only to them, in remaining still separate from them* as We are,
both by Assemblies and by some Ceremonies external, little important; to
tolerate them, to regard them as our Brethren, to receive them when they will
come to us, without obliging them to an express abjuration of the Doctrines
that separate us. Behold, what we have offered. And it is demanded of us, That
abandoning our Assemblies, our Ceremonies, and our Doctrines, and particularly
that of the Real Presence, we should reunite; that is to* say, that we
re-enter, without any more ado, into the Roman Church, to believe the Real
Presence, or at least to make Profession of believing it. There is so great
difference between tolerating an Error, and to make Profession of believing
that Error; that the former may be an action of Charity, and the second cannot
be but an abominable Hypocrisy: The one serves toward Salvation, and by the
other we evidently hazard our Salvation. I can say with assurance, that if we
should re-enter into the Lutheran Church, and that we should bring back our
People to them, to make their Profession of the Real Presence, we should commit
a Crime that God would never pardon us. After that, they would have Ministers
to lead back their People into the Roman Church, without Mystery, to make their
Profession of the Real Presence, which is a thousand times more dangerous, than
what we tolerate in the Lutherans.

2. We may further tolerate the Real Presence of the Lutherans without
tolerating that of the Roman Church, because there is a very great difference
between the one and the other. But before we pass further, it is good to
remark, that what those Doctors say is not true, That we regard that Real
Presence of the Lutherans as a light Error. It is a great Evil, and to cure
our Brethren of it, we would willingly have given half our own Blood. And what
we have offered to tolerate them, it was principally in hope to bring them
back, by little and little, from their wandering. If then we say, that their is
no Venom in that Opinion, we understand it of mortal Venom, and a killing One.
It is enough to confess some Venom in an Opinion, to acknowledge therein some
Absurdities, which dishonor Reason, and blast Christian Religion, and we
acknowledge it too much in the Real Presence of the Lutherans. But it is true,
that we believe not that it destroys any foundation of Faith. We regard it
principally in that manner, wherein it is expressed in their Confession, which
says, [Touching the Lords Supper, they teach that the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ are truly present, and are distributed to them who eat at the Lords
Supper, and condemn those who say the contrary.] There is nothing in these
general Words that we might not subscribe to. As for the manner of this
Presence, they are reserved, and define it not. They say, Jesus Christ is
there; but we know not how. If there be any which do pass rashly further in
settling what they call Ubiquity, that is to say, the Presence of Christ's
Humanity in all places of the World, that passes not among them for a
Fundamental Point.

The Real Presence of the Lutherans does not destroy the Bread, for they
confess that the Signs are of true Bread and true Wine; and according to that,
they do not suppose that God offers perpetually an Illusion to our Senses to
make us see and feel a Body, where there is not a Body. They do not destroy the
Sacrament, seeing they leave the Signs entire. The Real Presence of the
Lutherans has not for Attendants the Adoration of the Eucharist, and obliges
not Men to adore a Creature. It does not induce a Sacrifice of the Body and
Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ. Among the Lutherans, they have not retranched
the Cup from the People. In fine, It is not accompanied with an infinite Number
of Worships, of Ceremonies, and of Doctrines, which be incompatible with the
purity of the Faith. In that Church, they do not Worship Images, they do not
Invoke Saints, they do not prostrate themselves before Relics; they serve God
in a Known Tongue, they acknowledge no Mediator but Jesus Christ; no other
Satisfaction, but his Merit; any other Indulgence, but his Grace; any other
Sovereign Authority but his own, and that of his Word. In a word, Let the Roman
Church set her Real Presence in the same state, as is that of the Lutherans,
and we will offer to them the same thing which we offer to these, so they will
not ask us any more; that is to say, that we will offer them a Toleration, so
that she will not demand us to re-enter into her Communion. For yet once more,
We never offered to conjoyn with the Lutheran Church, whilst they abide in the
state wherein they are, and we will never do it for any thing in the World.

3. I must yet Advertize once more these Gentlemen, that for to know the poison
of an Error, one must principally regard it in that which is diffused on
practice, both of the Worship and of Morality. Then for to know how dangerous
the Real Presence is, we must not regard it in her self, but in the Attendants
given it; that is, Adoration, the Sacrifice, and the Retranchment of the Cup.
There it is that the danger lies, and that is it that the Lutherans have not.
[No subtilty of the Ministers, says Monsieur de Condom, shall ever be able to
persuade Men of good Sense, that bearing with the Reality, which is the most
important Point, and the more difficult, they ought not also to tolerate the
rest.] How can the Ingenuity and Light of Monsieur of Condom permit him to say
that? What if they tolerate a Speculative Opinion, which changes nothing in the
Worship and in the Religion, shall we be obliged to tolerate the Adoration of a
Creature, which is of all things most opposite to the Foundations of Faith? If
a Man be persuaded that God is in the Sun, by a presence of Substance, greater
than that wherewith he is in the rest of the World, it would be an absurd
Opinion. But I know not whether there be any Person, that would damn a Man for
that alone; but if that Man would conclude from that Error, that Men ought to
worship the Sun, and should himself so worship it, what Sentiment should we
have of him? As for me, I would tolerate his Error as a Visionary Thought; but
I would abhor him as an Idolater, because of his Conclusion. If then to
persuade Men, it may be sufficient to express things with a great Assurance; I
say, there will never be any subtilty or disguise that may persuade Men of good
Sense, that Toleration for a Real Presence, should induce to a Toleration for
the Attendants, which the Roman Church gives it. They say to that, That they
are not Attendants given thereto, but that they are Natural Attendants, and
that even the Calvinists do agree, that supposing that one must take literally
these Words, This is my Body; Catholics reason better and more Consequentially
than the Lutherans.] We do not confess, that it is good that the Public should
be advertized of it. It is a surprising Slander, that Facts of this kind should
be advanced without proof. Monsieur Daille, in his Apology for the Reformed
Churches, employs a whole Chapter to prove the contrary. Monsieur de Langres
has published a Sermon upon these Words, Be ye such, as to give no stumbling
Block neither to the Jew nor to the Greek; wherein he proves, That Adoration is
not an Attendant of the Lutherans Real Presence; and I will make it appear,
that it is not an Attendant even of the Roman Churches Real Presence. If any of
ours have confessed what Mon-Monsieur of Condom says, it was in the heat of
Dispute against the Lutherans, and we make no difficulty to disown it. But the
following Articles will oblige us to penetrate further into this Matter, and to
prove, that Adoration, the Sacrifice, etc. are not Natural Attendants of the
Real Presence.

ARTICLE XI. Of the Adoration of the Host.
WE are going to make a Chapter of a Point, whereon Monsieur de Condom has
made but one Period; which is this, [I will not stay upon the Point of
Adoration, because Expos. page 143.
the most Learned and most Judicious of our Adversaries have long ago granted
us, That the Presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, ought to carry to
Adoration those that are persuaded thereof.] And after that they would accuse
Anonyme, that he had accused Monsieur de Condom, to pass by the difficulties
Advertis. page 88.
which he finds most troublesome, Is it possible that Monsieur de Condom should
imagine, that we are so deprived of common Sense, to suffer our selves to be
surprised by such Illusions? He will not stay upon the Adoration of the
Eucharist. He shall do what pleases him; but he may permit me to stay thereon*
and that I may show to all them, who are solicited to change their Religion,
that this is a Capital Affair; and that for this Article alone, there is no
less danger than of their Salvation, by such a Change.

I have no need to stand upon that Truth, which is acknowledged of all the
World, that God does absolutely forbid the Adoration of the Creature under
Eternal Pains. I will observe only, that in the business here in agitation, we
tread not upon Thorns, as w do at other times, when we are obliged to express
the Sense of the Roman Church. For Example, when we speak of the Worship, which
they render to the Saints and Images. We know not in what Terms to speak the
Truth; for within this short time these Gentlemen thrust on their Delicateness
to the extreme. Here it is not so. As they keep no measure, they do not oblige
us to keep any; the most Scrupulous speak freely; they say roundly, That Men
must adore the Sacrament with Adoration of Latria. They are the terms of the
Council; There is no plea for doubt, but Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 9.
that all the Faithful, according to the Custom, which has always been
received in the Catholic Church, owe to this most Holy Sacrament, in the
veneration thereof, the Adoration of Latria, which is due to the True God.

Let us learn what is meant by this Adoration of Latria. It is a Sovereign
Adoration; it is an Act of infinite Annihilation of the Creature before the
Creator; it is a Worship which concludes all the Acts of Faith and Love, Hope
and Admiration, Confidence, Zeal and Acknowledgment; and in general, all
Homages due to a Being infinitely Good and infinitely Merciful. Behold, what
they would have us to render to that, which we consider but as a Creature. This
is the business which they would dispatch in a Period. To know of what
importance this Adoration is, let us first consider it in respect to our
Principles, and then we will consider it with respect to the Principles of
Monsieur de Condom, and of his Church.

I must then entreat these Gentlemen, that they would presuppose for a moment
with me, that we Reason in giving a figurative Sense to these Words, This is my
Body. In a moment I will have for them the same Complaisance which I now ask of
them, and I will suppose, that the Sense which they give unto these Words be
true, In this Supposition, that here is no Real Presence, no
Transubstantiation, I pray them to consider what is done in adoring this
Sacrament. They worship Bread; and I know not whether Bread, how holy soever it
be, be more worthy to be adored than the Sun and Stars, which are so beautiful,
and wherein God's Image shines with so much brightness. What would be said of a
Man, that should worship the Water of Baptism, the Sounds of God's Word, the
Characters of the Holy Scripture? I confess that the Sacraments, though one
should even suppose that Jesus Christ is not concluded within it, is a thing
most holy, and most venerable. But there is an infinite distance between
Reverence and Adoration. We owe respect to the Gospel and to Baptism, we owe
them no Adoration.

But here is a Thought, whereby we know very well, that many Persons who are
not very well persuaded of the Real Presence, do flatter themselves and others.
Although, say they, the Body of Jesus Christ were not there, whatever it be we
adore it; wherever it be our Adoration does terminate in him; and we shall
always have this Reason to give before the Throne of God, I had intention to
adore you. I am persuaded that this Excuse shall not be received by the Judge
of the World. He must then justify almost all the Pagans, who in adoring the
Creatures had an intention of Adoring God. Then should he show favor to those
Jews which adored the Golden Calf, for they had an intention to adore God. That
appears evidently enough in what they say of that Calf, These are thy gods, O
Israel, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. Can they be thought
brutish enough to have thought, that the figure of this Calf, which was but now
made before their Eyes, had brought them out of Egypt before it was made? Who
sees not, that they regarded this Calf, as the Image and Emblem of that Great
GOD, who had done so many Wonders in their favor? Yet had the Wrath of Gnd
almost consumed them with all their good Intentions. And if one believes the
Jews of this day, their present Calamity is still an Attendant thereof; for
they have a Proverb that says, That in every one of their Miseries there is a
part of the Golden Calf. Men say, I direct my Intention to Jesus Christ,
whatever part he be in. In Conscience let them tell me* if a Man, which with
the like direction of Intention should adore the Sun and the Moon, would be
innocent? Jesus Christ is not there, but he may be there; he is there at least
by his Divinity. It is true, there are some particular Vasquez, lib. 3. disp.
1. cap. 2.
Doctors in the Roman Church who have advanced this Doctrine, That one may
worship God in any Creature: Prostrate himself before a Beam of the Sun, under
which a Demon should lie hid; yea, before a Straw, before a Pismire* etc. so
that Intention be directed toward God. But I will believe that honest Men do
not relish this strange Theology. Men should know, methinks, that Errors can
never excuse Crimes, unless some Errors of Fact, and even supportable Errors.
One shall not be acquitted for saying, I believe; for the Judge will Answer,
You should have informed your self, and have been instructed. What difference
find they between the language of a Pagan, that should say, I believed that the
Sun and Moon were gods, therefore I adored them; and that of a Christian* that
shall say, I believed that the Sacrament was Jesus Christ, therefore I adored
it? There is a great one, say they; The Scripture has said nothing which
should give ground of believing, that the Sun and Moon are to be worshipped;
but it has said, That the Eucharist is the Body of Jesus Christ. So, although
that should not be so, God would be obliged to pardon me, since he has given
occasion to the Error, by the Words which he has used. That is the Question,
whether Scripture give place to the Opinion of the Real Presence by its
Expressions. There is no Heretic but would escape the Judgment of God by that
way; for there is none that pretends not, that the Scripture has given place
to his Heresy. A Text ill understood, can never serve to excuse neither an
Heresy nor a False worship. Origin teaches us, That the Ancient Fathers that
preceded him, had imagined, that God had given the Sun and the Moon to the
Nations that they might worship them; choosing rather that they should be
Idolaters, than Atheists, They grounded this Opinion upon a Text which is read
in Deuteronom. 4. When thou shall see the Sun and the Moon, etc. thou shall not
bow down before them, and shall not serve them; for the Lord has given them
for a Portion to all Nations that are under Heaven; that is to say, according
to the gloss of Justin Martyr and Clement Alexandrin: He has given them to be
the Objects of their Adoration of People. If the Pagans had had the knowledge
of that Text so ill explained, and that they would thereby justify themselves,
would they be accepted thereto? If a Woman should defile her Bed, committing
Adultery with a Man that she had taken for her Husband, upon slight
appearances, should she be the less Criminal for it? When Men are in danger of
taking away from God, that which pertains to him alone, for to give it to the
Creature, one had need take all Securities possible. Doubt not of it, it is a
Worship which cannot be forgiven, to adore God in the Creatures, and to adore
the Creatures under Intention of serving God. It is a deep Hypocrisy to
prostrate ones self before the Sacrament, being persuaded that it is but Bread,
or even in doubting whether the Body of Christ Jesus be there. Therefore I
cannot forbear to remark by the by, that there is Cruelty in them that would
have Protestants to prostrate before the Sacrament, when they meet it. It is to
oblige them to an action of Hypocrisy, yea, to an action of Cruelty: For every
Man that prostrates himself externally before an Image, which he does not adore
with adoration of heart, he is a Profane Man as well as an Hypocrite. See then
with what Justice these Gentlemen would oblige us to re-enter into the Roman
Church before we be persuaded of the Real Presence, for to commit there, in
adoring the Sacrament, which we regard as Bread, the most Criminal of Actions
that can be committed in the Divine Service.

Considering the manner wherein Monsieur of Condom Reasons, I believe he will
easily grant me what I proved but now, That even in supposing Real Absence in
the Sacrament, one might not render it Adoration of Latria. But I pass further,
and now will suppose with him, that these Words, This is my Body, should be
taken in the Sense of the Real Presence; and I maintain that with this
Supposition, To adore the Sacrament is a Fault that cannot be forgiven, and a
Worship which overthrows the Foundations of Religion.

First, If we suppose that Jesus Christ is in the Eucharist, these Gentlemen
will permit us to suppose it with all the Exceptions, which themselves bring
thereto. According to them Jesus Christ is there, but he is not there
infallibly. Want of Intention in the Priest, a defect in the Matter; if they
put into the hands of him that celebrates, a Body which is not well composed of
Flour, a Liquor that be not Wine; if the Priest be not Baptized, if he be not a
Priest; if he has forgotten to pronounce these Words, This is my Body, which
may happen too often, because they recite the Canon of the Mass without
thinking of it, and with great swiftness. In all these Cases the Body of Christ
comes not, Consecration is not done. Those that assist at the Celebration of
the Mystery, cannot then have a perfect certainty, that-what they adore is
Jesus Christ. Yet we see them prostrate themselves, and give the Worship of
Latria to that Object, which according to their Principles may be nothing else
but Bread. Would not that put Men into a fright? What Remedy can Men find
against so great a peril? Shall it be to oblige the Adorers to say, I adore you
my Savior, if you be there? Here would I attest the Conscience of these
Gentlemen, and would ask them, If of a thousand Adorers, or it may be of a
Million, if there be any one that does make this Reserve either with Mouth or
Heart? All the World adore in earnest, as if it were indubitable that Jesus
Christ is there; but do they believe that Men were excusable, though they
should make that Reserve in adoring it? Should Men ever expose themselves to
the peril of rendering an Infinite Homage to a Creature, and to annihilate ones
self before that which is Nothing? You worship what you know not; this was the
Crime of the Samaritans. Seeing it is impossible to clear ones self absolutely,
even within the Principles of the Real Presence, whether Jesus Christ be truly
in the Eucharist: Is it not better to worship him in that place, where we know
him to be assuredly?

But let us put on our Complaisance for these Gentlemen, as far as it can go;
let us be more Catholic than they; let us suppose that the Body of Jesus Christ
is always undoubtedly in the Eucharist. I will demonstrate, that even in this
last Supposition, it cannot be lawful to adore the Sacrament. I say,
Demonstrate; for if I be not extremely blinded, I do not believe there is a
Demonstration more sensible than what I am going to say. I will therefore first
lay down those Principles which these Gentlemen will grant.

1. That God is every where, that he fills all places, and penetrates all
Creatures, and particularly all Bodies; yet would it be an Idolatry to adore
him in the Creatures, that is to say, to adore Creatures wherein he is. For
Example, God penetrates by his Substance Dogs and Horses; he penetrates all
Marble Statues and Brass, which have been made to represent the Worthies of the
Pagans, or their False gods. Yet it would be truly Idolatry, if one should
prostrate himself before those Animals, or before those Statues, to adore them,
under pretense, that God fills them.

2. My Second Principle is, That the Body of Jesus Christ, according to the
Doctrine of the Roman Church, is in the Bread of the Eucharist after the manner
of Spirits, without extent, without division, invisible, inpalpable; and to
speak it in other terms, The Body of Christ Jesus does not fill the Bread in
another manner, than the Substance of the Deity does fill the Brass or Marble.
If any say, that this Principle is false, and that the Substance of the Body of
Jesus Christ does fill the Signs of the Eucharist, by the annihilation of the
Substance of the Bread and Wine, whereas God does fill the Marbles without
altering their Substance. I will Answer, That this does nothing against our
Principle. If the Presence of the Humanity of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist
does annihilate the Substance of the Bread, it is because God would have it so,
for to place the Substance of Jesus Christ under the Bread, it is not worth the
pains to annihilate the Substance of the Bread. It is evident, that the Flesh
of the Lord, which penetrates it self in the Eucharist, could also penetrate
the Substance of the Bread. That Answer would therefore serve only to let us
see the uselessness of Transubstantiation, and of the Annihilation of the
Substance of the Bread. In truth, seeing they had need here only of the Real
Presence, it was not worth the pain to add thereto Annihilation, or Change of
Substance, which adds a thousand difficulties to those of the Real Presence.
However it be, I pretend that according to the Principles of the Roman Church,
the Flesh of Jesus Christ is not otherwise in the Eucharist, than the Substance
of God in Common Bread, or within any other Body. The Flesh of Jesus Christ is
wholly entire in the whole Eucharist; it is entirely whole under every part
thereof. The Substance of God is entirely whole in every Body, and wholly
entire under every one of the Parts of that Body. The Flesh of Jesus Christ is
wholly entire out of the Eucharist, as it is wholly entire within it. The
Substance of the Divinity is wholly entire without every Body, and wholly
entire within that Body. The Flesh of Jesus Christ is in the Eucharist in a
manner indivisible and without extension. The Substance of God is within each
Body, without any division, and without any extension of Parts. In fine, I am
assured that one cannot find any Essential difference, and that may concern our
Subject, between these two Manners of Subsisting; One of the Divinity in all
Bodies, the other of the Flesh of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist.

3. My Third Principle is, That the Divinity, which so penetrates all Bodies in
the World, is infinitely more adorable than the Flesh of Jesus Christ, which
penetrates and fills the Signs of the Eucharist. For the Divinity is adorable
by himself, and because of himself; but the Humanity of Jesus Christ is only
co-adorable, as the Ancients have spoken; that is to say, that it merits not to
be adored, but because it is Personally united to the Divinity.

4. In fine, my last Principle is a Truth of Experience and Sense; it is, That
the Change which is wrought in the Signs of the Eucharist, hinders not the
Signs from being entirely filled with Creatures. The Substance of Bread and
Wine is therein no more, I suppose it with those Gentlemen. Yet let them take a
Loaf of Bread of whatever bigness they please, let a Priest consecrate it; let
it be traversed, penetrated on all parts; let it be divided and broken into
parts almost imperceptible: yet every where we still find something figured,
colored, round, or square, or triangular, white or black, small or big; and
all that we taste in penetrating this Subject on all sides, they are Creatures.

These Principles then being laid, see how I reason. If it be permitted me to
adore the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which is all replenished and filled up
with Creatures, only because the Flesh of Jesus Christ does fill it in a
Spititual manner, without division and without extension; why should it not be
permitted to adore the Marble and the Brass, which are full of the Divinity,
which is infinitely more adoreable, and which is present in this Brass, in that
manner that the Flesh of Jesus Christ is present in the Signs of the Eucharist?
Or else I thus tutn my Reasoning; God is present in this Marble, he fills it,
he is there in a manner incomprehensible and adorable. Yet is it not permitted
me to prostrate my self before this Marble to adore it; to take parts thereof
to be adored by the Faithful, or to carry them in Pomp. Why? Because that if
God be in the Marble, there is also a Creature there, it is full of it; and I
could not adore this Subject, which is in part Creature, in part Creator; but
that I should thereby give a Sovereign Adoration to the Creature, that which
the Creatou^ does Soveraignly detest. I make application of my Principles to my
Subject. It is true, the Flesh of Jesus Christ is in the Species of the
Eucharist; but under those Species all is full of Creatures, of Accidents, of
Figures, of Color, of Quantity. I could not therefore adore therein my
Creator, but at the same time I must adore the Creature, which is conjoined to
him. If they know any Answer to that Proof, they will do us a kindness to give
it us. After that believe those Gentlemen, when they tell us with an assured
Tone, That the Presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist ought necessarily to
carry them toward Adoration, that are persuaded thereof,

If the Adoration of the Eucharist be not an Attendant of the Real Presence, as
the Roman Church conceives it; by stronger Reason, the Real Presence of the
Lutherans will not carry them to Adoration, who are persuaded thereof; for it
is well known, that the Lutherans do keep the Substance of the Bread after
Consecration. They do not believe it to be Annihilated. That Substance of
Bread, which remains in their Sacrament, should cause in them more fear, than
the Accidents do to the Roman Church. They should fear to adore the Creator in
a Subject, which remains a Creature after Consecration, as much as it was
before. So that these Gentlemen do make Illusion to the Public, when they say,
That, by the Calvinists Grant, the Catholics do Reason more consequentially in
this Subject, than the Lutherans do.

Before we conclude this Article it is good to mark* that Monsieur de Condom
does suppose, That all the Lutherans reject not Adoration; Some of them, says
he, reject Adoration. The most of them then do receive it, since there are but
some that reject it. Monsieur de Condom teaches us there something new. These
are Facts important enough, not to be advanced without Proof; but that does not
very much concern us. If Monsieur de Condom be not deceived, we declare to him,
That the Lutherans, which adore so, are not those to whom we offer Union; with
a good heart we declare Anathema to such.

But let us grant them also this Point: Suppose that the Lutherans do Reason
less congruously than the Roman Catholics; what imports it me? To Reason ill,
not to know how to draw a Consequence, is it a Crime against Piety and
Religion? A Man may have odd Opinions, whereof, if he perceives the
Consequences, he might see that they ruin all Religion; but he abhors those
Consequences, and rejects them. Another, which has the same Opinions, has
more penetration; he sees the true Attendants of his Principles, he admits
them, he ruins all. Because that my Charity obliges me to bear the Fancies of
the former, shall I be obliged to tolerate the Impiety of the latter? The
Lutheran believes, That the Body of Jesus Christ is present in the Eucharist;
if he did reason Consequentially, he would say, Then I must adore him there. In
so Reasoning and so Adoring, he would commit, according to us, a very great
Evil. But he does not think good to Reason in that manner; therefore he will
not adore it; he keeps to his Fantastical Opinion, to believe, That Jesus
Christ is present in the Substance of the Bread. The Roman Catholic holds with
him the Real Presence; but he goes further, he Reasons better, if they please
and concludes, that they must Adore; according to me he becomes guilty of an
extreme Evil. Is it the same thing? Because I tolerate the first with his
Erroneous Opinions, ought I to tolerate the second with his Worship, which I
find absolutely incompatible with the purity of Religion, although he Reasons
more Consequentially than the first? In a word, It imports us but little that
People do not Reason well, so that they do no Evil* If any Man, as Hercules
furious, should take his Children for little Monsters, and yet ceases not from
Caressing them, he is not Criminal; but if in supposing that these Children be
Monsters, and in reasoning Consequentially, does crush his Children to death,
because Monsters must be so served, he is guilty of Murder.

I will only add now two Reflections in favor of those for whom I write, they
are such who in good earnest do seek Instruction about the Truth. The first is,
That we should not, after all this, trouble our selves to prove to the Roman
Church, that they adore the Creature with the Creator in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist; for they agree thereto. These are the Terms of the Council of Trent;
We must render to this Holy Sacrament the Adoration of Latria. The Sacrament is
composed of the Flesh of Jesus Christ invisible, and of the sensible Accidents
of Bread and Wine. They adore the whole Sacrament; they adore then the
Accidents of Bread and Wine, which are the Creatures. And thereupon we may not
forget to remark it to these Gentlemen, that they are unjust to invite us to
Reunion, until they shall have proved, that one may innocently render to the
Creature this Adoration of Latria, which even, according to them, ought to be
rendered only to the Creator.

The other Reflection is, That we may also exempt our selves from entering into
the bottom of the Question* and say, That although it might be true that Jesus
Christ is in the Eucharist, and that one might adore him there, I would still
hold me to my practice, which is to Worship only in the Heavens. Reason
suggests to us, that in all things we should take the surest part, and less
dangerous. If the Body of Christ Jesus be not in the Eucharist, they that adore
this Sacrament commit an infinite Evil. If the Body of Jesus Christ be there,
they that worship him not, as there, do no Evil at all, or their fault is so
light, that Men know not what Name to give it. I do not adore Jesus Christ in
the Eucharist, because I know not whether he be there; I am not the more
Impious thereby, because I adore him in Heaven, where I know he is. But he that
adores the Sacrament, if Jesus Christ be not there, he adores the Creature, and
his fault is infinitely greater than mine.

I will make sensible, by one Example, the great difference that is between the
Roman Catholic, in case he be deceived about the Real Presence; and that of
the Protestant, in case he be mistaken in holding Real Absence. Suppose we that
a King has two sorts of Subjects; some are scrupulous and fearful, they will
not render homage to their Prince whilst he lies hid in his Retirements,
inaccessible and invisible to all the World, because they fear that the King is
not there; but as soon as this King comes forth to appear in public, that they
hear his Voice, they prostrate themselves before him, and do render a perfect
Obedience. The other Subjects are in an Extremity quite opposite; They not only
Reverence the King without seeing him, and without knowing him; but meeting an
unknown Person calling himself their King, though he be not, without further
inquiry, they suffer themselves to be seduced by light Appearances, join this
false Prince to their true King, and render the same honor to this Imaginary
Sovereign, as to their true Prince. Is it not very easy to discern the
difference which is between these two sorts of Persons? Hardly can one find the
shadow of Sin in the first sort; but it is clear, that the Second sort are
guilty of Treason. Their Ignorance does not excuse them, seeing that in such
Affairs Men are obliged to get Instruction. We are those scrupulous Subjects,
we will not adore Jesus Christ where we are not sure that he is; but we adore
him where he is assuredly. We are not then guilty, neither of refusing to our
Prince the Homage we owe him; nor of giving to any other what we owe only to
him. The Roman Catholics are those other Subjects so imprudent, that they
suffer themselves to be deceived by him who is not their Prince, and which
render him the same Honors as to their King. This Reasoning and this Example
do manifest evidently, I think, that the Roman Church could without any Risk
adhere to our Worship, and not adore Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, though he
were there; because that adoring Jesus Christ in Heaven, that would suffice to
keep them from being Impious. But for us, it is impossible to adhere to their
Worship, if Jesus Christ be not there, since we should hazard the adoring what
is not God. This is what I had to say of Adoration; after that, I leave it to
be judged, if it were a business to be ended in a Period. It is great Wisdom in
Monsieur de Condom, to have drawn a Curtain of Silence over a Worship, for the
Justification whereof nothing was to be said. But the Care of our Salvation
must oblige us not to abide by that which he has said unto us; for we must
consider this Article as being capable of keeping us in an Eternal Separation
from the Roman Church, though it were that alone, about which we could not
agree.

ARTICLE XII. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
WE are come at last to the Sacrifice of the Mass. This is the place wherein
they believe, that Monsieur de Condom and the Author of the Advertisement do
triumph in Explications and in Sweetnings. I wonder how the World do blind
themselves without any appearing Reason: As for me, I never conceived any thing
in the Sacrifice of the Mass, but what Monsieur de Condom makes us see therein;
and yet have I always minded that Affair, as the greatest that can be between
two Religions. I always believed that, according to the Roman Church, the
Eucharist was made a true Sacrifice. Does Monsieur de Condom deny it? On the
contrary, he speaks it in Terms as express as may be. [So the Son of God is put
Expos. page 145, 146.
on the Holy Table, by virtue of these Words, etc. Jesus Christ being present
does there renew and perpetuate, in some sort, the Memory of his Obedience to
the death of the Cross. So that nothing is wanting there to be a true
Sacrifice.] And a little after, [A Sacrifice nevertheless most true, in that
Jesus Christ is truly contained and presented to God under this figure of
Death.] I always conceived, that this Sacrifice is not only a Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving, but that it is truly Propitiatory. Dare Monsieur de Condom deny
it? I think not; for they are the very Words of the Council Sess. 22. cap. 22.
of Trent, [Docet Sancta Synodus Sacrificium istud vere Propitiatiorum. The Holy
Council declares, that it is a Sacrifice truly Propitiatory.] And I find, that
Monsieur de Condom agrees thereto in these Words, [We think that this Oblation
causes God to become mere propitious to us, and therefore we Page 148.
call it Propitiatory. We present to God the Lord Jesus Christ in a true
Sacrifice, as our only Victim, and our only Propitiation by his Blood.] Either
I understand nothing in these Terms, or they signify, that we offer the Lord
Jesus Christ in a Sacrifice truly Propitiatory to God, to render him propitious
to us, and to obtain remission of our Sins. It is a true Sacrifice, according
to Monsieur de Condom; it is also a Propitiatory Sacrifice, according to him.
There is no need of Logic to conclude; then, according to him, it is a
Sacrifice truly Propitiatory. In fine, I have conceived, that in this Sacrifice
the Church does the Office of an Offerer; that Jesus Christ is the Victim, and
that God is he to whom they offer that Oblation truly Propitiatory. Have we
been mistaken? I think not; for I believe I see that very thing in these Words
of Monsieur de Condom, We unite our selves to him in that state, and we offer
him to God as our only Victim. This is the state of the Controversy, and I
never conceived another.

To annihilate this Controversy, those Gentlemen fain some differences among
us, that never were. The Author of the Advertisement says; [That we regard
with horror the Sacrifice Advertism* page 46.
of their Altars, as if they should make Jesus Christ to die once again.] We
declare, that we never had such a thought. I conceive not how these Gentlemen
have forgotten, that one of our Proofs against this Sacrifice is drawn thence,
That Jesus Christ dies not there. We say, there never was a true Sacrifice of
a living Oblation, wherein the Oblation did not receive death. How then should
we accuse them, to cause Jesus Christ to die on their Altars? Monsieur of
Condom, to cause to reapproach to him, amplifies the Terms of Sacrifice and
Commemoration which they and we make use of, because we agree, that the
Eucharist is the Commemoration of the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ. He concludes,
that then, according to us, it is a Sacrifice of Commemoration. We must not
mistake here; there is difference between the Commemoration of a Sacrifice, and
a Sacrifice of Commemoration, as between the Day and the Night. In fine,
Monsieur of Condom labors hard to tell us, That they have no design to offer
to God a new Payment, and that it is not a new Oblation. We know it well
enough; the Council of Trent had told us so, and even had said more too; [It
is, says it, one single and the same Oblation; Sess. 22. cap. 2.
and he that offers himself now by the Ministry of the Priest, is the same that
offered himself on the Cross.] But does that avail any thing toward the bottom
of the Question? Be it the same Oblation and the same Sacrifice, and
consequently the same payment; will that hinder the Question from remaining the
same, viz. If it be just and reasonable to present daily Jesus Christ in a
Sacrifice truly Propitiatory for the Sins both of the Living and of the Dead?

We must presently see, whether this be so small a Controversy as they would
persuade us; and if we can re-enter into the Roman Church whilst this Sacrifice
shall subsist there. To dispatch this difference, I must pray the Doctors to
make some Reflections with me.

1. I will suppose a Truth which cannot be gainsaid; that is, That Sacrifices
have always made up the Essence of that which they call the Externals of
Religion, and consequently they are always an Essential difference among
Religions. With the Pagans, one Religion was made to differ from others by
their Sacrifices; Paganism was different from the Judaism by their Sacrifices,
which had another Object, another Matter, and which were done in Ceremonies
very different. In fine, It seems to me, that the Essential difference for the
Exterior, between the Religion of the Ancient Jews and that of the Christians,
consists, in that they had Sacrifices, and we have none; for it is not, that we
serve another God than that of the Israelites; it is, that we serve him
otherwise. That being so, is it not true that there is an Essential difference
among Christians that have Sacrifices, and they that offer none? If there had
been any Jews who had denied the Necessity of Sacrifices, and who had condemned
the use of killing Oblations in the Temple of Jerusalem, would not those People
have been the Abomination of all the rest of the People? If they had made a
Party; if they had separated, and that they had built a new Temple where they
had offered no Sacrifice to God; had Men believed that those People had had the
same Religion with the other Jews, because they had worshipped the same God who
brought them out of Egypt? If it be the Intention of Jesus Christ, that there
shall be in his Church a perpetual Sacrifice of his Body and of his Blood; we
must not flatter our selves, we follow not the Religion of Jesus Christ. But if
that continual Sacrifice has not been instituted by the Lord, assuredly they
make a new Christianism, and a new Religion. The Question then is to know, if
without any other Mystery we should pass into a Religion which is Essentially
different from ours?

2. But it is not only the Question to know, If Men should introduce into the
Church a new Sacrifice; but, if Men should Sacrifice the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Son of the Living God. It is the greatest Oblation, the Noblest and most
important in the World. And that deserves well, methinks, to have Reflection
made thereon before we engage to Reunion, whereto they invite us. If any rash
Person would sprinkle with the Blood of Oxen and Sheep their Altars, according
to the Usage of all People and of the Ancient Church, there would not be
Thunders enough to crush to death such an Undertaker. If such an Impious Man
should form a Society, wherein they might practice such Sacrifices, they would
arm all the Powers of Christianism to abolish such a Religion. Yet would that
agitation be but about the Sacrifices of some Beasts. The business is, to
Sacrifice the God of Heaven, the Master of the World, and they will persuade
us; that it is a business of Nothing.

3. The Question again is to know, Whether they should put into the hands of a
Man the GOD of the Universe, as an Oblation, in the hands of a Sacrificer; that
is, if we should debase the Creator into the hands of a Creature? It is a
Truth, which good Sense dictates among all Nations and all Ages, that the
Sacrificer is greater than the Oblation. Heb. 7. 7.
Without contradiction, the lesser is blessed of the greater. It is the
Principle of St. Paul, the Priest blesses the Oblation. They put the Lord Jesus
Christ into the hands of a Priest, as an Oblation; they then lift up the Priest
above Jesus Christ. We cannot but have regard to that, as to a very good Affair.

4. We cannot also keep our selves from seeing* that this Doctrine does
annihilate the Priesthood of Jesus Christ by good and legitimate Consequences;
If the Lord Jesus Christ was to have Successors in his Off ce of Priest, he is
not then himself an Eternal Priest. Either St. Paul's Reasoning is bad, or my
Proof is invincible: For, in fine I Reason like him. He said, If Perfection had
been in the Levitical Priesthood, was it needful Heb. 7. 11, 12.
that another Priest should arise after the Order of Melchisedeck, and who
should not be called after the Order of Aaron? The Priesthood being changed,
there must of need be a change of the Law. I say the same: If Perfection was
found in the Priesthood of Jesus Christ, who is the Eternal Priest of
Melchisedecks Order, why should Men introduce new Priests, which much more like
to be after the Order of Aaron, than after the Order of Melchisedeck? And if
the settling of a new Priesthood after the Order of Melchisedeck, has
overthrown the Levitical Priesthood; does not the Priesthood of these
Sacrifices annihilate the Priesthood of Jesus Christ? [This is your Error, say
they, you suppose that this is a new Priesthood, and it is not so; for it is
the same, it is the Priesthood after the Order of Melchisedeck, which is
Eternal, because it abides still in the Church; and without that the Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ would not be Eternal, after the way of that of Melchisedeck.]
Why would Men oblige us to believe things that are incredible, to justify the
Church of Rome? They tell us, That the Priesthood of their Priests, is the same
as that of Jesus Christ. I know not whether Heaven and Earth are more distant,
and if Light and Darkness be more different. Jesus Christ is God, those Priests
are Men. Jesus Christ abides for ever; those Priests die. No Man succeeds Jesus
Christ; Priests succeed one the other. Jesus Christ offered not for himself;
the Priests offer for their own Sins, as for those of the People. Jesus Christ
is Holy, separate from Sinners; Priests are often engaged into great Disorders.
Jesus Christ has offered once one sole Sacrifice; these offer every day, and
reiterate their Sacrifice. Jesus Christ finishes his Sacrifice in the Holy
Places not made with hands; Priests make their Sacrifices upon Altars of Stone,
and in Temples made by Man's hand. In fine, Melchisedeck was a singular Man, and
only; it must needs be therefore, that he who was to sustain that Priesthood,
whereof his was the Figure, should be a singular and only Person; but the
Priests are in great Numbers. After that, can Men deny, that Priests are
Sacrificers much rather like the Order of Aaron, than that of Melchisedeck? And
if it be so, we say it once more, The Establishment of their Priesthood
destroys that of Christ by good Consequence.

Though that should be granted, say they, it is a disavowed Consequence, and
which by consequence should not prove an obstacle to the Reunion. To that I
say, Though Men disavow it, yet we see it and fear it still, because it
produces actually its effect. It is not in Points of Practice, as in those of
Speculation. In these it is true, so the Consequence be disavowed, it must not
be imputed, although it do arise from the Speculative Principles of those that
disavow it. But when a Practice or Worship destroy by consequence an important
Truth, that is in vain to disavow the Consequence, while People remain in the
Worship, and in that Practice they are actually guilty of having done prejudice
against such a Truth. For Example; A Pagan does join to the Adoration of God,
the Sovereign, many Inferior Deities. We tell him, That by this Worship he
offers a great Wrong to the Sovereign God. He may Answer, That it is a
Consequence which he disavows, and that his Intention is, to render an infinite
Honor to this Sovereign God. Because he disavows the Consequence, is he
justified?

5. Finally, We cannot keep our selves from seeing, That the Sacrifice of the
Mass does a great dishonor to the Sacrifice of the Cross; for if it be needful
to reiterate every day that Sacrifice, the first Oblation which was made
thereof must have been insufficient. We Reason as the Apostle, that says, The
Sacrifices that are offered every year, cannot sanctify them Hebr. 9.
that have recourse to them; otherwise they had ceased them from offering them,
since the Offerers being once sanctified, should have had no more Conscience of
Sin. We Reason as these Doctors themselves: We shall hear one of them presently
saying to us, If the Mass were infinite, it were in vain to offer many Masses.
Let Us be permitted to say also, If the value of the Sacrifice of the Cross were
infinite, it is in vain to offer so many others.

It is here that Monsieur de Condom pretends that we are much in the wrong,
because, according to him, The Sacrifice of the Mass offers no prejudice to
that of the Cross; the Reason which he gives, is, It Is a new Payment of a new
Propitiation. He says not, that it is not a new Sacrifice; yet the Council of
Trent insinuates it, saying, It is the same Oblation, and the same Priest; and
the Doctors say it expressly. But it is a terrible Paradox to say, That a
Sacrifice, wherein no Person dies, wherein there is no effusion of Blood, which
is done upon an Altar, and which is done at this day toward the end of the
World, be the same singular Sacrifice which was done almost 1700 Years ago, on
the Cross whereon Jesus Christ died, and did shed his Blood. Not only, it is
not the same singular Sacrifice; that it is not a Sacrifice of the same kind,
for here Jesus Christ dies not. Monsieur of Condom tells us, That Jesus Christ
is upon the Altar but only in a Figure of real Death of the Signs, which
represent his Death. It is natural to conclude, that he is there Sacrificed as
he dies; he only dies in Figure there, he is then Sacrificed but in Figure
there. He dies not there truly; he is not then offered in a true Sacrifice.
However it be, one shall never say, that will follow the language of Reason,
That an Action wherein Jesus Christ died really, and another wherein he dies
but in some Signs, be one and the same Sacrifice. In fine, Although Jesus
Christ should be in the Eucharist, and that in the Sacrifice of the Cross and
of the Mass there should be but one Oblation, would it follow, that it were but
one Sacrifice? Does the Oneness of the Sacrifice depend solely upon the Oneness
of the Oblation? Does it not also depend on the Oneness of the Action? If God
had raised every year that Goat, which was offered for the People in the Feast
of Propitiation, and that it had been killed every year, because it had been
the same Oblation, it could never yet be said, that it had been one and the
same Sacrifice.

They say again, That it is not a new Payment, nor a new Propitiation; that
they do only apply the Propitiation of the Sacrifice of the Cross; that it is
the same Jesus Christ who is offered; that it is his Merit which is presented.
What does all that do? We say not, that the Sacrifice of the Mass does wrong to
the Merit of Christ Jesus, for we know well that have design to offer Jesus
Christ and his Merit in the Sacrifice of the Mass. But we say, That this
Oblation reiterated of the same Satisfaction, does accuse of insufficiency the
former Oblation. Either Jesus Christ has not sufficiently offered to his
Father his Infinite Merit; or the Oblation thereof, which they repeat every
day, is useless. For if the Oblation done in the Cross be sufficient, all other
Oblation is superfluous; or if the other Oblations be not superfluous,
certainly that of the Cross is insufficient, whatsoever these Doctors say. They
have a design to make application by this Sacrifice of the Mass, of the
efficacy of that of the Cross; that does not hinder from being a new Sacrifice
in the Church. It is most certain, that the Mosaical Sacrifices were destined
to apply the efficacy of the Death of Jesus Christ, and of his Sacrifice to
come. Mean while, they were not the same Sacrifice as that of the Cross. And if
any this day make application to himself of the efficacy of the Death of Jesus
Christ by the death of a Beast, it would not be a Sacrifice, but a Sacrilege.
In a word, It imports us not, why, and to what end they present Jesus Christ
every day in a true Sacrifice. They do it, and this Enterprise seems to be very
surprising, terrible, and absolutely opposite to the declaration of the Holy
Spirit, who says, That Jesus Heb. 9. 25.
Christ does not offer himself several times. Whatever Intention Men have, God
will not be paid with that Intention; and will always judge, that they have
done wrong to that Oblation, once made, capable of sanctifying for ever those
that are sanctified.

Besides that, I would fain know, if they can say in Conscience, That Jesus
Christ died purposely to obtain for us all things, for which they offer this
Sacrifice of the Mass. It is not only for the Remission of Sins; it is for the
preservation of Health, for the Cure of a Disease, for the Prosperity of an
Enterprise, yea, and for the finding out of those things that are lost. In a
word, There are but few things, though never so base, for which they do not
celebrate the Sacrifice of the Mass; by the favor of this Word of the Council
of Trent, for other Necessities. It is impossible we should count for nothing
so great an Abuse as that is, to offer the Son of God, his Flesh and his Blood,
which the Angels adore, for things of this Nature. And we cannot comprehend how
they can say, That it is the same Propitiation of that of the Cross; for it is
certain, that the Lord has not suffered on the Cross, to obtain for Men these
sorts of Goods. Monsieur de Condom must also give me the permission to ask him,
how that which is taught in the Roman Church, That the value of the Sacrifice
of the Mass is Finite, can agree with what he says, That it is the same
Payment as that of the Sacrifice of the Cross? Bellarmine proves very well,
that the value of the Mass is finite, [If the Value of the Bellarm. de Miss.
lib. 2. c. 4. 55.
Mass were Infinite, it were in vain to offer many Masses to obtain the same
thing; for if one Mass alone were of an Infinite Price, certainly it were
sufficient to obtain all. Of what use were it to offer others?] The following
Words appear remarkable to me; [One may prove the same thing by the Sacrifice
of the Cross, which is singular, not to be repeated, only because it is of an
Infinite Value, and that it acquired a Price for all the Sins which are to be
pardoned, both future and past.] Can any distinguish more neatly the two
Sacrifices, and the two Payments; that of the Cross, and that of the Mass? One
is Infinite, the other limited: One is never repeated, because it is Infinite;
the other is daily reiterated, because it is of a Finite value. Bellarmine,
will they say, has no design to oppose the Council of Trent; and in the same
place he proves, That the Sacrifice of the Mass, is the same Sacrifice with
that of the Cross. It is true; but these Doctors say what they please, and they
would have us to believe them, even when they lay down things incompatible.

I do not believe it necessary to stay long upon what Monsieur de Condom says,
That the Sacrifice of the Mass is an Attendant of the Real Presence. If that
Reflection were solid, it would do for us, and it could not serve, but to give
us Aversion for the Doctrine of Reality, whose Attendants should be so strange,
and would tend to establish a New Sacrifice, that is to say, a New Religion.
But we cannot agree, that the Sacrifice of the Mass be an Attendant of the Real
Presence. It may be an Issue, if Men please, because it followed after it, and
that they have made a Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Eucharist, only after they
had imagined a Real Presence of the Flesh of Jesus Christ. But it is an Issue
which has no foundation, but in Illusion; for in truth it is clear, That the
Flesh of Jesus Christ, in whatever manner it be given us, is only given us but
to be Eaten, and not to be Sacrificed; seeing the Lord commands us to Eat his
Flesh, and never ordains it to be Sacrificed. If the Real Presence did
necessarily induce the Sacrifice, it were because Men should Sacrifice the Lord
Jesus Christ, wherever he is. Were it so, he were then to be Sacrificed in
Heaven. So in this place, no more then about Adoration, we cannot grant that
the Catholic Romans do Reason more Consequentially than the Lutherans, because
these which hold the Real Presence, do not yet make a Sacrifice of the
Eucharist.

Yet once more, I have no design either to prove nor refute, and I will hold me
religiously within the Bounds which I have marked out for my self. Therefore I
will not examine all that Monsieur de Condom says, to expound the Epistle to
the Hebrews. It is one of his digressions, done for swelling his Work. He shall
say whatever he pleases; but he shall never make them believe, who shall
preserve but a little liberty of the Spirit, that this Epistle be favorable to
the Sacrifice of the Mass. Never will Men comprehend the reason of the Silence
of the Apostle upon this matter, in a place where he treated to the bottom,
both of the Sacrifice and of the Christian Priesthood. This were a manifest
prevarication; and if having wherewith to satisfy the Jews, who would have by
all means Visible Sacrifices, he had not put into their hands the Sacrifice of
the Mass to impose Silence on them. Monsieur de Condom would believe he had
done much, if he could but draw this Epistle from laying so heavy upon his
Party, and had proved that it does nothing against him. Also has he no other
end in his Reflection, it is not a thing to be dispatched in Eight or Ten little
Pages; but though he had done it, he had yet done nothing to purpose. It is not
enough to have proved, that this Epistle contains not Proofs against the
Sacrifice of the Mass. They should find therein Proofs for this Sacrifice; for
it is there that they ought to be, if there were any in the Scripture; and if
they find none in that place, it is a prejudgment, that they cannot be found in
any part.

ARTICLE XIII. Of the Retranchment of the Cup.
BEhold the last of the Consequences of Transubstantiation and of the Real
Presence, it is the Retranchment of the Cup, and Communion under one kind.
Monsieur de Condom finds in his Theology, that it is so natural a Consequence
thereof, and so necessary, that those who confess or tolerate Real Presence,
should find it no trouble to Communicate under one kind. If it were true that
the Retranchment of the Cup were a necessary Attendant of the Real Presence, it
were to us a new Reason against the receiving thereof; but it concerns me
little whether that Consequence be good or bad. It is a Controversy which I
leave to the Bohemians to dispatch, and to the Germans, French, Bavarians, and
to so many others, who did in the last Age demand with so much instance, the
Restitution of the Communion under both kinds; and who notwithstanding believed
Transubstantiation and the Real Presence.

I will say only Two things thereupon. The first, That the Church, which during
a Thousand years entire, by the Confession of these Doctors, Administered the
Communion under both kinds, did not believe the Retranchment of the Cup were a
needful Attendant of the Real Presence; seeing that, if we believe them, that
same Church believed also that Real Presence. I grant that it is an astonishing
thing, That during the Ten first Ages Men should not have that Scruple, which
they have had in the following. In those Times when Men accounted it a greater
honor to wear on their Face the mark of their Sex, than they do this day; I
know not how then Men should not abhor, to see after the Communion a thousand
Bodies of Christ Jesus, hanging at the Beard of a Mariner. They have not
thought of a Remedy to be sought for that Scandal; but since Berengarius, and
since the establishing of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. One had need be
very dull, methink, and thick Skulled, not to be sensible, that these new
Precautions, which they since that began to be thought of, are an evident
Proof, that there has been Innovation in the Doctrine.

The other thing I would say is, That I found a Word in the Book of Monsieur de
Condom, which makes me suspect, that himself is but ill persuaded, that the
Communion under one Kind is an Attendant of the Real Presence. [In the
Consecration, says he, the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ are mystically
separated, because that Jesus Christ said separately, This is my Body, This is
my Blood, which does include a lively and efficacious representation of the
violent Death which he suffered.] If the Body and Blood be mystically separated
in Consecration, why should they not be so in the Communion? If Jesus has said
separately, This is my Body, This is my Blood; has not he also said
separately, Eat, Drink; He that eats my Flesh, and He that drinks my Blood? In
fine, If the Signs be separated in this Sacrifice, to induce a lively and
efficacious representation of the violent Death of Jesus Christ, why do they
not also give them Separately at the Communion, seeing they make there the
Commemoration of that Violent Death, and that Men participate there of the
whole efficacy of that Death? If Monsieur de Condom would thus Reason upon the
Principles which he himself has laid, he should then Reason as Cajetan and
many other Able Men have done, who did believe Transubstantiation and the Real
Presence. All that may serve to make it appear, that the Lutherans do not
Reason so ill as Men would persuade us, when they sever the Doctrine of the
Real Presence from all those Attendants, which they give it in the Roman Church.

But that is not my principal Affair. Here it is; It is to make known, that
Monsieur de Condom has no reason for desiring to persuade us, that this
Retranchment of the Cup is nothing important, and that it should not hinder us
from Reunion to the Roman Church. The Christian Religion, according to us, has
but Two Sacraments; and should it be nothing important to us, to see ravished
from us the Moiety of one of these Sacraments at one blow? I know not how that
can be said, seeing, that according to our Principles, he that divides the
Sacrament destroys it, and he that destroys it robs the Church of it. They
would have us reckon for nothing, an Attempt, happily the strangest which was
ever seen in Religion. All the World agrees, that our Lord Jesus Christ has
Instituted this Sacrament under both Species; that Antiquity has so practiced
it, and after Fourteen hundred Years they come to snatch it out of our hands.
These Doctors, who boast of so perfect a Conformity to the Ancient Church, do
abandon it in this place, which is of the chiefest importance. They grant it,
they are not ashamed of it; and they would have us like it, and that we should
account this Enterprise for nothing. What, can we account for nothing so
manifest an Infraction of our Masters Orders, which said so expressly, Drink ye
all of it? It will avail nothing here to say, That this Command is not
addressed to all the Faithful, but to the Priest alone. It is an Illusion,
which I have no design to encounter. The business is to know, whether, in our
Principles, we cannot Communicate under one kind. Now, seeing that after our
Principles these words, Drink ye all of it* are addressed to all the Faithful;
we cannot, retaining our Principles, Communicate under one Kind, without being
Hypocrites, Prevaricators and Rebels against the Orders of our Lord.

But to make Men sensible how much this Enterprise is terrible, and this Affair
important, I beseech them, who have a Care of their Salvation, to make with me
the following Reflections.

1. That in all Sacraments and Sacrifices, and generally in all Sacred
Ceremonies of the Law, there were parts so Essential, that in ruining them Men
had entirely destroyed that part of Divine Service; and of a Sacred Ceremony
they had so made a Sacrilege. Moses had ordained, that every day twice, in the
Evening and Morning, the Holocaust of a Lamb should be offered. It is that
which the Law called, The Continual Sacrifice. If they should have offered but
one Holocaust at Noon, and that they had Sacrificed a Bull instead of a Lamb,
is it not evident that it would have been a manifest Prevarication, and that
this Action would have passed before God for an Abomination? God had also
ordained, That on that Solemn day, which they called of Propitiations, they
should present two Goats; that one of them should be Sacrificed for an
Holocaust, and that the other being charged with the Iniquity of the People,
should be sent into the Desert. If they should have presented but One Goat
instead of Two, is it not evident that the Propitiation had not been made, and
that God would have considered that as a signal Prevarication? And that an High
Priest, that had been guilty of such an Attempt, would have been put to Death
without Mercy? As for me, though I should strive, yet cannot I perceive what
difference there is between such Facts, and This whereof we now treat. Jesus
Christ has established us a Sacrament under both kinds of Bread and Wine, he
says, Eat, Drink. At a blow, suddenly they steal away one Moiety from us, they
rob us of the Wine, consecrate; they forbid us to drink thereof, and they would
have us to regard that as a Sacrament, and as the same Sacrament.

2. Let Us consider besides, that the Efficacy and Virtue of Sacraments depend
absolutely on their Institution and the Will of their Author. For, in fine, at
the bottom, to eat a little of the Flesh of a roasted Lamb, to suffer some
Violence in ones Flesh by Circumcision, to be washed with a little Water, in it
self cannot be of any Virtue. And Ceremonies have no Efficacy, but because God
has instituted them, and has promised to accompany them with the Virtue of
his Grace and of his Spirit. But is it not true, that he has not promised to
accompany Sacraments with his Virtue, but on Condition that Men should keep
close to the Ceremonies that himself has Instituted? Circumcision was to be
done in certain Parts; if they had done it on the Lips or Ears, instead of
being a Seal of the Covenant, it had been a depravation evident of the
Covenant, which would have provoked God instead of procuring his Grace. They
were to roast the Paschal Lamb, to eat it with bitter Herbs; if instead of that
they had roasted a Beef, or had boiled the Lamb, and that they had eaten this
Lamb with a sweet Sauce; who can deny, but that instead of a Sacrament it had
been a Sacrilege? God would not have shed any Virtue on that corrupted
Ceremony, and this Change would absolutely have ruined the Efficacy of the
Sacrament. If instead of Baptizing with Water, any should Baptize with Dirt, or
any other such thing; or in retaining Water, any should alter visibly the Sense
of the Sacramental Words of Baptism, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; could Men believe that this Sacrament would
confer Remission of Sins? It is clear that God has engaged himself to give his
Grace with his Sacraments; but not with Men's Sacraments. When Men change the
Institution of a Divine Sacrament, they make an Human Sacrament, to which God
has promised nothing. Therefore it is a most clear Evidence, that in
retranching the Moiety of the Signs in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, they
ruin the Efficacy thereof, they banish the Spirit of God, and estrange his
Grace from it. For Jesus Christ has not promised to afford his Grace, but to
such Sacraments as he has instituted, and as he has instituted it. After
that, they should have us reckon it for nothing, that they take from us one of
the Means whereby this Saving Grace and Efficacy are communicated; is that Just?

3. These same Reflections make us see, with the fullest Evidence, that the
Retranchment of the Cup destroys and ruins the Sacrament of the Eucharist. For
a Sacrament is a certain Assemblage of Ceremonies instituted of God; and if you
take away one part of these Ceremonies, it is no more the same Sacrament. That
appears by what I have said of the Passover, Circumcision, and Baptism; in
which, if Men should make any notable Change, by way of Retranchment, they
would have ruined them: I say, by way of Retranchment, because one may alter
Sacraments, by way of Addition, without ruining them. The vain Ceremonies which
the Jews had laden the Passover with, did not absolutely destroy it; and the
useless Pomp, wherewith they have clothed the Sacrament of Baptism among
Christians, hinders not its Efficacy. When the Essential parts remain, what is
added does incommodate and hurt, yea, load the Subject; but the Essence of that
Subject subsists. But when they have taken away one of the Essential parts* all
things which Men add beyond the Institution, cannot restore what they have
spoiled. And thence it is clear, that both the Signs being equally Essential in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, they could not retranch one without ruining the
whole Sacrament entirely. We must not therefore dissemble, that we regard not
the Communion in the Roman Church as a Sacrament. They may not therefore
wonder, that we cannot Communicate with them, while it shall remain in the
state wherein it is.

4. Finally, We must remark that this Retranchment of the Cup, which they would
reckon for nothing, does oppose and ruin all the Ends for which the Eucharist
has been established. We have already seen, that it ruins the Efficacy of the
Grace of God, which he would convey to us in that Sacrament. Besides that, we
must remember, that our Lord Jesus Christ did Institute it to be an Image of
his death; As often as you shall eat of 1 Cor. 11.
this Bread, and drink of this Cup, you shall show forth the Lords death. Now
after the Remark of Monsieur de Condom himself, the lively and efficacious
Representation of the lively Death which our Lord suffered, is not found, but
in that his Flesh and his Blood are mystically separated. For indeed, a Flesh
cannot be living when it is separated from its Blood, and for the fit
Representation of Jesus, as dead, we must see his Flesh and his Blood
separated. It is then very evident, that they which give the People but one
Sign, which give the Flesh and Blood Mystically conjoined, do not give in their
Communion the lively and efficacious Representation of the Violent Death which
our Lord suffered.

It is further certain, that this Divine Sacrament has been instituted as a
Sacred Repast, that should teach us in a Mysterious manner, that our Souls
shall find in the Lord Jesus Christ complete Nourishment; therefore it has
been established under the two Signs of Bread and Wine, which are sufficient to
nourish the Body; and that signifies, that the Grace of Jesus Christ is
sufficient to nourish our Souls. But is it not evident, that in Retranching the
Cup they ruin this excellent Mystery? Can one live with Bread alone; can a
Body be sustained with Meat without Drink? And the Grace of Jesus Christ, that
makes our Souls to live, is it sufficiently represented by a kind of Repast,
with which one must necessarily die?

This Sacrament was also instituted to be a common Repa^t, a Feast of Society
among many Brethren, for to nourish Charity and entertain the Union of the
Faithful. Therefore the Ancients said, that this Union was mystically
represented by the Union of many grains of Wheat, which compose one Loaf of
Bread; and by that of many grains of Raisons, which compose one Wine. It is
then a Family Repast, this Sacrament; but where was there ever seen a Repast,
where only Meat is given, and not Drink? Certainly, Epistol. ad Ca^il.
those Heretics which St. Cyprian condemns, because they would use only Water
in the Eucharist, were less Cruel, and did less ruin the Mysteries of this
Sacrament. For there, at least in their Eucharist, there was both Meat and
Drink; and that is it which is essential to every Repast. Thenceforth
therefore, let them talk no more of this, as of a business little important,
which destroys the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which ruins the Efficacy of it,
and which opposes all the Ends for which it was instituted.

Monsieur de Condom has put himself behind a Retranchment, wherein he
conceives that we cannot force him. It is an old wrangle about one Article of
our Discipline, which permits such as have an invincible aversion for Wine, to
Communicate under the sole kind of Bread. This Example shows, that Monsieur de
Condom is not very ambitious of speaking always things that are novel and
sublime; for there is no Missionary so small, that has not treated this
difficulty in the very dust of Public places, and that has not declaimed
thereon from the very Stalks. Yet, now must we consider it as having somewhat
in it, seeing a Man of Merit and Weight would have it so. [They have judged,
says he, by Expos. page 176.
this Rule, that both Kinds were not Essential to Communion, by the Institution
of Jesus Christ; otherwise they must have refused wholly the Sacrament to those
that could not receive it wholly entire.] I wonder that these Gentlemen do not
also argue against us, that we have dispensed Blind men from Reading God's
Word, the Deaf from Hearing, and the Dumb from Singing the Praises of their
Creator. I always thought, that no Man was obliged to Impossibilities. To hear
God's Word and implore his Name, are at least as necessary to Salvation, as
participation of Sacraments; yet the Deaf and the Dumb are dispensed, because
of Impossibility.

Our Discipline speaks of Persons which have an invincible Aversion for Wine,
that can neither Smell nor Taste it, and much less swallow it. We dispense not
those Persons from taking the Wine; it is Nature that dispenses them putting
into them an insuperable Obstacle from the reception of Wine. It Is not
therefore We that give this Dispensation, nor that divide the Sacrament. To
explain my self more neatly. I say there are two sorts of Commands: Some are
Negative, which ordain the abstaining; such as be the Prohibitions, for
Example, of committing Adultery or Murder, of falling into Idolatry. Some are
Affirmative, which order us to do, for Example, Giving of Alms, Visiting the
Sick, Comfort the Afflicted. The first sort do always oblige, and in all
Circumstances; for it is never permitted to commit Adultery, to Rob or commit
Murder: But the Affirmatives oblige not, but within certain Circumstances, and
under condition of Possibility. The Command of partaking of the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, is one of those Commands Affirmative, which oblige not but in
such Occasions wherein it is possible. A Man that has no Goods, is dispensed
from giving Alms. He that has no Feet cannot Visit the Sick: He that has no
Tongue, is dispensed from Comforting the Afflicted, Likewise, he that cannot
absolutely drink Wine, is dispensed by this absolute Impossibility. Methinks, a
Man must be blinded with his Prejudices beyond all that can be said, to compare
things so different, and to say, We dispense a particular Man among an hundred
Thousand, from taking the Cup, because he cannot drink Wine; therefore it is
permitted willingly, and without necessity, to take away the Cup from all
Christian People.

I am sensible that those Doctors will not be content herewith, and that they
will say, However tell us, if what this Man takes, that communicates with you
under the Sign of Bread, without Wine, is a true Sacrament: If it be a true
Sacrament, why should not that be One which we present to our People? I Answer,
That what we offer to this Man is a true Sacrament, because we offer him both
the Signs; yea, we oblige him to take the Cup in his hand: And what the Roman
Church presents to their Communicants is not a true Sacrament, because she
gives them nothing but Bread. But they will say, What he receives among you,
that cannot drink the Wine, is not a true Sacrament as to the Sign* I Answer,
That it is a true Sacrament, as to the Thing signified. It is certain, that to
speak exactly, he does not take with his Mouth the Sacrament of Jesus Christ;
for this Sacrament is composed of Two parts, and he receives but One. But he
receives Jesus Christ, signified by the Sacrament, and receives as much of
Graces, as they that Communicate of the Sacrament it self. Why? Because the
Sacrament is entirely presented to him, because he receives it in his desire
and heart, and because only an insuperable Impossibility hinders him from
communicating of the Sign. Suppose we, that a Man is found, which has the same
aversion for the Bread as for the Wine; that never was, it may be, found; but
it is not impossible. This Man will come to the Lords Table, he will take with
his hand the one and the other Sign, he will bring them near to his Mouth; but he
will return them, not being able to pass further. What does that Man? Does he
take a true Sacrament? Not at all; he takes not the Sacrament, he recelves the
Spiritual things presented under the Sacrament, that is, Grace. But to what
purpose does he come near the Table, to receive nothing there? For he might
have received Grace without stirring from home. He comes to make unto God a
solemn Protestation, that his Impotency is the only cause that hinders him from
partaking of the Signs; that he thirsts after his Grace, that he desires to
have part in the efficacy of the Sacrament, and to show to all the Faithful,
that he does not deprive himself of those Sacred Signs out of contempt of
Religion. If those Doctors do not relish this Theology, I beseech them to hear
Epist. 77.
St Bernard, that tells them, It is not Privation of the Sacrament that damns;
but Contempt. I conjure them to consult all the Theologues of their School, and
examine what they say of Baptism of Vow, or the Vow of Baptism. There is none
but says, That he who desires sincerely and ardently to receive Baptism, and
dies without partaking of the Sign, does nevertheless receive the Efficacy and
all the Virtue of Baptism.

ARTICLE XIV. Of Holy Scripture.
WE have upon this Article very important Controversies with the Roman Church
of the Perfection of Scripture, of its Obscurity, of its Authority; also
touching the Utility and Necessity of Reading the said Holy Scripture, of the
Sovereign Judge of Controversies and of Traditions. Monsieur de Condom passes
almost all these under Silence, and wraps it up in few Words; except the
Question of its Authority, which he Treats of a little more largely. I have no
design neither, to make here large Common places upon these Controversies.
Volumes have been sufficiently written, on both sides, to compose great
Libraries. I will only say, That all the dexterity of Monsieur de Condom, will
never make us to pass this for a thing of small importance. We shall never
relish, that any should make it their Task to speak ill of Holy Scripture. It
is a wicked Character, and a bad Prejudice for these Doctors Cause. When Men
speak ill of their Judge, and that they seek for Means of Recusation against
him, it is a Proof, that they do not believe him favorable to their Interest.
If the Roman Church believed the Scripture to be on their side, they would not
seek out so many Means, to make her lose her Credit with the People. It is a
thing that could never be believed, if we did not see it, That Christians
should busy themselves to prove, that the Book which includes the Doctrine
that saves them from Hell, is an imperfect and mutilate Book, gnawed by the
Teeth of Time; depraved and corrupted by the Jews and by the Heretics; that it
contains but a little part of the Doctrine of the Church; that they must add
thereto the Help of Traditions: That it is an an Obscure Book, that Men cannot
understand it without the help of the Church; that God has filled it with
Rocks and Shelfs, that proud Spirits might be wracked thereon: That it is a
Leaden Rule, which Men turn what way they please; that Heretics may easily
abuse it, to fight against the Truth; that we find not Light enough therein to
dissipate the Darkness of Error; that it is a Labyrinth, wherein Men are
necessarily lost when they are not conducted; that it has no Authority, in
regard to us, without the Testimony of the Church; that it has not Characters
of Divinity sufficient to prove it self; that it cannot explain it self by
clear Places, of what it says in obscure Passages; that without the Authority
of the Church, we should be no more obliged to believe it to be Divine, than
any other Book; that the Lecture of this Book is dangerous, that one must
extremely distinguish the Persons, to whom the Reading thereof should be
permitted; that Versions in the Vulgar Tongue cannot appear without peril; that
the People should not have liberty of handling these Sacred Books. They would
have us to hear all these things patiently, and that we should keep Silence
thereat. But that cannot be: We should be the most base, and the most
ungrateful of all Men, if we should abandon the Defense of a Book, to which
alone we are beholding, next to God, for our Eternal Salvation. They will not
fail to tell us, that we are Calumniators, and they speak not with that
contempt of the Holy Scripture. They will bring us the Testimonies of some
particular Persons of the latter days, which have spoken of it with grand
Eloges and Praises. And I could relate the Words of other particulars, and
would bring an hundred for one, which speak thereof in the Terms which I
expressed just now. If Monsieur de Cedeau, Bishop of Grass; if the Gentlemen of
Port Royal have spoken of this Scripture with the Respect due thereto, that
has not been regarded as their fair side and best Character. And all the World
knows the Violent Persecutions whereto some have been exposed, because of that.

Monsieur de Condom may say what he pleases in favor of Tradition; but we
maintain, That it is an opening of the Door to all the Corruptions of Doctrine
and Worship. There is none so strange and so opposite to the Spirit of
Christianism, that may not enter into the Church under this Name of Tradition.
Sad Experience teaches us enough thereof. It is this Word that filled with
Images the Temples of Christians, to the great Scandal of those who are jealous
of the Purity of Worship. It is that which introduced into Religion the Service
of Creatures, Invocation of Saints, the Worship of the Holy Virgin,
Pilgrimaget, Adoration of Relics, and so many other such like things. If the
Roman Church were reduced to defend her self only by Scripture, she should soon
be driven to forsake the most part of her Worship and of her Devotions: But
where Scripture fails her, Tradition is an obscure Spring, entangled and
Profound, which furnishes with all that she pleases. Methinks, it is very
unjust to wrangle with People, and impose it for a Crime on them, that they
will not believe but God alone, speaking in the Scriptures, and by the Pen of
his Prophets and Apostles.

With what Justice would they have us to regard, as a small business, that
Enterprise, to have taken away the Word of God, in the Book thereof, from the
hands of the People? Is not that a Capital Affair? Where shall Knowledge be
drawn, if the Spring thereof be shut up? Where shall Men learn to know God
aright, if they rob the People of that Book, where God himself makes himself
known? When I see that they say with Confidence, That it is not true, that they
have forbidden the Lecture of the Word of God, that dismays me, and drives my
Patience to the utmost. I know not how Men can contradict so a Public
Authority. It is true, that there are some in the Roman Church, which condemn
that Prohibition made to the People of Reading the Holy Scripture; and I could
wish no fairer Discourse thereon, than what has said the Author of the
Dialogues between the two Parishioners of Saint Hilary du Mont. But what was
said of those Persons? Father Annat.
They say they have borrowed the Weapons of Heretics, and have brightned them
the more. [They accuse them to oppose the Sentiments of the Church; because
that the Church, conducted by Gods Spirit, permits not indifferently the
Reading of Holy Scripture to all Persons, without the Advice and Explication of
Ecclesiastical Superiors, for fear lest the Difficulty or Obscurity of
Understanding in some places, should produce Scruples and Errors in Men's
Spirits. It being certain, that all Heresies, which are born in its bosom, have
always their foundation and their defense in the Words of the Holy Scripture
ill understood.] It is the Lord Bishop of Ambrun, who speaks in his Ordinance
against the Traduction of Mons. I think he knows what he says; for the least
thing that may be granted to an Archbishop, it is, that he should know
Religion. And indeed, does not all the World know, that the Rules which are at
the Head of the Index Expurgatorius, forbid the Lecture of the Holy Word of
God; excepting those who shall have permission from their Ordinary, of the
Curate or the Confessor? It is not a Decree of the Council of Trent, will they
say: No, but it is the Spirit of the Council. They are Theologians, deputed by
the Council of Trent, that speak it. It is Pope Pius the Fourth, who presided
in that Council, and who possessed the Spirit thereof. Sixtus the Fifth, and
Clement the Eighth, Successors of Pius the Fourth, ought to have had the
Spirit of the Church. Methinks it is they that say, That by the Command and Use
of the Holy Inquisition Roman Universella, the Power of permitting the
reading or retaining the Bible in the Vulgar Tongue, both of the Old and of the
New Testament, has been taken away from Bishops, Inquisitors, or Superiors of
the Regulars. Let Men but read the last Writings, which have been made
thereabout, upon the occasion of the Version of Mons; the Ordinances of my
Lords of Paris and of Ambrun; the Writings of Father Annat, and all the
Apologies which have been made for the Defense of those Pieces; and Men shall
see whether it be true, That the Reading of Scripture be permitted and ordained
to all the World. I must remit those, that will be instructed in this Matter,
to the Book of Monsieur Mallet, where Men shall see the Councils, Popes,
Cordinals, Bishops, Faculties of Theology, and the Theologues agreeing in this
Article. It is, That the Reading of the Word of God is dangerous, when it is
permitted to all the World. But, is there need of Proofs for a thing that is
seen? Where is there a Reading of the Word of God; in favor of the People? Is
it in the Church? If they Read any part thereof, it is in a strange Tongue; it
is no more for Instruction; It is for Prayer, as said a Franciscan in the
Council of Trent: Is it in Private Houses? But in what Country does the People
know the Word of God of himself? Certainly, in Spain and in Italy, the Bible is
that of all Books that the People knows least of. In France, some honest
Persons read it; but their Number is very small. It is not charged as a Duty
upon any Person; happily there are not of a Thousand, One that has cast his
Eyes upon this Sacred Book. Thence comes the profound Ignorance of most People,
even of those who distinguish themselves by their quality, or by their
Character. We must not flatter our selves; We shall never regard that Conduct
as coming from the Spirit of God, and we shall never re-enter into a Church,
which treats Holy Scripture with so much Injustice.

ARTICLE XV. Of the Church.
AS for the Authority of the Church, it cannot be an Affair of little
Importance, seeing the Question is, whether the Tribunal of it shall be lifted
up above the Holy Scripture. Monsieur de Condom cannot be ignorant, that this
Controversy of the Infallible Authority of the Church, is an Article so
Capital, that thereon depends all the Reunion whereto they invite us. Whilst
that the Roman Church shall call it self Infallible, she will shut the Door
against all Reformation; and as long as she shall refuse all Reformation, she
cannot hope that we shall return into her Bosom. This Doctrine of Infallibility
is the most dangerous that could ever enter into the Church; because it opens
the way to all sorts of Errors and Superstitions, and takes away all liberty
of Examining those things, which Use or Authority have once established. A
Church that calls her self Infallible boldly, establishes boldly what she
wills, and what may be found useful for its Interest. And after that, there is
no more any Means to return. We must also be permitted to say, That this is an
Affair of the highest Importance, seeing the Foundation of the Faith of our
People depends thereon. They would not have us to establish it on the Holy
Scripture, which is the Stay and Pillar of Truth; and they would have us to
knowledge all that we must believe, as from the Church, without being able to
tell us which is this Church, and where are the Titles of its Infallibility.
These Gentlemen do thrust us very hardly upon the Authority of Scripture, the
diversity of its Senses upon the liberty whereof they accuse us, as given to
Women and to Artificers, to interpret it after their manner, and to make
themselves a new Religion, if it seems good to them. But I know not how they
mind not, that with all their Maxims of Submission and blind Obedience, for
their Interpretations of the Church, they must cast the Faith of their People
into an incertitude, greater a thousand times, than that wherein they say that
we are. It is the Church, say they, to whose Interpretations we must cleave. I
will; but let them show me that Church to whom I must submit. I see in the
Orient a Greek Church, which they call Schismatic; in the Occident, I see
there Societies of Men, whom they call Eutychians, Jacobites, Nestorians,
Melchites, and many others. Each one of these Societies tells me, that she is
the true Church, whom I must hear. Which shall I believe? Believe her, say
they, that has the Marks of Antiquity, of Succession of Chairs, and
particularly of the Apostolic Chair. But every one of those Societies does
boast to have all those Advantages, to be the most Ancient, to be Apostolical;
to have had the Apostles for Founders. The Church of Alexandria says, that she
was founded by St. Mark, her first Bishop; that of Jerusalem, by St. James.

These are Matters of Fact, and to clear my self thereof, I must read whole
Libraries: I that neither have Latin nor Greek, which have neither time enough,
nor piercing Wits to follow hard Studies. Either I must remain uncertain, or
else I shall be reduced to believe, that the Roman Church is the true Church,
upon her own simple Word, and upon the Witness that she gives her self, which
is of all things in the World the most unjust; for no Man ought to be believed
in his own Cause. Yea, though I should believe, that the Roman Church is the
true Church, and Infallible. If I ask where that Infallible does rest, they
cannot teach it me. The one will say, that it is in the Pope; others will say,
that it is false, and I must beware of that thought. Some Doctors will tell
me, that the Infallible Oracle is not found but in Councils; but others will
call that Opinion, Heresy, and will Threaten the Tribunal of the Inquisition,
if I yield unto those Thoughts. I know not then what side to turn to, to find a
solid Prop to my Faith; for on all hands I see nothing but Doubts, in that
which they call the Church, uncertainty, and dividing of Opinions. If I pierce
into the bottom of that Church, and that I examine the Sense thereof, I see
People that say with one Voice, We must follow the Church; One cannot go off
from her without wandering. But under that appearance of Uniformity, I see a
prodigious diversity of Opinions: Some are Semi-Pelagians, and teach, That
Grace is not efficacious, but by the Will of Man; others defend Efficacious
Grace by it self, and accuse the former of recalling Pelagianism. Some say,
That the Command of Loving God obliges at all times; and the others say, that
it never obliges. I see some that accuse others to be the Corrupters of
Morality, and which indeed make the Truth of their Accusation palpable by ones
Finger; but they who are accused, do by turns accuse their Adversaries to be
Calvinists, Heretics, to ruin the Virtues of Sacraments; to estrange the
Faithful from the Communion of the Body of Christ, and to bind Conscience by
unjust Chains. All those People are in the Church; they follow all the
Sentiments of the Church; as they say; yet are they in Paths so opposite, that
Hell and Heaven are not more. See the Uniformity of that Church, whereto they
would have me to give up my self. It must be a concluded Affair: We shall never
resolve to leave the Foundation of the Word of God, who always abides the same,
to engage our Selves in a Sea of Doubts and Uncertainties, where we cannot set
our Foot, nor find a fixed Bottom. That the important Controversy of Authority
Infallible of the Church, be not an Obstacle to our Reunion.

Monsieur de Condom would persuade us, by all means, that we are, in that
regard, in the same Practice, and in the same Opinion with his Church. In that
we make our Church Judge Sovereign and Infallible of the Controversies which
arise among us. He proves it by two things: First, Because we condemn the
Doctrine of the Independants, which say, That every Faithful Man is to follow
the Motions of his own Conscience, and that each Flock is to be governed by
their proper Laws, without dependence of any other, in Matters Ecclesiastical.
Whereto we oppose, That if that Doctrine had place, there might be formed as
many Religions as Parishes; and we conclude, That the Faithful ought to be
Dependants in regard of their Faith; that is, they must depend upon a Superior
Authority, which is that of the Church. I conceive not what difficulty Monsieur
de Condom finds therein. Have we ever said, That the Faithful ought to be
absolutely Independent of the Church? Do we deny the Authority of the Church to
be great, holy, venerable? Do we consider the Decisions of holy Councils
Assembled in God's Name, and who have decreed according to his Word, as
Nothing? There is much difference between a Great Authority, and an Infallible
Authority; between a blind and absolute Dependence, and a Dependence
conditional. The Authority of the Church is great, but it is not Infallible.
Councils ought not to be despised; but their Decisions are not to be received
blindfold. The Faithful are to live in Dependence; but they must examine by the
Word of God those Decisions, whereon they are to depend. Not to make a New
Religion, if they think good; but to submit to Decisions by a Principle of
Reason, lightened with Divine Faith, and grounded on the Word of God. But they
will say, If those Private Men in their Examen, Judge, that the Decision of the
Church be not true, what must they do? Ought they to submit or no? If they
submit against the Judgment of their Reason, that is it we ask. If they submit
not, and that they follow their Thoughts, there is a new Religion. I Answer, If
those Private Men Judge, that the Decision of a Council be false, they cannot
but follow the Judgmenr of their Heart, although all the Popes and Bishops
should oppose it; but if they be wise, they will not stick to their first
Examination; they will labor to have their Doubts cleared. If they cannot,
they will keep silence, in case the Error in hand be not Capital. If they
believe that their Salvation is concerned, then their Consciences obliges them,
not to make a New Religion, but to choose that which they believe most conformed
to the Truth of the Gospel. I will not engage further into a Question which
has a long Train; One may read thereon those who have Written to justify our
Separation, and among others, the excellent Answer of Monsieur Claude, in his
Book of Prejudices; there may all see, what are the Rights of Private Men, and
of Flocks, when the Church begins to wander.

The other Proof which Monsieur de Condom brings to prove, That we give ^^ our
Synods an Infallible Authority, is drawn from our Discipline. That Discipline
would have, that when a Point of Doctrine is in Controversy, after that the
business has passed the Judgment of the Consistory, of the Colloques, and of
Synods Provincial. In fine, They should acquiesce in the Judgment of the Synod
National. The same Discipline Ordains, That in the Letters of Mission, whereof
the Churches do charge the Deputies, which go to Synods, there be a Clause of
Submission in these Terms, [We promise before God, to submit to all that shall
be concluded and resolved in your holy Assembly, being persuaded, that God will
preside by his Spirit, etc.] To that Monsieur de Condom adds a Fact drawn from
the Synod of Saint Foy, Anno 1578. where some Overtures were made of
Reconciliation with the Lutherans, and deputed Four Men, to whom was given an
Absolute Power to terminate that Affair as should seem good to them. Behold,
say they, where ends the false delicateness of these Gentlemen! They will not
receive the Decisions of Councils; they make no difficulty to put their Faith
into the hands of Four Men; who would be weary to be obliged to answer so many
things that come to nothing. What does all that, I pray you? Does that prove,
that we hold the Church for an Infallible Judge? All that Monsieur de Condom
says, returns to this Reasoning, or it returns to nothing.

Those who give their Synods power to judge Soveraignly of Points of Faith, who
promise Submission in the assurance that the Holy Ghost presides there; and who
retrench from the Communion of the Church those that would not submit to their
Decision, give to these Synods an Infallible Authority; but the Calvinists do
that; therefore they give to to their Synods an Infallible Authority. This
Argument supposes false, and concludes ill.

1. It supposes false; for it is not true that we promit our Synods a blind
Submission. What is said to them, That we are persuaded, that God will preside
in the midst of them by his Spirit, is a Clause of Civility, whereof the Terms
are not to be abused. That signifies nothing, but that we wish and hope, that
the Holy Ghost will direct them. It is not true neither, that the Synod of
Saint Foy have put the Faith of the Protestant Churches of France, in
deposito, into the hands of Four Men; for what was committed to them was not to
make new Articles of Faith, but only to compose a Formulary in general Terms,
which all the World might receive. And they did not so far refer themselves
wholly to their Judgment, but that they reserved liberty not to follow them, if
they should chance to make some false Advance.

2. This Argument concludes ill; for* from what Power we give to our Synods to
Judge of the Points of Doctrine, and do cut off those that will not submit to
their Judgment, Monsieur de Condom concludes, that we attribute to them* an
Infallible Authority. This Reasoning is worth nothing, or this is good. The
Bishops and Archbishops do give Ordinances; Councils Provincial and National in
the Roman Church, decide Points of Faith, and cut off those that will not
submit; therefore they believe themselves Infallible. I do not therefore think
that the Bishops, neither separately nor in their whole Body, out of a General
Council, esteem themselves Infallible. Must then the Privilege of
Infallibility be had, to have the Power to Judge of a Point of Faith* There
would then be none, but the Pope or the Council that could Judge thereof.

There must be an Order. Every Society is in right of Judging of Controversies
which arise in its bosom, and that Member thereof that will not submit to that
Judgment, may be cast out of the Body. Therefore we do properly complain, That
the Roman Church having pronounced against us in the Council of Trent, after
that did cast us out of their Body; They used in that the right which
appertains to every Society; but we complain, that they have unjustly condemned
us. The Question touching the Rights and Authorities of Councils and Synods
deserves an Examen much more ample; we will leave it as an Incident which
Monsieur de Condom has brought into his Book, without necessity, and only to
entangle the state of the Question. It imports nothing at the bottom, what
Authority Synods may have, to know whether the Roman Religion is far distant
from the Protestant, which is properly the Affair here in agitation.

ARTICLE XVI. Of the POPE, and of his Authority.
I Follow the Order of Monsieur de Condom; I finish by the Head of that great
Body into which they would have us re-enter, that is, the Pope. Here also,
after him, a Point whereof we have made a stumbling Block without any reason.
What is the Pope? It is the Principle of Unity, the Cement of Union: It Is a
Head whereto all the Members have a relation, and who makes the Uniting of the
Church; for Men know there is no Government more solid, and that contributes
more to the Conservation of States, than the Monarchical. What hurt then can
there be to set upon the Body of the Church a Spiritual Monarch, a Visible
Head, that may watch for its Conservation and may govern it? Must not People be
very Captious, to make of that a cause of Separation?

I will regard well this Article at first, under the same face that Monsicur of
Condom does. The Pope is a Visible Head, a Spiritual Monarch; but who has
appointed this Monarch? Is it possible that Men do not feel, that this puts a
prodigious difference between the Religion of Protestants and the Roman
Religion. To make it appear, I suppose, that the Lord Jesus Christ would have
the Government of his Church should be Aristocratical, and that he has put it
into the hands of such whom he has called Bishops and Priests, whom he has
invested with equal Power. I know well that this Principle is contested; but
once more, I am not obliged to prove any thing in this Work. I am permitted to
suppose my Principles, and in supposing them, I must show how they are
incompatible with those of that Church whereunto they would have us return. If
then the Lord Jesus Christ has settled a Government Aristocratick in his
Church, this kind of Government is of Divine Right; and if it be of Divine
Right, none must be permitted to change it under whatsoever pretense. The kind
of Government is so much of the Essence of a State, That the State changes
absolutely, loses its Name and its Form, when the Government is changed. All
the World knows, that a Kingdom, which by a general Revolt shakes off the Yoke
of its legal Master, and then a Popular Government, a Republic, which by the
violence of an Usurper becomes a Monarchy, are no more what they were before;
and they would, that without ruining the Church, they may make a Monarchy
thereof, against the intention and design of Jesus Christ. We do not understand
that.

Suppose we also, that this Sovereign Power, exercised at Rome, be an Usurped
Power. It is the Principle of Protestants, Selon ce Principe, is it possible
that they would oblige us to submit to an Usurped Power? If a Tyrant or Rebel
had taken the place of the Legal Prince; were it not extreme baseness, and a
Crime of High Treason to acknowledge this Usurper? We must then be persuaded,
that this Authority, which they call, Of the Holy Siege, is legitimate, before
that it can be honestly done, to solicit us to submit thereto.

There has been a time wherein God had charged himself with the Care of
Governing immediately the Commonwealth of the Hebrews by Prophets and inspired
Judges, whom he sent to them. If any, during that time, had undertaken, without
a Call, to make himself Monarch of that People; is it not true, that by this
attempt the Usurper had made himself guilty, less against the Nation whereof he
would oppress the Liberty than against God, upon whose Rights he had
undertaken? That People, though inclined to Revolt, durst not make them a King;
they ask one of God. If that Nation had otherwise used it, it is certain, it
had been Criminal before God as much as may be.

If we will consider this Reflection, we shall see that Protestants in their
Principles, must regard, as guilty of the highest Enterprise against the Rights
of God, Him, that without Call, has made himself the Head of this Church; and
it will be granted, that without the greatest baseness, they cannot submit to
that Prince who has seized upon God's Rights without his permission. In fine,
It is impossible that Protestants should regard as Indifferent, or as Tolerable
in Christian Religion, a Dignity which is absolutely opposite to the Spirit of
Christianism. This Spirit is Humility, Poverty, Despising the World, Obedience,
Renouncing all kind of Pomp, Grandeur, and Vanity. After that they would have
us to regard, as Prince Spiritual of the Christian World, a Man that is Crowned
with all the Pomp of the Kings of the Earth; that makes his Feet to be kissed
by the Persons of the greatest Quality; that is carried on Men's Shoulders, and
who carries the Rights of Sovereignty, and the Characters of Puissance, beyond
what was ever imagined.

But after having considered the Pope is the Theology of Politicians, who keep
within general Terms; why should it not be lawful to us, to regard him in an
Italian Theology? See what it is in this Italian Theology, It is a Man that
cannot be Did. 96.
tied nor untied by a Regular Power; who was called God, by Constantine. Now it
is manifest that God cannot be judged by Men. It is a Man, whose Faults cannot
be Did. 40.
admonished on Earth, though he should be known to neglect his own Salvation,
and that of his Brethren; useless and relaxed in his Works, silencing the Good,
and leading with himself Crowds of Men to the first slavery of Hell; because
being settled to judge all the rest, He may Barn. Romans Eccles. lib. 1.. 5. 13.
not be judged of any. It is a Man, whom none of the Councils lawfully Assembled
durst ever judge; because he is the Judge of all. On the contrary, Councils
have often cried, The first Seat is Judged of none; and they say to the Pope,
Judge your self, Justify or Condem your self. It is a Man, Bellar. min. contra
Gerson.
whereof the Roman Ceremonial says, That as often as the Emperor sees him, he
ought to salute him, bare his Head, and kneel to him; approach his Throne, kiss
his Feet devoutly, hold his Stirrup till he be got up, then takes his Horse by
the Bridle and leads him some Paces. And in whatever Town, where the Pope is to
be carried in a Chair, the Prince of the place, though he were a King, must
carry the Chair some steps, with the greatest Lords of the Country. It is a
Man, that can do all what is needful to lead Souls to Paradise, and may take
away all Obstacles, which the World and the Devil, with all their Strength and
Craft, can oppose. It is a Man, that can suffer the Title of Vice-God, as Paul
the Fifth, in the beginning of this Age. They made Pictures and Dedications
with this Inscription, Paulo Quinto Vice-Deo, etc. Most Invincible of the
Christian Republic, etc. It is a Man of whom the Canonists say, Restituit Papa
solus, deponit and ipse, Dividit ac unit, eximit atque probat, Articulos
solvit, Synodumque facit Generalem, transfert and mutat, appellat nullus ab
illo. That is to say, That he alone settles, deposes, divides, unites,
condemns, approves, breaks Articles, makes Councils, transports, and changes
according to his good pleasure without appeal. It is a Man that gives Realms at
his Will, loosens Subjects from Council. Lateran. 5.. 4.
their Oath made to their Prince, who is Master of the Temporal of Kings. It is
a Man, who alone possesses the Privilege of Infallibility, and who is the only
Oracle of the Church. It is a Man, that can dispense against Laws Divine and
Human; and. 7.
according to the plenitude of his Power, dispences above Right and Law,
dispences against Apostles and their Canons; against the Old Testament, about
Tithes, Vows, and Oaths. It is a Man, whom they set upon the Altar, when he is
Chosen, and then to go to Adoration. It is a Man, that can suffer to be told in
a full Council, Do so, that we may never lose the Spirit, Life, and Salvation,
which thou have given us. Thou art the Pastor, the Physician,. 9.
the Pilot, the Patron: Thou art, in fine, God on Earth. It is a Man that likes
it well, that in the same Council they should apply to him these Words of Psalm
72. Aethiopians shall come, etc. his Enemies shall lick the dust; all Kings
shall adore him, all Nations shall serve him. It is there also where they
styled him, The Divine Majesty. In fine, He is a Man that Council. Later. 3.
likes to be called, Lord of Lords; Most Prudent, Most Wise, Adored of all Men.
If this Power be not lawful, why would they have us to submit thereto? How
could that agree with our Principles?

These are happily the things which Monsieur de Condom means, and whereof he
says, That Ministers cease not to relate them, to render that Power odious.
You know well, say they, that this Italian Theology is slighted: They do not
Canonize in France the Excess of the Canonists; contrarily they are condemned:
And you cannot be ignorant, that the Gallican Church has still opposed them. I
grant it, if they please: Why then, would they that I should regard the Pope,
under the Idea which the Gallican Church forms, rather than under that which
the Roman Church? I always heard say, That to know a Subject, we must not
regard him in the Opinion which certain Persons have of him; but in himself, in
that which he says of himself, and what he does. Now it is certain, that the
Pope is in himself what the Canonists have made him; and that he thinks of
himself what the Canonists have said; for it is he that has caused those
Canonists to write: It is the Canon Law of the Roman Church, approved generally
by the Court of Rome, and according to which they rule their Conduct. The
Gallican Church may do what they please; the Pope does still keep himself in
the possession of Excommunicating Kings, dispensing their Subjects to the Oath
of Fidelity, of transporting their Kingdoms to others, and exercising in
general, all Actions of that Power which is attributed to him by the Canon Law.
It is clear then, I must regard the Pope, not by what the French say of him,
but in what he is, and what he does. Men may say, that a thing should be white,
when it is black, and blacks others that changes nothing therein.

Besides that, I see not why they could not regard him in France, under the
Character they give him in France it self. The Council of Lateran, wherein the
Pope was called, The Divine Majesty, Vice-^od* King of Kings, puts himself
above all Councils, is printed in France with the Kings Privilege, under the
di ection of the Fathers Labbe and Cossart, without any Correctiff. Can France
have lost the Memory of that terrible. Harangue, which was made in the grand
Convention of the States 1615. by Cardinal Perron, in the Name of all the
Clergy of the Kingdom? They would have passed an Ordinance, in those States,
That no Subject, under any Pretense, could be dispensed from the Oath of
Fidelity. The Gallican Church, by the Mouth of a French Cardinal, opposed it,
and attributed to the Pope all that excess of Power that frights us: How after
that can any Man boast of the Sense of the Gallican Church?

But happily, pretend they; That Innocent the Eleventh, who holds now the Seat,
has renounced to all those Pretenses that so offend us, and has reduced
himself to the Moderation of the Gallican Church, because he approves by a
Brief Monsieur de Condom*s Book; and that Book of Monsieur de Condom says,
That there are things, whereof they Dispute in the Schools, which the Ministers
cease not to allege, to render that Puissance odious; but that it is not
necessary to speak thereof, seeing they are not of the Catholic Faith. In
Conscience can Men believe, that the Court of Rome, by the touch of a Pen, and
without being either forced or solicited, had renounced all her magnificent
Pretenses, to all those Privileges, which they have acquired by the effusion
of so much Blood, and for which they were like to have overthrown all during
the Sitting of the Council of Trent, in the fear they had, that it was intended
to have a stroke at them. These Disputes of the Schools, in the Sense of the
Court of Rome, are but the Nice Trifles wherein Canonists agree not; although
in the sight of my Lord of Condom, they are possibly what we regard as Capital.
Men know how to find a commodious Sense in Terms more difficult to turns; and
the Court of Rome finds enough to satisfy themselves in these Words of
Monsieur de Condom, [That Expos. 209.
Men ought to render to the Pope, the Submission and Obedience which the Holy
Councils have always taught the Faithful.] The two last of those Holy Councils,
are the Fifth of Lateran, which is Counted General; and that of Trent, for
which my Lord of Condom has so great a respect. Those two Councils carry the
Popes Authority, as far as it can go, at least it will not be a Dispute of
Schools, to know whether they may call the Pope, Our holy Lord; for the Council
of Trent seldom calls him otherwise; although the Apostles have not called the
Son of God, but Our Lord simply. It must neither be a Dispute of the Schools,
to know, whether the Pope be Superior to the Council; for the Council of Trent
submitted so fully to him, that they did nothing withut his Order; and seeing
they proposed nothing but by the Pope, Proponentibus legatis; since it declared
not to pretend to touch the Authority of the Holy See, nor submit him to their
Canons; and since it demanded from the Pope, the Confirmation of all their
Decrees; and indeed, the Pope is at this day so far Master of this Council,
that he Dispenses against all their Canons. After all this, how can they invite
us to re-enter into the Roman Church, whilst such a Power shall subsist? We
that pretend, That the Power of Pastors is a Pure Ministry? We that believe,
That Jesus Christ has not left them any Jurisdiction on Consciences? We that
acknowledge no other Universal Head of the Church, but Jesus Christ? We that
believe, That Humility is of the Essence of the Ministry Evangelical? We that
ascribe no Adoration nor Divine Majesty, but to GOD?

ARTICLE XVII. Of the Points which Monsieur de Condom has forgotten; Of the
Worship in an Unknown Tongue; Of the Multitude of Ceremonies; Of Masses without
Communicants; Of forced Celibat.
I Do heartily consent to what Monsieur de Condem wishes, to lay apart diverse
Questions, that we regard not as a lawful Subject of Rupture; but we cannot
advance our Complaisance so far, as to confess all that he has left, and
whereof he has not spoken, be of this Number. I could add diverse Points, which
are most Essential, and which Justify our Separation; but I confine my self to
Four, that I may not be accused, to make Subjects of Separation where there are
none.

I. The First is the Necessity which the Roman Church has imposed on her self,
to have their Service in the Latin Tongue, which is not understood of the
People. I know not why Monsieur de Condom does not take away the Scruples that
we could have thereon; but we are obliged in Conscience to advertize them, that
that alone would be capable of hindering us from re-entring into the Roman
Church, though there were nothing else to stay us; because that nothing is more
opposed to the Intention of Jesus Christ, who has instituted his Service with
purpose, that his People might be Edified thereby. Although they could say the
best and holiest things in the World, that could serve for nothing; seeing that
the Spirit and the Heart, that could not understand them, could not be edified
thereby.

II. The Second thing which Monsieur de Condom has forgotten, is the multitude
of Ceremonies; and it is an Article that we cannot pass any more than the
others, that makes an Essential difference between Religions. Judaism and
Christianism differ Essentially, and only by that, they call us to another Yoke
like to that of the Jewish Church. We do not believe we can suffer it with a
good Conscience, I have considered those Ceremonies as opposed to the true
Service of God; because the most are destined to honor Saints, Images,
Relics, the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and other Creatures. At present I
consider only their Number and their Uselesness; and under that regard, I
maintain, that they are absolutely opposed to the Spirit of Christianism.

We must not imagine, that it is but a small ill to be useless in matter of
Religion. The Gospel condemns to the Fire the Useless Servant, and punishes
with Eternal Pains Unfruitful Works. Let them not say, That at the most those
Ceremonies are Useless. That which does not serve in Religion does much hurt.
Those Ceremonies are not come from a good place, for the most have been
borrowed or imitated from those Religions, with whom Christian Religion should
in honor have nothing Common. They have been introduced under the Pretense of
Helping Devotion, and we find on the contrary, that fastening our Spirit to the
Bark of Religion, it hinders him from piercing into its Internals. The Hearts
and Spirits of the Vulgar, are but of a small Capacity. When they are filled
with those Multitudes of Ceremonies, true Piety finds no more place. The People
see Churches magnificently Adorned, Images, Statues, Priests that celebrate
Mysteries with great Pomp; they see a Worship composed of a great number of
Mystical Actions, whereof they know neither signification, nor end; and all
that covered with the Veil of a Strange Tongue. This Composure of Ceremonies,
which has a great Air of Magnificence, surprises the Senses, strikes the
Imagination, dazles their feeble Lights, occupies the Capacities of their
hearts, and fills them with an odd kind of Admiration, and of a confused
Veneration, merely Corporal and Mechanical, whereby they believe they do
satisfy their Duty abundantly.

The more Superficies that a Body has, the less Solidity. Ceremonies are the
Superficies of Religion, and it is certain that they produce a Superficial
Piety. For the most, they that are the worst Christians, are they that do most
give up themselves to these Appearances, and who are the most exact in the
Observations of these Ceremonies. So may one say truly, that they compose a
Veil and a Refuge for Hypocrisy, An Hypocrite, that will not submit to that
Obedience which God demands, and that will not renounce such a Crime, is
content to pay God with Ceremonies: He essays to satisfy his Conscience
therewithal, and persuades himself, that God should be contented therewith.

This affected Magnificence is unworthy the Grandeur and Majesty of Religion.
Her Mysteries are too beautiful to be hid, and this great Apparel of Ceremonies
is not, as they believe, a Garment for her Ornaments, but it is a pompous Tomb,
wherein she lies buried. There is no need of placing Mysteries in Habits, in
Gestures, and in Visible Actions; Religion has Mysteries abundantly sufficient
to fill the Heart. and occupy the Spirit. The Perfection of Religion, consists
in exposing the Native Beauties of her Mysteries to the clear sight of Men.
Therefore the most perfect of Religions is that of the Blessed Souls, that see
all Mysteries without Veils. The least perfect of Religions was that of Moses,
which did cover all her Mysteries under the Shadows of her Ceremonies. It Is
plain, that Christian Religion holds the Middle, between the Religion of the
glorified Saints, which has no Ceremonies; and that of the Jews, which was
wholly made up of them. Therefore she must have some Ceremonies, which are the
Sacraments; but she must have but few; and to load her therewith, is to bring
back Judaism.

In fine, We have a just Reason to refuse all Reconciliation with the Multitude
of those Ceremonies; they have produced part of those Evils whereof we complain
at this day. There are some of them which were introduced in the beginning,
without any ill Intention; but afterward they have thence drawn Consequences
which have ruined the Truth. In the First Ages, there was nothing more simple
than the Celebration of the Eucharist. Justin Martyr tells us, That they took
Wine, that they mixed it with Water, that they Blessed it together with the
Bread, and that they distributed it to the Assistants by the hands of the
Deacons. But the ill understood Devotion of the following Ages, did swell up
this Sacrament with great Numbers of Ceremonies. They that followed after, in
those Ages of Ignorance, did judge, that the Body of Jesus Christ was at least
really under them, seeing they did celebrate this Mystery with so much Pomp.
And in fine, Finding in the Sacrament all the Ceremonies of a Sacrifice; it
became easy to them to fall into the Conceit, that indeed it is a Propitiatory
Sacrifice. This is a part of the Reasons which make us to regard this great
Heap of Ceremonies, as a Worship wherein we never ought to Communicate.

III. Monsieur de Condom, in the Matter of the Eucharist and of the Sacrifice
of the Mass, has not said one word of Mases without Communicants; I know not
why; for he could not be ignorant, that we regard that as a great Affair.
Indeed one cannot imagine a greater Metamorphosis, than that which they have
introduced thereby into the Sacrament of the Eucharist. It is certainly clear*
by the History of the Institution, and by the 11 th Chapter of the first
Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, that the Lord had given this Sacrament
to be a Repast of Union and Charity, wherein all the Faithful were to have
their part. Every one ought to Eat and Drink therein, in memory of the Benefit
of the Death of his Savior; And they have made thereof a Spectacle of
Devotion, where there is but one Actor, and all the Faithful are but
Spectatours. The Author of the Institution says, Eat and Drink all; and at
this day, One only Eats and Drinks; the Devotion of all the rest consists only
in Regarding and Contemplating. I could show, That there is nothing so remote
from God's Intention, nothing so opposite to the Ends for which this Sacrament
has been Instituted. But I will only be content to say, That such a Thing, in
the Primitive Ages, would have passed for a Prodigy. If there should have been
a great Assembly of Men, Professing to be Christians, in the midst whereof, at
the Celebration of Mysteries, the Pastor only had Eaten; the Faithful entering
in would have taken them for a Company of Reprobates, and for a Church of
Manicheans, who had in honor the Creatures of God, and Wine above all. These
Gentlemen are too Learned to be ignorant of this Truth. There remains yet a
Proof thereof in their Canon Law, where we read, That when Consecration De
Consecr. did. 2. and Distinct.
is finished, all must Communicate or be put out of the Church; for the
Apostles have so Ordained, and the Roman Church observe it so.

IV. I have but one Word to say, it is about the Yoke of the Celibat, which they
impose on so many Persons in the Roman Church. God forbid that we should blame
the pure and voluntary Celibat: We say as St. Paul, that it were to be wished
that the Ministers of the Gospel were as He; they could serve then, both with
less distraction, and with more Zeal, the Glory of God and the Salvation of the
Faithful. But we cannot tolerate a Forced Celibat, which they impose on so many
Men and so many Women, who are engaged either by Inconsideration, or by the
Violence of their Superiors into a state, for which they are not fit at all.
The design of finding an Establishment in the World, to have a Benefice whereon
they might live, engages the Priests into the said Celibat; and that is done,
without having in the least consulted their Heart and their Conscience. In all
Families, a Boy must be destined to the Church, with a prospect of enriching
the House, and putting it into a better Condition. It is a Point that we can
never digest, because that this kind of Celibat, is an inexhaustible and
inevitable Source of Impurirties.

I think now to have done all that Monsieur de Condom does exact from him, that
shall think it fit to Answer his Treatise. I have confuted nothing, and proved
nothing; I have only explained things, and I believe, that I have Explained
with a very great Fidelity, if not with a great Exactness and piercing Wit. I
have only proved the Three Things, that they permitted us to prove. The First,
That in those places wherein Monsieur de Condom gives an Idea of his Religion,
as Sweeter than that which we have, he does it not with all that Fidelity
whereof he is capable. In other places, where they would annihilate Disputes,
what we have said does clearly show, That Objections and Disputes remain still
entire; that is the Second Thing which we were to prove. And finally, From the
first I have showed, That the Doctrine of the Roman Church destroys
Foundations; that is the Third Thing which Monsieur de Condom demanded. I
Conclude, protesting, that I regard the Reunion of Christians, as the greatest
Good that we can receive from Heaven. We are ready to buy it with the last drop
of our Blood; but we will never buy it by abandoning our Verities.

FINIS.

