THE LAWS OF JAMAICA, Passed by the Assembly, And Confirmed by His MAJESTY IN
Council, Feb. 23. 1683.

To which is added, A short Account of the Island and Government thereof. With
an Exact Map of the Island.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills for Charles Harper at the Flower de Luce over
against St Dunstan's-Church in Fleet Street. 1683.

TO THE READER.
Reader,

I Have now neither time to write the particulars of the History of that
Flourishing Island of Jamaica, nor convenience to insert it into this Book of
the Laws of that Country, because I should thereby make it to swell beyond the
intended convenience of a Pocketbook. But for the better satisfaction of any
that may be inclined to remove themselves to that Island, I have been desired
to write this short (but true) account of that Country; which please to take as
follows.

The Island of Jamaica fell first into the Possession of the English the 10th.
day of May, in the year 1655. The Middle of it is situated nearest in 17
degrees 40 minutes of North Latitude, so that their longest day from Sun Rising
to Sun Setting is 13 hours 4 minutes, and their shortest 10 hours 56 minutes,
The difference of Longitude, from the Meridian of London, to the Meridian which
passes over Port Royal (the chiefest Town there,) is 78 degrees 45 minutes
Westward, which causes 5 hours 15 minutes difference in time, so that when it
is Noonday there, it is a quarter of an hour past 5 in the Afternoon in
London. The length of the Island lies nearest East and West, and is accounted
to be 180 Miles, and the breadth in the broadest part of it 45 Miles, so that
its Figure is nearest an Oval. It lies under that which is called the Torrid
Zone, nevertheless the Air is moderately temperate, occasioned by the long
absence of the Sun every night, by the strong Easterly Breezes which generally
blow from 8 or 9 in the Morning to 4 or 5 in the Afternoon, and by the Land
Wind, which is a small cool Breeze that comes off the Shore from all parts of
the Island in the Evening, and blows gently all Night. The Nights are for the
most part fair, and not a Cloud to be seen in the Sky, so that by their
clearness and coolness they are exceedingly pleasant; The Day time is much more
hot and troublesome, by reason of the Sun, and the Sea Wind, which most days
blows very hard; If the weather be such as is accounted seasonable, it commonly
rains a shower in the inland parts under the Mountains more or less every Day,
about 1 or 2 a Clock, from the beginning of April, to the beginning of
December, with Thunder and Lightning, and this makes the Island fertile,
especially if accompanied with those they call the general seasons, which are
commonly great rains in May and November, that continue Night and day with
small intermission for 8 or 10 Days together, but these failing (as sometimes
they do) is prejudicial to all things in the Country; the rest of the Year is
for the most part very fair and delicate weather, without much rain. Thunder,
or Lightning, and not at all too hot. There are Earthquakes sometimes, two or
three perhaps in a Year, but so moderate that they are over before one can well
be sensible what they are, and never have yet been so violent to do any harm,
The Middle parts of the Island are very full of Mountains, which toward the
Eastward end of it, are so high that they are not habitable, scarce accessible,
These Mountains for the most part are covered with large Timber Trees of diverse
sorts of Wood fitting for building and several uses, as well as for bearing
many sorts of Fruits, which maintain great plenty of Pigeons, Doves, Parots,
and other sorts of Birds, and also of wild Hoggs, all very good for food,
betwixt these Mountains there run many Rivers, several whereof by the
acquisition of diverse of the smaller Rivulets become large, but few Navigable,
by reason they are for the most part barred at their falling into the Sea, and
many of them sinking into the ground (when they come into the Lowlands) before
they can reach thither; these Rivers are well stored with good Fish, Mullets,
Creafish, and Eeles, such as are in England, the rest strangers to the English
Climate, though all very sitting to be eaten. The Sea about this Island is also
plentifully stored with many sorts of very good Fish, and likewise with
Tortoise, and Manates, both pleasant and delicious Food. The Low-lands and
Plain grounds, are where the People generally Inhabit, and in these are Level
tracts of several Miles in length and breadth, like our Meadows, (full of Grass)
called Savannas (which Name they retain from the Spaniards) in these are bred
great plenty of Cattle, Sheep, Horses, Asses and Mules, sufficient both for
food and service, there is also in the Country great stocks of Hogs, Hens,
Ducks, Pigeons, Rabbets, Turkeys, and diverse kinds of wild Fowl, and also
sufficient stores of all sorts of Garden Herbs and Roots, Pulse and Sallads,
and with excellent Fruits, some known here, as Grapes of diverse sorts, and from
several Countries, Lemons, Oranges, Citrons, Pomgranats, and Musk Mellons,
besides other very good Fruits, proper to that Country, as the Celebrated Pine,
and many more not much inferior to that incomparable Fruit, and that which
makes these Fruits of the more use and beauty, and the Country thereby the more
pleasant, is, that they (as well as the leaves on all the Trees) continue all
the Year, there being no Winter, or decay, but a continual Spring, on every
seasonable shower of rain, so that there is nothing wanting, for a necessary,
plentiful, or delicate living; In this Island are many convenient Harbors for
Shipping, besides several Bays and Roads fitting for the landing or taking off
of Goods: The chiefest of these is Port Royal, which in its safety for
Shipping, depth of Water cleanness of Ground, and convenience of the Shore and
Wharfs, for lading and unlading of Shipping, may compare with any in the known
World, and to add the more to the security of this, and the other Harbors of
this Island, those dreadful Hurricans, which often afflict the Islands of
Barbados, Nevis, etc. never yet came near this Country. Adjoining to this
Harbor, on an Isthmus of Land, is a handsome Town of the same Name, built from
the Foundation by the English, the ground it stands on is but 53 Acres, and
cannot be enlarged in its buildings otherwise then what the Inhabitants gain by
the height of their Houses, for it is encompassed all round with the Harbor and
Sea, unless on the East part, and there the Isthmus being narrow, is cut off
from the Sea to the Harbor, with a strong and well fortified Wall, built with
Brick and Stone, and sufficiently Gunn'd, to secure the Town from any attempt
from the Land part, without which Wall none are suffered to build, that so
there may be no shelter for an Enemy; This Town for its bigness is very
Populous, and contains about a 1000 Houses, many of which are built with
Bricks, and beautified with Balconies, after the modern way of building in
London; the Streets are also regular, and kept very clean; there is also in it
a fair Church built with Brick and Stone, and handsomely finished within, and
for the defense of the Town and Harbor, there are 5 Forts strongly built with
Stone, on which are mounted about 110 large Guns, all kept in good order;
hither resort most of the Ships, here is the Custom-house, here live the
Merchants, and here is managed the chiefest part of the Trade of the Island;
To this Harbor belongs about 100 fine sailing Sloops, from about 12 Tuns to 40
Tuns in bigness, most of them built in the Country, which find very good
employment in trading and carrying goods about the Island, and to the
Spaniards, catching of Tortoise, and other ways, by which their owners live
very well. About 7 Leagues to the Westward of this is an old Harbor, a very
large, good and safe Harbor for Shipping, and here also is a small Town built,
which daily increases, as the inland parts of the Country about it, are more
and more settled and planted; More Westerly is Carlisle Bay, a safe Road for
Shipping, and there is likewise built a pretty Town of that name, of about 100
Houses, which has a fine Trade, that also increases, as the Country does in
Plantations; farther West is Bluefields Bay, and other good Roads, and the like
there is also in St. James's, St. Anns, and St. Mary's, on the North side of
the Island, and in the Parish of St. Georges in the North-East parts, is Port
Antonio, a safe and good Harbor, and such another in the South-East part,
called Port Morant, besides diverse good Bays more on the South side, as Morant
Yallahs, etc. So that there want not conveniences for the Importing or
Exporting of their Commodities, in any part of the Country. There are no
Poisonous or hurtful Creatures known to be in this Island, nor any voracious
but the Crocodil, of which though there are many in the Sea, and the Rivers,
yet it is rare to hear of any injury done by them. There is but one Town in the
inland parts of the Country, and that is called St. Jago de la Vega, it is
seated near the banks of a fine River on the one side, and on the other is A
large Plain, or Savanna of several Miles extent, it is about 6 Miles from the
Sea of Port Royal Harbor, and was built by the Spaniards many years since, and
in their time was a large Town, and well built after their manner, but on the
first Peopling of the Island by the English, (when they were only an Army) many
of the Houses were destroyed by the Soldiers, and have not since been rebuilt,
because the trade of the Country consisting wholly of Planters and
Merchandising, the one sort whereof living scattered about the Country as
Farmers do in England, and the other dwelling in the Seaport Towns, there is no
occasion in the Inland parts for such a Community of Men to dwell together, as
that Town would have received had it continued in its former greatness, yet
here are still many Streets, and fair Houses, here is also the seat of the
Government; The Governors House and Chief Courts of Justice, here the Assembly
met, and here are kept all the Records of the Island.

The chiefest Commodity that this Island makes, is a sort of Muscovadoe Sugar,
that excells any that is made in any other of his Majesty's Plantations, the
quantity of which increases so much every Year, that it gives Addition to the
number of Ships Trading thither; besides this Sugar, there are great quantities
of Indico, Cotton, Ginger, Tobacco, Piemento, Cacaes, Hydes, Achiots,
Tortoise-shell, and diverse sort of dying, and other woods, for fine Joyners
work, and Cabinets growing there, all which Commodities are as good in their
kinds, as are in any Country, and excepting the Sugar, Indico, Cotton, Ginger
and Tobacco, are peculiar to this, and are in no other of His Majesty's
Plantations; there are also many other accidental Commodities brought in from
the Spaniards, as Log-wood, Plate, Pieces of Eight, Gold, Pearl, Emeraulds,
etc. by means of which Manufactory and Trade, there is not less then 20 Sail of
Ships of 300 Tuns a piece Burden, and upwards, besides others, which only use
that Voyage, and of all sorts above 100 sail of Ships now laden every Year, and
as the Island fills with English, and is supplied with Negroes, the Trade and
Shipping will both increase; This Island depends wholly on His Majesty, without
any other Proprietors or Companies, and ever since His Majesty's happy
Restoration, he has been graciously pleased it should be Governed by a
Governor fully Empowered by His Majesty's Commission, who has a Council
consisting of 13 of the gravest and chiefest Gentlemen of the Island, to advise
with on all occasions, and to them, when it is requisite, there is called an
Assembly of Two and thirty of the Gentlemen of the Country, chosen by the
Freeholders from among themselves, by virtue of His Majesty's writ, which to
that end is Issued out by the Governor, into the several Precincts of the
Country; These together with the Governor, and Council make such Laws as are
necessary for the well Governing of the Island, and to the making of any Law,
there must be the consent of the Governor, Council, and Assembly, as three
distinct States, of which if any one dissent, no Bill can pass into an Act, so
that the making of Laws there, is Assimilated as near as may be, to that of our
Native Country of England, and these Laws so made, are of Force at all times,
until His Majesty be pleased to declare his pleasure to the contrary, And for
the Encouragement of any of His Majesty's Subjects to go thither, with intent
to settle and Plant, His Majesty is graciously pleased, to give every Man for
himself, Wife, Children, and Servants, and all he brings with him (or shall at
any time after import) 30 Acres of Land for every head, in any part of the
Island, that they themselves shall choose, which is not already possessed by
others, they paying only the common charges of the Surveying and the Patent;
and this passes to the Possessor, his Heirs, or Assigns for ever, by his
Majesty's said Grant, under the great Seal of the Island, in common Soccage,
which Patent being enrolled, in the Office for that purpose established there,
is good against His Majesty's claim, or any pretenders whatsoever, though the
Patent it self, should happen to be Lost, Burnt, or any otherwise destroyed,
the manner of the civil Government there is as in England, by Sessions of the
Peace, Justices, Constables, and other necessary Officers, which are appointed
in the several parts of the Country, as there is occasion, that Justice may be
equally distributed; And for the Military Government, and defense of the
Island, every Man from 16 years old to 60, is obliged (in 6 weeks after arrival
with intent to settle there) to list himself in what Company of Foot, or Troop
of Horse, he pleases, but haing listed himself, he is not to remove at his
pleasure, except he goes to dwell in some other part of the Country, and then
he must list himself in that Regiment, where he goes to reside; Of this Militia
(it being no otherwise) the Governor is Captain General, who is empowered by
his Commission, to make under him Colonels, Captains, and all other Officers,
which Train and Discipline their respective Soldiers, and take care that they
keep good Arms, well fixed, and sufficient stores of Ammunition always by them,
that so they may be ready on any occasion. The Town of Port Royal has in it one
entire Regiment of this Militia, consisting of 10 Companies, one of which
Companies mounts the Guard successively every night, and keeps Watch in the
several Forts, in as good order as is used in any regular Garrison, that is in
pay. For the trial of Titles of Land, decision of controversies, and recovery
of debts, there are several Courts established, the methods whereof will here
follow, written by an ingenious Gentleman, who has been a long Practitioner in
the Courts and Laws of that Country, as well as in the Laws of England.

THE PREFACE.
HIS Majesty having been graciously pleased (with the advice of the Lords of
the Privy Council appointed a Committee for Trade and Plantations) to give His
Royal Assent to several Acts made by the Governor, Council and Assembly of
Jamaica; it was thought fit to Publish the same, as well for the benefit of its
Inhabitants, as all others His Majesty's Subjects who may Trade or be any ways
concerned there; but for prevention of Mistakes (lest strangers to Jamaica,
might think these few Acts were all the Laws and Privileges of that Island,
which might lessen it in their esteem, and discourage some from adventuring
themselves or their fortunes thither) I was desired by some Persons of Quality,
to give a more particular account thereof, in observance of whose commands, and
respect I bear the place, I promised my endeavors, but must be very brief, for
that the Book is in the Press ready to come forth; wherein I may be the more
excusable since a Gentleman who has lived long in, and very well knows that
flourishing Country, has here already given so good a description of the
Island which (as he says) was taken from the Spaniards in the Year 1655, and I
may add in the 7th. year of his now Majesty's Reign, who when he came to
exercise His Royal Authority was pleased to own what his Subjects had done
(which was the same as if he had Commissionated them) and among other his
glorious Titles descended to style himself Lord of Jamaica by whose special
grace and favor we have hitherto all the Laws and Privileges of English Men
exercised and continued amongst us there. These Acts now Printed being only
Bylaws for better Government of the Plantation (which in some case requires
different Regulations from the Kingdom of England, as some Counties for
Stanneries, Fens, etc. do here) and for raising such necessary customs as may
defray the Public charge of that Country, for all Judges and Justices in
Jamaica determine all Pleas there according to the Laws of England; pursuant
whereunto that Island has been Governed, except some little Variations for
ease and benefit of a new settlement, as our proceedings being all in English,
our pleading general Issues and giving special matters in evidence, our suits
being more concise and far less chargeable than in England, the Practice of our
Courts there much more plain and intelligible. To begin with his Majesty's
Supreme Court of Judicature (so called) which has the same Jurisdiction with
the King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer at Westminster, and is held 4
times in the year as the Terms in England, viz. every last Tuesday in February,
May, August and November, which continue each time about a Week, and therein
are first determined all Pleas of the Crown, then follow Common Pleas, etc. The
Judges of that Court being Commissioned by his Majesty or his Governors are
always 5 or 7 whereof not less than 3 can try any cause and they consist of the
most considerable Gentlemen of the Island both for Parts and Estates, and
usually the Chief Justice is one of the best Quality, who has practiced and is
well read in the Laws of England; tho few of them are so learned as the Judges
here, yet they are Men of the greatest sense and reason (whereon all Law is or
should be grounded) This Court is not Burdened with many Officers, for one
called the Clerk of the Grand Court is Prothonotary Custos brevium, etc. Nor do
we trouble our selves with many sorts of Writs, as Originals, Capias, Alias or
Pluries, very rarely or never, arresting any Person of known residence, only
send him a Summons to appear next Court, and that he may come provided, a Copy
of the Declaration is always left with the Summons, which being served 8 days
at least before the Court, the Defendant is bound to appear, plead, join issue,
and come to Trial the very next Court, or Judgment will pass by default, no
Imparlance being allowed without special cause, as on oath that he has
material Witnesses, and has endeavored, but cannot Subpoena them. In Trials
we have not several Venire's nor a particular Jury for every cause, unless in
some special matter of great import, but by a general Venire, the Marshal
prepares enough for four or five setts of Jurors, not knowing what issues they
are to Try (which prevents packing or partial returns) who are impannel'd in
Court, and put upon the Crown side, or Common Pleas, in such causes as the
Judges extempore direct. And the same Jury usually Tries Six or more at a time,
as the Court thinks their Memory, may well bear, for help whereof some of them
take Notes; also they are permitted to take with them the Record it self with
all Papers or Deeds proved in Court, most of our actions there being plain
matters of Debt or Account and some few Ejectments, Writs of Dower, Partition,
etc. The Jurors indorse their Verdict on each Record which is delivered in
Court to the Clark, who of course enters Judgment unless it be arrested, which
every one may move the last day of the Court, but is rarely granted without
very special cause presently made appear; but if such motions are ever favored
it is in excessive damages on action of Slander or frivolous Trespasses which
are usually discountenanced; we are not intreagu'd with dilatory Writs of
Inquiry, but when any judgment is confessed or passes by nil dicit in case,
etc. the next Jury happening to be trying issues in Court take the Record and
Assess Damages presently. And for ease of those who live by their labor to
prevent unnecessary attendance and expenses, all Actions depending that Court
or Term, are called and tried alphabetically beginning with the Plaintiffs
names; so all parties witnesses, etc. may guess on what day such a letter may
come on, and accordingly give their attendance. Fourteen days after the
beginning of the Court Execution issues, for which we have but one Writ
comprehending both a Fieri fac and Capias ad sat. (viz.) to levy the Debt and
Costs of the Defendants Goods, or if he have none, then, to take his body, but
because no general Imparlance is allowed before, we in a Manner give one after
Judgment: For that no man may be ruined by hasty surprise and sale of his
goods, the same after seizure in Execution may be returned, but must be left in
the Defendants hands to dispose to most advantage (if he end not with the
Plaintiff) so as to bring the money into next Court, wherein if he fails, then
a Venditioni exponas issues to the Marshal to sell them or any other goods or
take his body: Before or after which the Defendant is at liberty to bring his
Writ of Error returnable before the Governor and Council though it is very
rarely practiced, such Writs meeting with very little encouragement in just
Debts. His Majesty has also constituted in this Island a Court of Chancery
wherein the Governor himself always sits as Chancellor, assisted by several
discreet Gentlemen of eminency as Masters, where Causes are speedily determined
without those delays and expenses used in England There are also in every
Parish or County monthly Courts erected for trial of all Actions under Twenty
pounds, or ad infinitum, with a Justicies out of Chancery, which the Governor
cautiously grants on special occasions. Of Judgments in these Courts Writs of
Error lie retornable at the supreme Court, but rarely brought for reason
aforesaid. Then every Justice of Peace (besides the authority of a Justice in
England) has power of holding a Court of Conscience for all matters not
exceeding Forty shillings value. The Quarter Sessions are also held in each
Parish or County after the manner of England, and there is a Court of Admiralty
at the Town of Port Royal for trial of Piracy and deciding other Maritime
affairs, from whence we have the liberty of appealing to the Governor there,
or to his Majesty in Council here for redress. The Governor also has power
(as Ordinary of the Diocese) for probate of Wills, granting Administrations and
determining all controversies concerning the same; But Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual Courts are not yet known in this Island, Nor are Purchasers here
encumbered with bad Titles for that Register (so much wished for in England) is
here established where all Conveyances being acknowledged are to be enrolled
within three months, if the Cognisors inhabit there; But if any persons Feme
Coverts or others residing in England, and interested in any Lands or
Plantations there shall desire to dispose of the same here, they must seal and
deliver their deeds before two or more credible Persons going for Jamaica, who
attesting the same before a Judge there, the same may be enrolled in Six
months, and shall be as valid in Law, as if done by Fine, Recovery or
otherwise. In which case I should advise the Purchaser to take by way of Lease
and Release, and to have two parts at least of each, with Covenants for further
assurance, etc. that if one part happen to miscarry, he may require another,
yet so as always to keep one here, lest any breach of Covenants should happen.
And since this public Register or Office of Enrolments is found of such
general use, that no Purchaser or Lender of money can be deceived in his Title,
it may not be unseasonable (for advancement of our Plantation Trade, and
consequently enriching our native Country of England, the great Receptacle of
all our wealth) to encourage monied men (who expose it here at 4, and 5. per
cent. yet cannot get satisfactory security) to adventure some of it for
Jamaica, where they may have unquestionable security, by men of visible
estates, or good Mortgages, for neither Persons nor Estates can be there
encumbered, but they must be discovered either by the aforesaid Register or
report of their Neighbors, who generally more intimately know and better
observe each others Affairs than they can in England. Nor was it ever known
that any Mortgage has been defeated or Title proved defective where compared
and agreeing with the Register, so that any Persons having moneys here to put
out, may remit the same to Jamaica by Bills of of Exchange at 20 per cent. or
in Commodities (by advice of Merchants here) at 40, or 50 per cent. or more
advance, and lend the same at 10 per cent. running only (in Commodities) the
risque of the Sea which also is so inconsiderable, that it may be ensured for
about 2 per cent. But when they recall their moneys they may expect 15, or 20
per cent. loss on their returns though sometimes they gain also back which loss
when it happens may be attributed to the difference of our Coyns here and
there, Jamaica money being about more in value there than it will yield in
England. And such Adventurers have this further encouragement, that all real
Securities there are meliorated (being certainly emprovable) the longer they
continue planted, whereas lands here usually decrease in value. It might also
turn to much greater advantage then the best way of employing money in England
To purchase Plantations there, many good penniworths frequently offering, as
may be found by inquiry here of such as have estates there, though usually
those that have least do most undervalue the place: For if Jamaica lie under
any ill character she owes it to some few Prodigals who having Riotously
consumed that little they carried thither, and being through ignorance or
laziness incapable of any employ, come home and rail against the Country, to
justify their unprofitable voyage and return. There is also another imputation
on Jamaica, viz. the difficulty of getting due returns and recovery of just
Debts. To the first it has usually more noise than substance, for many men of
declining fortunes, to deceive their Creditors, or otherwise, boast of great
concerns there, and disappointments by their Factors and Agents, etc, when
really they have little or nothing in the Island, for if they had, the Law is
open and much more cheap and expeditious remedies to be used there than in
England, though indeed as to the second some have herein met with obstructions
partly occasioned by a former Law indulging all new Comers for 5 years against
prosecutions for foreign Debts: But that being now thought a disparagement to
so populous and opulent a Colony, was dislik't by the Lords Committees and is
not confirmed: Other inconveniences some have met with for want of due
information how to draw their proofs an procurations: I would not encourage any
litigious suits, but for instruction of honest Creditors against able Debtors,
I should prescribe this method, that all Letters of Attorney be Attested by
Persons going thither, who may prove the same viva voce, which being recorded
there, is good though the witnesses die or return, whereas Persons usually send
procurations under Corporation seals which are not there admitted for that
better proofs may be easily had as aforesaid; But such cannot always be found
for Debt: In such case the Law there is so favorable to admit depositions
attested under the seal of the City of London or other Corporations, but then
the Plaintiff would do well to give due credit on Oath for what he has
received, or else the Defendant may have just occasion (with security) to delay
him by Injunction till he answer his Bill in Chancery: Or if the Debt accrews
by Specialtie, the Original bond it self must go over, it being unreasonable to
recover against any man on a Copy, yet the Bond it self lie out against him;
nor can indorsments nor truth so well appear unless produced in Court. If any
Bill of exchange be drawn from Jamaica which will not be paid here, one of the
original Bills must go back doubly protested as well for non acceptance as for
non payment, and in mistaking these or such like measures (grounded upon Law
and Reason) many have been baffled or delayed and then causlesly reflect on the
Justice of the Island. This is what occurs at present about our Temporal Laws.
I may also add that the People are generally of the Church of England, and I am
confident, in no part of the Kings Dominions has his Majesty more truly Loyal
Subjects for the number of its Inhabitants, than are in Jamaica: We have very
few Papists or Sectaries, for neither Jesuits or Nonconformist Parsons do or
can live among us; some few have attempted, but never could gain Proselytes
enough to afford them sustenance (though all except Papists may freely exercise
what Religion they please without disturbance) But for able orthodox Divines
there is so great encouragement that it is to be admired so many can content
themselves with such mean or no Benefices in England, when they may so
comfortably subsist in Jamaica, for that they are certainly provided for by an
Act entitled, For Maintenance of Ministers, which see in this Book Folio 124.
Besides which allowances, in most Parishes the Contingencies by voluntary
presents for Christenings, Marriages, Buryings, and otherwise with Houses
taking Boarders, Schooling, etc. make considerable additions. So that they may
live comfortably and lay up; Victuals being as plentiful and of the same sorts
for Butchers meat, tame and wild Fowl, Fish, Bread, etc. (with more variety) as
in England, with this difference that we have green Peace, Beans, Cherries,
Asparagus, Musk and water Mellons, Pines, Grapes, Oranges, Pomgranats, Citrons,
Lemons and hundreds of several other sorts of Fruits in season all the year
long. But some are apt to object the hazard of the Voyage, and unhealthiness of
the place; as to the first, It Is as safe going to Jamaica as to go in a Wherry
on the River Thames, where more Boats are cast away in proportion than Ships
going for that Island, for we soon come into a trade Wind and presently sail
before it, almost constantly blowing from East to West, that is from England to
Jamaica. It being rarely known that any Vessels miscarry going thither. And
this is evident enough if we consider the common rate of Ensurers at two per
cent. who are men of foresight and experience never proposing less then
doubling their money which they cannot do if but one Ship in an hundred
miscarry, yet that does not happen in time of Peace. Then as to the
unhealthiness of the Climate, (there are some who never were abroad think all
places beyond Sea much alike, so that having heard of sickness and seasonings
for new comers in places lately settled they are apt to impute it without any
reason to Jamaica, the Air being always serene and weather constantly
temperate, though usually reputed very hot, yet it is only so comparatively in
respect of these Northern Climates, being with us always Summer as if every
Month were June. I have observed and can experimentally affirm for Twelve years
last past Jamaica to be as healthful a place as any part of England, for sober
temperate persons, who have command of themselves, especially at first arrival,
and can moderately drink one third Wine with two thirds Water, but one the
other side I think it as pernicious a place to debauch in, as any in the World,
and this so necessary virtue of sobriety being more habitual in the other Sex,
makes the place far less fatal to them then men, whereof usually ten dye in
proportion for one Woman, as appears by the yearly Bills of Mortality on Port
Royal (which is the London of Jamaica) and it is not extraordinary, if we also
consider the nature of the Climate (as it really is,) most propitious to
Childbearing Women who are not so subject to Miscarriages, Distempers, Pains
or Difficulties before, at or after Delivery, as they are in England, for being
always Summer, there is no danger of catching colds, nor need of Fires in their
Chambers, no Rooms there having any Chimnies except the Kitchen which is
usually apart from the dwelling house. In Jamaica the Women after Childbed are
strong and lusty at three days end, and about House again in a week; nay some
Negro Women are at work in the Field the same or next day. I have been often
questioned about the Natives of our Island whether they were not a terror to
us, etc It may not therefore be impertinent to declare that Jamaica is wholly
Inhabited with English, who found none there but Spaniards, which were soon
beaten off, and are long since in battle or by flight extirpated, though
perhaps it was formerly very populous with Indians, but those were destroyed by
the Spaniards, so that we have no Natives at present but Children of the
English, or their Negro Slaves (which are imported thither as Merchandise from
Guiney and other parts of Africa) of whom we are in no such fear or danger as
in lesser Islands. But Jamaica is of too vast an extent for any such surprise,
being in many places divided with mountains of difficult access, and great
Rivers not passable but by Boats or Ferries, which dare carry no Negroes
without a written Ticket or License from their Master or Overseer. And if any
Slave be found wandering out of his Masters Plantation any person may seize and
carry him to his Owner or next Officer and receive a certain reward. By which
and other expedient methods, it is safer living or traveling in Jamaica than
England, we having rarely any House-breaking or Robbery, for want of receivers,
most persons there generally knowing each other as they do in Country Cities
here, though there are few Inns for Travelers, yet they are better and cheaper
accommodated at Planter Houses, who are generally very Hospitable and are
conveniently dispersed over the whole Island, for all Jamaica is settled by the
English from one end to the other, though in some places more thin than others.
The Houses indeed are not so close as in some parts of England, yet usually the
Plantations are contiguous, for a great Sugar work requires some hundreds of
Acres for Canes, Wood, Provisions, Pasture, etc. yet most of the Planters, are
forward enough to spare some of it to a good Neighbor on reasonable terms. The
Wood-lands are commonly cleared and used for Planting, but there are vast even
Meadows called Savannas, for grazing of Horses, Cattle, Sheep, etc. which we
never cut nor make any Hay of, having Grass all the year long, though sometimes
a little too much dried or scorched by the Sun, when many purposely set it one
Fire, the ashes whereof mannure and improve the Ground against another Crop,
which will suddenly spring again with the next gentle showers or without, by
the great dews which there fall in the night, and in the mean time the Cattle
retire to other pastures in shady Woods or lower Marshes; it is also observable
that our Horses are generally swift, but few or none of them shod, yet will
gallop the most stony way, and climb steep Rocks like Goats, nor are they
troubled with near so many distempers as Horses in England, it being common
(though never so hot or hard ridden) to turn them presently grazing, but the
Horses are usually of so small a breed that all Gentlemen's Coaches (which are
there very numerous) go with six Horses a piece, we have also several
Hackney-Coaches. The manner of living there for gallantry, good Housekeeping
and Recreations (as Horse-Races, Bowls, Dancing, Music, Plays at a public
Theater, etc.) sufficiently demonstrate the flourishing condition of the
Island, yearly increasing as well in number of Inhabitants as in wealth and
plenty, being most commodiously seated in the midst of the Spaniards, so that
we drain the benefits of their Gold and Silver Mines without their Labor and
expenses. The Town of Port Royal, being as it were the Storehouse or Treasury
of the West Indies. is always like a continual Mart or Fair where all sorts of
choice Merchandises are daily imported not only to furnish the Island, but vast
quantities are thence again Transported to supply the Spaniards, Indians, and
other Nations, who in exchange return us bars and cakes of Gold, wedges and
piggs of Silver, Pistols, Pieces of Eight, and several other Coyns of both
Mettles, with store of wrought Plate, Jewels, rich Pearl Necklaces, and of
Pearl unsorted or undrill'd several Bushels; besides which, we are furnished
with the purest and most fine sorts of dust Gold from Guiney, by the Negro
Ships, who first come to Jamaica to deliver their Blacks, and there usually
refit and stay to reload three or four Months, in which time (though the
Companies Gold may be partly sent home) yet the Merchants, Masters of Ships,
and almost every Mariner (having private Cargoes) take occasion to sell or
exchange great quantities; some of which our Goldsmiths there work up (who
being yet but few) grow very wealthy, for almost every House has a rich
Cupboard of Plate which they carelessly expose, scarce shutting their doors in
the night, being in no apprehension of Thieves for want of Receivers as
aforesaid. And whereas most other Plantations ever did and now do keep their
accounts in Sugar, or the proper Commodities of the place, for want of Money,
it is otherwise in Jamaica, for in Port Royal there is more plenty of running
Cash (Proportionally to the number of its Inhabitants than is in London, which
(among other worthy Acts) we chiefly owe to the provident care of his
excellency Sir Thomas Lynch our present and former Governor, who about Ten
years ago (by advice of his Majesty's Council there) raised the value of our
current Coyns about more than they will yield in any other part of Christendom,
so that none care to carry Money off but bring great quantities thither, which
occasions the daily increase of our Sugar works and other profitable
Plantations, and gives great encouragement to the Gentlemen Planters in other
adjacent Islands and Plantatione to remove and settle amongst us, being there
obliged to use trash, and Sea-Coals to boil their Sugar (which renders it not
so good as when made with quick wood fires;) nor are they here at so great
charge for Horses and Cattle to do their work, nor pent up in such narrow
Plantations for want of Land as in those small Islands, nor subject to many
other inconveniences incident to little Countries and small numbers of People.
This Island of Jamaica being very Capacious, and supplied both from abroad and
in it self with great Plenty of all things necessary.

F. H.

INDEX
AN Act appointing the number of the Assembly, page 4. An Act for regulating
Servants, page 6. An Act for the Highways, page 22. An Act appointing the
prices of Meat, page 30. An Act against Blasphemy, and for preventing disorders
in Alehouses, Taverns and Victualling-Houses, page 33. An Act impowering
Justices of the Peace to decide differences not exceeding Forty shillings, page
37. An Act rating Liquors sold by Retail, page 42. An Act for Compensation of
Mr. Nicholas Scarlet, page 44. An Act for the restraining and punishing
Privateers and Pirates, page 46. An Act ascertaining the Quit-Rents and manner
of the Receipt thereof, page 55. An Act for preventing damages in Plantations,
preserving of Cattle and regulating Hunting, page 62. An Act securing the
Purchasers of Thomas Bun's Land upon Port Royal, page 75. An Act encouraging
the Importation of White Servants, page 78. An Act for Registring of Deeds and
Patents, page 82. An Act for the Ferry between St. Katherines and St. Andrews,
page 93. An Act impowering the Churchwardens of St. Katherines to receive
Twelve pence per Tun for all goods made up, in Cask that are Landed on, or
Shipped from the Bridge at Passage-Fort, for maintaining and repairing the same,
page 97. An Act for Confirmation of Pious, Charitable and Public Gifts and
Grants, page 100. An Act declaring it High Treason to counterfeit His Majesty's
Broad Seal of this Island, page 103 An Act for clearing of Rio Cobre above and
below Caymanas, page 105. An Act for regulating Building and preventing Fire,
page 115. An Act for the maintenance of Ministers and the Poor, and erecting
and repairing of Churches, page 124. An Act ascertaining the value of Foreign
Coins, and establishing Interest, page 139. An Act for the better securing
certain Titles made by way of Release and confirmation under the Great Seal of
this Island, page 145. An Act for settling the Militia, page 148. An Act for
prevention of Law Suits, page 166. An Act for establishing Courts and directing
Marshalls proceedings, page 171. An Act appointing where the Laws of this
Island shall be lodged, page 193. An Act for raising a Public Impost, page
198.
AN EXACT MAPP OF IAMAICA
Seala Miliarum

LONDON Printed for Charles Karper over against St Dunstans Church in fleet
Street



At the Court at Whitehall, the 23d. of February, 1682.
PRESENT The King 's Most Excellent MAJESTY.
Lord Keeper. Lord President. Lord Privy Seal. Duke of Ormond. Duke of
Beaufort. Earl of Oxford. Earl of Chesterfield. Earl of Sunderland. Earl of
Clarendon. Earl of Bath. Earl of Craven. Earl of Ailesbury. Earl of Conway.
Earl of Nottingham. Earl of Rochester. Lord Bishop of London. Mr. Secretary
Jenkins. Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer. Lord Chief Justice Pemberton. Mr.
Godolphin.
WHereas by the Powers given unto Charles Earl of Carlisle, late Governor in
Chief of the Island of Jamaica, and in his Absence to the Commander in Chief
thereof for the time then being, Dated the Third day of November, in the 32 d
Year of His Majesty's Reign, as also by a Commission unto Sir Thomas Lynch,
Knight, now Governor in Chief of the said Island, bearing Date the Sixth Day
of August, 1681. His Majesty has been Graciously Pleased to Authorize and
Empower the Governor, Council, and Assembly of the said Island to Constitute
and Ordain Laws, which are to continue and be in force until His Majesty's
Pleasure be signified to the contrary. And forasmuch as certain Laws have in
pursuance of the said Powers and Commissions been transmitted unto His Majesty,
with the Humble Desire of the said Council and Assembly, that His Majesty would
be Pleased to pass the same, in the Words following.

An ACT Appointing the Number of the Assembly.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, that in every Assembly hereafter
to be called by His Majesty's Writs, and held within this Island, there be
Chosen Three Representatives for the Parish of St. Catharines, the like number
for the Parish of Port Royal, and Two for each other of the respective Parishes
that now are, or hereafter shall be in this Island; and that the Provost
Marshal, or his Lawful Deputy, give to every Person Elected, within ten Days
after his Election, notice that he is so Elected.

Provided always, that every Person Elected shall be a Freeholder in this
Island, and that none have Right to Vote in any Election, but those that are
Freeholders in the same Parish Where the Election is to be made.

An ACT For Regulating Servants.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, That all and every
Master or Masters of Slaves, for the first five Working Slaves, shall be
Obliged to keep one White Man Servant, Over-seer or Hired Man for Three Months
at least; and if the Number increase to Ten, Two; and for every Ten after the
first, One, to be Resident in the Plantation, where the Negroes are employed;
and if any shall be wanting for the space of six Months of the proportion
aforesaid, he, she, or they for every Servant so wanting, shall forfeit five
pounds to the Use of the Parish where such Default shall be made, to be
Recovered by the Churchwardens by Action of Debt in any Court of Record in
this Island.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Masters, Mistresses, or Overseers of Slaves, who shall not truly inform the
Constable or Constables, within their several Precincts, when thereunto
required, of all such Hired Men, or Servants, and Working Slaves, as shall
justly and truly belong unto them, or under their Care, shall forfeit the Sum
of Twenty pounds, to be Recovered by Bill, Plaint, or Information in any Court
of Record within this Island, where no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law
shall be allowed; one Third of which Penalty shall be to our Sovereign Lord the
King, his Heirs and Successors, for and toward the Support of the Government
of this Island, and the Contingent Charges thereof; one Third to the
Churchwardens of the Parish where the Offense shall be Committed, for the Use
of the said Parish; and the other Third to the Informer, or he that shall sue
for the same. And whatever Constable or Constables shall neglect his or their
Duty herein, by not demanding an Account every Six Months, and returning the
same unto the Justices sitting at the next Quarter Sessions of that Precinct,
which they are hereby required to do, shall for every such Default forfeit the
like Sum of Twenty pounds, to be Recovered and applied in manner and form
aforesaid.

That all Servants shall have according to their Contract and Indenture, and
where there is no Contract, or Indenture, Servants under Eighteen Years of Age
at their Arrival in this Island, shall serve Seven Years, and above Eighteen
Years of Age, shall Serve Four Years, and all Convicted Felons, for the time of
their Banishment, and at the expiration of the Times aforesaid, shall receive
from their last Master, Mistress, or Employer Forty shillings, and a
Certificate of their Freedom upon Demand; and whosoever shall refuse, without
just Cause, to give such Certificate to Servant, Artificer, or Labourer, whose
Time is expired, or Contract performed, shall forfeit forty shillings for every
such Refusal.

And whosoever shall Employ any Free Person without a Certificate from the the
last Employer, of the Performance of his or their last Bargain or Contract,
shall forfeit Ten pounds.

That no Person or Persons presume to Trade with any Servant or Slave without
the Master or Mistresses Consent, on Penalty of forfeiting to the Master or
Mistress of such Servant or Slave, treble the value of the things Traded for,
bought, or Sold, and also Ten pounds Current Money of this Island, to be
recovered by such Master or Mistress by Action of Debt in any Court of Record;
And all Contracts made with Servants or Slaves to be utterly void.

That if any Servant or Hired Labourer shall lay violent Hands upon his or her
Employer, Over-seer, or other Person put in Authority over him or her, such
Servant or Labourer shall for such Offense Serve his or her Employer without
any Wages twelve Months, by Order of any Justice of the Peace on Conviction.

That by the like Order and Conviction any Over-seer or Artificer, Hired
Labourer or Servant, that shall embezle, purloin, make away, or waste any of
his or her Employers Money, Goods or Chattels, not exceeding the value of forty
shillings, shall serve, or make Satisfaction, according to the Discretion of
any one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace; and if above the value of forty
shillings, to serve two Years by the like Order without any Wages, and be
further liable, in case that Time will not satisfy; and if any such Person as
aforesaid shall embezle, purloin, or make away any Money, Goods or Chattels of
any others than their Masters, Mistresses, or Employers, they shall incur the
same Penalty, and Serve the Party injured as aforesaid, after their Time
expired with their Masters or Mistresses.

And be it further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That if any Freeman of this
Island shall at any time hereafter beget a Woman-Servant with Child, he shall
(upon due Proof thereof made, which Proof shall be by the Oath of the said
Woman, as in other Cases of Bastardy) give good Security to save the Parish
harmless; and as a further Punishment for his Offense, and for and toward
Satisfaction of the Master or Mistress of such Servant, shall forfeit and pay
unto the said Master and Mistress the full Sum of Twenty pounds current Money
of this Island, and shall likewise provide for the Maintenance of the said
Servant and Child, and in case of failure herein, shall serve the Master or
Mistress of such Servant, double the time that she had to serve at the time of
the Offense committed, or shall procure one in his or their stead, that shall
be obliged so to do. And in case one Servant shall beget another with Child,
then the Manservant shall, after the Expiration of his Term, serve the Master
or Mistress of the Woman-Servant, double the time she had to serve, at the time
of the Offense committed.

That any Manservant Marrying without the Masters or Mistresses Consent, shall
serve two Years for such Offense; but if any Freeman shall Marry a Servant, he
shall be liable to pay the Master or Mistress Twenty pounds, and she shall be
free.

That all Suits between Servants and their Masters or Mistresses relating to
their Freedom, shall be heard and determined by any two Justices of the Peace
without any Appeal; and if any Servants absent themselves from their Masters or
Mistresses Service without Leave, or a Ticket from their Master, Mistress, or
Over-seer, shall for every such Days Absence, serve one Week, and so in
proportion for a'longer or shorter time, the whole Punishment not to exceed
Three Years.

That if any Person shall turn away any Sick or Infirm Servant, under pretense
of Freedom, or otherwise, and such Servant shall die for want of Relief, or
become Chargeable to any Parish, the Offender shall forfeit Twenty pounds of
Current Moneys of this Island, to the Use of the Parish where such Death or
Charge shall happen, to be Recovered by the Churchwardens by Action of Debt in
any Court of Record, unless the Party offending shall pay the same, and also
receive the said Servant, if Living, and him to maintain during the whole time
the said Servant had to serve. But if any Servant, through wilful Misbehaviour,
shall happen to have the French POX, Yaws, or any other Disease, broken Bones,
Bruises, Sickness, Impediment, or Imprisonment, he or she shall serve their
Masters or Mistresses double the Time thereby neglected; and also for all
Charges occasioned by reason thereof, at Ten shillings per Month, after their
Time by Indenture or otherwise be expired; and also Masters or Mistresses of
Servants, who shall receive unjust Molestation by complaints or Suits of Law,
shall have the same Remedy for their Expenses and Loss of Time.

That no Servant be Whipped Naked without Order of a Justice of Peace, upon
Penalty of Five pounds, to be Recovered by the Party Injured by Action of Debt
in any Court of Record. And whosoever shall not give to each White Servant
Weekly, four pounds of good Flesh, or four pounds of good Fish, together with
such convenient Plantation Provision, as may be sufficient, shall forfeit to
the Party Injured Ten shillings for each Offense. And whosoever shall not
Yearly give to each Servant three Shirts, three pair of Drawers, three pair of
Shoes, three pair of Stockings, and one Hat or Cap, and to the Woman
proportionably, shall forfeit to the Party Injured forty shillings.

That no Master, Mistress, or Overseer shall cause or suffer any Christian
Servant to be Buried or Interred, until the Body of such Servants shall be
viewed by a Justice of the Peace, Constable, or Tything-man, or by two such
Neighbors, as the said Justice, Constable, or Tything-man shall choose and
appoint, on Penalty of Twenty pounds current Money of this Island, unless such
Person died Ten Miles from the Dwelling of a Justice, Constable, or
Tything-man, and has been viewed by two of the next Neighbors, and in default
of Neighbors, by two of the same Family, or that the said Justice, Constable,
Tything-man, or Neighbors have not within Six Hours after Notice given, come
to view the Dead Body; and whosoever upon Notice given, and Request made to
view such Dead, shall not within four Hours after such Notice repair to the
view, or on the view finding any suspicious Tokens of the Bodies unlawful Death
shall not forthwith give Notice to the Coroner, or in Default of a Coroner of
that Parish, to the next Justice of the Peace, shall forfeit Ten pounds, which
Justice, in such Cases, is hereby empowered to act as a Coroner.

That whosoever shall entertain a Servant, knowing the same to be so, shall
forfeit for every Day and Night after the first, five pounds; and not knowing
him to be a Servant, Twenty shillings for every Day and Night after the first,
so that the whole exceed not treble the value of the Servants time remaining to
be served with the Master or Mistress. Provided, that this Clause extend not to
Servants, by Contract made in this Island, but such as are attested by a
Justice of the Peace, nor to such as entertain any as bring a Certificate of
their Freedom, attested under the Name of a Justice of Peace, though the same
be false and forged, or for any other Person whose Name the bringer
personateth, but such forger, falsifier, personater, or bringer, and every one
of them shall be set in the Pillory, and lose his Ears on Conviction thereof in
the Supreme Court of Judicature: But whosoever shall entertain a Servant any
time, if the said Servant shall be Drunk, Trade or Gain, during the said Time,
shall forfeit the Sum of Twenty shillings, the one half to the Parish where the
Offense shall be committed, and the other half to the Informer, to be levied by
a Warrant from any Justice of the Peace. And also if a Servant or Hired
Labourer shall be guilty of hiding or entertaining any Person's Servant or
Slave, he shall forfeit one Years Service to the Master or Mistress of such
Servant or Slave, or receive Thirty Nine Lashes on the Naked Back at the
Election of the Party Injured, to be ordered by any Justice of the Peace to any
Constable in the Precincts.

That no Person shall Ride, Load, or Carry on his Employers Horses, Cattle,
Carts, and Carriages (or willingly suffer the same to be done) any Goods or
thing whatsoever, other than the Masters or Mistresses, without such Master or
Mistresses Consent, on Penalty of Three Months Service for each and every such
Default.

And all Constables and Tythingmen are to be diligent in Apprehending and
Searching for Run-aways, on Penalty of Twenty pounds for every Neglect, and
upon the Apprehending of Run-aways, if the Master or Mistress be known, the
Servant shall be carried to the Masters or Mistresses nearest home, on Penalty
of Forty shillings; if not known, to the next Common Gaol, and the bringer to
receive of Master, Mistress, or Jailer, Eight pence per Mile, so as the whole
exceed not Forty shillings, which said Jailer is hereby empowered and commanded
to receive such Runaway or Run-aways, and to pay unto the bringer Eight pence
per Mile as aforesaid for every such Runaway so brought to him, on Penalty of
Forty shillings; and that it shall and may be Lawful for the Marshal to detain
and keep in Custody the Bodies of all such Run-aways so brought unto him, until
the Master or Mistress of them, or their Assigns shall pay unto him the full
Sum of what he has so paid for them, with Two shillings six pence per pound
for laying out the Money, and so proportionably, and also six pence for every
Twenty four Hours the said Runaway has been in his Custody; and if the said
Marshall shall suffer any Runaway so brought to him to escape, before he be
duly delivered to his Master or Mistress, or his or her Assigns, that then the
said Marshal shall pay unto the Master or Mistress of the said Runaway, so
much as he shall be Condemned in by the Verdict of a Jury at Common Law; also
any one may take up any suspected Persons, and carry him or her to any Justice
to be Examined.

That the Captain, or any other Commission-Officer, shall at the Head of every
their respective Company and Troop, Publish, or cause to be Published this
present Act once every Twelve Months, under the Penalty of Five pounds.

Provided also, That the several Fines, Forfeitures, and Penalties before
mentioned in this Act, and not declared where they shall be Recovered, and how
Disposed of, be one Moiety to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors, for and toward the Support of the Government of this Island and
Contingent Charges thereof; the other to the Informer, to be Recovered by
Action of Debt (if not exceeding Forty shillings) as all Penalties of Service,
before any Justice of the Peace, and if above Forty shillings, and not for
Service, in any Court of Record within this Island, wherein no Essoign,
Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further provided, That no Person or Persons shall be sued, molested,
or troubled for any Fine or Forfeiture against this present Act, unless the
Party so Offending shall be sued or impleaded for the same within two Years at
the most after the said Offense shall be committed.

An ACT For the Highways.
FOR the better amending and keeping clear the Common Highways, and known
broad Paths within this Island, leading to Church and Market, and for laying
out New Highways, and turning Old Highways, where it shall be needful, be it
Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, that the Vestry of each
Parish, or the Major part of them shall, on every third Monday in January
before Noon at their Parish Church, or other Convenient place, choose four or
more Freeholders, each seized of at least Thirty Acres Freehold in Right of
himself or Wife, to be Surveyors for the Year ensuing; if the Vestry neglects,
each Person absent or negligent shall forfeit forty shillings, and the Justices
at their next Sessions being informed thereof, shall appoint four or more such
Surveyors as aforesaid, every Person so Chosen or Appointed shall within Ten
Days (due Notice being given him by the Clerk of the Vestry) procure himself to
be Sworn before some Justice in the said Parish, Diligently and Faithfully to
perform the said Office for the Year ensuing, and give a just Account to the
Justices and Vestry (if required) of what he shall receive, pay, or do, by
virtue of his Office, on Penalty of Ten pounds Sterling.

That the Surveyor being Sworn as aforesaid, shall within sixteen Days after
their having viewed and considered the Highways and Bridges, inform the
Justices and Vestry of the Defects, Wants, and Alterations needful in the same,
to the end (as they are hereby empowered) the said Justices and Vestry may lay
a Tax of such Money, Labor, or other things, as to them shall seem convenient
and necessary, which if the Justices and Vestry shall not do before the last
day of February in each Year, then the said Surveyor shall make such Tax in
Writing, which being Confirmed by any two Justices in the said Parish, shall
stand good till some Complaint be made at the Quarter Sessions in that Parish,
and the Justices then and there to confirm or alter the same without Appeal
from thence.

That the Highways be sixty foot wide in standing Wood, forty foot where the
Wood is only on one side, and twenty four foot in open Ground, and that the
Surveyors have Power to cut down, dig up or remove as well all sorts of Trees,
Bushes, Prickle, Fences, Rails, Gates or Enclosures, or other thing or things,
as may any ways straighten, hurt, hinder, or incommode the Highways, as also
to dig for Stone or Gravel, Clay, Marl, Sand or Earth in any Land not Planted
or Enclosed, as Yard or Garden to a House, or to Press any Cart, Carriage,
Workman, or other thing fit to be employed in the Highways for such Reasonable
satisfaction to the Parties concerned, as such Surveyor can agree for, and in
case of Disagreement, such as the next, or any Justice in the Parish shall
appoint. Provided Nevertheless, that where Gates are, or shall be erected, of
at least Ten foot between Post and Post, or the Highway straightened by
Enclosure on both sides, but the way so well kept by Causeyway or otherwise,
that two Carriages may meet and pass each other, and the Ground as firm as is
necessary, then the said Surveyors shall forbear to pull down or remove such
Gates or Fences, any thing herein seeming to the contrary notwithstanding. But
if any Person shall again erect, or cause any Nuisance, in the Highways, which
was by the Surveyor removed, for such Offense he or they shall forfeit five
pounds.

And in Case where a New Path or Road is wanting, or where Old Ways may, with
more Convenience be turned or altered, or where to some Plantation or
Plantations no Highways are yet laid out, to lead them into the High Roads
which go toward the Market or Church, or to any convenient Harbor or
Landing-place, fitting for receiving a Shore or Shipping off any Goods, upon
Notice thereof given to any Justice of the Peace, he shall on request issue his
Warrant to the next Constable in the said Parish to Summon a Jury to meet at
some convenient place and Day, therein to be mentioned, to view and lay out, or
alter such Path or Roads, which said Justice is hereby empowered to administer
an Oath to the said Jury, that according to the best of their Skills and
Judgments, and with most Convenience to the Public, and least Prejudice or
Damage to any particular Person, they will lay out such Way, which having done,
the Surveyor is to make Return thereof to the Justices at the next
Quarter Sessions of the Parish, where the same Way is, as well under his own,
as the Hand of the Jurors, by whose Oath the same as laid out to the end the
same may be there Filed, or Recorded, and after known for a Public Highway.
And if the said Surveyor shall neglect his Duty therein, he shall forfeit
Twenty pounds. And be it further Enacted, That every Vestry with consent of the
Justices, may agree for two Years with particular Persons for their Parts and
Proportion of the Ways by them to be cleared, as also with the Surveyors what
part of the Parish they shall look after, and such Agreements shall discharge
the Parties from other Duties, than what is agreed for, as also the Surveyor
from looking after any other part than what is allotted him, and such Justices
and Vestry-Men are to Record all their doings touching the Ways in the
Vestry-Book, which Record in all places shall be deemed good Evidence.

And the said Surveyors may respectively issue their Warrants to the Constable
or Tything-men to warn in Workers, or to levy Money according to the Tax or
Rate made as aforesaid, and whosoever shall fail to send in his proportion of
Workers, with such Tools as shall be convenient, shall for every Head pay three
shillings per day upon Conviction, to be Recovered before any Justice of the
Peace by the Surveyor.

And if any Justice neglect his Duty touching the Premises or any part
thereof, he shall forfeit Ten pounds, and every Vestry-man, Surveyor,
Constable, Tything-man, Juror, or Clerk of the Vestry, who shall neglect his or
their Duty, where no Penalty is before set, shall respectively forfeit Five
pounds for each Offense.

All which said Forfeitures shall be to the Use of the Highways, and if not
exceeding Forty shillings, to be Recovered by Action of Debt before any Justice
of the Peace, if above Forty shillings, in any Court of Record, where no
Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

An ACT Appointing the Prices of Meat.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, that no Person or Persons upon any
pretense whatsoever shall presume to ask, demand, and receive for fresh Beef,
Mutton, or Goat, any more, greater or higher rate or price than hereafter is
mentioned, viz. For fresh Beef or Goat four pence per pound, and Mutton six
pence, to be weighed without the Heads, Entrails, or Feet, and that the Sewet
be Sold at no higher Rates than the Meats aforesaid, under Penalty of
forfeiting Twenty pounds current Money of this Island, for every time they
shall take, ask, or receive any higher price, and if any Person or Persons
shall refuse to sell any Beef, Mutton, or Goat by weight, he or they for every
such Offense shall forfeit Twenty pounds current Money of this Island.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any Person
whatsoever that shall destroy any Turtle Nests, or take away any of the Eggs
thereof upon any Bay or place within this Island, where the Turtle shall lay,
shall forfeit forty shillings current Money of this Island, or receive so many
Lashes on the bare Back, as any Justice shall Order, not exceeding Nine and
Thirty for every such Offense.

The one third part of all the aforesaid Penal Sums of Money shall be to our
Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors for and toward the Support
of the Government of this Island, and the Contingent Charges thereof, one Third
to the Churchwardens for the Use of the Parish, the other Third to the
Informer, to be Recovered in any Court of Record within this Island by Bill,
Plaint or Information, in which no Essoign, Wager of Law, or Protection shall
be allowed.

An ACT Angainst Blasphemy, and for preventing Disorders in Alehouses,
Taverns, and Victualling-Houses.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is
Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, That no Person or Persons
whatsoever in this Island be enabled to have and receive any License or
Licenses from the Governor for the time being to Retail any strong Liquors,
unless they bring Yearly Certificates under the Hands of two of the Justices of
the Peace living in the same Precincts, where the said Person keeps, or intends
to set up his House of Entertainment, and have also given good Security in the
Secretaries Office of One Hundred Pounds that he shall suffer no Disorders to
be committed in his said House, or any thing there done contrary to the Laws of
England or of this Island, and that no Persons whatsoever presume to sell Rum
or Rum-punch or any other Mixture of Rum without License first obtained from
the Justices in Sessions, and Security given to the Clerk of the Peace of the
said Precincts, under the Penalty of Forty shillings for every such Offense.

Provided always, and it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That
whatsoever Person so Licensed as aforesaid, shall Entertain or Receive any one
in their Houses, to Tipple or Drink in the time of Divine Worship or Service,
shall forfeit Twenty shillings for every such Offense, and the Person or
Persons there so found, shall pay each of them five shillings, both which
Forfeitures shall be levied by Distress by Warrant from any Justice of the
Peace within this Island, and whosoever shall by Public and open Profaness or
Blasphemy Dishonor Almighty God, and be thereof duly Convicted in the Supreme
Court of Judicature, shall be Fined Twenty pounds Current Money of this Island,
or more, at the Discretion of the Court for every such Offense, and that such
as are either Servants or not worth so much, shall be liable to such Corporeal
Punishment, as the Judges shall think meet, loss of Life and Limb only excepted.

And it is further Enacted, That if any of the said Persons, so having received
Licenses as aforesaid, shall keep or suffer any Common Gaming in their Houses,
they shall forfeit Ten pounds Current Money of this Island; and whosoever shall
by false Dice or other Fraud or Deceit win any Money or other things shall
forfeit treble the value thereof, being Convicted by Verdict, Confession, or
otherwise, and that no Sum exceeding forty shillings won at any Game, or
betting on the side of any, shall be recoverable, and all Bonds, Contracts, and
Securities whatsoever for above the Sum aforesaid, won as aforesaid, shall be
void. Provided nevertheless, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed or
construed to hinder or abridge any Maker of Rum, but that by himself, Servants,
or others, he may vend and sell the same pure and unmixt, any thing in this Act
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, That the aforesaid Penalties mentioned in this Act, and not
declared where they shall be Recovered, or how Disposed of, be one half to Our
Sovereign Lord the King, for and toward the Support of the Government of this
Island, and the Contingent Charges thereof, the other to the Informer, who
shall sue for the same in any Court of Record within this Island, wherein no
Essoign, Protection, Injunction, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

An ACT Impowering Justices of the Peace to decide Differences not exceeding
Forty shillings.
WHereas, many inconveniences may arise unto the Inhabitants of this Island by
being vexed and troubled with Suits at Law for small and trivial Injuries,
Debts, and Trespasses, wherein the accustomary Fees and Charges usually exceed
the Original Debt and Damages; for prevention whereof, Be it Enacted and
Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by
the Authority of the same, That all manner of Debts, Trespasses, and other
Matters, not exceeding the value of forty shillings, wherein the Tithes of
Lands are not concerned, shall and may be heard, adjudged, and determined by
any of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this Island, within their
respective Precincts without Appeal, which said Justices are hereby required
upon Complaint made, to grant a Warrant or Summons against the Person
complained of, thereby requiring him to appear and Answer the said Complaint,
and in case of Nonappearance, to issue out a Warrant of Contempt directed to
the Constable to bring the Contemner before him, as well to Answer the said
Contempt, as the Plaintiffs Action, and may if he see Cause, fine the
Contemner, provided the said fine exceed not Ten shillings, to be for the Use
of the Parish where such Offense shall be committed, and after Judgment given
in either Case, may grant a Warrant of Distress directed to the Constable to
levy the said Fine, Debt, Damages and Charges upon the Defendants Goods and
Chattels, who by virtue thereof shall expose the same to Sale, returning the
Overplus, if any be, to the Defendant, and for want of such Distress, to take
the Defendants Body into Custody, and him carry and convey to the Common Gaol
of the Precincts, there to remain till he shall have satisfied the said Debt
and Charges, and it shall be Lawful for the Justice of Peace to receive for
each Warrant One shilling and Three pence, and no more, and for the Constable
for serving of each. Warrant the like Sum, together with six pence for each
Mile he shall be compelled to Travel in Execution of the Premises, provided
the whole exceed not five shillings, and the Justice is hereby required to keep
a Record of all such Proceedings, under the Penalty of Ten shillings, the one
half to be for the Poor of the Parish, and the other half to the Informer, to
be Recovered as aforesaid.

And whereas the Uncertainty of the Expiration of Laws heretofore made for the
better Government of this His Majesty's Island may hereafter create some Doubts
and Disputes concerning the Validity of the several Judgments made and given by
the several Judges and Justices of the Peace within this Island, as also all
the Proceedings of the Military Officers upon the same; for prevention whereof,
Be if further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that all and
every Judgment and Judgments made or given by any of the Judges or Justices of
the Peace within this His Majesty's Island upon or by virtue of any of the
aforesaid Laws, and all other Proceedings whatsoever, and all and every Act or
Acts, thing or things done or acted thereupon are hereby Ratified, Confirmed,
and Adjudged Valid and Lawful to all intents and purposes whatsoever, and all
and every Judge and Judges of the several Courts, the several Justices of the
Peace, the Military Officers, and all other Persons whatsoever within this His
Majesty's Island, that have any ways Acted by or under the Authority of the
aforesaid Laws, or any of them, are hereby for ever saved and kept harmless,
and indempnified against all manner of Persons whatsoever, and if any Person
shall be sued or any ways molested by reason thereof, it shall be Lawful for
him or them so sued or molested to plead the general Issue, and give this Act
in Evidence, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

An ACT Rating Liquors Sold by Retail.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, that from and after
Publication hereof, all Vintners and Tavernkeepers, or any other Person or
Persons who do or shall Utter or Sell by way of Retail Madera Wines or Brandy,
and shall presume by any means directly or indirectly to take or receive above
the Rates hereafter mentioned for the aforesaid Liquors, viz. For Madera Wine
sifteen pence the Quart, and Brandy two shillings and six pence the Quart, and
so proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity, shall forfeit the Sum of
forty shillings for every such Offense, to be levied by Warrant from any of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the Precincts, where the Fault is committed,
on the Goods and Chattels of any Person or Persons so Offending, the one half
of which Forfeiture shall be to the Churchwardens for the Use of the Parish,
the other to the Informer, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An ACT For Compensation of Mr. Nicholas Scarlet.
WHereas, Nicholas Scarlet, Gent. has a long time lain under diverse great and
dangerous Wounds received in the Public Service of this Island in pursuit of
several Rebellious Negroes, by reason of a Command from his Superior Officers,
whereby he has been a long time hindered from all manner of Employment, to his
great Suffering, Damage and Charge, as also to the loss of the Use of one of
his Limbs, as has sufficiently been made appear to Us; to the end therefore
that all Persons, of the like Quality and forwardness to serve the Country,
may, for the future, receive due Encouragement,

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, that the said
Nicholas Scarlet shall, in Compensation of the said Loss and Damage, have and
receive out of His Majesty's Public Revenue a Yearly Salary of Ten pounds
during his Residence in this Island, which said Sum of Money is hereby
appointed to be paid by the Receiver for the time being out of the Treasury
when demanded, upon Penalty of Twenty pounds, the one half to our Sovereign
Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, for and toward the Support of the
Government of this Island, and the Contingent Charges thereof, and the other
half to the Party aggrieved, to be Recovered in any Court of Record within this
Island, by Bill, Plaint or Information, where no Essoign, Protection, or Wager
of Law shall be allowed.

An ACT For the Restraining and Punishing Privateers and Pirates.
WHereas nothing can more contribute to his Sacred Majesty's Honor, than that
such Articles as are Concluded and Agreed on in all Treaties of Peace, should
by all His Majesty's Subjects according to their Duty, be most inviolably
preserved and kept in and over all His Majesty's Dominions and Territories, and
whereas not only against such Treaties of Peace made by His Majesty with his
Allies, but also contrary to His Majesty's Royal Proclamation, several of his
Subjects have and do continually go off from this His Majesty's Island of
Jamaica into Foreign Princes Services, and Sail under their Commissions,
contrary to their Duty and good Allegiance, and by fair means cannot be
restrained from so doing.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, that from and after Publication
hereof, it shall be Felony for any Person, which now does, or within four Years
last past heretofore has, or hereafter shall Inhabit or belong to this Island,
to serve in America in an Hostile manner, under any Foreign Prince, State, or
Potentate, or any Employed under any of them against any other Foreign Prince,
State, or Potentate, in Amity with His Majesty of Great Britain, without
special License for so doing, under the Hand and Seal of the Governor or
Commander in Chief of this Island for the time being, and that all and every
such Offender, or Offenders contrary to the true intent of this Act, being
thereof duly Convicted in His Majesty's Supreme Court of Judicature within this
Island, to which Court Authority is hereby given to hear and to determine the
same, as in other Cases of Felony, shall suffer pains of Death without Benefit
of the Clergy.

Provided nevertheless, that this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to any Person or Persons, which now are or have been in the Service or
Employment of any Foreign Prince, State, or Potentate whatsoever, that shall
return to this Island, and leave and desert such Service and Employment before
the first day of January next ensuing, rendering themselves to the Governor or
Commander in Chief for the time being, and giving him such Security as he shall
appoint for their future good behavior, and also that they shall not depart
this Island without the Governors Ticket.

And for the better and more speedy Execution of Justice upon such, who having
Committed Treason, Piracies, Felonies, and other Offenses upon the Sea, shall
be Apprehended in, or brought Prisoners to this Island, Be it further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That all Treasons, Felonies, Piracies, Robberies,
Murders, or Confederacies committed, or that hereafter shall be committed upon
the Sea, or in any Haven, Creek, or Bay, where the Admiral has Jurisdiction,
shall be Inquired, Tried, Heard, Determined, and Judged within this Island, in
such like form, as if such Offense had been Committed in and upon the Land, and
to that end and purpose Commissions shall be had under the Kings Great Seal of
this Island, directed to the Judge or Judges of the Admiralty of this Island
for the time being, and to such other substantial Persons, as by His Majesty's
Governor or Commander in Chief of this Island for the time being, shall be
named or appointed, which said Commissioners, or such a Quorum of them, as by
such Commission shall be thereunto Authorized, shall have full Power to do all
things in and about the Inquiry, Hearing, Determining, Adjudging, and Punishing
of any of the Crimes and Offenses aforesaid, as any Commissioners to be
appointed by Commission under the Great Seal of England, by virtue of a Statute
made in the Twenty Eighth Year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, are
Empowered to do and execute within the Kingdom of England, and that the said
Offenders, which are, or shall be Apprehended in, or brought Prisoners to this
Island, shall be liable to such Order, Process, Judgments, and Execution, by
virtue of such Commission to be grounded upon this Act, as might be awarded or
given against them, if they were proceeded against within the Realm of England,
by virtue of any Commission grounded upon the said Statute.

And all Trials heretofore had against such Criminal or Criminals before any
Judge or Judges by virtue of such Commission or Authority at any time
heretofore granted, and all Proceedings thereupon, are hereby Ratified,
Confirmed, and Adjudged Lawful, and all such Judges, with all and every the
Inferior Officers, that have Acted thereby, are hereby indemnified to all
intents and purposes whatsoever, and in case they, or any of them, shall at any
time hereafter be sued, vexed, molested or troubled for any such their
proceedings as aforesaid, he or they so sued, vexed, or molested shall plead
the General Issue and give this Act in Evidence, any Law, Statute, Custom or
Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Person or Persons, that shall any way knowingly Entertain, Harbor, Conceal,
Trade or hold any Correspondence, by Letter or otherwise with any Person or
Persons, that shall be deemed or adjudged to be Privateers, Pirates, or other
Offenders within the Construction of this Act, and that shall not readily
endeavor to the best of his or their Power to Apprehend or cause to be
Apprehended such Offender or Offenders, shall be liable to be Prosecuted, as
Accessaries and Confederates, and to suffer such Pains and Penalties, as in
such Case by Law is provided. And for the better and more effectual Execution
of this Act

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Commission-Officers, in their several Precincts within this Island, are hereby
required and empowered upon his or their knowledge or Notice given, That any
Privateers, Pirates, or other Persons suspected to be upon any unlawful Design,
are in any place within their respective Precincts, to raise and levy such a
Number of well Armed Men, as he or they shall think needful for the Seizing,
Apprehending and carrying to Gaol all and every such Person or Persons, and in
case of any Resistance or Refusal to yield Obedience to His Majesty's
Authority, it shall be Lawful to kill or destroy such Person or Persons, and
all and every Person or Persons that shall Oppose or Resist, by striking or
Firing upon any of the Commanded Parties, shall be deemed, taken, and adjudged
as Felons without Benefit of the Clergy, and every such Officer that shall omit
or neglect his Duty herein shall forfeit Fifty pounds current Money of this
Island for every such Offense, to be Recovered in any of His Majesty's Courts
of Record within this Island, by Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no
Essoign, Wager of Law, or Protection shall be allowed; one Moiety thereof to be
to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, for and toward the
Support of the Government of this Island and the Contingent Charges thereof,
and the other Moiety to the Informer, and all and every Person or Persons, that
upon Orders given him or them shall refuse to repair immediately with his or
their Arms well fixed, and Ammunition, to such place or places as shall be
appointed by the said Officer, and not readily Obey his Commands in the
Execution of the Premises, shall be liable to such Fine or Corporeal
Punishment, as by a Regimental Court Marshal shall be thought fit.

Provided further, that the Governors Assent to the passing of this or any
other Act, shall not extend, or be Construed to extend to the determining of
this present Sessions of the Assembly.

An ACT Ascertaining the Quit-Rents and manner of Receipt thereof.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That a Patent Sealed under the
Great Seal of this Island, and Recorded in the Office of Inrolments Established
in this Island shall Evidence the Patentee or Patentees just Right and Title to
all and every parcel of Lands, House or Houses, Tenements or other things in
the said Patent granted, and be a good Bar to the Right and Title of His
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors: And to the End His Majesty's Grants may not
be hindered, delayed, or obstructed, the Keeper of the Seal, or Chancellor for
the time being, shall and is hereby obliged the next Tuesday before each Grand
Court to cause all such Grants and Patents, as are in the Office, to be Sealed
at St. Jago de la Vega, and all Inferior Officers, who are concerned in
drawing and passing the same, are then and there likewise to be ready to do
their Duty.

And forasmuch as all Titles of Land are derived from His Majesty, and the Land
has been laid out, and Patents made by His Majesty's Officers, in which many
Errors or Mistakes may have happened, which according to the strict Rules of
Law, might make many Grants void in all, or in part, Be it therefore Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That all Lands granted or hereafter to be granted by
His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, upon Surveys made or to be made, be for
ever good to the Patentee, and to those to whom the Right of the Patentee shall
come, for all Lands comprised within the Survey or Bounds, any Misnomer,
Misbounding or Mistaking of Quantity, or other Error notwithstanding, against
His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or any other Person or Persons claiming
under him or them for ever, and that all such Grants shall be taken as strongly
against His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, as the Grants of any other
Person or Persons should or ought to be taken against him or them, or his or
their Heirs or Assigns. Provided nevertheless, and be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That where either His Majesty or the Patentee are
aggrieved by Mistake in Quantity, a re-survey shall be made, by one Surveyor
indifferently Sworn between the King and Patentee, or who claims in his
Right, before any of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, upon which re-survey
a Confirmation of the former Grant shall issue under the Seal of this Island
reciting the Error, and reserving for the future the same Rent mentioned in the
said Grant according to the just Quantity found by such re-survey, for which
Confirmation the Chancellor shall receive Ten shillings, and the Clerk of the
Patents Eight shillings and no more, to be paid as all other Charges of the
said re-survey by the Party requiring the same, but no Retrospect shall be had
to what Rent ought to have been paid, be the Quantity more or less, any thing
in this Act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Dispute
shall ever arise upon any Survey, wherein the Survey or Plot given into the
Patent-Office shall vary from the real Run and marked Lines, in all such
Disputes the Judges before whom the same shall happen, shall adjudge the real
Run and marked Lines, which are proved before them to be Run and Marked, to be
the bounds of the Lands granted, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And Whereas there have been uncertainties and Disputes in the payment of His
Majesty's Quit-Rents reserved in the Patents formerly granted, by reason of the
words, Manured and Planted; and whereas his said Majesty has been and now is
Graciously pleased, that whatsoever shall arise from the Quit-Rents, shall be
applied toward the Support of the Government, and defraying the Contingent
Charges of this Island, in Consideration whereof, and to ascertain the same, Be
it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That every Parcel or
Parcels of Land of what Nature and Quality soever granted and Patented before
the Twenty fifth Day of June, One Thousand Six Hundred Seventy and One, shall
for Arrears and growing Rents pay for every Thirty Acres Annually the Sum of
one shilling, and so proportionably for every Parcel under one hundred Acres,
and for every hundred Acres two shillings six pence, and proportionably for a
greater Quantity, and for all Lands of what Quality soever from the aforesaid
time to the Twelfth Day of March One Thousand, Six Hundred Seventy and Four,
shall pay one half penny per Acre, and so proportionably for a greater quantity;
and for Foot-Land, one half penny per Foot for two sides of the Square added
together, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity, as a certain
established Quit-Rent and Acknowledgment to His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors for ever, any Law, Custom, or Usage, or any thing contained in the
said Patents to the contrary notwithstanding.

And for the more speedy and easy Collecting of the said Quit-Rents, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Receiver of the
Quit-Rents, or his Lawful Deputy shall twice every Year (to say) after each
Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, and of the Annunciation of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, keep an Office in the Town of St. Jago de la Vega, in the Parish
of St. Catharines, and in the Town of Port Royal during the space of one Month
at each place, and then and there to Receive the Quit-Rents from the Persons
concerned, which said Office he shall attend from the Hours of Eight to Eleven
before Noon, and from the Hours of Two to Five in the Afternoon, and upon
Receipt of His Majesty's Quit-Rents, thereof to Acquit and Discharge all
Persons, on the Penalty of Five pounds Sterling, which said Penalty shall be,
the one half to His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors for and toward the
Support of the Government of this Island and Contingent Charges thereof, and
the other half to the Informer, to be Recovered in any Court of Record within
this Island, wherein no Wager of Law, Essoign, Protection or Injunction shall
be allowed.

An ACT For preventing Damages in Plantations, Preserving of Cattle, and
Regulating Hunting.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority of the same, That all Plantations bounding in
Savanna's, Highways, Watering-places, and all Pastures made out of Wood-land,
shall make sufficient Fences, which sufficient Fences shall be judged by Oath
of Three Freeholders before any one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
which said Freeholders shall be Chosen, one by the Party grieved, the other by
the Owner of the Cattle, and the other by the Justice of the Peace, and if
either of them do not appear, or refuse to make their Choice, that then in such
Case the said Justice shall name two, and what Damage shall be done by any
Stock in any Plantation so Fenced as aforesaid, the said Damage to be Appraised
upon the Oath of the said Three Freeholders, and the Owners of the said Stock
shall pay double the said Damage so committed or done by their Cattle, Proof
being made appear by the Oath of one or more, to be Recovered before any
Justice of the Peace, if not exceeding Forty shillings, if above, in any Court
of Record by Action of Debt.

And it is further Enacted and Provided by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Person or Persons whatsoever shall kill or destroy any Cattle, Horse, Mare,
Mule, or Asinego, but he, she, or they who shall kill or destroy any of the
aforementioned Stock, shall forfeit for each they shall kill or destroy the
Sum of Fifteen pounds current Money, to be Recovered by Action of Debt in any
Court of Record within this Island by the Owner or Proprietor of the said Beast.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Owners of Neat
Cattle shall keep one White Man at each respective Pen, and at all Pens
whereunto belongs above Two hundred Cattle, the Owner of such Pen shall keep
two White Men, upon pain of forfeiting Ten pounds for every White Man, that
shall be wanting as before, for the space of Three Months, to be Recovered in
any Court of Record by Action of Debt, the one half to the Parish for the Use
of the Poor, the other Moiety to the Informer, or him that sues for the same.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons and
Owners of Cattle, that shall fail to Pen their Cattle once in three Nights, at
the l^^st, that all such Cattle doing Damages shall pay double the Damage, to
be Recovered as aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Strays of any
sort of Cattle, where ever they shall be found and taken up, shall belong to
the Proprietor of the Ground where they are accustomed to feed, Provided the
said Proprietor cause the said Stray or Strays to be Cried by the Common Crier
three distinct Court Days in the Court of the said Precinct, describing all the
Marks of the said Stray, with the Age and Kind; and further that the said
Proprietors do turn loose again the said Stray, to continue in the same feeding
Ground where the same was accustomed to feed, and tying a With about the Neck
of the said Stray (which shall be a Common Mark for Strays) and in that manner
to continue one whole Year from the first taking up or Penning of the same.
Provided further, that if in the mean time no Person shall Challenge or Claim
the same, that then the property of all such Strays remain to the Proprietor of
the Ground as before, they giving Satisfaction for taking up the said Stray.
Provided always, That this Act extend not to any Ear-marked or Burnt-marked
Beast, Horse, Mare, Colt, or any other sort of Cattle, but all such shall
belong to the Owners or Proprietors of the same, if Claimed at any time after
the expiration of the Year.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Clerks of each
respective Courts of Record in this Island are hereby empowered to make Entry
and Toll any sort of Cattle, that shall be Sold from one Person to another,
taking as near Description of the several Marks, Natural or otherwise, as can
be, and vouched by two sufficient Persons known to the Clerk, which Entry or
Toll shall be good against any former Sale or Bargain, or any other Title
whatsoever, except in all such Cases where the Provost Marshal or his Deputy
has levied the same by Execution, and the Clerk of the said Court shall take
Twelve pence for each such Entry and for keeping a Record of the same, and no
more.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person
whatsoever shall presume to carry any Fire, or smoke Tobacco in any Savanna or
Plantation, or Highways whatsoever, under the Penalty of Ten shillings for
each time they shall so offend, and be further liable to pay all Damages that
shall accrue to any Person or Persons by means of the same, to be Recovered (if
not exceeding Forty shillings) before any Justice of the Peace, if exceeding
Forty shillings, by Action of Debt in any Court of Record within this Island:
And if the Person so offending, be not able to make Satisfaction, then the said
Person shall be Whipped for every such offense at the Discretion of any one
Justice of the Peace. Provided. That this Clause extend not to Owners of Land,
to carry Fire in their own Plantations, or burn their own Savanna, yet to be
liable as before, if thereby they injure or burn any other Persons Savannas, or
Plantations, and that all Penalties for carrying of Fire, shall belong to the
Person that sues for the same.

And whereas it is found by Experience that several Common Drivers of Cattle,
or Horse-catchers do frequently Ride and drive Gangs of Mares and other Cattle
from off their own Feeding Ground or Pasture, whereby those that are big, cast
their Young, and Young ones are often separated from their Dams, and do
likewise often deface the Marks of such Cattle and Horses, or new Mark them for
themselves or others with wrong Marks, to the great Damage of all such
Proprietors; for prevention whereof, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That no Person or Persons whatsoever shall hereafter presume to
drive or ride in any Savanna as a Common Horse-catcher after any Horses or
Mares without having first given Security for their Honesty, and obtained leave
from the Proprietor or Proprietors of such Savanna's or the Major part of them,
under the Penalty of Twenty pounds, to be Recovered as aforesaid, one third
part whereof shall be to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors,
for and toward the Support of the Government of this Island and the Contingent
Charges of the same, one third part to the Proprietor or Proprietors of such
Savanna's where the Offense shall be committed, the remaining third to the
Informer, or he that shall sue for the same.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any such Common
Driver or Horse-catcher, or any other Person employed by or for him or them,
shall presume to Sell or Barter any Horse, Mare, or Colt, or other Cattle, but
such as he shall bring two sufficient Freeholders of the place where he does
Inhabit, or other good sufficient Evidence to vouch before the Clerk of some
Court of Record within the Precincts where they shall be Sold or Bartered as
aforesaid, that he bred them, or otherwise came Lawfully possessed of them,
under the Penalty of Fifty pounds, to be Recovered and Disposed of as
aforesaid. And whosoever shall Buy, Barter, or Bargain with any such known
Horse-catcher or Driver, for any Cattle or Horses without the same be first
vouched as aforesaid, he, she, or they so Offending shall for every such
Offense forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty pounds, to be Recovered and Disposed
of as aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Driver or
Horse-catcher shall at any time hereafter fraudulently or designedly put any
false Burnt Mark, Ear-mark, or any other Marks, or deface any old Mark, he or
they shall for such Offense be guilty of Felony.

It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons
that are Keepers or Owners of Goats, shall suffer their Goats to feed in any
Persons Land except their own, and if any do suffer the same to feed in any
Persons Land, it shall be deemed Trespass, and the Owner of the Land shall
Recover in any Court of Record full Costs of Suit in the said Action, besides
what Damage shall be given by the Jury.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person whatsoever
shall be capable of Hunting with any Gang of Dogs in this Island, that is not a
Planter in it, and has not at least five Acres of Land Planted, and that any
Person that shall presume to Hunt any Gang of Dogs within this Island, being
not Qualified as aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such Offense his Gang of
Dogs, and the Sum of Ten pounds Sterling, to be Recovered in any Court of
Record within this Island, by Bill, Plaint, or Information, the one Moiety or
half part of all such Forfeitures shall be to our Sovereign Lord the King, his
Heirs and Successors, for the Support of the Government and Contingent Charges
thereof, and the other Moiety shall be to the Informer, or any Person that
shall sue for the same. And it shall not be Lawful for any Planter or Planters
in this Island to own any Hunting Gang of Dogs which shall not properly belong
to themselves, their Mates in Planting, or Hunted by their Servants, under the
Penalty of Ten pounds Sterling for each time he or they shall so offend, to be
Recovered in manner and form aforesaid, and to be disposed of as aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Hunting Gang of Dogs shall kill or maim any Tame Stock belonging to any Planter
or Person whatsoever, or do him or them any Prejudice or Damage, the Party so
Damnified, lift the Damage amount to not above forty shillings, Satisfaction
for the same shall be Recovered by Warrant from any Justice of the Peace, but
if it amount to more than forty shillings, the Person or Persons so injured
shall sue for the same at Common Law. And if any Person shall kill or maim any
manner of Tame Stock, as Sheep, Hogs, or Goats, either by Hunting or otherwise,
and shall not forthwith discover the same to the next Justice or Constable, to
the end the Damage may be known and Recovered, as aforesaid, such Offender
killing, maiming, or injuring any such Tame Stock, and not discovering it as
aforesaid, shall pay five pounds for every Default, besides Damages to be
Recovered by the Party Injured in any Court of Record.

It is further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person
whatsoever shall Hunt any Gang of Dogs within four Miles of any Craw^ or
Settlement (except in his own Land, or leave from the Proprietor of the same,
upon pain of Ten pounds Sterling, and that no Person or Persons whatsoever
shall set any Snare or Engine in any place whatsoever (his Planted Ground only
excepted) under Penalty of forty shillings for every time any Person shall so
Offend in either of the Premises, to be Recovered as aforesaid, and disposed
of as aforesaid, and to pay all other Damages that shall accrue by the same.

An ACT Securing the Purchasers of Thomas Bun's Land upon Port Royal.
WHereas, one Thomas Bun, late of this Island, in the Fourteenth Year of His
Majesty's Reign, Patented a certain Parcel of Land on Port Royal, and after
that, Constituted and Appointed one Martin Vanolphin his Attorney, thereby
giving him full Power and Authority for him, and in his Name, to Bargain and
Sell all and singular the Lands and Tenements of the said Thomas Bun, and that
he the said Martin Vanolphin, in pursuance of the aforesaid Authority, did for
a Valuable Consideration, well and truly paid to the aforesaid Thomas Bun,
Bargain and Sell the aforesaid Parcel of Land unto William Parker, Esquire, and
Robert Swanley, and that a Moiety of the said Land was Sold by the said Swanley
to one Thomas Tothill, Deceased, whose Estate real was, in pursuance of an Act
of this Island, exposed to Sale, and Sold for and toward the Satisfaction of
the just Debts of the said Thomas Tothill to Sir Charles Modyford, Baronet, and
the whole Purchased as aforesaid, Sold by the said Sir Charles Modyford,
Baronet, and William Parker, Esquire to Edward Yeomans, Esquire for a Valuable
Consideration, and the aforesaid Letter of Attorney, through the Ignorance and
Neglect of those Times, not Proved and Recorded, as the Law of this Island now
requires, To the intent therefore that the several Purchasers may for ever
hereafter be quieted in their several Purchases, and secured in their Titles
and Covenants, and a speedy Improvement made by Building thereon. Be it
therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it
is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, That the Sales
made as aforesaid by Martin Vanolphin to William Parker, Esquire, and Robert
Swanley, and the Sale or Sales of them and either of them unto any other Person
or Persons whatsoever, are and shall be deemed and adjudged good and effectual
in the Law to all Intents, Constructions, and Purposes whatsoever, as if the
said Thomas Bun himself had, by his own Deed or Bargain and Sale, Actually and
Really Sold and Conveyed the same, and all and singular the Land Sold and
Conveyed, as aforesaid, be and remain to the Heirs and Assigns of such
Purchaser or Purchasers, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, as shall Claim by,
from and under the Title or Purchase of the said Sir Charles Modyford, Baronet,
and the said William Parker, Esquire any Law or Custom, Usage or Pretense of Right
whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An ACT Encouraging the Importation of White Servants.
Forasmuch as it is provided in an Act of this Country, Entitled, An Act for
Regulating Servants, for the strengthening and better Defense of this His
Majesty's Island, every Master and Owner of Slaves shall have such quantity of
White Servants proportionable to the Number of Slaves as is therein directed,
and as by the said Act does more plainly appear; and to the intent also all duo
Encouragement may be given Merchants, Masters, and Importers of White Servants
to bring the same, and may not then be discouraged nor their Servants lie upon
their Hands for want of Buyers,

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority of the same, That no Merchant, Master, or Importer of
White Servants, shall presume to Sell any White Servant or Servants, before
they have been Ten Days Imported, under the Penalty of Ten pounds for every
such Servant so Sold, the one Moiety to be to our Sovereign Lord the King, his
Heirs and Successors, for and toward the Support of the Government of this
Island and the Contingent Charges thereof, the other Moiety to the Informer, to
be Recovered by Bill, Plaint, or Information in any Court of Record within this
Island, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.
Provided nevertheless, that for the Ten Days after Importation of any such
White Servants, as abovesaid, the Factor or Seller shall pay the Master for
their Diet aboard the Ship, nor shall they be removed by the said Master from
thence before the Ten Days be past, under the Penalty aforesaid, to be
Recovered and Disposed of as aforesaid.

And be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whatsoever Master
or Commander of any Ship or Vessel, that shall bring in or Import into this
Island to the Number of fifty White Male Servants, and due Proof upon Oath
being thereof made before the Naval Officer (who is hereby empowered to
administer the same) shall for that Voyage be altogether freed and exempted
from paying any Port-charges for the said Ship or Vessel, wherein the said
Servants shall be Imported, any other Custom or Law to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Debt or Debts
Contracted for any Servant or Servants Sold within this Island, shall or may be
Recovered by Warrant from any Justice of the Peace in the same manner as is
provided in the Act empowering Justices of the Peace to decide Differences not
exceeding forty shillings, any Law, Custom, or Usage heretofore to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And it is also hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after
the Twenty fifth Day of March next ensuing, no Person or Persons whatsoever,
employing themselves in the Trades or Exercises of Coopers or Porters within
this Island shall use any Negro Slave or Slaves in their said Trades or
Occupations, under the Penalty of Twenty pounds for every such Offense, to be
Recovered and Disposed of as aforesaid.

Provided also, That nothing be herein Construed to prohibit any Master or
Owner of any Sugar-Work within this Island from making Cask at their respective
Plantations, or other convenient place, as heretofore, any thing in this Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

An ACT For Registring of Deeds and Patents.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, That a Deed in due form of
Law made and within three Months after the Date thereof acknowledged by the
Party or Parties that grant the same, or Proved by the Oath of one sufficient
Witness or more before the Governor, or some one of the Judges of the Courts
of this Island, and the same Recorded at length in the Office of Enrolments,
which said Office shall always be kept at St. Jago de la Vega within the said
three Months, shall be Valid to pass the same without Livery, Seizin,
Attornment, or any other Act or Ceremony in the Law whatsoever, and that no
Deed hereafter made without such Acknowledgment or Proof and Enrolment shall be
sufficient to pass away any Freehold or Inheritance, or to Grant any Lease for
above the space of three Years.

Provided nevertheless, That any Old Deeds or Conveyances heretofore made for
Lands or Houses, and omitted to be Recorded upon being Acknowledged or Proved,
and at any time after the making hereof, Recorded in the said Office of
Enrolments, shall be effectually Valid and of force, but if it shall happen
that any second Bill of Sale or Conveyance for a Valuable Consideration be made
by the said Vendor or his Heirs for the same Land or Houses, or any part
thereof, and the same be duly Executed and Recorded, then it is hereby
declared, that the last Vendee shall have and enjoy the said Land or Houses,
any thing in this Proviso or otherwise to the contrary notwithstanding. And if
any Vendee has omitted to execute and inroll his Deed within the time as
aforesaid, but shall at any time afterward have done the same, no second Sale
being made by the first Vendor, his Heirs or Executors, the same shall
nevertheless be good to the said Vendee, his Heirs and Executors, and a
perpetual Bar against the first Vendor, his Heirs and Executors, any thing in
this Act or any other to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Deeds and
Conveyances granted and made out of this Island, and remitted hither, being
Proved before the Governor or any of the Judges of the Courts of Common Pleas
as aforesaid, and all those Deeds and Conveyances where any Granter or
Conveyancer shall Personally appear in His Majesty's Court held before the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London for the time being, and shall then and
there own and acknowledge such Deed, Grant, or Conveyance to be his Act and
Deed, and an Attest thereof be made under the Seal of the Mayorality of the
said City, and the same be Recorded in the aforesaid Office within six Months
of the Arrival of the Ship that brought the same, shall to all intents and
purposes whatsoever be as Valid, as if the said Deeds or Conveyances had been
here Made, Acknowledged, Proved, and Recorded according to the form and time
herein before appointed.

Provided nevertheless, That if any Person here Lawfully empowered, shall in
pursuance of that Power make Sale of any Lands or Freehold to any Person
whatsoever within this Island, and the Deeds thereof be duly Proved and
Recorded according to the true meaning of this Act, before any Conveyance from
the Proprietor or Proprietors of the same Land or Freehold or any part thereof
be here produced, proved, and Recorded as aforesaid the said Deed so made and
passed here shall stand good and effectual in the Law to all intents and
purposes whatsoever.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
any Mortgage of any Lands, Tenements, Real or Personal Estates whatsoever
within this His Majesty's Island, having received full Satisfaction and payment
of all such Sum and Sums of Money as are really due to him by such Mortgage,
shall at the Request of the Mortgager, enter Satisfaction upon the Margent of
such Mortgage Recorded or to be Recorded in the Office of Enrolments, which
shall for ever hereafter discharge, defeat, and release the same, and shall
likewise perpetually Bar all Actions brought, or to be brought thereupon in any
Court of Record within this Island, and if such Mortgagee shall not within
three Months after request and tender made for his reasonable Charges repair to
the Office of Enrolments, and there make such Acknowledgment as aforesaid, he,
she, or they so refusing shall for every such Offense forfeit and pay unto the
Party or Parties aggrieved the Sum of fifty pounds Current Money of this
Island, to be Recovered in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record within this
Island, by Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no Essoign, Wager of Law, or
Protection shall be allowed.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That it
shall and may be Lawful for the Judges before whom such Acknowledgment of Deeds
or other Writings are and shall be made, to demand and receive for every Deed
of the value of Twenty pounds or more, Ten shillings, and for every Deed under
the value of Twenty pounds, Five shillings, and no more, under the Penalty of
Twenty pounds, the one half to be to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors, for and toward the Support of the Government of this Island and
the Contingent Charges thereof, and the other half to the Informer, to be
Recovered as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Clerk of the
Enrolments shall and may take and receive for Enrolling and Copying an Ordinary
Deed, Grant, or Patent for one or more Parcels of Land, or any Deed or
Conveyance not exceeding the length of such Patent, five shillings; for every
Deed exceeding the length aforesaid eight pence per sheet, accounting Twenty
Lines to a sheet, and eight Words to a Line; for every Short Writing not
exceeding the length aforesaid, Twelve pence; for Recording every Plot, one
shilling and three pence; for searching the Record, Twelve pence; and for
Ackowledging Satisfaction in the Margent of a Mortgage, recorded one shilling
and three pence, and no more, under the Penalty of Ten pounds to the Uses, and
to be Recovered as aforesaid.

And be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Patents
already granted and not Enrolled shall be Enrolled in the Office of Enrolments
within six Months, and all Patents hereafter to be granted shall be Enrolled
within six Months after the Sealing such Patents, which Enrolments, as likewise
all such as are already there Enrolled, shall be good and valid in the Law
notwithstanding any Clause inserted in the said Patents directing the contrary.

And whereas it is most manifest, That the Estates of several Orphans have been
preserved and vastly Improved by being, during their Minority, Leased out by
their Guardians; and whereas it may be Disputable whether such Leases are
Warranted by the Laws of England.

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Leases heretofore made or granted, or that hereafter shall be made or granted
of the Estate of any Orphan, by the respective Guardian for any term of Years,
not exceeding the Minority of such respective Orphans, shall be good and valid
in the Law, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to contradict or alter any Power given or to be given by the Parent to
any Guardians, or to give liberty for the future to any Guardian to Lease out
the Estate of any Heiress for any longer Term or Time, than till she shall
complete the Age of Fourteen Years.

Be it likewise Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Clerk
of the Enrolments, or whosoever shall execute the said Office for the time
being, do find two sufficient Sureties, with himself, to become bound to our
Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, in a Bond of the penalty of
Two Thousand pounds for the true and faithful Execution of the said Office, and
for keeping of the same in the Town of St. Jago de la Vega as is herein before
declared, and not elsewhere, which said Bond shall be Recorded in the Supreme
Court of Judicature within this Island, and be kept by the Chief Justice of the
same for the time being, to be made use of according as is directed in an Act,
Entitled, An Act Impowering the Secretary to take Security; and whosoever
after Publication hereof shall Officiate in the said Office before he has
given such Security as aforesaid, he or they so Offending shall forfeit the Sum
of Five Hundred Pounds, to be Recovered by Bill, Plaint, or Information in any
of His Majesty's Courts of Record within this Island, wherein no Essoign,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed the Defendant; one Moiety whereof
shall be to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, for and
toward the Support of the Government of this Island, and the Contingent
Charges thereof, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall prosecute the
same.

An ACT For the Ferry between St. Catharines and St. Andrews.
WHereas, William Parker, of the Parish of St. Andrews, Esquire, has at his
particular Charge found out and made a very Convenient Way between the Salt and
Fresh River in the Parish of St. Andrews and St. Catharines, which will be of
great Use and Advantage to the whole Island, in causing a more near and easy
Correspondence with the several Precincts, and whereas the said William Parker
has likewise set up and erected a Ferry for the better Accommodation of the
said Passage, and whereas the same cannot be maintained without great and
constant Charges, be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Governor,
Council, and Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority
of the same, That the said William Parker, his Heirs and Assigns be by this Act
Empowered and Authorized for the space and term of Fourteen Years from the
making hereof, to ask, demand, sue for, recover, and receive as a Duty and Toll
for the Transporting of any Person over the said Ferry, Seven pence half penny;
for every Horse and Man, fifteen pence; for every grown Beast, that has no
Rider, seven pence half penny; for every Sheep, Calf, or Hog, six pence; and
that the said William Parker, his Heirs and Assigns may and shall erect a
Tavern or Victualling-House near the said Ferry, and shall not be compelled to
renew or pay any License Money for the same. Provided always, That if the said
William Parker or his Assigns shall not finish and complete the said Way and
Passage within Twelve Months from and after the making of this Act, and that in
all places it be not less than eight Foot broad, and that the same be always
kept in good and sufficient Repair, that the aforesaid Limitation of the Rates,
which shall be paid by virtue of this Act, or any Letters Patents granted for
the same, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no
other Person whatsoever presume to erect, maintain, or keep a Ferry or Raft
over the same Rivers for the space or term of Fourteen Years from and after the
making hereof, under the Penalty of Five Hundred Pounds Current Money of this
Island, the one half to be for the Use of our Sovereign Lord the King, for and
toward the Support of the Government of this Island and the Contingent Charges
thereof, the other half for the Use of the said William Parker, his Heirs or
Assigns, to be Recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in His
Majesty's Supreme Court of Judicature within this His Majesty's Island, wherein
no Protection, Essoign, Injunction, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

An ACT Impowering the Churchwardens of St. Catherines to receive Twelve pence
per Tun, for all Goods made up in Cask that are landed on, or shipped from the
Bridge at Passage Fort for maintaining and repairing the same.
WHereas it is evident that the making and repairing the Bridge at Passage Fort
has been very chargeble to the Parish of St. Catherines considering the said
Bridge is for the public Use of several Parishes, in respect whereof some care
ought to be taken for easing the said Parish of the great Charge they are at in
maintaining the same, and that the several Persons that make use of the said
Bridge, should proportionably pay toward the doing of it.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That from and after the making
hereof, all Goods whatsoever made up in Cask, and that are landed either upon,
or shipped from the said Bridge shall pay Twelve pence per Tun, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity.

And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Churchwardens of St.
Catherines for the time being shall take care that the Bridge be kept in
sufficient Repair, and in case of their Neglect therein, that then the
aforesaid Churchwardens shall forfeit respectively Ten pounds, one half
thereof to the Informer, and the other half to the Poor of the said Parish to
be recovered by Bill, Plaint or Information in any Court of Record within this
Island, wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

And it is further Enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Churchwardens of the said Parish of St. Catherines, are hereby Empowered to
Appoint such Person or Persons as they shall think fit for collecting the
aforesaid Duty, and to employ the same to the use and behoof of the aforesaid
Parish, and if any Person or Persons shall refuse to pay the aforesaid Duty, it
shall be lawful for such Collector as shall be appointed by the Churchwardens
aforesaid, to detain or keep in his possession the Goods of the Person or
Persons so refusing, until he or they shall have satisfied the same, as it is
before expressed, any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An ACT For Confirmation of Pious, Charitable and public Gifts and Grants.
TO the Intent that Pious, Charitable and public Gifts and Grants, so
necessary in new Colony's to be encouraged and made Good, may not be defeated,
but may take Effect according to the True Intent and Meaning of the Donor or
Donors, Devisor or Devisors, notwithstanding any Incapacity in the Grantee or
Devisee, or those to whose Use the same is granted or devised:

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Governors, Council and assembly,
and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, that for
and during the Term and time of Twenty years next ensuing, all Gifts, Grants,
Conveyances and Devices of any Houses, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Goods or
Chattels, to any Good, Pious, Charitable or Public use or uses, as for the
maintenance of Lawful Ministers, erecting or maintaining of Churches, Chapels,
Schools, Universities, Colleges, or other places for Education of Youth, or
maintenance of men of Learning, or any Almshouses or Hospitals, or any other
uses whatsoever, heretofore made and hereafter to be made within the time
aforesaid, be and are hereby for ever confirmed and made good, according to the
true intent and meaning of the Donor or Donors, Grantor or Grantors, Devisor or
Devisors, the Statute of Mortmain, or any other Statute, Law, Custom, or Usage,
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless and it is hereby enacted and Ordained that no Gifts,
Grants or Devise to any Person or persons whatsoever for any superstitious use,
or for maintenance of any Minister or Teacher whatsoever other then such as are
lawfully Ordained and allowed of by the Church of England, be hereby confirmed
and made good, any thing herein, or in any other Act seeming to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

An ACT Declaring it High Treason to counterfeit His Majesty's Broad Seal of
this Island.
FOrasmuch as by the Laws of this Island no due and condign Punishment has
been heretofore provided for such as shall falsify, forge or counterseit his
Majestys Broad Seal of this Island, by reason whereof diverse evil disposed
persons may be emboldened to perpetrate and commit the said Offense, to the
dishonor of his Majesty, and the disinheriting of many of his Majestys good
Subjects; for prevention whereof,

Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, that whosoever shall
at any time hereaster Falsify, Forge or Counterfeit his Majesty's Broad Seal of
this Island, that every such offense shall be deemed and Judged High Treason,
and the offender or offenders therein, their Councellers, Ayders, Abetters, or
Concealors being legally convicted thereof by the Oaths of two lawful and
credible Witnesses upon Trial or otherwise, then every such person and persons
so offending as aforesaid shall be deemed, declared and adjudged to be Traitors
and shall suffer and have such Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, as in like
Cases is Ordained by the Laws and Statutes of his Majesty's Kingdom of England.

An ACT For Clearing of Rio Cobre above and below Caymana's.
Whereas the River called Rio Cobre, or the Town River that passes by St. Jago
De La Vega is for several Miles together about the Caymana's stopped up, and has
wholly lost its old Channel by means of the extraordinary Floods, and by the
abundance of Trees and great quantitys of rubbish that has been fallen above
the said River, and upon other small Rivers and Gullies that fall into the
same, whereby several Plantations above and below the stop are upon small
Floods totally overflown and the stop by the means aforesaid daily increases,
so that it is evident, that in a short time, if no Remedy be applied, all the
settlements and Sugarworks thereabouts will be altogether lost, and what is
good Manurable Land now will be turned into mere Bog and Morass, unfit to raise
Cattle, in, or convert to any other use, which will not only be a very great
loss to to this Island in General, but an utter ruin to the settlers in
particular, who have expended great sums of Money in planting thereabouts; for
prevention of so great and growing a mischief, be it therefore Enacted and
Ordained by the Governor, Council and Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Authority of the same, that the Governor or Commander in chief
for the time being do issue out a Commission, in the nature of a Commission of
sewers under the Broad Seal of this Island, thereby constituting and appointing
twelve good and sufficient Freeholders such as the Governor or Commander in
chief as aforesaid, with the Major part of the Council shall think fit to
nominate and choose out of the Parishes of St. Catherines and St. Andrews
whereof five shall be a Quorum and one of which five shall be a Justice of the
Quorum, thereby giving and granting unto them or any five or more of them, full
power and Authority to assess, lay and receive a reasonable Tax upon the Lands
or Negroes, or upon both, as to the said Commissioners or to any sive or more
of them, shall seem just and convenient, of all Persons whatsoever, who have
any Lands bounding any ways upon the said River, or upon whosoever shall
receive Advantage by clearing the said River, toward the clearing the Old
Channel, or by turning the present Course of it some other way, as upon a due
survey of the premises, shall seem most necessary, and which may be done with
the least Charge or prejudice to any Person, and that the limits of the said
Commission to Tax be and extend upon all the Lands bounding on both sides of
the River, from the Plantation of Henry Molesworth Esquire commonly called Cow-park
unto the Mouth of the said River where it falls into the Sea. And be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every such Person as shall be
named a Commissioner in the said Commission, after he has knowledge thereof,
shall take his Corporal Oath to lay a reasonable Tax upon all the Lands or
Negroes or upon both, as aforesaid, and that he will to the best of his Skill
and Knowledge execute the said Commission, which Oath shall be taken before the
Governor or Commander in Chief, or before whom by the Kings Writ of Dedimus
Potestatem, he shall appoint, or before the Justices of the Peace in the
Quarter Sessions of the Precincts, where any of the said Commissioners shall
reside, and whosoever of the said Commissioners shall refuse to take the said
Oath shall forfeit the sum of Five pounds; And further, That whosoever shall
wilfully fall any Trees or cast or suffer to be cast the same, as also any
Pane, Trash or other Rubbish whatsoever, into the said River, or into any other
River or Gully that shall come into the same, whereby the said stop shall be
any wise increased shall forfeit for every such Offense the like sum of Five
pounds, both which forfeitures shall be one third part to Our Sovereign Lord
the King, His Heirs and Successors, for and toward the Support of the
Government of this Island, and the contingent Charges thereof, and the other
two thirds to whomsoever shall sue for the same toward the Expense of
Preventing the Overflowing of the said River, or toward the cutting of a new
Channel as aforesaid, and that each of the said Commissioners, that shall meet
and sit as aforesaid, shall for each day they so sit receive toward their
Expense Five shillings per Diem out of the said Moneys to be levied as
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners unto whom the Commission as aforesaid shall be directed, or any
Five or more of them by virtue of the said Commission, and of this present Act
shall have full power and Authority to See, Survey and View the said Lands as
do use to be o'reflown or any part of them, and all the said Lands and Negroes
or their several Owners who possess any Lands or Negroes within the Bounds and
Limits aforesaid, to Tax, Rate, Assess and Charge with such Sum and Sums of
money, as well for the present clearing of the Old Channel of the said River or
for the making a new, if it shall be found necessary, as also for the keeping
of it clear, after it shall be cleansed, or turned another way, and that the
said Commissioners or any Five or more of them shall and may make and appoint
diligent and able Surveyors, Collectors and Overseers, and such other Officers
as they shall think fit to Survey and Oversee, and to Levy, Receive and Lay out
the Money to be Levied and Expended in and abour the premises, and to do and
execute whatsoever shall be needful and expedient to be done therein according
to the directions and Orders, which shall from time to time be prescribed by
the said Commissioners or any Five or more of them, and to allow them for their
pains; what shall be thought reasonable, and also that it shall and may be
lawful for the said Commissioners or any Five or more of them by Warrant under
their hands and Seal to Command the taking of any Cart, Wain or Negroes of any
Person within the Bounds and Limits of the said Commission to help toward the
clearing and removing the Premises, or toward the making a new Channel,
Provided always that the Owners of such Carts, Waines or Negroes are not then
making Sugar, and that they take not above five Negroes for a Week out of a
Plantation, and a Wain or Cart for the same time and that the Owners of such
Carts, Waines or Negroes, that shall be so employed be allowed out of their
respective Taxes what shall be thought reasonable for the hire of them, by the
said Commissioners as aforesaid. And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
that it shall and may be Lawful for the said Commissioners or any Five or more
of them, by Warrants under their hands and Seals, to give Authority to any
Person or Persons to Levy the said Sums of Money by them from time to time to
be Assessed upon the Persons, Lands or Negroes, or upon all or any of them as
aforesaid by distress and sale of the Goods of such Person or Persons that
shall not pay, or refuse to pay the same, and the Overplus of the value rising
upon such sale shall return to the Owner of the same, and in default of such
distress to be taken and sold, it shall and may be Lawful for such Collectors
as shall be appointed by the said Commissioners or any Five or more of them to
sue the Factor or Attorney of such Person or Persons as have Lands lying within
the Limits aforesaid.

And that all Constables, Marshals and Tything-men be Aiding and assisting in
the levying all such Taxes, as shall be assessed and levied as aforesaid, and
that they receive Twelve Pence in the Pound for Levying the same. And be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Action or Suit shall be
brought against any Person or Persons for taking any Distress or Sale of the
same, or for turning the Course, of the River through any Persons Land, or for
Cutting a new channel through the same, or any other thing done by the
Authority of this Act, the Defendant in any such Action, or Suit shall plead
the General Issue and give this Act in Evidence, whereupon Issue shall be
Joined, and the Jury shall find for the Defendant, and Assess treble Damage for
his wrongful vexation in that behalf. Provided always and it is the true Intent
and Meaning of this Act, that if any new Channel for the Conveyance of the said
River be cut through any Persons Lands, all such Damages as he receives
thereby, shall be valued by the said Commissioners or any five or more of them,
and Satisfaction shall be made to the Owners of such Lands out of the Money so
to be Assessed and Levied as aforesaid, and whatsoever Land shall be Recovered
by means of Draining, what now is overslown shall belong to the first
Proprietors; and that this Act continue in Force for the Term of Five Years and
no longer, any thing in this Act or any other seeming to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An ACT For Regulating Building, and preventing Fire.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority of the same, That no Person whatsoever presume to
Build any House at Port Royal within thirty Foot of the High Water Mark, and
that when any House or Houses are already Built, or hereafter shall be Built,
on the Harbor side nearer than thirty Foot of the High Water Mark, the Wherry
Place only accepted, such House or Houses so Built or to be Built, shall and
are hereby adjudged, deemed and taken to be public Nusances, and the
Proprietor or Proprietors of the same shall cause such House or Houses Built
thereon to be taken down and removed within six Months after conviction
thereof, or otherwise Build or cause to be Built within six Months a strong
substantial Wharf, so as the same may make a firm Passage or way of Thirty Foot
from High Water Mark. Provided that no House shall be Built further Northward
on the Harbor than Major Samuel Bach and Captain Anthony Swimmer on any Land
Wharfed or to be Wharfed out between Fort James and Fort Carlisle, but that all
Land so made out of the Harbor, or to be made, shall remain unbuilt on.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the aforesaid Authority, That when
any Fire shall happen to break out either at Port Royal, or at any other Town
already Built, or which hereafter shall be Built within this Island, that two
or three of the Chief Military or Civil Officers of the same Town or Parish
shall or may and hereby are Empowered to give all such directions for the
Pulling down or blowing up any such House or Houses, that shall be by them
adjudged meet to be pulled down or Blown up for the stopping and preventing the
further spreading of the same, and if it shall happen that the pulling down or
blowing up any such House or Houses by the directions aforesaid, shall be the
Occasion of stopping the said Fire, or the Fire stops before it comes to the
same, then all and every Owner of such House and Houses shall receive
Satisfaction, and be paid for the same by the rest of the Inhabitants, whose
Houses shall not be Burnt, who are hereby empowered to make such Rate or Rates
for the raising and Levying such Sum and Sums of Money as shall be thought
convenient by the Justices and Vestry men of the Parish.

Provided always, That if that House where the Fire shall first begin and break
out shall be Adjudged fit to be Pulled down to hinder the further spreading and
increase of the same, that then the Owners of such House shall receive no
manner of satisfaction for the same, any thing in this Act or any other Act to
the Contrary Notwithstanding.

And whereas it may be doubted that the Sea may encroach upon the Southward
part of the Town of Port Royal for the prevention whereof be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid that all Proprietors or Owners of Land or Houses their
Factors, Agents, Attorneys, and Guardians, of Children, or any Persons employed
by them, or any of them that are Interested on the Southermost part of
Port Royal from Fort Rupert to the House and Land now Inhabited by one Edward
Watkins, and known by the Sign of the Blew Bell, be hereby Enjoined and Obliged
by this Act within twelve Months after Publication hereof Substantially to
Wharf out, and Secure and keep Secured their respective Proportions of Land
joining on the Sea, with substantial Wharf of lasting Timber at least one Foot
into the Sea, under the Penalty of Ten Pounds current Money of this Island, for
every Year any such Person or Persons shall Neglect the same, one third part
thereof to our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and Successors, for and
toward the Support of the Government of this Island and the contingent Charges
thereof, one third part to the Churchwardens of the Parish of Port Royal for
the time being, for the use of the Poor, and the other third part to the
Informer or he that shall Sue for the same, in any Court of Record within this
Island, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

And that the Owners or Proprietors of such Land or Houses as aforesaid may be
the better Encouraged to Wharf out as is before appointed, the Street now
called the Church Street, shall be no more deemed, accounted or taken for a
Street, but shall be Added or Annexed to each Propriety and Freehold in
Proportion to their Respective Interest bounding upon the same, for which
Consideration they are hereby Obliged to leave a Passage at least eighteen Foot
open to the Sea.

Provided that nothing in any Clause of this Act shall Permit and suffer any
Person or Persons whatsoever, to Build any House nearer to the Church on the
South Side, than what are already Built for the whole length of the Church
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons do fetch or cause to be fetched in any Boat, Vessel, or Canoa, from the
Riffs or Shoals, or dig up any Stones below High Water Mark from the Eastermost
and Southermost Parts of any of the Cays lying off Port Royal, and that no
Stones simall or great be fetched or taken up for balast or any other use from
the Eastermost side of the Point on Port Royal, so far as Plum-Point on Penalty
of Ten Pounds for every such offense, and that no Commander and Master of any
Ship or Vessel cast or hoist out any Ballast overboard into the water within
the Harbor of Port Royal, or any other Harbor or Bay upon the Penalty of
Twenty Pounds for every such offense.

And be it farther Enacted, that no Wreeks be laid up within the Harbor of
Port Royal, or if any such decayed Vessels or Wreeks sink in the Harbor by
neglect of the Owner or Owners, Possessor or Possessors of the same, and not
removed within one Month after the sinking thereof, the said Owner or Owners,
Possessor or Possessors of the same shall forfeit Twenty Pounds for every Month
such Vessel shall so lie.

Provided also that the several Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties before
mentioned in this Act, and not declared where they shall be recovered and how
disposed of, be one third to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors, for and toward the support of the Government of this Island and
Contingent Charges thereof, one third to the Churchwardens for the use of the
Respective Parishes, and one third to the Informer to be recovered by Action of
Debt in any Court of Record within this Island, where no Essoins Protection or
Wager of Law shall be allowed, any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as great and diverse complaints are daily made by Masters and
Commanders of Ships and Vessels Trading to this Island, that upon their Ships
or other Vessels coming into any Harbor of the same, the Seamen belonging to
the said Ships or Vessels do run on Shore insomuch that they have not left on
Board a sufficient Number of men to watch the said Ships or Vessels, Be it
therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Person or Persons that shall receive or entertain any Seaman or Seamen
belonging to any Trading Ships or Vessels Riding in any Harbor of this Island,
after the Ships Bell Ringing to set Watch, at eight of the Clock at night,
every such Person or Persons receiving or Entertaining of every such Seaman as
aforesaid, shall forfeit for the Entertainment of every such Seaman, the Sum of
Forty Shillings, one half to the Poor of the Parish, where the Offense is or
shall be committed, and the other half to the Master or Commander that shall
Prosecute for the same, to be recovered by a Warrant from a Justice of the
Peace, as in cases of Debt not exceeding Forty Shillings.

An ACT For the Maintenance of Ministers, and the Poor, and Erecting and
repayring of Churches.
For raising a convenient maintenance for the Ministers and Poor, and Erecting
and repairing of Churches within this Island, Be it Enacted by the Governor,
Council and Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same,
That the respective Justices of every Parish within this Island, or any two of
them, shall every Year Issue out their Warrants to the Constables and
Tything-men, to Summons the Freeholders of that Parish together, on the Second
Tuesday in January for the Choosing of Ten Vestry-men, and two Churchwardens
such as shall conform to the Church of England, and if they shall neglect to
Issue their Warrant, so as the Election be not made that day, they shall
respectively forfeit five pounds Current money of this Island, and in Case the
said freeholders duly Summoned as aforesaid, shall not appear, or appearing do
not Choose the said Ten Vestry-men and two Churchwardens, that then in their
Default the said Justices shall within ten days after the said second Tuesday
in January, or any day after as to them shall seem convenient, lay a reasonable
Tax on the said Parish for the maintenance of the Minister and Poor, and for
Erecting convenient Churches and repairing such as are already made, and making
convenient seats in them, and if the said Justices and Vestrymen shall neglect
their duty herein they shall respectively forfeit five Pounds Current money of
this Island.

And Be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That such
of the Justices and Vestrymen that shall not be present at the time ted to make
the said Taxes, and thereof be convicted by a Certificate under the hands of
such as do appear, and have no sufficient excuse for the same, shall
Respectively forfeit five Pounds Current Money of this Island, and a Roll of the
said Tax so made shall be delivered into the hands of the respective Constables
of the said Purishes with a Warrant under the same signed by any two Justices
of the Peace impowering him or them to Levy the said Tax and upon refusal to
distrain and sell by Public Outcry and pay the same into the hands of the
Churchwardens, retaining to himself Twelvepence per Pound for Levying thereof,
and if any Person shall refuse to Pay what he is so Assessed and the said
Constables Distrain for the same all his Charges shall be paid him with such
further allowance for his pains, as the said Justices or any one of them shall
judge reasonable, and if the said Justice or Justices shall neglect to Issue
the said Warrant, he or they shall respectively forfeit five Pounds Current
Money of this Island, and if the said Constables or any of them fail of their
duty herein, they shall respectively forfeit five Pounds Current Money of this
Island, and the Churchwardens so Chosen shall undertake the said Office and
receive and keep a good account of the Moneys or goods Levied by Virtue of this
Act, and the same Issue by Order from the said Justices. and Vestry-men of the
Parishes for the purposes and intents aforesaid, and the Churchwardens shall
as often as thereunto required, yield and give a just and true account unto the
Justices and Vestrymen of all their Receipts and Disbursements, and in case the
said Churchwardens, or any of them shall neglect their Duty herein they shall
respectively forfeit five Pounds Current Money of this Island for every refusal.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
respective Justices of the Parishes of St. Dorothy and St. Thomas in the Vale,
or any two of them shall every Year Issue out their Warrants to the Constables
and Tything-men, to Summons in the Freeholders of the said Parishes the Second
Tuesday in February for the Choosing of ten Vestrymen and two Churchwardens as
aforesaid, and that the said Justices and Vestry-men, or the Major part of them
are hereby empowered to lay on the Parishioners a reasonable Tax over and above
the rate imposed on them by Virtue of this Act, by the Justices and Vestry-men
of the Parish of St. Catharines, Provided it exceed not one Hundred Pounds
Current Money of this Island, for and toward the Building and Erecting Churches
and making convenient Seats in them in their respective Parishes and to no
other uses whatsoever, and that whatsoever Rate or Rates has been already
assessed by the Justices and Vestry-men of the Parish of St. Dorothy's upon
their Parishioners or any other Person or Persons having Land, Goods or Stock
within the said Parish, is hereby Ratified Confirmed and Declared Lawful, any
Clause in this Act seeming to the contrary notwithstanding, a Roll of any Taxes
so made shall be delivered into the hands of the respective Constables of each
Parish with a Warrant under the same signed by any two of the Justices,
Impowering him or them to Levy the said Tax, and upon refusal to Distrain and
Sell by Public Outcry as aforesaid, any thing in this Act seeming to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Justices and Vestry-men of each Parish have full Power to enquire into Arrears
of former Subscriptions and Taxes, and to Levy the same Arrears by Warrant from
the Justices to the Constables aforesaid, and that the Minister demand no Fee
in his own Parish for Christnings, Marriages, Churchings, or Buryals under the
Penalty of five Pounds for every offense, unless such as the Justices and
Vestrymen shall allow, any Law, Custom, or usage to the contrary
notwithstanding, the one half of all which Forfeitures shall be to the Poor of
the Parish and the other Moiety to him or them that shall sue for the same, in
any Court of Record within this Island.

And forasmuch as many Persons who may by Virtue of this Act and the Act for
mending and repairing the Highways, be Taxed, and have nothing in the Parish
where they are Taxed upon which any Distress may be made, It is therefore
Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That in such Cases from and
after the making hereof, an Action of Debt shall lie in any Court of Record, or
before any Justice of the Peace as in other Debts for the several
Churchwardens and Surveyors of each Respective Parish and their Successors to
recover against any of the said Persons Rated or Assessed by virtue of this
Act, or any of them, or their Agents or Attorneys here all such Sum and Sums of
Money as are or shall be rated or assessed upon them as aforesaid.

And that the same Rate or Assessment produced in such Court of Record or
before such Justice of the Peace as aforesaid, shall be sufficient Evidence and
proof for the recovery of all such Sum or Sums of Money so Rated or Assessed as
aforesaid: Provided nevertheless, and it is the true intent and meaning hereof,
That no Justices of the Peace and Vestry-men shall have power to assess any
such Person or Persons as aforesaid above the Sum of one shilling Per Annum and
for every hundred Acres of Land and so proportionable for a greater or lesser
quantity.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
any Person or Persons aggrieved or Rated in any such Assessment or Tax have
hereby liberty granted to Appeal to the Justices siting in the Quarter Sessions
in their Respective Precincts in this Island; Provided, that such Appeal to
them be made at the first or second Quarter Sessions after such Taxes made and
not afterward, and that there it Appearing to the said Justices that he, she
or they were Over-rated, Taxed or Assessed, the said Justices are hereby
Authorized and Empowered, if they find him, her or them, so Over-rated or
Assessed, to ease him, her, or them as to their discretion shall seem meet, but
that no Appeal shall lie further, or to any other Court or Place in this
Island, for any Tax or Rate made or Assessed by the Justices and Vestry-men of
each respective Parish in this Island, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding, And be it further Enacted and Ordained by
the Authority aforesaid, That the Churchwardens of each respective Parish
within this Island, do buy or cause to be bought one Fair well bound Book,
wherein the Minister, and in case there be no Minister there resident, the
Respective Churchwardens upon notice thereof given by the Masters of the
several Families, who are hereby required to give such notice under the Penalty
of five Pounds shall Register or cause to be Registered by the Clark of the
Vestry of that Parish, the Times of the Births, Christnings, Marriages, and
Burials, of all such Person or Persons that shall from time to time be Born,
Christened, Married, or Buried, within the said Parish, under the Penalty of
five Pounds for every such Default; And that the said Clark or Person that
shall Register the same, shall have and receive as a Fee for each Entry Fifteen
Pence and no more.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such
entries duly made and kept as aforesaid shall at all times hereafter be Deemed,
Judged and taken as an Authentic Record of all such Births, Christnings,
Marriages, and Burials, and in all and every the Courts of Records in this
Island; But if any Person hereby Authorized to make such Entry or any other
whatsoever shall make or cause to be made any false Entry, or shall raze our or
Imbezel any Entry or Books of Entry, he or they so offending shall be proceeded
against and Punished in manner and form, as the Laws of England provide against
such as Steal, Raze, or Imbezel, Records; The one Moiety of all which
Forfeitures or Penalties or any other mentioned in this Act, and not directed
how to be disposed of, shall be to the Poor of the Parish where the fault is
committed, the other Moiety or half part to the Informer, to be recovered by
Bill, Plaint or Information in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record in this
Island, wherein no Wager of Law Essoin, Protection or Injunction shall be
allowed, any thing in this Act or in any other Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Parish of Port Royal do allow and Pay unto the Minister thereof two Hundred and
fifty Pounds Per Annum of Current Money of this Island, and that the Parish of
St. Catharines do allow and pay unto the Ministers thereof One Hundred and
forty Pounds of the like Money Per Annum and not less; And that the Parish of
St. Thomas, St. Andrews and St. John's do allow and pay unto their Respective
Ministers One Hundred Pounds of like money Per Annum, and that all the other
Parishes within this His Majesty's Island, that either have or shall have a
Minister, do allow and pay Eighty Pounds Current Money and not less, as a
constant Yearly Salary for the support and Maintenance of every of their
Ministers to be Paid at their Respective dwelling Houses every six Months,
without any Charge or defalcation by equal Portions, and none to be Capable of
being presented to the said Benefices, or receiving the Profits of the same,
unless they produce due Testimonials that they are qualified according to the
Canons of the Church of England, by having taken Deacon and Priests Orders, and
the said Testimonials to be Recorded in the Secretaries Office.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Minister not duly qualified as aforesaid, Presume to Marry any Person or
Persons whatsoever under the Penalty of one Hundred Pounds Current Money of this
Island, one third thereof to our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and
Successors, for and toward the support of the Government of this Island and
the Contingent charges thereof, one third to the Poor of the Parish, where the
offense shall be committed, and the other part to him or them that shall Sue
for the same in any of the Courts of Records within this Island, and that no
Minister presume to Marry any Persons whose Banes have not been Published three
times in their Parish Church or have a License from the Governor or Commander
in Chief for the time being, Authorizing him thereunto, under the like Penalty
and to the same uses, to be recovered as asoresaid, or twelve Months
Imprisonment: Provided always and it is the true intent and meaning of this
Act, That no Ecclesiastical Law or Jurisdiction, shall have Power to Enforce,
Confirm, or Establish any penal Mulcts or Punishment in any case whatsoever,
any thing in this Act or any other to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas this Island in the twenty ninth Year of his Majesty's Reign by an
Act of this Country was divided into fifteen Parishes, which were called,
distinguished and known by several names hereafter mentioned, that is to say,
St. Thomas, St. David's, Port Royal, St. Andrews, St. Katharines, St. Dorothy's,
St. Thomas in the Valley, Clarendon, Vere, St. John's, St. Georges, St. Mary's,
St. Anns, St. James, St. Elizabeth's, Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by
the Authority aforesaid, That all and every of the said several Parishes rest,
remain and for ever hereafter be distinguished and known by the aforesaid
respective Names, and by no other whatsoever, any thing in this or any other
Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

An ACT Ascertaining the Value of Foreign Coins, and Establishing Interest.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council and Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted
by the Authority of the same, That each single Spanish Dubloon or French Pistol
shall be current, and pass for twenty Shillings Current Money, each single Piece
of Sevil, Mexico, or Pillar, and each French Crown at five shillings, Current
Money, a Peru Piece of Eight at Four shillings, and all Moneys whatsoever of
those Coins aforesaid, shall in all Payments whatsoever be proportionably
rated, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

That whosoever shall for base lucre by any way or means Coin, Falsify, Impair,
Diminish, Seal, Wash, Clip, File, or Lighten, any of the Money aforesaid, or any
other Money Current in this Island, shall be guilty of High Treason, any Law,
Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, that from
and after the twentieth day of July in the Year of our Lord one Thousand six
hundred eighty and one no Person or Persons whatsoever upon any Contract made
or to be made shall directly or indirectly take for the Loan of any Moneys
above the Value of Ten pounds Current Money for the forbearance of One Hundred
Pounds Current Money for one Year, and so after the rate for a greater or lesser
Sum for a longer or shorter time, which said Interest is hereby declared to be
only recoverable upon Penal Bonds and Mortgages.

That all Bonds, Contracts, and Assurances whatsoever, made hereafter for the
Payment of any Principal Money to be lent on Usury, whereupon or whereby there
shall be received or taken above the Rates of Ten Pounds Current money in the
Hundred as aforesaid, shall be utterly Void, and that all and every Person or
Persons whatsoever, who shall hereafter upon any Contract to be made, take,
accept, or receive, by any way or means, or Corrupt Bargain, Loan, or Exchange,
Shift, or Interest, of any Moneys, or by deceit or any other Fraudulent
Conveyance for forbearance or giving day of Payment for one whole Year, or in
proportion for a longer or shorter time for their Moneys, the Sum of Ten Pounds
Current Money aforesaid, shall Forfeit and lose for every such his or their
Offense treble the Value of the Money lent or bargained for, by any way or means
whatsoever, One Moiety of which Forfeitures shall be to Our Sovereign Lord the
King his Heirs and Successors for and toward the support of the Government of
this Island, and the Contingent Charges thereof, the other Moiety to him or
them that shall Sue for the same, in any Court of Record within this Island,
wherein no Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

And whereas certain evil disposed Goldsmiths, deceitfully do make and sell
Plate and other Gold and Silver Wares to the great Defrauding of his Majesty's
Subjects of this Island, for remedy whereof, Be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That no Goldsmith or Worker in Gold or Silver within this Island,
from and after the first day of August in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six
Hundred Eighty and One, shall Work, Sell, Exchange, or cause to be Wrought,
Sold, or Exchanged, any Plate or other Goldsmiths Ware of Gold, less in
fineness than twenty two Carrats, and that from the time aforesaid, no
Goldsmith or Worker in Gold or Silver shall Make, Sell or Exchange in any place
within this Island, any Plate or Goldsmiths Wares of Silver less in fineness
than that of Eleven Ounces two Penny weight, and that no Goldsmith or Worker in
Gold or Silver shall presume to put to Sale, Exchange or Sell, any Plate of
Goldsmiths work of Gold or Silver, before he has set his own Mark to so much
thereof as may conveniently bear the same, upon pain of Forfeiting the Value of
the thing so Sold or Exchanged.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
whatsoever Goldsmith or Worker in Gold or Silver as aforesaid, from and after
the said first day of August, shall presume to Sell or Exchange any Gold or
Silver Wares, of less fineness than aforesaid, for every such first offense,
shall forfeit treble the Value of the said Wares so Sold or Exchanged, one half
whereof shall be to our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and Successors, for
and toward the support of the Government of this Island, and the Contingent
Charges thereof, and the other half to the Party aggrieved to be recovered in
manner and form aforesaid, and whosoever shall offend the Second time, and
thereof be convicted, shall stand in the Pillory for the space of one Hour, and
lose his Ears for the same.

An ACT For the better Securing certain Titles, made by way of Release and
Confirmation, under the Great Seal of this Island.
WHereas Nicholas Keen and John Duray Late of this Island, Died Aliens, or
otherwise Incapable by Law to make any good Devise or other Conveyance of such
Real Estate as they, or either of them Dyed Seized of in this Island, And
forasmuch as Redman Macragh Claiming under one Dennis Macragh Deceased, who
Claimed under the last Will and Testament of the said Nicholas Keen has as
well through his own Industry and Expense as the great Charge and Hazard of the
said Dennis, very Considerably Improved the said Estate of the said Nicholas
Keen; And that Samuuel Bradway Executor of the Last Will and Testament of the
said John Duray, to whom also the said John Duray did by his Last Will and
Testament in Writing Devise, give and Bequeath all his Real Estate, has out of
the same, Satisfied and Paid the Debts of the said John Duray, and by his own
care and Cost very much Advanced and Improved the Real Estate of the said John
Duray, And that the said Redman Macragh and Samuel Bradway, have on their
Humble Petitions, severally obtained a Grant for the same, under the Great Seal
of this Island, by way of Release and Confirmation, that is to say, a Grant
unto the said Redman Macragh his Heirs and Assigns for Ever, of all the Real
Estate of the said Nicolas Keen, and the said Samuel Bradway, another Grant as
aforesaid, unto him, his Heirs and Assigns for Ever, of all the Real Estate of
the said John Duray.

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Assembly,
And it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, That the
said Grants severally made under the Great Seal of this Island, by way of
Release and Confirmation of the Estate of the said Nicholas Keen Deceased unto
Redman Macragh, his Heirs and Assigns, and the Grant made as aforesaid, by way
of Release and Confirmation of the Estate of John Duray unto the said Samuel
Bradway, his Heirs and Assigns, be hereby Ratysied and Confirmed, and the
several-Estates hereby also Released, and Confirmed unto the said several
Grantees, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, any Statute, Law, Custom, or Usage,
to the contrary in any wise Notwithstanding.

An ACT For settling the Militia.
WHereas the Situation of this Island, amidst Subtle, Rich and Potent Nations,
cannot but sufficiently Convince every reasonable Man of the Necessity the
Inhabitants have, of being well Armed and Trained up in the Art Military, as
well for the Honor and Service of His Most Excellent Majesty, As the
Preservation of our own Lives and Fortunes,

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Assembly,
And it is hereby Enacted and Ordained, by the Authority of the same, That no
Person whatsoever from 15 to 60 Years of Age, remain Unlisted by themselves, or
Masters, Mistrisses, or Employers under the Captains, in the respective Places
of their Abode, in Foot, or Horse, the space of six Weeks, on Penalty of Forty
Shillings and so for every Six Weeks, such Persons shall remain Unlisted; And
that every Foot Soldier be provided with a well Fixed Musket or Fusee, or (if
the Officer so appoint) with a good Pike and Sword, or Lance and Pistol, Each
Musqueteer to have six Charges of Powder and one Cartouch Box, and so shall
appear, when and where Appointed, upon Penalty of Ten Shillings for his Default
in not Appearing, and Four Shillings for want of each Charge of Powder, Gun,
Pike, Sword, Pistol, or Cartouch-Box, so as the whole Penalty for any Person at
one time Exceed not Ten Shillings; and that every Soldier belonging to the
Horse, shall when and where commanded, appear and be provided with a good
Serviceable Horse of Ten Pounds Value at the least, Covered with a good Saddle,
with Holsters, Breast Plate and-Crupper, and a Case of good Pistols, Hanger,
Sword or Rapier, and half a Pound of Powder, on Penalty of Ten Shillings for
each times absence, and Six Shillings for default of each the particulars
abovementioned, so as the whole Penalty for one time exceed not fifteen
Shillings, and that every Foot Soldier shall have at his Habitation and Abode
two Pounds of good Powder and Six pounds of sizable Bullet, and every Trooper
have at his Usual place of abode, a well Fixed Carbine with Belt and Swivel and
Four pounds of fine powder, with twelve pounds of Sizable Bullets, on Penalty
of Ten Shillings for each Default, and that each of them shall bring the same
into the Field, when Commanded, upon Penalty of answering the same at a Court
Martial: Provided nevertheless, that nothing herein be Construed to Extend to
sorce or compel any Person, that has or shall be in conimission in this Island
to List himself in any Company or Troop, or to serve in any Capacity beneath
the sormer Commission, unless such Person has been Degraded by a Court Martial.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person so Listed
as aforesaid shall depart thence without a discharge from the Commander of the
Company or Troop where Listed, on Penalty of forty Shillings, and that no
Commander of any Company or Troop shall refuse when desired to give a discharge
in Writing to any that is removing his Abode out of the Precincts under the
Penalty of Five Pounds.

And whereas at the Town of Port Royal, Guards, and Watches are every Night set
and appointed, Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,
That it shall and may be Lawful for any Person or Persons Listed in the
Regiment of Port Royal (except on extraordinary occasions) to put a well Armed
Man in their room, who if approved of by the Captain of the Guard, shall excuse
his or their Absence; Provided always, that the Commission Officers and
Sergeants of the Respective Companies be obliged in their respective turns, to
Mount the Guards in their proper Persons, and that no Person shall refuse to be
a Sergeant, Corporal, or Drummer, in the Company or Troop, wherein he is
Listed, under the Penalty of Five Pounds.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Captains of Companies of Foot or Troops of Horse, shall within Six Months from
and after Publication of this Act, Provide for their Companies, and Troops,
Drums, and Colors, Trumpets, Trumpeters, and Banners. at their own Charge
under Penalty of Ten pounds, and so for every Six Months such Commanders shall
remain unprovided, and that all the Colonels of the respective Regiments, or
next Chief Officer in their. Absence shall once every Year at the Least Issue
out their Warrants to their Inferior Officers commanding them to make diligent
Search and inquiry in their several precincts, that all be duly Listed, Armed,
and Equipped, and to return to them such defects as shall be found, to the end
the same may be reformed on Penalty of 100 Pounds and that once every two
Months, or oftener, as occasion shall require, and Command be given by the
Commander in Chief, the several Companies and Troops in each Regiment shall
Meet at the next and most convenient Places, to be appointed by their
respective Ossicers, to be then and there by them Mustered and Exercised, only
the Regiment on Port Royal shall Meet and Exercise one Company in each Week
Successively, and the whole Regiment once in Eleven Weeks.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid That during
the time the said Officers and Soldiers are in Arms they shall observe and
keep all and every of the Laws and Articles of War, and give all due Obedience
to their Superior Officers, which Laws and Articles the Commander in Chief with
Advice of a General Council of War, is to make and Establish, and the
Commanders of the several Regiments to give out Copies of the said Articles
unto their respective Officers, that the same may be publicly read once every
Six Months unto the Soldiers, whilst they are in Arms, that all Persons may
the better know and observe their Duties, and if it shall happen that any of
the Officers or Soldiers, shall when they are out of Arms, endeavor to take
revenge by force, for any thing his or their Superior Officers Lawfully did in
pursuance of his or their duty and this Act, the said Officers and Soldiers
shall be brought to a Court Marshal and there punished, as if the offense had
been done in time of Service or Exercise: Provided that the said Punishment do
not Extend to Life or Limb.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That once every Year, or
oftener if thereunto commanded, each particular Captain shall give to his Field
Officer, and the Field Officer to the Commander in Chief, fair Written Rolls of
their respective Companies and Regiments, and if any Field Officer, Captain or
other Inferior Officer or Soldier, shall neglect or contemn performing the
Lawful Commands of their respective Superior Officers, he or they shall be
punished by Fine, Casheering or Punishment according to the Discretion of a
Court Marshal, which the Commander in Chief is to appoint and Establish, and
the Orders of the said Court Martial, are hereby declared to be Binding in all
Military Affairs; And if any Person upon any Invasion, or other Public
Military Service, be Wounded or Disabled, he shall be Cured and Maintained out
of the Public Revenue, and if any Person whatsoever shall be Sued, Molested,
or Impleaded, for any thing Lawfully commanded in the Execution and Pursuance
of this present Act, he shall plead the General Issue and give this Act in
Evidence, and shall thereupon, if found for him, recover Costs of Suit and
treble Damages.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon every
Apprehension and appearance of any Public danger or Invasion, the Commander
in Chief do forthwith call a Council of War, and with their Advice and Consent
cause and Command the Articles of War to be Proclaimed at Port Royal and St.
Jago de la Vega, from which said Publication the Martial Law is to be in Force,
that then it shall and may be Lawful for the said Commander in Chief to Command
the Persons of any of His Majesty's Liege People, as also their Negroes,
Horses, and Cattle, for all such Services as may be for the Public Defense,
and to pull down Houses, Cut down Timber, command Ships and Boats, and
Generally to Act and do with all full Power and Authority, all such things as
he and the said Council of War shall think Necessary and Expedient for His
Majesty's Service and Defense of this Island: Provided always and it is the
true Intent and meaning of this Act, that as soon as the Common Law revives and
is in Force, the said Negroes, Servants, Cattles, Ships or Boats, so Employed
as aforesaid, be immediately discharged; and to the end it may be certainly
known, when the Martial Law cease, and the Common Law takes place, It is
hereby declared that upon Lodging the Colors and discharging the Soldiers from
their Arms, the Martial Law cease and the Common Law revives and takes
place. Provided also that the Martial or his Deputy shall not presume to
arrest, any such Soldier, within one Month after every such discharge, nor in
the time of his going or coming, to or from the place of Exercise, or
Rendevous, under the Penalty of Ten pounds, and of being further liable to an
Action of false Imprisonment; and in case of any such Arrest, it shall be
Lawful for the respective Captain, or other Commission Officer to release any
of his or their Soldiers so Arrested.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
if upon any Alarm or Invasion any Person or Persons whatsoever shall suffer
either by the Landing of an Enemy or drawing together His Majesty's Forces of
this Island, all such Damage or Damages whether in Servants, Negroes, Horses,
Cattle, or in the Labor of any of them, or in the expense of Provision, or by
Fire, or by any other Loss whatsoever, that may Accrue by the means aforesaid,
that then upon due application and Proof thereof made unto the Governor and
Council, the said Damages shall be reasonably Valued, and forthwith paid out of
the Public Revenue, and that if there be no Money there, the Governor and
commander in Chief do forthwith call an Assembly, and recommend to them all
Cases of the like Nature, so that Money may be Legally raised for the Public
Disbursements, and every one receive just and equal satisfaction for their
losses.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted and declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That the several Fines and Forfeitures Mentioned in this Act, and
not Declared in what manner they shall be recovered, and how disposed of, that
all such as do Relate to any Person under the degree of a Captain, shall be to
the respective Captains to Defray the Charge of their Companies or Troops, and
to be Levied before the next Exercising day, by distress and Sale of the
Oftenders Goods by the Captains Warrant to the Sergeant or Corporal, and if no
Distress be found, the Punishment to be by Ryding the Wooden Horse, or being
tied Neck and Heels, not exceeding an Hour at the discretion of their Officer,
but if the offender be a Servan^ the Owners Goods shall be liable to the
Distresses and Sales as aforesaid, so that Satisfaction may be made; and for
all other Penalties mentioned in this Act, the same shall be levied by Distress
and Sale of the offenders Goods and Chattels by the Provost Marshal by Warrant
from the Commander in Chief, one half thereof shall be to Our Sovereign Lord
the King, His. Heirs and Successors for and toward the Support of the
Government of this Island, and the Contingent Charges thereof, and the other
half to the Informer.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
Lawful for any Commission Officer belonging to the Regiment on Port Royal under
the degree of a Captain, in the absence of the said Captain from of the Point,
to Grant Warrants of distress against any Persons whatsoever that shall Absent
themselves from their Duty on the night Guards, without sending a sufficient
Person to serve and Watch in their Stead, which said Warrants so Granted shall
be as Effectual to all Intents and purposes whatsoever, as if they or any of
them had been granted by the Captains themselves.

And be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Wherry, Ships
Boat, or Canoa, shall at any time pass the Fort at Port Royal under the Penalty
of Twenty Shillings to be recovered by Warrant from any Justice of the Peace,
without giving Notice to the Captain of the said Fort, or whosoever shall
Command in Chief therein in his Absence, which said Notice shall be sufficient
Leave to pass the said Fort, without any further Charge or trouble whatsoever,
unless the said Captain or other his Subordinate Officer have reasonable cause
to Suspect the Person so desiring leave, to have some evil design in going off
with, or carrying off any Persons contrary to Law, in which Case it shall and
may be Lawful for the said Captain or his aforesaid Officer to hinder their
departure out of the Harbor until the said Captain or Officer be satisfied of
the Lawfulness of their occasion, any Act, Custom, or Usage, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Be it also further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person
whatsoever presume to Fire any small Arms after eight of the Clock at Night,
unless in case of an Alarm, Insurrection, or other lawful occasion, and in
either of the said Cases Four Muskets or small Arms distinctly Fired shall be
taken for an Alarm from Quarter to Quarter, and every Person that shall be duly
convicted before a Regimental Court Martial, of neglecting his Duty in taking
and giving forward any Alarm by Firing Four Muskets or small Arms as aforesaid,
or shall be Guilty of Firing any small Arms after Eight of the Clock at Night,
unless as aforesaid, shall be Fined, or otherwise punished at the discretion of
a Court Martial, not extending to Life or Limb.

And whosoever shall be found to be a Transgressor herein, by the next
Commission Officer under Penalty of Five Pounds be caused to be Apprehended,
and sent under a Guard to the next Marshal, who is hereby obliged under Penalty
of Twenty Pounds to receive and secure the said Offender until he shall be
Tried or Discharged by a Court Marshal as aforesaid.

And for the better Prevention of False Alarms, That no Captain, Master, or
Commander of any Ship, or Vessel, Riding at Anchor in the Harbor of Port Royal
or any other Bay or Harbor, or any other Person, Fire any Gun after Sun set,
under Penalty of Forty Shillings for every Gun so Fired, to be Levied by
Warrant from the Chief Officer not under the Degree of a Captain, who is hereby
Empowered to Administer an Oath and give Judgment thereupon by Distress or Sale
of the offenders Goods, and for want of Distress the said Chief Officer is
hereby Empowered to Commit such Offender to Goal, there to remain until payment
of the same, and that in Case the said Chief Officer shall not perform his Duty
therein, he shall forfeit Ten Pounds to be levied by Warrant from the Governor
or Commander in Chief for the time being; Provided always that this Clause
shall in no ways concern or extend to any Captain, or Officer of any of His
Majesty's Ships of War, for their Firing of one Gun for the setting of the
Watch.

Provided always and it is hereby further Enacted and declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That nothing in this Act contained be expounded, construed, or
understood, to diminish, alter or abridge the power of the Governor or
Commander in Chief for the time being, but that in all things, and upon all
occasions, he may act as fully and freely as Captain General and Chief
Governor, to all Intents and purposes, as if this Act had never been made, any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, And it is hereby Enacted and Declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That nothing within this Act, or any clause therein contained shall
be deemed, construed or understood, to give any Captain, General or Commander
in Chief, any Power or Authority for the sending any Person or Persons of this
Island against their will, or to do any other act or thing contrary or
repugnant unto the known Laws of England or this Island.

An ACT For prevention of Law Suits.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, And it is
hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, That all Possessions
of, or Titles to any Lands or Houses whatsoever, derived by or from any Sales,
for Valuable considerations made either by the Brovost Marshals, Creditors, or
by the Executors, or Administrators, of any Persons Deceased, or by the
Husbands in Right of their Wives, or by the Endorsments or Delivery up of
Patents, or by any Decrees in Chancery, or by any Last Wills and Testaments, or
by any Patent Granted upon Judgment given in Writs of Escheat or Cessavit, and
the said Person or any claiming under them now being in Possession of the same,
be by this present Act Ratified, Confirmed, and Declared good and Legal to all
Intents and Purposes whatsoever; Provided always that such Possessors or
Purchasors, their Heirs, or Assigns, have or shall continue in quiet or
peaceable Possession of the same, for the space of Seven Years without any
Claim or Interruption, and the said Sales, Patents, Decrees, and Possessions,
as aforesaid, to be a perpetual Bar against all manner of Persons Claiming, or
to Claim, any Right or Title by Descent, Purchase, Marriage, or Limitation, for
or by reason of any former Grant, Gift, Patent or Conveyance, any Law, Custom,
or Usage, in any wise to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is hereby Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That in all
Writs of Escheat hereafter to be Granted, the Provost Marshal be commanded to
Inquire by a Jury of Twelve Free and Lawful Men upon their Oaths, (they then
being upon the Premises) the true Value of all and singular, the Real Estate,
which any Person so Dying without, Heirs was at the time of his Death Sei zed
of, and that after Office found and returned into the Supreme Court and
Judgment hereupon given and Recorded, It be Lawful for the Governor for the
time being, or in his absence, the Commander in Chief, to pass any Grant of the
said Escheated Estate, under the Broad Seal of this Island. Provided that a
Clause be therein Inserted, that the said Grant shall determine and be Void, in
case any Right Heir appears and Claims the same, and Legally approves himself
to be Heir, within Three Years after the Date of the said Patent, and that the
Value of the said Escheated Estate, as it was Apprised at, shall be secured to
be paid unto the Treasury of this Island, after the Expiration of Three Years
from the Date of the Patent, If no Heir in the mean time shall Obtain the same,
by such Person or Persons to whom the Governor or Commander in Chief, as
aforesaid, shall by Patent under the Broad Seal of this Island grant the same,
and that the Treasurer or Receiver, be hereby required to pay or cause to be
paid, the Sum or Sums of Money the said Escheated Estate was Valued at, out of
the Treasury, unto or for the Use of such Heir, who shall Claim the same, and
Approve Himself to be Heir, before any other Payment whatsoever, which Proof of
the Heirs Title shall be made by any public Attestation, or otherwise as shall
be believed to be Evidence by the Judges and Jury, to be recovered at any time
without Limitation.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Bills of Sale
and Conveyances whatsoever, heretofore made, or that hereafter shall be made,
by Husband and Wife, and acknowledged before the Judge of any Court of Record
within this Island, and duly Recorded, shall be good and Valid in Law against
all Persons whatsoever, that can or may pretend to Claim any Estate in the
Lands or Tenements so conveyed, to all Intents and purposes whatsoever, as if
the same had passed by Fine and Recovery in any of his Majesty's Courts of
Westminster.

Provided always that where any true and Valuable Improvement is made on such
Escheated Land by the Patentee or Patentees during the said Three Years, that
such Heir before his Entering upon the same shall satisfy and pay unto such
Patentee or Patentees, all such Charges, as the Chancellor for the time being,
shall judge to be reasonably Expended, together with the Interest of the same,
according to the Custom of this Country, any thing herein contained to the
Contrary notwithstanding.

An ACT For Establishing Courts and directing the Marshals Proceedings.
FOr the better and more Orderly Regulation and Establishment of the several
Courts of Justice within this Island, as well in respect of the time as place
for holding the same, and also directing the Marshals Proceedings, Be it
Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Authority of the same, That the Judges of the Supreme Court of
Judicature for the time being, are hereby fully Empowered and Authorized to
have Cognizance of all Pleas, Civil Criminal, and Mixed, as fully and amply, to
all intents and purposes whatsoever, as the Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas
and Exchequer within His Majesty's Kingdom of England, have or ought to have,
and the said Court shall be duly and constantly kept at the Town of St. Jago de
la Vega and not else where, once every three Months, and not oftener, and that
there be Five Judges at the least appointed to hold the same Court, three
whereof to be a Quorum, and that the several Inferior Courts of Common Pleas
established, or that shall be Established in the several Precincts of this
Island, shall have Jurisdiction over all Causes wherein any Freehold isnot
concerned, to the Value of Twenty Pounds with Cosles and no more, and that the
same be held and kept at the same time and in the same place of the respective
Precincts, where the Justices of the Peace shall hold and keep the Quarter
Sessions once every three Months, and that none of the said Courts be kept
oftener, nor in any other place or manner than is hereby declared.

Provided always and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that in
respect Port Royal is the Chief Seat of Trade within this Island, and it is
found by Experience that a quicker and more speedy dispatch of all Maritine and
Merchandising affairs give the greatest satisfaction to all Parties concerned,
it shall and may be Lawful for the Judge or Judges of the Court there
Established, to hold and keep the same once every two Months and not oftener,
and that it shall and may be Lawful for the Chancellor here for the time being
upon application made to Grant a Justices to any of the Inferior Courts,
within this Island, any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall not be
Lawful for any Person or Persons whatsoever Appointed, Elected or Chosen, to be
a Judge or Judges of the aforesaid Courts, to Execute or Officiate his or their
said Place or Office, until such time as he or they shall respectively take the
Oaths of Allegance and Supremacy in open Court, and that none of the said
Judges directly nor indirectly shall ask, demand, or receive, any other profit,
benefit or advantage, from any of the Clarks of the said Courts, or other
Person whatsoever, under color or pretense of such their Place, Office or
Authority, but what is allowed them by the Acts of this Island, under the
Penalty of Five Hundred pounds of Current Money of this Island.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every of
the Judges of the several Courts before mentioned, be and are hereby
sufficiently Empowered to make, order and establish all such Rules, and Orders
for the more orderly practicing and proceeding in their said Courts, as fully
and amply to all Intents and purposes whatsoever, as all or any of the Judges
of the several Courts of the Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer in
England Legally do, and that no Councillour or Attorney be suffered to practice
in any of the said Courts, until they be first admitted by the same, and have
taken as well the Oath of an Attorney, as the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
under the Penalty of Twenty pounds of Current Money of this Island, and
whatsoever Councillor or Attorney shall by negligence or ignorance mistake his
Clients Cause, and Imperfectly lay his Action or ill Draw the Declaration,
whereby the Client shall suffer a Nonsuit, he or they so offending shall be
liable by Rule of Court, without any other Process or course of Law whatsoever,
to pay unto the party aggrieved full Costs of Suit; and to the end that no
Person shall be Damnified by mistake of his Lawyer, for matter of Form only, Be
it Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the Judges shall at
all times on Motion made in Court, order Amendments, and shall not upon Arrest
of Judgment or Writ of Error for matter of Form only, reverse any Judgment
whatsoever, And be it Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Action of Wast shall be permitted to be brought or allowed to lie within any
Court of this Island, and that no Freeholder whatsoever, being of know
Residence, shall be Arrested by any Process out of any of the said Courts upon
the Penalty of Twenty pounds Current Money to be paid by the Plaintiff to the
Party so Arrested, and what Action or other proceeding whatsoever shall be
entered, sued, had, made, or prosecuted thereupon, contrary to the true intent
and meaning thereof shall and is hereby declared to be void and of no Effect to
all intents and purposes whatsoever, And that no Suit be had or Process taken
out of the Supreme Court of Judicature for any matter or Cause of Action under
the Value of Twenty pounds Current Money of this Island, upon the Penalty of
Twenty Pounds of the like Money, to be paid by the Plaintiff in the said
Action, but that the same be tried in the Court of the Precincts, where such
Cause of Action does arise, Provided that both Parties reside there, and that
the Inhabitants and Residents, in St. Catharines, St. Dorothy's, St. Thomas in
the Vale, and St. John's, Sue as formerly in the Supreme Court for any Sum
whatsoever, until they shall have Petty Courts Erected in their own Parishes,
any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all and every
the Inferior Courts within this Island, upon Summons duly served, and the
Defendant not appearing, Judgment shall go by default in the same manner and
form, as in the Supreme Court; Provided always that it is the true Intent and
meaning of this Act, that as well in the Supreme Court as any other the
Inferior Courts within this Island, the Provost Marshal or his Lawful Deputy
shall appear in open Court and there depose upon Oath, that the Party or
Parties against whom Judgment shall go by default, has been legally Summoned
Fourteen Days before the said Court, any thing in this Act or any other to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And it is likewise Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that upon
any Declaration exhibited in debt upon specialty or Bill under hand, or in case
of a book Debt upon a Concessit Solvere and disclosing the special matter to
the Chief Judge of the Supreme Court, of Judicature that the said debtor
against whom the Plaint is entered is either gone off this Island, or that upon
process already taken out against him, a Non est Inventus has been returned,
an Attachment shall then Issue, thereby commanding the Provost Marshal, or his
lawful Deputy to attach such Monys Goods, Chattels, or Debts in the hands of
the Possessors of the same, be they Attorney, Wife, Servant or any other
Person, and also require them to appear at the next Court, to show Cause, why
the said Money, Goods, Chattels or Debts, or so much thereof as will satisfy
the said Debts then demanded, should not be delivered to the Plaintiff; at
which Day, if the said Possessor or Debtor, be they Attorney, Wife, Servant, or
other Person, as aforesaid, be convicted by Confession, Verdict, or otherwise,
that the said Moneys, Goods, Chattels or Debts do properly belong to the person
so gone off this Island, or otherwise absented himself as aforesaid, and if the
Plaintiff before or after due proof made, do solemnly swear in open Court, that
his Debt is true, and that directly or indirectly no part or parcel of what he
demanded is satisfied, and also give in Security in double the Sum he demands,
to restore the same with treble Damages, or so much thereof as shall at any
time afterward be disproved, that then and in all such Cases the Plaintiff
shall have Judgment to recover the said Debt out of the said Money, Goods,
Chattels or Debts so attached as aforesaid.

Provided always, That if any will appear as Attorney to the said Debtor and
put in Bail to answer the Action and pay the Condemnation, that then and in all
such Cases the Attachment on the said Money, Goods, Chattels or Debts shall be
dissolved, and Proceedings had according to the Custom of the Common Law, but
if the Possessor or Owner of such Money, Goods, Chattels or Debts, be they
Attorney, Wife, Servant, or other person, as aforesaid, shall after Attachment
so laid on them in the respective hands dispose of the said Money, Goods,
Chattels, or Debts, toward the payment of any other Debts, before the said
Debt, for which the Attachment was laid, be satisfied, or the said Attachment
be dissolved, that then and in all such Cases the said Party, for such their
Default, shall be liable to make satisfaction to the Plaintiff out of their own
proper Estates.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That in all
Debts not exceeding Forty Shillings, upon Complaint made to any Justice of the
Peace, that the Debtor against whom he complains is gone off this Island, or
otherwise absented himself, that then it shall and may be lawful for the said
Justice of the Peace to issue out a Warrant of Attachment to be levied by the
Constable, in manner and form as is before prescribed, to the Provost-Marshal
for the Execution of the Writ, and to be immediately determined by the said
Justice, any Clause in this Act or any other to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Summons and other Process hereafter mentioned shall be served and executed in
manner and form, as is herein directed, and in no other manner or way
whatsoever, (that is to say) That all Summons as well from the Supreme Court as
all other the Inferior Courts within this Island, Port Royal only excepted,
shall be delivered to the Party, or left at their respective Dwellings fourteen
days before the several Courts by a sworn Marshal, and that at Port Royal all
Summons shall be delivered ten days before the Courts, otherwise it shall be
deemed and taken as no Service, and the Defendant not bound by it to appear;
and that all Replevins, Foreign Attachments at the Supreme Court and Warrants
of Arrest be served at any time as heretofore, and that no Execution shall be
taken out, served or executed until Twenty Eight Days be fully expired after
Judgment, except at Port Royal, where Execution shall issue Ten Days after
Judgment obtained, and that no Negroes, Horses, or any manner of Utensils
belonging to a Plantation, Brick or Pot-work, nor any other Negroes whatsoever,
from and after the making hereof shall be taken in Execution, where the Party
against whom the Execution is obtained, shall offer Goods for satisfaction of
the Debt and Costs of Suit.

And it is further Enacted, That the said Defendant who has his Goods taken
upon Execution shall have free liberty to convey and carry off the Goods so
taken at his own proper Costs and Charges to the next and most convenient place
and Market for disposal of the said Goods, and there shall have free power and
liberty to make Contracts, bargain for and sell the Goods so taken in
Execution, the Defendant first acquainting the Marshal who levied the Execution
upon the Goods, with such Bargain or Contract, to the end the Marshal may
deliver the same, and receive the Produce thereof according to his Precept.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Defendant,
after his Goods shall be so taken in Execution as aforesaid, shall delay or
neglect selling or disposing of the Goods until ten days before the next
ensuing Court, that then and in all such Cases, it shall and may be lawful for
the Marshal to take the said Goods and Chattels of the Defendant, and the same
to sell by public Outcry.

And it is further Enacted by tho Authority aforesaid, That where no such Goods
as aforesaid shall be shown and offered to the Provost-Marshal, so that the
Negroes, Working-Cattel, or necessary Utensils must be taken in Execution, that
then and in all such Cases the said Negroes, Horses or Utensils shall not be
removed, but remain still in the Defendants possession, and that upon the
Marshals return at the same Court as aforesaid, that he has levied such
Effects and left them in the Defendants hands, there issue out a Venditioni
Exponas, without any charge of Mile-money, in these words following:

The King to the Provost-Marshal, Greeting,

WHereas We lately commanded thee by Our Writ, That of the Goods and Chattels
real and personal of A. B. thou should levy or cause to be levied as also
Costs of Suit which C. D. has recovered against him, By Virtue of which Writ
thou did return unto Us, that thou had taken in Execution of the Goods of
the said A. B. to the Value of the said Debt and Costs of Suit, which said
Goods remain in the Custody of the said A. B. by thee in form as aforesaid
taken, thou expose to sale, and the Money thereof coming thou immediately
render to the said C. D. for his Debt or Damages and Cost as aforesaid, but if
the Goods aforesaid shall be imbezell'd or made away, or that the said A. B.
does not deliver the same, that then thou levy the said Debts or Damages and
Costs upon any other the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. and immediately
expose them to sale, and if thou can not find sufficient Goods or Chattels,
by which the whole Debt or Damage and Costs may be satisfied, that then you
take the Body of the said A. B. and him safely keep, so that thou have his Body
before Us, at Our next Court, to satisfy the said C. D. of the said Debt or
Damages and Cost, or so much thereof as by thee cannot be levied, and have
thou then and there this Writ. Witness, etc.

By virtue whereof the said Goods shall be sold by public Outery at the next
Court of the Precincts, where the Goods are taken, and if they are so arrested
or taken in the Parish of St. Catharines, St. Dorothy's, St. Thomas in the
Vale, or St. John's, until they shall have petty Courts of their own erected,
Publication shall be then made at the same Court, that the Return is made, that
the said Goods shall be sold twenty Days after by public Outcry in the
Parade-place of St. Jago de la Vega, and the Money arising from the said Sale
shall not remain in the Marshals hands, but be paid to the Plaintiff, or his
Order within ten days, under the Penalty of half the Debt to be recovered by
the Plaintiff to his own Use, in any Court of Record within this Island, where
no Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where the Person
against whom such Execution is issued has not the Goods aforementioned in this
Act by him to show and offer to the Marshal within the time prescribed, that
nevertheless the Marshal shall not lay the Execution upon any Negroes,
Working-Cattel, or Utensils upon or belonging to any Plantation, Brick or
Pot-work, or any other Negroes whatsoever, if the Defendant show or deliver to
him any other Stock or Cattle being in a Pen, the said Cattle or Stock to be
sold by public Outcry, upon Venditioni Exponas, to be issued as aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Accidents that happen, whilst the Goods that are taken in Execution, remain in
the Defendants possession, be born and made good by the Defendant, and that no
property shall be by the Defendant transferred or made in or to any such Goods
that shall be so taken in Execution by virtue of this Act. Provided always and
it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, That where the Body of the Defendant
shall be taken in Execution, that nevertheless if any Effects afterward
appear, the Plarntiff may take out another Execution, and levy the same on the
said Effects, for satisfaction of the said Debt, any Law, Custom or Usage to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Prisoner
or Prisoners under Execution, shall have nothing to maintain him, her or
themselves, that then he, she or they disclosing the same upon Oath unto two
Justices of the Peace of the Parish where he, she or they shall be Prisoners,
and making it appear to the Judges of the Supreme Court, that he, she or they
have given notice to all their Creditors ten days before the said Court, that
they or either of them intend to take the benefit of this Act, bringing
likewise to the said Court a Certificate of such their Oath under the Hands and
Seals of the said Justices, that then the Prisoner or Prisoners so taken in
Execution shall be publicly let to hire at the said Court, the Marshal
receiving for his Fees a proportionable share with the other Creditors, and the
Money so arising from the said Hire shall be paid to such persons, as the Court
shall appoint, to be equally divided among the Creditors as aforesaid, but in
case any Creditors shall refuse to consent to letting the said Prisoner or
Prisoners to hire, that then such Creditor shall pay or cause to be paid to the
said Prisoner or Prisoners Three Shillings and Six Pence Weekly. Provided
always and it is hereby Enacted, That if any Prisoner or Prisoners so let to
hire shall at any time afterward come to have or enjoy an Estate, having not
first satisfied their Debts, that then at all times hereafter the Judgment
obtained against him, her or them shall remain good and in force, and another
Execution shall be taken out and levied against the Goods and Chattels of the
said Prisoner or Prisoners, wheresover. they shall be found.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the
Provost-Marshal by himself or any of his Deputies shall levy any Execution in
any other manner than what is herein before declared, or shall ask, demand or
receive any Mile-money for the Executing any Writ of Execution or Venditioni
Exponas, shall forfeit One hundred Pounds current Money of this Island for
every such Offense, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Island,
wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed, the one Moity
whereof shall be to Our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors, for
and toward the support of the Government of this Island, and the contingent
Charges thereof, the other Moity to the party aggrieved.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Fines,
Forfeitures and Penalties beforementioned in this Act, and not declared how
they shall be disposed of shall be recovered in any Court of Record within this
Island, wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed, the one
Moity whereof shall be to Our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and
Successors, for and toward the support of the Government of this Island and
the contingent Charges thereof, and the other Moity to the Informer, or he that
shall sue for the same.

An ACT Appointing where the Laws of this Island shall be Lodged.
WHereas no place has been hitherto appointed for the lodging and securing the
Acts of this Island, so that his Majesty's Subjects have been at no Certainty
where to find the same and take Copies thereof, to their great detriment and
Inconveniency; for remedy whereof for the future, Be it Enacted and Ordained by
the Governor Council and Assembly, And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
of the same, That from and after the end and determination of this present
Session as well the Original Act heretofore made and Enacted since the
Seventeenth Day of of March in the Year of Our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred
and Eighty, as those also herewith, or that shall hereafter be Enacted shall be
Lodged in the Secretaries Office of Enrolments at St. Jago de la Vega, and not
elsewhere, and the Secretary for the time being shall at all Office Hours be
ready to show all or any of the said Acts when thereunto required by any of His
Majesty's Subjects as may or shall have occasion to View the same, and shall
give Copies thereof, or any Clause in any of them contained for which he shall
be allowed Eight pence per Sheet accounting Sixteen Lines to a Sheet, and
Fourteen Words to a Line, and that he shall likewise be allowed for Comparing
and Examining any Copy containing the whole body of the Laws with the
Originals, Forty shillings Current Money and no more, and to the end His
Majesty's Subjects may be fully satisfied no Embezelment, Razure, or
Defacements of the said Acts, or any of them shall for the future, be Committed
in the said Office, it is Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that
the Secretary of this Island, or his lawful Deputy that shall Act in his Room
or Stead shall give in Bond with good and sufficient Security to Our Sovereign
Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors, in the Penalty of Four Thousand Pounds
in the following Condition.

THE Condition of this Obligation is such, that if the above bound A. B. shall
and do well and faithfully Execute and Perform the Offices and places of
Secretary, and Clerk of the Enrolments for this His Majesty's Island of
Jamaica, and also faithfully and truly keep and preserve in his said Office,
all and every the Acts of this Island made since the seventeenth Day of March
in the Year of our Lord God One Thousand Six hundred and Eighty, so that his
Majesty's Subjects may have recourse thereunto, and do in all things else
comply with the Duty of the said Offices according to the Trust reposed in him
and according to the Laws of this Island in such Cases made and provided, that
then the above written Obligation to be void and of none Effect, or else to
remain in full force and virtue.

Provided always that neither the said Secretary nor his Deputy for the time
being do or shall from and after the Twentieth Day of November next ensuing,
presume to Act or Officiate his said Office until he or they shall enter into
the aforesaid Bond, with the Condition before recited, upon Penalty of Five
Hundred Pounds for every time he or they shall so Officiate or Act in his said
Office to be recovered in the Supreme Court of Judicature in this Island, by
Bill, Plaint or Information wherein no Essoin, Protection, Injunction, Wager of
Law or Non vult ulterius prosequi shall be admitted or allowed, the one half to
be to our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors, for and toward
the Support of the Government of this His Majesty's Island and the Contingent
Charges thereof, and the other half to the Informer, or him that shall Sue for
the same, any Law, Custom or Usage, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also and be it hereby Declared, That if the Secretary or his Lawful
Deputy for the time being in this Island, shall enter into Bond as aforesaid,
which said Bond shall be lodged as is appointed in an Act entitled an Act for
Regulating Fees, That then it shall be accounted sufficient to discharge him or
them from entering into any other Bond, or Security required by the Acts of this
Island, any thing herein or in any other Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

An ACT For raising a Public Impost.
WE His Majesty's Most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Assembly of this His
Majesty's Island, being duly sensible, of His Majesty's extraordinary Grace and
Favor in restoring unto us our Ancient Form of making Laws, and in the Great
Assurance given us of His Princely resolution, to apply not only the Revenue by
us now intended to be raised, but even all His Majesty's Quitt Rents arising
from Lands granted or to be granted within this Island, to the Support of the
Government of this His Majesty's Island, and the Contingent Charges thereof,
and to no other use whatsoever, And we likewise taking into our serious
consideration the great expense His Majesty has, and may be at in and about
the Support of the Government of this His Island, and the Contingent Charges
thereof, as also the Great Sums of Money required for the Reparation of His
Forts and Fortifications now much decayed, and the apparent danger and
inconveniency that may accrue by any longer neglect, have Cheerfully and
Unanimously given and granted, and do hereby give and grant, unto His Most
Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for and toward the Repairing and
Building Forts and Fortifications, and for the defraying of the many necessary
and contingent Charges, in and about the Support of the Government of this His
Majesty's Island, a certain Impost on the several Liquors and Goods hereafter
mentioned, and Humbly Beseech His Majesty, to accept the same, and that it may
be Enacted, And be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Assembly, and it
is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, That from and
after, the first day of October in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six
Hundred Eighty and Two, All the following Liquors and Goods hereafter
specified, that shall be Imported, shall pay after the Rates hereafter
mentioned, That is to say, all Spanish and Madera Wines the Sum of Four pounds
Per Tun, all Wines Imported, of the Growth of the Western Islands or Mixture of
the Madera Wines, with those of the Western Islands, the Sum of Ten Pounds Per
Tun, every Tun of French or Rhenish Wines Three pounds, Every Gallon of Brandy
one Shilling, every Gallon of English Spirits Three Pence every Tun of Beer or
Syder Eight Shillings, every Tun of Mum or Metheglin Forty Shillings, for every
Hundred Pounds of White Sugar Ten Shillings, for every Hundred Pounds of
Muscovado or Pameel Sugar Six shillings, for every Pound of Indigo Six pence,
for every Pound of Tobacco two Pence, for every Hundred Pounds of Ginger Ten
shillings, for every Gallon of Rum One Shilling and Six Pence, for every
Hundred Pounds of Cocoa Ten Shillings, and so proportionably for a greater of
lesser quantity, of the several Liquors and Goods aforesaid imported into this
Island by way of Merchandise.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Merchant or
other Person Importing any Wines or other Liquors into this Island, shall
(being thereunto required by the Collector) within Twenty Days after Landing,
make up Accounts and give Bonds in the Penalty of double the Value the same
shall amount unto, and upon such account so to be made up and Bond given as
aforesaid, shall be allowed after the rate of Ten Per Cent for Leakage, and
shall have time for Payment thereof, as is hereafter Mentioned; That is to say,
from the end and expiration of the first two Months, from the making up such
Accounts to pay one third part thereof, and another third part at the end of
the fourth Month and the remainder at the end of the Six Months, And that every
Hogs-head of Wine or other Liquors, that shall not have full Seven Inches or
above left therein, and every Butt or Pipe not above Nine Inches shall be
accounted for outs, and the Merchant or Importer, to pay no Custom for the
same, and in case of difference that may arise between the Importer, or Master
of the Vessel touching Leakage on Board, and for Wines or Liquors that shall
happen to Sour within the aforesaid Twenty Days, the Person or Persons so
aggrieved, shall have a Warrant of Survey from the Naval Officer, who is hereby
empowered and required to grant the same, and that returns of such Warrants to
be granted as aforesaid, shall be made upon Oath to the said Naval Officer, and
by him remitted to the Collectors Office in Order to the making up their
Accounts with the Collector, and better proving their Damage by Ill Stowage or
otherwise, and in case any such Merchant or Importer shall (being thereunto
required as aforesaid) refuse to make up his Accompto and give Bonds as
aforesaid he shall lose the benefit of the Ten Per Cent for Leakage, and the
time given for the payment of the Money, and if the Receiver shall be forced to
Sue for the same, and do recover, the Defendant shall pay treble Damages.

And it is further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if at the entry of
any Ship or Vessel, in the Naval Office it shall appear by the Masters report
or otherwise, that he has imported any Madera Wines he the said Master or the
Boat-swain shall take the following Oath, which the said Naval Officer is
hereby Empowered to administer, I A. B. do swear that the Wines by me Imported,
were taken on Board at the Island of Madera, and that I do not Directly or
Indirectly know, but that the said Wines, are of the said Island, without any
mixture of the Wines of the growth of any of the Western Islands; so help me
God. And if the said Master or Boat-swaine shall resuse to take the abovesaid
Oath, that then the said Wines so Imported shall be deemed and taken, to be
Wines of the Growth of the Western Islands, and shall pay Customs accordingly.

And it is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That if all
or any of the aforesaid Liquors or Goods liable to the Duties aforesaid, be
Landed and afterward Exported, within Twelve Months after the Importation
thereof, that the Collector or Receiver shall discompt or repay unto the Owners
or their Assigns half the Customs of the said Liquors, and Goods, according to
the Rates before mentioned, which the Collector or Receiver is to repay or
count, on the Penalty of double the Sum for every such refusal, to the Party
aggrieved. And it is likewise further Enacted and Declared by the Authority
aforesaid, that all Ships and Vessels coming from any Place to the Northward of
the Tropic of Cancer to Trade within this Island, shall respectively Pay for
every Tun such Ship or Vessel shall contain, and for every time they arrive,
one Pound of good and new Gunpowder, and also all Ships and Vessels trading
any way to the Southward of the Tropic of Cancer, shall respectively pay, for
every Tun such Ship or Vessel shall contain, One Pound of good and New
Gunpowder, once every Year and no more, the same to be to our Sovereign Lord
the King, His Heirs and Successors, for the public use of this His Majesty's
Island.

And it it is likewise further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,
That the Collector or Receiver appointed for the receipt of such Gunpowder
shall receive the same in Specie, and not presume in lieu thereof, to receive
money or any other consideration whatsoever, upon Penalty of Twenty Pounds
Current money for every such offense.

And it is likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Master or
Commander of any Ship or Ships, Merchant Factor, Purser, Mariner, or any other
Person whatsoever, without the presence of the Collector, or some Person
appointed by him, or notice given him, or before his or their Regular entry,
made with the said Collector, or payment of the Duty or Security given by Bond
as aforesaid, shall after Sunset, and before Sunrising put on Shore, or put
into any Boat or Vessel in order to Landing any of the Liquors, or any Goods
contained or mentioned in this Act, with an intent to defraud His Majesty of
his Customs for the same, the said Liquors and Goods shall be forfeited, two
Third parts to Our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors for and
toward the support of the Government of this Island and the contingent Charges
thereof, and the other third part to the Informer or Seizer, be it the Receiver
his Agents, or any other Person whatsoever, the same to be recovered by Bill,
Plaint or Information, in any Court of Record within this Island, any thing in
this Act or any other to the contrary notwithstanding, And all manner of
Persons, are hereby required to be Aiding and Assisting to the Receiver, his
Agents, the Informer, Discoverer and Seizer of such Liquors or Goods so Landed
or unladen contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Act.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and
may be Lawful for the Receiver, his Agents, the Informer or Discoverer, by
Virtue of a Warrant from the Commander in Chief, or any of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, to that purpose first obtained, with one Constable or
more, to search according to Law all manner of Houses Cellers Warehouses, and
Shops, for such Liquors and Goods as they or any of them shall be Informed,
were carried there to be concealed in prejudice, to the true meaning of this
Act, and such Liquors and Goods so found, shall be forfeited and Condemned in
Manner and Form before mentioned; Provided that the Search be made within Three
days after Information.

And it is likewise further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid
That during the continuation of this Act the Collector or his Deputy give his
or their attendance at his Office, from Nine to Eleven of the Clock in the
Morning, and from two to Four in the Afternoon, upon Penalty of Twenty Pounds
Current money of this Island for every default.

Be it likewise Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
every Person and Persons whatsoever in this Island, which from and after the
making of this Act, shall have or receive from the Governor or Commander in
Chief of this Island a License to Sell and retail any Strong Liquors in any
part of this Island, shall pay for the said License, and every Year for
renewing of the same, the Sum of five Pounds Current Money, to Our Sovereign
Lord the King His Heirs and Successors. And whosoever shall presume to Sell by
Retail any of the strong Liquors as aforesaid, without such License had and
obtained as aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such Offense, the Sum of Ten
Pounds current Money of this Island.

And it is hereby Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
new Setler or Comer shall import into this Island any Rum, Sugar, Tobacco,
Indico, Cocoa, Ginger, or Cotton, by himself, or any other person or persons
for his or their better convenience in Settling and Planting, and shall not
only declare, such his or their intentions upon Oath before the Collector, who
is hereby empowered to Administer the same at the time of importation, but
shall likewise make the same appear, within three Months after his or their
arrival, by some visible effect, which he or they shall show, in order to it,
that then the same being sufficiently made known and appear to the said
Collector or Receiver, the said Goods shall not be chargeable with any Duty or
Customs, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding, And the said
new Comers to enjoy the aforesaid Privilege for three Months after their
arrival. Provided also, that it shall and may be lawful, for any Master or
Merchant of any Ship or Vessel to land or put on shore, any of the said Goods,
without being further liable to pay any Duty or Custom for any part or parcel
thereof, more than what he shall sell or dispose of within this Island, any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That as well his
Majesty's Quit-Rents, arising from Lands granted or to be granted, within this
Island, and every part and parcel thereof, as also all and every part of the
Revenue, hereby granted, or which hereafter shall grow due by Virtue of this
Act, or any thing herein contained, shall be applied and appropriated, and are
hereby appropriated to the Support of the Government, of this his Majesty's
Island, and the contingent Charges thereof, and to no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever.

And that His Majesty's Forts and Fortifications within this Island, may for
the future be kept in better repair, And if His Majesty in his great Wisdom
shall think convenient, other new ones may be built: Be it further Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That the Sum of One Thousand Pounds per Annum, arising
as aforesaid, be, during the Term of Seven Years, Annually paid and
appropriated unto the Repairing, Building and Rebuilding of His Majesty's Forts
and Fortifications, within this Island, and to no other use, intent and purpose
whatsoever, and the same is hereby appropriated accordingly.

And it is hereby further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Collector or Receiver-General of this Island, for the time being, or he that
shall Officiate in his room or stead, shall annually, during the Term
aforesaid, out of the Money received by Virtue of this Act, charge down the
said One Thousand Pounds so as aforesaid appropriated, to the particular
Account of the Fortifications, and shall keep a distinct Book of Accounts for
the same, which Book of Accounts, shall be free and open at all Office-hours,
for any person to view the same, without paying any manner of Fee therefore;
and that the said Receiver-General or his Deputy shall (when and as often as
thereunto required, by the Governor, Council or Assembly when sitting, or to
any Committee by them or either of them to be appointed) give in upon Oath
(which Oath they are hereby empowered to Administer) a just and true Account of
the particular Disbursements out of the Thousand Pounds per Annum, so
appropriated as aforesaid, and that the said Receiver-General shall with good
and sufficient Security, such as shall be approved of by the Governor and a
Quorum of the Council, enter into Bond in the Penalty of Five Thousand Pounds
(which Bond shall lie in the Secretary's Office, to be sued, in manner and
form, as is directed in an Act, requiring all Masters of Ships and Vessels to
give Security in the Secretaries Office) under the Condition hereafter
expressed; That is to say,

THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bound A.B.
Collector or Receiver-General, shall well and truly account for as often as he
shall be thereunto required, by the Governor for the time being, and a Quorum
of the Council, or a Committee of the Assembly, all and every such Sum and Sums
of Money, which either have or shall come to his hands, either by Virtue of an
Act, entitled, An Act for Raising a Public Impost, made at an Assembly held
by Prorogation the Fourth day of October, in the Thirty third Tear of His
Majesty's Reign, or an Act, entitled, An Act for Raising a Public Impost,
made at an Assembly held by Prorogation the Twenty first day of September, in
the Thirty fourth Year of His Majesty's Reign that now is, or any other Act or
Acts whatsoever, as also well and truly to pay the Sum of One Thousand Pounds
yearly and every Year, for and during the time the aforesaid Act, made in the
Thirty fourth Year of the King's Reign, entitled, An Act for Raising a Public
Impost, shall be in force, by Warrant of the Governor, with the Advice and
Consent of a Quorum of the Council, for and toward the Repairing and Building
Fortifications, and also pay all other Sums of Money, according to the intent
and meaning and to the uses mentioned and directed in the said Acts, that then
this present Obligation to be void, otherwise to remain in full force and
virtue.

And in case the said Collector or Receiver-General or his Deputies shall
presume to Act in the said Office, longer than twenty days after the passing of
this Act before he has given the Security, with the Condition aforesaid, he or
they shall for every such Offense, forfeit the Sum of One Thousand Pounds
current Money of this Island. One third part thereof to be to our Sovereign
Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors, for and toward the support of the
Government of this Island and the contingent Charges thereof, One other third
to the Informer, or him that shall sue for the same, and the other third to the
Poor of the Parish, where the said Informer shall be resident, to be recovered
in any Court of Record within this Island, by Bill, Plaint, or Information,
wherein no Essoin, Protection, Wager of Law, or Non vult ulterius prosequi
shall be admitted or allowed, any thing in this Act or any other seeming to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And that the said Collector, Receiver, or his Deputy, shall not at any time
hereafter, upon any pretense whatsoever, pay the said One Thousand Pounds per
Annum, or any part or parcel thereof, or any other Sum or Sums of Money
whatsoever, arising from the Quit-Rents, or by Virtue of this Act, unless he or
they shall first have or receive, for his or their Authority a Warrant under
the Hand and Seal of the Governor, or Commander in Chief for the time being,
with the Advice and Consent of the Council expressing the Sum to be paid, and
the end and purpose whereunto the same is or shall be applied, And in case the
Collector, Receiver-General or his Deputy, shall contrary to the true intent
and meaning hereof, pay any Sum or Sums of Money whatsoever, or if any other
person or persons whatsoever, shall misapply any of the Moneys so as aforesaid
appropriated contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Act the Offender
or Offenders, shall forfeit and pay treble the Sum by him or them so paid or
misapplied.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Forfeitures and
Penalties, mentioned in this Act, and not declared how they shall be disposed
of, and in what manner to be recovered, shall be one half to our Sovereign Lord
the King, His Heirs and Successors, for and toward the Support of the
Government of this Island, and the contingent Charges thereof, and the other
half to the Informer, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint or Information, in any
Court of Record within this Island, wherein no Essoin, Protection, Wager of
Law, Non vult ulterius prosequi, or Injunction shall be allowed, any thing in
this Act, or any other to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

And it is hereby Enacted and Declared, by the Authority aforesaid, That from
and after the First day of this present October, an Act entitled, An Act for
Raising a Public Impost, made at an Assembly, held at the Town of St. Jago de
la Vega, the Fourth day of October, in the Three and thirtieth Year of His
Majesty's Reign that now is, and all and every Clause and Clauses therein
contained be and are hereby repealed, to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

And it is hereby Enacted and Declared, by the Authority aforesaid, That this
present Act remain and continue in force, for the Term of Seven Years, and no
longer.

WHich Laws having upon the perusal of the Right Honorable the Lords of the
Committee of Trade and Foreign Plantations, been presented to His Majesty at
this Board, His Majesty was graciously pleased (with the Advice of His Privy
Council) to approve and confirm the same for the space of Seven Years, to
commence from the First of October last preceding the Date hereof, And pursuant
to His Royal Pleasure thereupon signisied and expressed, the said Laws are
hereby approved and consirmed for the space of Seven Years accordingly.

John Nicholas.

FINIS.
LAW BOOKS Printed for, or Sold by Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-Luce, over
against St. Dunstan's-Church in Fleet Street.
Folio, Law.
THe Statutes at large, from Magna Charta, to this present Year 1682. in
Paragraphs and Sections, with References to the Books of the Law, and an exact
Table; By Joseph Keble of Gray's-Inn Esquire in folio.

An Assistance to Justices of the Peace, for the easier performance of their
Duty; The first Part thereof being a Collection of all the particular Clauses
of Statutes from Magna Charta to this time, that does any ways concern Juslices
of the Peace; In the other Part the whole Office of a Justice is methodically
digested; with the newest and most approved Presidents, under proper Heads; the
whole accommodated to present use. By Joseph Keble of Gray's-Inn Esquire

A Collection of Entries, etc By William Rastal; fol.

The Lord Coke's Book of Entries.

-- His Commentary on Littleton, being the first Part of the Institutes.

-- His Commentary on Magna Charta, etc. or the 2 d Part of the Institutes.

-- His Pleas of the Crown, or 3d. Part of the Institutes.

-- His Jurisdiction of Courts, or 4th. Part of the Institutes.

-- His 11 Reports in French, with a Table, and the 12th and 13th in English.

-- His 11 Reports complete in English, with a Table.

An Abridgment of Cases, and Resolutions of Law, contained as well in the
Law Books, Statutes and Records, as of modern Judgments in the Courts of
Westminster. By H. Roll, Sergeant at Law: Published by the L. C. J. Hales.

The Year Books, in to Volumes, the last Edition, with new Notes and Tables to
them all.

Origines Juridiciales; oran Account of the English Laws, Courts of Justice,
Forms of Trial, Punishment in Cases Criminal, Law-Writers, Law Books, Grants
and Settlements of Estates, etc. Also a Chronology of the Lord Chancellors,
Keepers, Treasurers, Justices Itinerant, Judges, Barons, Masters of the Rolls,
Kings Attorneys, and Sollicitors and Sergeants at Law. By Sir William Dugdale,
Knight.

The Law of Common Assurances, touching Deeds in general, viz. Feoffinents,
Gifts, Grants, Leases, with two Alphabetical Tables. By William Sheppard, Esquire

The Country Justice; containing the Practice of the Justices of the Peace, as
well in as out of Sessions. By M. Dalton, with large Additions, printed 1682.

Modern Reports; By William Style of the Inner Temple Esquire

Actions for Slanders; By William Sheppard Esquire

Reports of H. Roll Serj. at Law, in two Volumes, in the King's Bench, in the
time of King James.

Prynn's Animadversions on the Lord Coke's 4th Institutes.

Sir Henry Yelverton's Reports in the King-Bench, in the time of Queen
Elizabeth and King James. Published by Judge Wild.

The Reports of Sir John Davies, with a Table.

The Reports of the learned Judge, Sir Henry Hobart; The fourth Edition
corrected and amended.

The Reports of Sir George Crook Knight. in the time of Q. Elizabeth, K. James, and
K. Charles the First; Collected in French by himself, revised and published in
English by Sir Harbottle Grimstone, Master of the Rolls; the third Edition, in
three Volumes. This Book is now reprinted with References to all the late
Reports.

Reports in the King's Bench, in the time of King Charles the First. By Jo.
Latch of the Middle Temple.

Reports of the late Reverend Judge Th. Owen Esquire one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas; with Tables.

Reports and Arguments, in the time of K. Charles the Second, of that learned
Judge Sir Jo. Vaughan, lato Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

The Reports of Sir James Dyer, in the time of H. S. Ed. 6. Phil. and Mary, and
Q. Elix. with a Table.

The Reports of the Lord Keeper Littleton, in the time of King Charles the
First; with Tables.

The Office and Authority of Sheriffs, gathered out of the Statutes and Books
of the Common Law; Corrected and very much enlarged by Mich. Dalton; with a
Supplement of all Matters relating to Sheriffs, since Mr. Dalton's time.

Formulaebene Placitandi, A Book of Entries, containing variety of choice
Presidents, of Counts, Declarations, Informations, Pleas in Bar and Abatement,
Continuances, Replications, Rejoynders, Issues, Verdicts, Judgments after
Verdict, Utlawries, Recoveries and Avowrics, and other Pleadings, in real,
personal and mixed Actions, of general use to all Students in the Law; the 2 d
Edition corrected and amended. By William Brown, a Clerk in the Court of Common
Pleas, in two Parts, in fol.

Mr. Thompson's Book of Entries, in sol.

Law, Quarto.
The Grand Abridgment of the Common and Statute Law of England, Alphabetically
digested, under proper Heads and Titles, very useful and beneficial for all
persons whatsoever, that desire to have any knowledge in the said Laws; in four
Parts. By William Sheppard Esquire

Doctrina Platitandi, or the Art of good Pleading, showing where, and in what
cases, and by what persons, Pleas as well real as personal, or mixed, may be
properly pleaded. By S. E. Sergeant at Law.

The Complete Clerk, containing the best forms of all sorts of Conveyances and
Assurances, and other Instruments now in use and practice; and forms for Bills
and Answers in Chancery, etc. with the names of. Men and Women in Latin; also
Trades and Occupations, Counties, Bishoprics, etc.

Placita Latin Rediviva, A Book of Entries containing approved Presidents of
Counts, Declarations, Bars, Replications, etc. as well real as personal.

The Reports of the learned and judicious Clerk, J. Gouldsborough Esquire in the
time of Queen Elizabeth.

A Treatise of Wills and Testaments, fit to be understood by all men, that they
may know, whether, whereof, and how to make them. By H. Swineborne, Judge of
the Prerogative Court at York; The fourth Edition very much enlarged,

Law, Octavo.
An Abridgment of the Statutes in force and use from Magna Charta till this
present year 1682. By Edmond Wingats of Gray's-Inn, Esquire

Fetzherbert's Natura Brevium, corrected and amended; printed 1676.

The Terms of the Law, with large Additions.

The Complete Justice, being a compendious and exact Collection out of all such
Statutes and Authors as may any ways concern the Office of a Justice of Peace,
very much enlarged and carefully brought down to the year 1681. with a proper
Charge to be given at the Quarter Sessions. By R. Chamberlain of Gray's-Inn, Esquire

Fragmenta Autiquitatis, Ancient Tenures of England, and Jocular Customs of
some Manors, made public for the Diversion of some, and Instruction of
others. By T. Blunt of the Inuer-Temple, Esquire

The Complete Attorney, and Guide for Solicitors in the Courts of Chancery,
King's Bench, Common-Plea:, and Exchequer, with the manner of their Proceedings
in any Action, real, personal, or mixed, (from the Original to the Execution)
with the Fees of the Officers in those Courts; to which is added, the Practice
of the Court; in London, and Ecclesiastical Courts.

The Office of Coroners and Sheriffs, together with an casie and plain Method
for the keeping of Court-Leets, Court-Barons, and Hundred-Courts; By J.
Wilkinson of Bernards-Inn.

Law, or a Discourse thereof, in four Books; By Sir Henry Finch, Knight. in English.

De Laudibus Legum Angliae; By Sir John Forteseue, Lord Chancellor to King
Henry the Sixth: Whereunto is added the two Sums of Sir Ralph de Hengham,
commonly called Hengham magna and Hengbam parva, with Notes on both; By the
famous Antiquary John Seldom, Esquire

Tractatus de Legibus and Consuctudinibus Regni Anghae tempore Regis Henrii
secundi; Compositus Authore Randulpho d' Glanvilla.

History, etc.
in Fol.
1. The History of Q. Elizabeth; By W. Camden King at Arms; the third Edition
with a new Table. 2. The History of the Grecian War; By Thucidides; Translated
out of the Original Greek, by Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury. 3. Dugdale's
Monasticon Auglicanum; In three Volumes, with Tables. 4. -- Origines
Judiciales. 5. The History of the Life, Reign and Death of Edward the Second,
King of England, and Lord of Ireland. 6. Machiavel's Works complete, with his
Letter in vindication of his Writings. 7. Dugdale's History of the Baronage of
England; In two Parts. 8. The Historical Tracts of the Reverend Peter Heylyn,
D. D. with an Account of the Life of the Author, never before published; and an
Exact Table to the whole. 9. The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley; the Ict. and 2 d
Parts. 10. The Whole Body of Ancient and Modern Architecture; By John Evelyn,
Esquire Adorned with 51 Copper Plates.
Where also are Sold all sorts of Law Books, and most sorts of English-Books.

FINIS.

