A JOURNAL OF THE EXPEDITION, of Monsieur DE LA FUEILLADE, For the Relief of
CANDY.

Written in French (by way of letter) by a Gentleman who was a Voluntiere in
that service: and faithfully Englished.

LONDON. Printed for T. Williams at the Bible in Little Britain, and J.
Starkey at the Miter in Fleet street near Temple Bar. 1670.

A JOURNAL OF THE EXPEDITION of Monsieur DE LA FUEILLADE, For the Relief of
Candy.
SIR
I Have neither presumption; nor ability enough to undertake the full
satisfaction of your curiosity, but must freely acknowledge it beyond the reach
of my faculties; You desire I should give you a particular account of the true
motives inducing Mr. Fueillade to so dangerous and so painful an Enterprise.
And it is my request that you would consider, my sincerity would be renderd very
much suspected, should I take a liberty of inserting a^^ thing, but what I have
received either from (...) ears, or eyes.

You know well (SIR) and you have often (...) pressed it to me, how difficult it is
to discover (...) principles and Original motions by which manki^^ is actuated,
especially if in public employment the variety of motives which produce their
action making it almost impossible to find out the source or first cause, of
their commotion.

I am of your judgment, that zeal for Religion interest of Conscience, and the
honor of the mo^^ Christian King, (who is Eldest son likewise of (...) Church)
are persuasions strong enough to exc^^ the Generosity of a French Cavalier: But
wheth^^ the world may easily be persuaded that the Ga^^ lantry of Mr. Fucillade
was regulated by th^^ principles, is a question I cannot readily dete^^ mine.

The manner in which the best, and most ill^^ strious of his actions have been
too frequently (...) presented makes it evident, there is always mo^^ of malice
then equity in the judgment of Men.

If Mr. Fueillade passes alone into Spain, to vi^^ dicate the honor of his
Majesty, against the Cou^^ de S. One, who by an insufferable insolence in h^^
discourse, had endeavored to detract, and blemi^^ it, it is looked upon as the
Bravado only of a Capr^^ cious Huffe. If in Paris he appears at the head o^^
500 men, to support the Reputation of two Eminent Prelates who in some public
writings ha^^ been bitterly asperst. If he enters himself into (...)
Bookbinders Shop, and be so transported wit^^ al, and affection to his friends
as to give the after a box on the ear that dispersed them, it is cried as the
action of a Madman, that could not ^^ffer such truths to be published, as
reflected on Brother; In short, if it be affirmed that he has clar'd himself to
certain of his friends that he ^d no other prospect in his Voyage to Candy but
good of the Church, and advantage of his own ^ul, 'twill be replied immediately,
that that declation is like several other things he has been made say, which he
never so much as thought of him^^f, and that if he does really design the
benefit the Church, it is but because his Holiness had ^mis'd him Ecclesiastical
possessions.

For my part I dare make no other judgment his motives, and designs, then what
his own ^ords and actions do oblige me to; and I must ^eds say, it is not
without some trouble that I (...) it reported, that this Expedition of his was
(...) the effect of a disgust he took, for not being ^ade a Marshal of France.

Not but this scandal carries some specious ap^arance of truth, for the whole
world knowing Fucillade was not a person that could believe self further off
from honor then Mr. Crequy, d'Humieres, and Mr. Bellefond. As soon as
understood that his Majesty had conser'd that or upon them, and had not
proceeded to him; as not to be doubted but his great spirit would ^nt it: And
the News of his Voyage being ^ad abroad almost at the same time, it was ^^ght
but reasonable to infer, 'twas indignation put him upon a design of manifesting
to other Nations how worthy he was of that honor, wh^^ was denied him at home.

Nevertheless, if one has patience to consider t^^ for the execution of this
Enterprise, he had (...) only his Majesty's consent, with supplies of Mor^^ and
Ships, but was accompanied likewise wi^^ young Prince and a considerable number
of yo^ Cavaliers, of the principal quality in the Kingd^^ in my opinion it must
needs be confessed, that it (...) so far from being the effect of any capriccio
discontent, (as has been published) that it m^^ with more reason be looked upon
as proceed from the comparable prudence of his Majesty, (...) being willing to
comply with the pressing sollic^^ tion of the Pope, for relief for the
Venetian, unwilling without occasion to break openly (...) the Turk, contrary
to the inviolable fidelity his word; he could not with more wisdom dexterity
prevent the discovery of these succo^^ then by committing the affair to Mr.
Fueillade, (...) was the most proper person of the whole Cour^^ conceal the
design, under pretenses of his (...) vadoes, or the discontent he was suspected
be in.

I shall not detein my self to present such circ^^ stances to your observation,
as might fortify conjecture. You have heard with what noise commination his
Majesty did publicly proh^^ the going thither; and yet Mr. Fueillade in mean
time listing, and engaging a great (...) of Gentlemen: You know likewise he
refus'^^ make any public disposal of places and C^^ mands, which
notwithstanding was done un^^ hand; And last of all the Standard of Malta being
set up in our Ships, instead of the French, leaves us no room to be doubtful.

Thus far I have enlarged my self upon the design and intention of this
enterprise, that I might entertain you with all passages from the very
beginning. About the end of July we had new assurance of this expedition, by
the great number of Reformed Officers and Gentlemen who engaged themselves
daily with Mr. Fueillade, and by the several young Lords whom the example of
the Count of S. Paul, had drawn into the same enterprise.

Their Rendezvous was appointed at Lions, where they who were under the pay of
Mr. Fueillade appeared first, to the number of about 300. about the latter end
of August; but by reason certain Bravo's of the Town began to Troop together
with the Soldiers of the Regiment of Lions, and form parties against our
Nobless, (which in other respects were in no great favor with the Townsmen) a
new order was obtein'd to continue their march to Toulon, which was the place
they were to embarque in. But there likewise they occasioned such disorders as
cost 3 of their Companions their lives: Which caused Mr. Fueillade to repair
thither with all speed to prevent the evil consequences of that accident.

On the 8th of September he arrived there with Mr. S. Paul, and on the 10th to
perfect the Rolls of such as were in pay (which was 20 sols per diem) he had a
general Muster. He had present complete four hundred, which he divided into
four Brigades, each of them bearing the name of its Commander. Besides which
there remained near 200. Volunteers all of principal quality, which he disposed
likewise into the several Brigades, and afterward appointed the Commands as
follow.

The Commander in Chief. Monsieur de la Fueillade.
Son aid de Camp.

Mr. Le Chevalier de Tresmes.

The Commanders of the four Brigades.

Messieurs The Count of S. Paul. The Duke of Caderousse. The Count de
Ville-maur. The Duke de Chasteau Thierry.

Every Commander of a Brigade had under him Sub-Brigadiers, Aide-Majors, and
one Ensign.

The Sub-Brigadiers of Mr. S. Paul were

Messieurs The Marquis de Chamilly. De Jovency. The Chevalier des Molets. The
Chevalier de Sepe-Ville. Tambonneau. The Count of Chalain. Beau-Chevilliers.
Des Fourneau.

The Aide-Majors.

Messieurs Du Pre. Des Roches.

The Ensign

Mr. Derlingue.

The Sub-Brigadiers of the Duke of Chasteau Thierry.

Messieurs Du S. Marcel. Du Moulin. De la Forets.

The Aide-Majors.

Messieurs De Rome-Cour. Poncet.

The Ensign Mr. The Chevalier de Gonor.

The Sub-Brigadiers of the Duke de Caderousse.

Messieurs The Marquis de Refuge. The Chevalier de Suze. The Marquis de Tord.
De Flavigny. De Bois-Commun. Clincault.

The Aide-Majors.

Messieurs The Chevalier Dampiere. De Rouvile.

The Ensign. Mr. Hongre.

The Sub-Brigadiers of the Count de Ville-maur.

Messieur's De Bois le Comte. De Ville-Maur the Son. De Charmont. De Virgini.

The Aide-Majors.
Messieurs De la Mondie. De Longuemar.

The Ensigno

Mr. de la Cost.

Things being established in this order, all thoughts were employed in
hastening the embarquement, which at length was finished the 20th of September,
and on the 25 we set sail.

The first place in which we came to anchor, was the Gulf of Palmo in Sardinia,
about 4 leagues from Callari, where by reason the winds were contrary, we
continued a day and a half, but we spent that time in providing our selves with
water, and such other fresh victuals as we wanted.

At our landing in this Island it was no unpleasant surprise to us to see
several great Savadge fellows springing of a sudden as it were out of the earth
with nothing humane about them, but their Guns, which they carried with them
under their arms; and vanishing from our sight as suddenly as they appeared.

We were informed they were the Inhabitants of that Island, that they had no
clothing but skins, nor no other Palaces then such holes as they made
themselves in the earth. There were 7 or 8 of us had a curiosity to go a little
farther into the Isle, to see how things were disposed in their quarters.

We were not advanced above musket shot toward the place where we saw them in
first, but we perceived a long Caverne, at the mouth of which we found 3
Schiffs, or wherrys drawn up upon rowlers. Our Guide called Charmont,
Sub-Brigadier to Mr. de Ville-Maur^ (who had had frequent affairs with those
Savages) told us that they had most of them the same at their several Caves,
and that they never used them but upon some certain design, which when they
had accomplished, they drew them back again with incredible agility, and
address.

Being past a little way into this Den, we perceived light in several places
toward the bottom, which made us believe there were variety of passages by
which those Brutes might upon occasion go forth to what part they pleased of
the Isle, especially toward the shore, where they lay their little Piquerons;
all which was confirmed to us by our experience sooner then we desired, for
having discoverd a parcel of their hunted provisions, which they had very
cleanly disposed upon a shelf hanging in the air, in a very obscure Corner, we
took the boldness to ease them of that care; and returning to the Skiffs again
that brought us ashore, very well pleased with our prize, we found our selves
suddenly invested with so great a number of that enraged kind of cattle, that
they seemed to spring out of all parts of the shore in a moment, and that which
surpised us most was that at the same time they were running after us with
their Fusils upon the shore, at the same time a great number of little boats,
and wherryes advanced to intercept us at sea: But by great happiness those who
were sent from our Ships for fresh provisions, having discerned the danger we
were in, came immediately in to our assistance, and were fain to make use of
all the credit their commerce gives them with that Nation, to get us out of
their hands; which yet they could not obtain, 'till we had paid sufficiently
dear for what we had so unjustifiably stolen.

We left this Gulf with a good gale of wind steering directly for Malta, where
we arrived the 18th of October: so that we spent 25 days in making but 400
leagues, for they count it no more betwixt Toulon and this place.

We continued there 4 days, during which time Mr. Fueillade had several
private Conferences with the Grand Master: it was immediately believed it was to
solicit him to send some releif too, and to persuade him with us to attempt
something in favor of the Venetians, and the interest of the Church, that
might be worthy of the honor of that Order.

In short that very day we came aboard again, the Grand Master called all his
Knights together, and in a long harangue represented to them how much more it
was their interest to assist the Town of Candy, than the French, who had no
other instigation, but the common concernment of the Church. He added that it
would be great dishonor for them to do nothing for their releif, neither in
the Town nor upon their coasts, and the French come so far with such undaunted
courage and resolution, to sacrifice their lives in that place for the honor of
their Religion, and the glory of their Prince; and at last desired all such as
were disposed to follow so Generous an Example to declare themselves: at which
word all the French Knights of that Order cried out they were ready to go
along, and that they attended nothing but his commands: There were some Germans
and Italians who made the same proffer, but amongst all the Spaniards there was
but one that presented himself.

The Grand Master loves that nation very well, but he took such displeasure to
observe it, that he could not contein himself from reproaching them upon the
place; and named 4 immediately which he obliged to go along with the other, that
it might not be said the Spaniards (who are so much tickled and affected with
being every where acknowledged the strictest and foremost of the Catholics)
should indeed be the last in defending the interest of Religion and the Church,
when they are so solemnly at stake.

From Malta to Candia, is reckoned about 300 French leagues, which we made in
less then 13 days, for on the last of October we found our selves in the
entrance into the White Sea, betwixt Morea and Candia, which are not above 25
leagues asunder, in which when we were a little advanced we discovered before
us two little Islands hard by one another, the biggest of which runs out
toward Canea and is called the Cerigues, and the lesser toward Morea, and is
called little C^rigo.

We had some difficulty in passing these Isles, by reason of a great number of
Rocks interspersed, but after having well considered, we could not leave
Cerigues to the leeward, without running up too near to Canea, nor Cerigo to
the other hand, without fetching too great a compass, which would be no less
dangerous, seeing we must have coasted upon Moria, the wind being gentle we
resolved to pass amongst the Rocks, which we effected at last with great
trouble, but no prejudice at all.

The first of November we came into Standia, a little Isle some 6 or 7 leagues
from Candia, which is nothing but a long Mountain which shelters the Vessels in
its Harbor, and is the chief reason the Venetian Fleet lies there.

This Isle is inhabited by Greeks, but no less barbarous and rude, then the
before mentioned Savages in Sardinia: They have no other Trade with Strangers,
but for powder and bullet, of which they have particular need, their
employments and livelihood, being nothing but hunting, which is very plentiful
in that Isle. The same day at 5 in the evening Mr. Fueillade put himself into a
Gally (with Mr. de Fenelon and some other Volunteers) which attended there to
bring him to Candy, where as soon as he was arrived he went with Mr. Morosini,
Captain General of the place, to veiw the works at S. Andree and Saboniera.

The second; Mr. de S. Paul entered into another Gally with the rest of the
Volunteers and 50 Cavaliers of his Brigade, passing to the Fosse, which is a
place by the Sea about half a league from Candy, where they might come to an
anchor. Being got thither, he left his Gally and went into a Barque, the
Volunteers, and the rest of the Company did the same, in order to their landing
at the Port of Tramata: As soon as they appeared at the entrance of that
Harbor, the Comte S. Paul was saluted by the Turks with five rounds of their
Cannon, and they, which followed him received their proportion, but all got in
without any considerable damage.

As soon as Mr. S. Paul was landed, Mr. Fueillade went back immediately to
Standy, with resolution to have landed all the rest, the next morning: but
about 9 or 10 the next day, there appearing 36 of the Turks Galleys (which
pretended to land men too, gave an alarm to the Town, and such incouragment to
the Turks, that they pretended they would have fallen on forthwith. But the
Venetian Fleet, which was at Standy, put to Sea with our 3 Ships, and
constrained the Turks to return as they came. We thought to have landed in the
Island, but being got already as far as the Trench, it was resolved we should
take the benefit of the night, and put into Candy immediately.

It was the 3 of Novem. that Mr. Fueillade presented himself with his Troops
before the port of Tramata, and entered happily together into the Town.

There was only the Comte de Fountain, Mr. de Fenelons sons boat shot through
and sunk by three volleys of Cannon, which killed two men and took off both the
legs of a third.

All Mr. de Fenelons money and plate were in that boat which was sunk, but was
happily fisht up again the next day by a Turkish slave, who had his liberty
given him for his pains, and he is at present in the service of Mr. de Fenelon
in France.

Whilst Mr. Fueillade was gone to Standia to put his troops in order, and to
embarque them, so as they might with most speed and convenience enter into the
Town; They who were already arrived with Mr. S. Paul, had nothing to do but to
visi^^ the French Officers that had Commands there and to inform themselves of
every thing. Of this number I was one, and having no less curiosity then the
rest, I thought it more for my instruction to go singly about it, and to
satisfy my self as particularly, and with as much order as was possible.

The first thing I did, I went round the place, to take a view of the
Fortifications, and began with the works of S. Andre and Saboniera, which lie
at the two extremities of that side of the Town that runs along by the Sea.

The Bastion of S. Andre is the highest part of the Town on that side toward
the Sea, and is not more then about forty paces distant from it; on the other
toward the Ravelin of the Holy Ghost, there are nothing but Rocks. The Bastion
of Saboniera has one side washed with the Sea, and on the other (which is
defended by the Fort of S. Demetrius) there is nothing but a continued Rock,
shooting itself out into the Land. There being no earth to be had to make their
approaches: on the side they were capable of being attacked, the Turks
attempted not them there at first. They began with two of the inland Forts,
Martiningo and Panigra, where by their frequent and desperate assaults they had
taken most of the outworks, especially at Martiningo, which Fort they gained at
length, and planted one their Colors, with the half Moon, upon it: But there
being a Cavaliere. or mount still left belonging to the Bastion, besides a
strong retrench went lined with hewed stone (which they called a Retirad^ or
retreat) and several other little platforms, they were so much incommoded and
disturbed, that they grew desperate of making that Post good.

Whilst they were in suspense of making good these two attaques, where they
lost the best of their men, a soldier run to them out of the Town, and advised
them, that all their endeavors would be to no purpose, till they fell upon
those two Bastions next the Sea, and by that means stopped up the mouths of both
the Harbors, that of Tramata by their approaches at S. Andre, and that of the
Mole, (or the Port of the Gallys) by their intrenchments at Sabionera.

The Turks were easily persuaded; but because they wanted earth to make their
approaches on the sides where the Bastions were attackable, they quitted not
their former Posts, till they had brought a vast prodigious heap and thrown it
betwixt the Fort of Panigra, and the Ravelin of the Holy Ghost. The Venetian
perceiving it, imagined at first it had been to raise a platform in that place,
and plant a battery to play into the Town: but their earth increasing to so
great a quantity, they were convinced it was in order to their approaches
against S. Andre. A while after they saw all their forces drawn down on that
side, and toward Sabionera, where earth being wanting as much as on the other,
they were forced likewise to bring it a distance from the Mountain, by which
means, with ^^finite labor, they have entrenched themselves about these two
Forts, and that so strong, and effectually that within two years time they
hav^^ brought them to very great extremities.

The Bastion of S. Andre, runs out with a grea^^ shoulder on that side next the
S. Esprit, and (...) the other toward the Sea it has only a line draw^^ from
the end of the courtain, to the point of th^^ Bastion, without any Flancker at
all, in stead (...) which there is only a very obtuse angle, which (...) the
reason there remains near forty foot of lan^^ betwixt the Bastion and the Sea.
To stop up th^^ space they have cut a kind of trench with a Raveli^^ that runs
a long from the point of the Bastion (...) the Sea, where it meets with the
little Town (...) Priuli, which with the whole work was den^^ minated from
General Priuli who built it. Th^^ Bastion is desended without by a good half
Moo^^ at the point of it, which is called the Redout (...) S. Andre, and
another Fort before it, which (...) Marquis de Ville caused to be thrown up,
and th^^ so commodiously, that it ruined the enemies d^^ signs, and
facillitated the frequent salleys he ma^^ with his French in such manner, that
the Gra^^ Visir who had taken up his quarters just ov^^ against the S. Esprit,
on this side the Joffa, or t^^ River of Mount Ida, was forced for his security
to remove to the other.

There was nothing unattempted by the In^^ dells, that could conduce to the
destruction of t^^ Post, but their success was but small, and the^^ losses
great. In so much that the great advantag^^ and reputation it brought to the
defenders, render at length the Venetians so jealous of the honor Marquis de
Ville, that Morosini the General f^^ the Venetian resolved to destroy him by
the most infamous treachery in the world: For the General report in Candy is
that he writ a letter himself to the Visir, that if at a time he mentioned, he
would fall upon the Marquis de Villes Fort, he would dispose of things so, as
he should not fail to become Master of it, and in case the resistance was
extraordinary, he would assist them with the Artillery of the Fort, and a good
body of Musquetteers placed commodiously to play amongst them: by particular
providence, the messenger was taken, and brought to the Marquis by one of his
guards.

As soon as he had read the letter, and was assured of all the circumstances of
this horrid design, by the disposition of the messenger, he resolved to keep
all private, and having advised with some of the French Officers who were his
friends, it was concluded no notice should be taken, till they had taken the
best measures they could to secure their return to Venice, whither it was
agreed their complaints against the General should be carried.

All things being prepared for their embarquement, as was concluded, the
Marquis de Ville attended by a good round number of French Officers, went to
Morosini and upbraided him highly by his treachery. He was much discomposed and
astonished at the news, but Mr. Marquis de Ville, stayed not till he had
recollected himself, but le^t him in his surprise; and went immediately to
Tramata, that he might not have any time to interrupt ^is passage: The General
did what could to stop them in the Harbor, but the French that were with the
Marquis were numerous enough to frustrate all his endeavors.

The news of this horrid attempt was got to Venice before the Marquis arrived.
The General had not failed in several of his letters to the Senate, to justify
himself, and cover the blackness of the design, with the subtil'st most
exquisi^e dashes, and flour^shes of art: But as soon as the Marquis had made
his complaint, produ^'d the letter, and the proofs he had in his hand, the
S^nate perceived it could not possibly be kept from the world with all the
pretenses and disguisements imaginable, if the Marquis and the Officers he had
with him had a mind to devulge it, for which reason they resolved at what rate
soever, to oblige them to silence, and money they supposed to be the readyest
way. Mr. de Vill^, quickly found their intentions, and judged it convenient to
make use of this occasion for the full payment of his own arreares, and to
oblige the Venetian to quit and discharge all the Tickets which were due to the
Officers that accompanied him: But they saved him the labor o^ desiring of
that; for the Senate sent him very honorably whatever was his due and
something more, and discharged the Officers so freely of their bille^s, that
they did readily own the bounty o^^ that Commonwealth, and promised to conceal
the perfidy of the General, upon whom they might otherwise have drawn the
hatred and aversion of other States.

This Fort (which was as it were deserted after the departure of the Marquis
and the French he carried away with him) in a short time after fell unto the
hands of the Turks, who by that means gaining upon the half Moon that commanded
it, blowed that up also, so that the Bastion having lost ^ll its outworks, they
raised three great batteries, one of 4 great pieces upon the Redoubt which was
pointed against the R^velin of the Holy Ghost, another of three great pieces
upon the shore, to play ^t the same time upon the Scotseze, the Port of
Tramata, and that side of the Bastion, where it ^id much more hurt than two
other great pieces that lay at greater distance, and thundered continually into
the breach, which at that time was near sixty paces wide: The third Battery
which consists but of two great pieces is raised upon the work of Priuli which
they have demolished, flanck^ng the Scotseze, and the other works before it
with great detriment and execution.

Whilst their Canon are playing with this fury against the Bastion, the ruins
of the Fort de Ville and the half Moon, were employed to make redoubts, and
other Lodgments for the better seturity of their trenches, and having gained
this ^arth which might be removed toward the Foss^, ^hey opened several
trenches this way and that way which served for Lines of Communication, and ^un
up as far as the point of the Bastion, and some ^imes under the very breach,
for in some places their Posts are so near, the Soldiers can hit the ends ^f
their Muskets together, and reach one another Tobacco, there being nothing but
a Palissado be^wixt them.

They have likewise a great number of Cappo^ieres, which are Pits cut deep in
the ground, covered for the most part with earth, supported by great pieces of
wood set a cross and boards laid a Top of them: and these Lodgments being made
so as to open one into the other, do make such Galleries that under them they
advance many times to the works of the Town, and some times under most of the
streets; On the other side the besiegers not being behind hand with their
Pyoneers, working under ground perpetually to countermine them, they have
likewise their several Gall^ries, that run under most of the best Posts and
Batteries of the enemy, and not seldom into their very quarters; so that
sometimes as they are advancing thus in their several mines, they fall upon one
another (...) close before they are aware, that having no time to give fire to
what they have prepared, without equal danger to both sides, instead of
springing their Mines, they force and tear away the baggs o^^ powder with
hooks, and sometimes come (...) handy blows.

The Breach at S. Andre seemed to me indifferently well repaired and fortified
by a good Palissado, several redoubts, and a double retrenchmen^ within the
Bastion it self, to which they have added another of hewed stone since our
arrival, righ^^ over against the neck of the Bastion: it is in th^^ form of a
Tenalia, and stops up one side of th^^ Scotseza (which is otherwise imperfect)
so wel^ that it ser^'s also for a retrenchment. The brea^^ is stopped up likewise
with ten or twelve embrazure^ to each of which there is planted a great Gu^^
laden with pistol bullets, and nails, alway^ ready to be showerd in amongst
them, in case (...) assault. The Gate of S. Andre, is betwixt the bastion of
that name and the Scotseze, in the midst of a small courtaine of about 35 paces;
it is well fortified, and the enemy has his Posts there likewise, and, so
commodiously placed, they do great mischief to them that defend it, in so much
that this is one of the places in which the service is most hot and most
frequent: For you most know, since the Turks ruined the Fort Priuli, and
demolished the little Tower, they have made themselves masters of all the
ground betwixt the bastion and the Sea, and have raised two great batteries
(besides what they had raised before upon the Priuli) one, of four Mortar
pieces against the breach, and the other of five pieces of Cannon against the
Gate.

From S. Andre I went to the Port of Tramata which lies at about 200 paces
distance, in which space beyond the Gate of S. Andre is the Scotseze, a small
bastion whose point is very sharp, and runs into the Sea: It Is properly but
half a bastion, by reason that side which is extended upon the shore, falls in
with the courtaine, and makes but one line of about 50 paces, upon which there
are two little Redoubts not far from one another, at the end of which is
another half Redoubt, near which ^he Sea running a good distance into the land
makes the whole space it advances of the figure of (...) reverst angle, the
side of which that looks toward the Scotseza is of about 30 paces, and the
other of about 50, which terminates in a great Demi-Redoubt, which is upon that
point of land that makes the bending, and gives the Harbor an oval form. That
part of the oval that runs far thest into the Town, makes almost a reverst
angle, on which they have raised a strong Tenailla the sides of which make the
greatest part of the oval. The entrance into this Haven being toward the Fort
of S. Andre, and by consequence within reach of their batteries, and so unsafe
for the Ships, they have made a new one on the other side, by which they can
come in with greater security.

The sides of this angle reverst being much above musket shot over, they have
thrown up new works upon the sides of the Tenailla, and stopped up the cone, or
corner of the place, with a long strait line, very well fortified, in the
midst of which is the Gate of Tramata.

From the end of the Tenailla to the Haven of Galleys is near 200 paces, all
which space running along in a strait line by the Sea, and fortified only with
a few acute, and reverst angles, is terminated by a rising ground, which runs
about 110 paces into the Sea, and joins it self to a strong Castle built upon a
Rock at the mouth of the Haven, and covers all that side which is on the right
hand as they enter.

That side next the Harbor is fortified by two Arsenals, and the Gate called
the Arsenal Gate, by which they pass to the Arsenal, and to that rising ground
which runs out to the Castle: That side which looks to the Sabionera, is
secured by a fair Mole, forced in the Sea, from the foot of the great Arsenal
wall, to the point over against the place where the high piece of ground joins
it self to the Castle, which makes the mouth of that Harbor, which is called
the Mole.

The Mole joining it self to the Corner of the Grand Arsenal, (which is the
farthest point that extends it self into the Harbor) serves as a flank^^ to
the side toward the Sea: and at the angl(...) is at the extremity of the same
side, there is a ^^rong battery that commands the Sea, and (...) long the
shore, where the enemies have (...) their entrenchments: The other angle is
secu^^ (...) flanker, raised upon the courtain, where (...) a battery that
scowrs the breach; be(...) ^ount called the Cavalier Barbaro, is be(...)
^^lanker at the side of the inward angle of the A^^ ^^enal, which ^cowrs the
Trench, and all long the False-Bray. After I had veiw'd the two A(...) and
visited the Magazins, in which (...) was nothing wanting either for the defense
of a p^^ce, or the destruction of men, I past to the Sabionera, which is no
further from the Grand Arsenal th^n the length of the Courtine, and that is
about a hundred paces.

The Sabionera is a large Bastion, which shoulders ^ut toward the Royal Fort
on one side, and the Sea on other, the point of (...) Bastion (...) beaten
quite down, and the breach about 90 p^ces, but they have reinforced it with a
good Pal^^ssado, several little platforms, and two retrenchments, one within
the breach, and the other without, under ^he neck of land that is on the side
toward the ^ea: But its chief defense lies in the Cavalier or mount de Zane,
which commands it almost every where.

The outworks being ruined I can say little of them unless it be that there is
a large platform upon the close way, which defends the point, and another
little one before the quarter, which was built by General Spaal.

For the Entrenchments, and Posts of the enemies they are almost in the same
manner as before S. Andre, unless it be that they have there a great: number
of Redoubts, especially on that side toward the breach, where the Rock does
not come. There are reckoned seventeen of that sort, beside; several
entrenchments and mines to the very breach, to which, by the benefit of their
approaches, and several trenches, they have cut both open, and covered, they
can advance as they please nay even to the False-bray: They have diverse
galleries likewise, many of them brought a good way under the Bastion, which
do often fall in with those of the Town, who have their mines also under their
batteries, and under all the principal posts of the enemy: by which means they
often encounter under ground, as is observed already i^ the Relation of S.
Andre.

That which is remarkable on that side toward the Bastion of S. Demetry, is
that the quantity o^^ earth the Turks have brought thither to shelter
themselves, is so great, that they can march up and down to their several posts
without so much as seeing the Rock.

It Is on this side the Janisarys have their post, toward the mouth of the
Lazaret, the other troops being quartered up and down upon the mouutain and
thereabouts.

Near the mouth of the Lazaret, there is a tongue of land which runs into the
Sea, upon which they have planted a battery of 7 great Guns, which command
almost to the entrance of the Mole: besides which they have 3 one under the
other upon the shore, the farthest of which consists of three great pieces,
which play both upon the entrance of the Harbor and Mole. That which is under
that ^s of three pieces which play only upon the Harbor, and the third (which
is nearest) has but two pieces, which play upon the courtaine, and flanck of
the Arsenal. Besides these four batteries upon the shore, there are three more
at greater distance, one of five Guns upon the Mount Marule, which plays upon
the point of the Bastion* another of five upon a little eminence in the midst
of their approaches, and the third of four pieces; They have two mortar pieces
under the breach which do great mischief many times to the place, but that
which gives them most trouble is a platform they have made in the Sea, near the
Haven, from whence their Cannon can play into it, in despite of the protection
of the Mole.

At first the Artillery of the Castle rendered this post useless to the Turks,
by dismounting their Guns as fast as they planted them: but they have since
found out so good a way of sheltring themselves, that the Town cannot hinder
them from shooting into which part of the Haven they please, in so much that
they are in too great liklyhood to become masters of it, unless some way could
be continued of destroying that platform, by mines or otherwise: And this is it
that they are as serious upon, as so important an inconvenience does require.

After I had observed the two Attaques of S. Andre, and Sabionera both within,
and without, and all that side toward the Sea, which they commanded, I
surveyed the other but in transitu as it were, yet to complete my Tour of the
Town, I shall give a short touch of them, as I proposed.

The first was the Bastion of Victoire, which is large and beautiful with a
good Mount within it, that commands to the Royal Fort of S. Demetrius, it is a
great work, which covers the whole Bastion, and part of the courtaine, on the
Sabionera side, which Fort is likewise defended by it, and the Fort of Molina,
which flancks the enemies works with four great pieces of Canon: The Fort Royal
has two half Moons at its two extremities, with a good scarf and a fair
Retirade within it: and for as much as the whole work is bending on the
Sabionera side, it could not be but the other side next the bastion of Jesus
must run out longer then the other. Before the point there is a kind of a
spur, under the shutter of another work called the point of the Heartbreak.

The bastion of Jesus which is the next has a horn work likewise before it,
but much less. Betwixt the bastions de la Victoire, and Jesus, there is another
work raised by the General Priuli, and called the Fort of saint Marie de la
Presa, which is in the middle of the courtaine; All the other Bastions which
are near it, have a good Ravelin betwixt every two of them about the midst of
the courtaine.

The Martiningo is upon the angle that runs furthest out into the land, toward
new Candy. There is a good retreat within it, and a strong ^^mount nearer the
Town, it is defended by a large work called Saint Marie without, which was
utterly demolished when the Turks removed their attaques to S. Andre, as is
observed before.

The Bastion of Bethlem is something less then ^^he rest, but is defended by a
good Halfe-Moo^^ before it, called Moccenigo.

The Panigra is she^^red without by a good work of the same name, and has good
Retreat within it. The breach the Turks made there and all the ruins without,
have bin very well repayr'd, as well as Martiningo, by the diligence of an
eminent Ingineer of the order of S. Francis. To make these reparations they
have pulled down several houses in the Town, there being scarce any other wood
^^eft for that purpose, and for these two last years their occasions in that
nature have bin so great (their works and lodgments being daily beaten down and
repaired) that there are very few le^^ standing, where one may lie secure: For
this reason the Soldiers and Inhabitants, are glad of huts ^under ground
(especially in those quarters which are nearest the Attaques) the showers of
stones and fireballs, and grenades, are so frequent.

The Gate of the same name is near the flanker toward Bethlem; and one that
side toward S. Andre, on the middle of the courtaine, lies the Ravelin of the
Holy Ghost, against which the enemies Canon thundering continually have made no
inconsiderable breach.

Having thus finished my Tour of the Town, I returned to Mr. S. Paul, where I
understood of the arrival of Mr. Fueillade and all his Troops in the Town.

It was designed we should have been mustered the next morning which was the
14th of November. but most of our men that were not used to the Sea being
indisposed and out of order, it was thought convenient to allow them two days
longer to recollect themselves. On the sixth they were drawn out, before
Morosini the Captain General of the place, and Cornaro the Provider General of
the Kingdom of Candy, who found them in very good order, and past many
complements upon Mr. Fueillade an^^ the rest of our Officers.

Mr. Fueillade taking occasion from their great civilities, desired we might
have the guard at the bastion of S. Andre: but the Knights of Malta and other
Officers of the Town, who had had the keeping it a long time before, opposed it
very strongly, and protested they would not yield that honor to any persons
whatsoever. Mr. Morosin^ apprehending the contest might grow higher, to satisfy
Mr. Fueillade, without disobliging his own Officers, gave him the guard of a
little Chappe^ above the bastion, and just by the breach, and because it lay
somewhat too open to the enemies shot three or four works were thrown up
immediately to secure it. On the 8th day of November about 6 i^^ the morning Mr.
S. Paul with his Brigade mounted the Guard, and was not releiv'd till the next
morning at the same hour; he lost that day his Major Dupre, and Mr. Marienval
whose head was so shattered with a great shot that Mr. Chamilly and Mr. Lare
who stood by him, were both dangerously wounded with the splinters of his skull.

On the 9th the brigade de Chateau Thierry went upon the Guard, for orders were
given the brigades should relieve one another according to their ranks, and
that each was to continue there 24 hours, that is from six hours in the
morning, to ^he same hour the next: which is worth the observation, to
distinguish what brigade was upon the guard when any considerable action
happened in our post, without being necessary to name them particularly all
along. That day there past nothing ^t S. Andre, but at night the Turks sprang a
Mine under one of our outworks, and put fire to the Gabions that sheltred
another, advancing at the same time with great shouts, and firing to the
assault; but they were vigourously repulst by the brigade of Chateau de
Thierry, who slew several of them, without any loss except Mr. Hongre, who was
slain with an arrow in his eye.

On the tenth the Town sprang a little Mine on S. Andres side under the
forwardest post of the enemies, which blew it quite up, and a little work ^hey
had made before the Gate of the bastion: The Turks repayr'd it again in a short
time, but they were scarce settled there again, but another Mine was sprang in
the same place, that cleared the gate ^bsolutely.

Ot the 14th they made another sally on Sabionera ^ide to surprise a new post
of the Turks, but the design succeeded not that day; The next day they made a
new attempt upon it, and demolished it quite.

On the 19th on S. Andres side they gave fire to a Fougasse, and at the same
time sallied out (...) men only, upon that place, and beat the (...) back, but
the Turks observing the smalness (...), rallyed of a sudden, and returned (...)
others (which came in from all sides) to (...), leaving our men scarce time to
make (...) ^^he Town.

(...) made a fierce sally on the Sabionera (...) m^^n, who slew near 200 of
the (...) the heads of a Basha and 3 (...) Officers a long with them,
notwith(...) not much above half our men (...)

(...) ^^lly was made on that side, the (...) assault upon S. Andre, which
(...) and ^^pell'd at length the brigade of (...) upon the guard with part of
of (...) Harcourt, behind the bastion.

On (...) on S. Andres side they sprang another (...) under a battery the
enemies had raised near the (...), and at the same time Mr. Marcel Sub-b^^gad^^
Mr. Chateau Thierry made a sally with (...) Gentlemen, and gained about 20
paces of ground which the enemy had possessed before the face of the bastion
toward S. Esprit, advancing as it were under the Gate which is on that side:
Mr. Fu(...) having notice of their success repaired immediately to them, and
made a work be thrown up to hold ten or a douzen Musketeers: at which place
there were lost 3 or 4 Gentlemen of the brigade of Chateau Thierry,

This work that Mr. Fueillade and S. Marcel caused to be made, bindred the
enemy from stopping up the Gate of S. Andre, and from attempting any thing on
that side under shelter, for which reason the Turks resolved to fall upon it
before it was finished: As soon as they were perceived to advance upon that
design, we drew out six musquetteers only, out of the same Brigade, and sent
them to their relief, with which supply they ^eat back one Turks bravely,
though they could ^ire but one after another, and that but half shelterd.

The Turks being netled to see themselves repulst, came the same day to the
charge again, with so great numbers, and such quantity of all sorts of fire,
that they demolished that work, advancing to, and putting fire to the very Gate
of S. Andre: Mr. Fueillade drew out 20 Musquet^eers to charge them, but they
beat them back with such resolution, and persisted in that obstina^y to burn
the Gate, that there was great danger ^f their taking the Town that day.

Their fire balls, fire pots, Grenades, and other ^orts of artifices they
threw perpetually into the ^ost where the brigade of S. Paul was, were very
^errible, and mischievous, yet that young Prince ^ontinued there all day at the
head of his men, with Mr. Fueillade, who received a slight hurt on ^is lip
with a Granadoe.

During this conflict three pieces of great Canon were brought into the street,
and pointed over against the Gate, and a good number of our brigades drawn out
and disposed thereabouts, to ^epel the enemy in case they burnt it, and
endeavored to enter; but at night they drew off of themselves to our no small
satisfaction.

On the 29 Mr. de V^lle-Maur who was upon the guard, sallied out about break of
day with Mr. Decourty one of the Officers that was with him and having beat
back the enemy to a convenien^^ distance he threw up a work some 5 or 6 paces
before their post, which had two considerable effect for besides that the gate
of the bastion was render^^ more secure, the enemy could not work, without
being discovered, which made them the next morni^^ plant two great Guns against
it, which did mu^^ mischief, and brake the right arm of Mr. Fouca^^ Captain of
the Guards to Mr. Fueillade.

The first of December the Venetians sprang: Mine under a battery the enemy had
raised a whi^^ before, and called it the Scotseze, it pointed upo^^ the breach
of S. Andre: which Mine succeeded (...) well, that blowing up the battery
entirely, (...) buried all their Artillery, and the Basha whic^^ commanded it,
in the ruins, as we understoo^^ by a Turk that came running to us into the
Town he informed us likewise that the whole Turkis^^ force in Candy was not
above 20000 fighting me^^

On the second they sprang a Mine on Sabione^^ side, but without any effect;
They sprang anothe^^ on S. Andre with much more advantage, for (...) threw down
all their blinds of earth, under whic^^ they could securely fire into our works.

On the fourth, there was a sally made by 2^^ Gentlemen of our brigade, and a
commanded part^^ of twenty more of the Garrison, on the Sabioner^^ side: they
were led up by Mr. Fourneaux, Sub-Brigadier to Mr. S. Paul, who taking along
wi^^ him Mr. Chapestan, (Captain Major of the Town) went out with design to
surprise one of the best and nearest posts of the enemy, which they performed
so vigorously, that after they had made a great slaughter of those Infidels,
they brought away one of their Colors, and a Renegado back with them.

When this sally was in deliberation, several of our Volunteers made great
application to Mr. Fueil^^ade, that they might go out with that Party: but ^^e
refused them, and not without some indignation to see them so importunate.

The Chevalier de Tremes, one of the gallantest, and bravest persons of the
Brigade, dissatisfied with the refusal, went to that part of the breach, where
the enemies Cannon was the most hott, and leap^^ng over the Palissado, he ran
most desperately ^^lone (with his sword only in his hand) to a post of the
enemies, and returned with it all bloody to ^^he same place again: Mr.
Fueillade seeing him ^^ome back in that posture, told him in some kind ^^f
passion, he had as good have a butcher as he for ^^is Aid de Camp: in which
command he was at ^^hat time.

This desperate (rather then discreet action of ^^is,) had like to have been
the occasion of great ^^isorders; Those who saw him vault over the ^^alissado,
thought themselves obliged in honor to ^^oe the same, and had all of them
hazarded to have ^^ollow'd the example, had not Mr. Fueillade bin ^^dvertis'd,
and with his utmost authority and ^^hreatnings restrein'd them.

Yet all this could not hinder but Mr. Ville-Franche, nephew to Mr. S. Andre,
took the same leap, and joining himself with the party drawn out, he behaved
himself so, that by main strength he pulled a Turk out of their trenches, and
brought him through all their fire to the foot of the bastion: but as he was
entering with his prisoner into the Town, he received a pistol shot in his leg,
and dyed of it afterward. Mr. de la Mag^elane de Ragny was in the same party,
without orders likewise, slain there with 9 or 10 of our brigades, and 7 or 8
of the Garrison.

The sixth the Venetians gave fire to a Mine under a battery they had raised to
command the Port of Tramata: but the effect was inconsiderable.

On the 8th they made another small sally with 8 men only, who forced away a
Colors from a post they attempted, and bringing it back with them they planted
it in the breach.

From that day to the great sally on the sixteenth, there was no considerable
action, only some little disputes and skirmishes for small parcels of ground,
with which notwithstanding our brigades being daily diminished, we began to
complain, that instead of attempting some brave and considerable enterprise, as
they had promised us, we were continually exposed to the Mines, Grenades and
Fireballs, and employed night and day in trifling services, in which we lost
the best of our men.

For these reasons it was the General desire of our whole party that we might
be employed upon some action worthy the bravery of the French, before our
number was utterly dis-abled, seeing it was that only which engaged us in that
voyage: In short we expressed so much dissatisfaction to see our selves cut off
insensibly every day, without doing any thing of importance, and so impatient
of performing some honorable thing in a sally by our selves, that Mr. Fueillade
resolved to propose it in Council to the Venetians.

The Venetians were at first surprised with the proposition, and represented to
Mr. Fueillade the truth and no more, that there was indeed honor to be hoped
for by the French in so daring an enterprise, but that there was also great
prejudices would follow upon the Venetians, nor could that little honor be
acquired, but at a very dear rate.

In short there was but small appearance, that 300 men (as we were no more)
should attaque the trenches of the Turks, which were guarded with 2600 to be
seconded upon occasion with far greater numbers, and ^ortify'd with good
redoubts, from whence they could fire upon us on all sides within the shelter
of their works.

To this they added that it was not in their power to afford us any relief in
case of disaster, which was too likely to befall us, yea though we contrary to
all probability should beat off the enemy, yet all the ground we should gain
would be of no advantage, seeing they had neither men to make good, nor pioners
to throw it down, and in a word that they wanted Soldiers much more then
ground: By this it was clear how useless this enterprise was esteemed by the
Venetiaas, and how dangerous to the French.

Finally they left it to Mr. Fueillade and his Council to consider to what
purpose it was to expose such a handful of Nobless, against such a numerous
enemy, so well entrenched, especially having no expectation of relief.

By the great instances he made to the Venetians, to engage themselves in this
sally, it is manifest his reflection was greater then usual, proposing a way of
effecting it, without so visible a destruction to his men, and it was to fall
upon the enemy on S. Andre side by the retrenchment of the Holy Ghost: but Mr.
S. Andre Monbrun opposed that immediately, repres^nting that he had tried that
way himself with eight hundred men, and had left six hundred behind him,
without doing any thing considerable for the advantage of the Town.

But all these discouragements could not alter the resolutions of Mr.
Fueillade, though against the judgments of the Venetians, and all the Officers
of the place, I will not give you his reasons, for to speak truth, I can see
none; Perhaps the end of his expedition being to perform something worthy of
the Nobless he carried with him, he thought he could not in honor return
without attempting something extraordinary: But if he could not undertake any
thing whilst his force was entire, I see no reason why he should do it, when
they were harrast out, and reduced to a moiety of the number. It may be also he
thought the action would be the more illustrious; and I do not doubt but
without any great violence to his inclination the gallantry and cheerfulnes of
the young Cavaliers which were with him, contributed much, amongst whom the
glory of so great an enterprise does often take away the sight of those dangers
that are otherwise too evident and conspicuous.

But the greatest part of those who were not to bedaze^d by the false lusture
of an exploit so evidently dangerous, were of opinion, it had bin better
conduct to have managed the remainder of his forces to the benefit of the place
he came on purpose to relieve. And to have attended further order from his
Majesty, who pressed him not to return as he testified to him himself when he
came back. This sentiment was but just, yet when money begins to fail, and
soldiers every day to be paid, one is glad to embrace any occasion of
acquitting himself without any strict examination of the consequences.

I am not certain whether Mr. Fueillade was in any such exigency or not, this I
know he desired a young Nobleman of my acquaintance, to let him have two Bills
of Exchange, which he had to receive. But that I may loose no more time in
making conjectures at the reasons of so great a piece of gallantry, it is
sufficient you know the news was very acceptable to all our young Nobless, and
that they expressed very great joy when Mr. Fueillade assured them he was
preparing all things for a general sally, as they had often desired: And on the
fourteenth when orders were given out to all the Brigades to be ready the
sixteenth by break of day, they were so transported, it was easily visible that
Mr. Fueillade was not so much induced by reason to this enterprise as by a
compliance and inclination to passion and precipitancy, to which he was as much
addicted as the rest of the young Nobility were about to be sacrificed.

However this resolution appeared irrational and desperate to the Venetians, it
is to be believed the vigor, and cheerfulnes wherewith our youngsters prepared
themselves to execute it, gave them some hopes the success might not be so
fatal as was to be expected in reason; seeing General Morosini gave them 100
men of the garrison, which were disposed into the several Brigades, and mounted
several pieces of Canon on that side where the sally was to be made, lining the
wall with Musketeers and all sorts of Grenades, which did much increase the
slaughter of the enemy, as I shall give you an account with as much exactuess
as can be performed by the eyes of one single person.

Orders being given through our Brigades for a general assault on the 16 of
December, at break of day, every one employed that evening in rectifying his
conscience, and in the night about two a clock they stood all to their arms at
a rendevous appointed, where new orders were immediately given out for the
sally: Our four Brigades, and the 100 General Morosini lent us, made up about
450 fighting men, besides servants which marched for the most part by their
Masters sides, having each of them a pair of pistols at their girdles, and a
kind of half pike in their hands, with a long and very sharp iron at the end of
it, for their swords are but of little use against the Cymeters of the Turks,
who fear nothing but our fire arms, which yet they manage with more dexterity
then we, especially their Muskets, when they shoot from their works, or have
leisure to take their aim; for ^^n those cases they seldom miss, besides the
meanest amongst them are so curious in their Muskets, that the worst they have
may compare with our best: And for the half pikes I am speaking of, they have
so peculiar a dexterity in putting them by with a kind of buckler or target
they use, that it is rare ^^ut the hand that forces it, is upon the turning
aside, ^^ut of with their Cymeter: We had no want of back, or breast, or head
pieces, nor of any other ^^ort of defensive arms of proof. The Arsenals were
full of them, and every man had liberty to go in and choose, but no body
thought it convenient to make use of them, by reason of the ditches, and pits
and ru^^es we were to pass over. Some there were took Casques for their heads,
which they were forced to throw away when they came to engage, the great heat
they were in not suffering them to endure them.

When our four Brigades had taken their posts in the place of Arms, they were
drawn out into three divisions.

The first consisted of five and thirty out of each Brigade, which made up
seven score men, commanded by Mr. le Marquis de Chamilly, with whom marched Mr.
Chapestan (Captain Major of the Town) as guide, who had a particular knowledge
of all the enemies quarters.

The second was of fifteen out of a Brigade, making sixty in the whole, which
was commanded by Mr. Beauchevilliers, Sub-Brigadier to Mr. S. Paul.

The third was of forty men being ten out of a Brigade, which Mr. Marcell
commanded.

There were near a hundred and fifty Gentleme^^ in S. Paul's Brigade, and in
the 3 other about (...) hundred a piece, besides their servants, so tha^^
having drawn out of each Brigade sixty Gentlemen there remained no more then 90
in that of S. Paul and forty in each of the other, which made up 210^^ which
were kept in a body as a reserve.

All things being in this Order, we march^^ toward Sabionera about two in the
morning to fa^^ down into the False-Bray, where, we were to hav^^ lain on our
bellys till break of day: But our Officers met with no small trouble to put us
in orde^^ out of the Town: for the Venetian having grea^^ apprehensions of this
^ally, instead of opening u^^ a gate, by which we might have more conveniently
got to our appointed place, and concealed ou^^ selves till the morning, had
ordered two holes t^^ be made on purpose in the wall of the False-Bray by which
there could pass but one man at a time, fo^^ which reason we could get down but
in files, an^^ one after another: after this the three division^^ were drawn
up, each of them with their fro^^ toward the place they were to attacque, and
so disposed that they might fall on all at a time, without incommoding one
another at all.

The Brigade of Ville-Maur followed as a reserv^^ to reinforce such as should
be beaten back: th^^ rest which were kept as the maine reserve had order to
continue behind near the False-Bray, to secure their retreat in case of a
repulse.

We were all in this posture upon our bellies in the False-Bray, expecting
morning with impatience, and the signal, which was a Granado to thrown toward
the enemy, when we found our ^^ves prevented: For having got notice of our
de^^n, they had pointed all their Artillery toward (...) place of our sally,
which began to thunder ^^on us with so great fury, when we least expected ^^m:
that they killed two of our men with the (...) of the wall, they beat down upon
us: but the ^^atest inconvenience was their grenades, and fire^^s, which they
threw amongst us, which con^in'd Mr. Fueillade to give the signal sooner then
^^s intended.

Mr. de Chamilly advanced first, along ^he False^^ay, and fell on upon their
redoubts on that side ^^ere the breach was: Beauchevillier fell on, on ^^t side
next the Sea, and S. Marcell in the ^^ddle: The Turks who expected us in their
Tren^^s, gave us immediately so great volleys of shot, (...) so great quantity
of Grenades and other fire^^rks, that we were as it were buried in flames, a
sudden, which were the more terrible, be^^se the smoke and the dust took away
our sight: (...) the most horror of all was from their Canon, ^^ich they plied
freely from all parts, especially ^^m that where the Venetian the night before
had ^^nted, on purpose, three ranks of great guns, which ^^ved very much to our
advantage, and did great ^^cution upon the enemy.

After some resistance Mr. de Chamilly threw himself into their Trenches, and
having fallen upon ^^ir first redoubt, he forced them to leave it. Here ^^as at
the entrance of this work the Marquis of ^^anes, who was at the head of that
party with Mr. de Chamilly, and gave great testimony of his valor, received
two shots, one in his lif^ ey^^ which pierced his head, and came out a little
abo^^ his right ear, the other about his temples on th^^ same side, where it
made only a contusion. Th^^ Count de Beaumont his Brother, about sixte^^ years
of age, was then fighting by his side, a^^ seeing him fall down dead at his
feet, and tw^^ more, (of which one was the Son of Monsie^^ l'Intendant of
Toulon, who had his belly ripped ope^^ with a slugg out of a Musket) remained
undaunt^ notwithstanding, in the midst of so many dange^^ and deaths, and
without more ado, giving tw^^ of his servants order to carry his Brothers bo^^
into the Town, and give him an account, he thre^ himself into the middle of the
throng with mo^^ fury then before: as if his sorrow was not to (...) washed away
but by the blood of those Infidels.

When Mr. Chamilly had taken the first redou^^ with his party, Mr. Fueillade
whose eyes we^^ every where, observing how honorably that div^^ sion had done,
he drew out sixty men out of th^^ body of his reserve, and sent them to
re-info^^ him under the Command of Mr. Jouency: Th^^ supply relieved them so
vigorously, and well, that (...) their coming up the enemy was beaten from his
(...) cond redoubt also. The Brigade of Chateau Thie^^ perceiving the disorder
that began to be in the e^^ mies quarters, advanced also to charge them, (...)
which the young Duke performed excellently we^^ In the mean time the other
Squadrons under Bea^^ chevilliers and S. Marcel, backed by Mr. de V^^ Maur, with
the rest of his Brigade charged the^^ so well near the quarter where Mr.
Chamilly ha^^ gaged, that they augmeneed the disorder of ^^ofe who were
tottering before, and beginning to ^^ke their heels: after which marching up
with the (...) rest, and drawing as it were into one body, ^^y behaved
themselves so, that the enemy was ^^ten off of 7 of his redoubts.

The care we had all taken the night before to put (...) consciences in order,
had settled it strongly ^^on the spirits of most of us, that we were fight(...)
for our Faith, and the interest of our Religion, ^^d that dying in that cause
we could not fail of a ^^rious crown of Martyrdom, and in this per^^asion we
were much encouraged by the example a brave Capuchin, called Father Paul, who
^^rching at the head of our party with his Crueifix (...) his hand, exhorted us
both with voice and ^^sture, to fight courageously for Heaven: Nor ^^d the
galantry of Mr. Fenelon contribute little to ^^e ardour of those which aspired
to this Martyr^^me, for marching up and down with his Son, ^^e Comte de
Fontaine, where the danger was ^^eatest, and the firing most hot, he added
great ^^gour to the whole party: Monsieur his Son was ^^ounded in this charge
in the most fibrous part of ^^s foot, and near the place where he was shot at
^^s landing, of which he dyed within few days ^^er.

It Is undeniable that Mr. Fueillade exposed him^^f in all places, and upon all
occasions as far as ^^y body, and that without any thing but a thin ^^it, and a
switch in stead of a sword in his hand: ^^d this you may be assured, that even
those who ^^ndemn'd the enterprise as rash, are obliged at least to confess, it
could not have been manag^^ with more conduct, nor executed with more co^^ rage
and address; his excellence appearing in (...) places, and upon all exigences
so opportunely, a^^ his Orders were so apposite to the purpose, that (...)
seemed to have forseen all the several accidents o^^ the sally.

For my part I am persuaded that by his vig^^lance, and activity (which renderd
him prese^^ in all places of danger, where there was occasio^^ to encourage the
t^^erous, or to restrain those wh^^ were transported) he did much more
executio^^ then he could hope for himself, what confiden^^ soever he could have
in his good success.

In short who could ever have imagined that (...) few of our young Gentry,
falling upon Retrench ments so well fortified, manned with 2600 me^^ and backed
by a much greater number, had be^^ able to have take seven of their Redoubts,
kill 1200 the defendants, and put all the rest in disorder. Ye^^ this Mr.
Fueillade has done with so many Fren^^ Gentlemen, If you will give credit to a
Turk, wh^^ came the next day into the Town, and assured (...) of the truth of
it, and that they had lost a Bas^^ that commanded them, and six Colonels.

In the heat of this execution, Mr. Fueilla^^ whose eye was not idle, observed
the Turks ra^^ lying on all sides, and preparing to renew the charg^^ according
to their custom: and began to appr^^ hend the difficulty he should have to
preserve th^^ remainder of his Nobless, if he did not suddenly recall them from
the fight, which they had already maintained two long hours and more: But his
great ^^rouble was to get them off, he beat a retreat, but they were so warm in
the blood of those Infidels; ^here was nothing almost could stop them; Mr.
Fueillade was constrained to go himself and force Mr. S. Paul out of the fight:
he sent one expressly (...) Mr. Chateau Thierry to inform him of the dan^^er he
and all his party were in, if they advanced. ^^he Comte de Beaumont (excited by
is passion for ^^he loss of his Brother the Marquis of T^^vanes) was engaged so
far amongst the enemies, there was ^^o body, but the brave Chevalier de Tremes
could ^^et to him, or prevail with him either by force or ^^treaty to come
back, for he returned not into the ^^own till the heat of the engagement was
quite ^^er: But that which gave the most trouble and ^^scomposure to Mr.
Fueillade, was that during ^^e time he sounded a retreat, and that he himself
^^ok the pains to stop the most forward. Father ^^aul (of whom we have spoken)
was on the other ^^de, at the head of a party of desperadoes, whom the
^^oquence of his zeal and the sight of the Crucifix (...) carried in his hand,
had infallibly drawn to ^^eir destructions, had not he run to them himself, ^^d
obliged them to consult their security rather by (...) honorable retreat, than
to be deluded by the ^^in hope of Martyrdom, as the Priest persuaded ^^em:
Notwithstanding the Crucifix he held in ^^s hand, Mr. Fueillade could not
contain but ^^amed the indiscretion of his zeal, yet he did it ^^ith that
devout moderation, he still made use of ^^e name of God, in his reprehensions.

As soon as we were come off from the fight, and ^awn up in good order under
our Colors, the Brigades of S. Paul, and Caderousse, who were left in the
False-Bray to secure our retreat, had order to march some paces toward us,
both together in front, that they might appear the more numerous, which
contributed much to our safety: for the Turks who were just ready to fall upon
us, seeing them advance, imagined they were fresh forces sent out of the Town
to relieve us, and to enable us for a new engagement, whereupon they chose
rather to stand upon their guard, than to assail us: We no sooner observed
their resolution, but we began our retreat immediately, and to make the more
advantage of their mistake, we retreated step by step, very slowly, faceing
about ever and anon, as if we would return to the charge; When we came near
that place in the False-Bray, where the two holes were made for our coming out:
The two Brigades which appeared so opportunely, entered into it, and at the
same time we began to file off, two and two, to get in again, as we got out,
but so as every rank discharged before they entered; This made the Turks look
upon it as an artifice to draw them into some ambuscade, and they were the more
gulled into that opinion, by observing the Brigades of S. Paul, and Caderousse
to disappear at the same time we drew off. In so much as it may be truly
asserted that this stratagem (which cannot be attributed to any thing but the
good conduct of Mr. Fueillade, saved the lives of all of us that were left: for
it is clear, had the Turks charged us again but with their swords in their
hands, there had been scarce any of us alive; But by good fortune, and their
diffidence, we came safe into the Town, where the pleasure we might have taken
after we had escapt so many dangers, was totally disturbed by our sorrow for
our loss, having left near six score Gentlemen dead and wounded, behind us in
their Trenches, whose heads were next day set up upon pikes before the Visiers
quarter; who above all the rest admired the head of the Marquis de Doradour,
for the delicacy of its tincture, and the excellence of his hair, which he had
got tied up in tresses the night before, that it might give him no trouble in
his charge. He made that be set up upon a large Pillar in the midst of all the
rest, after he had kept it several days, to show it as a wonder to his friends.

Of six hunderd Gentlemen that arrived in Candy, after this sally there
remained not above 230 of which there were fifty at least wounded and sick,
most of which number are since dead. The ensuing List will give you the names
of the most considerable, with the manner how they were killed or wounded,
either before the sally, or in it.

A List of such persons of quality, as were Slain or Wounded, under the Command
of Mr. Fueillade, in his Expedition to Candy.
In the Brigade of Mr. S. Paul, before the Sally. SLAIN.
Messieurs De la Magdelaine de Ragny. Du Pre. De Marienval. De Ville-franche.
De la Fontaine. De Bouteville. Bernier. De Rouverais.

WOUNDED.
Messieurs Des Roches. Du Menou. De la Sabloniere. De Vaudevil. Girault. De la
Camp. Ranvie. Odebert.

In the Sally on the 16 December. SLAIN.
Messieurs Le Marquis de Tavanes. De Jouancy. Le Marquis d'Oradour. De
Neufville. Seneschal. Desquoys. De S. Quentin. De Gaillard. De S. Baville. De
Fontaines. Le Chevalier de Ville Serin Vernueil.

WOUNDED.
Messieurs Loyal, wounded to death. De Chamilly, with a Pike in his leg. De
Tambonneau, with a Musket shot through his jaws. De Torigny, with a Granade in
his cheek. De Sepville, with a Granado in his leg. Le Chevalier Molets,
slightly in his face, and his thigh. De Beauchevillier, with a musket in his
leg. De Chavigny, with a musket through the side of his head. De Lare, with
two musket shot in both his arms. Dinfreville, had his leg broke with a
musket shot. De Mantalor, shot through the neck. The Chevalier de
Ville-Bussiere, in his shoulder. De L^^geliere, through both his shoulders. De
Mantalor, in his hipp. Des Fossez, in his arm. Des Essars, in his shoulders.
De la Laud, with a stone in his head. De Sonotte, with a musket in his
shoulder. De Sauvager in his thigh. De la Colombiere, in his hipp. Le Sueur,
with a stone in his head. De Monton, in his arm. Oury, in his thigh of which
he is since dead. De S. Aubin, in his hipp. Coulon, with a stone in his head.
De la Roque, with an arrow in his shoulder. De Boemar, in his leg.

Of the Brigade of Chateau Thierry, before the Sally. SLAIN.
Messieurs De Saint Michel. De la Chevalerie. De Launer.

Upon the Sally on the 16 December. SLAIN.
Messieurs De Ville-Neuve. De la Matpliere. De ^a Sablonniere. Melet. Le Bouc.

WOUNDED.
Messieurs De S. Marcel, with a musket in his belly, two fingers cut off, and
dead since. Le Count de Fountain, shot in his leg, and hurt in his foot.
Poncet, shot in the shoulder. De la Forets, with a stone in his head. De
Rome-Cour, with a Granado in his shoulder. De Besaudun, had an arm cut off,
and since dead. Vergon, with a granadoe in his hand and leg. De Chaludet, with
a musket in his leg. Lesleu, with a musket in his head. Le Blan, an arm cut
off, since dead. De Pastres, with a shot through his body, since dead. De Crole,
with a shot in his thigh. De la Mothe, with a shot in his arm. De Mont-Cornet,
with a shot through his body. De Cerigot, with a stone in his arm. De Milieu,
with an arrow in his reins.

Of the Brigade of Caderousse, before the Sally. SLAIN.
Messieurs De Loste^nau. Le Comte de Montbrison. Fleury. Ba^^das.

WOUNDED.
Messieurs The Marquis de Refuge, with a shot in his shoulder. De Montredent.
^e Bon. De Broquetieres, with a granado in his hipp.

In the Sally on the 16 December. SLAIN.
Messieurs De Casteret. Soulage. Richet. De la Branetiere:

WOUNDED.
Messieurs De Flavigny, with a shot through his thigh. Hongre, with an arrow in
his head, since dead. Suarts, with a stone in the head. De Marinville, in the
thigh, dead since. De Bas-Douart, with a shot in his shoulder, and another in
the knee. D'Agaignes, with a shot through his jaws, that carried away half his
tongue.

Of the Brigade of Ville-Maur. SLAIN.
Messieurs Le Comte de Ville-Maur, Commander of the brigade. De Bois le Comte.
De Lusignan. De Chinol. Martigny. Chateau Guillaume. De Liran. Du Taro. De
Chaseras. Du Beuil. De Bois Peraux. De la Brunetiere. Le Chevalier de Lusignan.

WOUNDED.
Messieurs De Moliere, with a shot in the elbow. De Charmon, with an arrow in
the arm. De Narbonne, with a stone in his leg. Descouris, his leg cut off,
since dead. De la Cost, in his head. Coupe, in his knee. De Rochefort, his
arm broke. De Pressi, in his thigh. De la Payo, in his head. D'Hotel, in his
head. De la Haudonnier, in his arm. De Maison Neufve, in his leg. De
Sourillon, in his head. De Moriniere, in his head and arm. Du Plessi, in his
head. De Goguery, shot through the belly. De la Roche Monmorin, in his leg. De
Vaubourg, in the belly. Le Chevalier de Vausel, in his arm with an arrow. Du
Cour, with the splinter of a granado in the head.

Of Mr. Fueillad's family, before the Sally. SLAIN.
Monsieur de la Tour.
WOUNDED.
Messieurs Foucault. Cour-Landon. Deschaunis.

Upon the Sally. SLAIN.
Messieurs Boesle Cour. Artificie.

WOUNDED.
Messieurs De Vaudeville, his right hand cut off. Ranviere. Vigniole. ^arguin.
D'Aubusson, alias de Chambon. De Senau. Mariniere.


Besides these which I have inserted into this List, by reason of the eminency
of their birth and qualities, there were more then two hundred Gentlemen, of
whose names I could not inform my sel^^ It Is no wonder therefore if after so
sad an engagement, there were nothing but sorrow and dejectio^^ to be seen
amongst us that remained: there bein^^ scarce one amongst us, but had either
some relatio^^ or some friend to condole, some dead person to bury some wounded
to assist, or some sick person t^^ relieve.

In this manner we were all of us employed, di^^ charging our malancholy
devoires, and preparin^^ four our return, our condition not permitting (...) to
attempt any new design, nor to perform a^^ considerable duty in the Town. From
the very da^^ of our Sally, our posts were committed to the defense of the
Knights of Malta, from whence seve^^ were arrived since our coming, besides
what w^^ found upon the guard at the breach of S. Andre.

We were obliged notwithstanding to attend (...) fair wind for 18 days, which
we endured wit^^ much trouble and impatience: To divert the ca^^ and disquiet
that was upon me, I thought good (...) the mean time to make a visit to a
certain Grecia^^ Priest of my acquaintance, a person of great wort^^ and honor
in all his proceedings.

These kind of Priests amongst the Greeks, a^^ not unlike our Parish Priests,
unless in this th^^ they have the liberty of marrying once.

They are habited in a long violet colored Robe, girt about the middle with a
great Rope of the same color, with pendants at each end: They wear an odd
unusual kind of hatts, much different from ours, for besides that their brims
are very broad, and their crowns like a sugar loaf, and about two ^^cubits
high, they carry a great many Taffaty bands about them, of several colors,
fastened length wise, from the top to the bottom, and have their brims covered
with the same.

They behave themselves like true Pastors of the people, who pay them a
reverence as if they were their Fathers, depositing whatever is most dear, and
precious to them, in their hands. In short there is not a family amongst them,
which puts not their whole affairs into their management, making them Vmpires
in all their differences, referring their very marriages and alliances to their
Conduct, and regulation.

This Priest had a young Neice, came lately to live with him, of an excellent
proportion, an amiable air, and a certain sweetness in her eye, that rendered
her beauty (though otherwise not extraordinary) more greatfull and agreeable,
then the most exact.

She speak Italian excellently well, but my skill in that language being but
small, I addressed my self principally to her Uncle, who loved French likewise,
and having contracted a friendship with him, I did believe he would give me
leave to wait upon her, and entertain her sometimes at his house. But I had
scarce began my proposition to him, but with a deep sigh he interrupted me, and
told me, that the late misfortune of his Niece made him apprehensive of some
all consequence or other, if she should accept that honor: Is it (said I) that
you imagine me so dishonorable as to solicit so fair a Lady, (and so nearly
related to a person for whom I have so great veneration) to any action of
scandal? He replied, I take you Sir for too Noble a person, to design any such
thing: But it may be you are ignorant that my Niece is married to an Italian
Officer, a cruel, treacherous, and violent man, who having bin forced to marry
her after he had shamefully abused the simplicity of her youth, ceases not to
retain an implacacle jealousy of her, and a furious desire of being revenged,
the effects of which I cannot but fear, from his actions a while since to one
of the bravest Gentlemen among you.

His last words made me forget the resentment his Nieces dishonor began to
excite in me; and to desire to be informed who that Gentlemen was, and what
that deplorable accident. Which he related to me very civilly in this manner. A
certain Cavalier of Normandy, called the Baron de S. Gille, a person of great
strength and courage, and one that was very eminent in France for his resolute
prosecutions of all kind of desperate enterprises, either good or bad, having
attempted several times, (but in vain) to obtain from my Niece those favors,
which the Law forbids, though Nature requires; at length he resolved with the
Chevalier de Tremes, after they had been in a debauch, to go and make her a
visit at her chamber, and to take such a time as they might most probably find
the Italian Officer within, upon whom they looked but as a pretended husband,
and one who kept her company for his divertisement only.

Accordingly these two Cavaliers were as good as their words: They waited upon
her in the evening, and found her husband with her, who seeing them enter,
advanced to meet them, and to know their desires. They replied briskly, they
^ame as he did to entertain themselves with that Lady, and without attending
his answer, addressed themselves to her: having past some preliminary
complements, according to the ordinary civility of the French, they began to
cajole her, and to take some liberty that she did not approve, in so much that
she was obliged to rebuke them something ^^owder then usual: The Baron S. Gille
replied in her own note, according to the false opinion he had of her, telling
her that having been so liberal of her favors to a pittyfull Italian, she
ought not be disgusted at what they requested with so much civility.

The husband stole out in the beginning of the discourse, and having in great
have fetched a pair of Pistols, and concealed them in his breeches: he enters
just as they finished the conference, when taking as it were the word out of
their mouths, smiling he told them he had often heard say, that ^^t was the
custom in France for Ladys to have their Gallants to relieve and assist their
Husbands in their Matrimonial functions, and it was but reasonable those
Gallants should taste the pleasures of that Sacrament, seeing they performed the
duties of it: But by misfortune that custom was not as yet come thither, which
in his judgment was very convenient. You have (replied the Chevalier) a more
commodious way of easing your selves in your Nuptial fatigues, seeing your
Grecian Marriages are only for such a certain time as is agreed on: For which
reason Sir there being great probability that you have not married this Lady
for longer time, then others of your profession do ordinarily in this country,
(which is never above 3 months) I suppose the term of your contract may be
expired, and we permitted to enter into (...) new and short Matrimony, for a
few days only, during which time you may have opportunity (...) you think fit,
to go see your Uncle. I shall readily consent Gentlemen (said he) when I am
assured the date of my marriage is out, which as yet I do^^ not know, but if
you please to let the business depend till to morrow, I shall in the mean time
endeavor to inform my self.

These Gallants perceiving the Lady was stolle^^ away, whilst they were
rallying in this manne^^ with her husband, they took their leaves continuing
their mirth still, and he answering with great pleasantness and hipocrisy: till
on the middle of th^^ stairs (whither he had waited on them in complement) he
drew out his two pistols, on a sudden and firing upon them both together, he
shot th^^ Baron S. Gille through the heart, but the othe^^ went only through the
Chevalier de Tremes slee^^ and his shirt, burning them both without any other
hurt.

Whilst the Chevalier was endeavoring to kee^ up his friend who was then
sinking down upon th^^ stairs, the Italian got away, and took sanctuar^^ with
the General of that Nation, where he remained not above two days, before he
appear^ again, no body concerning themselves to reveng this murder, because it
was known, he only a^^ticipated the Justice of France, who had prepar^^ a more
ignominious death for the Baron, for several crimes he had committed, the last
of which ^as running away with the Kings money in Bri^ny.

Yet this reason satisfied not me so, but that in ^^ome kind of passion, I told
him, that I was ^^qually surpised that the French should have no ^^ore
resentment of it, and that the Venetian General should have more care to save
the life of that ^^urderer, and stifle the memory of the action, ^^en to do
Justice, as if the crimes charged upon (...) Baron were sufficient to expiate a
murder.

He was making his answer, when a noble Gre^^an came in, (to desire something
for his family, ^^hich was deposited in his hands) and interrupted ^^ur
discourse, which I could not renew till two ^^ays after: But then the subject
was altered, for ha^^ing received the letter you did me the honor to ^^rite, the
latter end of November; importing a ^^esire in you to understand something of
the faith ^^nd Mysteries of their Religion, but especially their ^^utward
policy. I made that the subject of our en^^rtainment, to the end I might give
you the more ^^act account, when ever I should have opportunity.

He enlarged immediately upon the extent of their Religion, enumerating the
several people of the ^^ast, which have submitted to the Jurisdiction of ^^he
Patriarchs of Constantinople, of Antioch, of Alexandria and Jerusalem, which
are the four, ^^hat do properly compose the Greek Church, ^^eing bound
together in the same Communion and Errors: He would have discoursed to me
likewise ^^f several Christian Societies, and Sects, which their Bishops and
Patriarchs have apart; but the ide^^ which he gave me of them being so vast and
confused, that my memory I found would be too weak^^ to retain them, I desired
he would in few word^^ instruct me only, in the Orders observed in the present
Government of the Church, and in the principal points in which they dissented
from th^^ Roman.

He had the humanity to grant my request, an^^ to inform in this manner. That
the Greek Church which extends it self almost quite through the Eas^^ is
governed properly by the four Patriarch a foresaid: The next after them are the
Metropolitans who have several Churches, and several Bishop under them: Next
them are the Archbishops, an^^ Bishops in great numbers, of which there are no
le^^ then 150 in the Patriarchate of Constantinople, (...) this day, and of
those 150, there are 35 Metropo^^ litans: The Archbishops have generally no
Su^^ fragans, and the Bishops are always superior (...) the Priests, from whom
they recieve their ordin^^tion as in the Church of Rome.

The Patriarchs are chosen by their Metropol^^tans, but the Patriarch of
Constantinople is oblig^^ to give a certain sum of money to the Gran^^ Seigneur
chief Basha, to have his privileges con^^firm'd.

The Metropolitans are chosen by right of seni^^rity and age.

Their Archbishops, and Bishops are select^^ from amongst the Friars, and
after their ordin^^ tion, are obliged to observe the vows of a Re^^gious life,
that is to say, to celibacy and abst^^ nence from flesh, in which they cannot
dispense with themselves during life.

After these we may consider the Abbots or Archimandrits, which bear the habits
of their Order, living in the same austerity and retirement with their several
Monks, but with more regularity and exemplariness, in respect there is never
any scandal or disorder, amongst them. Nor is it much to be admired, the
strictness of their Penances, and their assiduity at their prayers, employing
them day and night, and not exposing them to those temptations wherewith others
are entangled.

The Religious are all of them of the Order of S. Basil: They are so numerous,
that upon Mount Athos alone, there are no less then 4 or 5000 of them disposed
into several Monasteries: The severity of their fasts, exceeds the ancient
rigor of the Church: for besides their fasting on Wednesdays and Fridays
throughout the year, they observe four Lents: the first is of seven weeks,
during which time they have not the use so much as of milk or fish, living for
that time upon dried meats, only upon Sundays and Saturdays: (which being the
Jews Sabbath is never fasting-day with them) they are allowed milk, and fish,
and wine, and oil: For the assiduity of their devotions, it is greater then
the Chartereux, amongst us, for they being obliged to prayers but every three
hours, these are obliged every hour and half.

Their Priests and Ecclesiastics, we may distinguish into two sorts: For there
are those which live like Regulars in their Cloisters, where they have their
Deans, Subdeans, Archdeacons, Lecturers, and other Canonical Officers: they
are called Layick Monks, and are properly the same with our Canons: The other
are Seculars, who say Prayers for the People, and administer the Sacraments to
all under their Cure: But the chief and most venerable amongst them, are the
Papas we have mentioned before, which are selected ordinarily from amongst the
Religious, and hold the same rank with our Parish Priests almost, only they are
more venerable, and have greater authority in temporal affairs.

For what respects the Doctrine of the Greeks in point of Mystery: it will not
be imper^^nent to take notice by the way, what books and writings they make use
of, before we speak of their differences from our Church:

1. They have no less esteem and adherency to the ancient traditions of the
Church, then we.

2. They do^ admit with the same veneration and respect all the Books of the
Holy Scriptures, but have no other Translation of it, but the Septuagint.

3. They give the same reverence almost, to the Acts of the seven Greek Synods,
to the writings of S. Basil, of S. Chrysostom, and S. John de Damas.

4. They have a great value likewise for S. Gregorys Morals.

5. And addicting themselves much to the study of Schole Divinity, they read
the writings of Thomas Aquinas with great admiration, especially his Sum of
Theology.

6. Their Liturgy is in the ancient Greek language, which the most of them do
not understand (...) They use S. Basils Lyturgy on Festival days, and S.
Chrysostomes upon others.

If their Books, and their principal Doctors be well considered, it is no hard
matter to believe, their opinions in Points of Faith and Mysteries, cannot be
much different from ours, unless in three particulars only.

The first in which they dissent from the Roman, ^^is, about the procession of
the Holy Ghost: which they will have proceed from the Father alone: For (say
they) it from the Father and the Son, he must necessarily have a twofold
understanding, and a twofold will: Yet they forbear not to worship him, to
acknowledge the equality of the three Persons, and to baptize in his Name.

The second is about the C^libation of Priests, who amongst them are allowed to
marry once, and this opinion is founded upon the fourth Canon of the Council of
Gangra, which prononces an Anathema against all such as do scruple to receive
the Sacrament from the hands of a married Priest. Nevertheess it is to be
believed they do not absolutely dis^^pprove of the Celibacy in them, seeing
(as we said before) those which hold the first rank in their Church, are
obliged after their Ordination to the ^bservance of all the vows of Religion,
of which Celibacy is the first.

The third concerns the state of the Soul, after he death of the body: They
believe not as we ^oe, that they go immediately to Heaven, to receive the
recompense either of their good works or ^ad: but they are of opinion they are
reserved, (the good in places of pleasure: the bad in pain and horror) till
the day of Judgment, otherwise say they that day would be to no purpose all
peop^^ being sentenced before.

Upon this score it is they reject Purgatory, ye^^ the Custom of praying for
the dead is receiv^^ amongst them (as amongst us) for an Apostolica^^
Tradition, and a thing practiced by all the Saints and the whole Church from
age to age: and th^^ they assert that (betwixt two places where the^^ suppose
the good, and the bad, to attend) th^^ is a third for those who had a desire to
turn b^^ deferred it too long, and that it is those Souls whi^^ receive benefit
by the prayers and sacrifices ma^^ to God for them: Which is an opinion not
ve^^ remote from our Purgatory.

But if it be considered that the Greeks admit o^^ the seven first occumenical
Councels, rejecting (...) that succeeded them, by reason that in the sever^^
called by Pope Adrian, it was decreed, that all th^^ Decisions of that Council
should ^^e inviolab^^ and perpetual, and whoever should call any Cou^^ cel
after that, should be accursed, it will be (...) hard matter to conceive why the
Greeks, who di^^ so little from the Romans, in points of Doctrin^^ and Faith,
should be at that distance notwit^^standing in matters of practice and
discipline.

For the Greeks having no regard to all the alte^^tions in the Church of Rome,
since the said sev^^ Councels, but looking on them as innovations a^^
corruptions, they think themselves obliged to st^^ the closer to their ancient
discipline, by th^^ adherency to that, upbraiding us as Heretics. T^^
Catholic on the other side considering the dis^^ pline, and Ceremonies of the
Church, but as things indifferent and changeable in themselves, the utility of
them depending upon certain circumstances that might be altered: they do not
think themselves obliged to esteem them as indispensible precepts, but as
practices left wholly to the authority of the Church, who having established
them at one time for particular reasons, may retrench them upon another
occasion that they shall think just, and substitute new in their places,
reserving still a veneration for those which they change; for the Church may
lawfully introduce a new discipline, and make the people submit to it, without
condemning what was practiced before. And this they have done several times as
they judged it convenient: But the Greeks regarding the points of their
discipline, and the ancient practice of their Church, as inviolable precepts,
have retained them as firmly, as their Articles of Faith. And this is the great
difference betwixt the Greek Church and the Roman.

These two Churches have the same Sacraments, but they agree not in the form
of administration. The Greeks baptize with water like the Latins, and ^^n the
name of the three Persons of the Trinity, but they continue the way of
immersion, which was ^^he ancient way of the Church. The Romans on the other
side considering very well that sometimes ^t may happen, they cannot have water
sufficient, and sometimes not vessals proper to plunge the whole body of the
child, they would baptize, and that moreover the cold of the water in which it
is plunged, did many times alter its health, and prevail with the Parents to
defer its baptism, with great danger of their Souls, they did conceive
aspersion might be as well, seeing in the primitive times (though rarely) it
was allowed upon certain occasions.

The Greeks have the same opinion of the real presence of Jesus Christ in the
Eucharist, and of the Transubstantiation of the bread into his body, They adore
the Host as we do upon their knees, and as it is removed from one place to
another, they prostrate themselves like us: But the first difference betwixt us
is, they think it Jud^ical and contrary to the very institution of the
Sacrament, to use any bread, but bread without Levain; the reason they give is
from the words Recumbentibus Discipulis, for, say they, if the Disciples were
sitting at the Table, when Jesus Christ took the bread and changed it into his
most adorable Body, it is manifest it was not leavened bread, for it was the
custom of the Jews to eat that standing, as in the Geremony of the Passover.

Another difference is, they give the Communion to the people in both kinds,
following the ancient practice of the Church, whereas the Church of Rome
(believing Christ to be entirely in either) have thought fit to administer it
seperately, and upon consideration of diverse inconveniences, have changed that
practice in their ordinary distribution.

They have another peculiar ceremony, and that is to consecrate several Hosts
upon Holy Thursday, reserving them apart to be communicated to those that are
sick during that year.

Confession, Extream-Unction, Ordination of Priests, and Marriages they do use
in the same manner almost with us: Nevertheless the bonds of their Marriages
are not so strong as ours, seeing they do break them frequently upon trifling
occasions, but this is but in some particular occasions, and principally in
Moscovy.

Their fasting, and abstinence from certain meats, much more austere then
amongst us; they observe all the ancient fasts, that is they eat but once a
day, toward the evening, and besides their observation of Wednesdays and
Fridays throughout the year, they have four Lents, which the Layity keep with
almost the same severity as the Religious: The first is the same with ours, and
lasts seven weeks. The second begins the morning after the Octaves of the
Pentecost. The third is of fifteendays, commences the first of August, and
holds ^^o the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, which is their principal Feast:
The fourth lasts all the time of the Advent, which begins fifteen days before
ours.

The Laiques do not immitate the Priests and Monks, less strictly in the
assiduity of their prayers, then in the austerity of their fasts. There is a
great number of them, which recite the Breviary, as they do, and on Sundays
and Festivals, man, woman, and child fail not (without great necessity) to be
present at Church from 2 a clock in the morning, singing of Hymns till Sun
rising, after which time they retire till nine, and then meet again, to be
present at Mass: After dinner they (...) to Vespers as the Catholics do, but
with much more exactness: most of the Priests and the people place their
principal devotion in the worship of the Virgin Mary: They have no Music in
their Churches: The women never sit intermingel'd with the men, but are placed
apart where they can neither see nor be seen, but through a lettice. Preaching
they use but very seldom; nay one of their Monks being accused of having
preached in Lent, Easter, and Christmas, was banished to Mount Sinay, by the
Patriarch of Constantinople.

Their prayers for the Dead, their Invocation of Saints, their confidence not
only in their prayers and intercessions, but in their merit and assistance,
their veneration for Relics, and their worshipping of Images, is the same with
ours, with this small difference only, they have no statues, nor images embost
in their Church, but in flat painting great store, yet they do not absolutely
reject them, for they are to be found sometimes in the Chapels of their Canons.

And this is in few words what I could learn of the Doctrine, and discipline of
the Greek Church: I suppose it is sufficient to confirm you in the opinion you
have always had of it, that unless it be in the question about the Procession
of the Holy Ghost, the estate of Souls after the death of their bodies, and the
Celibacy of their Priests, there is no essential difference betwixt that and
ours: For which reason I shall return to my first subject, in which it remains,
that I give you a short account of the number of men in the Town, the diversity
of Nations of which they consist, their several Posts, and which way they have
subsisted so long, at the expense of the Venetian.

When we came away, we left the Garrison much weakened, as well as the
Auxisiary Troops: The number of Companys was large enough, but the Soldiers
that composed them were very few: Some there were which had not above 4 or 5
men left; the rest were generally not above a dozen or fifteen, and the fullest
Company of all had not above 25. In so much as there were in a manner, as many
Officers as Soldiers.

The Regiment of Savoy, which at first was 6000 men, was reduced to 2000. Yet
all these relicts put together, amounted to near 7000 men, besides the
Inhabitants, which were about 4000, and all at the charge of the Venetian, as
well as the Soldiers.

The force of the Garrison is composed, of Greeks, Slavonians, Italians,
Germans, some Swisses, Savoyards (which is their greatest foreign force) French
(most Officers) and Knights of Malta, who alone have the Guard of the Breach of
S. Andre: The French, Savoyards, Germans, and the few Swiss there are there,
have their Posts in the outworks and places attacked: The Greeks, Slavonians,
and Italians have the Guard of the Generals doors, the Gates of the Town, and
other places where the enemy have not made their approaches. The Towns men in
all places, being obliged upon the least alarm, to be in arms, and if after
the beat of the Drum they be found without, they are shot immediately upon the
place.

Those who understand nothing of the address and policy of the Venetian do
wonder how they have been able to sustein the charges of so redious a war,
against so potent an enemy. And indeed to consider the provision for that
Garrison, the Ships they are constrained to keep at Sea, the frequent levies
they are forced to make, the recruits, the Ammunition, the Officers pay, the
Convoys, and the quantity of Victuals they are constantly sending, not for the
Garrison only, but the Inhabitants themselves, both men, women and children,
one would think so great a charge would have exhausted the treasury of that
Republique, and ruined its Citizens. For which reason I shall give you an
account of their economy, according to the best information I could gain.

You know very well already that the auxiliary forces, as the Popes, the
Malteses, the Savoyards, are no charge to that Republique, no more then the
Germans and we were, when we were there; but it may be you do not know that
these supplys do contribute to the subsistence of those who are under their
pay, and that they have a cunning way of paying their Officers without money,
and this is it I desire you would understand.

The whole trade of Candy, and the rest of the Isles under the dominion of the
Venetian, being managed to the advantage of that common wealth, under the
direction of a Proveditor General, and the Inhabitants restrained from
transporting, or selling their commoditys to any body else; it must necessarily
depend upon him to set what price he pleases upon such provisions as are
brought unto the Town. In so much as the auxiliar^ f(...) constrained to pay
three or four times as much as they cost, which yields them very great gain,
and facilitates the payment of the Soldiers, which is done commonly with
Tickets, which they discharge with very little money; For they having no less
need of provisions then the Officers of the Auxiliary Troops, are forced to
take them off at the same price, in payment of their Tickets, by which means
they discharge Tickets of 100 Crowns, with 25, and by this piece of conduct and
economy, they maintain 3 or 4000 Soldiers in that Town, at less charge then
500 in an other place.

Yet notwithstanding this policy of the Venetian, in paying their forces with
Victuals: The Officers have had great reason to complain of the stopage of
their money, for indeed they give them but little of that: which renders them
all very poor and miserable that engage in their service. For if it be true
that want of money is the greatest misery a Soldier can suffer amongst all the
perplexitys of a Siege, it is most certain their condition in Candy, cannot but
be extreme, seeing they not only are always without money, but without hopes of
any hereafter, their Tickets being paid, without receiving a farthing. Upon
which consideration, amongst all the Reformado Officers, that were with us,
there was but one (how indigent soever they were) who would take employment
under them, except two more, which had escaped hanging very narrowly at Paris:
True it is there were two or three of our most considerable Volunteers, who for
particular reasons desired to have stayed: But Mr. S. Andre would by no means
hear of it, but told them they would be counted fools or mad men, by all that
knew the condition of that place, if they persisted in that humor: In short he
acquainted Mr. Fueillade, who obliged them to go along, in spite of all their
importunity to the contrary.

The fourth of January we took our leaves of Candy, under the favor of a
darkish evening, yet we could not do it so privately, but the enemy discovered
it, though it was so late, we were got out of the reach of their Canon, before
they began to give us their salvos, which they did very liberally, firing into
all parts of the Harbor, out of which we past with our 3 Vessels, the Duke
Admiral, the Mermaid, and another, in which our wounded and sick men were put,
to the number of fifty or threescore.

By the way Sir I think it not amiss to let you understand that in Candy, and
almost quite through the Levant, they have a way of treating their sick, very
much different from ours, yet very convenient and of little expense; They
suffer them to have neither flesh, nor eggs, nor broths, nor syrrops, nor
gelleys: The use of these things being observed to be mortally dangerous; for
the whole nourishment they give them, is only a certain drink made of water and
slices of bread crumbled into it, and boyld upon the fire, to such a degree
till the bread and the water be brought to a kind of a consistance, which they
call a Panade, which is to be taken as hot as broth: This liquour is indeed
not over pleasant to be taken, nor proper to recover ones strength, (for it is
observed, all those who take are on the other side very weak and feeble) but
it carrys this advantage along with it, that the fever being once gone, they
need not above 3 or 4 days to recover their health and their flesh.

We returned by Standia, where we were at anchor as we came. The weather being
cross we were forced to stay there to the 24, at which time our impatience made
us resolve to take the opportunity of a very strong gale of wind, which however
dangerous, might carry us with full sails a great way in a little time: But
that wind blowing hard into the m^^th of the Harbor, our greatest difficulty
was to get out to Sea; The Venetian Gallys that came on purpose to tow us out,
were not able themselves to keep at Sea: Three times they a^tempted to hale us
out by force of oars, but all three times they were disapointed, and we left
in great danger of the Rocks that are there about, for our Ships being forced
together now and then, to avoid the Rocks, they struck against one another so
violently, they were in great danger of miscarrying: But at last they managed
things so well we got the wind in our sails, making the whole Tour of Candy,
and passing as far as Cerigo, over those Rocks which we escaped with so much
difficulty as we came.

We were scarce out of sight of those Islands but were taken with a furious
tempest, which dispersed our 3 Ships: The Admiral wherein Mr. Fueillade was, was
carried with great impetuosity upon the coast of Barbary, where he had been
irrecoverably run on ground, had not one of the crew by accident discovered
Mount Gibel in Sicily, and (without knowing what Mountain it was) given us the
alarm that we were upon the coast of Barbary within three leagues of Cape-Bon,
where we found the Vessel with our sick men: from thence we set sail for
Malta, but could not make it in two days time, by reason of the variety of
winds from several points; we were forced to coast up and down there for some
time by little and little to gain the entry into that Harbor, where we found
the Mermaid with Mr. S. Paul, his family, and the rest of his Brigade: We stayed
there only two days to refresh our selves, and went away the fourth of February.

Mr. le Comte de S. Paul, whose design was to pass through Italy, went on shore
for some days to ease himself of an infirmity in one of his legs: he kept only
such of his servants as were necessary about him, and sent the rest in the
Mermaid along with us, which was very happy for him, for the same Ship happened
to be visited with the plague by the way: and 60 of his men to dye of it.

He having not seen the Grand Master when he was there before, by reason of a
certain scruple he made to receive with the Title of Highness, notwithstanding
the assurance was given him that his Highness de Longueville his Brother, had
given him the Principality of Neuchatel in Switzerland: But this difficulty was
accommodated at his return by an ingenious expedient: It was contrived that Mr.
S. Paul should make his complement in French, and the Grand Master his return
in Italian, and that the Interpreter in repeating the words of Mr. S. Paul
should have care to give him the Title of Highness in this manner, His Highness
gives your Eminence to understand. And in explaining the words of the Grand
Master, to Mr. S. Paul, he should say, His Eminence tells your Highness. And
this expedient was found very agreeable, as not engaging, either one or the
other, beyond the the rules of their Ceremonies in any of their entertainments
by which means they had two or three meetings, with great satifaction on both
sides. From Malta with came with a fair wind into the Tuscan Sea, coasting all
along upon the shore to gain Porto longon (between the Isle of Corse, and the
Elbe) from whence the passage is not a little dangerous to Genoa; from whence
we past (without coming to an anchor any where) to the Isles of Years, which
are not above two or three small leagues from Toulon; where during the
Quarantine we made, I had leisure to look over my Memoires, and to reconsider
the variety of dangers we had past both by Land and by Sea, in this expedition,
thereby to give you as full and as exact a Relation as you desired.

FINIS.
A RELATION Of the Siege of CANDIA.

From the first Expedition of the French Forces under the Command of M. de la
Fueillade, Duke of Roannez, to its Surrender, the 27th. of September, 1669.

Written in French by a Gentleman who was a Voluntier in that Service, and
Faithfully Englished.

LONDON. Printed for T. Williams and I. Starkey, and are to be Sold at their
Shops, at the Bible in Little Britain, and the Miter in Fleet Street, near
Temple Bar, 1670.

A CONTINUATION Of the Siege of CANDIA, From the Departure of M. de la
Fueillade to its surrender.
THe forces under the Command of M. Fueillade having been harrast out which
continual duty since their arrival, and reduced in their last Sally to a third
part of what they were at first, though the Enterprise was brave, and performed
with as much gal^antry as could be Expected from so inconsiderable a number,
yet they found to their Cost that ^^iracles were ceased, and that resolution
and reason must go together when any great action is ^ndertaken, or any success
extraordinary to be ^op'd for.

Was it possible four hundred men, drawn out with so much difficulty and
disadvantage, incapable of any Arms for their defense, and desperate of
relief, should dislodge two thousand six hundred, well entrenched, well
accommodated with provisions, well furnished which Cannon, Morterpeices,
Gernados, Firebals, Mines, and all things the mischeivous invention of mankind
could contrive for their destruction? Yet such was their Courage, and so far
were they fortunate, they beat them out of seven of their redoubts, routed them
in four several charges, and repelled them to such a distance, that could they
have received any proportionable supply from the Town, or interrupted the
coming in of the Turks from all other parts of the Leaguer, they had probably
cleared that side, and performed an Action would have been as wonderful in this
age, as incredible in the next.

But probable means being always a necessary ingredient to the consection of
any Extraordinary Exploit, they paid dear for the Experiment, and that
insatiable gallantry which was not to be satisfied of late but by raising the
Siege, starts (as i^^ were) now at the very noice of the Turks, and i^^ shrunk
and come down to that pass, a retreat is th^^ greatest of their designs, and to
save their ow^^ stakes, as much as any of them desired.

Mr. Fueillade having indeed expressed himself excellently well, and with no less
conduct tha^^ hazard, brought the unhappy remainder of h^^ Brigades once more
into the Town; having view what were left, and sadly observed the postur^^ they
were in, he called a Council of his Officers forthwith to advise what was to be
done, he represented the Condition of his men, the smalness of their number,
the jealousy and diffidence he had in the Officers of the Town, who had neither
given them the Assistance nor encouragement they might fairly have expected;
and concluded upon the whole, that the rest were to be preserved, and that all
convenient preparation should be made in Orders to their return.

The next day M. Fueillade making a visit to the Generalissimo Morosini, gave
him an account of their resolutions, he let him know with wha^ Zeal they had
undertaken the Enterprise, with what Valor and fidelity they had persued it
hitherto, and were still ready to persist were there any visible hopes of
excountring the Enemy; that the siege was like now to be carried on with
approaches, and mines, to which it was not fit the Nobility in his Squadron
should be exposed, without possibility of action; that in that respect they
were reduced to an incapacity of doing any thing Considerable for the future;
that the Turks might be indeed encouraged by their departure, but that the
number he should carry with him would not be so great, as to give them any real
advantage; That the Lunenburgers, Bavarians, and other supplys from Venice were
at hand, and would abundantly recompense the loss of them: That he hoped by
their Comportment since they came, they had given such testimony of themselves,
they were in no danger of any dishonorable aspersion. That there was nothing to
be expected, but by raising the Siege, which would be the work of a
Considerable Army, and not a handful of men; that he would with his utmost
endeavors move and excite his most Christian Majesty to undertake it again,
and give him a faithful account of the danger they were in; that he was
unwilling to leave them in an Exigence, and his whole Brigade were of the same
Judgment, but that by continuing there he should but defraud his Majesty of so
many of his Nobles, as might Command a considerable part of the new force he
did hope would be sent, without doing any thing of importance for the benefit
of the Town.

To which General Morosini replied, that he was sorry for their departure, but
most of all for the Occasions; that in the name of the whole State of Venice,
and all Christendom besides, he gave him thanks for what he had done; that
their Enterprise had been noble and honorably managed; that he had assisted him
more vigorously in his last Sally, had he not wanted men, and apprehended too
rationally, lest the Turks should have laid hold of the Opportunity, and
(falling on the other side) have carried the Town; he acknowledged their
Fidelity, applauded their Valor, and having earnestly desired him, as much as
in him lay, to dispose his Majesty once more to their relief, he promised him
what accommodation th^^ Town could afford in Order to their embarkment.

Things being acted in this manner, some few days were allowed to the
refreshment of the wounded and sick, and to the repose of such as were well and
in the mean time all Convenient preparation was in order to their return.

In the beginning of January all things being ready, they went aboard their
Galleys in the Fort or Tramatra. The Town expressed some sorrow for their
departure, and paid them some formalities at their Shipping; and that the Turks
themselves might bear a part in the Geremony, they gave them several Volleys
from the platform of Priuli, and all their Batteries on that side, but without
any Considerable prejudice; they hoysting sail and falling off to Standia
immediately.

The weather being ruff, he was forced for some time to attend at Standia for
a fair wind, which at length coming happily about he embraced, and in short
time came safely to Malta through all the rocks and difficulties of those seas.

The Grand Master understanding his arrival, sent one of the principal of his
Officers to Complement him, and to let him know, how great an honor he should
have esteemed it to have seen him himself, and to have received the deplorable
relation of his Misfortunes from his own mouth; that he had heard of the
Gallantry of his attempt, and that the miscarriage was not imputable to any
want of courage or conduct on his side, but to the Common fate and uncertainty
of War. That he was sorry the custom of that Island would not admit him
(coming from a place infected) till his Quarentine was made: That if he were
perswadable to that, he would promise him a suitable Reception afterward; if
otherwise, that he would take such orders as should supply him with whatever
the Island could afford in the mean time.

M. Fueillade returned him his thanks, accepted the kindness he proffered for
the supply of his Fleet, and three or four days he stayed there to refresh; But
the minds of his party being at home, and the memory of their misfortunes too
heavy upon their hearts, they could not relish the civility they received
there, nor be satisfied with any thing but the quickness of their return.

M. S. Paul having designed to make a visit in Sicily, and from thence pass by
Rome and Italy into France, was persuaded to stay in Malta for some time, where
at length, after a just attendance, being admitted to his first visit to the
Grand Master, to avoid some punctilios of Ceremony, which he had been otherwise
obliged to, he was received in bed, and two days after his visit returned at
his own Lodging, with no small kindness and civility: In short M. St. Paul
received many honors from him, the last of which was, that he Commanded two of
his Galleys to attend him to Messina for his security and Guard.

M. Fueillade's resolution being to go along with his party, he set sail for
Thoulo^, gratifying thereby the impatience of his Soldiers, who were already
weary of those parts, and importunately desirous of the Compassion of their
friends. But his Calamity being yet incomplete, it pleased God to afflict him
once more, and to visit one of his ships with so surious a plague, that it
swept away most of them before they came a shore; as if providence had been
offended at his departure, and judged it ignoble and indecent for him to desert
so pious an Enterprise with so many men.

Having brought the remainder of his forces to the Isles of Years (which are
certain small Islands at no great distance from Toulon) he left them there till
further Orders, himself hasting thither before: which being done, and such
quarters and accommodation as was necessary provided for them, they were Landed
forthwith, and disposed in such manner as with least prejudice to the
Inhabitants, was most convenient for them.

It was not long before his affairs at Toulon were so well settled, there
remained nothing for him to do, but to make his personal account to his
Majesty, not only of his own Conduct and occurrences, but of the present
posture and Condition of the Town, which how courageous soever within, and
supported with promises from abroad, was notwithstanding so pressed and overlayd
by the daily supplys and advancements of the Turks, that without a more
vigorous and speedy assistance, there was but small hopes of defending it long.

For the Turks had not only received considerable recruits, great quantity of
Provisions, and all the encouragement that ready money, and fair promises could
give them, but they had lodged themselves at the foot of the Bastion of St.
Andre, possessed themselves of the Pruili and Scotthere and raised such
platformes there as played upon occasion so Effectually into the Harbor of
Tramatra, the Gallys could neither enter nor remain there but with great hazard
and insecurity.

Besides the Grand Vizier upn the news of the Retirement of M. Fueillade,
imagining he should find the Town under some weakness or discouragement,
resolved upon a storm; accordingly having drawn up 16000. of his men as
privately in the night time as was possible, and divided them into two bodies,
he fell on in two places with great clamor and fury. Never did the Turks show
more courage then now: Never was the service more desperate on both sides; The
Vizier himself was assistant, exhorting, encouraging, and threatening his men;
the ladders were placed to the breaches, the Turks ascended with their
Fireballs, Grenades, and such pernicious instruments of mischief. Sometimes
the Turkish Cressent was advanced by them, and immediately pulled down again by
the Town; sometime they proceeded, and gained upon the place, when on a sudden
they were repelled, and lost what advantage they had gotten before, so that at
the last observing their progress but small, and the Garrison invincibly
pertenacious in defense of the Town, he sounded a retreat, leaving the ground
covered next morning with the dead, besides what they buried and carried off in
the dark.

Neither was this the only Considerable assault or repulse that did happen; not
a week but some attempt or other was made upon it without, not a week but some
Signal Exploit or other was performed in its defense within, and though in this
and several other assaults he had lost many thousand of his men, and the wants
and distresses of a Leaguer were not sparingly amongst them, yet having
received constant supplys from Morea, and new provisions coming in hourly from
all parts, the Grand Signiour urging and upbrayding him by his delay, the Grand
Vizier went on resolutely with his designs; his approaches were advanced with
all possible industry, his Batteries renewed, his Mines, his Gallerys, his
pits, and all manner of preparations doubled, his Guns playing incessantly from
a new mount they had raised near the Monastery di Santo Spirito to disturb them
in their retrenchments, which they were beginning to throw up within the old
works, as foreseeing the other would be inevitably destroyed; and as if all
this would have been too little to have ruined them, he perfected his Mines
with that privacy and diligence, he brought many of them not only under the
Walls, and Outworks, but under the principal Streets and Quarters of the Town.

Besides all these advantages which the departure of the French, or his own
assiduity had given him, he was quickened and excited by the noise of new
Commotions at home: The Common people in Constantinople had a long time been
sencible of a ^ence of the Grand Segniors Court, their Trading was grown dead
and inconsiderable, and their Spirits turbulent and tumultuous; the length and
^esperateness of the service in Candia was become ^errible to his Remoter
Colonys in Asia, and Afric; at Alexandria and other places the new eveys
which were made mutining, Kill their Offi^ers and desperse; Nor were the
Janisaries more ^bedient then they, they had no affection for an ^mployment had
devoured so many of them already, they saw no visible hopes of gaining it
suddenly, and they had such an alarm of the vast preparation was making all
over Christendom for its relief, they could not believe there was any great
likelihood of being Masters of it at last; and to foment their disorders yet
more, it was given out (whether by way of Artifice or otherwise is not known)
that private Orders were given by the Grand Segnior for the secret strangling
of two of his Brothers, for whom they had some pretended kindness and
Compassion: Upon this score all things were in Confusion there, and without
speedy and propitious success in this siege, the Grand Vizier was not only like
to run great hazard in his own fortunes and reputation, but there would be
great danger of some violent revolution in the State.

All these reasons put together were enough to have invigorated a Complexion
much more phlegmatic then his; no wonder therefore if he doubled his Zeal,
renewed his assaults, multiplied his Mines, and pressed with all possible
importunity for recruits, which the Grand Segnior knew very well were but
necessary, commanded several of his new raised men to be drawn down and
transported, but so great an impression the terror of that leaguer had made
upon them, that they despised his Orders and disbanded; in so much that he was
Constrained to send six thousand of the Janissaries attending his person, and to
Command several of his standing forces in Dalmatia thither, for his
reinforcement.

Nor were the Christians less serious on their side; They considered solemnly
the Condition of the Town; they foresaw the dishonor it would be to have a
place that was the Frontier and Bulwark of Christendom, ravish' dout of their
hands; they were sensible how much the loss of that Town would expose them to
his Armies in Italy or Sicily, as he pleased himself, and therefore with no
less diligence then they were attaqu'd, did they begin to prepare for its
relief.

The Lunenburg forces, and others from the Dukes of Bavaria and Brunswick,
being happily landed in few days after the departure of M. Fueillade, put the
Town into a condition of sustaining it self for a while, and gave them leisure
to attend their greater supplys; They were Commanded by General Waldeck in
chief, and one Mollison a Scotchman had a Regiment, both of them Officers of
great Valor and Experience, and worthy of such Soldiers as they brought with
them: This Brigade raised up their Spirits, and gave them such Confidence of
the security of the Town, that General Morosini thought fit to take the
Opportunity and put out to Sea with his whole Fleet, to retard (if not
intercept) the Visiers supplys, which his intelligence informed him were coming
from all parts of Greece, of Egypt, of Asia, and Bar^ary, and to facilitate the
access of new forces he expected himself.

Having left the Command of all things in the hands of M. Andre Monbrun who had
given so frequent and considerable Testimonies of his Conduct, he divided his
Fleet into 3 Squadrous, one of them was Commanded into the Archipelago to
attend the motion of such forces as were expected from Asia, or Afric,
another was to ply about the Coasts of Greece for the same purpose, and the
third to be cruising about the Island of Candia, to pick up those that by the
means of the weather or any other Accident, should escape from the vigilance of
the other.

Nor was the design absolutely ineffectual, though it took not to that degree
it was hoped: General Morosini took several Saichs and other small vessels
intended for Canea, and forced the Grand Segnior to march most of his forces
from Constantinople and other ports (where they lay ready to be embarked,) to
Morea by land, to evade the danger of being taken by Sea, from whence by the
connivance of the night, (it being not above ten hours sail) they could with
more certainty and convenience convey them to the Grand Vizier.

This March, and the impediment the Venetian Galleys gave them by their daily
appearance upon that shore, gave them no small interruption in their progress
before the Town, in so much that the Grand Segnior himself began to be
impatient, and to upbraid the Vizier with his delay; But at length in spite of
their watchfulness on bothsides, the Vizier had 7000. new raised men, and 2000.
Janisaries landed at Spinalonga, to the great Corroboration and encouragement
of his Camp: and General Morosini returned with 2000. fresh men, seventeen
hundred barrels of Powder, and such other recruits of money and provisions as
might encourage and enable them to hold out till they should receive more
considerable supplys.

And now the Alarm being taken on all hands, and the condition of that Town
known all over Christendom; it was not to be doubted but all Christian Princes
would be concerned, and contribute their assistance, according to their
interest or affection.

His Holiness being Father of them all, and by consequence most proper for so
general a Negotiation, by his Nuntios in Spain and in France, he solicites very
earnestly for their assistance, he tells them the importance of the place, of
what advantage to Christendom, not so much in respect of the native
Commodities, or the convenience of the Port, as that it was as it were a stop
and period to the Tyranny of the Turks; That the Venetian had hitherto
maintained it at his own charge, though the benefit accrewed to them all: that
after two years contest and reluctance, as it were upon their own bottom only,
it was no wonder if they tottered at last having so powerful and so wealthy an
enemy to deal with; That it would have great reflection not only upon the
policies, but the Religion of the Christians, should they sit still and suffer
so serviceable a member to be cut off, without endeavoring by timely
applications to repel the fury of the Gangreen. That the Turks had made a
progress beyond what could have been imagined, had brought their mines into the
middle of the Town, and with their platforms and Batteries, gone a great way in
stopping up the Harbors, yet the Town was not desperate, nor their danger
insuperable; if their Exigence was great, it must be great Princes must relieve
them, and whither could he address himself with more Confidence, then to them
who were always the greatest enemies to Paganism, and the greatest propugnors
of the Christian faith.

The Spaniard acknowledges the proposal, laments the condition of the Town,
promises his Galleys of Naples and Sicily, and some Land forces from Milan, and
pretends, his assistance should have been much greater, but that the King of
France his late invasion of Flanders, and his new pretenses, kept them in so
constant and chargeable an apprehension, that they could not rationally part
with any more, unless they would expose themselves too grossly, and give him an
advantage they might never recover, to which they suggested the minority of
their Prince.

But the King of France to remove that objection, and incline them to as
vigorous an engagement in that Enterprise as himself, assured his Holiness upon
the Honor of a King, he would in no manner whatever disturb them for a twelve
month, and as if he had feared his word alone would not have been taken by the
Spaniard, he applys himself so ardently to the sending of relief, that they
might be certain he was not able to drive on two such Enterprises at once,
neither his stock nor his time being sufficient to bear it.

He acquainted his Holiness with his Resolution of sending eight thousand men
under the Command of the Duke of Navailles, and that he would give orders to
the Duke of Beaufort (his Admiral at Sea) to prepare against May such a number
of his Galleys and men of War as should be sufficient to transport and secure
them; he desired that his Holiness would in the mean time make use of his
paternal influence upon the Princes of Italy, that there would be necessity of
intermediate supplys, to keep up their spirits and support them till more came;
That the Duke of Modena Mantua, and Parma in respect of their situation; and
vicinity to the Sea were to be solicited for leveys, which in a short time
might be Embarked, and at Candia before others on Shipboard: and that his
Holiness Galleys (which he had intimated should be sent) might be ready at such
a Rendezvous as should be agreed on in the mean time.

And that his words and actions might correspond, and the World take notice and
observe how little he considered the distance of the place, the dangers by the
way, nor the difficulties there, when honor and Religion called so loud for his
assistance, the Duke of Beaufort is Commanded immediately to the Fleet to fit
up such a number of his Ships with all practicable diligence as he should think
Competent for the design. And the Count de Vivonne dispatched with the same
Orders to Toulon to be ready at a precise time to attend him with his Galleys
and all the power he could make.

All stones being turned in this manner that might contribute, and all hands
employed that might hasten their relief, His Majesty gave Order for the raising
five thousand foot and 700. Horse to be Commanded by the Duke of Navailles, of
which the Regiments already marching for Rossillon and those in Dauphen for
more Expedition were to be part, besides which four hundred and twenty men were
to be drawn out of his Regiment of Guards, two hundred of his Musketeers, and
two hundred Reformades, to which 300. of the Army horse were to be added under
the Command of the Marquess de Francier, and two hundred more reformed Officers
in the room of so many of the Guards de Corpse who were Countermanded. The Kings
Musketeers were given men to M. Maupertuys, and M. de Montbrun, being divided
into two Squadrons; the Regiment of Guards to M. Castelan, all of them persons
of great Gallantry and Experience. The Rendezvous was appointed at Toulon, and
that nothing might be able to discourage or retard them by the way, five
hundred thousand Livers were ordered to be pay^^ them, one half at Lions by
Bill of Exchange, th^^ other in Provence out of the receipts of that Province;
seven and twentyd ays being allowed them for their march, and seventeen more
for their repose when they came there.

The 28. of February the Duke of Beaufort too^^ his leave of his Majesty,
repairing with all spee^^ to his charge, accompanied with the Chevalier d^^
Vendosme his Nephew, and several great Office^^ and persons of quality.

He was no sooner arrived at Toulon but he fe^^ immediately to his business
with all imaginabl^^ Providence and dexterity, preparing all thing necessary
for his Voyage; he viewed the Ships surveyed the Equipage, encouraged the
Officers and rewarded the Seamen; in short whatever wa^^ wanting was provided,
and what everwas nece^sary was done.

Nor was the Duke of Navailles less active at home, having finished his Leavys,
and taken what care was possible for their accommodation by the way, Orders
were given for their march, and as in great Actions there are no passages, so
trivial slight, from whence the capricious will not take occasion to make their
conjecture and presage, so in this there was an accident (though sad in it self
yet otherwise of no great importance as to the main of the design) which
possessed many people with an ominous presage, and was no small discouragement
to the expectation of the World:

As they were drawing down from all parts to the Rendezvous, for greater
Expedition it was thought Convenient to Embarque some of their Companys upon
the Soane, and so it fell out that either by the badness of the Vessels^, the
soulness of the weather, or the unruliness of the Soldiers, two of them sunk
down to the bottom, and about fifty or threescore of the Soldiers were drowned
^he Officers all of them escaping, but one Ensign which conducted them into
the other world.

On the tenth of April, the Duke of Navailles ^ook his Congey likewise of his
most Christian Majesty, with all speed hastening to his Enbark^ent, he was
attended by sixty supernumerary Officers, to supply the vacancys in case of
indis^osition or death, each Captain having received or his incouragment five
hundred Livers, each ^ieutenant three, and each Ensign two hundred.

About the beginning of May, he arrived with ^s whole Train at Toulon, where
joining his ^lligence with the Duke de Beauforts, all things were got ready
with inconceavable Expedition.

And if the French were thus solicitous, at such a distance, whose incitement
was rather honor, and Compassion for their friends, then any peculiar interest
of their own, it cannot be supposed but the Pope, the Venetian, and all the
Princes of Italy were obliged to it much more, the Conflagration being so
near, and their houses next like to be on fire.

According to the intimation before, his Holiness had prevailed for three
thousand men to be raised in Germany, and dispacht immediately for Venice, the
Dukes of Modena, Parma, and Mantua, had engaged for a Considerable number, to
be leavy'd partly at their own charge and partly at the charge of the Venetian,
who was obliged to provide them with shipping, and all other accommodation for
their Voyage: Besides which several Companys were Ordered by his most Catholic
Majesty to Final, to Embarke there in the Duke of Tur^^s Gallys, and a thousand
select foot raised and maintained by the Duke of Modena himself, all which
were, as they had opportunity, conveyed into the Town, but rather as a
reinforcement, then relief; their expectation of raising the Siege being placed
upon the more Considerable supplys from France, and from Spain.

And because valor without recompense is seldom long lived, and the Coin is
the cause men generally fight for, the Venetians sent considerable sums along
with their Fleet, and his Holiness consigned a hundred thousand Crowns of the
Mount of Piety, and his whole stock of gold which had been brought into the
Datary since his promotion.

Besides which, that others might be provokt to the same merit and fidelity,
Leonard Moro Commissary extraordinary to the Venetian Fleet, having, during the
whole series of the war, given large testimony of his Conduct, upon his solemn
request was permitted to resign, and made a Member of the Grand Council as a
reward of his service.

And as if the living were too few, to afford objects, for their piety;
Cattarino Cornaro, (a person of Singular Eminnece and worth, and often
entrusted with their greatest affairs) having been unfortunately slain in a
sally upon the Turks, his body was Ordered to be conveyed to Venice, where he
was afterward interred with extraordinary solemnity, and an honorable Monument
erected to his memory, at the charge of the State, and his Brother innobled
with the Order of Knighthood.

In this manner the Munificence and liberality of the Senate, vying as it were
with the courage of the Soldiers, all things went on cheerfully and well, nor
could all the Mines, the Cranadoes, the assaults from without, The Duty, the
dangers, the distresses within, dismay or affright them to the least overture
of a surrender, but with invincible constancy and Vigilance they Encountered
all the difficultys of the Siege, and frustrated all the Stratagemes of the
enemy.

By this time the Men of War were come about from Rochel, and Breast, the day
for their Embarkement growing sudden at hand: That their provisions might be
suitable to the greatness of their number, and his men not liable to any
indigence at Sea, the Duke of Beaufort pressed the Merchantmen in all the
Harbors of Provence, whilst the Count de Vivonne wanting Slaves for his Oars,
by reward and persuasion prevailed with his own men to supply them, so ready
were they to serve for the honor of Christendom in any capacity whatever.

Whilst these things were in agitation, his Holiness sent his Pontifical
Standard to his Excellence the Duke of Beaufort, which was to be carried in the
French Admiral though Don Vinzenzo Rospigliosi was to command as Generalissimo
when the Fleets were together, but in his absence, or in case of mortality, the
Duke was to succeed.

The Banner was very costly and rich, with our Savior represented betwixt S
Peter, and S. Paul, all very lively, and exquisitly wrought, which was set up
with great Solemnity, all the Artillery and small shot giving their vollies,
besides the incredible acclamation of the people and Soldiers.

I cannot omit in this place to make mention of the Count de S. Paul, in M.
Fueillades Expedition, he had more then his share, not only in the Gallantry,
Glory of his actions, but in the greatness of his sufferings, he had been upon
all Dutys, upon all sallys, under all the anxietys and incommoditys of the
Town, yet all this was no^^ sufficient; spurred on by a generous indignation
fo^^ his former misfortunes, or a pious compunction for the danger of
Christendom, he was no sooner in France, but he re-assumes the design, and
would go thither again, from whence he escapt so hardly before, and had not the
King by his Express Command required him to desist, he had gone along with the
rest, and perhaps made the loss more considerable by his own.

On the fifth of June, having received the Benediction of the Pope, and the
acclamations of the people, after all the Ceremonious formalitys were over,
they set sail for Candia, the greater Ships being Ordered before, and the
Galleys coming after, the Rendezvous being at Cherigo, an Island, some three
and twenty leagues distance from Candia, and not far from the Coast of Morea.

The weather and the wind did seem to conspire to the success of the
Enterprise, conveying them in a short time to the Road of Malta, and from
thence to Cherigo, but the Galleys meeting with some accidents were forced in
at Civita-vecchia, where they were Complemented from his Holiness, and the
Count de Vivonne, and the rest of the Officers presented with Medals of Gold
and of Silver.

The Popes Galleys were not long after them, but the weather being not
altogether so propitious, they were glad to put in at Naples, and take those
Galleys along with them, from whence they past away for Messina, where they
joined with those of Sicily, and advanced with all speed to the Rendezvous.

The Turks having the alarm of their approach, thought it no time to be idle;
they plied their Mines, renewed their Batteries, multiplied their assaults, and
with perpetual and indefatigable industry, possessed them selves of most part of
the Bastion of St. Andre: and because the Town had made two Retrenchments
within that Bastion, which gave them impediment, and hindered their advancement
into the Town, by continual thundering upon them with Canon of extraordinary
bigness, they made two such breaches that thirty men might march in a breast.

This was an opportunity not to be dallyed with, all their forces were drawn
up, and with as much privacy as could be, the Attack was began, and urged with
as much Valor and Eagerness as was possible; but the besieged expecting what
followed, and being prepared as vigorosly to receive them, they were several
times repulsed with the loss of a considerable number of their Soldiers, and
many of their principal Officers into the Bargain. Yet not without great
mischief to the Town Geacomo.

Contarini was hurt dangerously in the arm, the Marquis de St. Andre in the
thigh, and Colonel Pini slain; all which were persons of no small Eminence,
and importance to the Garrison.

On the sixteenth of May, the French Fleet touched at Sapienra, a small Island
on this side of Morea, two days after which, the Popes Galleys, and the Galleys
of Malta arrived at Corfu another Island in the Mouth as it were of the
Adriatique Sea, to whom on the three and twenty, the French Galleys came up,
and all hasting to the General Rendezvous.

On the nineteenth of the same Month the Duke of Beaufort appeared with his
Fleet in Candia Road, being precipitated from the Rendezvous by a Letter from
the Captain General in the Town, representing the pregnant Exigence of the
Garrison, that the Turks had made themselves Masters of the Bastion of St.
Andre entirely, that they had made so considerable breaches in the
Retrenchment, that they were not secure of defending it two days: that they
incroacht howerly upon the Ports, and were in a fair way with their
Platformes, and Batteries, of Commanding them quite, and interrupting all
possibility of Relief. That without present assistance all things would be
desperate, and the whole charge and preparation for their rescue, frustrate and
ineffectual.

His Excellence being surprised at this news, Sails immediately to Standia an
Island some three leagues distance from Candia, he sends orders forthwith to
Cherigo for the Galleys to follow him with all speed, and the next day advances
for the Town, where he no sooner arrived, but he was attended by M. Castelan,
and received a punctual account of the condition of the place, which was too
bad to admit of any delay, or so much as the staying till the Galleys came up.

Whereupon he set Sail immediately for Candia, and going himself presently on
shore, a Council was called, in which it was concluded, that no time should be
lost, that all the forces under the Command of the Duke de Navailles should be
instantly Landed. That in respect, the Turks had not only got possession of the
Bastion of S. Andre, planted their Canon there, and done irrepairable prejudice
to both their Retrenchments, but on the Saboniera side also advanced their
approaches, cut off their sally-Ports, and raised with incredible labor a
platform in the Sea, which would in a short time block up the Haven, beat down
the Arsenal, and endanger the Town, that therefore it would be expedient, they
should the next morning attempt to remove them on that side, in pursuance of
which resolution, for as much as they had certain intelligence their forces on
that side were 8000. strong, well entrenched, and accommodated with Artillery,
Grenades, and all things requisite for their defense, that the whole power
they could make, (without leaving the Town too naked and exposed) should be
drawn out as privately and as early as was possible, in Order to which the Duke
of Beaufort went himself that evening, with the Duke of Navailles to make
choice of their ground, and to discry the face and posture of the enemy, in
which speculation the Duke de Beaufort, as an unlucky prognostic of his
following misfortune, received a slight hurt with a Granadoe, to the
Consternation of them all.

The forces being landed, and the General Morosini engaged to assist them with
six hundred Pioneers, and what men he could possible spare out of the Garrison,
having concluded, the rear of the Enemy to be most accessible, and the Fort of
Demetrins most convenient for their Sally, a new Council was held, and the Army
resolved to be drawn out in this manner.

In the front there marched four hundred select men out of each Squadron with
fifty Granadiers at the head of them, and three Troops of horse in the Rear;
next them followed the Regiments of Loraine and Brittany, Commanded by Gaures
and St. Valier, with four Troops of horse upon the wings; after them marched
the Regiments of Montague, Jonsal, and Grance. The Reserve was Commanded by M.
Choiseville consisting of the Regiments, of Harcourt, Conti, Ligniers,
Montpezat, and Vendosme, with four Troops of horse on the wings also, to attend
Emergencies: there were placed betwixt the first and second line fifty
Commanded Musketeers and a hundred Reformado Officers: On the other side of
the Sabionera next the Sea, the Duke de Beaufort (who his death being decreed)
had been inexorable to all persuasion to the contrary, had drawn up about three
hundred of his Seamen, a number much short of what he did propose, with which
he undertook by the assistance of M. Colbert, to beat them upon that side of
their Entrenchments, and give the other some diversion.

Being marched out with great silence, they were ^rawn up in a large plain
leading to the enemies Camp, where they were put in very good Order, and to
attend a Signal which was to be given:

But the Turks having perceived, and endea^oured what they could to give
obstruction to their Landing, immagin'd very well they were not ^o be long
without action, for which reason they ^oubled their Guards, multiplied their
perdues, and took such Courses as were most likly to give the alarm of their
approach, in so much that they were no sooner advanced into distance, but they
were saluted with Canon, and small shot, from all quarters on that side.

M. Dampire, had Order to fall on thereupon, which accordingly he did, and with
invincible Courage beat them out of two Redouts in an instant, killing diverse
of the enemy, and leaving their works, to the possession of the Regiment of
Lorraine; the Regiment under the Command of St. Valier, with the Commanded men
and the Companies of Guards, fell on upon another work, which they carried
immediately; from that they persued them to another, and from thence to a third,
till in a short time they forced them out of all, and observed them drawing up
upon a rising ground, with intention to Engage them together.

The General advances to charge them, and did it with that briskness and
effect, he beat them from that place, slew many of their men, and put them into
no inconsiderable dis-order: Thus far things were prosperous and well, the
enemy was beaten on all hands, their quarters deserted, their Canon seized,
their mortar pieces taken and overturned* and all things portending Victory and
success: But as there is nothing more uncertain then the Event of a battle,
and no conclusion can be made from a happy beginning; so here in the midst
their Triumph, when the day was almost their own, and nothing to be expected
but the acclamations of the people, an unlucky accident interposed which
altered the scene, and put them al^ into confusion.

Having beaten them, and taken possession of their principal Battery, which the
Turks had forsaken in dis-order, and left their Grenades and Mortarpeices
behind them, with several Fire works thrown up and down in their distraction,
it happened some of them by accident took fire, which passing from one to
another on a sudden, made so violent an impression upon the apprehension of the
Soldiers, that all the Authority of their Officers, their threats, nor their
prayers, nor their Examples could not prevail with them to stand; but their
imagination having once possessed them, 'twas their Mines, and that the whole
Field was to be blown up where they fought, the terror increast like the fire,
and running from one party to another, put the whole Army into a Combustion.

And here it was the Officers were at a loss, the Soldiers intractible, and the
Commanded men themselves not to be Commanded, M. Castelan ^mployed all the
persuasion, all the violence, all ^he Artifice he could, but to no purpose. M.
St. ^alter exhorted, and threatened, and wounded, ^ut in vain, their fear was so
great, they thought ^hey could not be safe but in the Town, and their
^iscretion so little, they did not consider after so ^gnominions, a flight,
there would be no secu^^ty for them long there. Nor were the there hun^red
Seamen on the other side in less confusion then ^^ey: Though they had no such
accident amongst them, yet they must share in the distraction, and ^ake as much
have to their Ships, as the other to ^^e Town, as if it had been dishonorable
not to follow their Camerades, though in the most ignoble action of their lives.

Long, it was not before the Turks had discried their condition, and rallying
immediately, came afresh to the charge: The Admi^al and M. Colbert did what was
possible to support them, they joined with what were left of the fifty
Musketeers and the first Battalion, and received them Courageously; but
overpowered with numbers they were broke, and disperc'd: M. le Bret, and M.
Choyseville took as much pains in the Reserve, and with the few that would
stand, made an honorable defense; but fresh Companys being power'd upon them
from St. Andre side, and the whole force advancing against them on that; they
were forced to give ground, and submit to the impetuosity of the Turks.

The French (by Computation) lost in this engagement about six hundred of their
Common Soldiers, and of Officers 365. many of them persons of great Quality and
Command; nor had their fortune been so moderate, had not the Duke of Navailles
after all was desperate, with incredible temper and magnanimity with M.
Tullad^t, M. Argellon, and five or six Gentlemen more, made good a Courtin, and
favored their escape, and after that charged through their whole Batalion, and
come off.

But that which made their loss most deplorable was the death of the Duke de
Beaufort, who being abandoned by all (but M. Bourgneuf slain immediately by
his side, and M. Hoquette wounded in the leg) fell in desperately amongst the
Enemy, an^ was k^^d himself.

One of the Troopers reported he saw him wounded in the Field, that he
endeavored to have got him upon his horse, but that his Excellence had not
strength, nor he time to effect it: that he dragged him a while by the Arm, but
the Enemy pressing on and he unable to follow, he was forced to forsake him,
and that looking back he see them kill him immediately, but what ever was his
fate, his body was not to be found; M. Mar the Captain of his Guarde going
out with a Trumpet on purpose to inquire.

Never was Action more prudently disigned, never more happily commenced, never
more unfortunately concluded: Never were there better Officers then here, nor
had they ever more occasion to show it: by their unequal and dis-advantagious
Charges, by their frequent, though inconsiderable rallys, by their importunity
to their Soldiers, they satisfied the Turks how unusual it was for them to run,
and that this Victory was due to the pucilanimity of the Soldier, rather then
any ill Conduct in them.

And as if yet those Infidels had not been sufficiently happy, nor the French
sufficiently unfortunate, the Duke of Navailles either by pains, and fatignes
in that Sally, or by a sense and apprehension of the dishonor, he was like to
undergo, or as some have reported by the unkindness, and injustice of the
Venetian, who neither sent him the six hundred Pioneers that were promised, nor
gave them that assistance he might in reason have expected besides,) was so
strangely disturbed, he fell in a short time into a feavour, and was carried to
Standia for the recovery of his health.

But as yet the Galleys were not come up: on the 24th. of May they put in at
Zant, on the 29th. at Cherigo, were receiving the Admirals Orders, they made no
stay at all, but in the beginning of July came safely to Candia, where the
Count de Vivonne finding the Fleet without an Admiral took possession of the
Charge, and Executed that Office to the time of his return.

The same day arrived also the Malta Squadron with 800. fresh men, which with
those in the French, and 1500. Germans which Landed over night, it was hoped
might encourage them to some other attempt that might perhaps be more
successful then the former: But the Duke of Navailles indisposition, put them
off of that design, besides which the Turks had fortified themselves so
strongly in their Camp, and received so considerable a supply, there was no
visible probability of doing any thing extraordinary.

On the 25. of July, all the Frenchmen of War, Galleys, and other Vessels
being brought toward the Lazareto, and as near as they could get, Order was
given for the firing upon the Turks with their great Guns, which was performed
with considerable Execution, but by an unlucky accident at home, or some
Mortarpeice from the Enemy, the Santa Teresia, the Duke of Navailles Ship, was
blown up into the air, four hundred of his men killed, and five and thirty
Officers, besides all his money and goods.

To which misfortune another was added, which was that General Geronimo
Battaia, a person that upon all occasions had with much Valor and judgment
hazarded his life for the defense of that place, was wounded mortally in three
places as he was giving Order against a new approach, the Enemy was making
toward the Sabionera, to the great affliction of the Town.

The face of affairs being thus bad, the Duke of Navailles sick, and the Turks
so well entrencht and recruited, there was no good to be done: he resolves
therefore to return, and immediately sends this account to his Majesty.

That it being in his Orders to return in case he had no hopes of freeing the
Town, he was Embarking accordingly: That by the last Action and several other
services since he came, his forces were reduced to a third part of their
number. That the Turks gained daily upon the Town; that they had carryd the
first Retrenchment, and constrained the Garrison to think of a third, about
which 2500. men were constantly imployd. That his men being harras'd and
sickly, and 2000. fresh ^en coming in under the Command of the Duke of
Mirandola, his stay would be of no great concernment to the place.

His most Christian Majesty having received this Advice, and being informed
they might hold out ^ill the spring, resolves upon new leavys, which were to be
joined to new forces to be raised by his Holiness, and commanded by the
Mar^shal de Bellefors, who had been once before in nomina^on for General: but
the Town was surrendered in short time, and that design lost.

About the beginning of September, the Duke of Navailles Embarkt in order to
his return, and fell off to Standia, from whence, (after small attendance) the
wind coming right, he set sail for Malta, where his indisposition detaining
him, he reserved the Marquis de Grantys Ship for himself, and sent away the
rest: 8. of which came in to Toulon, the first of October with near 2000. men,
but above 1500. of them wounded or sick.

The Vizier having received supplys from Morea, and courage from the departure
of the French, it was no wonder if he pressed daily upon the Town. He made
several assaults, sometimes three in a day, and though he was constantly
repelled, and with very great loss, yet it was not without great injury to
them: He had raised a Mount upon the Bastion of St. Andre, which played so
effectually upon the 2d. Retrenchment, there was scarce any security at all: in
so much that the Church of St. Francis being filled with Earth, and twenty
great Guns, planted on the top of it: was the greatest defense they had for
that breach: On the other side they grew so fast upon the haven, and battered
the Arsenal so continually from their Platformes, it was conceived there was no
way to prevent shutting up the first, but by filling the latter with Earth
likewise.

But all this being done, and all the art, and industry used that might be
expected from humane nature, could not stop the Carreer of the Turks; They had
received vast supplys from Morea to reinforce them, they had received vast
sums of money to encourage them, they abounded with all manner of provisions
for the sound, and all sort of Medicaments for the sick; they were promised
large Rewards if they carried the Town, and to have them doubled if speedily:
They knew it was impossible for any considerable relief to arrive that Winter,
and therefore resolved with all their diligence and power to distress it in the
interim: They had forced their way over the Graft, possessed themselves of the
first Retrenchment, demolished the second, were Mining the third, and had
scarce left them ground enough within for the throwing up a Fourth: They had on
the other side with their Mines, and their Batterys, and their Grenades, made
the Sabionera, untenable, endangered the Arsenal, shut up both the Harbors,
and in short reduced the whole Town to rubbish and dust, in so much as it
seemed indefencible for the one, and uninhabitable for the other; and besides
all this the length of the siege, the Narrowness of their ground, the slaughter
of their men, and the incommoditys they suffered for want of provisions, had
brought their men into such a condition, they had not above 3600. left able to
bear Arms, which was not sufficient to do the ordinary duty.

All these considerations being represented in a Council of War, it was
unanimously resolved, they should submit to their fate, and give notice of
their desire to Treat, which being accordingly performed, and the proposition
received with great joy thorough the Visiers Camp, Colonel Arnardi, and
Segnior Scordeli the Vice Chancellor were employed to manage it, and on the
first of September sent out on the side of the River Giofro, where the Grand
Visiers Quarters was, to meet with the Commissioners in the behalf of the
Turks: But there was nothing Concluded that day more then that the conference
should be renewed the next in the open Field in a large Tent, the Vizier would
cause to be set up before the Fort of Dametrius, where they met and having
continued the Treaty to the fifth of September, at length the Articles were
agreed upon and Hostages given on both sides, viz. for the Venetians, Segnior
Calbo Commissary of the Provisions, de Riva Lieutenant of the Generals Guards,
and Zaccaria Moccenigo; for the Turks, the Beglerbeg of Temiswar, Mahomet
Bassa, the Agi of the Janisaries, and CassiBey, the Tefferdat of Romilia.

The Turks Hostages were sent immediately into the Town, and the Venetians into
their Camp, where they were received by the Grand Vizier with great humanity, a
rich apartement assigned them, a Guard of Janisaries to attend them whither
they pleased, and a Table of thirty dishes a Meal allowed them, to which was
added the civility of several Visits from the Vizier himself, and all the chief
Officers of his Army.

The Articles agreed upon, and afterward on the 19. of September ratified by
the Senate, and the Grand Segnior, were these.

1. That the City of Candia should be surrendered into the hands of the Grand
Vizier, to enjoy absolutely, and freely dispose of as a place belonging to the
Grand Segnior.

2. That all Forts, and Principal Ports of the Island of Candia, with the
Insulets adjacent which are now in the Possession of the most Serene Republique
of Venice, shall still remain under the Obedience of the said Republique, as
they were before the beginning of the War.

3. That all the Islands in the Archipelago, and other Seas, that are in the
Possession of the most Serene Republique of Venice shall contiue as before
under the entire and absolute Jurisdiction of the said Republique.

4. That the Fort of Clessa, and all other places in Dalmatia, and Albania,
conquered by the most Serene Republique of Venice, from the Turks, shall
remain to the said Republique, in sovereignty, and independent.

5. That neither of the two partys shall be bound or obliged to supply the
other with any sum of moneys, or any other thing whatsoever, under pretense of
reimbursement of the Charge and Expense of the War, or by way of pension,
present, or any other Title whatsoever.

6. That the Grand Vizier permit, and grant the Captain General so much time as
is Convenient and Necessary for the carrying all Ammunition, either for War or
food out of the City of Candia: That he freely consent that all Soldiers march
out of the place with their Arms and Baggage. That he permit the Inhabitants
who have no desire to continue there, to retire with their Familys, Rings and
Jewels, whither they please. That he consent that the Captain General may carry
away all the Republiques sacred vessels, and all Ornaments whatsoever belonging
to their Churches.

7. That the Captain General may take out of the City of Candia 320. Brass
Guns, which are to be in the power and at the free disposal of the most serene
Republique of Venice.

3. That the Prisoners and Slaves taken on both sides during the Siege of
Candia, be immediately restored, the Captain General and the Grand Vizier
issuing out their Orders required for the Execution of this Article.

9. That all these Articles agreed and faithfully Executed, both partys shall
swear and promise to preserve the Peace reciprocally and inviobably for the
advantage of the Trade, and the mutual quiet of both their subjects.

On Friday the 27 of September, the forces were drawn out of the City of
Candia, according to the said Articles, and the Keys sent the same day to the
Vizier, who received them with much satisfaction, rewarding the person that
brought them with a large sum of money: having received them, he sent
immediately into the Town to cleanse the Streets, and those few houses which
were left, and to remove the dead bodies out of the Churches of St. Francis, St.
Titus, St. Salvator, and St. Peter, which he designed as Mosques for the
worship of Mahomet.

On the fourth of October the Town being cleans'd, and the Articles (to the
immortal honor of the Grand Vizier) punctually performed, he made his Solemn
Entry into it at the Breach of St Andre, with his whole Army consisting of
about 15000. Soldiers, and eleven thousand pioneers, besides his necessary
attendants: he found the Town naked of all provisions, and inhabitants, there
being left only two Greeks, three Jews, and eight more Strangers, whom the
Vizier would have permitted to depart, but they chose rather to change their
Religion, then their Quarters, and continued there.

The Peace being Concluded and ratified in this manner, and the Town in the
possession of the Turks The; Generalissimo Morosini, committing the conduct of
the rest of the Fleet, (which was then at Standia,) to the management or M. St.
Andre Mo^^brun, went himself with a Squadron, furnished with Ammunicion and
Provision, and several Officers of Quality, (that were Natives,) to Suda
Spinalongas and the rest of the Garrisons reserved by the Articles, to
reinforce and furnish them with all things convenient and necessary incase of
any danger, or insult.

This done, the Generalissimo having certify'd the loss of the Town, and the
number of the inhabitants that had deser^^d the Island, and were at present
without any habitation, he recmomended to the Senate the appointing of some
place and way for their subsistence, and Orders were issued out accordingly for
their reception in the Town of Pola, and Perenzo in Istria. The Archbishop of
Candia having lost his Bishopric was recompensed with the Church of St.
Gregory in Venice, and the Revenue that belongs to it: to which places having
recommended and transported them all, he returned himself to Venice, and in
acknowledgment of his great services, was with great Solemnity chose one of the
Grand Council, which was honor Extraordinary, because at that time the number
was complete, and no Vacancy at all.

And thus the City of Candia, that with so much honor for so many years had
opposed it self to the puissance of the Ottoman Empire, was at last (after
three years continual Siege, after more Execution of men, and more Stratagems
of War, then perhaps is legible in the Chronicle of any age,) forced to a
serrender, but with this honor and apology, that it had slain and destroyed
near 100000. of their men, that it had given so long opportunity for their
tumults, and confusions at home, and though at last by their Mines under the
Town, and their Grenades playing perpetually into it, they were reduced to the
greatest necessity imaginable, yet could not they be forced to dishonorable
conditions, or persuaded to do any thing at last incongruous with the bravery
of their Comportment during the whole Siege.

FINIS.

