THE JUDGMENT Given forth by Twenty Eight Quakers AGAINST George Keith, And his
FRIENDS, With Answers to the said Judgment, declaring those Twenty Eight
Quakers to be No Christians. AS ALSO, An Appeal (for which several were
Imprisoned, etc) by the said George Keith, etc. to the Yearly Meeting, Sept.
1692. With a Full ACCOUNT of the said Yearly Meeting, Signed by Seventy Quakers.

LICENSED,

October. 28th, 1693. Dan. Poplar.



Printed at Pensilvania; and now Reprinted at London, for Richard Baldwin,
near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1694.

An ADVERTISEMENT by George Keith.
THat diverse Papers stufft with Lies and Calumnies against George Keith, our
Opposers hand about from one to another, and some from Meeting to Meeting,
which we cannot yet procure Copies of; as one of Rob. Owen's, which he Read in
a Public Meeting at Philadelphia: and though he expressly promised G. K. a Copy
of it, yet now detains it, pretending he did not limit a time. Another Paper of
James Byles they carry about from Meeting to Meeting: and another Paper that
was signed by many at their Yearly Meeting, which G. K. occasionally hearing
read at their Quarterly Meeting at Philadelphia, desired a Copy of it, which
they most unjustly refused. And thus like all Evil Doers, they seek to hide
their Evil Deeds, and smite at the Innocent in secret. And for all their
hypocritical Pretenses to the Light, they are such, that are not willing to
have their Deeds brought to the Light, as Christ said, The evil doer hates the
light, and will not bring his deeds to the light, lest they should be reproved.
If they had Truth on their side, they would not so smite in the dark, but would
openly, and face to face, appear, and make good their Charge; but this they
cannot: for they have no Covering or Refuge, but Lies and Falsehoods, which GOD
in his due time will sweep away, to the clearing the Innocent. Amen.

The Printer ( William Bradford's) ADVERTISEMENT.
THat notwithstanding the various Reports spread concerning my refusing to
Print for those that are George Keith's Opposers, these are to signify, That I
have never refused, but often proffered to Print any thing for them; and do now
again signify, That if John Delaval, or any of his Brethren, have any thing to
Print, I am most willing to do it for them: not that I want to beg their Work,
I need it not; but to leave them without excuse, that if they be any way
wronged, or falsely charged by what is Published to the World, they may have
equal privilege to vindicate themselves as publicly: though I have little cause
to make this offer to them, considering their many Abuses to me.

W. B.
Printed in Philadelphia in Pensilvania. 1693.
A true Copy of Three Judgments given forth by a Party of Men, called Quakers,
at Philadelphia, against George Keith, and his Friends: With Two Answers to the
said Judgments.
The First Judgment.
AT a Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, the 26th of 11 Mon. 1691. Thomas
Fitzwater charged George Keith, for denying the sufficiency of the Light, which
G. Keith denying, T. Fitzwater insisted, that he could prove the same; and
being examined concerning his Proof thereof, several Friends present stood up,
and said, They heard the said George Keith say, That he did not believe the
Light was sufficient, without something else; namely, Thomas Prichard, William
Harwood, Benjamin Chambers, William Southbe, and several others. And after the
matter in Debate had been thoroughly heard, the aforesaid Credible Evidences
giving their Testimonies as abovesaid, the Meeting saw no reason to give
Judgment against Tho. Fitzwater, in this particular abovementioned; but the
said Thomas very readily left the matter to this Meeting, and condemned the
rash Spirit that he spoke those words in, although the Charge in it self was
true.

This is a Copy of what passed at a Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, the 26. of
3. Month. 1692.

A. M.



The Second Judgment.
WE being prevented in our Meetings of late, to proceed orderly in business, by
reason of a turbulent and unsubdued Spirit, which has much disquieted us, but
having respite at this time, have considered seriously and duly of a Charge
exhibited several Months past, by George Keith, against William Stockdale,
many, if not most of us, being present at several Meetings, where the
Allegations of each side were heard; and as the Friends then present concluded
on a Judgment in this matter, but were prevented of publishing the same, by
reason of George Keith's unruly Behavior, and extreme Passion, which abruptly
broke up the said Meeting, we declare our concurrent sense as follows, That
whereas Proof was made by two Witnesses, That William Stockdale should say,
That George Keith 's preaching Christ without, and Christ within, was preaching
two Christ's: which W. Stockdale denied the words so spoken; and alleged, That
George Keith called him, an Ignorant Heathen, and gave him several vilifying
Expressions. Our Judgment is, That William Stockdale is reprovable, and
blameworthy, for uttering the said Words, they being an Offense to many sound
and tender Friends, and that he condemn the same. And as for G. Keith's manner
of proceeding against him, we cannot own the same to be pursuant to Gospel
Order, the said G. Keith having not alone dealt with him in private, before he
had further prosecuted his Complaint; neither can we hold him excusable for his
undecent Expressions to W. Stockdale, he being elder in Truth and in Years.

Given forth by the Meeting of Public Friends, at Philadelphia, the 4th of 4th
Month. 1692. A True Copy, by Samuel Jenings.

The Third Judgment, and Condemnation, against G. K.
To the several Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in Pensilvania, East and
West-Jarsey, and elsewhere, as there may be occasion.
BEloved Friends: In tender Love, and with Spirits bowed down before the Lord,
is this our Salutation unto you, earnestly desisiring your growth and daily
preservation in the ancient Truth, and in the simplicity of the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and our Hope and Breathings are, that no insinuation or
wiles of the Enemy shall prevail to turn you aside from your Steadfastness, or
to cause you to esteem lightly of the Rock and Way of Gods Salvation unto you,
but that you be kept in the Light and Life, which was, and is the Just Man's
Path to the end of our Days. Amen.

Now, dear Friends, it is with Sorrow of Spirits, and Grief of Souls, that we
signify unto you the tedious Exercise and vexatious Perplexity we have met
with in our late Friend George Keith, for several Months past: With mourning
and lamentation do we say, How is this Mighty Man fallen! how is his Shield
vilely cast away, as though he had not known the Oil of the holy Ointment! How
shall it betold in Gath, and published in the Streets of Askelon! Will not the
Daughters of the Philistines rejoice? Will not the Daughters of the
Uncircumcised triumph, when they hear that he is fallen upon the sooring
Mountains, and from the High Places of Israel! Oh! how are we distressed for
thee, thou as a Man slain in thy High Places! Whilst thou walked in the Counsel
of God, and were little in thine own Eyes, thy Bow did abide in strength, thy
Sword returned not empty; from the Fat of the Enemies of God, thy Bow turned
not back; his Enemies were then vile unto thee, and his Followers honorable in
thy esteem. Oh! how lovely were thou in that day, when his Beauty was upon
thee, and when his Comeliness covered thee! Why should his Ornaments exalt thee,
which were given to humble thee before him! and how thou art fallen from thy
first Love, and are become treacherous to the Spouse of thy Youth! Consider
where thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first Works.

But so it has happened, Friends, lest any Flesh should glory, but become
silent before the Lord, that this once Eminent Man, and Instrument of Renown,
in the hand of the Lord, whilst he kept his first Habitation, and knew the
Government of Truth over his own Spirit, and witnessed the same to be a Bridle
to his Tongue, was then serviceable both in Pen and Speech to the Churches of
Christ; but now, and of late, it is too obvious and apparent, that being
degenerated from the lowly meek and peaceable Spirit of Christ Jesus, and grown
cool in Charity and Love toward his Brethren, that he is gone into a Spirit of
Enmity, Wrath, Self-Exaltation, Contention and Janglings; and as a Person
without the fear of God before his Eyes, and without regard to his Christian
Brethren, and letting loose the Reins to an extravagant Tongue, he has broken
out into many ungodly Speeches, railing Accusations, and passionate
Threatenings, toward many of his Brethren and Elders, and that upon slender
Occasions; and when some in Christian Duty have laid before him his Unsavory
Words, and Unchristian Frame, he has treated them with such vile Words, and
abusive Language, such as a Person of common Civility would loath. It has been
too frequent with him, and that in a transport of Heat and Passion, to call
some of his Brethren in the Ministry, and other Elders, and that upon small
Provocations, if any Fools, ignorant Heathens, Infidels, silly Souls, Liars,
Heretics, rotten Ranters, Muggletonians, and other Names of that infamous
strain, thereby, to our grief, foaming out his own Shame. And further, his
Anger and Envy, being cruel against us, and not contenting himself with his
harshness against Persons, but he proceeded in bitterness of Spirit to charge
our Meeting, with being come together to cloak Heresy and Deceit; and
publishing openly several times, That there were more Doctrines of Devils, and
Damnable Heresies, among the Quakers, than among any Profession among the
Protestants. He has long objected against our Discipline, even soon after his
coming among us, and having prepared a Draught of his own, and the same not
finding the expected Reception, he seemed disgusted since: He has often
quarreled with us about Confessions, declaring, That he knew none given forth
by the Body of Friends to his satisfaction; and often charged most of us, of
being unsound in the Faith: We have offered in several Meetings for his
satisfaction, and to prevent Strife among us, and for preserving the Peace of
the Church, to deliver a Confession of our Christian Faith in the words of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Author of the Christian Faith, and in the
words of the Apostles and Disciples, his faithful Followers; or we would
declare our Belief in Testimonies of our ancient Friends, and faithful
Brethren, who were generally received by us; or we would concur and agree upon
a Confession, and have it transmitted to the Approbation of the Yearly Meeting
here, or the Yearly Meeting at London; yea, it was offered unto him at the same
time, that a Confession concerning the main Matter in Controversy, should be
given out of a Book of his own, but all was slighted as insufficient. The Lord
knows the trouble which we have had with this unruly Member, and the openness
of our Hearts and Well-wishes toward him, notwithstanding his Rage and
Violence agasnst us, and of the Endeavors of many in this place, to have
gained upon him by a Friendly Converse, and by other Means not inconsiderable
to a Brotherly Freedom; but our Labor hitherto seems to be as Water spilt upon
the Ground: And this Meeting having tenderly and orderly dealt with him, for
his abusive Language, and disorderly Behavior; he has not only slighted all
Applications of gaining him to a sense of his ill Treatments and Miscarriages,
but in an insulting manner said to the Friends appointed by the Meeting to
admonish him, That he trampled the Judgment of the Meeting under his Feet as
dirt: And has of late set up a separate Meeting here, where he has, like an
open Opposer, not only reviled several Friends, by exposing their Religious
Reputations, in mixed Auditories of some Hundreds, endeavoring to render them
and Friends here, by the Press and otherways, a Scorn to the Profane, and the
Song of the Drunkards, but he has traduced and vilified our worthy traveling
Friends, J. D. and T. W. in their powerful and savoury Ministry, whose Service
is not only here, but in most Meetings in England, Scotland, and Ireland, well
known to have a Seal in the Hearts of many Thousands of the Israel of God. He
has also within a few Weeks appeared in opposition as it were, to the Body of
Friends, by putting on his Hat, when our well-received and recommended Friend,
J. Dickenson, was at Prayer, and that in a Meeting of near a Thousand Friends,
and others; and so going out of the Meeting, to the great Disquiet thereof, and
to the drawing some Scores into the same Opposition with him, by his ill
Example: and he thus persisting in his repeated Oppositions, hard Speeches, and
continued Separation, and laboring like an unwearied Adversary, to widen the
Breach made by him, and so abusing some of the neighboring Meetings, by being
as yet under that Cover of being owned by us, we are hereby brought under a
Religious Constraint, and to prevent other Meetings of being further injured by
him, to give forth this Testimony, strained as it were from us by his many and
violent Provocations, viz. That we cannot own him in such ungodly Speeches, and
disorderly Behavior, or in his separate Meetings, and that we disown the same,
as proceeding from a wrong Spirit, which brings into disorder inwardly, and
leads into distraction and confusion outwardly; and until he condemn and
decline the same; we cannot receive him in his Public Ministry, and would have
him cease to offer his Gift, as such, among us, or elsewhere among Friends,
till he be reconciled to his offended Brethren. And as to those few of our
Brethren in the Gift of the Ministry, who are gone out with G. Keith, into his
uncharitable and dividing Spirit, the miserable Effects whereof many of us have
sufficiently known in Old England, and other parts, our Judgment is, That
whilst they continue such, they become unqualified to the Work of the Gospel,
as degenerating thereby from the Guidance of God's blessed and peaceable Spirit
in their Hearts (from whence proceeds the effectual New Testament Ministry) and
being turned from the peaceable Fruits thereof, are gone to Uncharity and
Contention. And now, all you who have walked in Fellowship and Communion with
us, and are drawn aside through Inconsideration, or otherwise, into this Spirit
of Separation and Prejudice against our Meetings orderly established, and
wherein we have been often and mutually refresht together, we cannot but in the
fear of God, and in love to your Souls, admonish you also of the Insecurity of
your present State, and that therein we cannot have Unity with you, and unless
you return from under that Spirit, Dryness and Barrenness from the Lord will be
your Reward. And so, dear Friends, we exhort you all, to behave your selves in
the Spirit of Meekness, and peaceable Truth, upon all occasions, but more
especially upon any Discourse or Conference with any of them who are
discontented among you, or started aside from you; and avoid all Heats and
Contentions in Matters of Faith and Worship; and let not the Salt of the
Covenant be wanting in your Words and Actions, for thereby the Savor of your
Conversation will reach the Witness of God in them. The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all. Amen.

Given forth by the Meeting of Public Friends in Philadelphia, the 20th of the
4th Month, 1692. Samuel Jenings, John Delavall, William Yardly, Joseph
Kerckbridge, Walter Faucet, Hugh Roberts, Robert Owen, William Walker, John
Lynam, George Gray, John Symcock, Griffith Owen, John Bown, Henry Willis, Paul
Saunders, John Blunston, William Cooper, Thomas Thackray, William Byles, Thomas
Loyd, John Willsford, Nicholas Walln, William Watson, George Maris, Thomas
Ducket, Joshua Fearne, Evan Morris, Richard Walter.


Here follows Two Answers to the said Judgments.
To all faithful Friends in Pensilvania, East and West-Jarsey, and to all
everywhere else, in all parts of the World, to whose Hands this may come, The
Salutation of Love.
WE in behalf of our selves, and many Brethren, who are falsely called the
Separate Meeting at Philadelphia, having taken into our serious and weighty
Consideration, Three several Papers, given forth by them of the opposite side,
who have opposed us, and continue to oppose us in our present Testimony to the
Truth of Christ, and his blessed Gospel and Doctrine, viz. The first given
forth by the Monthly Meeting of the opposite side, the 20th of the 3d Month,
1692; wherein they clear T. Fitzwater of his falsely accusing G. K. for denying
the sufficiency of the Light, saying expressly in their said Paper, That Four
credible Witnesses giving their Testimony, That they heard G. K. say, He did
not believe the Light was sufficient, without somewhat else: the Meeting saw no
reason to give Judgment against T. Fitzwater in this particular, the said
Thomas condemning the rash Spirit that he spoke these Words in, though the
Charge in itself was true. And G. K. having both at Quarterly and Monthly
Meeting preceding, sufficiently proved, and which was confessed by T. Lloyd, as
the Mouth of these Meetings, That by that somewhat else, G. K. had frequently
declared, he did not mean Humane Learning, nor the Scriptures, nor outward
Preaching, (although the Scriptures, and outward Preaching are instrumental, in
God's ordinary way of working, together with the inward Operation of the Spirit
to Men's Salvation) as absolutely necessary, but the Man Christ Jesus, and what
he did and suffered for us on Earth, and what he now does for us in Heaven, and
the fullness that dwells in him. By which it plainly appears, the said
Monthly Meeting has excluded the Man Christ Jesus, our blessed Mediator and
Savior, from having any part or concern in our Salvation, and therefore we do
unanimously, and with one Heart, judge and condemn their false Judgment, in
clearing Tho. Fitzwater, that has this tendency, not only to condemn G. K. for
his sound Christian Doctrine, but is a plain denial of the Man Christ Jesus,
and the great Merits, and Value, and Efficacy of his Suffering, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension, and his Mediation for us in Heaven: All which are
somewhat else, than the People called Quakers commonly understand by the Light;
to wit, the Light in every Man's Conscience. And by this rash and inconsiderate
Act of their Monthly Meeting, proceeding from great Ignorance, Error, and
Unbelief in them, they have sufficiently declared themselves to be no true
Believers in the Man Christ Jesus, and therefore No Christians: and for this
cause we cannot own them to be our Christian Brethren, nor join with them in
any Religious Worship, until they condemn themselves for the said Act, and give
us some Evidence of their unfeigned Repentance, and sincere Faith, by their
open Confession and Declaration of the Truth of Christ, which now they have
denied.

The Second Paper is given forth by a Meeting of these called Friends of the
Ministry, signed by Sam. Jenings, as Clerk of the said Meeting, wherein they
give too partial and defective Judgment against William Stockdale, not blaming
him for any Offense to God or Christ, nor convicting him for his Sin of
Blasphemy, whereof he was guilty, in charging G. K. for preaching Two Christ's,
because he preached Faith in Christ within, and in Christ without us; wherein
he plainly denied Faith in Christ without us, that we judge Blasphemy against
the Son of Man. Also, the said Meeting has falsely judged and blamed G. K. for
calling W. S. an ignorant Heathen; for seeing he denied Faith in Christ without
us, we judge it was his proper Name, and he was not worthy to be accounted in
the Truth, having discovered his so great Ignorance and Unbelief in one of the
great Fundamenals of the Christian Faith. Also, they falsely accuse G. K. for
not giving W. S. Gospel Order; whereas, upon due Examination, we find, that he
had given him sufficient Gospel Order.

The Third Paper is signed by Samuel Jenings, John Simcock, Thomas Lloyd, and
others, in Number 28, all pretended Preachers, wherein they have passed a most
false Judgment against G. K. for his sound Christian Doctrine, and Godly Zeal,
in sharply reproving gross Antichristian Errors that he had detected them
guilty of, partly by the open Confession of some, and partly by the Connivance
of others, and seeking to cloak and cover and defend the Guilty; and the said
Three Papers, and the Matter contained in them being sufficiently answered in a
late Book, called, The Plea of the Innocent, etc. which we having read and well
considered, do approve of, and allow to be given forth by our unanimous Consent
and Approbation, the particular things, in matter of Fact, therein contained,
being all known to some of us, and the most principal to most of us: And we of
this Meeting deliver it as our unanimous Judgment, that all these who have
given Judgment in the said Three Papers abovementioned, have given a false
Judgment in them against the Truth, and against G.K. and his Friends joined
with him in this Testimony. And we do declare against their false Judgment, and
say, That G. K. and other Friends of the Ministry joined with him in this
Testimony, ought not to forbear the Exercise of their Ministerial Gift that God
has given them, notwithstanding the false Judgment of false Brethren, that
have joined together in a Faction against him, and his faithful Brethren, but
that he and his said faithful Brethren of the Ministry ought to be encouraged
and received by all faithful Friends everywhere, in the use and exercise of
their Ministerial Gifts, which we are persuaded they still have, and the use
and exercise thereof will tend to the Glory of God, the Prosperity of Truth,
and Salvation of Souls. And we also deliver it as our unanimous Judgment, that
all these 28 Persons that have signed that false Judgment against G.K. and his
Friends, ought not to be owned nor countenanced in their Preaching or Praying,
but denied, and all others that justify them, until they condemn themselves
for their said false and rash Judgment against G. K. and his Brethren; and
until they give some public and open Confession and Declaration that they are
sound in the Faith of Christ, they having given sufficient cause to us, to
conclude, That at present they have not the sound Faith of Christ. And though we
have just cause to blame them for condemning us without all Hearing and Trial,
yet they have no cause to blame us, because we have often sought and requested a
Meeting with them, to have Things of Difference fairly debated and tried, but
could never obtain it; and they having now made public their false Judgment
against us, in three several Papers, we are concerned, for the Defense of
Truth, and our Reputation, both as Men and Christians, to give forth this
public Testimony against them, and to recommend it to all faithful Friends to
consider and examine by the Spirit of Truth; and let both their public Papers
and ours be impartially weighed in the Balance of Truth, in order to which we
are willing that all their Papers be printed as well as ours, that have been
published on both sides, that so the impartial Readers may have a fair
Opportunity to judge of both.

Given forth at our Meeting at the House of Philip James in Philadelphia, the
3d of 5th Month, 1692, in behalf of many of our Brethren both in Town and
Country, who are one with us in this Testimony, tho not now present. Richard
Dungworth, John Wells, Philip James, Henry Furnis, James Shattick, James
Cooper, sen. William Davis, Robert Wallis, James Poulter, Nicholas Pierce,
Thomas Budd, John Barclay, William Bradford, James Cooper, jun. John Loftus,
John M' Comb, James Chick, John Bartram, Abel Noble, Joseph Walker, Thomas
Paschall, Richard Helliard, William Wait, Anthony Sturges, Ralph Ward, Thomas
Peart, John Chainler, Peter Chamberlain.


An Expostulation with Samuel Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and the rest of the Twenty
Eight unjust Judges and Signers of the Paper of Condemnation against G. K. and
his Friends: And Complaint for a Public Hearing and Trial before all impartial
People.
WHereas Samuel Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and others, being in Number Twenty
Eight, have published a Paper against G. K. and the rest of his Brethren, who
are joined with him in this Testimony for the Lord Jesus, against whom they
prophecy, That Dryness and Barrenness from the Lord will be their Reward. We
having read and considered the said Judgment, do testify against it, as an
unjust and unrighteous Act; but that which aggravates the Crime against them
is, that they say, This Meeting having tenderly and orderly dealt with him,
etc. when they know in their Consciences, they dealt not with G. K. nor ever
sent for him to their said Meeting, but Tried and Judged him altogether in his
absence; wherein they have done worse than the Baptists did in the case of Tho.
Hicks: for when Friends appealed to the People called Baptists, for Justice
against T. Hicks, they took their time, and appointed a Meeting, and three or
four Days before the said Meeting, sent Letters to G. W. and W. P.'s Houses, to
give them Notice to be at the Meeting; but they being so far from home, that
they could not have timely Notice, it was reckoned great Injustice for them to
proceed and try Friends, and T. Hicks, in their absence; and upon Complaint
they gave another Meeting: but T. Lloyd, S. Jenings, and the rest are so far
short of the Justice of the Baptists, that they never so much as acquainted G.
K. of their Meeting, or Intent to proceed against him, nor never sent for him
that we can understand, only W. Byles came to G. K.'s House, and asked for him,
his Wife told, He was from home, and she expected him the next Morning; but
they told nothing of their business with him, but in all have proceeded to
judge him in his absence before he came home. Is this your orderly dealing with
him? Is this your Justice? Is this your Christian Tenderness? your Charity, and
your bearing with him in a Christian Spirit? for shame cease thus proceeding,
or you will be a stink in the Nostrils of the Nations where it shall be told.
What! pretend to Christianity, and fall short of Heathen Justice! Joh. 7.50,
51. Acts 25 16, 17. Did the Baptists do unfair in proceeding to try Friends in
their absence? Then much more you: for they gave some Notice before of their
intending to try Tho. Hicks, but you never so much as told G. K. of your so
Meeting: wherefore allow us so much Justice as the Baptists did, to have
another Meeting publicly to try G. K. where all People may be present, that
are willing to come, and whereof G. K. may have timely Notice, and liberty to
plead his own Cause, and let all impartial People judge; and through God's
assistance we shall make it appear, that your said Judgment is unjust, and G.
K. not worthy of Condemnation. Was there ever such an Act done in any Christian
Society before, to condemn a man without ever hearing of him, or suffering him
to speak for himself? Surely its far short of any worldly Court, where the
Party shall have timely Notice to prepare for his Trial, and liberty to plead
his own Cause in the face of the Country, and where his Accusers are not
allowed to sit and give Judgment against him: But so it is, that these Unjust
and Unrighteous Judges have proceeded to Try, Judge, and Publish their Judgment
against G. K. without ever hearing of him, when it is well known the most of
them were his great Opposers: They might be sure this way to condemn him, when
only a Faction of them get together, and accuse him, and he, nor any for him,
be present to speak for him. But that which still heightens the Crime of Tho.
Lloyd, Sam. Jenings, and the rest of the Twenty Eight Unjust Judges, is, that
they of the Ministry should give such a false Judgment, and then impose it on
all the Meetings in these Three Provinces, when most of the Friends thereof are
great Strangers to the Matter in Controversy, not knowing which Party is in
the right, but they must take the said Judgment upon trust from them, without
enquiring into the Cause and Verity thereof; and where they think their said
Judgment will not readily be swallowed down, they will follow it from Meeting
to Meeting, clothed with their Magistratical Robes; and if any Friends show
their dislike of having it imposed on them without their own consent and
consideration of the matter, presently threaten to bind them to the good
Behavior, and to the Peace, and call out for a Constable, thereby endeavoring
to trample us down by their Magistratical Power and Authority, as Samuel
Jenings, Sam. Richardson, Thomas Lloyd, John Delavall, and Anthony Morris, did
lately, at a Monthly Meeting near Frankford, as is well known to many. Oh!
whither do you think these things will run? Will it not give People just cause
to say, The Quakers are turned Persecutors? but our Trust and Confidence is in
the Lord alone, who hitherto has pleaded the Cause of the Innocent, and carried
his People through all the Powers and Oppositions that have hitherto risen up
against them in all Ages, and we doubt not but he will do the same for us, as
we keep faithful to him, and to the Guidance of his Holy Spirit, Light and Life
in our Hearts. But are these your Proceedings Christian, or Protestant-like? Or
do they not rather relish of rank Popery, for the Clergy, or them of the
Ministry, to impose their Edicts on the People, without their enquiring into
the matter? Is not this blind Obedience? Is not this believing as the Church
believes, in order to bring in Ignorance the Mother of Devotion? Oh! who but
ignorant and blind Men, but can see these things! And yet now will ye stand in
them, O ye Unjust Judges! will ye not be willing to answer our just Complaint
for a Hearing? Will you come short of the Justice of the Baptists, who admitted
of another Meeting for a Hearing? But perhaps you will say, The Act of that
Meeting was Infallible, being made up of such a Body of the Ministry, (as
Arthur Cook said lately in the House of G. K. That a Yearly Meeting could not
err.) But we desire to hope, that some of you will better consider of it, and
answer our just Complaint, and not lurk in Holes and Corners, but come openly
and defend your selves, and repent of the Error and false Doctrine you have run
into; and let a Time and Place be appointed and agreed on by both Parties for a
Public Hearing: If you have Truth and Justice on your side, come forth and let
it appear before the World; and say not, That such and such things are false,
but prove them to be so, and bring things to the light, and let not Christ's
words be fulfilled on you, viz. You hate the Light, because your Deeds are
evil, etc. Say not, that we are bold and daring thus to challenge you: for it is
not writ in a presumptuous Spirit, as relying on our own Strength or Parts, but
on the Lord alone, on whom is our Dependence, and who knows the Innocence of
our Cause, and therefore we are not afraid to bring it to the Test, but willing
to appear openly, as hitherto we have done in Print, and not as your Practice
is to report false things secretly abroad, which we know not whom to fasten
upon; but what we publish in Print, remains to be the Author's, whether true or
false; If false, why don't you refute it, the Press is free and open for you,
as for any? But the matter in our late Printed Books is true, and stands over
your Heads, and which you will never be able to refute.

But next, let us enquire, What have you condemned G. K. for? Some of you say,
Partly for matter of Doctrine, and partly for hard Words: But as for Doctrine
you have not mentioned what it is; and as for the hard Names you mention, it is
made appear in, The Plea of the Innocent, etc. that they were justly given by
G. K. to them that deserved the same: But have his Opposers given no hard
Names, no unjust and false Reflections? Yea, many. But why only then must G. K.
be condemned, and not they also who have given hard Words, and false Names to
G. K.? When G. K. complained against them for not giving Judgment against W.
Stockdale's Blasphemy, Samuel Jenings could excuse it, by bringing the Example
and Practice of worldly Courts, saying, George, thou have reviled thy Brethren,
and in Court, we allow of Discount. So that according to S. Jenings, W.
Stockdale's Blasphemy must be discounted against G. K.'s reviling his Brethren,
as they account it, but can never prove. But if Discount be allowable in this
case, why are not G. K.'s hard words discounted against those that have been
given to him, so far as they will reach? And that it may appear what hard Names
have been given, we think fit here to mention, viz.

They say G. K. has called them,

1. Fools. 2. Ignorant Heathens. 3. Infidels. 4. Silly Souls. 5. Liars. 6.
Heretics. 7. Rotten Ranters. 8. Muggletonians.

They of the other side have called G. K.

1. Brat of Babylon. 2. Accuser of the Brethren. 3. Apostate. 4. Worse than
Profane. 5. A Troubler of the Church. 6. A Person that no one could have
difference with, but he was in danger of the Life of his Soul. 7. A Preacher of
two Christ's. 8. A Teller of an old St. Andrew 's Story. 9. Pope. 10. Father
Confessor. 11. Liar. 12. Devil. 13. Muggletonian. 14. Compared him to a Wolf,
Tiger, etc. 15. One that always endeavored to keep down the Power of Truth.
16. A more vexatious Adversary than Hicks, Faldo, Scanderet, or the worst of
Enemies. 17. One that is fallen upon the soaring Mountains, etc. 18. As a Man
slain. 19. Become treacherous to the Spouse of his Youth. 20. Fallen from his
first Love. 21. Gone into a Spirit of Enmity, Wrath, Self-Exaltation,
Contention, etc. 22. Foaming out his own Shame. 23. A Person without the Fear
of God before his Eyes. 24. Letting loose the Reins to an extravagant Tongue.
25. Broken out into many ungodly Speeches, railing Accusations, passionate
Threatenings, being Cruel, etc. like an unwearied Adversary. With many more that
can be proved.

Now let the impartial Reader judge, which have exceeded in hard Words; and
whether they are not very partial, to pass by all that has been said against
G. K. and condemn him for what he has spoke in its right place; as is made
appear in the Book called, The Plea of the Innocent. And yet when G. K. was the
Complainer for many Months, for Justice to be done to Truth, they could plead
for Discount, and put Blasphemy against Christ Jesus, in the Balance, against
Reflections upon themselves, and yet now will not discount for hard Words. And
also, they have judged a whole Meeting, without ever admonishing of them. If
this be not Partiality, Injustice, and Unrighteous Judgment, tell us what is.
And clear your selves of these things, if you can.

Signed by us, in the behalf of the rest of our Friends, by order of our
Meeting, the 18th of the Fifth Month, 1692. Thomas Budd, Richard Hilliard, John
Heart, Thomas Paschall. William Bradford, James Cooper, Elizabeth Keith.


An APPEAL from the Twenty Eight Judges, to the Spirit of Truth and True
Judgment, in all faithful Friends, called Quakers, that meet at this Yearly
Meeting at Burlington, the Seventh Month, 1692.
WHereas Twenty eight Persons, called Friends of the Ministry, have published a
Paper of false Judgment against George Keith, and the rest of his Friends and
Brethren, without any Hearing or Trial, We, in behalf of the rest, do make this
our Serious and Solemn Appeal to the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment in you
all, that by the help and guidance of the same, ye may enquire and search into
the matter, requesting and beseeching you to do Justice in these things, for
the Vindication of the Truth, and Honor of Christ, the Peace of your
Consciences, and the Credit and Repute of our Holy Profession, and making up
the Breach that is among us, if possible, and answering the expectation of our
faithful Brethren in England, and other places of the World, who will be
greatly concerned with us, that Justice and true Judgment may take place
impartially, and without respect of Persons.

And Friends, Think it not strange, that we appeal to you universally, that by
the Spirit of Truth ye may give true Judgment in these Matters concerning Us,
and these Twenty eight Persons, and others of the Ministry, who are joined with
them therein: for though upon a pretense of their being Ministers, they claim a
Superiority over you the Lord's Heritage and People, as if ye were not capable,
nor qualified to judge them, but that they have Authority to judge you, and on
this pretended Authority, (too like the Roman Hierarchy) they have sent their
Paper of Judgment against us to you, though they were no Yearly Meeting, nor any
true Representative of the Body of Friends in these three Provinces, but a
Party or Faction of prejudiced Men against the Truth, (and us the defamed
Witnesses of it) many of whom we can prove guilty of great Ignorance and Error
in Doctrine, as well as some of them are guilty of evil and scandalous
Practice, repugnant to our Holy Profession; and some that have been too busy
to comply with their usurped Authority over you, have read the said Judgment in
diverse Monthly, Quarterly, and other Meetings, without the Consent of the said
Meetings, or so much as asking it. All which we appeal to you, Whether it be
not a manifest Usurpation over you, and seeking to bring you into Bondage? And
when we have at several Meetings requested the Friends of the said Meetings, to
enquire and examine the Matter of Difference between these Twenty eight Men and
us, some of the said Twenty eight have still refused to suffer the thing to
come to any further Examination or Judgment, pretending, None have power to
judge in these Matters, but Friends of the Ministry, whereof these Twenty eight
are the far greatest part in these Three Provinces, and most of the rest of the
Preachers are joined with them, to uphold and defend them in their Tyrannical
Usurpation over your Consciences, as if ye were only to see with their Eyes,
and hear with their Ears, and not with your own, and that ye were to take all
things without all due Examination and Trial, by an implicit Faith,
Papist-like, from them. But if there remain that Nobility in you, and Sense of
your Christian Liberty and Freedom, wherewithal Christ has made you free, as
we hope there does, ye will not suffer your selves to be so imposed upon, nor
to be thus Ass-rid by them, as to take things by a bare implicit Faith from
them, but every one of you to see with your one Spiritual Eyes, and hear with
your Spiritual Ears of God's opening, and to bring these weighty Things of
Difference to the true Touchstone, the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment in
your selves, which ye have as well as they, and which many of you are better
taught by, and acquainted with, than they; even as formerly it was, that many
of the People say beyond the Priests and Teachers, in the days of the Prophets,
and of Christ in the Flesh, and the Apostles; and also of late, many Thousands
of the People have seen beyond the Priest and Teachers, and have been made able
by the Spirit of Truth to judge them for their great Ignorance and Error. And
that ye may have the better opportunity to examine these matters, and
impartially and thoroughly to search into them, and judge of them, we have
procured to be Printed their Three Papers of Judgment, viz. The first given
forth by their Monthly Meeting at Philadelphia, the 26th of the Third Month,
1692; wherein they clear Tho. Fitzwater, and condemn G. K. for saying, The
Light is not sufficient, without something else. Which something else, Thomas
Lloyd, as the Mouth of the said Monthly Meeting, acknowledged, They knew G. K.
held to be the Man Christ Jesus, and what he did and suffered for us on Earth,
and what he now does for us in Heaven. The Second Judgment is given forth by
them called Friends of the Ministry, concerning W. Stockdale, signed by Sam.
Jenings, as Clerk of the said Meeting, the 4th of the Fourth Month, 1692. The
Third signed by Twenty eight of them of the Ministry, against G. K. and his
Friends, etc. Which said Judgments we desire you to compare with our Printed
Answer, called, The Plea of the Innocent, etc. and another called, An
Expostulation with Tho. Lloyd, Sam. Jenings, etc. and another by way of
Epistle, in Answer to their Three false Judgments.

And we earnestly request and desire of you, to procure of these Twenty eight
Men, that we may have a Public Hearing with these Men, before you all, at a
Place and Time mutually appointed by them and us, before the People be gone
from the Yearly Meeting; and that an orderly Method be agreed upon betwixt them
and us, to prevent all Confusion, and especially that none but one speak at
once, and that every one that speaks, who is concerned, may have full
liberty, without interruption, in order to which we are most willing, that one
or two Impartial and Judicious Men may be chosen by both them and us, to
Preside, and have full Power to command and enjoin Silence to any of them or
us, as they shall see occasion; and whoever of them or us yields not
Obedience to the said Command, shall be held and declared unworthy and
incapable of further speaking at the said Public Conference. And also, we
demand that Justice of these Twenty eight Men, that they will give us the said
Public Hearing and Trial before you.

And let these particular things be discoursed of, and come to a Public
Hearing and Trial at the said Meeting, and what other things they and we shall
agree to, viz.

1. Whether George Keith has been proved guilty by these Twenty eight Men (his
Accusers) of reviling, ungodly Speeches, and false Accusations? Or whether he
has given Names to any of them (as alleged in their Paper) that they did not
deserve, and did not belong to them? And whether it be not false, that they
say, This Meeting having tenderly and orderly dealt with him?

2. Whether they who have signed that Paper against him, are not guilty of
giving him Names that did not belong to him, but may be justly accounted Names
of reviling, ungodly Speeches, and false Accusations? And whether Samuel
Jenings particularly is not greatly to be blamed, for calling G. K. Worse than
Profane, and Apostate, seeing we know not wherein G. K. is in any one
particular gone from Friends Doctrine or Practice, or what thing or things he
is guilty of, so as to be worthy of having his Ministry denied?

3. Whether it cannot be proved, that that Faction (which have sufficiently
shown their opposition and prejudice against G. K. and have signed to that
Paper against him) are guilty of cloaking more damnable Heresies and Errors,
than any Protestant Society in Christendom, while it can be proved against
them, that they have not only cloaked W. Stockdale for above Eighteen Months,
in saying, To preach Faith in Christ within, and in Christ without, is to
preach Two Christ's: and Tho. Fitzwater, in saying, The Light is sufficient
without any thing else, and that he owned no Man Christ Jesus, as Mediator in
Heaven, but the Grace of God within him; and saying in his Prayer, O God that
died in us, and laid down thy Life in us, etc. and saying, That he had not
learned that Lesson, whether the Godhead was crucified on the Tree of the
Cross, or somewhat that he took of the Virgin, etc. But they have cloaked
diverse other Persons in their vile and gross Errors, as can be sufficiently
proved, and particularly Sam. Jenings, in saying, To do our own Business, as
Men, we needed not a supernatural Power. And Tho. Lloyd, in arguing some hours,
That we might be Christians good enough, without the Faith of Christ, as he
died for our sins, and rose again without us. And Arthur Cook and J. Simcock in
their charging G.K. for imposing Novelties upon them, when he affirmed, Christ
was in Heaven in the same Body, for being, in which he suffered; and J. Simcock
denied that Christ rose in the same Body in which he suffered. And Rob. Young,
in saying, That he read not in all the Scriptures of Christ without, and Christ
within; and that Christ was separated from his Body in the Cloud. And Rob.
Owen, and Will. Southbe, in denying any general Day of Judgment, and the
Resurrection of the Dead, but only what every one witnessed within here.
Whether these, with many more that can be proved, were not cause enough for
G.K. to say, More damnable Heresies and Errors were cloaked among the Quakers
here, than in any Protestant Society in Christendom?

4. Seeing their Paper, signed by the Twenty eight, mentions a main Matter of
Controversy betwixt G. K. and them, which (they say) they proffered to refer
to one of his own Books, or to the Yearly Meeting here, or to the Yearly
Meeting at London; let them show what that main Matter of Controversy is, and
wherein his present Doctrine does contradict any of his former Books, which he
says, they can never prove.

5. Whether the Act of the Monthly Meeting at Philadelphia, the 26th of the
Third Month, 1692, is according to Christian Doctrine, That the Light is
sufficient without any thing else; thereby excluding the Man Christ Jesus
without us, and his Death and Sufferings, Resurrection, Ascension, Mediation,
and Intercession for us in Heaven, from having any part or share in our
Salvation, and thereby making him only a titular, but no real Savior, as one
zealous for that side, lately called the Difference betwixt them and us
concerning Christ, An empty Barrel: and another great Zealot said, He did not
believe to be saved by that which died at Jerusalem.

6. Whether it be necessary to our Salvation to believe, That Christ died for
our sins without us, and rose again, and is gone into Heaven without us, and
there does make Intercession for us? And whether it does not belong to sound
Christian Doctrine to believe, That Christ will come without us in his
glorified Body, to judge the Quick and the Dead; and that there shall be a
general Day of Judgment; and that there is a Resurrection of the Dead to be;
that the deceased Saints have not yet attained generally, but wait for it until
Christ's coming? And whether there is not to be a Resurrection of the Body,
that is not the Resurrection or Quickening of the Soul only, as some falsely
imagine: Let them clear themselves in these things, they having given us just
cause to suspect them Unbelievers therein.

7. Whether every true Christian is not taught and led to believe in the Power
and Spirit of Christ, and his Light and Life inwardly revealed, and by the help
of the said measure to believe in him who has the fullness, even the Man Christ
Jesus without us, glorified in Heaven? And whether by true Faith in the Man
Christ Jesus without us, as it is wrought by the Measure of the Spirit, and
Light of Christ in us, we receive not a daily supply and increase of more
Grace, Light and Life, and a further Measure of the Spirit from the Man Christ
Jesus? And whether they who have not this Faith in the Man Christ Jesus without
them, are worthy to bear the honorable Name of Christians?

8. Whether it is not a great and necessary part of Christian Doctrine,
necessary to be preached, in order to bring People to an inward knowledge and
enjoyment of God and Christ, and the Holy Spirit, to Preach Faith in Christ
without us, even the Man Christ Jesus, as he died for our sins, and rose again,
and is ascended into Heaven, and there makes Intercession for us, as well as
Faith in Christ in us, as he does inwardly enlighten us? And whether it can be
said, that the Man Christ Jesus is in us, otherwise than by a figurative
Speech, of giving the Name of the whole, to the measure or part; as when the
Sun is said to be in such a House, the fullness of the Sun's Light is only in
the Body of the Sun, and but a Stream of Light comes from the Sun into the
House?

9. Whether the said Twenty eight Persons had not done much better to have
passed Judgment against some of their Brethren at Philadelphia, (some of
themselves being guilty) for countenancing and allowing some called Quakers,
and owning them in so doing, to hire Men to fight (and giving them a Commission
so to do, signed by Three Justices of the Peace, one whereof being a Preacher
among them) as accordingly they did, and recovered a Sloop, and took some
Privatiers by Force of Arms?

10. Whether hiring Men thus to fight, and also to provide the Indians with
Powder and Lead, to fight against other Indians, be not a manifest
transgression of our Principle, against all use of the carnal Sword, and other
carnal Weapons? And whether these called Quakers, in their so doing, have not
greatly weakened the Testimony of Friends in England, Barbados, etc. who have
suffered much for their refusing to contribute to uphold the Militia, or any
Military Force? And whether is not their Practice here an evil Precedent, if
any change of Government happen in this place, to bring Sufferings on faithful
Friends, that for Conscience Sake refuse to contribute to the Militia? And how
can they justly refuse to do that under another's Government, which they have
done, or allowed to be done, under their own. But in these, and other things,
we stand up Witnesses against them, with all faithful Friends everywhere.

11. Whether it be according to the Gospel, that Ministers should pass Sentence
of Death on Malefactors, as some pretended Ministers here have done, preaching
one day, Not to take an Eye for an Eye, Mat. 5.38. and another day to
contradict it, by taking Life for Life?

12. Whether there is any Example or Precedent for it in Scripture, or in all
Christendom, that Ministers should engross the Worldly Government, as they do
here? which has proved of a very evil tendency.

Signed by us, in behalf of many Friends, who are one with us herein. George
Keith, George Hutcheson, Thomas Budd, John Heart, Rich. Dungworth. Abrah.
Opedegraves.


POSTSCRIPT.
BY a Warrant signed by Sam. Richardson, and Rob. Ewer, Justices, the Sheriff
and Constable entered the Shop of Will. Bradford, and took away all the
above-written Papers they could find, called, An Appeal, etc. and carried the
said W. Bradford before the said Justices; and also sent for John M' Comb, who
(as they were informed) had disposed of two of the said Papers, and they not
giving an Account where they had them, were both committed to Prison: Also,
they sent R. Ewer, and the said Officer, to search the said W. Bradford s House
again for more Papers, etc. but found none yet, took away a parcel of Letters,
being his Utensils, which were worth about 10 l. Now the said Papers being
seized, and a great Rumor spread abroad of Sedition, Disturbance of the Peace,
and Subversion of the Government, etc. we have, though with some difficulty,
procured the said Appeal to be Reprinted, that every one that desired might
have the Opportunity to read and judge of the Matter contained in the said
Appeal, and also to signify, that we did not, nor do not intend any thing
against the present Government, or Magistracy, but own them in Commission to be
Magistrates, and account it our Duty to obey them, either actively or
passively; but knowing that it is contrary to the Quakers Principles to use the
carnal Sword, and finding by Experience that it is impossible to uphold
Magistracy without it, therefore we proposed it to be duly considered and
discoursed of, among all Friends, at this Yearly Meeting at Burlington.

A COPY of the MITTIMUS.
WHereas William Bradford, Printer, and John M' Comb, Tailor, being brought
before us, upon Information of Publishing, Uttering, and Spreading a Malicious
and Seditious Paper, entitled, An Appeal from the Twenty eight Judges, to the
Spirit of Truth, etc. tending to the Disturbance of the Peace, and Subversion
of the present Government; and the said Persons being required to give Security
to answer it at the next Court, but they refusing so to do, These are therefore
by the King and Queen's Authority, and in our Proprietary's Name, to require
you to take into your Custody, the Bodies of William Bradford, and John M'
Comb, and them safely keep, till they shall be discharged by due Course of Law;
whereof fail not, at your Peril, and for your so doing, this shall be your
sufficient Warrant.

Given under our Hands and Seals, this 24th of August, 1692. These to John
White, Sheriff of Philadelphia, or his Deputy. Arthur Cook, Samuel Jenings,
Sam. Richardson. Humph. Murrey, Robert Ewer,


From the Yearly Meeting at Burlington, the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh
Days of the Seventh Month, Anno 1692.
To our Friends and Brethren in the Truth, both in Pensilvania, East and
West-Jarsey, and elsewhere, as there may be occasion, to be Read in their
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, as they in the Wisdom of God shall see meet.
WHereas there has been an unhappy Difference of late, between our Friends,
George Keith, and the rest concerned with him, and our Friends, Thomas Lloyd,
John Simcock, Sam. Jenings, and others joined with them, which has tended to
the great Reproach of Truth and Friends, and Dishonor of our Holy Profession.
And whereas there has been a Paper signed by Thomas Lloyd, Samuel Jenings,
John Simcock, and others joined with them, being in Number Twenty eight, of
those who have opposed George Keith, and the Friends joined with him, whereby
he is condemned, as a Person unfit and unqualified to be a Minister of Christ,
and as a Person without the fear of God before his eyes, etc. And whereas the
said Paper of Condemnation has been the occasion of setting up many separate
Meetings, as well as of other Confusion and Disturbance, (both privately and
publicly) in these Parts. And whereas the said George Keith, and others joined
with him, being offended with the said Judgment, have appealed to the Spirit of
Truth and true Judgment of all faithful Friends at this Yearly Meeting, and
have requested (by a Second Paper sent to the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest
concerned with him) That they might have a fair Hearing and Trial before
impartial Friends, (who have not taken part to the signing Papers sent to each
other, on either side) the Second Day of the said Meeting, about an hour after
the breaking up of the Meeting for Public Worship; and we whose Names are
hereunto subscribed, being extremely grieved and troubled, under a sense of the
Reproaches the Truth has met withal, by reason of the said unhappy Difference,
yet having not concerned our selves actually in the said Difference on either
side, being met at the said Meeting House, with true Desires to the Lord, that
he would make us instrumental to put an end to the said Difference, and truly
make up the said Breach, before it grow wider, according to the Request of the
said George Keith, and the rest of the Friends joined with him in their said
Appeal: And the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest concerned, (though again
desired, by two Messengers from the Meeting, to appear, and they) refusing, the
Meeting adjourned till an hour after the Public Meeting the next day; and then
being assembled, and the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest concerned still
refusing to come, (although the said Thomas Lloyd, had lately before advised
the said George Keith, to make Application to the Yearly Meeting in this Case,
as diverse of us can witness) and the said George Keith, and the rest concerned,
laying their Complaint before us, and the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest
concerned, not appearing, (though again desired several times) our Expectations
and Desires, (with respect to that effectual and absolute healing the said
Breach) is in some measure frustrated. Notwithstanding whereof, having heard
the Papers on both sides read, and having weightily and deliberately considered
them, do give it as our Sense and Judgment, That the said George Keith, and his
Friends concerned in the said Paper of Condemnation, are not guilty of the
Charges and Censures therein contained; and that therefore, for the Honor,
Prosperity, and Welfare of Truth, and Peace and Quietness of the Churches of
Christ in these Parts, and elsewhere, the said Thomas Lloyd, and the rest of
the said Twenty eight Persons, forthwith Re-call their said Paper of
Condemnation, and that they condemn the same by a Writing under their Hands,
directed to all the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, whereunto the said Paper
was directed; and that they forbear offering to speak, by way of public
Testimony in Meetings, till they have so done. And we do also give it as our
Judgment, That those Public Friends who are charged with Misdemeanors, and
Ill Behavior in their Lives and Conversations, do forbear speaking in Public
Meetings by way of Testimony, till they clear themselves, and make Satisfaction
to their Brethren: And that all Public Friends on both sides, forbear all
Railing and Reviling one another, either publicly or privately, which has
only this tendency, to dishonor Truth, and lay Stumbling Blocks in the Way of
the Weak; but that in such Case they observe the Primitive Churches Order,
established by Christ and his Apostles, and practiced among Friends.

Signed by Us, in behalf of Our Selves, and many more Friends, who are one with
us herein. Robert Turner, Elias Burling, John Reid, Charles Read, Thomas
Coborne, Harmon Updengraves, Thomas Powell, Nathaniel Fitzrandal, Joseph
Richards, Edmund Wells, Thomas Kimber, John Neall, Anthony Woodward, Andrew
Smith, William Hixon, John Panceast, Henry Burcham, Thomas Hearse, John Jones,
Joseph Willcox, Thomas Godfrey, John Budd, Roger Park, Caleb Wheatly, Edward
White, Thomas Gladwin, Thomas Rutter, Edward Smith, Benjamin Morgan, Joseph
Sharp, William Thomas, John Bainbridge, John Snowden, William Black, William
Snowden, Abraham Brown, John Hampton, Daniel Bacon, Joseph Adams, Edward Guy,
Barnard Devonish, Samuel Ellis, Thomas Cross, James Moore, Thomas Jenner, John
Harper, Robert Wheeler, Nathaniel Walton, Robert Roe, Peter Boss, Thomas
Bowls, William Budd, James Silver, Samuel Tailor, Griffith Jones, William
Righton, Thomas Kendall, Samuel Houghton, Emanuel Smith, Peter Daite, Richard
Sery, George Willcox, William Wells, Isaac Jacobs van Bibet. Cornelius Scevers,
William Snead, David Sherkis, John Carter. Henry Paxon, Thomas Tindal.


FINIS.
BOOKS lately Published, viz.
THE TRIALS of Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas Budd, and William Bradford,
Quakers, for several great Misdemeanors, before a Court of Quakers, at the
Sessions held at Philadelphia in Pensilvania, the Ninth, Tenth, and Twelfth Day
of December, 1692. Giving also an Account of the most Arbitrary Procedure of
that Court.

An Account of the Divisions of the Quakers in Pensilvania.

A further Account of the Divisions of the Quakers in Pensilvania,

The Principles, Doctrines, Laws, and Orders of the Quakers.

The Judgment given forth by Twenty eight Quakers against George Keith, and his
Friends; with Answers to the said Judgment, declaring those Twenty eight
Quakers to be No Christians. As also, an Appeal (for which several were
Imprisoned) by the said George Keith, etc. to the Yearly Meeting, 1692. With a
full Account of the said Yearly Meeting, signed by Seventy Quakers.

All Five sold by R. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1693.


