A JOURNAL OF THE Siege of Mentz, Under the Command of His Serene Highn^^^ THE
Duke of Lorrain.

AND THE CONFEDERATE PRINCES.

Who Attacked that Important Place on the 21. of June, and took it on the 31.
of August, in the Year, 1689.

With all the Bravery, Courage, Resolution and Prudence, as ever has been shown
in any Nation.

Written in the German Tongue by an Eminent Officer, and Translated into
English from a Manuscript sent to His Majesty, King WILLIAM, of GREAT BRITAIN.

LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley, and are to be sold by R. Baldwin, in the
Old Bailey. 1689.

TO THE READER.
THIS Brief and Exact Account of the Besieging and Taking of such an Important
Place as the City of Mentz, cannot but be acceptable to all sorts of Persons,
not excepting that Party that lost it; For in it they will observe the Candor
of a Generous Conqueror, who gives all the Praises to his Enemies that they
deserve: He omits nothing of Importance that the Besieged did to defend
themselves, and he lays down the advantageous Articles upon which this Strong
Place was surrendered. Here even Generals, and Subordinate Field-Officers, will
have a full View of those Methods which those brave Hero's who attacked it, did
observe. The Inferior Officers will see with what Courage and Valor they led
on those Men which each commanded in their respective Posts. The Common
Centries will be filled with a Generous Envy and Emulation, to imitate those
that were employed in this Remarkable Siege: And even such Persons as are not
addicted to Arms, will find a Delight in Reading with what Bravery it was
Attacked and Defended: The rather, because that this Relation of it has been
transmitted to us by an Eminent Officer, who had a great Share in the Action,
and that was an Eyewitness of the greatest part of the whole Proceeding, so
far as the Considerable Employ which he had, would permit him: And where his
Eye could not reach, he made use of so exact an Inquisition from those who
Commanded in their respective Posts, that it will give sufficient Satisfaction.
In a word, This is the most Exact Journal that could be made of such a Siege. I
shall no longer detain the Ingenious Reader from satisfying his Curiosity
therein.

A DIURNAL, etc. Concerning the Siege and Reduction of Mentz.
June 21.

HIS Serenissime Highness the Duke of Lorrain decamped this day from Mayen with
the whole Army, and having le^ a Garrison of 2000 men in diverse small Towns on
the other side of the Mosel, to cover the Country of Treves and the Towns of
Cochheim, Mayen, Kayserseck, Andernack, and others, and to fill some places
situated on the Rhine, in the Ringga^^ near Coblence, as also Konnigstein, he
marc'd that very day as far as Munster.

June 22. At Noon he took up his general Quarters toward (...) on the Mosel,
where he caused the Bridge of Boats to be brought, which could be put up in
three hours time, and his Highness passed it that very day with all the Foot,
and one Regiment of Dragoons, and encamped his Troops on the other side of the
Mosel near Alcken, the Artillery and all the Baggage passing the River in the
night.

June 23. The Horse, with the rest of the Dragoons, passed the Bridge, the
resolution of fording the River over, having been changed; and the whole Army
leaving on one side the Castle of Erenstein, ruined by the French, continued
its March the same day over high Mountains and strait Passes, where the Horse
was obliged to file off.

The Camp was on a Line between Herwiesen and Buckholtz, and they advanced but
two hours March that day.

The Lunenberg Army encamped beyond Buckholtz, where it was come the day
before, having taken its March on this side the Mosel over the Mountains. The
Imperialists left Wing did reach to it: Toward night the Baggage, which had
taken another way, joined the Army.

June 24. The Duke of Lorrain's Horse and the Dragoons, marched first, the
Imperial Foot followed them, and they marched before the Army of Lanenberg,
which had placed it self near the way, and whose Foot joined that of the
Imperialists, and the Horse were to form the Reerguard. The Camp was not far
from Leuningen, and it was upon two Lines.

June 25. That day the Army rested. Till then there had been no talk of any
considerable Motion of the Enemy, and there was a Rumor that there was a great
Consternation amongst them: We had information that 14 Cornets were gone from
Mayance or Mentz toward Homburg, that the Enemies had carried away a great
number of Wagons loaded with Baggage and Wine, that they had reduced to ashes
the Cities of Landau, of Kim on the Nohe, and Keyserlautern. The Country People
told us also, that on the 23d a Party of 50 Horse of the Enemy had advanced
within two miles of this place. But some Party of our Forces having been sent
to get intelligence of the E^^mies Motions, returned without information. Two
Deserters from Mount Royal told us, that that place was furnished with 12
Battalions, but that the Garrison deserted in great numbers, so that some
Companies consisted but of 15 or 20 men; they also informed us, that a
considerable Party of Dragoons had entrenched themselves at Trar^ack under the
Cannon of that Place, and that they were working with all possible diligence on
the Fortifications of Trarback and Mount Royal, that they were already for the
most part set in a posture of defense; and that the Governor Montal did
frequently send out Parties to burn the Country; and that the Enemy had
abandoned the City of Treves, without burning or plundering of it, having
lodged the Garrison that was in it, in Mount Royal and Thionville.

Here follows an Account of the Field-Officers.

GENERALS.
General Lieutenant: The Duke of Lorrain. General Field-Marshal: Count
Starenberg.
The Foot is commanded by The Grand Master of the Tutonick Order, General.
Souches, Feldzeugmeister. Sachsen Cobourg, Major General. ^^^tersdorff, Major
General.


The right Wing is command^^ by his Highness the Margrave (...), in quality of
General of the Horse.

Under him,

The Field-Marshal Lieutenant, Count of Thurn, commands the Regiments of Horse
belonging to Dunewald and Taffe.

The Field-Marshal Lieutenant, Prince of Commercy, commands the Regiments of
Curassiers of Franconia, and that of the Dragoons of B^^eith.

The left Wing is commanded by Count Palfi, in quality of General of the Horse.

Under him,

The Field-Marshal Lieutenant, Duke of Wirtemberg, commands the Regiment of
Horse of Palsi and of Newbourg.

The Count of Serau is to command in quality of General Major, in both the
Wings.

June 26, 27. The Army remained those two days in the same Camp, and there
passed nothing of Remark: according to Country-peoples Reports, there had been
seen near to Castellan, not far from Creutzenach, some French Parties
considerable strong; but some Imperial Parties, which were sent after them,
commanded by the Prince of C^mmercy, saw none of the Enemy.

June 28. The Army being on its March, and having gone through such narrow
Defiles, that in some places the Horse could not go but one after another,
encamped between Kisselbach and Richereda, the Camp being posted all in a Line.

June 29. We decamped again, and marched near two hours through Defiles, on the
Hundsruck, to a small River named Gildenbach, which falls into the Nohe, and
the great Forest of Sohn, which extends as far as Metz. The Army encamped there
on two Lines.

June 30. The Army rested. The same day came the old Foot Regiment of Count
Staremberg, with a Battalion of Auersberg, who had passed the River on the
Flying Bridge, which had been brought from Coblence to Rudesheim.

July 1. We took that day our March through narrow Defiles, which were very
troublesome, high Mountains, and Woods, which lasted above three hours; we went
and encamped between Schwabenhauson and Wald Labersheim, two Villages that are
distant, in a direct Line, two hours from Creutzenach and Scomberg; 2000 Foot
were commanded to hide themselves in the Wood, to observe the Enemies Motion.

July 2. We were ready to decamp; but because that Newbourg's and Palfi's
Regiments of Horse, and the Foot Regiments of Newbourg, Wirtemberg and Erf^, as
also the Munster Regiment of Dragoons (which had been left to cover the Baggage
and the Artillery, on a report that the Enemy had appeared in a Party of 500
men) were not yet returned, and that they joined us in the Camp but toward
three in the Afternoon, the March was countermanded, and the whole Army
remained encamped in the same place.

July 3. That day we decamped, and we took our March within an hour of
Creutzenach, the Camp being on two Lines, between Creutzenach and Pretsenheim;
in this last place was found a Castle, whose Jurisdiction is parted betwixt
Lorrain and a certain Count of Velon: that day we also worked in the
Construction of the Bridge of Boats, which had gone up the River from Coblence,
that was done below Bingen, a little beneath the fall of the River Nohe, which
covered the said Bridge; another was also made close by on the River Nohe.
General Thungen, who was commanded thither with a small Body, causing some
Forts to be raised, to secure the first of the said Bridges. Since that the
Bridge of Boats of Bingen was taken away, because that his Electoral Highness
of Saxony (whose Army was to pass over it) desired that it should be removed a
little higher. Which was done accordingly, conveying it gently near to the
Army, it was thought that it should be fixed at Ingelheim. His Highness the
Duke of Lorrain, not thinking it convenient to have it so near Mayence; and
thereby exposed to the Enemies insults.

July 4. We encamped that day, and a Detachment of 10 Battalions of Foot with a
Regiment of Dragoons with 6 Pieces of Cannon and 4 Morters, were sent to make
themselves Masters of Eberbourg, a Castle within three quarters of a mile of
Creutzenach, where the French had placed 150 men, which the Duke of Lorra^^
with the General Officers, had been to view a little before; but those Troops
were countermanded again, after it had been consider'^ that the reduction of
that place would require four days. The same day came to the Army Caraffa's and
Commercy's two Regiments of Horse, who had passed the Rhine on the Bridge of
Boats at Bingen.

July 5. This day the Army decamped, and marched one hour and half; the Camp
was on two Lines, between Groltzheim and Sponheim, within an hour of Bingen.

July 6. The Army being on two Collumns, marched during three hours through
Ockenheim and Altzheim, the Horse on the right, and the Foot on the left, not
far from the Rhine, and the Baggage being enclosed between the Two Collumns, we
made an Halt at Nider-Ingelhei^^: The Enemy made no great Fire with their
Cannon, with which they might have done much Damage, the Squadrons having
insensibly drawn too near to that place: The Reason must be, That most part of
their Cannon was not yet mounted on the Rampert. We did not unbridle all that
Night.

July 7. Our Horse got a little further from that place before day, to avoid
the Enemies Cannon. The Foot came that morning with the Baggage and the
Artillery. The Camp was on one single Line; the Regiments of Horse and Foot
being intermixed, and fronting the ^ield: The Camp was extended from the Rhine,
above the City, to a Wood beneath the City; but it wanted much yet from joining
the Rhine beneath, seeing that the Contravallation extends it self near Two
Hours and an half. The Enemy made all the day long a great fire with their
Cannon, which killed during those Two Days but Twelve of our Men, and some
Horses. Hitherto they made no Sallies: They posted Three strong Horse-Guards
within 2 of 300 Paces of the Counterscarp, and they were seen to work
diligently both at the Rampart and at the Glacis. A Party of Twelve Masters of
the Regiment of Pelfi, who were gone to forage, having no other Arms but their
Carbines, brought that day to the Camp 18 Prisoners from Kira, on the Notice of
a French Party which was strong of 20 Fool. His Electoral Highness of Saxony
came that Day to the Camp, with his Marshal of Camp, and a small Retinue. The
said Elector alighted at the Prince of Bareith's, where the Duke of Lorrain
went to give him a Visit. They entertained one another for some time in
private, and after that, in presence of Monsieur Flemming, Marshal of Camp;
after which his Electoral Highness passed over the Rhine at Russelsheim.

July 8. That Day the Foot of Saxony passed the Rhine in Boats, above Mayence.
The Horse, which till then had encamped some time over against Worms, was to do
the same presently after. That Day there also came into the Camp of Lorrain Two
Regiments of Foot of the Prince's of Saxony, another of Horse being ordered to
follow. The Enemy fired greatly their Cannon on the General Quarters, where it
did some Mischief, but of no great consequence: That Day there also came into
the Camp a great number of Peasants to work. The Night of the 8th, till the
9th, some of the Army of Lorrain, who had been commanded, took their Post in a
deep Valley near to a Mill, and opened the Trenches within 7 or 800 paces of
the Counterscarp on the Right. Upon this the Enemy sallied out, and gave an
Alarm, but did soon retire again.

July 9, 10, 11. Nothing passed that was considerable, except that the Trenches
were much advanced on the Right Hand. Monsieur Flemming, the Camp Masters
Baggage, had almost been carried to the Enemies Fort on the Rhine, through the
Watermens imprudence, but it was saved by those of Hesse. The 10th is Highness
of Bavaria name to the Camp for some Days; His Highness the Duke of Lorrain
went to meet him on Horseback, with the Prince of Commercy. The Night of the
11th, till the 12th, those of Saxony took their Post with 8oo Men, near to the
Convent of the Nuns, beneath the Town, near the Rhine, and opened the Trench.

July 12. The Trench was carried on very far that Night toward the Left, from
that place where the other began, and we began to work about a Redoubt, to
secure them both. The Hesseans did cast all that Night from beyond the Rhine,
with Two Mortar-pieces, Bombs into the City, which caused therein a great Fire
near to the Castle, toward 10 at Night, which, as may be perceived, consumed
about 8 houses, and it was put out about Midnight.

July 13. The Enemy by Day did ruin that which had been raised up by Night at
the Redoubts. At the Lorrainers Attack they advanced far that Night in the
Vignes toward the Left. There was a Line of Communication drawn also from the
Attack on the Left to that on the Right, and they continued to work at the Two
Redoubts which had been began. The Enemy made Four false Sallies, but presently
retired each time. There were Four Field Pieces conducted into the Appreaches,
which are sometimes used with success. Those of Saxony pushed on their
Approaches also on the side of the Rhine: They also took their Posts early in
the Morning in the Grand Charter House, which is distanc'd off 450 Paces from
the Counterscarp, which they found to be abandoned by the Enemy, contrary to
their Opinion: However, they were met with in some Houses about some 50 paces
distance from thence, where they fortified themselves, above all, in the Garden
of Stadian, where they had met to the Number of 1000 men. They however
attempted nothing: That Night some Pieces of Cannon of 8 or 6 pound bullets,
were drawn near to the Approaches, which were not made use of however before
the 10th at Night inclusively. The Enemy fired fiercely that day on those of
Saxony; Monsieur, the Prince Palatine, Frederick William, who was come as a
Volunteer in the Camp, was that day killed by a Falcon Bullet, at the Head of
the Trench, in presence of the Princes his Brothers, the Prince Electoral, and
the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, the Bullet having gone through his
Head. He was carried from thence to Franckfort, there to be embalmed. And
because there was a Design of altering the Camp, and to form it as it was to
remain all along the Siege, the General Quarter of Lorrain was dislodged, and
that of Wei(...)aw also, and it was placed a little lower, near to Prazzenheim.

July 14. The Prince of Hanover commanded with 4000 Lunenburgers, in the
Approaches of Lorrain, which as it had been agreed on, had not been advanced
that Night: However, there were many at work, to enlarge them, and to put them
in condition of Defense: There was also Two Redoubts perfected, that were on
the Right and the Left. The Enemy began to fire fiercely with their Great and
Small Shot; and of this last they made whole Vollies all the Night long,
especially from the Counterscarp; yet were there but Two Men killed, and Two
wounded. They also sometimes gave us Alarms, but always found our Men in
readiness. The Trenches were enlarged also on the side of the Saxons, and set
in posture of Defense; but nothing was advanced beyond that; which could not be
done neither, before the coming of the Elector of Bavaria, as I was informed by
the Prince Elector, who commanded that Night in the Trenches with 1500 men.

July 15. That Day we began to trace out the Lines of Circumvallation, to
secure the Camp toward the Field, and to hinder all succor. There were some
smart Skirmishes betwixt the Two Horse-Guards; Diverse were killed on both
sides, and amongst the rest of our Men was d'Andlau, Captain in Palfi's
Regiment. The Enemy took diverse of our Men Prisoners that were gone for
Forage, who had ventured above 8 hours Way from the Camp; the Number is not
yet known. The Prince of Savoy came from the Camp of Bavaria into this: 'Till
now the Trenches could not be carried on at the Electoral Attack, but to 450,
and that of Lorrain to 500 Paces distance off the Counterscarp. The last are
passably well secured: Every Night there are 4000 men lodged in the Trenches;
the Imperialists are there Two Days together, and a Field-Marshal Lieutenant
commands there every night; the Lunenburgers are there every Third Night. I
believe, that in so little time there never was so much firing of Artillery
from any City as from this; there are every Day above Four or Five Hundred
Cannon Shots made: And after all it is to be wondered, that with the great
firing there has been yet but Ten Men killed. The loss in the Approaches are
also very slight, and will not reach in both the Attacks to above the Number of
40 persons. Besides, the Enemy have also a considerable Number of Pieces in the
Counterscarp. The Night of the 15th to the 16th, the Prince of Saxe Gobourg was
in the Trench, which was also carried on with the loss of but few Men.

July 16. This Night the Labor of the precedent Nights was finished, another
Redoubt was made, and the Trench was advanced a little; The Enemy did
incessantly give Alarms, and fired continually their Cannon and Small Shot;
They labored also on a small Work on the Left, that they might more
commodiously hinder the Approaches. That Night were reckoned about 30 killed
and wounded. A Lieutenant who had deserted the City, brought to us the Platform
of it, and showed us the places where the Enemy had conducted their Mines; He
believed also that the City was attack't in its weakest part, especially on the
Lorrainers side. He further said, That the Garrison consisted of 8000 Men, and
that it was resolved to defend it self to the last extremity, and that it would
make a very great Sally upon us, so soon as we were got a little nearer.

July 17. The Saxon Horse, consisting of 6 Regiments, namely the Regiment of
Guards, Field Marshal, Baron Ilato, of the Prince Frederick, Promnitz, and a
Regiment of the Dragoons under Colonel Minkwitz, passed over the Bridge of
Boats, belonging to the Imperialists, because that of Saxony was not yet
perfected. They lodged themselves in those Posts which had been appointed them.
His Electoral Highness of Bavaria came also at Night in the Camp; the Foot
which he brings is from 5000 to 5500 Men; he passed the Rhine, in the Night,
and this day on Pontons, a little above the Bridge. The Elector of Bavaria
lodged in Person in the same Village where is the Elector of Saxony. The work
of the Trench was also carried on very far this Night. The Prince of Hanover
Commanded there, and there were reckoned 12 killed and wounded.

July 18. Those of Hesse gave the first time 2000 of their Men for the
Approaches, who worked very well that Night about them, and they advanced
within 250 or 300 paces of the Counterscarp. The Enemy fired extraordinarily
all that Night, yet it is to be wondered, that the loss of our Men did not
exceed the number of 26 killed and wounded.

July 19. The French was advanced a little another way also. We began to raise
a Battery. The Enemy fired furiously all the Night long: the loss of our Men
amounted to 28 killed and wounded. The Enemy set fire themselves to an House
that was near the Gate. The Saxons Bridge of Boats was finished that day. That
Night we began again to work at the Electoral Attack. The Elector of Bavaria
passed the whole Night in the Trenches, with a design of posting himself near
an House at 8 paces distant from the Charter House, which till then had been
the place of Arms; those that were commanded for that design gave back a
little, perceiving the Enemy to advance in great numbers toward them, which
caused some confusion, so that our own Men began to shoot from the Approaches
on those that were Commanded. His Electoral Highness of Bavaria, and the two
Camp Marshals, Caprara and Flemming, and General Stenan got off luckily without
being wounded, after they had a long time received the Enemies and our own
shot. Some days since a certain Captain was seized, who is a French Engineer,
who endeavored to get into the Town, whose Name is (...) Cormaellan, of Mount
Royal.

July 20 and 21. These two Nights the Trenches were very much advanced at the
Electoral Attack. They were advanced to 300 paces of the Counterscarp. There
were the first Night 60 killed and wounded, and the last, about 50. We
continued to work at the Battery on the Lorrainer's side, it is to be mounted
with 30 Cannons. The Trenches were enlarged, and the Lines were carried on both
on the Right and the Left, to make a larger Front before the Town; by that we
draw nearer to the point of the Counterscarp, from which we have yet 150 paces
distant. These two Nights there were reckoned about 40 killed and wounded. The
Enemy, as he was wont, did continually sire both his great and small Shot
toward both the Attacks. They fire not so furiously now on the side of the
Champion: there were for diverse Nights together, some Deserters of our Camp
that went into the City.

July 22. Three French Officers stole at open day from our Camp into the Town.
The work of the Trenches was a little retarded this Night at both the Attacks,
through the violent Rain which fell, however the labor of the two precedent
Nights were accomplished at the Electoral Attack; and at the Lorrainers Attack,
there was a little work done at the great Battery. The first Night we had about
Nine killed and wounded, and the last Night, about Fourteen. Those of Hesse did
cast all the Night long, from the other side of the Rhine, Bombs in the Town,
out of 4 Mortar-pieces. The Enemy gave that Night a Sign in kindling a Fire on
the great Tower; we conjectured it was to give Duras notice of the Three
Officers getting in, which were believed to be considerable Persons. This day
we had a Deserter from the Town, who was a Lorrainer by Birth, who confirmed
the relation which the others had given, viz. that the Enemy had resolved to
defend themselves to the last extremity; that they had made diverse Mines, which
are all discovered; that they wanted nothing; that Wine was brought in
abundance to the Soldiers, even on the Ramparts; that there were always Six
Battalions on the Guard. It has been concluded at the Electoral Attack, that
every day, 3500 Men shall serve in the Trenches, of which his Electoral
Highness of Saxony furnishes a little more than the three fifth parts. At the
Lorrainers Attack, 4000 ought to be there every day, which is regulated in this
manner, That the Imperialists shall furnish every third day 5000 Men, the
Lunenburgers 4000, and the Hessians 3000, of which, those that are designed for
the Lorrainers Attack, incamp already on this side the Rhine. The greatest part
of the Generals believe that the great Battery will not be ready in 8 days time
yet. A French Party, of about 400 Foot, has been seen not far from Bingen; it
is thought that they seek to post themselves in the Neighborhood, to incommode
our Forragers.

July 23. We advanced but little that day, by reason of a great Rain. At the
Elector's Attack the Trenches were carried on a little, and the Trevaux were
more secured: Some Lines also were carried on at the Attack of Lorrain, on the
Right and Left, to give a larger Front, they work also on the Battery and on
the Ditch; we had in the Lines one killed and three wounded, and at the Battery
two killed and five wounded.

July 24. Two French Officers were killed out of the Camp, that designed to get
into the Town; Five more were pursued, but could not be taken; a Party of the
Enemies, of 300 Men on Horseback, were seen on Creutzenach-Road. A Citizen who
had been sent by the Governor of the Town with Letters to the Marshal of
Duras, brought them to the Duke of Lorrain, the most secret Letters were writ
in Characters, concealed in a Brass Button which buttoned up his Breeches,
their Contents are not yet known, there being no body found in the Army that
can unravel them. This Night, at the Electoral Attack, the Trenches were
carried on toward the Left of the Citadel with very little loss; two small
Pieces were mounted also, with which the Enemies Horse-Guard was galled, which
upon that retired into the Town. The Enemy did Pallisado the small Works, and
those Ditches which they had in the Stadian Garden. At the Lorrainers Attack, a
Line was drawn on the Right, round the Works, and there was much laboring
about the great Battery also. The Letters which have been found on the
abovementioned Citizen, contain an Advice from the Marquess of Vxelles to the
Marshal Duras, That the Garrison is composed but of 6000 Men, amongst which are
numbered above 1800 sick and wounded, and that the rest are extremely fatigated,
resting neither Night nor Day, so that he shall be forced to surrender the
place to the Germans if he is not speedily relieved; desiring, after that, the
Marshal Duras, to let him know with the soonest the Kings pleasure, on that
subject.

July 25. Another Line was traced on the Left, we also worked very hard at the
Lorrainers Battery.

July 26 Fifteen large Cannon were placed on the Lorrainers Battery, and the
said Battery was secured with Two Lines newly drawn.

July 28. Ten Pieces more were placed on the same Battery, very large, as also
proportionably of Ammunition. The Pieces were placed in the Embracements, and a
new Redoubt was traced out on the Right 60 paces distant from the Foot of the
Glacis. Thirty Barrels of Powder have been drawn out of two Mines, which have
been discovered near the great Battery of the Imperialists, by the means of a
French Miner who made his escape out of the place to come to us. Our Army was a
little lessened, by a Detatchment of 6000 Horse, which were sent toward
Heidelberg, under General Dunewald's Command. This Day Marshal Duras came
before Heidelberg with 1500 Men, and at Night they Assaulted the Town, and
entered the Suburbs, endeavoring to Post themselves in the new Church of St.
Jacob, but they were vigorously repulsed with the loss of 350 Men.

July 29. From the Lorrainers Attack, we began to beat the Counterscarp, and in
a short time the Cannon was dismounted, the Embracements were so ruined that
the Enemy were forced to take in the said Pieces on the Neighboring Bastion,
on the Right, whence they fire at this present with 4 Cannons. This Night we
labored hard on the new Redoubt, and a new Line was traced on the Left, the
better to get into the Ditch, near the Gate.

July 30. They fired extremely at the Lorrainers Battery this Morning, and by
that means, the Enemy were forced to remove further off their Pieces. They made
good use of their time however, and after that ours had made their discharge,
they fired hard from the Bastion on the Right Hand, on our Battery, and our
Approaches. This Night the great Redoubt was put in a good condition on the
left, on which the Enemy Sallied about 60 strong, but were soon repulsed with
the loss of 9 Men, amongst which was an Officer, we reckoned also that Night
upon many killed and wounded. Our Miners began this Night their Counter-mines,
two able Spanish Engineers were that Night killed.

July 31. We fired not so hard from the Lorrain's Battery as we had done the
two precedent Days, because of the heat; on the contrary, the Enemy fired more
than before. There was no great firing that Night on either side with the
Cannon, but the small Shot was the more fierce on the Electoral Attack, while
they were taking a new Post. We lost diverse of our Men in that Action, who
behaved themselves bravely. Count Reuss, Major Sweinitz, and Captain Altback,
were wounded. A Dragoon of the Regiment Laud, who surrendered himself that
Day, told us that the Ground of the Glacis was filled with Bombs, covered over
with Boards, with long Nails, whose points were hid with earth, and that all
the angles of the Counterscarp were undermined.

August 1. Two Towers that were situated on the lest were beaten with our
Cannon from the Battery of Lorrain, all the Day long, not without Success. The
Enemy did also fire his Cannon-on us from the Works. This Night those of Hesse
flung into the Town from beyond the Rhine diverse Bombs. The Enemy did also make
a vigorous Sally on the Lorrain Approaches, but were repulsed by the
Lunenburgers, who were that Night on the Guard; we lost above 100 Men in this
Action. The Enemy drew a Line also of Communication to the Glacis. We likewise
did draw a great Parallel from the Redoubt on the Left to that on the Right.

August 2. The Cannon began to play again from the Lorrain Battery by break of
Day, on the Works both on the Right and Left, which was continued till Night
with good success; there was also slung from Seven Morter-pieces diverse Bombs
into the Counterscarp. About Noon our Cannon had beaten down the Roof and the
best part of the top of the round Tower, which is on the Left of the Cathedral,
whence our Men had received great damage. The square Tower near St. Stephen's
Church, a little higher than the round Tower, was for the most part ruined
also. The Ramparts and Works on the Right were also endamag'd. We could plainly
see the Enemy work on the Rampart, so soon as we had discharged our Cannon, and
that they began to entrench themselves there. The Parallel-Line was this Night
finished, and those of Hesse mounted Six Pieces more of 24 Pound Buliet; there
was nothing else remarkable that passed: Neither did the Enemy fire but their
Muskets and small Pieces; ours did cast some Bombs and Carcasses into the Town,
so did those of Hesse from beyond the Rhine, which cast diverse Bombs in the
Enemies outworks. We had that Night Five killed and Twelve wounded on our side.

August 3. The Cannon played from the Battery of Lorrain that Day, on the great
Tower near the Gate Gais, and on the Three Bastions, St. Alexander, St.
Boniface, and St. Martin, to make a breach, but we fired not so fiercely as the
Day before. The Enemy fired very vigorously all that Day with their Muskets,
and killed and wounded diverse of our Men; they also shot some Vollies of Cannon
into the Camp, and toward the Approaches, but with no effect. This Night ours
encompassed the Redoubt on the Left with Pallisadoes, and finished the Ditch
before the Battery. The Cannon this Night was more quiet on both sides, but the
Enemy fired continually their Muskets, we also cast some Bombs into the Town.
Colonel Erfa was wounded in the right arm by a piece of our Shells.

August 4. We continued this Day as we had done yesterday in battering the
three foresaid Bastions, and the great Tower near to the Gate Gau, but not very
much; we had Two Deserters, who told us that the Enemies were carrying on a
Mine toward the Lorrain Battery. This Night a great Parallel Line was drawn
toward the Glacis. From the Imperial Attack we cast all this Night long a
great number of Bombs into the Town, to disturb the Enemy in their labors,
there was also smart firing of small shot on both sides, for all that the
Lunenburgers that were that Night on the Guard in the Trenches had but one
killed and Ten wounded.

August 5. We began again early in the Morning to batter from the Lorrain
Battery the three Bastions and the abovementioned Tower, which was continued
all Day till Night. The French began about Noon to play off their great Cannon
on our Batteries and Approaches, from a little Fort, which draws near to the
top of the Castle, they cast also diverse Bombs, by which we had above Forty
dead and wounded. We also did cast, not only all Day but all Night also, Bombs
on the Fort, and all other places where there was any prospect of indamaging
the Enemies Works. The small shot was also increased this Day on both sides
more than ever. A certain Deserter from the Town, said that the Enemy had
finished the Mine, which they had began to conduct toward our Trench and
Battery, and that they were ready to store it with Powder. Moreover, at the
Imperial Attack have been brought to perfection the Two new Lines, which are
about 25 Paces from the Glacis. This Night has been traced the great Battery at
the Electoral Attack, which contains 887 Paces in its Circumference, and which
is to be mounted with 36 Pieces of large Bores. This Battery is made with two
inward Angles, in that place which is advanced before the last place of Arms.
The middle of the Battery beats on the Ravelin of the Citadel; our Cannon is to
batter in Flank and Front the Enemies Defenses, which answer to our Attack;
after having perfected a Line of Traverse, with double Bastions to cover our
Left Flank, we began to open a Ditch and to raise higher the Battery. The
design of it consists of 12 Foot thick near the Ditch, 6 at the Berne, 25 at
the Platform, and 15 behind.

August 6. We began again early in the Morning to Fire our Cannon, and to cast
Bombs from the Imperial Attack, where the Two Generals, Souches and Wallis,
with the Prince of Saxen Weissenfels, this Day Commanding, the Enemy have done
the same. They made two vigorous Sallies betwixt Twelve and One, under the
favor of a great Rain, with 300 Horse and 1500 Foot; they slided along from
both the Gates of Altmunster and Gau toward our Men, Attacking the first Line
with great fury, of which they easily made themselves Masters, it being not yet
in posture of Defense, nor Lined with Small shot. Our Men that were in the more
remote Lines were diligent, got out of the Trenches on the Right and Left, and
vigorously drove back the Enemy after a large half hours Combat, with great
loss; so that for the most part they ran away on their Feet and Hands, what was
found of the Enemy at the head of the Trenches were presently cut to pieces,
the Soldiers Rage going so far, that they set some Heads that had been cut off
on Spikes before the Camp, and cut Leather Thongs out of the Skins of their
Backs; which was afterward forbidden by his Highness the Duke of Lorraine;
there was great Firing on both sides of Cannons and Bombs during the Combat.
The number of killed and wounded on our side amounts to 300 Men, amongst the
Dead are the Aid General and Major of the Granadeers, the Baron Bressee, who
was sent some time since to his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg, Captain
Sicking Canon of Mentz, as also Lunati Captain of the Granadeers. After this
Combat, some of the Enemies wounded Officers that had remained on the place,
asked for Quarter from our Men. His Highness the Duke of Lorrain having been
informed that the ground from the head of the Trenches to the top of the Glacis
was covered with a great number of French Bodies Dead and Dying; the last of
which made such Cries and Lamentations as moved Compassion. His Highness the
Duke of Lorrain sent a Drummer to the French at Mentz, but they laughed at it,
asking whether we had not something else to desire? which obliged our
Musketeers to dispatch the wounded Officers. The Governor did this out of
fear, that the sight of so many Dead and wounded should imprint some coldness
on the rest of the Garrison; wherefore he thought it not fit to Correspond to
the Duke of Lorrain's Humanity, choosing rather to leave his Wounded and Dying
Men amongst the Dead without help, than to show so sad a Spectacle to the
Garrison and Townsmen. But through a Christian Charity, all those that have
been found to the very foot of the Glacis have been taken up and Buried. The
number of the Dead and wounded of the Enemy ought to amount to 500 persons,
according to the Deserters reports, and the List which they have brought to us
thereof. Amongst the first is said to be a certain Lieutenant Colonel who was
highly considered amongst them, and diverse other Officers of the First Rank.
There was but little firing this Night on either side, only ours did cast Bombs
into the Town. After this the Enemy made some show of Sallying forth again, as
they did effectively, with but few Men, out of the Counterscarp, doubtless with
a design to carry away the Dead and Wounded which they found in great numbers
heaped up together round the Pallisado's, but they were again repulsed with the
loss of some killed and wounded. Some of our Musketeers going out of the
Trenches by stealth to strip some of the Dead remaining on the place, were made
Prisoners by the Enemy. There has been dug up at the Electoral Attack, on
the Right of the first Redoubt a large Well, whence a Gallery is to be advanced
under ground, both to work about some Mines, and to give vent to those which
the Enemy may have made under the Glacis. The Ditch of the Battery has been
advanced some paces this Night, but in the Morning it was found that they had
distanc'd themselves too far from the Right Line, and that consequently that
work was exposed to the Enemy, because it might be manned by them from their
Defenses.

August 7. This Day was but small Firing; on either Side, which has happened on
our side, because that we were busy in Raising a New Battery, yet the Enemy
Fired continually with their Small Shot all Night, and we cast diverse Bombs
into the Town. The Lunenburgers who were this Night in the Trenches lost some
Officers, and private Centries. Some of the Enemies were made Prisoners, that
were endeavoring to carry off some of their Dead. A new Line has been drawn on
the left of the Imperial Attack; we have labored Day and Night about the new
Battery; at the Electoral Attack, the Wells have been made deeper which were
made for the Mines, conveying out of them the Water which was in them.

August 8. This day no more than yesterday has there been but little Firing on
both sides, the Reasons on our side were, that the Batteries and the Mines were
not yet brought to perfection. A Deserter who came this day to us confirms the
great loss that the Enemy has sustained in the Sally which they made the 6th.
passed: He has also discovered to us all the Mines of the Enemy, and to what
places they had been Conducted. This Night another Redoubt and Battery has been
raised at the head of the Gallows, and a Line has also been drawn; we cast all
night long Bombs and Carcasses into the Town. On the contrary, the Enemy Fired
fiercely their small shot from the Ramparts and the Counters^arp. They also
made a small Sally on the Imperialists, who soon forced them to Retreat with
the loss of 20 Men, though of our side we had not a few killed and wounded that
Night. His Electoral Highness of Bavaria passed all the Night long in the
Trenches, and has caused a great Redoubt to be traced in a certain place which
is very convenient to cover and defend that Battery which has been named St.
Emanuel, and which is to be of 50 Paces in length on two sides; the Work of the
Battery has been carried on also, and there has been raised at the left of the
Trench a Traverse, behind which the Guard of Horse of the Electoral Attack is
to be Posted.

August 9. This Day our Cannon played smartly all along, principally on the
Tower of the Gate Gau, and in the Night diverse Bombs were cast into the Town.
The Enemy did likewise continually fire with their small shot all the Night
long, and cast also some Bombs into our Camp. We labored hard to set in
defense the newly erected Battery; the Lines on the Right of the Gibbet were
finished also, and new Lines were carried on toward the Glacis of the right
and left. We continued at the Electoral Attack to work on the Battery and
Redoubt before mentioned, and on the Lines of Communication also.

August 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14th. These Days there passed no great Matters on
either side; We at the Imperial Attack joined the Lines that were newly raised,
we also made some Embraces for 8 Pieces on the New Battery, 6 of which are to
batter the Enemies Bastions, and batter in flank that Work which the Enemy
newly raised near to the Gibbet. There was a Well also made, a little more
advanced than the First, and by that means we have carried on our Work to the
Pallisadoes of the Counterscarp, where we happily have discovered some of the
Enemies Mines; all that Work has cost us but very few Men, no more than to the
Lunenburgers who lost not 10 Men, though that on the 13th at Night when they
did Duty in the Trenches, they forwarded much their work by Sapping: The 14th
at Night the Great Tower near the Gate Began was beaten down with the Cannon from
our New Battery. Diverse Deserters are come into our Camp, but on the other
hand, diverse of ours, above all, of the Elector of Bavaria's Guards, and diverse
French went over to the Enemy. On the 10th the abovementioned Work was
continued at the Electoral Attack. This Night the French quitted the House of
Stadian, which is out of the Town, and its Garden, after they had burnt it: It
was observed in their Retreat, that a small Body descended by the Covered way
toward the water, it is probable to favor the Retreat of the rest. The 11th
the St. Emanuel's Redoubt was finished, the Ditch was also advanced, and we
began to raise the Parrapet higher, and to make Platforms, the Miner being
already got far under ground, has advanced some paces under the Glacis. Two
Masters of Fire works being got to us from the Town, Confirmed that the number
of killed and wounded increases much, that the Garrison was much decreased, and
that the Governor expressed a great impatiency for Succor. That the Besieged
did no longer take the Bavarian Attack to be feigned, seeing that they already
perceived it very much advanced toward them, which had made them resolve to
work anew on the Mines of the Citadel, and in re-inforcing with more Men the
Post thereabouts. The 12th His Electoral Highness's Bridge of Boats was taken
away from the Lines of Circumvallation, which is to be laid a little above the
Village Weissenau. His Electoral Highness of Bavaria, besides the ordinary
Workmen, has Commanded a 1000 more to Raise the Battery, whom he causes to be
Paid, he remained all this Night in the Trenches, because that a Deserter had
said that the Enemy would attempt a Sally; He caused the Posts to be reinforced
for that reason, but the Enemy firing continually, did not not disturb the said
Laborers by any Sally. The 13th We advanced with the Ditch and the Parrapet
through these Laborers means to that place of the Battery which had been
designed; The Right Flank of it was covered with a treble row of Gabions
against the Island which the Enemy still possesses on the other side of the
Rhine, and we have drawn from the said Flank a Line of Communication, which
joins the Redoubt called St. Margarets. The 14th There was made on the Right of
the Battery 18 Embraces; we also designed to ^^nk the Ditch 14 Foot deeper, and
to Raise the Battery by 12. The Work of the sapping toward the Glacis of the
two advanced Posts has ^een continued, and in the Front some covered Lines have
been finishe^ to secure our felves the better against the Enemy. His Electoral
Hig^ness of Bavaria Commanded also that the Trenches should be Reinforced, in
the apprehension that it being St. Lewis's Day, the French, according to their
Custom, might attempt something that Night or the next in honor of their
King's Name. Chains have also been laid, and an Estachado made on the Rhine a
little above the Town that no succor should get into it by Water.

August 15. Prince Veldents was greatly wounded after Dinner with a Musket
shot. We continued at the Electoral Attack to Raise the Battery and to make
more Embracings, the work of the last has been carried on to 40 Paces on each
side, so that on the Right it is advanced to the Glacis. At the Lorrain Attack
we have not only begun this Night to draw the Parallel Line, but to Raise a new
Battery also, which cost them 40 Men killed and wounded. The Cannon of the
Great Lorrain Battery played not so siercely as before, that we may work with
more security in the Mines; yet have they with their small Battery Dismounted
the Enemies two Cannons which they had planted on the Gibbet, of which great
part has been beaten down, and by that means caused the Enemies Horse, that had
posted themselves there, to Dislodge. Some French Deserters, among which is
found a Horseman, who say that the Governor having had Advite that the last
night our Men would attempt an Assault on the Counterscarp, he had Commanded
thither all the Granadeers with 4 Men of each Company, and that he had caused
to be carried thither 500 Grenades, but that they had been Fired about Eleven
at Night by one of our Bombs which had fallen there, and had made such a havoc
that all flew into the Air. The same Deserters add, that there are above 4000
reckoned to be Wounded and Sick in the Town, and that the Governor had Orders
to hold out to this Day, but that afterward he was to attempt a good
Capituiation; that upon that the Governor had forbid any more Firing of the
Cannon, nor casting of Bombs without particular Orders: wherefore for this
Reason they of the Town had not Fired above 10 Cannon-shot a day, nor cast
above 8 Bombs in 8 Days time; above all, to kill no Dog neither within nor
without the Town: the Reason was, that they believed that a Jewish Woman came
in and out frequently under the shape of a Dog.

August 16 Last Night about 8 of the Clock the Enemies Cannon began to play
very hard, which has been continued to this Morning. A certain Deserter who
came this day to us, Confirms that there are a great number of Officers and
Common Centries wounded in the Town, that our Bombs and Carcasses did a world
of damage ^^ the Enemies Defenses, especially in the covered way, and t hat the
Counterscarp had been reinforced with M^^, searing every moment an Assault. The
two last Redoubts were this Night enclosed with Pallisadoes, at the Electoral
Attack; 20 Cannons have also been Planted on the Great Battery making the
Embracements, 2 pieces of Cannon being Planted against the Champion. All the
Night was employed in Fortifying the Parrapet of the Parallel Line at the
Lorrain Attack, which had been drawn the Night before, and in enlarging the
Trenches; Digging in the Earth a great Vessel full of Ancient Medals was found.

August 17. This Day diverse Deserters came into the Camp from the Town, who
according to the others Relations confirm, that the continual Labor they were
put to had forced them to do so, That the Governor did incessantly Encourage
the Garrison to a vigorous Desence; assuring them that he would defend himself
to the last extremity. That there had been a noise in the Town, that the
Artillery of the Lorrain Attack was removing to the Electoral Attack, because
that we were not sufficiently provided with great Cannon to batter the Town.
That besides, it had been spread about in the Town to put a stap to the
Soldiers Desertion; That the Deserters were very ill treated in the Camp, so
far as to refuse them Bread for their subsistence; That they were rifled and
ill treated, and that they even put to death in the Camp all Persons that
surrendered themselves there, and that not one could yet get a free Passage, nor
avoid the Besiegers fury. Upon this Report Major General Werner was commanded
to cause all the Cannon of the Lorrain Battery to fire at the same time that
those of the Electoral Attack should be discharged. The Serenissime Duke of
Lorrain having been informed of the false Rumors which the French Officers did
spread abroad to affrighten the Soldiers, thought fit to undeceive them of
that false impression; causing diverse Bills to be writ, which were by an
invention shot into the Town, which contain, that all Deserters were to expect
a kind Treatment, and like unto that which was used toward those who had
already passed into the Camp, assuring them, that far from ill treating those
that would retire, a free Passage was given them, and wherewith to go forwards
under good Passes. M^^ster, Colonel of the Dragoons of the Troops of the Wic.
Wurizbourg, killed himself this morning in his Bed, accidentally touching one
of his Pistols which he had laid by him. This night 16 Pieces more of Cannon of
large bore have been mounted at the Electoral Attack on the great Battery,
opening at the same time the Embrasings. The Work at the Lorrain Attack has not
been advanced any further, 15 Soldiers were killed, and 23 wounded.

August 18. We began at six this morning to batter with 36 Pieces of Cannon
from the Electoral's great Battery, the high Defenses of the Town and Citandel,
in the presence of his Electoral Highness of Bavaria, and of many other
Generals, and diverse Bombs have been also cast into it; which has obliged the
Enemy to draw back their Cannon. This was immediately followed at the Lorrain
Battery by the Discharge of 48 Pieces of Cannon, and of 12 Mortarpieces, which
were repeated diverse times, to let the Enemy know we wanted no Artillery. We
had begun the night before to fire furiously from the same Attack, and to cast
a great number of Bombs and Carcasses into the City. The Deserters who came in
to day relate, that they saw some of the Bills that had been shot into the
City; that the hopes of a good Treatment, which was promised to them in it, had
made them take this Resolution of coming, and that diverse others would follow
their Examples. There was drawn this night at the Electoral Attack the Parallel
Lines of Comm^nication from the two last Redoubts to the Battery, where we have
begun to make a new place of Arms. The Works are advanced along the Glacis at
the Lorrain Attack. And whereas the Enemy have set up a Row of Pallisado's
behind the Patrapet of the Counterscarp, and that they have gathered together a
great heap of Sythes and of other Instruments on the left of the Lorrain
Trenches, on the apprehension that the Besieged had that we should attack the
covert way; it has been thought fit to leave there that Battalion which was
there in reserve this day. In the mean time our Miners are day and night busied
in discovering the Enemies Furnaces, and to make some in those places where we
designed to open. There was this day nine killed, and 21 wounded in the Works.
This day about Noon we learnt, that the French had made themselves Masters of
Cocheim, where they had made about 600 Prisoners of War, being the 15th of this
month, St. Lewis his Day, after that the Besieged had sustained the fourth
Assault.

August 19. They continued this day to fire all their Cannon from the two
Attacks to ruin the Enemy's Defenses, which was not without effect. They
raised a little Fort at the Electoral Attack from the other side of the Bridge,
a little higher than the Island: They began also that night to raise another
Battery, the Work of which cost us many men's lives, and several wounded. The
Count of Reus, Major General of the Saxons, found a great many wounded, and
Captain Wedel with a Lieutenant, and diverse others killed. They made Platforms
at the Lorrain Attack near to all the Regiments, who were be fore the Front of
the Lines of Circumvallation, to plant their Fieldpieces there, and to hinder
by that the Surprise of the Enemies, who, according to the News that was
spread, ought to be on their March to relieve the City. This day we met with
two Deserters, who yet could give no intelligence, but that the Enemy had
relieved the Guard of Horse, who till this present time, had been posted at the
Gallows, because they had received very great Damage from the Redoubt which was
on the left side of the Trenches of Lorrain, that they could not advance any
further on the Work. The Enemy had that night sprung a Mine at the Lorrain
Attack, which had no great effect, but only that it had ruined some paces of
the Gallery which did lead to our Mine, burying two men with it who were found
there, and sprung also a Furnace on our left side under our Gallery nigh 18
feet, making two of our Mines useless, yet that did not hinder to carry on our
Works, nor kept us from working at four places of the Sap. Another Deserter
came to the Camp, who did us better Service than the other two: observing that
one had brought a Peasant to speak to an Officer of the Guard before the Tent
of his Highness the Duke of Lorrain, he discovered that he was a man who
carried all the Intelligence from without into the place; and that he carried
it back to the Mareshal Duras and others, all that was fit to be known. He was
presently seized, and they found that he had some Letters about him writ in
Ciphers: and having confessed his Crime, there was a Report, that he should be
empaled alive, after the Hungarian manner; to be made an Example to those who
should dare to undertake so dangerous an Enterprise. There will be to morrow
104 pieces of Cannon mounted on the Battery against the City besides Mortar
Pieces.

August 20. The last night the Saxons began to raise a new Battery, to mount
there 12 Cartouches, which they had received from their own Country.

August 21. A Deserter reported to the Duke of Lorrain, and to the Elector of
Bavaria, that there was great plenty in the Garrison, and that there was there
5000 fighting men. The Bavarians discharged five new Pieces of Cannon upon the
Counterscarp. The same day the Enemy sprung a Mine on the side of the Lunenberg
Attack, but it had very little effect, having burst on the side, because the
Allies had countermined it. An hour after they sent some Miners to sind it out
there, but they were forced to retire, being half dead, by reason of a horrible
Smoke that came from it. The French had began another Mine on the left side,
but we hoped that that which we had made very near it, would be ready to spring
before theirs. The Saxons took a new Post near to the Counterscarp, but yet
they suffered a great loss, having had at that time many men killed and
wounded. Adjutant Rothkirk was of the number of the first. A Lieutenant in the
Regiment of Schomberg was dangerously hurt in his Body; with many others, as
Colonel Scot, who was mortally wounded in the Trenches.

August 22. They continued this Day to fire their Cannon at the Garrison, and
we wrought all night at the great Parallel Line, but we did not advance very
much, by reason of the Rocks that hindered us. The Imperialists and the Hessians
wrought all night at the Sap, they took their Post 20 paces from the Pallisade
on the left side; and they maintained their Ground in despite of the cortinual
firing of the Musketeers and Granadeers of the Besieged, and from the great
quantity of Stones that were shot from their Mortars; yet very sew of the
Soldiers were killed or wounded. They made again another great Sally, and the
Prince of Commercy was resolved to oppose it with his customary Force, and
succeeded; who put himself at the Head of his Granadeers, and beat them back,
after they had made their first shot, even into their covert way. He had on
that occasion, which was very hot, four Horses killed under him, and the fifth
wounded. His Master of the Horse, his Adjutant General, and Baron Charles
D'Osterstein, who followed the Prince, had also every one their Horses killed
under them. One of his Trumpetters and one of his Grooms were killed with their
Horses; yet that did not hinder, but the Prince failed not to make two
Lodgments in the openings of the Glacis, which the Furnaces had done, and they
maintained themselves there, though the Besieged made their greatest Efforts, to
force them out. We lost 100 men on this occasion, and the Enemy suffered little
less in number. And as the great Officers mount the Trenches, as well as the
Soldiers, Prince Christian of Sax-Hall was there also killed. To congratulate
the Victory that Prince Waldeck had gained of Mareshal d'Humiers, we this day
discharged all our Cannon four times.

August 23. The Lunenbergers alone relieved the Imperialists, and the Hessians
in their Trenches, and advanced their Works on the right side, as they had
proceeded on the lest the night before; so that they found themselves very near
to the two sides, and with an equal distance to the covert way. The same day we
seized on a Reformade Golonel, who was suspected to have held Intelligence with
the Governor of the Garrison.

August 24. Two Thousand Imperialists, and as many of the Hesseans, re-gained
the Place of the Lunenbergers, and advanced their Works by the Sapp, within 20
Foot of the Height of the Glaci^ The Enemy sprung again Two Mines, which were
very ineffectual, except that we had one Soldier killed, and two wounded.

August 25. The Imperialists and the Hessians got again into their Works,
continued the Sapp to the very height of the Glacis, and made all necessary
preparations to be able to open at the first Command. There was also carried on
this Day the Two Branches of the Trenches which they had begun to advance
toward the Two sides, to encompass behind the Redoubt, which the besieged had
raised to the Height of the Gallows, very nigh to the Pallisade.

August 26. Four Thousand Lunenbergers mounted alone the Trench, after their
usual manner, and advanced in the places of Arms with Faggots, and an
Instrument to open the Ground, and with every thing that they had need to
attack the Covert Way. They used the same means at the Bavarian Attack, and the
Saxon Attack, whose Batteries had fired without ceasing all the Days before
against the Defenses of the besieged, and had not only ruined them, but had
also made very great Breaches in the Ramparts, which facilitated their
App^^a^hes: Insomuch, that the Trenches being also carried on above the Glacis,
there was great hopes that we should carry the Covert Way in this Attack, in
the same manner as the Imperialists had done theirs, when they should come to
make an Assault. The Elector of Saxony having received at Franck fort the sad
News of Duke Christian of Saxe Hall, who was killed at the Approaches, and
being informed, that the Army was advanced on all sides, came back immediately
to the Camp of Weissenau, where was his General Quarter, to take again the
Command of his Troops which he had given him.

August 27. All the Army being disposed for a general Attack at the Covert Way,
and the besieged having attempted in vain to dislodge the Besiegers from their
Works, begun about Four of the Clock in the Afternoon to give an Assault, with
all Success that in Reason they could promise themselves, by the Conduct and
Experience of their Generals and their Officers, and from the Valor and
Undauntedness of the Soldiers. They began then about Four of the Clock, after
the Signal of Three Cannons Discharged, and One Bomb that broke in the Air:
They marched openly to the Assault, with that extraordinary Courage and
Boldness, that the Enemy, being not able to endure our Onset, immediately gave
way, and quitted their Posts and the Covert Way, as well at the Imperials
Attack, as that of the Saxons and the Bavarians. In the mean time the Enemy
having taken new Posts on both sides, and in Front, their firing was so very
great and so lasting, for 3 hours, that it is impossible to apprehend not so
much as the least Idea, in relation to what has been done; for there is no
Parallel of the like in any former Siege. We were near 2 hours exposed without
Covert, upon the Height of the Glacis joined to the Pallisado's, without being
able to cover our selves, by reason of the continual firing that was made, and
did endure it with the greatest Courage and Valor, till at last the Besieged
being broken, and pressed on all sides, were forced to give way to the
Besiegers, who took their Post at the very brink of the Ditch, where they fell
to work to cover themselves. During the time of the greatest Attack the Enemy
sprung a Mine, which buried in its Ruins Four Colors, and a great many men.
All the Night following was taken up in continual Skirmishes.

August 28. The next Day they sprung Two Mines more; but instead of doing hurt,
their opening served to lodge those Men who were near the place where the Mine
sprung. Mean time there was a continual firing from our Artillery and
Mortar-pieces. Our loss was greater at the Imperialists, the Lunenbergers and
the Hessians Attacks, than at the Bavarians and Saxons, because the Enemies
Resistance was greater there.

Here follows a List of the Officers who were killed and wounded in that
Assault.

Of the Side of the Imperialists.
Count Maximilian of Staremberg, Marshal of the Camp, was wounded, but he died
afterward. Count Souches, General of the Artillery, wounded. Baron Wallis,
Lieutenant Marshal of the Camp, killed. The Marquess of Parelli wounded. Count
of Furstemberg killed. Count Lamberg had both his Legs taken off with a Cannon
Shot, of which he died a little after. The Colonels, Laternach, Wounded.
Schomberg, Wounded. Hulster. Wounded.
With many others, whose Names are not yet known.
Of the Saxon Regiment which is among the Imperialists.
Lieutenant Colonel Berghaltz, Wounded. Captain Remitz, Wounded. Captain
Tecusler. Wounded. Captain Pforte, Wounded. Major General Geigerstberg, killed.
Of the Regiment of Gardes du Corpse of his Highness the Elector of Saxe.
Major General Sahle, Wounded. Captain Tittichof, Wounded. Ensign Gersdorf,
Wounded. Ensign Glitzing killed.
Of the Regiment of Duke Christian.
Major General Zeigler, Wounded. Captain Dunhoff, Wounded. Captain Stange,
Wounded. Ensign Keiser, Wounded.
Of the Regiment of Reus.
Captain Clunter, Wounded. Lieutenant Zeigister, Wounded. Lieutenant Ditzwick,
Wounded. Ensign Wetzmuth killed.
Of the Regiment of Rupser.
Captain Pfoster, Wounded, and. His Lieutenant, Wounded. Lieutenant Michel,
Wounded. Ensign Reitzwich, Wounded.
Of the Regiment of Zinzendorf.
Colonel Count of Zinzendorf, Wounded. Count of Trunhoff, Wounded. Lieutenant
Colonel Ratel, Wounded. Captain Burgsdorf, Wounded. Lieutenant Reumor, Wounded.
Ensign Herling, Wounded. Lieutenant Walckchoffen, killed. Ensign Winchel,
mortally wounded.
Of the Regiment of Flemming.
Major General Rodowitz, Wounded. Colonel Pistorius, Wounded. Captain
Vicethomb, Wounded. Captain Renecke, Killed. Lieutenant Haubwitz. Killed.
Ensign Waldan, Killed. Lieutenant Manshyff^ll, mortally wounded.
Of the Regiment of Saxe Gott^.
The Lieutenant Col^nel, Wounded. A Captain, Wounded, and A Corporal, Wounded.
Amongst the Lunenbergers,
The Prince of Hannover was wounded in his Hand with a Granade. Baron D'Eltz
wounded in the Small of his Back. One of his Pages in the Arm. Major General
D'ohr with a Musket Shot. Lieutenant Colonel Hulsen, Mortally Wounded. Major
Schegel, Mortally Wounded. Major Meynecken, Mortally Wounded. Lieutenant
Colonel Truchteben, Lieutenant Colonel Ramstorf. Major Hering, Captain Tanyis,
Captain Knige, with many others, all wounded.
Of the Regiment of Hesseans.
Colonel Gortz, Killed. Captain Valentine, Killed. Captain Mohr, Killed.
Captain Grammar, Killed. Colonel Schenk wounded twice. Major Butler wounded
twice. Major Lo^menstein wounded in the Foot. Captain Elley wounded in the Calf
of his Leg. Captain Busch, Wounded. Captain Schenck, Wounded. Lieutenant
Heyemer, Wounded.
Of the Troops of Franconia.
Captain Sickes, killed Captain Teutsch, killed Captain Ordens, killed With
Three other Captains.
Among the Bavarians.
Monsieur, the Elector, had a Contusion in his Arm. The Marquess of St.
Maurice, Colonel of the Regiment of his Highness's Guards, was killed. The
Count of Gagersberg wounded. With some other Officers. A great many of the
Wounded Died afterward of their Wounds.
Besides, there are about 2000 reckoned to be killed and wounded among the
common Soldiers. And the loss of the Besieged was not less considerable, there
being among the killed and wounded, whose number was at least 2000, a great
many Officers of Note, and the Chief of the Garrison; nor is that to be
wondered at, since they gave Quarter but to very sew of those who defended the
Covert way, the Engagement being maintained with so great Heat and Fury.

August 29. The Besieged finding that the Enemy carried it on with the greatest
vigor; and having (without doubt) well considered the situation of our Camp,
the Impossibility to force it, and to throw Succors into the Place, the
weakness of the Garrison, the Necessities and Wants of their City, their great
Loss that fell upon them of their best Officers and Soldiers, the great number
that they had of Sick Persons, and of such who were incapable of Fighting, the
Covert way carried off by the Enemy, our Lodgments being out of reach, the
Breaches very great and spacious, the Body of the Garrison ready to be seized,
and the Remnant of their Forces dismayed, and incapable to hold out another
Assault, caused the White Flag to be hung out on the 29th of this Month at
Eight of the Clock in the Morning, and to beat a Parley to capitulate. His
Highness the Prince Albert of Saxe Coubourg, who commanded in the Trenches, on
the side of the Imperial Attack, sent a Trumpet to the Besieged, to demand of
them what it meant; to which they answered, That the Governor was inclined to
give up the Garrison: and if the Duke of Lorrain would be pleased to send the
Governor a Lieutenant Colonel, with another Officer, to concert with them
about Conditions, He would send to their Camp Hostages of the same Quality.
Whereupon Prince Conbourg sent his Aid Major to consult with the Duke of
Lorrain; and they agreed to the Governors Desires. But they had obliged the
Governor to send first of all his Two Officers: Whereupon the Duke of Lorrain
sent into the City the Prince de Commercy, and Lieutenant Colonel Princi; and
so there was a Cessation of Arms between both Parties. The Treaty was concluded
before Night. It was resolved, that the next Day we should take possession of
St. Jacob's Tower, and of the Gau Gate, with 5000 men; and that on the 31st,
Sunday morning, the French Garrison should go out of the place with Six Pieces
of Cannon, Two Mortars with the Arms of France, and some Wagons laden with
their Baggage, with their Colors flying, Drums beating, lighted Matches, and
to be guarded to Landau, with a Convoy of 10000 Imperialists. Our Soldiers
were much troubled to find that they had made a Treaty with the Incendiaries,
for they had all a very great desire to take the City by Storm, to be revenged
on the cruel and perfldious French.

August 30. We took possession of the aforesaid Places, and all things were
preparing for the next Day, the Enemy to depart the place, and we to receive
and convoy them.

August 31. The time being come that the French Garrison was to leave the
place, and to pass through our Army, according to the Capitulations that had
been made, the Imperialists drew up their Army into Ranks at Six of the Clock
in the morning, to receive their Enemies. Many of the Imperial Cavalry posted
themselves on the Right side of the Began Gate; On the left side were chiefly to
be seen the Gardes du Corpse of the Elector of Bavaria, and next to them the
Gardes du Corpse of the Elector of Saxony, with some other Troops of the
Imperial Cavalry and Dragoons: After which the French began to march out of the
City at Seven of the Clock in the morning, in this following manner:

First of all there appeared 50 Horsemen with Four Officers, followed with 60
Dragoons and 2 Officers.

80 Foot with 10 Officers, 8 Mules, 6 Light Horsemen, 12 Carts and 5 Horses
laden.

50 Foot with 6 Officers, 24 Carts, 26 Horses laden.

54 Foot and 3 Officers, 80 Horses laden, and 26 Carts.

54 Foot with 3 Officers, 83 Horses laden, 17 Carts and a Chariot.

48 Foot with 6 Officers, 37 Horses laden, and 12 Carts.

49 Foot with 3 Officers, 2 Mules, 22 Carts, 6 Officers, 23 Horses laden.

49 Foot with 3 Officers, 7 Mules, 87 Horses laden, 37 Carts.

50 Foot with 3 Officers, 7 Mules, 87 Horses laden, 37 Carts.

50 Foot with 3 Officers, 2 Light Horsemen, 1 Chariot, 1 Litter, 49 Carts, and
46 Horses laden.

57 Foot with 4 Officers, 31 Horses laden, 32 Carts, 9 Mules, 1 Chariot with 2
Ladies, 26 Carts, 26 Horses laden.

64 Foot with 6 Officers, 63 Horses laden, 11 Carts.

66 Foot and 5 Officers, 26 Horses laden, 10 Carts, 1 Coach with six Horses,
another Coach with the Colonel of Dragoons, who was wounded, 2 Chariots, 5
Mules, 12 Carts, 3 Light Horsemen, Mr. De Vienbour.

4 Halberdiers and 23 Foot with 5 Officers, 44 Carts, 76 Horses laden.

32 Foot 7 Officers.

41 Dragoons with 2 Officers.

32 Light Horsemen with 2 Officers.

The Marquess of Vxelles, Governor of Mayence, with a Train of 40 Horse.

98 Dragoons, 12 Officers, with 2 Standarts.

78 Dragoons, 10 Officers with 2 Standarts.

88 Dragoons, 13 Officers and 2 Standarts, and 9 Officers wounded.

75 Horsemen, 4 Officers, and 2 Standarts.

611 Foot of the Regiment of Dauphin, with 6 Colors, and 40 Officers.

603 Foot of the Regiment of Anjou, 28 Officers, and 6 Colors.

250 Foot, 23 Officers, and 3 Colors, of the Regiment of Bretagne.

267 Foot, of the Regiment of Granadeers, 31 Officers, and 3 Colors.

207 Foot, of the Regiment of Jarsi, 31 Officers and 3 Colors.

379 Foot, of the Regiment of Benois, 32 Officers, and 3 Colors.

246 Foot, of the Regiment of Orleans, 16 Officers, and 3 Colors.

273 Foot, of the Regiment of Maine, 21 Officers, and 3 Colors.

339 Foot, of the Regiment of Cursole, 26 Officers and 3 Colors.

311 Foot, of the Regiment of Bourbignan, 24 Officers, and 3 Colors.

43 Dragoons, of the Regiment of Houte, with 6 Officers.

44 Horsemen with 5 Officers.

76 Foot.

250 Foot Soldiers, who marched about the Baggage.

300 Horses belonging to the Officers.

Which amounts to in all, 4572 Foot. 357 Officers. 400 Dragoons. 45 Officers.
287 Horses. 29 Officers. 1000 Foot that marched on the sides of the Carts, of
the Horses, of the Coaches, and of the Horses laden.


So that the French who marched out of Mayence, were to the Number of 6690 Men,
with 572 Horses loaded.

334 Carts. 31 Mules. 45 Light Horsemen. 6 Chairs. 2 Coaches. 1 Litter. 36
Colors. 10 Standarts.
Besides these, there were embarked in several Boats which had been sent from
Strasburg, with Ammunition for the Enemy, 6 pieces of Cannon, 2 Mortars, 2
Haubitz, and 1500 sick People, where some were continually Dying, which they
threw over into the Rhine. Our Loss amounted to almost 8000 Men. We may very
well see that they carried away a great many things, and a vast number of
Goods, besides the Money they had extorted from the Neighboring Countries. As
the Marquess of Vxelles was going out of the Garrison, he took his leave of the
Duke of Lorrain, of the Elector of Saxony, and of Bavaria, as also of all the
rest of the Princes and Generals, who had been very obliging to him. And as the
French are very perfidious, and that they could not rely upon their words; the
Allies had reserved some French Officers to remain here as Hostages, till all
the Articles of Agreement had been punctually performed. They assured us that
the French Garrison did consist of 11000 fighting Men before the Siege: They
were constrained to surrender the Place because they wanted Powder, for there
were found but 600 weight of Powder. The time of their departure out of the
Garrison, was from Seven a Clock in the Morning till Three of the Clock in the
Afternoon. After which time, the Allies took possession of the City. Our Bombs
had done very little hurt to any of the Convents, except a Nunnery; yet there
were a great many Houses whose tops were pierced like Sives. They took out of
St. Stephens Church many Cart-loads of Dead Bodies of the French, which they
threw into the Rhine. There were a great number also that were not Buried, and
a great many in Holes and in Convents, which lay not a foot deep in the Earth,
which caused a most horrid stinking smell in all those Places. The Castle of
the Elector, which the French had turned to an Hospital, was filled with Dead
and Wounded, among which, there were many Sick, who in three days had no kind
of Refreshment. The Enemies had wrought Day and Night in fortifying this
Garrison, in the time of Nine Months that they were Masters of it; for they
were so well advanced, and so Regular, that there remained little or nothing to
be done. But above all, the Fort that is upon the Rhine, is a Piece worthy
Admiration. The Peasants began to level the ways for our Approaches, and to
destroy the Mines. All the Engineers who were in that Garrison were either
killed or wounded. And very few remained alive on our side.

FINIS.

