The KING'S Letter to the General of his Army. With the Generals Letter to the
Prince of ORANGE.
White Hall, December. 11. 1688.
THings being come to that Extremity, That I have been forced to send away the
Queen, and my Son the Prince of Wales, That they might not fall into my Enemies
Hands (which they must have done, had they stayed) I am obliged to do the same
thing, and to endeavor to fecure myself the best I can, in hopes that it will
please God, out of his infinite Mercy to this unhappy Passion, to touch their
Hearts again with true Loyalty and Honor. If I could have relied on all my
Troops I might not have been put to this Extremity I am in; and would, at
least, have had one Blow for it: But though I know there are amongst you very
many loyal and brave Men, both Officers and Soldiers; yet you know, That both
your self, and several of the General Officers of the Army, told me, it was no
ways advisable for me to venture my self at their Head, or to think to fight
the Prince of Orange with them. And there remains only for me to thank you, and
all those, both Officers and Soldiers, who have stuck to me, and been truly
loyal; and hope you will still retain the same Fidelity to me: And to I do not
expect you should expose your selves, by resisting a foreign Army, and a
poisoned Nation; yet I hope your former Principles are so rooted in you, That
you will keep your selves free from Associations, and such pernicious Things.
Time presses me so, that I can say no more.

J. R.
I Must add this, That as I have always found you Loyal, so you have found me a
kind Master, as so you shall still find me.

J. R.



SIR,
HAving received this Morning a Letter from his Majesty, with the unfortunate
News of his Resolution, to go out of England, and that he is actually gone; I
thought my self obliged (being at the Head of his Army) having received Orders
from his Majesty, to make no Opposition against any body, to let your Highness
know (with the Advice of all the Officers) as soon as it was possible, to
hinder the Misfortune of Effusion of Blood. I have sent to that Purpose to all
the Troops that are under my Command; which shall be the last Order they shall
receive from,

Uxbridge, December. 11. 1688. At Noon

