HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS LETTER TO THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND: With The Speeches
of the Lord High Commissioner, and the Lord High Chancellor; together with the
Parliaments Answer to His MAJESTY'S Letter.

Published by Authority.

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE
IR
royal blazon or coat of arms

Printed by Thomas Newcomb in the Savoy; And Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the
Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty: Anno DOM. 1685.

His MAJESTY'S Gracious Letter to the Parliament of Scotland, with the Speeches
of the Lord High Commissioner, and Lord High Chancellor; Together with the
Parliaments Answer to His MAJESTY'S Letter.
JAMES R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe many Experiences We have had of the Loyalty and Ex^mplary Forwardness of
that our Ancient Kingdom, by their Representatives in Parliament Assembled, in
the Reign of our dearest and most entirely beloved Brother of ever Blessed
Memory, made us desirous to call you at this Time in the beginning of Our
Reign, to give you an opportunity not only of showing your Duty to Us in the
same manner, but likewise of being Exemplary to others in your Demonstrations
of Affection to Our Person, and compliance with Our desires, as you have most
eminently been in Times past, to a degree never to be forgotten by Us, nor (We
hope) to be contradicted by your future Practices. That which We are at this
Time to propose unto you, is, what is as necessary for your Safety as Our
Service, and what has a tendency more to secure your own Privileges and
Properties, than the Aggrandising our Power and Authority (though in it
consists the greatest Security of your Rights and Interests, these never having
been in danger except when the Royal Power was brought too low to protect them)
which now We are resolved to maintain in its greatest Luster, to the end we may
be the more enabled to Defend and Protect your Religion as Established by Law,
and your Rights and Properties (which was Our Design in calling this
Parliament) against Phanatical Contrivances, Murderers and Assassins, who
having no fear of God more than Honor for Us, have brought you into such
difficulties as only the Blessing of God upon the steady Resolutions and
Actings of Our said dearest Royal Brother, and those employed by Him, (in
Prosecution of the good and wholesome Laws by you heretofore offered) could have
saved you from the most horrid Confusions and Inevitable Ruin. Nothing has been
left unattempted by those wild and inhumane Traitors for endeavoring to
overturn your Peace: And therefore We have good Reason to hope, that nothing
will be wanting in you to secure your selves and Us from their outrages and
violence in time coming, and to take care that such Conspirators meet with
their just deservings, so as others may thereby be deterred from Courses so
little agreeable to Religion, or their Duty and Allegiance to Us. These things
We considered to be of so great importance to Our Royal, as well as the
Universal interest of that Our Kingdom, that We were fully resolved in Person
to have proposed the needful Remedies to you, but things having so fallen out
as render this impossible for us; We have now thought fit to send our Right
Trusty and Right entirely beloved Cousin and Counselor William Duke of
Queensberry to be Our Commissioner amongst you; of whose Abilities and
Qualifications We have Reason to be fully satisfied; and of whose Faithfulness
to Us, and Zeal for Our Interest we have had Signal Proofs in the Times of Our
greatest difficulties. Him We have fully entrusted in all Things Relating to
Our Service, and your own Prosperity and Happiness, and therefore you are to
give him entire Trust and Credit as you now see We have done; From whose
Prudence and your most Dutiful Affection to Us We have full Confidence of your
entire Compliance and Assistance in all those Matters wherein he is instructed
as aforesaid. We do therefore not only recommend unto you, that such things be
done as are necessary in this Juncture for your own Peace, and the support of
Our Royal Interest, both at home and abroad, but also that you do them so
speedily as may Evidence to the World that you are still in the same manner
addicted to the Royal Interest, of which we had so much Experience when amongst
you, that we cannot doubt of your full and ample Expressing the same on this
occasion; by which the great concern We have in you Our Ancient and Kindly
People may still increase, and you may transmit your Loyal Actions (as Examples
of Duty) to your Posterity. In full Confidence whereof We do assure you of Our
Royal Favor and Protection in all your concerns. And so We bid you Heartily
Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 28 th day of March, 1685. and of Our
Reign the first Year. By His Majesty's Command, DRVMMOND.

The Speech of the Lord High Commissioner.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HIs Majesty has been pleased so fully and obligingly by the Letter you have
now heard to intimate his Royal pleasure to you, as what I am to say seems in a
manner superfluous, so I need not take up much of your time, nor shall I do
more than touch a few things as briefly as is possible.

And in the first place, my Lords, This being the day of His Majesty's
Coronation in our Neighboring Kingdom, you see he is no sooner placed on the
Throne of his Royal Ancestors than he inclines to have your advice in what may
import the good of his Service and Subjects here; By which you ought not only
to be convinced of the great confidence His Majesty has in the Loyalty of this
his Ancient Kingdom, and their good Example to his other Dominions, but also
how fully he makes good his Royal Word and Declaration, to follow (in his
Reign) the Example of his late Majesty of ever glorious Memory under whose
Protection and Government we enjoyed so long Peace and Quiet; I say (my Lords)
as by calling you so soon, His Majesty expresses great confidence in you, and
seems still mindful of the Zeal and Affection of the last Parliament for the
Rights and Prerogative of the Crown, so (in a due return) it is not to be
doubted, but you will upon this occasion not only exceed what has been formerly
done, but also comply with all that can be proposed for establishing His
Majesty's Greatness and your own Security, and by this convince the World how
sensible you are of the great honor His Majesty has allowed you of being the
first Parliament of his Dominions to do so.

I am in the next place to tell you, that His Majesty is very mindful of the
Duty and Loyalty of this Kingdom to his late Majesty and himself, when he was
here amongst us: And the better to compose the minds of his faithful Subjects,
I am allowed to assure you of his Princely Resolutions to protect and maintain
the Religion and Government of this Church as they are now Established by Law,
and that he will take the Persons and Concerns of the Regular Clergy into his
special Care and Protection; And in order thereunto, I am to give the Royal
Assent to such Laws and Acts as can be reasonably proposed.

I am likewise to let you know, That His Majesty will concernedly maintain your
just Rights and Properties according to the Established Laws of this Kingdom,
and will not allow of oppressive Arbitrary Proceedings in Soldiers or others,
And further His Majesty being sensible of the great decay of our Trade, has
warranted me in His Royal Name to consent to such Laws as can reasonably be
proposed for recovery and improvement thereof.

And, my Lords, to conclude what I am to say on this Subject, His Majesty is so
concerned in the Encouragement, Welfare and Prosperity of this his Ancient
Kingdom, as He will not only do what can justly be desired or expected for
these ends, but even in Business of the Excise and Militia (his immediate
concerns) I am warranted to go the greatest lengths for your ease and
convenience that the nature of these things can bear, and His Majesty's Service
and your own Security will allow.

And, my Lords, His Majesty having in all things so evidently discovered his
gracious inclinations for the good of this Kingdom, and given us the fullest
assurances of his Favor and Protection that our hearts can desire, what
suitable Returns and Acknowledgments can we make to so excellent and
imcomparable a Prince, who in all things relating to our quiet and prosperity
prevents our very desires; So if during his Reign (which I pray God to make
long and glorious) we be not the happiest people in the World, we have only our
selves to blame.

And now the King having so fully done his part, it concerns you in the next
place to mind yours; And in order thereunto, I make no doubt but you will
assert the Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, and establish the Revenue as
amply upon His Majesty and his Lawful Successors as it was enjoyed by the late
King or any of his Royal Predecessors, since you cannot (in the least) doubt
but his Royal care for your repose and security will rather exceed than fall
short of any of his Ancestors. But to use any further Arguments to incite you
to what is so much your Duty and Interest, were at the same time to question
your Loyalty and Zeal for His Majesty's Service, and your concern for the
interest and honor of your Native Country whose Representatives you are, so I
shall not injure you, nor lessen your thanks by saying more upon this Subject.

My Lords, His Majesty certainly expects from the Prudence and Loyalty of this
Parliament, that effectual ways will be fallen upon for destroying that
desperate Phanatical and irreclaimable Party who have brought us to the brink
of Ruin and Disgrace, and are no more Rebels against the King than Enemies of
Mankind; Wretches of such Monstrous Principles and Practices as past Ages never
heard, nor those to come will hardly believe: What Indemnities and Acts of
Grace and Clemency have they not Contemned? And all the use they made of them
has still been to harden and confirm them in their execrable Villainies; and how
inconsiderable soever they appear, assure your selves they ought not absolutely
to be contemned; for if they had not support and correspondence not yet
discovered, it is not to be supposed they could have so long escaped the care
and vigilance of the Government: It therefore concerns you both in Honor and
Prudence, no longer to dally with them, but that the utmost severities be most
effectually applied, and all ways taken, both to find out their Favorers and
retired and secret Haunts.

My Lords, I doubt not but all of you sufficiently know that some of our Nation
are deeply involved in the late Horrid Conspiracy, who (and some others for
other Treasonable Crimes and Practices) are to be proceeded against before this
Parliament; The Evidence of their Guilt I shall leave to its proper Place and
Time, and do not doubt but His Majesty's Advocate will manage that weighty
matter with suitable care and faithfulness: So all I shall further say upon
this Subject at present is, that if Almighty God (who watches over the security
of Princes) had not Miraculously Discovered and disappointed those the most
Hellish and Barbarous Designs that were ever contrived, in Place of that Peace,
Happiness, and Tranquillity which we now Enjoy, these Kingdoms had certainly
been at this day a Sea of Blood and in all imaginable Misery and Desolation;
which (being evident beyond denial) will certainly provoke your and all good
Men's Indignation and Resentment against those who can be reached, not only as
Advisers and Contrivers of such Villainies, but Concealers of them: And since
our Honor and Security every way seems absolutely bound up in the Life of His
Sacred Majesty, ought we not most cheerfully to grant what the Exigencies of
His mild and gentle Government requires? Especially seeing what we give is
still bestowed upon our selves, and for maintaining us in our just Rights and
Possessions, against the most cruel and Barbarous Designs of His and our Enemes.

And now my Lords and Gentlemen, in the last place touching my self I shall not
say much, my unfitness for this Eminent station is possibly more obvious to me
than to any of you; however since His Majesty has been Graciously pleased to
place me in it, I am resolved to serve him boldly and firmly, and thereby
labor to make up my other great defects: And as this has still been my
Practice in the other great Trusts I have the Honor to carry under His
Majesty, so I know His Goodness will always accept the sincere endeavors of His
Servants in place of greater Performances.

The Lord High Chancellor's Speech.
My Lords and Gentlemen.
AFter what my Lord Commissioner has so well represented to you, it will be
very little necessary for me to say much.

I shall only take the liberty to put you in mind, (of what I believe you are
very sensible already) of the many obligations this Nation lies under to be
grateful to our great Monarch.

When by the Command of the late King, His Majesty who now Reigns came first
hither, what Disorders, Divisions, and Animosities found He amongst us? To
bring the state of things into your prospect as it was then, could not be very
grateful to you, nor pleasing to me, but we all remember with joy how well He
left us, and by what easy gentle ways He brought about the Establishment of
that Unity, which we were beginning to despair of:

Since that time, how much we have been in His particular care, during the
Happy Reign of that Excellent Prince His Brother, of ever Blessed and Glorious
Memory, is known to all the World.

But of all the instances of His Majesty's Care for us, his Favor toward us,
and his good Opinion of us, this of His calling us together in the very
beginning of his Reign, (which God grant may be long and prosperous) that we
might have the opportunity of presenting Him with the first Fruits of the
Service of His Parliaments, and of becoming Exemples to His other Dominions, is
the greatest and what we should prize the most, improving it as far as it will
go.

When we consider what strange turns the extravagant Follies of some, and the
malicious devilish Contrivances of others among us have taken, since the last
Meeting of Parliament, what Convulsions have Attacted the Body of this Nation,
and how vile a Ferment has raged in it, to have our Advice called for by our
Prince, how to provide proper Remedies for it, is the greatest Honor could be
put upon us.

That we may do what in Duty we are bound in return, let us lay aside all
private Aims and Ends; for how can we hope to serve His Majesty, or promote the
Interest of the Nation, while our Eye is directed only toward our own
particular? and let us with the Frankness and Cheerfulness of honest SCOTS MEN.
use all possible means for Uniting of the Nation, and the driving from amongst
us, whoever will not join with us upon such Terms as may conduce to the
Advancement of the Honor and Interest of our King and His Crown, and the
Well-being of this our Native Country, which we should not suffer to be
defiled and rendered contemptible to the whole World by entertaining so Venomous
a Bastardly brood of villainous men, as have of late, to the reproach of
Scotland, and of Humane Nature it self, maintained Principles, and ventured
upon Practices not to be named amongst any who have ever heard of a Government,
much less of Religion.

My Lords and Gentlemen.
You all know what a Conspiracy has been entered into by ill men of both
Kingdoms, against the Sacred Lives of the late King and his present Majesty;
and who but incarnate, Devils could think of attempting any thing against such
precious Lives? For what Prince in E^rop, or the whole World, was ever like the
late King, except His Glorious Brother who now Reigns? and to have cut off any
of them, had been barbarous to a degree of making us appear more abominable
then any people ever were, but for us to have lost both, had been our utter
ruin. Yet against both was the design laid, and had suceeded, if that watchful
Providence, which has often preserved the two Royal Brothers in so many
difficulties, had not defeated the success, by an un-fore-seen accident, and
had it succeeded, what Confusion, what Cruelty, what Blood, what un-expressible
Misery had overflowed these Kingdoms?

But besides this, we have a new Sect sprung up amongst us from the dunghill,
the very dregs of the people, who kill by pretended Inspiration, and in stead
of The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, have nothing in their mouths
but The Word of God, wresting that blessed conveyance of his Holy Will to us,
to justify a practice suggested to them by him who was a Murderer from the
beginning, who having modelled themselves into a Commonwealth, (whose Idol is
that accursed paper the Covenant, and whose only Rule is to have none at all)
have proceeded to declare themselves no longer His Majesty's Subjects, to
forefeit all of us who have the honor to serve him in any considerable
station, and will be sure ere long to do so by this great and honorable Court.
It is how to rid our selves of these men, and of all who incline to their
Princ(...)ples, that we are to offer to His Majesty, our Advice, Concurrence,
and utmost Assi(...)ance. These Monsters bring a public reproach upon the
Nation in the eyes of all (...) Neighbors abroad, while in their Gazets we are
mentioned as acting the vilest Assass(...)nations, and the horridest Villainies,
they render us unquiet and unsecure at hom(...) they bring Reproach upon our
Religion, and are our great plague.

Let us for the sake of our Allegiance, for His Majesty's Honor, for our
Reputatio(...) abroad, for the vindication of our Religion, and for our own
Peace and Tranquillity make haste to get our selves cured of it.

If this were once effectuated, we might yet hope for quiet, and in order to
the making our quiet the more comfortable to us, when once we are come to a
Resolution abou(...) what relates to the public peace, and to the respect we
owe to His Majesty, we may have occasion of considering what Laws may be
necessary toward the facilitating th(...) well-governing of our selves and
Native Country, both as to the regulating our Carriag(...) one toward
another, and the securing our Estates, from any thing that may be unea(...)
from the distribution of Justice between man and man, as to the improving of
our Trade and Commerce abroad, and encouraging Industry and Frugality at home;
for in all these things His Majesty's care will not fail us. And my Lord
Commissioner amongst his many other advantages, is so well known to be a lover
of his Country, that we need not fear, but that He will give his Concurrence
in what He is allowed so freely to consent to.

My Lords and Gentlemen.
To encourage us to do all we can toward the service and the Honor of our
Glorious Monarch, let (...) consider Him in all His Personal Advantages,
whether in what relates to War or Peace, where has the World afforded such
another? One whose Natural Endowments have been improved by his great
experience, at home and abroad, in Armies and Courts, by the greatest trials of
the most differing kinds; those of prosperity and success, and of adversity and
opposition, of hazards and toil, and of Authority and Command in the strictest
adhering to His Word; such Temperance and Sobriety, so indefatigable a
diligence in Affairs, so Undaunted a Courage upon all occasions, and so
unwearied a Clemency toward the most obstinate malicious Offenders? Did ever
Hero complete the Character so fully, in overcoming bravely, and showing
gentleness to the vanquished? And I must say, the Triumphs of His Patience are
not His obscurest Glories; nor is the forgiving of those whose virulent
Tongues, would have Tainted his Fame, if their malice could have reached it,
what is least to be admired in him; what Reputation other Princes have labored
for, at the vast extent of Blood and Treasure, and the putting of a constant
constraint upon themselves, sits so easy upon Him, that what they would have,
He forces from the Consciences of his very Enemies by His Merit, and it costs
Him no more than to be Himself But this Theme is not for me, I do Him wrong,
and while it may be at this very moment, He is receiving the Acclamations of
His good Subjects, in the chief City of our Neighbor Nation, at the great
Solemnity of His Coronation there, I am detracting from Him here, by giving him
too low a Character.

I shall only add, that He gave to Subjects the greatest example of Loyalty
and Obedience while He was one Himself; and now He is an example to all Kings
in His Love, His Clemency, and Care toward his People. Let us give Him the
return of our Love, our Fidelity, and our Obedience. And seeing He takes
pleasure in nothing so much, as in our felicity and prosperity, let it be an
additional tie upon us to advance His Honor and Greatness, by all the
endeavors of our Lives, without reserve, and with our whole Fortunes, which
under His protection we may (if we please) so peaceably and comfortably enjoy.

The Parliaments Answer to His Majesty's Letter.
May it please your Sacred Majesty.
YOur Majesty's gracious and kind remembrance of the Services done by this your
ancient Kingdom, to the late King your Brother of ever-Glorious Memory, shall
rather raise in us ardent desires to exceed whatever we have done formerly than
make us consider them as deserving the Esteem your Majesty is pleased to
express of them, in your Letter to us dated the 28 th of March. The death of
that our excellent Monarch is lamented by us to all the degrees of Grief that
are consistent with our great Joy for the Succession of your Sacred Majesty,
who has not only continued, but secured the Happiness which His Wisdom, His
Justice, and Clemency procured to us: And having the honor to be the first
Parliament which meets by your Royal Authority, of which we are very sensible,
your Majesty may be confident that we will offer such Laws as may best secure
your Majesty's Sacred Person, the Royal Family and Government, and be so
exemplarily Loyal, as to raise your Honor and Greatness to the utmost of our
power, which we shall ever esteem both our Duty and Interest. Nor shall we
leave any thing undone for extirpating all Fanaticsm, but especially those
Fanatical Murderers and Assassins, and for detecting and punishing the late
Conspirators, whose pernicious and execrable designs did so much tend to
subvert your Majesty's Government, and ruin us and all your Majesty's faithful
Subjects. We can assure your Majesty that the Subjects of this your Majesty's
ancient Kingdom are so desirous to exceed all their Predecessors in
extraordinary marks of affection, and Obedience to your Majesty, that (God be
praised) the only way to be Popular with us, is to be eminently Loyal. Your
Majesty's care of us when you took us to be your special Charge, your Wisdom in
extinguishing the seeds of Rebellion and Faction amongst us, your Justice which
was so great, as to be for ever exemplary, But above all, your Majesty's free
and cheerful securing to us our Religion when you were the late King your Royal
Brother's Commissioner, now again renewed when you are our Sovereign, are what
your Subjects here can never forget. And therefore your Majesty may expect that
we will think your Commands sacred as your Person, and that your Inclination
will prevent our Debates. Nor did ever any who represented our Monarchs as
their Commissioners, (except your Royal Self) meet with greater Respect, or
more exact Observance from a Parliament, than the Duke of Queensberry (whom
your Majesty has so wisely chosen to represent you in this; and of whose
eminent Loyalty, and great Abilities in all his former Employments, this Nation
has seen so many proofs) shall find from,

May it please your Sacred Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful,
and most Obedient Subjects and Servants, In name of the Parliament, Sic
Subscribitur, PERTH Cancel. I. P. D. Parl.
At Edinburgh the 28th of April, 1685.

