A JUSTIFICATION OF The Directors of the Netherlands East Indie Company.

As it was delivered over unto the High and Mighty Lords the States General of
the UNITED PROVINCES, the 22th of July, 1686.

Upon the Subject and Complaint of Mr. SKELETON, Envoye Extraordinary from the
King of Great Britain, touching the affair of Bantam, and other Controversies
at Macassar, and on the Coast of Mallabar and at Gamron, in the Gulf of Persia.

Likewise a Justification in Answer to the seveveral Memorials lately given
unto the States General by the Marquis of Albeville, touching Meslepatam and
other Places in the Indies.

Translated out of Dutch by a good Friend, for the Satisfaction of all such as
are Impartial Judges of the matters now in dispute between the two Companies.

Printed at London, in the Year 1687.

To the High and Mighty Lords The STATES GENERAL Of the United Netherlands.
High and Mighty Lords,
IN obedience to your Highnesses Letter addressed the 30. May 1686. unto the
Praesidial Chamber of the East-Indie Company at Amsterdam, being pleased to
Command the said Company in relation to your Highnesses Resolution of the same
dato, to transmit with the very first an Information unto a certain Memorial
presented by Mr. Skeleton, Envoy Extraordinary of his Royal Majesty of Great
Britain, unto your Highnesses the second of the said Month, touching the
Business of Bantam, and moreover containing complaints of what passed in the
East Indies at Gamron, Mallabar and Macassar, with demand of reparation,
hereupon the Regents (or Directors) of the said Company of this Nation, have
with all due respect, this to say: First Concerning the first Point, specifying
the business of Bantam, that although your Puissant Highnesses may very well
remember al what has happened and passed since the Month of May 1683, when first
those Clamors and heavy complaints were made by Mr. Chudlie, extraordinary
Envoy, in the Assembly of your Puissant Highnesses, and thereupon soon after
more fully dilated and deduced by Sr. John Chardin, both viva voce and in
writing: Nevertheless assuring our selves that it will not be unacceptable to
your Pu. Highnesses, that the said Memorial be again some what afresh
reiterated, the foresaid Regents of the East-Indie Netherlands Company will
with permission of your Puis. Highnesses make a short recital, first of what in
the beginning was don here in Holland by Conference and treatises, and also
afterward continued and further Progress thereof made in England by the L.
Ambassador Citters, according to the order given him by your Puis. Highnesses,
and consequently of the proceedings held in England by Committies on both
sides, and what further was acted in the same, and so com to the Principal
Matter, to demonstrate as briefly as possibly may be, how unreasonable and
wholly ungrounded those complaints are, which in the beginning were so
clamorous, and then will fully justify the Government of Batavia in their
management and proceedings in those affairs.

What Concerns the first, Mr. Chudlie extraordinary Envoy by his Memorial of
the 25. May, of the foresaid year 1683, complained to your Puis. Highnesses,
that the Government of Batavia had in a manner altogether extraordinary,
outragiouslie dealt with the English East-Indie Company, and by main force
driven them out of their ancient place of residence at Bantham, and that in so
strange a manner, that not any one Example (a thing rather to be buried in
silence, then related) of the like nature can be produced, and therefore
requiring that the said Netherlandish Company should be obliged to draw back
their Troops out of Bantam, reestablish the English there again, and to make
reparation of the losses by them sustained. But Sr. John Chardin, before
mentioned, who by the foresaid English East-Indie Company was sent hither in
Commission, did somewhat mitigate these complaints, apparently, because they
were so horribly extravagant, and in stead of accusing the Government of
Batavia, as if they had driven the English out of Bantam, did content himself
to say, that it happened through the suggestion and Counsel of Major St.
Martin, who commanded the Netherlandish Troops at Bantam in Chef, and that it
was he that disposed the King to put forth the English out of Bantam, and
although all he affirmed was without any proof, but only grounded on a
Conjecture, yet that which is to be wondered at is, that he would form a public
Memorial on so slight and weak grounds.

And although the Bewinthebbers were at that time unfurnished with such
Elucidation of matters as is requisite, not yet having then any of their Ships
returned out of India, and what they knew in the business, was by Letters only
sent in English Ships from England, where the said Letters were held up some
time, the seals broken and opened, and then afterward handed to the
Correspondent of the Netherlandish Company at London, notwithstanding they
omitted not according to the knowledge they had attained, to give your
Highnesses Informations and Answers to their Complaints. Whereupon your Pu.
Highnesses having given an Answer to the said Chudlie and Chardin (unto which
the English Company in some passages of their Writing do appeal) soon after
with the good liking of your Pu. Highnesses, a treaty began with the forenamed
Chardin and the Netherlandish Company, and the business was so far avanced,
that on both sides a final agreement was assuredly expected, whereas on a
sudden Mr. Chudlie and Sr. John Chardin pretending to have command and order
from their King to put a stop to the business, the foresaid Treatise here was
unexpectedly broken of, however was with consent of your Pu. Highnesses, who
desired nothing more then to compose and conclude, if possible, this matter in
a friendly way, continued in England, whereunto the Lord Ambassador Citters was
furnished with full Order and Power both from your Pu. Highnesses, as also from
the Company here: but hereupon the English Hightning their Demands, and as
appeared afterward, even in their reply, of which shall be spoken hereafter,
they avoued to have other designs, intending to reestablish themselves at
Bantam, unto which end in the latter part of the year 1683. they prepared a
great Fleet well manned to effect the same; but this their design, as
themselves affirm, and complain that they might not put it in execution, as
being hindered by the now deceased King, of happy Memory, hereupon this
Treatise was stopped, and no further progress made therein until at length, it
pleased his said Majesty to make way for the prosecuting of the agreement
prescribed Anno 1674. between his Majesty and this State, to wit, that the
differences should be determined and composed by Committies on both sides, who
to that end according to the foresaid Convention were to assemble together at
London, the which being also approved by your Pu. Highnesses, there was erected
a Tribunal Court, consistng of eight Committies, four on each part, before
whom, after that the Parties on both sides had diverse times appeared about the
Praeliminaries and cases incident, it was thought meet, that all things should
be handled in writing, and the State of the case so written, to be made by
Demand, Answer, Reply, and Duplick (or double Reply) even to a Triplick and
Quadruplick, and besides all this there were delivered up such pieces probatory
as might serve to fortify and maintain the case on the one hand, with the
Confutation of the same on the other hand, they of the Netherlandish Company
also making their Demand against the Demand of the English, and delivering the
same over by way of reconvention or contrary Demand, for the fraiting of four
Ships, wherewith the Netherlandish Company, upon the earnest Request of the
English Company had accommodated them, amounting to thirteen thousand nine
hundred pound Starling. In so much that the foresaid Pieces being delivered to
the said Committies to do right therein, the Englsh Commissaries in their vote
declared, that it was their opinion and sentence, that in stead of all what was
demanded by the English East-Indie Company (to wit, not only the recalling of
the Netherlandish Troops out of Bantam, and the Territories thereof, but
moreover and above to deliver up the Castle and City of Bantam.) The
Netherlandish Company was only bound, to reestablish the said English Company
in Bantam, so, and in such wise as was demanded by Monsieur Chardin in the
Hague, and to settle all things in state as it was before the War, and the
Damages and Reconvention (or contrary Demands) should be reserved.

But the Committies of this State delivering in their Advice, every one of them
in order did understand and declare, that forasmuch as the decision of the
case, which must be judicially determined, did depend upon the verity of Fact,
which the English Company had charged the Netherlandish Company with, and in
special that the said English Company were by them driven out of Bantam, of
which they could not produce the least proof, that therefore the said English
Company ought to have their Demand and Conclusion made, and taken up against
the Netherlandish Company, denied them: and the said English Company to be
condemned to satisfy the Netherlandish Company for the Fraighting of the four
Ships which they demand by reconvention: by which, because of the cessation of
voices, the case being fallen into the terms, which they were in according to
the convention of agreement of the year 1673/4, must come into the hands of an
Arbitrator or Compromissarius, to the chosing of whom by the foresaid agreement
the time of a Month was prescribed: but the said Committies for the Decision on
both sides, not agreeing, for although the English Company were plantif in
convention, yet the English Commissaries did not propose a Super Arbitrator, so
hereby the whole case, according to an Act passed and subscribed on both sides,
was left in the hands of his said Majesty and your Highnesses, to be
determined by you, according to the contents of the foresaid Agreemtnt And this
is the reason why the said Mr. Skeleton, Envoy Extraordinary, made the foresaid
Memorial and Address to vour Pu. Highnesses to do justice in the case to the
Subjects of England: Whereupon it must needs fall under Examination, whither
the complaints which the English Company have, and still do make of the
business happened at Bantam, be grounded on such solid Reasons, as to oblige
the Netherlandish Company so to resettle them at Bantam, as they were before
the War, (for more then this was before denied to be due to them, by the
English Commissaries themselves) and that with reparation of Damages and
Interests, which they pretend to have sustained by the Netherlands Company. Now
to make this case to appear more clearly, forasmuch, as since it was first
presented to your Pu. Highnesses by Mr. Chudly Extraordinary Envoy, and
afterward more amply pressed by Sr. John Chardin, is now wholly altered, and
quite of another face: as also that the Netherlandish Company has recovred
further proofs for the Confutation of what the English Company did bring in,
and maintain, therefore it will be necessary to dive somewhat deeper into the
matter.

The Case is this, Sulthan Agon, formerly King of Bantam, and Father of the
present King now reigning, having resolutions, both in respect of his age, and
other considerations to disinvest himself of the Government, and lead a still
and private life, he made over his Kingdom to his Eldest Son, retiring himself
to Turtiassa, a place of pleasure, about six miles from Bantam, and seated a
mile from the Sea, there to spend the residue of his days free from public
affairs. His Son seated on the Throne, and having the Government of the
Kingdom in his hands, forthwith sent Ambassadors to Batavia (accompanied for
the further Splendour with a train of about 300. persons) to give notice to the
Government there of his access to the Crown, and also to reniew their ancient
Alliance, sending also Ambassadors to England, where they were in such manner
received, as that those of the East-Indie Compagnie by their Letter to the said
King of Bantam in July 1682. written about two years after the young King was
come unto the Crown, say, that such honor was given to his Ambassadors, as if
they been sent from the greatest King or Potentat of the World, adding in the
said Letter, that they did with joy understand, that God Almighty had brought
and invested him on the Throne of his Kingdom of Sourosoan, that is, the
Kingdom of Bantam, with the good will of his Father.

And furthermore his Majesty of Great Britain sent away the said Ambassadors
with presents to the young King their Master, accompanied with an honorable
Letter to him, all which in the Process is produced, and in which he is styled
the famous and Illustrious Sulthan Abdul Cahar Aba Nasar King and Lord of the
said Kingdom of Sourosoan, that is of Bantam, adding moreover, that his Majesty
received the foresaid Ambassadors with all due respect, according to their
Character, and with entire affection, as coming from a Prince, whose Person and
Amity his Majesty declared to have in very high esteem, and unto whom, he
judged it necessary to send over his Agent or Envoy, furnished with power from
his Majesty, and order from the English Company, for to make a strickter League
with the King of Bantam, which testimony and proffer of Alliance was yet
further reiterated in another Letter, writ by the foresaid English Company from
London the 17. July 1682. also produced in the Process. By all which then it
appears undeniably unto all that are impartial; that the present King now
ruling was acknowledged both by the King of Great Britain, and by the English
Company, as well in England as in India, for the lawful Lord and King of the
whole Kingdom of Bantam, and as the Successor of his Father.

But forasmuch as the present King in the direction of the affairs of the
Kingdom, did not, as it seems, answer the expectation of his Father, nor
satisfy the humor of many of his Subjects, there arose a heavy Civil War in
the Kingdom, in which the malcontented entending to cast of the yoke from their
neck as they termed it, after they had also drawn the Old King to their party,
who thereupon strengthened himself in Turtiassa (as also the King now reigning
did at Bantam) at length by force of arms they made themselves Master of
Bantham, and besieged the young King in his Castle into which he was retired,
entending to bereave him both of his Throne and life, and to set up a younger
Brother in his place: whereupon this King apprehending no other way of
deliverance, as having most of the great ones of his Kingdom animated against
him, and the Communaltie also his enemies, thought it expedient for him to make
known to the General of the Council of the Netherlandish Company at Batavia,
his miserable State, and that he not only was to exspect the los of the Crown,
but also a most cruel death: the which he signified, in most lamentable wise,
imploring their assistance: but they not judging it convenient in a case of
such importance to intrude themselves to unadvisedly, did, before they
determined any thing in the least about it, conclude to interpose their
Mediation betwixt Father and Son, and to that end to send Ambassadors with
letters tending to that purpose: But the Father in a most disdaingful manner
rejecting the same, without vouchsafing to return any answer at all to the
Government of Batavia or their Committies, the said Government did at last
resolve, seeing the condition of the Son tending to ruin, as being forsaken
almost by all, to assist him against the Rebels, and if possible to deliver him
out of the miserable estate into which he was brought, which also they did with
such success, that notwithstanding the strong opposition of the Enemy, we
Landed our forces, raised the siege of the Castle in which the King was, and
set him again upon his Throne, who thereuppon both to demonstrate how gratly he
was offended with the English, who had assisted his enemies, as also to provide
for his own security for the future, did without any instigation of the
Netherlandish Company, command them to leave his country and to depart
elsewhere with their Goods. This then being a true Narration of what passed in
these affairs, these considerable things do present themselves to
consideration.

First, that the Old King having made over his Kingdom to his eldest Son, he
therely became lawful King by his Fathers transport, and was acknowleged so to
be, by the King of Great Britain, and by them of the English East-Indie
Company.

Secondly, that he therely being lawful King, his subjects in taking up arms
against him, were Rebels.

Thirdly, that according to the Law of nature and af nations, it is not only
permitted, to be assistant unto a King, that is oppressed by his subjects, but
that such assistance is approuvable and a Work of Charity and Love.

Fourthly, that it is contrary to the Rule of Justice, to ascribe the evil
Consequences of a lawful and worthy Act, unto him that is the Author of the
said Act, and not of the consequences.

Fifthly, that it is altogether against reason to impute the Chasing of the
English out of Bantam unto them of the Government of Batavia, and to their
auxiliarie Forces, because it is manifest, that the departure of the English
out of Bantam was not a necessary, but an accidental Consequence, the King not
causing them to depart because he was victorious (for he had suffered them to
live there from the time he came to the Crown until the War, to wit, during
the two years of his Reign) but only because he was certain they had assisted
his Rebels, besides many other suspicions he might justly have taken up against
them.

But against this, they of the English Company do allege, and depose for a
real truth, that they of Batavia had raised and fomented the quarrels between
the Old and the Young King of Bantam.

That two years before the War began they had had secret Negotiations with
Pangeran Diepa Panerat, one of the Principal Ministers of the young King, to
bring about this their design.

That they afterward having got this King into their snares, and most
perfidously brought him under their yoke, forthwith forced him to drive out the
English.

And to make the Ministers of the Netherlandish Company yet the more suspected
and stinking to all the world, they undertook in the beginning of the year
1683. to represent unto the King of Great Britain that the foresaid Major St.
Martin who commanded over the forces of the Netherlandish Company at Bantam in
Chef had committed very many Enormities against the Factors, People and the
Effects of the English Company at Bantam, so far that they dispossessed, and
drove them out of their place of residence: But in stead that the English
Company ought to have proved the Facts which are essential to the thing, in
case they herein aimed to triumph, they do not in the whole product which they
made in the Process thereof, so much as allege the least appearance either
directly or indirectly, no not so much as consequentially might serve for the
verifying of the Enormities of such Facts.

And although the Netherlandish Company might stand upon the Negative, which is
not necessary, nay many times possible to be proved, save only indirectly (for
no man can in a direct manner prove that which is not) nevertheless to manifest
clearly that they of the Government of Batavia are altogether blameless, let us
only consider the moral impossibility of the foresaid Fact, viz. that the
Governors of Batavia should have raised and fomented the questions and
differences between the Father and the Son, as also the notorious falsehood of
the second Fact, namely, that the said Government should have forced the King
to cause the English to depart out of Bantam.

What concerns the first, its known to the world, that for a long time, there
had been no good intelligence between the Old King and the Government of
Batavia, no not so much as to the least Correspondence, for the latter finding
themselves much affronted and injured, insomuch that at last they took up Arms
against each other, the War not ending until the Son came to the Crown, so
that they could not stir up the Son against the Father, muchless foment their
quarrel.

And what folly would it have been for them of Batavia, to animate the Father
to War against the Son, forasmuch as they lived with the Son in amity, and as
good Neighbors, not having any reason in the least to complain of his
Government and conduct toward them, whereas on the contrary if the Father had
got the upperhand they should have been in a far wors condition, and attracted
a nieu Enemy against themselves.

And that they should have stirred up the Son against the Father, and
encouraged him to War, cannot be imagined by any that are in their right
senses, partly because there by they could not expect any profit or advantage,
or if they had, it would have been mixed with an uncertaintie as to the event,
and again the Son would then have endeavored to have been aforehand and the
first aggressor, whereas on the contrary it was the Father, who thereby got so
great advantage over the Son, burning and ruinating the City, and keeping his
said Son besieged in his own Castle, so that, had it not been for the
intervention and succors of them of Batavia, the Father certainly would have
triumphed over the Son: and put the case the War had ended according to the
intention and advantage of the Son, what more could he have expected thereby,
who already sat on the Throne, and could be no greater then he was, would the
Son have listened to such counsel, and engaged in a War against his Father,
whose Interest consisted in governing his Kingdom in peace? And does it not
hence follow, that all these troubles did arise from them who breathed after
nothing more then change? Who not being able or willing to submit to the
Government of the young King, revolted against him, with intention to thrust
him from his Throne, and to set up another more suitable to their liking and
humor? Which their design also so far succeeded, that the young King was
brought to the point of loosing his Grown and Life.

Could the Government of Bantam at the beginning have with any reason imagined,
that the young King should finally have got the upperhand over his Enemies and
Rebels? or that the English should have intermedled with that War, and would
have assisted the Rebels against their own Prince, whom themselves owned as
lawful King (of which hereafter shall be more largely spoken) and he thereupon
should have thrust the English out of his Kingdom?

Would they have stirred up the Son against the Father, after that the Son by
so many lamentable Letters had implored their assistance, and let it come to
that extremity, that in case they had delayed but one day longer, he must have
given himself over to his Rebels, and undergon a cruel death?

In case the Rebels (before it was delivered by the Netherlandish forces) had
taken the Castle, and murdered the King, could they have hindered, that either
the old King or one of his younger Sons should have obtained the Crown, and so
managed the affairs of his Kingdom, as to take vengeance of them, that had
opposed themselves against his designs.

And if so be in cases of such nature place may be given to conjectures and
presumptions, is it not most probable, that the English themselves have done
that very thing, which they falsely impute to the Netherlandish Company?

They Publish for a certain Truth, that the young King, while the Father as yet
governd the Kingdom, assassinated their Agent and Commises, and that he always
carried himself as an Enemy to them, whereas on the contrary the Government of
the Father was most grateful unto them.

Does it then seem to be such an ungrounded praesumption, that they (partly to
revenge themselves of that Massacre, of which the King of Great Britain in his
Letter to the now King of Bantam declares himself so sensible) and partly that
it was much for their Interest, that the Son might be pulled down from the Throne
and put to death, and that the Father or another Brother were set up; they
should labor to kindle the fire and foment this War? Especially hereunto
concurring that they were so soon ready to join their forces to the assistance
of the Father, without which the Father could not have obtained those
advantages, nor the Son been brought to such a Laborinth.

Also it will clearly appear, that all the mischief which is come to the
English Company in this businest, is wholly from the bad management of affairs
by their own Men and Ministers in Bantam?

For the King of Great Britain and the English Company acknowledge the young
King for the alone King and Soverain.

But their Ministers declare him to be an Usurper and a Rebel of the Father.

Their Masters endeavor to establish a settled peace with him.

They set themselves formally against him as their Enemy.

Their Masters Endeavor to oblige the Son by all means possible, and send
great quantity of all manner of Ammunition of War to him.

They do not only disoblige him in all things, but even assist his Enemies with
the provision sent to his assistance.

Their Masters in their forementioned Letter, pray that God the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, would bless and prosper him.

They endeavor to bereave him of his Throne, and make him the most miserable
of men.

So that having by these unrighteouss courses brought upon themselves to be
driven out of Bantam, they now known not how to excuse the matter.

And being disappointed in their design, as fallen into the pit they dug for
others, they are at their wits End and know not what to do, some body must be
found out upon whom to lay the blame, and the next that comes to hand is the
Netherlandish Company, Hic mihi turbat aquas.

But had they sat still, or had (as they would make the world believe) kept
themselves neutral, according to the will and footsteps of their Masters, or
had they in stead of helping the Old, assisted the young King, these
difficulties nor questions had never happened.

And how can the English with any show of reason dispute or call in question
the Soverainty of the young King, seeing it is a known case, that the sending
and admitting of Ambassadors and Agents, together with the making of Treaties
and Alliances, are true tokens of a Sovereign power, and therefore all such as
admit and receive Ambassies, do thereby acknowledge the Soverainity of them
that send the same, which is also further owned by proffers of Alliances and
Leagues, which cannot be erected but between Sovereigns.

Now as to the second Fact; to wit, that after the Netherlandish Company had
got the young into their snares and perfidiously brought him under their yoke,
they then should have forced him to the expulsion of the English, This we have
before manifested to be a false fiction: For first they ought not in a case of
so great weight and tendency make such odious and malicious positions, except
they had clear and convincing proofs at hand: There is not any one of the
Witnesses, which the English Company have produced, that mentions a word
thereof, or that speaks of snares into which they of Batavia caused the young
King to fall, or of any yoke under which, against all fidelity, they had
brought him.

It is true, they produce in the Process one Mr. Wait, speaking of the
departure of the English by order of the King, who relates only of an hard
contest between the said King and Major Sr. Martin, before that order of
causing them to depart, could be obtained from him; but being, says he,
altogether under the power of the Hollanders, he was necessitated thereunto,
but besides what might be alleged to weaken this assertion, he confesses,
that what he witnesses thereof is not of his own knowledge, but that he
believes it to be true upon the credit of persons of worth, which of it self
is enough to reject the same, as also it is very observable what on this
subject the foresaid Sr. Martin and others with him do declare: to wit, that
the Contest was not to dispose the King to the ejection of the English, but to
turn away the wrath and indignation of the King (which because of their
assistance of his Father and the Rebels, he had taken up against them) and
thereby to deliver them from the loss of all their Goods yea life it self, as
out of revenge he had determined against them, which also was so taken and
acknowledged by the English Compagny at Bantam, when by their Agent they
returned thanks unto the Ministers of the Netherlandish Company for their
protexion. But suppose the King had not been so incensed against them, as has
been said, and that he had not had design at all to be avenged on them, yet the
mere consideration of his security might have moved him to their ejection, as
being assured they assisted his Rebels, and in apprehension, that they as well
versed in warkely affairs might from England or Elsewhere reenforce themselves
with ships and Soldiers, besides the Perilous neighborhood of their warehouse
to his Castle, his Father laying round about Bantam with his army, and keeping
it yet for some months besieged, and he as yet by his auxiliarie forces having
only the sea open, might if he were not very circumspect, be again suddenly
assaulted, or at least, the English remaining in Bantam by spying all
opportunities, make discoveries to the enemies, so as in way of providence it
was requisite for him to do what he did.

If the Letters, (brought in the Process) be reviewed, it will appear, whither
it be true, as is imputed to them, that they of their own motion did send
succors to the said King, yea so as thereby (if their most injurious aspersion
were true) to get him into their Klutches or on the contrary, that is was don
at the Great and instant entreaties of the young King, after that al ways of
reconciliation had in vain bin attempted.

But forasmuch as this assistance and succor is thus averslie and after so
odious a manner declaimed, it will be necessaire to relate the same somewhat
more fully, and more clearly to discover the occasion and progress thereof.

After the Rulers of Batavia had ripely consulted about the constitution of the
affairs of the young King, they thought meet, as also has before bin
specified; to proffer their service of Mediation, between the Father and the
Son, to which end they wrote two Letters in civil and obliging terms,
testifying their purpose and affection in a way of frindship to accommodate and
lay by their questions and differences, and with that Intention sent their
Plenepotentiaries with Letters, the one to the Father, and the other to the Son
in a Ship prepared to that end, after that some days before by way of advance
they had also sent three other Ships, but considering those Plenipotentiaries
went unto a place where the parties on both sides were in arms, and not being
certain whither they might meet with friends or enemies, they therefore judged
themselves obliged to put them into a posture of defense, furnishing them with
weapons in case of necessity to make resistance to sueh, as forgetting the
right of nations (especially in that confused state of things) and the respect
that ought to be given to public Persons, might possibly attempt to lay hold
on and injury them, and this is that fleet of Ships and Barcks which in these
and other of their writings they so much enhance and make a stir about, as sent
to Bantam to land our Troops there.

Our forefayd Plenepotentiaries having waited some time for an answer from the
old King, received none, and not knowing what properly the intention of these
men might as be to them, sent a good troop of men, to inform themselves more
exactly of the State of things: but being a little advanced, they met some
Europeans, who by an English Man enquired of them, wherefore they came to
intermeddle with the differences of the two Kings? whereupon being answered,
that they came as friends to procure a peace between the Father and the Son,
they soon perceyved the design they had formed against them, for forthwith they
saw a great troop of men gathered together, making ready some fire Ships and
other vessels fitted for war, making a show as if they would fall foul with
us, who verily were to few in number to have thoughts to attempt any thing
against so powrful an enemy, who seemed to come against them, which also they
did and came to the deed it self, shooting at us, and with their Canons, which
were Managed by the English, they much endammaged our Ships, whereby they
perceived, that they not only, did not accept of our Mediation, but also that
they treated us as enemies: upon which they of Baravia soon resolved by force
of arms to deliver the young King out of this Misery and the brinke of death,
and to this end to send a suffitient power of Ships and Men to this assistance,
which also had that success, as before is mentioned.

The assistance which the English gave to the old King, whereby the displeasure
and wrath of the young King was so kindled against them, even to their ejection
out of his country, is so notoriously known to the world, that besides the
proofs which the Netherlandish Company have already alleged, they yet
further could bring hundreds of convincing testimonies, but let only the
letters of the young King which he sent from his besieged castle to them of
Batavia be produced, and you shall hear him complaining in these formal words.

What reason has the English Captain to help to shoot at me, without once
laying to heart that he is resident in my Land and Zea, this is yet worse that
Mr. Boyer (one of the English Merchants at Bantam) causes my house to be shot
at, not once thinking, that I desired the King of England that he might be
Captain in the English Lodge: Irequest of Capitain Moor Speelman, that he will
warn the English not to com on shore, to shoot at my house, and assist mine
enemy also with powder, forasmuch as he has his residence in my Land, but not
in the Land of Sultan Agon (the old King) as also to persuade them not to
follow mine enemy, seeing they drink my water and dwell in my Land, and that
they close no more with Sultan Agon; if Captain Moor have love for me, let him
be pleased forceably to Insinuate this unto the English, that above all things
they shoot not at my house, nor betake themselves to Land.

The which also in a following Letter to the Major St. Martin he further
confirmed.

Beside the said King did afterward make often Complaints to the whole World,
that the English had given all assistance to his enemies: yea one of the
English themselves, relates in a certain book printed at London, in which he
gives an account of what passed at Bantam during the war, and of which he was
eyewitness, viz. that they of the English nation had furnished the old King
with most of all the Ammunition he had, and withal, that they used all means
possible to encourage and encense the Javans against the Dutch: and thereupon
he concludes, that they (to with the English) had no ground much to rely upon
the frienship of the Netherlanders, in case they once came to set foot on land:
Notwithstanding they are not ashamed to deny all this, yea in the Memorial
delivered by Mr. Chardin (while he was here) and seconded and further confirmed
by a certain Memorial, which the English Companine, together with their
demands, delivered over to the Commissaries, who were to decide on both sides,
namely, that the English in all this while, had kept themselves altogether
neutral between the said opposing parties, and conclude from thence, that the
King had not out of his motion caused them to depart, but through the Instigation
of the Major St. Martin (a thing most notorious false) as at the beginning they
clamoured and published to the whole world, namely that we drove them out with
force, after a most barbarous and unheard of manner.

So then it appears on both sides that their departure was caused by the Kings
order, who only has power of Command in his country, and whose command they
were bound to obey: But it is denied, and there is reason to protest against
Injury don us, as if we had bin the effecters of the same. Ought not then the
English to prove that fact? undoubtedly yea; but have they any proof thereof?
certainly non at al. Can the English Satisfy with this, that in stead of proof
they only produce obscure, suspicious discourses to which no credit will be
given* save only by such as are praeoccupied, and ready to take, whatever may
serve to feed and streng then an anticipated humor.

They remonstrate, that in a certain hearing, which the King of Bantam granted
them soon after the obtained Victory; they could not perceive the least
distemper, or Indignation, but that indeed there were some hot words passed
between the King and Sr. Martin: But, I pray, is this a proof to convince as to
a crime, especially of such nature as this? We neither may nor can rely upon
the gesture and countenance of any, muchless of a King, especially of an Indian
Prince, who seeks to keep in his wrath and indignation, and to take his best
opportunity to avenge himself: Is there any one that ever heard that Major Sr.
Martin instigated the King to chase the English? Is there any thing produced in
the least tending thereto? Certainly nothing: on the contrary the said Sr.
Martin as a Man of honor, a Gentleman of quality, and surpassing modesty,
wisdom and learning, wholly takes of all sinister suspicion, in protesting that
the intercourse with the King was intended to no other end, then to divert and
take of the King from the design he had to destroy all the English, and should
he not to do so, have had much more reason, then, as the English Company in
their Demand given in against the Netherlandish Company, and more amply in
their Reply do assert, that he some years before had caused the Agent of the
English Company to be murdered, together with their Comises, of which they
afterward made such heavy complaints, yet nothing followed thereupon: Is it
then to be wondered at, that he was so greatly incensed because of this their
action, that except he had forcibly bin diswaded by Sr. Martin, he had caused
them all to be slain? They endeavor also to make the Netherlandish Company or
their Ministers suspected to have an hand, likewise in this Action, but they
are necessitated to protest against this outrageous injury and Calumny, They
who at the same time were so highly out of favor with the old King then
reigning, would certainly be far from having an hand in so horrible a Murder,
by which they could not in any respect be advantaged: If that William Kaef the
Netherlandish Resident at Bantam, when the Old King overthrew and saccaged the
City, was fain for to escape massacring, to retire to Batavia leaving all the
Goods and Effects of the Netherlandish Compagnie in their Lodge, which
undoubtedly was by some English, though perhaps without the knowledge of their
Masters in part stolen: should not then the English, had they not in that fury
been protected by the Netherlandish forces, have been in far greater danger?
Would there have bin any appearance for any of them to have escaped with their
lives? And nevertheless according to their saying, It is the Dutch that caused
all these Troubles and Mischiefs to befall them. But the English were not then
of that opinion, nor used such kind of Language, when they came so solemnly to
declare their thankfulness to the Dutch, for their good will and protection
they had showed to them.

But how little the English Company does agree with it self, and how often
they are out and in in their writings, does hereby appear, that in what they
have deposed by form of demand, themselves say, that their Agent and the
Council the day after the raising of the Siege, were with the King in his
Castle, to take of and appease, if possible, the Chagrin and wrath of the King
so hot against them, and that they then found him by far less incensed then the
Hollanders said he was: Farthermore in their said Memorial, which they
delivered over, together with the foresaid pretenses, and to which by the
foresaid Demand they adhere, they say, that the same day they were introduced
to the King, who laid before them many accusations, not so much as permitting
them to speak a word for their defense.

It follows then, that whereas they said, when they were brought in before
him, they could not in the least perceive in his posture or visage any token of
indignation, is a pure untruth.

But yet further to convince the English Company of the falsehood of what they
impute to the Netherlandish Company, and that after so odious a manner, it is
only needful to look over the Answer of the Netherlandish Company to the
complaints brought in by Mr. Chudley and Sr. John Chardin, in May 1682. whereby
the same does testify a super-abounding affection and perfect readiness to
contribute to all means and ways of reestablishing of the English Company
there, by employing their Credit and Authority with the present King, as also
to reconcile the two contending parties, according to a Medium therein
proposed, and so consequently to recall our Troops out of the Kingdom of Bantam.

Now it can easily be conceived, they would not have done all this, in case
that by their means that War had been raised, or that they had had an hand in
the chasing of the English, or had caused the same, muchless if it had been
true, as is maliciously imputed to them, that for many years since they had
plotted, for to draw, and by that means to engrosse the whole Pepper-Trade
unto themselves, and that as they affirm, to the inestimable damage of the
English Compagnie, of which shall be further spoken hereafter. And seeing then
it is a false Fiction, that the Dutch Company should have driven the English
out of Bantam, although perhaps it might have been (which nevertheless was
never directly nor indirectly attempted) that by suggestion they might have
somewhat contributed thereunto; yet hereby also their pretended action of
damage and reparation does fall of it self.

But that of which also, they have made an hideous cry and tintamar, by an
express complaint in their foresaid Memorial, which in May 1683. they presented
to your Puiss. Highnesses, and which they more fully dilated afterward, is
first, that the day after the deliverance of the King, one James de Roy,
Lieutenant of the Company of Major St. Martin, should have taken down the Flag
named the Banner of St. George, planted upon the House of one Captain John
Fisher, that the said Fisher thereupon making haste to his House found the said
de Roy with a part of the Flag in his hand, having torn the rest, and given it
to his Soldiers to make Scarfs of.

Again the said Soldiers had drunk out part of the Drinking-wares, and taken
away the remainder together with his household stuff, and withal evilly
entreated him, and placed some black Moors in his house.

Thirdly, that five days after the departure of the English from Bantam, our
Soldiers came into the House of the English Company, and had sent some Moors
(of their Servants) to fetch of the Pavillion that was displaid on their Lodge.

Now suppose all this to be a true story, and might thereupon give credit at
the deposition of one man only, to wit, the foresaid Captain Fisher, and that
also in his own case, for further Witnesses are not brought for proof of this
Fact, yet it is considerable the Actor hierof was in service of the King, and
not as is very abusively said, the Lieutenant of Major Sr. Martin, and
consequently the Soldiers were Bantamers: and it is worthy of observation,
forasmuch as this Jaques de Roy is so ofsen brought upon the Stage, that he is
a person, who somewhile before the War, was retired from Batavia to Bantam,
for to shun his Creditors, whom the young King took into his service, who had
in and during the War signalized himself by special services, wherefore also
he was highly esteemed by the said King, though himself were a man of little
worth.

Again, although the foresaid first Flag (for there is mention made of two)
might have been the Banner of St. Gerge, yet could it not bring any respect to
a private House, and thereby to be freed from the disorders that in time of
War are incident, more then to any other House, and what concerns the Banner
and use made thereof, is that a thing to cause so much disturbance, that a
Captain of the King should with his Soldiers take down from a private House
the English Flag, after that the King and the whole Nation looked on him as an
Enemy of his Person and of the State?

What concerns the second part, although the relation thereof might perhaps be
according to truth, which nevertheless is doubted of, and cannot be prooved,
it does not touch the Dutch Company, yea though it had been don by their Men:
but must be imputed to the disorders in War.

As to the third point, if the recital thereof be according to truth, and that
they sent some of their black Servants to take down the Banner, which
notwithstanding is nothing but a report and recital of some Chinese, this does
nothing to the charging of the Netherlandish Company, the said Chinese might
be demanded, how they came to know those Moors were Servants of the Dutch
Soldiers and not of the King, as is much more probable, seeing it should be an
unusual thing, at least unheard of among us, that simple Soldiers should have
Moors to their Servants: but posito that the Dutch Soldiers might have been
Executors of the Kings Order therein: the Kings Right is incontestable, and he
might take away the Pavillion of the English, after that he had banished them
out of his Country, yea though the Soldiers had don it without the Order of
the King, which is not likely, yet had it been nothing else then a Military
Insolence, which also must be ascribed to the disorders of War, where the Laws
of Modesty and Deceneie are seldom regarded, and therefore without injustice
cannot be imputed to them, who in the time of the War at Bantam did represent
the Government of Batavia, who never were behind hand, in that respect which
they ow to Crowned Heads; but what need is it to have recours to conjectures,
whereas by a certain produced deposition it is apparent, that it was the King
himself who commanded the Flag to be taken down from the English Lodge: and
what is said of the Dutch Flags which after the Victory were planted upon the
Castle and in other parts of the City, deserves no Answer, since its a known
thing that we never pretended any territorial Right in Bantam, muchless put the
same in execution: but however the said Flags served to no other purpose, then
to make it known to the Dutch Troops, who after the raising of the Siege, were
posted in the principal places of the City according to the usual practice
every where in like occasions. The Flag upon the Castle was set up by order of
the King to show honor to the Dutch, however placed under the Flag of the King.

Besides they of the English Company complain, that the day after the raising
of the siege, the Dutch Resident Kaeff with a Troop of Soldiers and some
Masons came into the English Lodge, and ordered the English Agent forthwith to
take away the Galeries, and to nail up the Window: And that thereupon a Dutch
Renegate, who was in his Company, began presently to threaten him, that if the
English did not, he himself would do it, which also, as they say, he really did.

This seems to be an outrageous act don to the English: but if we look into
the nature of the thing, it will be found to be a mere trifel, which they ought
to be ashamed to urge in this manner:

The History is this: Because the Dutch Company would not be troublesome to
any, they chose their own Lodge at Bantam for their Magasin of Arms, and other
provisions. Now the Wall of their said Lodge touching part of the English
Compagnies dwelling House, and in that said Wall they formerly had had no other
opening beside a casement: Somewhile after the English by permission of the Old
King, who let slip no opportunity to affront and molest them, made great wide
windows, to open and shut, and besides that a Gallirie also which hanging four
or five foot over the ground of the Hollanders Lodge, gave the English
opportunity to hear and see all what ever the Dutch did: The young King
considering that our said Lodge in time of War, was like to be the great
Magasin, thought it requisite to prevent such dangerous consequences as might
be occasioned by overtures, being over a place of the House, where the Powder
and other Ammonitions of War did lay, and out or through which windows or
overtures in the wall, the English at all times might com upon that place, at
their pleasure: and knowing the English would not seal up those Windows, nor
suffer the Galliries to be taken away, he thereupon sent his servants with a
Dutch Renegado, to cause it to be don; and it may perhaps be true, that the
Resident Kaeff was at that time present, forasmuch as it was don in the said
Lodge of the Dutch Company, where according to his Office he was to take care
of the Magasin.

What evil can herein be imputed to the company, and what accusation can the
English frame from this? A thing which way so ever they take it, was carried on
by the authority of the King, and according to their saying executed by a
Renegado, the very naming of whom shows, that he was not in service nor under
the Oath of the Netherlandish Company.

And what besides this they lay to the Charge of the duteh Company, is, first
that they should have taken from the English their horses, and some other
things, and have eonstrayned them to take out the Powder that was in their
Ships and to bring it a shore.

Secondly, that what they, at the command of the King to depart, in all haste
had laden in their boats to bring aboard their Ships, in which neither the
people of the Country, nor the Soldiers did any ways hinder them, but passing
by the English Chalops which kept the watch at sea, they were by them arrested,
under pretense, they had order to suffer nothing to be carried aboard the
English Ships, and in case they persisted to do it they should be shot at, by
which they should have bin necessitated to return to Land with their Boats.

Thirdly that they complaying of such violence to Major St. Martin, he in a
jesting way should answer, that al was don by order from the King, whereas no
man on Land, Soldier or others had a hand in those Violences, but all was don
by our Soldiers only.

Forthly, that the Chief of the French requiring of the King restitution of
four Chists with Silver which was taken from him, the King should answer in the
presence of the Dutch Commissarie, that he knew nothing thereof, and that he
would do no injury neither to them, nor to the English, Danes, or other
Strangers trafficking in his Country, and in case any wrong had bin don unto
him, since the Hollanders had set foot on Land, that he must require reparation
from the Duth Commissarie, or the General at Batavia.

Fifthly, that at the last instance made, to cause the English to quit Bantam,
being, as they say, the day before their departure, our Soldiers came into the
English Lodge, robbed the Chambers, and took away all they found there;
whereupon the people of the country (so far were they from doing them the least
wrong) permitted them to seal up their Magasin and undertook to keep it safe
for them.

What Concerns the first point, sorasmuch as they do not only not say, much
less prove, that our men should have taken the horses and and other goods from
the English, nor that they should have constrained them to fetch their powder
out their Ships, therefore the Netherlandish Company will pass that by, as a
thing which does not concern them, and of which they are wholly discharged by
the often forementioned Memorial annexed to the demand or pretense which the
English Company deposed and delivered in, and to which they do refer
themselves, in which is expressly said, that Pagoran Diepa Panerat, one of the
principal Ministers of the young King, or rather the first Minister of State,
had don the same, although they put it in such General and ambiguous
expressions, in all appearence, as if they would lay it to the Charge of our
Men: Only what concerns the Powder, the Dutch company does say, that in case
it were true, that the English were fain by the order of the King to unlade the
same and bring it to Land, that it was don not because the King stood in need
of it, for he was abundantly furnished by them of Batavia, but only to prevent
that they might not deliver the same to his enemies, and besides it cannot be
ill taken, that the King in that confused state of things, would oppose and
hinder the English from going so often too and fro to their Ships.

Concerning the second point, namely that we should have hindered the English
from departing out of Bantam, and also to have stopped their boats, has not
the least appearance of truth in it, forasmuch as themselves confess, that we
assisted them with our Boats and Chalops to carry their goods and wares a board
their Ships, when none of the people of the country, or their Boats could be
obtained to be serviceable to them therein, so little acceptance they had with
that Nation, and how can this hang together, that we should have procured their
departure from the King, and then when they were ready to depart, to hinder
it, yea the English disagree in the very position laid down about it, for
their foresaid Memorial, to which by their demand, they refer themselves,
dictates not that their men were stopped at Sea by our Barks that kept watch, but
that it was don by the watch of the Netherlandish Company on Land at the mouth
of the haven, to wit, as having order to suffer nothing to be carried from Land
to the English Ships.

The complaints which thereupon they should have made to Major St. Martin
comprehended in the third point, as if he had in a kind of mockage, answered
them, that all was don by order of the King, what does this make to the thing?
for put the case the said Major (which not withstanding is not granted) might
say, not in way of Mockage, but in earnest, that it was to be imputed to the
order of the King, which goes farther, if those orders had bin executed by our
Soldiers, although that also is denied, and of which the English do produce no
proofs, yet could it not any ways prejudice the Dutch Company as not being
bound to be responsable for the Orders of the King.

Touching the Kings answer to the Chief of the French his complaint, and that
the King remitted him as to that matter to Batavia, of which is spoken in the
forth point, although it should be al true, which notwithstanding is not
proeved, it might be that the King did it in such a manner to free himself from
the trouble of those complaints, as well knowing that one of his Ministers had
ceased on the said Chefts with silver, which however it be, neither concerns
the English, nor obliges the Dutch Company to be answerable for the same.

But to demonstrate yet more fully how far the English Company in all their
pretenses do aberre from the truth, they say, as may be seen, in the proposal
of the first point, that the people of the Country, to wit, of Bantam, the day
before they, viz. the English were caused to remove, did indeed com into their
Lodge, but without doing of them the least Injury, and yet they say in their
foresaid Memorial anexed to their Demand, that at the same time they took away
all their provision driving the English out of the Chambers (except one named,
Wait) and took possession thereof; but a little after the Dutch Soldiers came
who further made spoil, and carried away al they found there: But this can not
be: because the English had a day before their departure carried away for
Batavia in the Ships of the Dutch Company all their Movables, to the very
least thing of any worth (their departure, as themselves say, being the 12. of
April) and so nothing could be found: and besides all the time of their
inhabiting of Batavia. which dured more then a year, they never brought in any
complaints, by a List or other way showing, what the Dutch Soldiers had robbed
them of, but on the contrary they came and rendered their thancks to the
Government there, for all the assistance had been don unto them, without the
least mention of wrong received: which had they don, the Government there might
forthwith have caused inquiry to be made, and if it had been true, procured
satisfaction; but letting that occasion slip, and being negligent therein, and
then to bring in their Complaints hier, and that without any proof, the Dutch
say is a thing altogether unreasonable.

As has before been alleged, the English Compagny from the beginning has
pretended reestablishment at Bantam from the Dutch Company, and to which in
their Demand or Memorial of their pretenses delivered over to the Commissaries
of both sides, they remain persisting, with request that the same may in the
first place before all other things be debated and determined, taking for their
foundation, that that reestablishment had already bin accorded and agreed to
by you Pu. Highnesses and by the Netherlandish Company.

But now not yet content with that, they praetend by their foresaid Demand
besides the recalling of the Dutch Troops, the delivering over the Castle of
Bantam in its entire, for to put into it a strong Garrison, pretending that
otherwise they would not be willing to settle themselves again there, yea they
require that the whole City be delivered up, and put into the hands of his
Majesty of Great Britain.

What concerns the first, it is true indeed that the English Company did
pretend all this, but it is evident, that the Dutch Company has as little
right to this, as to give over the whole City with the Castle, according to
their further pretense: We who have only a simple residence, without
participation of any Authority, which does wholly reside in the person of the
King, it is for us a moral impossibility to dispose of that which Privative
does belong to the King, and so to reestablish the English there against his
will without intrusion into his right, and violating his Authority: for
although the Dutch Company has their Troops in Bantam which serve the King for
a Garrison to defend his City, yet that affords them no Territorial right, nor
the least power to bring in again those whom he has banished from thence.

And as they cannot by force of Arms oblige the King to take in again the
English, and resettle them in Bantam without usurping upon the Right of
Nations, and deservedly to incur the disaffection and hatred of all the
Princes and Potentates of Indie, so can they with as little ground do it by
threatenings, without injury to their fidelity, which must be the stay of the
credit of the said Company among the Indian People, who otherwise would not
rely upon their word, nor enter into Alliances, and combinations with them.

But they of the English Company aver, that herein not only consists their
interest, but they have also the promise of your Pui. Highnesses, they only
requiring the Execution of the same.

As to their Interest the Dutch Company will easily grant, that the foresaid
reestablishment might be for their advantage (although they, as has before bin
said, declare that except they have a Garrison, and the Castle for their
security they would not reside there) so also undoubtedly it would be for their
interest, if the Dutch Company did admit them into those Countries, where we
have our spices, and which we possess by propriety, with seclusion of all
others: and so also it would be for the interest of this State and the
Inhabitants thereof, that the English would permit them the Navigation and
trade in the Barbados, Caribes, New England, the Virgins, and many other
Countries they possess in America, where they will not suffer us, nor other
Nations of Europe so much as to pass their Seas. But the Question in this case
is not, the convenience or Interest but the Right. If that the English Company
could groundedlie maintain, that the Dutch Company is bound to resettle them
there, and prove it by clear and convincing reasons that they had driven them
out of Bantam, the business were at an end.

But to come to their second ground, viz. the promise of your Pui. Highnesses,
and of the Dutch Company, which was made to them Anno 1683* that they should be
resetled there: To this we have before said, and do now again answer, that
those Proffers do serve for an undeniable proof, that the Dutch Company sought
nothing more then to continue with the English Company in an intimate
Friendship and Confidence, which by that accident at Bantam did seem in some
measure to be interrupted, and that they would rather decline the advantages
which by such excessive expenses they had acquired there, then to remain
continually in contention and quarrel with the English Company: and hereby the
Dutch Company oblitterate those aspensions and calumnies imputed unto them, as
if in all appearance they for their own Interest and wilfully had incited and
fomented the Differences, and war that followed thereupon, between the Father
and the Son, and had two years before formed that design by corresponding with
Pangoran Diepa Nagara, and so contrived the banishing of the English out of
Bantam: For if all this had bin true, they should very badly have managed
their business, after that all was thus succeeded, and they with such excessive
charges attained what they aimed at, they should then without any pressing
necessity have made so little account of it, and that for the mere pleasure of
them, who for all the pretenses, and justification of their complaints made,
had nothing to show in way of proof: Indeed had the English Company, at that
time rested satisfied, the Dutch Company should have been obliged to perform
the same, how praejudiciable soever it might afterward have been to them: But
forasmuch as the English Company was then pleased wholly to reject and break of
those transactions, whereas we so desirously longed that they might be brought
to a good end in England, and for which, as is said, the Lord Ambassador
Citters was fully authorized, all the time that business of Bantam was in the
terms, as they were, during the Negotiations, and treaty with Mr. Chudly and
Sr. John Chardin in the Hague, and which the English Company also caused to be
broken of: whereupon it falls now to be enquired into, whither the Dutch
Company, since the case of things be wholly changed and of an other nature, be
still obliged to the same.

It is evident that at that time the State of the affairs of Bantam was not
known, namely, whither the war between the Father and the Son were yet
remaining, or ended; if it were determined, whither by an accommodation or by
the Sword: If by the Sword, who of the two, the Father, or Son, remained
Conqueror, and thereby become master of the Kingdom: During which uncertaintie,
it can not be judged imprudencie, that the Netherlandish East-Indie Company (by
whose forces the Son was delivered from his inevitable ruin, and by whom he
further was to be assisted, so as not to fall under the oppression of his
rebellious Subjects) should interpose their credit and authority by the said
King for the settling of the English in Bantam, if he were Conqueror, and with
condition the English should yield no further assistance to the Father: and in
case the Father were Victor, that then the English should employ all their
credit by the Father, that the Dutch Company might enjoy a good Neighborhood
with them: and these Proffers of the Dutch Company, while things stood thus at
an uncertaintie, were the more excusable by the King of Bantam, because they
endeavored thereby to prevent the succors which the English Company pretended
to send the Father, and also because at that time it was not yet known, how far
the English had made themselves irreconcilable to him.

During this uncertaintie of things, the Dutch Company made these Proffers,
ye^ Sr. John Chardin himself projected an accommodation between both the
Companies, in which mention was made of the withdrawing of the Dutch Troops
out of Bantam, and what each Company should be obliged unto in those
occasional accidents, as are thereby specifyed: But as it pleased the said Mr.
Chudly and Sr. John Chardin very unexspectedly to break of those treatises,
which already were so far advanced, and they also of the English Company on
their part did reject the Proffers, which not only your Puis: Highnesses in
their foresaid Answer to the Memorial of Sr. John Chardin, had made: But those
also, which the Ambassador Citters afterwatds did make, in the name and upon
the account of the Netherlandish Company, after that the foresaid Sr. John
Chardin was returned into England, and the English began again to bring in new
Demands, after they had very disdaingfully rejected the former, hereupon the
Netherlandish Company judged, that they stood no longer bound to theirs,
especially when as somewhile after by tidings on both sides in Letters from the
Indies it was signified, that the War at Bantam was ended to the advantage of
the young King, who reobtained the Kingdom as possessor, had taken the Father
prisoner and subdued his Rebels, so that consequently the Netherlandish Company
had now no longer any ground nor pretext, either to treat with the English
about their resetling in Bantam, as being, Territorium plane alienum, muchless
to promise the same, and the rather because the now reigning King having
considered the conspiracies of the English with his Father and rebellious
Subjects, has declared them his pernicious Enemies.

Seeing then from all what has been said, it clearly appears, that the
English Company did rather chose to expect the uncertain Lot of War, then to
agree with the Dutch Company, while it was time, about their Setlement, it is
therefore reasonable that they now acquiesce, and leave the Netherlandish
Company unmolested, as to their reestablishment.

It follows therefore, that it is wholly besides the purpose, at present to
make use, or apply to their advantage the foresaid answer of your Pu:
Highnesses to the foresaid Memorial, after they had rejected the foresaid
Proffer, and had determined not only to reestablish themselves by force of
Arms, but wholly to become the Masters of Bantam, and to that end to set out a
formidable Power of ships and Men at sea, though their Entreprize, as they
themselves depose in their foresaid reply, was stopped by his Majesty of happy
Memory, and not suffered to put forth to sea: now this was the reason that
they having formed and being busy about this design, that the Charges thereof
might not be fruitless, did not only reject the Proffers a foresaid, of the
Dutch Company, but made such Excessive Extravagant demands, as the delivering
up of the whole City of Bantam with the Castle, although they well knew that it
neither would nor could be accepted of us, or in case they were accepted, that
then they had attaind to what they aimed.

So long then as the State of things was at an uncertaintie, and it might be in
doubt who of the twain father or son should have the upperhand, though the
son seemd by far more likely to prevail, nevertheless the Netherlands
Company judged, that in such a Constitution of things, it could not be il
taken that they entered with the English Company into a treatic, how they might
after the best way procure a peace between the two Kings, by interposing their
credit and service of love, and obtain the reestablishment of the English
Company; but all this being rejected by the English with disdaing, and that
uncertaintie which then was, being brought to a Certainty, so as the whole
business is become of quite another Nature, that the Netherlandish Company
should yet be bound to perform, what they in the uncertain state of things did
show themself willing unto, the Netherlandish Company apprehends, that it in
justice cannot be required. For first thereby, besides other considerations,
they should certainly be made loosers of the sum of six times hundred thousand
Ryxdallers, which the King of Bantam by evening acounts is found endebted to
the Dutch Company, and of which a Contract is made with him in particular, in
which he grants to their Company the Traffic in his Kingdom, so long and
until, he shall come to be in a condition to repay the same to the Dutch
Company: But that which besides this deserves to be reflected upon, is, that
the King of Bantam hearing a rumor that the English Company persisted in their
pretense of resettlement in Bantam, with the calling back of our Troops
thence, wrote to the Government of Batavia (even after he had surmounted al
difficulties) that in case they should consent therein, and withdraw our
Militia from thence, he should not be able to continue master in the work, but
be necessitated to retire to Batavia, in hope protection should not there be
refused him, and thereupon besought in all humility, that they would at no hand
forsake, and reduce him to such extremities, but perform their word given him
by solemn Contract. And how should the Netherlandish Company be officious to
their readmission, seeing the English Company in their writings do so
scandalously decipher him, as namely, that he has with the approbation of all
the world acted against the English Nation as an Enemy, so unthanckful, so
barbarous, with such antipathie from their Blood, without any the least reason
or provocation: that his Majesty of Great Britain without injury to his
honor, may not rest till he have secured himself of that City and whole
Kingdom, until he have got reparation, and that the sooner, because he is,
according to their saying, however he bear the title of King nothing else but a
perfect Slave of Batavia, and a Servant to their will and pleasure. High words
indeed: also it is a wonderful Dilemma of the English Company, to wit, if the
Old King of Bantam have any right to Bantam, and the dependencies thereof, then
the conclusion is most solid, that the same is devolved upon the deceased King
of Great Britain, of happy Memory: And if the right appertains to the young
King, as the Hollanders affirm, then he has acted by the approbation of the
whole World, against the Subjects of his said Maj. as an enemy, and according
to what they have deciphred him.

Concerning the first member of this Dilemma, being it is evident, that the Old
King of Bantam having given over his Kingdom to his Eldest Son the present
inheritor thereof, he now cannot afterward give it to another: the conclusion
that follows hence is directly against the English Company. What concerns the
second part of the Dilemma, if it be the young King to whom this right does
belong, and and that it be true, that he had acted against the English as an
enemy ungrateful, barbarous, and with antipathie to their blood, without the
least provocation, as indeed may be drawn, but nevertheless not to justify the
Demand of the English Company against them of Holland, neither can any thing
therefrom be concluded against the present King of Bantam, in case he has
justly, as he affirms, testified his displeasure against the English: But in
the mean while we cannot let pass, without taking notice that while they are
pleased to heap up reproaches upon the young King, then they say; he had acted
against the Subjects of his Majesty as an enemy, ungrateful, barbarous, with
an Antipathie of their Blood, without the least provocation, further, that he
is unworthy of alliance with them; but when the business is, to load the Dutch,
and make them the Authors of their expulsion out of Bantam, then they alter
their strain, and say, that they could not so much as observe neither in the
words or gesture of the King the least thing manifesting any displeasure
against the English, or that he had a design to make them depart out of his
Connirie.

Here, they name the present King a Slave of the Netherlandish Company, and in
their Reply they say, that the Old King, when he sat on his Throne, would
willingly have been a Slave of the King of England, and thereof would have made
his triumph.

In their Reply they give the mentioned King the name of a pauvre Idiot, a vile
person, une Chetive Creature, etc. And in their letter they wrote to him in
March 1683. they still him a wise King, to whom they say, they will send a
person with the Title of Envoy or Extraordinary Ambassador, with full power to
conclude an everduring League and Alliance with him.

The same Title the King of Great Britain gives him in his fore mentioned
Letter, stiling him a wise and righteouss Prince.

On the contraire, the English Company in their Triplick, call him a
Murderer, and Contemner of the public faith.

And how odiously the English Company in their foresaid Letter (annexing also,
what they wrote to Pangoran Diepa Penerat, Chief Minister of State) have
deciphred the Netherlandish Company, and in what esteem we were already with
them, even before the War of Bantam was kindled, the Dutch Company will
refer to the judgment of the Reader.

It has already been mentioned, that the English Company in their foresaid
Demand did pretend, besides the calling back of the Dutch Troops, the
deliverie also of the whole City and Castle of Bantam, or else as they said
they would not make their residence there again.

But besides that the English Commissaries, who were to decide the differences,
did as has been said, Judge, that this their demand, as altogether ungrounded
and unreasonable, ought to be denied, so it is a thing that does sufficiently
refute it self.

For before the War of Bantam the English Company had nothing there but a
Lodge and simple Residence, without the least Territorial right: The King after
he had triumphed over his Enemies, knowing that they had afforded all manner of
assistance to them, and not being at rest as fearing their future miscarriage,
and especially in this juncture of time, while he was yet surroundred of
Enemies, causes them to dislodge: Hereupon now the English Company comes and
demands the deliverie of the whole City and Castle, having had nothing there,
but as has been said, a Lodge for Commerce, and this they will have from the
Netherlandish Company, who have no right at all to dispose thereof, except
they chase away the King that now is, out of Bantam, for to put it into the
hands of the English, and except they could make it out, and to be agreeable to
justice, that the Dutch Company should threaten the present King to abandon
and deliver him over to the will and mercy of his Enemies, by remouving of
their Troops out of his City, whereas we are bound by Contract to maintain
and protect him, should now falter in our word, and falselie our trust, a thing
which may nor ought to be required of us.

But it is said, that the Dutch Companies intent in this, is to monopolise all
the trade of Pepper, and get it to themselves wholly, and to this they ad, that
seeing the Netherlandish Company having besides the trade of Cloves, Nutmegs,
Mace and cinnamon, all this would make them able to maintain a fleet to
withstand the mightiest King in Europe.

But besides that there are so many other great countries in the Indies, where
Pepper may be had, and to which the English Company have acces as well as the
Dutch, and that it is impossible, the Netherlandish Company should get them all
under their power and command, it ought to be called to mind, that when we were
in treaty here with Sr. John Chardin, that we proffered the Pepper-trade in
Common to the English Company, and that by the Contract which should be made
with the King the half should be allotted them, of which an article was at that
time made, and presented in writing, but by the said Sr. John Chardin rejected,
so far was it from the Dutch Companies intention to design the same, as its
maliciously laid to their charge, and not only as to the Pepper-trade, but they
add also in their Triplick, that the aim of the Dutch Company by this their
Residence at Bantam, was besides the Pepper to engrosse, to their inestimable
profit, the Linnen-Trade also: Whereas on the contrary the Dutch Company in
their foresaid proposals to Sr. John Chardin, beside the Pepper did admit them
to the half of all other Wares, including the Linen, which they also refused,
and notwithstanding in their said Reply they further say, that all the endeavor
of the Dutch Company was whether by right or wrong to keep things in the state
to which they had brought them.

The English Company had first set in their Demand they gave in, that by our
residence at Bantam we had made the Pepper-Trade more difficult to them, but in
their forenamed Reply they say, that we made way to Monopolise the whole, so
far may men be blinded by passion.

To what the English Company do further depose in their foresaid Demand, viz.
that those in pay, of the Dutch Company, had upon the coast of Mallabar
assaulted their Men, given fire on them, and this also to deprive them of the
remainder of the Trade in Pepper they as yet had there: The Dutch could have
wished, they had more clearly declared themselves as to the place where, the
foresaid Coast laying along the Sea the space of an hundred miles, as also to
the year and time when, together to what Ship or Barck and upon what occasion:
as on their part the Netherlandish Company is ready the show after what
manner they dealt with our Men upon the West Coast of Sumatra, to wit the
English Fregat.... in September 1683 being upon the Coast before Air Bangi,
and sending out his Chaloup with about forty armed Soldiers against our men
sitting in a Boat, shooting once and again with Bullets: As the Ships the
Society, the Praesident, the Eagel and Bercklie Castle, who at their return
homeward from Bantam, Cormandel and Bengale, in July and the following Months
of the year 1681. overwintering at the Island Mauritius, committed no small
insolences and mischiefs, especially they of the Praesident, and Eagel, robbing
and carrying away all what they found, notwithstanding all the complaints and
protestations made by the people of the Dutch Company, of which we have
authentic evidences in hand to show.

We pass by, that the English for so many years have made it their constant
work, to debauch our men at Bengale, on the Coast of Cormandel, at Bantam, and
elsewhere, to draw them out of our service, to serve them on their Ships
homeward, (being weakly mand) against the protestations made from time to time,
as is to be shown by evidences in hands of the Netherlandish Company: That the
English Company is intended, as themselves have divulged, to set down and
build a Fortress on Priamang, seated on the West Coast of Sumatra (a country
under the command of the Dutch Company, and where they have a Fort lying) which
by the first Letters that come, we expect to hear that it is already effected,
they having sent to that end diverse Ships, with Men, Materials, and warlike
furniture: the mischief that hence will ensue, may easily be gessed at.

It is a thing inconceivable, how they dare publish to the world, that the
Dutch Company by a contract made with them of Macasser November Anno 1667, and
as they say, printed at Batavia, by which the English Nation was secluded from
Commerce in that Country, and of which after the expiration of eighteen years,
they make complaints in their writings: whereas since that time two solemn
Treatises have been made betwixt England and this State, beside the forenamed
agreement of the year 167^, by which all pretenses and actions whatsoever,
which might have been against each other, were nullifyed as if they never had
bin, and although this should not be urged, the Dutch Compagnie is ready to
justify what they did, by holding forth to the world their right in making
such kind of Contracts: But what in this case falls into special consideration,
is, that the foresaid Contracts made by the Netherlandish Company, was during
the War with England, or before the peace concluded anno 1667. was, or could
be known in the Indies, or at Macassar.

So then although all were true what is published in a certain writing, and by
Mr. Skeleton, Envoy Extraordinary, annexed to the foresaid Memorial, presented
to your Puis. Highnesses, that we had violently seized on the Factors of the
English Company, carried them away prisonners to Batavia, and then spoiled
their Houses (although the Company, upon their Faith and Credit, are ignorant
hereof) what could this any way help the English, or why should they thus
exclaim about it? Has not England about this very time taken by force
New-Netherland from our West-Indie Company, and can the Dutch West-Indie
Company frame an action or pretense hereon? Without doubt, No.

The English Company finding themselves destitute of necessary proofs to make
good the matter of Fact, they charge the Dutch Company with, which
nevertheless can only serve as the foundation of what they urge, as also being
convinced of the unanswerable confutation made by the Dutch Company, with most
evident demonstration of the ungroundedness of the assertions of the English
Company, they betake themselves in their Reply to reproaches, calumniating the
Dutch Company in the conduct of their affairs after so odious a manner, and
in such extravagant terms, as must needs make all men astonished, how people
of honor and understanding should so forget themselves, yea so far as that the
English Commissaries themselves in the conference with the Commissaries who on
our side were, to decide the business, were constrained to abhor and manifest
their discontent thereof: And although the Dutch wanted no matter to convince
the English Company of their intolerable injury, and to disabuse the World
of so many untruths falsely imputed to them, yet they judged it better to
abstain and with a modest silence to pass it by, then enter into further
contest, and make the rupture of the Friendship (which is so necessary between
both the Companies) yet greater, and the wound incurable.

The Demand the Dutch Company made by reconvention, consisted herein, that they
at the earnest request of the English Company had lent or accommodated them
with four Vessels, for the transport of their persons, merchandises and effects
from Bantam to Batavia, under promise by writing to pay the Dutch Company for
the freight, these Ships they kept some months, making use of them in stead of
Magasins, and for preservation of their wares and effects, to the great
prejudice of the Dutch Company, who stood in very great need of them, in
respect of their traffic, but could not get them again what means and
insinuations soever they used, till some months after.

The foresaid Ships were,
Europa, big 600. last. New Middleborow, big 500. last. Delfshaven, 450. last.
't Wout, 100. last.
The freight of which amounted to the sum of 13900. L. starl.

It remains that we speak a word or two of what happened before Gamron in the
Gulf of Persia, over which also the English Company make their complaints,
first, in a certain Article in their Triplick, and afterward by that writing
which the foresaid Mr. Skeleton Extraordinary Envoy, annexed to the foresaid
Memorial by him presented the.. of May last to your Puis. Highnesses, of which
mention was made in the beginning: This Article contains first complaints
against the conduct of the Fleet, which lately the Dutch Company had in the
Gulf of Persia with which they intended, as they say, to shut or lock up all
the Havens of that great Kingdom.

And the said Memorial did further make like complaints that the foresaid Fleet
conducted by Reynier Kasembroot, with violence should have hindered John
Goldsborough Master of an English Companies Ship called the Merchant of
Bengale, from onlading the said Ship with Boats, thereby detaintng and
disturbing him in all their traffic and business: but after examination this
complaint will be found as groundless, as any of the other.

The case is this, that the Netherlandish Company time out of mind, having a
Comptoir or Lodge, together with their Traffic at Gamron, and other places in
the Kingdom of Persia, by virtue of an agreement made with the King, and of
Privileges granted unto them, the Persians in many points set themselves in
opposition against them, offering them many outrageous and unjust dealings, and
forasmuch as no reparation or redres in the least could be obtained by any
requests made, although accompanied with extraordinary and costly presents,
at last it burst forth into deeds, for to repair the injury don, and this is
the Fleet of Ships, which the Dutch Company for this end had in the foresaid
Gulf, with which they took from the Persians the Jland Kismus with the Castle
in the said Gulf, not far distant from Ormus or Gamron, not for to keep, for
it could not have been serviceable to us, but with intolerable charge, only
it was don to induce and necessitate the Persians to condescend to reason,
which it also effected, whereupon the Netherlandish Company restored the I
land and the Castle to the Persians again.

What then concerns the first complaint, that with that Fleet the Netherlandish
Company sought to shut up all the Havens in Persia, the Netherlandish Company
is necessitated to say, that it is very strange to them, that they should so
wrongfully and maliciously misconster the good intention of the Netherlandish
Company.

Has the Dutch Company with that Fleet of Ships done them the least wrong or
hinderance, as to what concerns their coming or departing in or from the said
Havens? yea even during the time that the Netherlandish Company lay with the
whole Fleet before Gamron? Have not the English sailed in and out, as they
pleased? They cannot but say, yea.

What reason had they then to judge so maliciously of their design.

But in the foresaid Triplick it is said, that the Netherlandish Company
intended indeed to set on foot and effect it, in case the English had not by
hap appeared there with a greater number of Ships, not to be hindered or forced
by the Netherlanders.

But before they were arrived there with any number of Ships together, did not
the foresaid Fleet and the said Kasembroot let their single Ships go in and out
freely and unmolested, yea even their Boats and Chalops: and with them also
their Ship Williamson laden with Goods fraited for and belonging to the
Persians? Surely they cannot deny it.

And what concerns this great number of Ships, which they say they afterward
had there, if compared with the number, especially the greatness of the
Netherlandish Ships, all mounted, mand, and in gallant equipage for War, they
were strong enuff, had they had order, to have kept them out of Gamron.

The Netherlandish Fleet lay a year and some months before Gamron, and the
English were but a small time with their foresaid number of Ships there,
whereas before and after there came other, yea single Ships, to and fro, and
yet according to their own confession no stop or hinderance was don to any of
them, save only to the Ship called the Merchant of Bengale before mentioned,
and of which shall be further spoken by and by.

From whence then is it evinced, that the Dutch Company had such a design, or
what proofs do they bring, to justify what they depose in their foresaid
Reply? Not one only word.

But to say how the case stands, the Netherlandish Company undertakes to show,
that the said Kasembroot, commanding the said Fleet in Chief in the Gulf of
Persia, did all the time of his abode there, by express order and command,
forbid, that no let or hinderance should in the least be offered to the English
Ships in their navigation and traffic in that Kingdom.

And, that the Dutch Companies management might be rendered the more suspected
and odious, they conclude thus in their Triplick, these are the means which
the Dutch Company uses, for to get great advantages upon the Indian Princes,
yea have thereby constrained that great and mighty King of Persia himself to
subscribe such Articles, as they would, that he might have his Havens again
open and free.

But besides that the Netherlandish Company has not, by all those excessive
charges, covenanted or acquired any greater privileges or advantages then they
always formerly have had in the Kingdom, except only a discharge from taking
yearly a quantity of Silk at a certain price, (at least so far as concerns the
last) according to the advice, which the Dutch Company lately received
concerning the same.

And in case the great Princes of the Indies, and the King of Persia himself
were so easily to be forced by such a Fleet as the Dutch Company had there, we
have reason to demand, why the English Company did not make use of that
occasion, namely when they had present such a Fleet as they boast of before
Gamron, for to recover of the Persians payment of the Tol or Custom of Ormus or
Gamron, which they say was so truly due unto them, but unjustly detained by
the Persians, at least as to the greater part thereof, and which in the year
1654. they demanded, as to the half thereof, amounting to many hundred thousand
gilders, of the Netherlandish Company, to wit, of the Goods which the said
Dutch Company until that time had brought and negotiated there, but was then by
Committies on both parts denied to be due to them, and they remitted to the
Persians themselves, where they so often importuned them by their complaints,
yea even to the threatening of them, but neverthless could never obtain any
satisfaction: would they not in all that time, wherein these pretenses have
since increased to such vast sums, if it had bin to be acquired with such
facility, have used these ways and means? Undoubtedly yea.

And thereby we may well judge, what was the Constitution of that Fleet they had
there, and of which they made such high boasts.

But in case they should yet attempt the same, could the Netherlandish Company,
although much prejudiced thereby in their Traffic, as undoubted would so be,
could they thereupon lay any action to the charge of the English Company, and
make pretenses upon them?

Surely the Dutch Company would wish, yea, entreat in a friendly way, that if
such a thing should be, our Ships might have the like usage, as the Dutch
Company did show to the English.

As to the second complaint, namely the hinderance occasioned to the Ship the
Merchant of Bengale in her unloding, by detaining and disturbing them in their
Traffic and undertakings.

Thus stands the case: The Dutch Company, as has been said, having War with
the Persians, or being as they say, in statu belli, and laying with their Fleet
before Gamron, there came tyding from Land, that there was an intent to board
our Fleet by fire Ships, and so cause us to leave the rode; whereupon we
resolved to cease on all the Persian Boats we could get, and make them fast
behind our Ships: the foresaid English Ship laying in the midst of our Fleet,
and making preparation to unlode in Persian Boats, the said Kasembroot desired
them to be pleased to desist, and not to make use of Persian Boats, especially
they being accustomed to take in their loding in the night time to be very
early at land to unlode, we offering them all the Boats of our Ships to assist
them, that we might be certain, that they under the cloack of coming to the
foresaid Ship, with their Fireships, and passing by our watch, might not before
we were aware, fall upon us; but they of the foresaid Ship rejecting our
proffer, there came among our Fleet a Persian Boat, mand with ten or twelve
Persian Rowers and one English Mariner, having by him two cases with Rosewater,
which the said Kasembroot caused to be brought into his Ship: the English
Interpreter presently thereupon making his complaint, the former proffer of our
Boats was renieuwed, and at his going away bid to take with him the two cases
of Rosewater, which he refusing, they were put into his Boat, and so he
departed.

This being the true history, we demand, what herein was don amiss by the
Dutch Company, to cause the English to make such clamorous complaints about
it? Or whither if any hinderance came thereby to the English (for damage they
had none) they brought it not upon their own heads?

The goods they accuse us to have taken out of the Persian boat (which
nevertheless they themselves confess were again restored, and put into the
boat where the English interpreter was) They aggravate, for to make them, in
all apearance, to seem of great importance; were only the foresaid two Cases
of Rosewater.

In the Contra-Protest, the foresaid Kasembroot has made against the Protest
of the English (and to which they appeal) the whole carriage of the business
is nakedly and clearly made to appear, for which reason they also thought
good, as the said Extraordinary Envoy annexed the said Protest of the English
to his foresaid Memorial, here withal also to deliver over this Contra-Protest.

Thereby more plainly to show: first, the Proffer we made of our boats for
their service to unlode their said ship, partly to take away the hinderance
they Complained of, and on the other hand to prevent the mischief, which by the
going to and fro of the enemies boats, (which they might have pretended to be
don only in the name and by the order of the English) could have befallen our
fleet.

Again, that the goods taken out the Persian Boat, but again restored, were
nothing but the said Cases of Rosewater.

And thirdly, that the English, during our dissension with the Persians, did al
what they could to incense them against us by Calumnies and falsehoods, which
also did remarkeably retard and set back our Business at Court, to the great
loss and detriment of the Dutch Company.

Espetially by the promises they made the Persians with six ships to chase us
from the Rode of Gamron, and out of the Fort of Kismus, whenas nevertheless
our said fleet consisted of nine ships, and of which the Dutch Company expects
due information at the return of our fleet.

And hereby the directors of the Netherlandish Company hope they have
Satisfied the desire of your Puissant Highnesses, having manifested on the one
hand the Notorious ungroundednesse of all the Complaints brought in by the
English, and on the otherhand the integrity of the Netherlandish Company in
these matters: and that thereby your Puissant Highnesses will the more be
incited, to appear for the Dutch Company in so righteous a cause, and to
Protect them against al and Every one, that shall endeavor for this any ways
to molest or injury them, which by these presents we most humbly request;
having judged that the importance of the Cause, and the multiplicitie of
enormous acts where with the Netherlandish Company is Laden, and that we
might refute al these things in a due manner, as also give pour Puissant
Highnesses a Grounded information, did require this our Large Exhibition of
things, and which in all humility we beg may not be unacceptable to your
Puissant Highnesses.

Was subcribed:, P. VAN DAM.


Contra Protest to the ungrounded agrievances of the English Residents DANIEL
EDWARDS and FRANCIS SNAPE, both in service of the Honorable English Company
here in Persia.
Gentlemen,
WE received yesternight the Protest you sent, and greatly wonder at the
aggrierances you make about a Persian bark passing through our fleet, and for
some time detained by us, which you affirm to have hired for to unlade the
Merchandises, of the ship called the Merchant of Bengale, to which we answer,
that it can not be unknown to you that we have more then a year secured this
Rode and Gulf with eight or nine ships, and notwithstanding that our
Commissioners for the compounding of the differences are at present at the
court of Persia, yet our men some few days ago have in a most hostile manner
bin driven from land, our flag taken down, and we as is noysed by them of
Gamron, threatened to be assaulted here in the Rode by a number of barcks,
manned with Persian Militia, so that nature treacheth us to be upon our watch,
and we thereuppon thought it necessary to sease all the Persian boats, yet
without the least thought of doing any let or hinderance to you, as your
selves know that in the unlading of the ship Williamson was not don, although
the said ship both going and coming was fraighted with Persian goods, but on
the contrary the day before yesterday, when we stopped the Persian Barq, which
would have passed our fleet, we proffered your Truchman David all our own boats
for to help the said ship to unlade, both because we would not hinder them in
their affairs, as also to secure our own ships from the threatened mischiefs,
(which by the swarving of the Enemies boats, pretending to com in the name and
by the order of the English) might have befallen us. But it seems, you were
rather prone thus unjustly to accuse us, that we should have detained your
goods (which were only the two cases of Rosewater) then to embrace the kind
proffer of our Boats: The said, David your Truchman took the two Cases into
the scute wherein he came from land, at the same time the the barck came abord
to us, and himself carried them away with him: And for as much as it seems to
be your wonted manner, by intricate and practiced insertions to render things
obscure, this your ungrounded accusations are not strange unto us, as having
since this expedition, with much patience born all the calumnious reproaches,
wherewith you have a long time sought to make us odious to the Persian Nation
to retard our agreement with them, Espetially promising them, to make us, with
six of your ships, to retire out of this Rode, and out of Kismus, of al which
we have suffitient proofs to show, and withal to make it appear, we had not
given you the least reason or provocation thereto: Al which has bin to the
apparent damage of our Company, and besides this ye seek also to constrain
us to let our Enemies barcks to pas and repas our fleet: Wherefore in the name
of the Netherlandish East-Indie Company we do Protest we are innocent of all the blood, slaughter, losses and inconveniences which shall result from thence,
on the one or other hand: Given in our ship, the Blaw-Hulck laying in the Rode
before Gamron.

Was signed, R: Kasembroot. W: Licochton. J: V: Ackersdijck, and W: van
Bullestraten.

Contra-Protest against John Golds-bourough, Master of the Ship called the
Bengale Merchant.
THe first of June Old style was delivered unto us, by them thereunto
appointed, your Protest, which having considered, we do find in it many things
are mistaken, and by you pressed contrary to truth, and therefore judge it
unnecessary, to give any answer thereunto, then what was don by our Insinuaion
and Protest delivered over the thirteenth and fourteenth of May N. S. to the
English Residents Daniel Edwards and Francis Snape, of which herewith a Copy
is inserted, and wherein the true state of things is fully contained, and to
which therefore we refer our selves: however we profess to be blameless, that
you by missailing to shore came to touch ground once and again with your Ship,
as not being to be imputed to us, but your own unadvisedness: Besides we did
never forbid or withstand, that any Barcks should come to you to fetch Ballast,
and is therefore the fault of the Persians, to whom the loss of time you say,
to have bin hindered by it, is also to be imputed and not to us, and withal
would let you know, we are not such unqualifyed persons as you are pleased to
term us, which rather may be imputed to you, as sufficiently appears by your
unreasonable Protest, and therefore are not any whit troubled, in case any
dispute do arise thereabout between you and our Company, to be able, as having
justice and truth on our side, to answer what has bin don: Wherefore we
Protest in the name and on behalf of the Netherlandish East-Indie Company,
against you, John Golds-borough, Master of the Ship called the Bengale
Merchant, and against all other, whoever they be or whom it may concern, that
we are blameless, and not bound to make satisfaction of your ungrounded
pretenses, or what any one may unjustly lay to our charge. Given in our Ship
the Blaw Hulck, laying in the Rode before Gamron the 19. June 1685. S. N.

There stood underneath and was signed Reynier Kasembroot, and Wouter van
Bullestraten, In the Margin, Delivered by us underwritten, And was signed,
Andries van der Linden, and Jacob Stuyt.

EXTRACT out the Register of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty Lords the
States General of the United Provinces.
Thursday the 18. Julie, 1686.
IT being deliberated by Resumption upon the Memorial delivered up by the
Directors of the East-Indie Company of these Countries the 22. of June past
unto their Puissant Highnesses, containing the consequents, and for
satisfaction to their Puiss. Highnesses Resolution of the 31. May past their
Information upon the Memorial of Mr. Skeleton Envoy Extraordinary of his Royal
Majesty of Great Britain to this State, delivred up the second of the said
Month to their Puiss. Highnesses, touching the affairs of Bantam, it is
understood and found meet by these, to request and give Commission to the Lords
van Else and the other Deputies of their Puissant Highnesses for Outlandish
affairs, to signify to Mr. Skeleton Envoy Extraordinary, that the differences
concerning what has past at Bantam in the year 1682. being arisen to the State
they are now fallen to his said Majesty and their Puiss Highnesses, They are
prepared and ready to tread into a Conference and treaty thereof, with the
said Mr. Skeleton, so he be authorized thereto in behalf of his Majesty, or else
with them, whom his said Majesty shall be pleased to authorize thereto, and in
that Conference and Treaty to show, that their Puiss. Highnesses have no other
meaning and intention, then to preserve and cultivate with his said Majesty and
Subjects an entire amity, and that they pretend not to do any wrong unto his
Majesty's Subjects. Hereunder stood, Agrees, with the foresaid Register, Was
subscribed

H. FAGEL.

EXTRACT Out of the Register of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty Lords
the States General of the United Provinces.
Twesday 1. July 1687.
Was read at the Assembly the Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville,
Extraordinary Envoy of his Majesty of Great Britain, requiring reparation for
what passed at Bantam, according to what is here inserted word for word.

High and Mighty Lords,
AS there is nothing which may contribute more efficaciously to the maintenance
and estabishment of Leagues and Alliances made between Kings and States, then a
Just and and prompt reparation of the Wrong, Injuries and Losses, which the
Subjects of one receive from the other.

Therefore the Marquis of Albiville, Envoy Extraordinary of the King of Great
Britain, finds himself commanded by the Order of the King his Master to put
your Highnesses in remembrance of the most considerable losses, enormous
Injuries, and the Honor of his Subjects most sensibly wounded by the
surreptitious, ungodly and insupportable proceeding of the East-Indie Company
of this State at Bantam, and to require without further delay an entire
Satisfaction proportionable to the Enormitie of the attempt, and to the Losses
which the Subjects of his said Majesty have suffered. Given at the Hague the
30. June in the year 1687.

Signed, The Marquis of Albiville.


Which being deliberated upon, it is found good and understood, that a Copy of
the foresaid Memorial shall be put into the hands of the Lords Everwyn and
other their Puiss. Highnesses Deputies for the affairs of the East-Indie
Company, to visit and examine the Commissioners of the Directors of the said
Company thereof to hear, as also to take the Considerations and most wise
Advise of his Highness the Prince of Orange, and to make report of the whole
to the Assembly here, and that forthwith an Extract of this their Puiss.
Highnesses Resolution, and a Cope of the foresaid Memorial shall be sent to the
Directors of the said East-Indie Company of the Praesidial Chamber at
Amsterdam, and therewith written to them, that against this day fortnight,
which shall be the 15. of the present Month, they send hither some
Commissioners well instruct^d upon the foresaid subject, that so the next d^^
early in the morning the said business may be taken in hand.

Was paragraphed B. van Schelting^. Lower stood, Agrees with the foresaid
Register. Was signed, H. Fa^^^

EXTRACT out of the Register of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty Lords
the States General of the United Netherland.
Weddensday 23. July 168^.
WAs heard the report or the Lords Verbolt bolt and other their Puiss.
Highnesses Deputies for Outlandish affairs, having in order and to satisfying
of their Resolution, as commissionated the 1. of this present, visited and
examined the Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville Envoy Extraordinary of his
Majesty of Great Britain to this State, by which he requires reparation for
what is passed at Bantam, more largely mentioned in the said Memorial and in
the Brief notes of this present: upon which having deliberated, is found good
and understood, that to the said Marquis of Albeville for answer to the said
Memorial shall be insinuated, that their Puiss. Highnesses by their Resolution
18. July of the year past 1686. have declared to Mr. Skeleton, as then his
Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to this State, that the differences about what
passed at Bantam in Juin 1682, being arisen to the State that they were
devolved to his said Majesty and their Puiss. Highnesses, they are prepared and
ready to enter into a Conference and treaty thereabout with the fore
mentioned Mr. Skeleton, if that he on the part of his Majesty be authorized
thereunto, or otherwise with such as his said Majesty should be pleased to
authorize, and in that Conference and Treaty to show that their Puiss.
Highnesses have no other meaning nor intention, then to maintain and cultivate
with the said Majesty and his Subjects an entire amity, and that they do not
pretend to do any wrong to his Majesty's Subjects; and that therefore their
Puiss. Highnesses could not have expected otherwise, from the justice of His
Majesty, but that the said Conference should have been set on foot, and some
person thereunto authorized: and now as yet they adhere to reniew the foresaid
declaration, and say, that they still are ready to enter into Conference and
treaty about the foresaid Differences with the said Marquis of Albiville, in
case he on the part of his Majesty be authorized thereto, or otherwise with
such, as his Majesty shall be pleased to authorize, and in those Conferences
and Treatises to show, that they have no other meaning nor intention then to
preserve and cultivate with his Majesty and Subjects an entire Friendship, and
pretend not to do or suffer any wrong be don unto His Majesty's Subjects, and
therefore they cannot conceive or apprehend what the foresaid Memorial, and the
terms in which it is couched, would have, or signify; And an Extract of this
their Puiss. Highnesses Resolution shall by the Agent Sproussen be delivered
into the hands or the Marquis of Albiville, to serve for his Information,
thereof to make use so and where it shall be thought fit; and also an Extract
of this their Puiss. Highnesses Resolution shall be sent to the Lord Citters,
their Puiss. Highnesses Ambassador at the Court of His Majesty the King of
Great Britain, to be subservient unto his Information.

Was paragraphed, Francis Verbelt. Underneath stood, Accords with the
foresaid Register, Signed, H. FAGEL

EXTRACT out of the Register of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty Lords
the States General of the United Netherlands.
Friday the 1. Augusti 1687.
WAs read at the Assembly the Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville Envoy
Extraordinary of his Majesty of Great Britain to this state, together with
an Appendix Containing complaints against the East-Indie Company of these
countries, as to what should have bin attempted at Metocapatans and at
Baktancapas according to the said Memorial, and the appendix inserted here by,
from word to word,

Fiat insertio:

Whereupon being deliberated was found good and understond that a Copy of the
foresaid Memorial and appendix shall be sent to the Directors of the East-Indie
Company of the Prasidial Chamber of Amsterdam, for to address an information
thereupon to their Puissant Highnesses, and nevertheles also a Copy and
appendix thereof shall delivered into the hands of the Lords Verbolt and other
their Puissant Highnesses Deputies for outlandish affairs, to revise, Examine
and make report of the whole here at the Assembly:

Was paragraphed, John vander Bergh, vt, Underneah stood, agrees with the
foresaid Register, Was signed H. FAGEL

Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville Exhibited the 1. August 1687.
High and Mighty Lords,
THe Marquis of Abbiville Envoy Extraordinary of the King of Great Britain
has received niew orders from the King his Master, to signify to your
Lordships the continuance of nieu injustices and violences offered by your
Company of the East Indies at Mechapatans and Batancapas, as they shall see by
the adjoined writing containing the Particulars thereof.

And as his Majesty finds himselft informed of the answer of your
Highnesses the 23 of the month past unto the preceding Memorial of his above
said Envoy, is willing to believe that these things have bin committed without
your knowledge, so like wise he does not Doubt, but they are of ill savor and
disapproved by your Highnesses, and that he cannot but expect from your justice
and friendship the reparation of these infractions, and the damages which the
Subjects of his Majesty have suffered in these quarters, His Majesty will
willingly also be persuaded by the asseurances which the said Memorial gives
him that your Highness will not neglect to send precise and Effectual orders,
to the end that for the future the like attempt, be no more used: as the
fairest means to maintain a good intelligence betwixt His Majesty and this
Commonwealth, to which his Majesty, on his part shall not fail to contribute
always, what in reason may be desired of him. Given at the Hague this 1.
August 1687.

Signed, Marquis of ALBIVILLE.

APPENDIX.
THe English East-Indie Company in a Request they presented to his Majesty of
Great Britain 29. June 1687. say, they have had advise by diverse Ships niewly
arrived, of the injuries and violences the Hollanders have exercised against
the English on the Coast of Cormandel, under pretext of having war with the
King of Golcondach.

That they made themselves master of Metchalapatam, after the same manner they
ceased Bantam.

That they had prohibited the English eight weeks ago to Traffic there any
more, although, they have had their residence and Magasin there eighty or
ninety years together, and that the Magasin was built by the Company, and
that they bought the very ground upon which it was erected, as may be seen in
the writing of the Governor and the Dutch Counsel at Pollicats.

That the Hollanders in time of peace did by main force Assault the Fort the
English had built at Batancapas, seated on the West-Coast of Sumatra, to secure
themselves the better of the Traffic in Pepper; that in contempt they brake
and tore in pieces the Pavillion of his British Majesty where is was set up.

That they there pillaged the English.

And because it is apparent, the design of the Hollanders is to appropriate to
themselves by violence, injustice and oppression the whole Trade of the
East Indies, The said Company hops that his Majesty with the first will
apply such remedies, as may praevent the continual invasions of the Hollanders.

A Letter of the Holland Company from Pollicat, written the 13. August 1686.
St. N. to Mr. William Gifford, Praesident of the English Company, and to his
Counsel at the Fort St. George.

It contains in substance, that the said Hollandish Company has bin evil
treated, some years since, beyond the Coast of Cormandel, as also the North
Coast from Onixa, unto Metchopotam, by the Ministers of State, and the
Governors of the King of Gulcondach.

That they often required justice, but to no purpose, and for to revenge
themselves of these injuries, they had seized Metchopotem 16. July. That for a
marck of the Friendship they desire to maintain with the English Company, they
permit them, to embarck in their own Ships out of their Magasins at Metchepotam
the effects the English had there, as also to take out in Barcks all the
Provisions and all the Marchandises which shall com in their Ships to
Metchopotam for to put them into their Magasins, yet upon condition that they
shall carry none out of the City of Metchopotam, to sell them to Merchants,
or to the Subjects of the King of Gulcondagh, until the said Company shall have
satisfactions.

The sooner to obtain this satisfaction they had resolved not only to hold the
mean while the said City in possession, but also to prevent that the English
should not suffer any damage during these troubles, they though it fit to
advertise them to bring into their Magasins the effects they had in the
Country, and that within the space of 6. or 8. weeks, reckoning from the time
the Company had seized the said City.

That they will also have, that the English Company advertise theirs of all
what they shall cause to be brought in, to the end that by the good order they
shall hold, the inconveniences may be prevented, which otherwise might befall
the English.

Answer of Mr. William Gifford Praesident, and of the Council of the English
Company, dated.... 1686. written to the Hollands Company at Pollicat. It being
in substance: That the English Company are not ignorant of the design the Dutch
Company now has in making themselves Masters in Metchapotam.

That they could wish that the ruinating of the English Commerce were not the
main end, the Hollanders now a long time had practiced these tricks:
Particularly at Bantam and since at Chimatra, but that the Hollanders were as
yet to be responsable unto them.

That they have remarqued that the Hollanders in all their Treaties they make
with the Indian Kings and Princes, have endeavored to exclude their Company
from Traffic in their Countries and Ports.

That this design is now discovered and resented in Europe, that their
presumption is to great to imposer Laws to the English in such a manner, that
now, since they are possessors of Metchapotam they will have the English to
comport themselves as to their commerce there, according to their pleasurre:
But the English are not obliged to follow their order, That the House and the
ground upon which their Magasin is built is an heritage acquired by their own
money.

That upon these grounds they counsel them to act with discretion and agreeing
to justice.

That they in the mean while will continue to traffic as formerly, and counsel
the Hollanders not to interrupt them, least they should attract sad
consequences contrary to their interest.

A Letter of Mr. Samuel Pots written to Mr. Clement du Jardin, and to the
Council.

Indraponna the 23. Sept. 1686.
It contains first a Relation of the state of some of the affairs of the
English Company.

Mr. Pots remits them to a certain Paper of 26. July to be informed of the
cause of his voyage to Batancapas, and why he took with him so much of the
Companies effects.

He gives reasons, why he did not wayt for orders or command, before he
undertook the voyage, that it was, because the two Sons of the Emperor and the
Mandarins, had extremely pressed him to hasten the voyage, as much as could be,
lest the Hollanders being advertised of the design of the English, should
settle themselves there before, and so the English be frustrated of their
entreprise.

He departed, as he says, from Indraponna 16. July, taking with him forty men
Domestics and Soldiers, going with them to Pagason, to meet there the two Sons
of the Emperor Manuncabbo, who waited them to go together to Batancapas, being
in all 2000. there to settle the English. That after 5 days voyage they
arrived with the Emperor and the two Princes: and that the Emperor had bid the
English to settle themselves there.

That three days before they arrived the Hollanders had settled and fortified
themselves there upon a Rock on the other side of the river, notwithstanding
that the Emperor and the Mandarins had commanded them to retire, telling them
that he had given the Country to the King of Great Britain to set the English
Company there; and that he had never given permission to the Dutch to reside
there.

That the same day of his arriving at Batancapas the Hollanders had sent him a
Protest, counselling him to take good heed of the Malayans, because they
complained that the English had wronged them by settling at Bancola and at
Indraponna, places which, they said, had formerly bin given unto them.

That at the end of two days he sent them another Protest.

That the day after his arriving, the Emperor and his two sons arrived, and
themselves planted the Pavillion of the King of England.

That the Hollanders had fortifyed themselves, as much as they could.

That during the 3 first weeks there was no opposition of the one or other
part, although the English did often press the Mallayans to fall upon the
English.

That the Hollanders seeing that after all their persuasions, the Mallayans
would do nothing, forced them to retire further up into the Country, about
three miles toward the North, with design (as the Emperor and his men
believed) to wast the Country, the Houses, and especially the City of
Batancapas.

That to prevent this desolation the Emperor and his two Sons had drawn back
their forces, except 60. or 70. Mallayans, whom they left there for to cover
the works.

That after the retreat of these Troops the the Hollanders in Batancapas the
day after being the 23. August on a Friday and on the Sunday had shot with
their greatest Canons at the people as they came to the Market in hope to make
them afraid, and no more to supply the English, or to bring them any more
provisions.

That a Canon-bullet with two points striking a tree near the Pallisado of the
English Fort, burst asunder in two pieces.

That the day after they had dispatched Mr. Samuel Worly to the Hollanders to
know of them the reason wherefore they had shot at the Magasin of the English
and their men, and to tell their commander they would send a piece of the Bullet
of the King of England, and inform him of the affront they had don to his
Subjects, but the Commander not being then present Mr. Worly had don the
message to another Gentleman that had the command in the absence of the other,
the said Officer should have answered that he much wondered they should make
such a work of one or two Camon shot, and pointing with his finger to diverse
Pieces not far off from him, should have said, behold there a great many, which
shall be shot of, and not failing of his word, the same afternoon 21. August he
made two shot more, after the same manner as before.

That the Mallayans being affrighted, the greater part which remained with the
English, deserted them.

That the Hollanders being advertised hereof, embarked in their Chalops the
Mallayans with a number of Dutch Soldiers.

That they fired continally their great Guns while they were in their Barqs,
and at length having set foot on land, they with fury assaulted the small
number of Mallayans, which were for the English, set on fire their Pallisado,
and having put to flight the said Mallayans, they fell upon the English which
were at the Entrance of the Pallisado.

That a certain man named Mackolon, an Officer of the Hollanders, told him,
that except he sought to escape, the Mallayans would kill him.

That not fearing their threats, the Hollandders had commanded the Mallayans to
assault the English, but the Mallayans testifying their dislike by refusing to
do it, the Ensign-bearer set himself in the front, forced an entrance into the
Fort, being followed of some Mallayans and about 40. Hollanders.

That these Troops were no sooner past the Pallissado, but they said to them
and the other English, that if ever they entered more into the Fort, they might
expect nothing else, but to be fallen upon.

That at the very same instant the Dutch Soldiers and the Mallayans began to
plunder, carrying away all they thought was of any worth, and gave it into the
hands of their Commanders, and while they were thus pillaging, the Dutch
Soldiers in contempt, brake and tare in pieces the Flag of the King of England,
which was set up there.

That after all these Violences the foresaid Officer by order of the Commander,
prayed him to retire on the side of the Hollanders, promising in the name of the
Commander, they would restore the Merchandise, Effects, Silver-work, Canon and
all what might appertain to the English, and what should be found in the hands
of the Mallayans.

That he thereupon going to the Commander named Mackabon: he instead of
performing what was promised, answered him, he could do nothing in it, and that
what the Mallayans had taken, was justly acquired, and they could not be
constrained to render the same: however as for the Canon he would endeavor they
might be restored.

But coming again to him, after he had ordered men and a boat to take in the
Canon, there came some of his men and said, that in case we would have the
Canon, the Mallayans pretended to have 500 dollars for them.

Seeing then too appearently that in this and in all other things the English
were merely deluded, he embarked his Soldiers and men that were left, and
returned to Indrapanna the 25. August.

High and Mighty Lords,
WE have received your Puis: Highnesses Letter and therewith your Resolution of
the first of this present, with an insertion of the Memorial presented to your
Puiss: Highnesses, with an annex by the Marquis of Albiville Envoy
Extraordinary of his Royal Majesty of Great Britain, which said Memorial
contains Complaints against the transactions and doings of the Ministers of
the Netherlandish Company at Maslapatnam upon the Coast of Cormandel and at
Batancapas upon the West-coast of Sumatra, with their Request of reparation,
concerning which your Puiss: Highnesses require information by us. We may not
omit, High and Mighty Lords, to propose, with all dutiful respect to your
Puiss. Highnesses, that forasmuch as the said Appendix, is in effect the
contents of such Letters, which the English Company, as they pretend, have
lately received out of the Indies, diverse particulars are rehearsed in what
manner the things they complain of were there transacted, of which we, by
reason our Ships are not yet arrived, tho expected every hour, cannot have
perfect knowledge, may it therefore please your Puiss: Highnesses not to
conster it amiss, that we defer the same a while; however we say aforehand,
that the said complaints, as they are proposed in the said Memorial, are of two
parts.

First, against the conduct of our people, in their actings at Maslupatnam: And
secondly upon the West-Coast of Sumatra, with the wrong don to the English at
both places.

As to the first, we apprehend, that by the information we ^^d the last year
out of India, and by another hand, (setting aside what we are yet exspecting)
we want noe matter fully to justify the transactions of our people there, and
to demonstrate the ungroundedness of the foresaid complaints.

And what concerns the second, namely that by force we should have hindered
them, that they could nor might settle themselves in the Country of the Prince
of Indraponna, nor build Forts where they pleased, whereas that Prince,
according to what they affirm, had made over that Country to them, although we
can not directly discover the perfect state and constitution of that business,
until the Ships, which we daily expect be arrived, nevertheless we are able by
the information which we had the last year concerning it, to affirm from the
contents of those Letters, that the English by reason of the unhealthfultness
of that country, and the mortality it brought upon their men, with other
difficulties, were intended yea did actually prepare do depart thence, so that
we thought to have mentioned nothing more, nor troubled your Puis: Highnesses
with that business, but have past it by in silence, but seeing out the
foregoing Appendix we find it otherwise, we shall nor may not neglect to
produce with the first opportunity unto your Puis: Highness: our just
complaints, and withal to show the injuries, losses and intrusions of the
English upon the propriety and right, which we (as to the West-coast) for a
very long time have had and acquired, and which we yet have the actual
possession and enjoyment of, and can prove that they continually have sought to
debauch, and draw from us these Princes, who in acknowledgment of the benefits
and services they received from us, and among many other, that we had delivered
them at our exceediing charge and expenses out of the hands of their enemies
under whose yoke they were brought, and moreover at whose Request, we have by
solemn Contracts taken upon us, and promised to defend them against all and
every one who should offer to do any injury or violence unto them and for
which they have declared us for their Sonverains, and in especial also that
forementioned Prince of Indraponna, in whose Country they have built a Fort,
endeavoring forcibly to thrust us out of our possession, by depriving us of
the enjoyment we had: And yet they themselves confess that our people on the
West-Coast have potested against the injuries they did to them, while they
sought to settle themselves at Boucoulo and Indroponna, countries and places,
as the real truth is, belonging to us, of which the Contracts are in our hands
time out of mind, and yet they cannot deny, that their people have set
themselves against us by building of Forts to keep us out, yea they complain
that we by raising a Fort have injuried and prevented them, and yet this is all
the damage and wrong, according to their own saying we have don them. If
indeed the English could make it out and maintain, that they have a right, to
com into a country of which the Soveraintie is made over to us, beside other
engagements we have there, tho as they say, by consent of the said Prince
(although that is not by us owned as true) to build Forts thereby to draw the
Commerce into their hands, with the secluding of us, to whom the right is only
belonging, and yet we not have just cause, by raising a Fort to prevent them:
or that hereby they should have a main action against us: certainly this must
needs come from another law then hitherto has bin known to the world. They
accuse us that we by privative Contracts have sought every where to keep them
from trading, and yet they make their appeal to such like Contracts, which
themselves have made there. The English Company shows that they wilfully
continue in their custom to make always complaints how impertinent or
ungrounded soever, thereby to preoccupy the world, yea to make an impression
even in the inhabitants of this State it self, as if we sought nothing else,
but made it our whole business to oppose and be thwarting of the English, as
amongst other their complaints, this also may apparently be seen in the
business of Bantam, which occasioned such commotion and klatter almost in all
places, and concerning which the information stated by this Chamber above a
year ago, and presented to your Puis: Highnesses has clearly manifested, what
is to be judged of the carriage and conduct of the Netherlandish Company in
that matter, which in the first was so odiously set forth. But forasmuch as it
is our intention after the arrival of our Ships, whose return from the Indies,
we daily expect, more amply, by the permission of your Puiss: Highnesses to
treat of these and other things, when we shall have further light by the
evidences we expect in those Ships, and to show the injuries offered us; we will
herewith conclude, praying, etc.

Beneath stood, High and Mighty Lords, Your most humble Servants, The Directors
of the East-Indie Company of the Chamber of Amsterdam, and from thence, In the
Margin,
In Amsterdam 7. Aug: 1687.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 24. lin. 14. after young, ad King.

Page 82. six lines from the end, for Cope read Copy.

To the High and Mighty Lords, The STATES GENERAL of the United Netherlands.
High and Mighry Lords:
THe Chamber of the East-Indie Company of Amsterdam, has after the Assembling
of the Seventien representing the said Company, and brought your puissant
Highnesses Letter, with the annexed Resolution, both being of the first of
August now past, containing an Insertion of the Memorial of the Marquis of
Albiville, Envoy Extraordinary of his Royal Majesty of Great Britain,
presented unto your Puis: Highnesses, with an Annex; the said Memorial
containing complaints against the doing and transactions of the Ministers of
our Company at Maslupatnam, on the Coast of Cormandel, and at Batancapas, upon
the West-Coast of Sumatra, with demand of reparation for the Infractions and
damages, which the Subjects of his said Roya^^ Majesty should have suffered at
both those places: and concerning which your Puiss: Highnesses were pleased to
command us to bring in our Information: and by reason the said Chamber could at
that time give only a provisional Answer, dated the 7. of August, because the
Ships by which we expected our Letters of Advice from the Indies, concerning
these Affairs, were not as yet arrived. The last whereof, to which we were
then necessitated to refer our selves, being by Gods good providence some days
since safely come unto us, and that thereby we now are in a capacity to inform
your Puiss: Highnesses more punctually, we will with permission further say,
that we find the foresaid complaints to be twofold: First, over the evil
proceeding and conduct of our men at Maslupatnam, and secondly at Batancapas,
where we, as they say, continually have exercised injustice and violence
against them.

What concerns the first, it will be necessary to dive somewhat more groundedly
into that business, viz. After the Netherlandish Company had sustained and born
many injuries, damages, and violences by the King of Golconda, who was misled
by his Chief Ministers, till at last the whole Traffic of the said Company in
all the Northern Factories and Lodges was forbidden, and it was commanded to
all the Regents and Officers, to deprive all the Factories and Minister ^hereof
of all means of livelihood, and fu^^^er that no wever nor handicrafts men
should thenceforward deliver any thing of what they had underhand unto them,
all which was directly contrary to the Octroy and Patents granted unto the said
Company. That at last we judged it reasonable to have recourse to force and
constraint, hoping thereby if possible to bring the King to better and more
moderate thoughts, but before we would enter upon it, we though it best in an
orderly way, to make our intent known to the King, who is judged by all to be a
Prince of a good nature, and always has shown himself affectioned to the
Netherlandish Company, and the rather because the Government of Batavia, were
fully assured that these Infractions and Troubles were occasioned to our
Company only by the evilaffection and ill will of Madolena and Achena, the two
Chief Ministers of that Kingdom, who had so remarkably injured the said
Company, and invented a way to incite their King against us, without any right
information how the case stood betwixt him and us, which said Ministers a while
after by reason of inward commotions occasioned by their ill management of
Affairs came to a most miserable End. However the said Government of Batavia,
to the end aforementioned sent a Commissarie with full Commission and Power to
treat with the King, and if it might be to compose all things in a way of
amity: But our Commissary was so unsuccessful, that the King either could or
would not assent to what we judged to be right and equal, in so much that to
acquire the foresaid reparation and satisfaction, we were necessitated by force
of Arms, to assure and make our selves Master of Maslupatnam, in hope thereby
to induce the King the sooner to listen to an accommodation, which also the 16.
of July 1686. was effected without blood shed, and the Kings Militia was caused
to depart, whereupon we fortifyed the City against any invasion which might
happen. And because the English Company had a Factory and a Lodge there for
their Commerce and Traffic, we by Letters in August following, let them or
their Ministers know, that however we had the Power and possession of the City
in our hands, our intention was not in the least to hinder or incommodate their
Traffic, and that they might consequentially dispose of, and lade their goods
they had or could make ready in their Ships, together with all their Provision
and Marchandises, which might by Sea be brought unto them, and take it into
their Lodge, only that they should not dispose of them to the Subjects of that
King, nor after the expiration of six or eight weeks suffer any goods more to
be brought to them out of the Country.

This being thus passed, and we perceiving that the Enemy began to stir, and
to cast up works to besiege us, and gather an Army thereby to deprive us of our
water and other means of Livelihood, we sent out our men against them, and with
success raised the Kings forces by driving them out of their Tents: and
forasmuch as the Enemy had threatened and intended to burn the City, which was
all built of Combustible matter, thereupon the English, with diverse others of
the Inhabitants for fear of being consumed by fire, retired upward into the
Country, but the King soon after resolving to come to a treaty of accommodation
with us, which also was at length effected, by the promising reparation of our
Damages, and that for the future they should no more deal thus unjustly with
us, but suffer us to enjoy free trading as formerly; all which being agreed
unto, we withdrew our Militia out the City, and gave it up again into the hands
of the King.

This being the true state of the matter, hereupon the English Company makes
complaints by an Annex, to which the Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville has
relation, over Injuries and Violences offered them at Maslupatnam, under the
pretext of a War, which the Netherlandish Company had undertaken against the
King of Golconda: but they say they are well acquainted with such Tricks and
Designs. And that we made our selves Masters of Maslupatnam, after the same
manner we before haddon of Bantam, to no other end then thereby to ruinate and
deprive the English of their Traffic.

That we had played such prancks to often, especially at Bantam, and afterward
at Sumatra, however they doubted not but we should be responsable for the same.

That we forbade them after the Expiration of eight weeks to trade any more at
Maslupatnam, notwithstanding they there have had their place of Residence and
Magasin above eighty or ninety years together, and had built the same at their
expenses upon ground bought with their own money.

That in all the Treaties we have made with the Kings and Princes of those
Countries, we always endeavored to exclude their Company from the Trade and
Havens of those places, thereby wholly to annihilate their Commerce, but that
notwithstanding the foresaid Insinuation they did intend to keep up their
trading at Maslupatnam.

Truly here is a wonderful kind of Language, and by it may be perceived, how
easy it is to Misconster a sincere and upright intention, and wrest it to a bad
sense.

The questions then naturally flowing from hence are these, viz.

First, Whether our Company did undertake this War out of an evil intention and
desire, under that pretext to offer injury and violence to the English.

Secondly, Whether it be true, that our Design was to make our selves Masters
of Maslupatnam, after the same manner as we had don of Bantam, and with no
other end and intention than thereby to effect the ruin of the Commerce of the
English.

Thirdly, Whether it be true, that we had forbode them their Traffic at
Maslupatnam, after the expiring of eight weeks.

Fourthly, Whether it then were, or yet is in the power of the Netherlandish
Company to enter into such Leagues and Contracts with the Princes of those
Countries, by which other Nations should be secluded from trading in any of the
Wares or Fruits growing in those Countries.

What concerns the first, it is known to all, that the East Indie Company of
these Lands, is the only erected Company of Commerce for to enjoy by and through
an honest trading in Countries so far remote from us, the profits which we
hoped might thence ensue.

But forasmuch as we found by sad experience, that we should have to do with
Nations which were not to be too much trusted, and had evilly entreated many of
our Traders, yea, murdered some of them, which before an Octroy was granted,
had negotiated with them, it seemed good to the States of our Country, to
prevent such mischiefs, to qualify and Authorize by a granted Octroy to this
Company, to procure reparation by all such means as should be judged most
convenient by them, with further Authority to make Leagues and Contracts with
the Princes and Potentates of those Nations, and to erect and build Forts and
Castles as might serve for their security.

These Wars then were not to be undertaken, but only in case of urgent
necessity, after all ways of Accommodation and condescension had in vain been
attempted.

It is a thing that speaks of it self, that between Marchandising and War there
is no agreement, and that Merchants can no wise have any interest thereby, and
the Company therefore had precise Orders to shun it as much as possibly might
be.

So that it is most absurd to suppose the Company should have engaged in that
War against the King of Golconda, so potent a Prince, and only out of a
jollitie of spirit, A War which we knew aforehand, that besides the cessation
of Traffic, would draw after it such charges and losses, without any
expectation (save only hopes of reparation and damages sustained) the very
least profit imaginable, muchless, that our main aim should have been to
incommodate the English, or eause other Damage to accrue to them. Certainly
the said Netherlandish Company ought not to be looked upon so void of all sense
as to cast themselves upon such heavy charges and troubles by a War, the issue
of which is uncertain, and that only to incommodate and cause some loss to a
third party, whereas the charges and hinderance to their own Commerce would be
of more importance an hundred fold, then the Damage of that third party could
amount to.

And besides what has the Netherlandish Company further and more insisted upon
or obtained, then the continuance of their former Commerce, according as it was
granted unto them by Octroy, or, as they call it in those Countries, by Firman?

Have they made any Contracts with the King to the prejudice or damage of the
English Company? Not in the least: What agreement or comparison then is there
between this business and Bantam? In Bantam the Netherlandish Company was
Auxiliary to Succor an oppressed King, whose condition and state was brought
to the very point of utter ruin, and who in this desperate juncture implored
our Auxiliary Forces against his Rebels, and by whose means he was delivered
from that oppression.

For which the King granted, or rather, we bargained and required nothing else,
but the Trade in his City and Country, with Seclusion of all other, not to
continue always, but only so long till the promise made of reimboursing the
charges we had been at in affording our help to him, and which by mutual
consent was summed up, should be performed.

This also may serve to demonstrate the Moderation of the Netherlandish
Company, in regard of the interest of the English Company. True the Troops
of the Netherlandish Company are still in Bantam; but has not the King power
to this? May he not retain them in his City for his service and the security of
his Person and State, and without whom he could not, as he declares, subsist
or be secure among his Subjects, especially those that had been up in Rebellion
against him, of whom he was not much beloved, and also the Old King his Father,
being yet alive.

By this also an Answer is sufficiently made unto the second Point, with this
Addition only, that it is very rediculous to think, that the Dutch Company
should have intended by this War aganst Golconda; to plot the overthrow and
ruin of the English Companies Commerce (which notwithstanding they maliciously
lay to our charge) as by the event also has clearly appeared.

And because, as before has been said, we foresaw that the Erecting of the
Netherlandish Company in the Indies, could not be maintained without force of
Arms, therefore, as has been said, the States did in a special manner
authorize them thereto.

Whereupon the English Company perceiving they were deprived of such a power,
did in imitation, of what the States had granted to us, also procure an Octroy
or Charter from the King now reigning, of which till that time they were
unprovided, and by reason of which, were fain to suffer those injuries and
Violences patiently, which now the one and then another of the Princes,
Potentates, and Nations molested them with, and still must have suffered, had
they not by special Authority been empowered to an offensive War in such case as
might fall out. And therefore as soon as they had obtained that Charter, they
by virtue thereof took up Arms against the Great Mogol in Bengale, and as is
thought also in Suratte.

And might not now the Dutch Company with as good ground and reason affirm,
that the English Company has undertaken this War, thereby to incommodate,
endammage and enterrupt us in our Trading, which is very considerable in those
Countries.

And in case we should make complaints against them, would they desist, or be
persuaded to make no further Progress in their Affairs? Undoubtly they would
not. Or if we should hereupon become troublesome to them, might they not justly
help themselves with the known Rule, that he who uses his own Right, does hurt
no man thereby. Yet thus Self-love and Interest does blind the Eyes of men.

We only wish and desire, that in such cases of their War, which they wage,
our Dutch Company may be treated, and have the same measure as the English
Company has had, all the while the Dutch Company made War with the King of
Persia and Golconda.

The third Point, so as it is couched and laid down in the Annex of the
Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville, is altogether abusive and untrue, to wit,
That we had forbidden them after the expiring of eight weeks to negotiate
there any more.

True, we understood it fit, and so forbade them that after the expiration of
eight weeks, they should bring no more Wares which they might have bespoken,
from the Country into the City, for if they would, they had opportunities
enough to bring in all they had during this time.

But here the quesion may be: Whether in this we have not don amiss and
contrary to Right of Nations?

First, by Sea we hindered them not, but out of our own goodwill, although we
had a Squadron of Ships before the City, permitted them freely to traffic; yea
they might during the space of these eight weeks, cause all what they had in
the Country to be brought unto them. Now in stead that they ought to have taken
and owned this as a great Civilitie condescension and benefit to them, this
they make a point or Article of their complaint and accusation, but with as
little ground, as in all the rest.

It is well known, that when the French, English, Spaniard, Portugises and
others, make Conquests of any Countries or Places beyond Europe, they then
forbid Navigation and Traffic unto all Strangers in the said placcs.

Yea so far that some of them, if they only spy at Sea a strange ship though
at some distance, seemingly approaching their Countries, they board, take and
confiscate them.

In conformity and according to this practice the Netherlandish Company, after
they were become masters of Maslupatnam, might have forbidden the Navigation and
all Commerce unto the English Company.

For although the Netherlandish Company made use and took possession of the City,
to no other End, then only to bring the King of Golconda the sooner to
reasonable terms; yet they could not be certain, whether it should have such
success as they expected, or how long it might be before it were effected.

And in the mean while, why might they not order themselves according to the
Rule of other Nations, and especially that which the English themselves beyond
Europe do practice; yea which the English Company does do in the East Indies
also, as shall more largely by and by be dilated.

How then can it be ill taken or imputed an Injury don by the Dutch Company,
that they only required, that the English Company, after the expiration of
eight weeks, should let no more Wares of the Country, to be brought into the
City, or to hold correspondence with the Enemies of the Netherlandish Company.

For if all what was carried out, and brought in into the City, should have
been at the pleasure of the English Company, while the Enemy lay posted with
his Army round about the same, it would certainly have been of too dangerous a
consequence to the Netherlandish Company.

They might therefore during the time the City was in their power, in matters
of such a nature, order and dispose of things, as they judged most convenient.

Neither can any justly interpret this in an evil sense, although it had been
don here in Europe: Namely to forbid that in a City surrounded and besieged by
Land, nothing be brought in and out, and that through the Army of the Enemy, who
undoubtedly neither could nor would permit the same.

But put the case that it might in some respect be controverted and disputed
(which certainly in reason can not be imagined) yet then it ought to be
enquired into, whether by that Letter or Insinuation any damage did accrue
unto them.

For, as before has been said, the English did of their own accord retire out
of Maslupatnam, leaving the City for fear of being burnt by fire.

And again, they do not say, that any stop or hinderance was done to them in
their Commerce: for on the contrary in their Answer unto the Insinuation (as
may be seen in the foresaid Annex to the Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville)
they affirm that they would continue their Traffic as before.

Thirdly, the English had diverse other Lodges more, by, or not far from
Maslupatnam, where they could without any molest drive their trade ^yea
Madraspamen it self, and the Fort St. George, which was their own Place and
Fortress, being also in the said Kingdom of Golconda, and where they have
their Capital or chief House of trading, lying also near thereunto.

And forasmuch as they could there receive Wares out of that Kingdom as well as
out of Maslupatnam, hence it manifestly appears that the suspicion which the
English Company would blot us with, as if we had remarkablie injured them in
their Traffic in the Kingdom of Golconda, is altogether ungrounded and
frivolous.

The following fourth Point, concerning the making of Contracts Privative (or
by way of Seclusion) with diverse Princes in the East Indies, about some kind of
Wares and Fruits growing in their Countries, shall be spoken to hereafter, upon
the subject treating of the West Coast of Sumatra.

Coming then to the second Capital point, to wit, the Infraction and damages
our men should have done to the D^tch at Batancapas, lying on the West-Coast of
Sumatra, we will with the permission of your Puiss. Highnesses, first a little
speak of the commodiousness and conveniences of those Countries, and then come
to the Matter it self.

It is thus, the foresaid Coast is divided into diverse Regions and
Jurisdictions, of which Boncoulo, Sillebaer, and from thence to the South, far
beyond the Straites of Sunda, do belong to the King of Bantam, and again from
Boncoule Northwards unto Sinckal, are under the Command of the Netherlandish
Company. The Prince and People of these Countries were in part subjected to the
Netherlndish Company, for and in acknowledgment of the Benefits they had
received from us, being to our vast expenses and trouble, freed from
oppression, and having our promise to take them into our protection.

And partly by the War these mutinous and unfaithful people waged against us,
for thereby being subdued and brought under our power, they were forced not
only to acknowledge that Soverainity we had, but also by Contract to oblige
themselves to deliver unto us at a certain rate all the Pepper and other
commodities their Countries yielded with excluding of all other Nations, not
only Indians, but Europians also.

And what concerns Boncoulo, it is true the English some years past, came with
their Forces, and possessed themsclves thereof, under pretext that the Old King
of Bantam had during the Civil Wars (in which he was taken Prisoner) granted to
them free Trading, and Habitation at Sillebaer, but were driven out of the last
place by the forces of the King that now reigns in Bantam, they retired to
Boucoulo, and built a Fortress there, where they yet keep their abode, and
from thence did transport and wrest out of our hands a very considerable part
of Pepper, we say, wrested, forasmuch as it was by Contract with Bantam made
over to us, whereby although they have intruded into what belonged to us, to
our great detriment; yet we will pass that by, as not being ignorant that such
manner of Contracts and Obligations made with Princes in whose Countries, where
we have only Lodges or Factories, do give us no full right actually to hinder
other Nations for to buy and transport their Commodities, but must leave it to
the disposal of him that is Lord and Master of those Countries.

But that we should be constrained to suffer other Nations to come and Traffic
in the Countries where, besides such Contracts, we have and exercise
Superiority, and permit them also for the security of their Commerce to build
Forts there, is a thing that none who are of a sound and sedate Judgment, would
so much as imagine; and yet this is the question that here must be agitated.

For the English as has been said, did not only not content themselves to
settle at Boucoulo, the Territory of Bantam, and build a Fortress there, but
did advance even to Indraporina, took post, and erected a Fort there also, and
this they did, notwithstanding the Protestations and friendly Informations of
the Netherlandish Company against it, as infringing their right, in a Country
in subjection for many years unto the Dutch Company, and where they, besides
the Contracts made with the People, do exercise all Acts of Soverainty, and of
which they have the Agreements and Contracts, lying by them to show. Now this
is it, for which the Dutch Company does judge they have reason so greatly to
complain, of which by and by we shall more fully speak.

Of the same nature is that of Batancapas, of which in special mention is made
in the foresaid Memorial and Annex, lying between Indraporina and Sullida, near
about three or four Miles from the last place mentioned, properly appertaining
to this Company, where they of the English Company do themselves pretend, that
by or over against our Fort aforesaid, they also erected one, but were
prevented by us, and over which prevention they make heavy complaints in their
said Annex, but without any ground at all, as shall appear by what follows.

The History, according as things were transacted, is this: After that Sapoele
Boahandslaers, unto whom Batancapas also was belonging, being a perfidious and
mutinous people, had diverse times before, and now again of late lift up
themselves against the Netherlandish Company breaking the fidelity they had
sworn, and the Contracts they had made with them; yet the Dutch Company upon
their submission, and laying down their Arms in March 1686. did again receive
them into favor, making a strickter Contract with them, and that for the
future they would, according to promise, remain in their fidelity, Obedience
and Submission to the Netherlandish Company, and henceforward respect and obey
the Governor at Badang, being the chief place of the said Company on the said
West-coast, without ever declining, upon pain of being declared Enemies, and
brought under the everlasting wrath of God over them and their posterity; and
besides with this condition, that all the Gold, Pepper and other Wares their
Countries yielded, or which were brought thither, should only be and remain for
the Netherlandish Company, they paying the ordinary price for them, as by the
foresaid Contract in the keeping of the Dutch Company is more at large to be
seen, which was agreed on 15. March 1686. being many Months before the English
Company, according their own confession, came to Batancapas. And no sooner were
they come thither but endeavored to mislead the people of Batancapas, and to
draw them from their Fidelity and Obedience; but well knowing what kind of
People they were and how little to be trusted, they erected a Fortress in
their Land, but were by the Netherlandish Company, according to their own
saying, prevented by building a Fort there also.

While things were in this state, it happened that some of the Nadias that were
fallen of with their men, did in the presence of six English, as Enemies, set
upon us in the foresaid Post, and drive our men a Canonshot out of the Fort
among the Inhabitants, by which, as was reported, four of the foresaid
Inlanders were slain: but as in such times and cases of that nature, all are
not alike mutinous and of the same mind, thereupon they who remained faithful,
went out against them that were fallen off, to drive them from thence, and made
themselves Masters of the English Fort, and except it had been for our
intervention, they would have murdered all the English in their retrait: but
whatever they left behind, as they desired by their Letter, was as much as
possibly could be, not only restored to them, but what is more, at their
Request we provided them all manner of provisions of meat and drinck, etc. for
which also in their Letters dated the 22. and 26. August 1686. they were very
thankful unto us, as we can show by them, in the last of which Letters one of
their men wrote, that he was come there, to wit to Batancapas, with order to
see whether (Note this well) he could have the Canon pieces, which the Malayers
in the Assault had found in the Fort, to be restored to him; but seeing that
they demanded too much money for them, he would go back to Indraponra, and make
report thereof to the Commander in Chief: In which it is worthy of observation,
that in the foresaid Annex, belonging to the forementioned Memorial of the
Marquis of Albiville, they say, that the same day they came to Bantam, our
Ministers sent them a Protest, and withal counseled them to beware of the
Malayers, with a Complaint (these are their own words) of the Injury the
English did to us, namely, in that they came to settle themselves at
Batancapas, and at Indraponra also, places both appertaining to the Dutch
Company, and that two days after our men had sent another Protest.

The case then standing thus actually as is said, the question will be, from
which of the two Companies, the English or the Dutch, the Action does arise,
and which of the two has cause to complain?

In case the Netherlandish Company had according to their expectation, received
in their Ships, that last arrived out of the East Indies, all the particulars
and Informations belonging to this matter, they would not have failed to make
their just complaints to your Puiss: Highnesses in a Methodical way; but
forasmuch as the Letters of the Government of Batavia specify, that they must
first wait for the Arriral of their Ships from the West-Coast, the
Netherlandish Company must defer the same, to a fitter opportunity.

However by what is already said, it does sufficiently appear by what force,
violence and intrusion those of the English Company have acted against us, both
at Indraponra, as also at Batancapas and elsewhere, and that consequently, we
have abundant reason to require reparation and Satisfaction of them.

That which the English Company alleges against this, so as it is contained
in their Annex to the foresaid Memorial of the Marquis of Albeville, consists
in this.

First, the Emperor of Maniarbohaer should have conferred and settled that
Country upon them, and had to this End sent up two of his Sons to establish
the English there.

Secondly, that they by virtue thereof having built a Fort there, we in a time
of peace had by violence assaulted them, and this only for the securing of our
Traffic in Pepper.

Thirdly, That we had disdainfully trampled upon and torn the Pavillion of the
King of England.

Fourthly, That out of the Fort we had shot at the Inhabitants of Batancapas,
and at them that brought their Wares to Market.

And lastly, that our men had robbed and taken away all the Marchandises,
Effects, Silverwork, Canon, and whatever they had there.

What concerns the first point, it is manifest, that the Netherlandish Company
for many years has had and still has the Dominion in and over the Countries
where Batancapas is seated.

That this Authority and Dominion is now again lately in March 1686. conferred
upon them with most advantageous conditions, and are thereby settled in the
peaceable enjoyment thereof: So that they had not any lawful Right to instal
and deliver up that Country into the hands of the English.

For as to the forementioned Emperor, whom the English style the Emperor of
Manicabo, it is true that up or in the midst of the Country of Sumatra, which
are Lands of Manicabo, a certain Prince or Emperor does reign.

But that the Prince ever came into the lower part of this Country, and as they
pretend, established the English there, shall while the world stands, never be
proved by them.

For it is certain, that that Emperor never has been in those lower
Countries, also in former times those Lower Countries were subjected to the
usurped Authority of that Queen Seehini, whose yoke long ago they have cast
off, and given over themselves unto the Dominion of the Dutch Company, who have
taken upon them to protect and defend them against all Opposers whatsoever.

However, according to our late Letters, it is true that there appeared in
these Lower Countries two young Lords, stiling themselves Princes, who also by
some were acknowledged for such, but cried down and rejected by others as
Counterfits.

But suppose they had been true and Lawful Princes, yea the very Sons of the
Emperor, which can never be proved, yet what right and Authority could they
have to establish the English there, muchless to make over the Country unto
them, or what appearance of Truth can be imagined, they should have don the
same?

It is certain never any of the English Company have been up in those Highlands
with the Emperor; no not any of Netherlandish Company themselves,
notwithstanding they have lived more then forty years upon the Nether-Coast.

That those Princes should have Order and Power from their Father to do this,
is not so much as affirmed, muchless proved by the English Company it self.

And although it could be proved, yet it must come under examination, whether
that Power and Authority could be stretched so far or not.

Yea be it how it will, it is enough for the Netherlandish Company, that we
according to the confession of the English themselves, not only were there
before them, but also that three days before their arrival, we had fortifyed
our selves, yea as they say, upon a Rock.

Add to this, and which indeed is wholly deciding in the subject case, that in
the very Letter the English produce and annexed to the Memorial of the Marquis
of Albiville, and to which he refers himself, it is said, that those so named
Princes did declare, that in case the Hollanders should establish themselves at
Batancapas before the English, that then the English should be frustrated
thereof. Words very remarkable from such, by whom the English pretend to have
obtained their right, espetially it being so fallen out as they said.

If notwithstanding the Emperor of Manicabo might pretend any right to those
Lands, and declare that we did keep them in our possession unlawfully, which we
suppose shall never be; yet then it would be a question to be decided betwixt
the Emperor and us, and not with the English.

The second point is also without any ground of truth, to wit, that our men
should have taken that Fort by violence from them, the English themselves
affirm in a certain Letter, annexed to the foresaid Memorial, that our men did
diverse times incite the Malbayers, and urged them to fall upon the English.

Moreover that one Mechelen, whom in their foresaid Annex they name Muchalon,
Commander in Chief of our Men there should have said to the English, and warned
them to save themselves, otherwise the Maleyers would fall upon and kill them.

But that the English not regarding those threats, at the last our men should
have commanded the Maleyers to fall upon them indeed.

Of which if they should be required, to bring in their proof it would be far
to seek, but on the contrary, it is a certain evidence that our men did
endeavor their preservation.

Hoewever we deny not, that our Maleyers, that is, such of them as remained on
our side, fell upon the other, which rebelled against us, and took in the Fort
they yet held in their possession.

It is worthy of Observation that the English themselves confefs, that not so
much as a man of them was killed in that action, because we prevented our
Maleyers, with all our might hindering them from doing it; but suppose it to be
true, tho it be not so, that our own men had taken the fort from the English,
what can be justly said against it? might we not drive them out of a Fort,
which in dispite of us they erected in a Country that belonged to us? and that
right over against the Fortress we had made there before, and after that by
two Protests we had warned them not to do it, but would not at all listen to us.

So that as instead that the English take this up a matter of Complaint and
accusation against the Netherlandish Company, they ought to have been thankful
to them for their kind and mild dealing with them; yea so far as to deliver
them from eminent danger of death and ruin.

As one Samuel Bats, who at that time commanded the English, together with John
Becton in their Letters have truly acknowledged.

And in case one of our Soldiers did, as they affirm in disdaing tear in pieces
the Pavillion of the King of England, although it is not true, for according to
the Letters thence received, the English themselved pulled down their Flag,
which surely is more likely to be true, because they apprehending the great
danger they were in, would not let the Flag come into hands of their Enemies.
But suppose it were don by an English Soldier, what blame can be imputed to
the Netherlandish Company in this?

Why did the English expose the Flag of their King in such manner, in the
Territory and Country appertaining to another? Is it not a thing known, that a
strange Flag is not respected in any place whatsoever?

That our men, according to the contents of the fourth point, should have shot
out of the Fort with their Canon, is true: But it was don, not before, but
after that the Rebellious Maleyers had assaulted us as Enemies.

And put the case they had not done it, yet are we not for this responsable to
the English Company.

Was it not free for our men to deal with them that had revolted and became
Rebels, as they thought meet? Surely if we had dealt more rigourously and in an
hostile manner with them, they had sufficiently deserved the same.

The spoiling of their goods they make mention of in the fourth point, the
Netherlandish Company denies to have been done by their men. If it was don by
the Maleyers, as in such occasions is ordinary, and therefore our State is not
responsable for that, besides whatever we had preserved of theirs, was restored
unto them again, as apperars by the forementioned Letter, in which the English
complain, not that our men had taken their Canon, but acknowledge it was don by
the Maleyers, and that it was yet in their possession.

If then the Maleyers could take and carry away the Canon, how much easier was
it for them to carry away other things? So that hereby is a clear and
unanswerable proof, that our people did not intermeddle with that business,
muchless that they should be guilty of the spoil made.

And besides all this, the foresaid Bats in the forementioned Letters only
desires, that we would endeavor to get into our hands, and send him his Books
and Writings, as also two men that were run away with one Moor, together what
provision of meat and drink they had left, without in the least mentioning any
other thing, as well knowing it was not remaining in our, but in the hands of
Maleyers: neither is it to be imagined to have been of any great importance,
for in such a place, where the inevitable danger was foreseen daily by them,
and where they had their Chalops and Boats, lying near their very walls to put
in whatsoever was of any worth, it is not easily to be believed, they left any
thing behind them, they made any great esteem of, but only what they willingly
would part with: and also whatever the Dutch Company could save, or get out of
the hands of he Maleyers, was restored unto them.

And can these men be heard, or any belief given to what was robbed and taken
from them was delivered into the hands of the Commander in Chief of the Dutch
Company, as they affirmatively depose in the Anaex of the Memorial of the
Marquis of Albiville, whereas in the Indies they not only mentioned not a word
thereof, but on the contrary by their Letters they declared their thanckfulness
to that Commander in Chief, for the great Love and Friendship he had showed him.

Add to this, that when the foresaid Bats worte, that he had received the
goods, he sent for in his foregoing Letters, that if there had been any thing
more in our hands, would he not have desired that it might also had have bin
conveyed to him? undoubtedly he would.

And yet they are not ashamed to allege such frivolous things and fictions, if
so be they might but by any means make our case odious to the world.

For it seems the English Company seeks to make it their Custom, by
Complaints how ungrounded and futil soever they are to preoccupie, and thereby
to get an advantage to the prejudice of the Dutch Company: but we doubt but
they shall fall short of their aim as in this, as they have in the business of
Bantam.

This is that which the English Company in the Memorial they delivered up do
make the ground of their Complaints, affirming that the design of the
Netherlandish Company was nothing else then by injustice, violence and
oppression to ingross into their hands the whole Commerce in the East Indies,
and that, as they add, by continuance. But that they hope His Majesty of Great
Britain will timely provide such remedies whereby such continual Intrusions,
Invasions and ingrossings of the Netherlandish Company may be prevented.

But we would willingly know of the English Company whence they gather and can
make good such Inferences, that they of the Netherlandish Company have ever
endeavored the same: Except they have recourse to such like conclusions, as
they have already produced, the ungroundedness whereof, we have nakedly and
clearly demonstrated.

Besides it is well known that the Countries in the Indies and in Africa are so
great and numerous, the districts almost infinite, that it would be a great
presumption, yea folly once to imagine it, not to speak of the absolute
impossibility to effect the same.

It Is true (and herewith also shall be spoken in Answer to the fourth point,
which we reserved to this place) that the Netherlandish Company has with a few
unconsiderable Potentates or Princes made Contracts over a Privative or
Seclusive Traffic of some kind Wares which their Countries did yield. But if
the English Company should maintain this to be an unlawful thing, they must
condemn their own doing, and so as it were pronounce Sentence against what
themselves have done in former times; and of which many examples may be
alleged: Now if the English Company has made such contracts, sometimes
without, and sometimes together with us, when we were in a nearer League Anno
1619. and some years following, as may be seen and will appear in the Public
Testimonies Writings lying by us.

And when the English Company had such Contracts with us together, then
according to their sentiment, it was lawful and good. But now the Netherlandish
Company does the same without them, as having no communion or fellowship in the
least with them in the Indies, it is condemned and exclaimed against by them,
as being unreasonable: Ought they not to call to memory, that in former times
the English Merchants had the whole Traffic of the Caveyaer which Rusland or
Muscovia did yield.

And to come yet closer to them, have they not made in the Indies, and yet
daily seek to make such Contracts, especially on the Coast of Malabaer?

That the Netherlandish Company has erected here and there some Forts for the
security of their Trade, and also to make the People of those Countries to
stand to the Contracts made with them, cannot be imputed a Crime to the
Netherlandish Company, or the English Company must confess themselves guilty
of the said crime, for they also have made Forts for the same end at Boucoulo
and Indraponra, and moreover endeavored to do the like at Batancapas, with
what face then can the English Company blame us in this? and lay it as a great
evil to our charge, whereas they themselves at Priaman (being on the West-Coast
of Sumatra, a Country under the subjection of the Netherlandish Company, and
where they had a Fortress) not only intended, but even actually took in hand
to settle themselves, yea also according to the Octroy or Charter granted them
by the King now reigning, as to other things, so in special to build a Royal
Fortress, fortifyed with 40 great Pieces of Canon, Magasins, Wharfs for
Shipping, and all other Houses and Buildings, there to erect a Court of Justice
and Admiralty, and henceforward there to regulate and govern themselves after
the same manner, that the Netherlandish Company (these are their very terms)
are wont to do in their places, commanding them that in the Building of that
great and Royal Fort, they should well provide for the security of their men,
not only against the mutinous People of Sumatra, but also (which is not to be
passed by without a Nota been) against their outlandish Enemies, the Hollanders.

For however that design of theirs was not effected, because the English coming
there with their Ships, found that the Netherlandish Company themselves had a
Fort there, so that had they gone forward, they saw it must be by falling upon
us in a hostile way, and drive us from thence, which in appearance they dared
not, yet to attempt: may we not hereupon justly demand, whether if they of the
English Company having attained to their desired intent, as to that City would
not have kept it alone to themselves, and whether they would have suffered us
to trade together with them there? For then the Fortress built at such
excessive charges in that City would have been of no use or benefit, but a
burden only.

But in case they now had near Priaman by force of Arms compelled some of those
Princes thereabout, or that any of them had of their own free will submitted to
the English Company, (for there are diverse Princes and Peoples, who have every
one apart their Jurisdictions and Command, and for many years since submitted
themselves to us) if I say, they should by force of Arms overcom any of the
said Princes, or if any of them should willingly, and of their own accord
submit to the said Engglish Company, and make privative or seclusive Contracts
with them, tho perhaps they had not built any Forts in the Country, and that
the Netherlandish Company would thereupon intrude themselves, and deprive the
English of their intrest, by building a Fortress, to hinder them from enjoying
the Fruits and Benefits of the Contracts made with those Nations: might not in
such a case the English justly have opposed us, yea driven us away by force?
undoubtly they might.

If then it deserve to be judged injustice, violence and oppression in us, by
lawful means to seek in one and the other Country out of or beyond Europe, to
get and appropriate to our selves the Trade thereof: Then we know not, how
possibly the English can be judged blameless, considering what they have don in
Carolina, Virginia, New England, Jamaica, and elsewhere, Countries of that vast
extent, that all what the Netherlandish Company does possess in East Indies, is
not to be compared thereunto.

And in case it be lawful to be don there, why then may it not be don by the
Dutch Company in the East Indies? except that it can be demonstrated, that the
Rights of the West Indies and the East Indies are not of the same nature.

But to remain only within the bounds of the East Indies. The Netherlandish
Company would fain know, upon what account Sillebaer, Boncoulo, Indraponra,
etc. were taken and possessed by the English? to what end they erected Forts
there? especialy if their design at Priaman had succeeded, was it not to draw
and appropriate unto them the Commerce of Pepper, as much as they could? They
endeavored to make and fortify Priaman in such a manner, for so their Orders
runs, that they might be in a posture to withstand the Hollanders, whom they
term, their Enemies.

If then the Netherlandish Company, be thus looked upon by them, it is no
wonder, their Ministers and Servants in the Indies labor to do us all the
spite, mischief and injury they possibly can.

Whereas on the contrary our men, according to the Letters which from time to
time we receive thence, endeavor nothing more, then to please and condescend
to them in all things, according to the order which our States do continually
give unto us: hereby also, were it possible, to free your Puiss: Highnesses
from further Complaints and Molestations, with which your Puiss: Highnesses are
so often disturbed by the English: but the greater condescension we have used
and labored to show unto them, what advantages and quiet soever we endeavored
to procure, what affronts soever we past by, all is but labor lost, and the
successive Letters we receive from the Indies testify, is as Oil cast into the
fire, and only makes them the more audacious and fierce aganst us.

And had we at the first at Indraponra, stoutly opposed and hindered them from
settling themselves there, to which we had an indisputable Right, they would
not have ventured to have undertaken, what they did at Batancapas, and the
troubles thereon ensuing would have been prevented, our condescension and
indulgence being the only occasion they abused thereunto.

If at any time infraction or injustice has bin committed, they must have
recourse to what happened in the business on the West-Coast, of which the
Netherlandish Company hopes after some time to make full discovery to your
Puiss: Highnesses.

However this is underniable that our Men now lately at Bengale did the English
a signal service, for when they were in a great extremity, and the Moors had
deprived them of all means of Livelihood, then by our mediation and
intervention the business was brought to a cessation of all acts of hostility
for a time: so far was it from our intent to plot, or cause any harm to come to
them, for if it had bin so, never fairer opportunity was put into the hands of
any, then in that business of Bengale, wherein the English, besides the loss of
Hundreds of their men, would have sustained irreparable damage in their
Estates and occasions.

At Batavia we took them into us, without in the least being obliged thereto,
there we harbored them a long time, we permitted their Ships coming in and
going out, to enjoy all manner of necessaries and refreshments, notwithstanding
all the continual nastinesses and pilfrings of their men; yea those very Ships
which came from the West-Coast in that miserable and desolate condition, and
where they had dealt so inhumanely with our men, as has bin related, yet we
provided them not only with whatever they needed, but also let them them
repair, and new build them again upon our Wharfs.

In case the Subjects of our Stase should com to request such a thing of them
in the Caribes, Barbados, Virgina, Jamaica, or other places, they not only
would not have admitted, but rather seized and confiscated them. The same usage
also in likelihood, we might expect from them at Madraspatnam, or their Fort S.
Georg, where as has be said, they have settled themselves on the Coast of
Cormandel, or at least would send us packing away from thence.

Their Ship the Royal James coming in Sept. 1686. from England, and arriving at
Priaman, with the loss of about 40. Mariners and 30. Soldiers, together with
all their Chief Officers unto the very last Sergeant they had, in expectation
to have found there a Royal Factorie, but in stead thereof meeting with our
Men, and departing from thence, at their earnest request, we furnished them
with all manner of refreshments, they pleading that because the season was well
past they intended to sail to Padang in Bengale, but in stead thereof, they
stiered their course to Indraponra, where they knew there was nothing to be
found for them, save men, ammonition and such like necessaries for War, with
which they provided themselves the better to maintain the place against us.

Their Ship the Herbert, being arrived before Batavia, some of their men came
into the City with Pocket Pistols, and picked a quarrel in their Lodging in the
night, and making use of their Pistols, they were by the assistance of the
People and Magistrates Servants disarmed, their Pistols by force taken away,
otherwise it had undoubtedly cost much Blood, and so these impudent men were
chased out of the City.

And besides some other Ships, the 1. of December of the last yea, there
arrived at Cochin, a City belonging to the Netherlandish Company on the Coast
of Mallabaer, a certain English Fregat (named Madras, and the Captain John
Wallis, coming from Cormandel, being bound for Suratta, who after he got fresh
Victuals and Water, and was without being taken notice of, come abord, he
entreprised in the night time with a boat propt with men to enter a certain
Moors Ship, who some days before as come from Suratta into that Rode, he
thoroughly searched the same, while that 15. Musketeers with their Cocks bent
lay in readiness near unto them, and required the Tandel or Boatsman (the
Master then being on Land at Coehin) to show him his Pasport, who affirming
that he had it not, took him along with him out of his Ship, and having brought
him a board his own, with much threatening commanded him to fetch his Pas from
Land, but when the said Boatsman was returned from Land, he saw that the
foresaid Englishman was departed, after he thus used violence in the Rode,
where all ought to be in the greatest security.

Again, on the fourth of the said month there arrived at Cochin for the same
end an English Schip called Carolus Secundus, mounted with 60 Guns and about
threehundred men, Mariners and Soldiers, having near 50 dead and 80 sick
persons after he was come from England the foregoing May: and notwithstanding
it was remonstrated, and complaints made to the Captain Jonathan Andrews of the
injury and violence he did to our Company, yet he was not ashamed to pretend
a right to visit a Moors Ship in our Rode, come hither from Suratta, upon the
pretext that in the said Moors Ship there were English Fugitives, however he
was at last persuaded to desist.

Now in case one or more Ships of the Netherlandish Company should undertake in
the Rhode of Madraspatnam, a City as has bin said, belonging to the English
East Indies Company, to visit, search and deal with them after the same manner
the English have done in our Rodes, what horrid Exclamations would they not
make throughout Europe about it? What pretenses of injuries, affronts and
damages would they not divulge? And yet this is the very thing they dare to
enterprise in our Rodes and Rivers.

They complain of Infraction, Wrong, Injustice offered them: But if ever any
wrong or injustice has been done, it is apparently to be seen in this, and in
a matter of such tenderness and consequence.

We pass by in silence, that the English have endeavored, and yet continue
daily to debauch and entice our men by money to desert us and enter into their
service, witness what they do at Bengale, upon the Coast of Cormandel,
Suratta, and elsewhere, neither have we ever been able to make them to desist
from these their continued practices for so many years successively, by all the
Protestations and Complaints made and delivered up unto them: And in case we
feared not to be overtroublesom to your Puiss. Highnesses in the rehearsal of
many other matters and transactions, whereby the greatest wrong and injustice
imaginable has been offered us: The Netherlandish Company could more amply
enlarge and extend these things. But with the permission of your Puiss:
Highnesses we shall reserve the same to another opportunity.

P. VAN DAM.
Delivered the 4. October. 1687.

