A TRUE RELATION OF THE COMMISSIONS AND WARRANTS for the Condemnation and
Burning of BARTHOLOMEW LEGATT AND THOMAS WITHMAN, the one in West-Smithfield,
London, the other at Lichfield, in the Year, 1611.

Signed with K. James his own hand.

In which is laid open their most Blasphemous Heresies and false Opinions,
being part of them the very same which our Ranters in these times profess to be
their New Lights.

Whereunto are added, The Pardons of Theophilus Higgons, and St Eustace Heart
Knight.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Michael Spark, MDCLI.

A NARRATION of the Burning of Bartholomew Legatt.
James R.
JAMES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defendor of the Faith, etc.
To Our right Trusty, and right Wellbeloved Counselor Thomas Lord Ellesmere
our Chancellor of England, Greeting.
Where the Reverend Father in God John Bishop of London, having judicially
proceeded in a Cause of Heresy against Bartholomew Legatt of the City of
London, in the Diocese of the said Bishop of London concerning diverse wicked
Errors, Heresies, and blasphemous Opinions, holden, affirmed and published by
the said Bartholomew Legatt, and chiefly in these thirteen blasphemous
Positions following, viz. That the Creed called the Nicene Creed and Athanasius
Creed contain not a Profession of the true Christian Faith, or that he will not
profess his Faith according to the same Creeds. That Christ is not God of God
begotten, not made, but begotten and made. That there are no Persons in the
Godhead. That Christ was not God from everlasting, but began to be God when he
took flesh of the Virgin Mary. That the World was not made by Christ. That the
Apostles teach Christ to be man only. That there is no Generation in God, but
of creatures. That this Assertion, God to be made man, is contrary to the Rule
of Faith, and monstrous Blasphemy. That Christ was not before the fullness of
time except by Promise. That Christ was not God otherwise then an anointed God.
That Christ was not in the form of God equal with God, that is, in substance of
God, but in Righteousness and giving Salvation. That Christ by his Godhead
wrought no Miracle. That Christ is not to be prayed unto. Wherein he the said
Bartholomew Legatt has before the said Reverend Father maintained his said
most Dangerous and Blasphemous Opinions, as appears by many his confessions
publicly made and acknowledged. For which his Damnable and Heretical Opinions,
he is by diffinitive sentence by the said Reverend Father John Bishop of
London, with the advice and consent of other Reverend Bishops, learned Divines,
and others learned in the Laws assisting him in Judgment, justly adjudged,
pronounced and declared to be an obstinate and incorrigible Heretic, and is
left by them under the Sentence of the great Excommunication, and therefore as
a corrupt Member to be cut off from the Church of Christ, and Society of the
Faithful, and is to be by our secular Power and Authority as an Heretic
punished, as by the significavit of the said Reverend Father in God the said
Bishop of London, bearing date at London the third Day of March in the year of
our Lord, 1611. in the ninth year of Our Reign, and remaining in Our Court of
Chancery more at large appears. And although the said Bartholomew Legatt has
since the said sentence pronounced against him, been often very charitably
moved and exhorted as well by the said Bishop, as by many grave and learned
Divines, to dissuade, revoke and remove him from the said Blasphemous and
Heretical Opinions, yet he arrogantly and wilfully persisteth and continues in
the same. We therefore according to our Regal Function and Office, minding the
execution of Justice in this behalf, and to give example to others, least they
should attempt the like hereafter, have determined by the Assent of our
Council, to will and require, and do hereby Authorize and require you our said
Chancellor, immediately upon the receipt hereof, to award and make out under
Our Great Seal of England our Writ of Execution according to the Tenor in these
Presents ensuing. And these Presents shall be your sufficient Warrant and
Discharge for the same.

REx Vicecomitibus London, Salutem, Cum Reverendus in Christo Pater Johannes
London Episcopus nobis significavit, quod cum ipse in quodam Haereticae
pravitatis negotio contra quendam Bartholomeum Legatt subditum nostrum
Civitatis London dicti London Episcopi Diocese. and jurisdictionis rite and
legitime procedens, per Acta inactitata deducta proposita, and per confessiones
ipsius Bartholomei Legatt, coram praefato Episcopojudicialiter factas and
recognitas comperit and invenit praefatum Bartholomeum, Legatt quamplurimos
nephandos errores falsas Opiniones Haereses and Blasphemias execrandas and
scelerata dogmata Catholicae and Orthodoxae Fidei and Religioni and Sacrosancto
Dei Verbo express contraria and repugnantia scienter maliciose animoque
pertinaci obdurato planeque incorrigibili credere tenere affirmare and
publicare idem Reverendus Pater London Episcopus cum consilio and consensu tam
Reverendorum Episcoporum and aliorum Theologorum quam juris etiam peritorrm in
judicio assiden. and assisten. eundem Bartholomeum Legatt per sententiam suam
diffinitivam obduratum contumacem and incorrigibilem Haereticum pronunciavit
decrevit and declaravit, eaque occasion tanquam protervum Haereticum and
Membrum putridum and contagiosum ab Ecclesia Christi and Fidelium Communione
recisum and amputatum fore. Cum igitur sancta Matter Ecclesia non habeat quod
ulterius facere and exequi valeat in hac part, idem Reverendus Pater praefatum
Bartholomeum Legatt, ut Blasphemum Haereticum brachio nostro seculari reliquit
condigna animadversione plectend' prout per Literas Patentes praefati Reverendi
in Christi Patris London Episcopi in hac part superinde confect' Nobis in
Cancellar' nostram Certificat' est. Nos igitur ut Zelator Justitiae and Fidei
Catholicae Defensor, volentesque Ecclesiam sanctam ac Jura and Libertates
ejusdem and Fidem Catholicam manutenere and defendere, ac hujusmodi Haereses
and Errores ubique quantum in Nobis est eradicare and extirpare, ac Haereticos
sic convictos animadversione condigna puniri, attendentesque hujusmodi
Haereticum in forma praed' convictum and damnatum juxta Leges and Consuetudines
Regni Nostri Angliae in hac part consuet' ignis incendio comburi debere. Vobis
praecipimus quod dictum Bartholomeum Legatt in Custodia vestra enisten' apud
West-Smithfield in loco publico and aperto ex causa pramissa coram populo
public igni committi, ac ipsum Bartholomeum Legatt in eodem igne realiter
comburi fac' in hujusmodi criminis Detestationem, aliorumque Christianorum
exemplum manifestum, ut in simile crimen labantur. Et hoc sub periculo
incumbenti nullatenus omittatis. Test, etc.

Henry Hibirte.
This contains a Warrant to be granted by Your Majesty unto the Lord
Chancellor of England, for the awarding of a Writ under the Great Seal of
England to the Sheriff of the City of London, for the burning of Bartholomew
Legatt, who is convicted of diverse horrible Heresies before the Bishop of
London, and by his Sentence left to the secular Power, as is by the said Bishop
certified to Your Majesty into Your Highness Court of Chancery.

And is done by force of Your Majesty's commandment to me given under Your
Highness Sign manual.

Henry Hibirte.



THe King to the Sheriffs of London, greeting, Whereas the Reverend Father in
Christ John Bishop of London, has signified unto Us, that when he in a certain
business of Heretical pravity against one Bartholomew Legatt our Subject of the
City of London, of the said Bishop of Londons Diocese and Jurisdiction, rightly
and lawfully proceeding by Acts enacted, drawn, proposed, and by the
Confessions of the said Bartholomew Legatt, before the said Bishop judicially
made and acknowledged, has found in the said Bartholomew Legatt very many
wicked Errors, false Opinions, Heresies, and cursed Blasphemies, and impious
Doctrines, expressly contrary and repugnant to the Catholic Faith and Religion,
and the holy Word of God, knowingly and maliciously, and with a pertinacious
and obdurate plainly incorrigible mind, to believe, hold, affirm and publish,
the same Reverend Father the Bishop of London with the Advice and Consent, as
well of the Reverend Bishops and other Divines, as also of men Learned in the
Law, in Judgment sitting and assisting; the same Bartholomew Legatt by his
definitive Sentence has pronounced, decreed, and declared to be an obdurate,
contumacious and incorrigible Heretic, and upon that occasion as a stubborn
Heretic, and rotten contagious Member to be cut off from the Church of Christ,
and the Communion of the Faithful; Whereas the Holy Mother Church has not
further to do and prosecute in this part, the same Reverend Father has left
the aforesaid Bartholomew Legatt as a blasphemous Heretic to our secular Power
to be punished with condign Punishment, as by the Letters Patents of the said
Reverend Father in Christ the Bishop of London in this behalf, above made has
certified unto Us in Our Chancery. We therefore as a Zealot of Justice, and a
Defendor of the Catholic Faith, and willing to maintain and defend the holy
Church, and Rights, and Liberties of the same, and the Catholic Faith: And
such Heresies and Errors every where what in Us lies, to root out and
extirpate, and to punish with condign Punishment such Heretics so convicted,
and deeming that such an heretic in form aforesaid, convicted and condemned
according to the Laws and Customs of this Our Kingdom of England in this part
accustomed, ought to be burned with Fire; We do command you, that the said
Bartholomew Legatt, being in your Custody, you do commit publicly to the Fire,
before the People, in a public and open place in West-Smithfield, for the
cause aforesaid, and that you cause the said Bartholomew Legatt to be really
burned in the same Fire, in Detestation of the said Crime, for the manifest
example of other Christians, lest they slide into the same fault, and this that
in no wise you omit, under the peril that shall follow thereon. Witness, etc.

A NARRATION of the Burning of Edward Wightman.
James R.
JAMES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defendor of the Faith, etc.
To our right Trusty and right Welbeloved Councellor, Thomas Lord Ellesmere our
Chancellor of England, Greeting.
Where the Reverend Father in God, Richard Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield,
having judicially proceeded in the Examination, Hearing and Determining of a
Cause of Heresy against Edward Wightman of the Parish of Burton upon Trent in
the Diocese of Coventrey and Lichfield, concerning the wicked Heresies of the
Ebionites, Cerinthians, Valentinians, Arrians, Macedonians, of Simon Magus, of
Manes, Manichees, of Photinus, and Anabaptists, and of other Heretical,
Execrable, and unheard of Opinions, by the instinct of Satan, by him
excogitated and holden, viz.

That there is not the Trinity of Persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, in the Unity of the Deity. 2. That Jesus Christ is not the true natural
Son of God, perfect God, and of the same Substance, Eternity and Majesty with
the Father in respect of his Godhead. 3. That Jesus Christ is only Man and a
mere Creature, and not both God and man in one Person. 4. That Christ our
Savior took not humane flesh of the substance of the Virgin Mary his Mother;
and that That Promise, The seed of the Woman shall break the serpents head, was
not fulfilled in Christ. 5. That the Person of the holy Ghost is not God
coequal, coeternal, and coessential with the Father and the Son. 6. That the
three Creeds, viz. The Apostles Creed, the Nicene Creed, and the Athanasius
Creed are the Heresies of the Nicolaitanes. 7. That he the said Edward Wightman
is that Prophet spoken of in the eighteenth of Deutronomy in these words, I
will raise them up a Prophet, etc. And that That place of Isaiah, I alone have
trodden the wine press: And that That place, Whose fan is in his hand, are
proper and personal to him, the said Edward Wightman. 8. And that he the said
Wightman is that Person of the holy Ghost spoken of in the Scriptures; and the
Comforter spoken of in the sixteenth of St John's Gospel. 9. And that those
words of our Savior Christ of the sin of blaspemy against the holy Ghost, are
meant of his person. 10. And that That place the fourth of Malachy, of Elias to
come, is likewise meant of his person. 11. That the Soul does sleep in the
sleep of the first death, as well as the body, and is mortal as touching the
sleep of the first death, as the body is: And that the Soul of our Savior
Jesus Christ did sleep in that sleep of death as well as his body. 12. That the
Souls of the elect Saints departed, are not Members possessed of the triumphant
Church in Heaven. 13. That the baptizing of Infants is an abominable custom.
14. That there ought not be in the Church the use of the Lords Supper to be
celebrated in the Elements of Bread and Wine: And the use of Baptism to be
celebrated in the Element of Water, as they are now practiced in the Church of
England. But that the use of Baptism is to be Administered in Water, only to
Converts of sufficient age of understanding, converted from Infidelity to the
Faith. 15. That God has ordained and sent him, the said Edward Wightman, to
perform his part in the work of the Salvation of the world, to deliver it by
his teaching or admonition from the Heresy of the Nicolaitanes, as Christ was
ordained and sent to save the world, and by his death to deliver it from sin,
and to reconcile it to God. 16. And that Christianity is not wholly professed
and preached in the Church of England, but only in part. Wherein he the said
Edward Wightman has before the said Revered Father, as also before our
Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical within our Realm of England, maintained
his said most perilous and dangerous Opinions, as appears by many his
Confessions, as also by a Book written and subscribed by him, and given to us.
For the which his Damnable and Heretical Opinions, he is by Divine sentence
declared by the said Reverend Father, the Bishop of Coventrey and Lichfield,
with the advice and consent of Learned Divines, and other Learned in the Laws
assisting him in Judgment, justly adjudged, pronounced and declared to be an
obstinate and incorrigible Heretic, and is left by them under the Sentence of
the great Excommunication, and therefore as a corrupt member to be cut off from
the rest of the flock of Christ, lest he should infect others professing the
true Christian Faith: and is to be by Our secular Power and Authority as an
Heretic punished: As by the Significavit of the said Reverend Father in God
the Bishop of Coventrey and Lichfield, bearing Date at Lichfield the fourtenth
day of December in the ninth year of our Reign, and remaining in our Court of
Chancery more at large appears. And although the said Edward Wightman has
since the said Sentence pronounced against him, been often very charitably
moved and exhorted, as well by the said Bishop, as by many other Godly, Grave
and Learned Divines to dissuade, revoke, and remove him from the said
blasphemous, Heretical and Anabaptistical Opinions; Yet he arrogantly and
wilfully persisteth and continues in the same. We therefore, according to Our
Regal Function and Office, minding the execution of Justice in this behalf, and
to give example to others lest they should attempt the like hereafter, have
determined by the assent of Our Council to will and require, and do hereby
authorize and require you Our said Chancellor immediately upon the receipt
hereof to Award and make out under Our great Seal of England, Our Writ of
Execution according to the tenor in these presents ensuing. And these presents
shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge for the same.

REx Vic' Civitatis nostrae Lich. salutem; Cum Reverendus in Christo Pater
Richardus providentia Divina Coventr' and Lich' Episcopus nobis significaverit,
quod ipse contra and adversus quendam Edwardum Wightman Parochiae de Burton
super Trent Coventr' and Lich' Dioces. de and super nephandis heresibus
Ebionis, Cerinthi, Valentiniani, Arrii, Macedonii, Simonis Magi, Manetis,
Manechiorum, Photini, and Anabaptistarum aliorumque heresiarcharum, and insuper
de aliis execrandis opinionibus instinctu Satana excogitatis and antehac
inauditis, juxta Canonum Ecclesiasticorum legumque and consuetudinum hujus
Regni nostri Angl' exigentiam judicialit' procedens, praedictus Edwardus
Wightman coram praefato Reverendo Patre ac aliis Theologis and jurisperitis
sibi in judicio assistentibus comparens, praedicta nephanda crimina haereses ac
alia detestanda blasphemia and Errores contumaciter and ex quadam pertinacia
scienter maliciose animoque obdurato publicavit defendebat and disseminabat,
per sententiam definitivam ejusdem Reverendi Patris cum consensu Theologorum
and jurisperitorum praedictorum just Legitime and Canonice contra eundem
Edwardum Wightman in ea part latam heretic' adjudicat' and pronunciat'
existit; and ideo tanquam ovem morbidam e grege Domini ne subditos nostros sua
contagione inficiet ejiciendum and eliminandum fore decreverit: Cum igitur
Sancta Matter Ecclesia non habeat quod ulterius in hac part facere and exequi
debeat, idem Reverendus Pater eundem Edwardum Wightman ut blasphemum and
damnatum Haereticum brachio nostro seculari reliquit, condigna animadversione
plectend' prout per Literas Patentes praefati Reverendi Patris Episcopi
Coventr' and Lich' in hac part superinde confect' nobis in Cancellar' nostram
certificat' est. Nos igitur ut zelator justiciae and fidei Catholicae defensor:
Volentesque Ecclesiam Sanctam ac jura and libertates ejusdem and fidem
Catholicam manutenere and defendere, ac hujusmodi Haereses and Errores ubique
(quantum in nobis est) eradicare and extirpare, ac Haereticos sic convictos
animadversione condigna puniri, attendentesque hujusmodi Haereticum in forma
praedicta convictum and damnatum juxta leges and consuetudinem Regui nostri
Angliae in hac part consuet' ignis incendio comburi debere; Tibi praecipimus
quod dict. Edwardum Wightman in custodia tua existent' in aliquo loco publico
and aperto infra Civitatem pradict' ex causa pramissa coram populo public igni
committi, and ipsum Edwardum Wightman in codem igne realiter comburi fac' in
hujusmodi criminis detestationem aliorumque Christianorum exemplum manifestum,
ne in simile crimen labantur. Et hoc sub periculo incumbenti nullatenus
omittas. Test, etc.

Henry Hibaite.
This contains a Warrant to be granted by Your Majesty unto the Lord
Chancellor of England, for the Awarding of a Writ under the Great Seal of
England, to the Sheriff of the City of Lichfield, for the burning of Edward
Wightman who is convicted of diverse horrible Heresies before the Bishop of
Coventrey and Lichfield, and by his Sentence left to the secular Power, as is
by the said Bishop certified to Your Majesty, into Your Higness Court of
Chancery.

And is done by force of Your Majesty's Commandment to me given under Your
Highness Sign Manuel.

Henry Hibaite.



THe King to the Sheriff of Our City of Lichfield, Greeting. Whereas the
Reverend Father in Christ, Richard by Divine Providence of Coventrey and
Lichfield Bishop, has signified unto us that he judicially proceeding,
according to the exigence of the Ecclesiastical Canons, and of the Laws and
Customs of this Our Kingdom of England, against one Edward Wightman of the
Parish of Burton upon Trent, in the Diocese of Coventrey and Lichfield, of and
upon the wicked Heresies of Ebion, Cerinthus, Valentinian, Arrius, Macedonius,
Simon Magus, of Manes, Manichees, Photinus, and of the Anabaptists, and other
Arch-Hereticks, and moreover of other cursed Opinions belched by the instinct
of Satan excogitated and heretofore unheard of, the aforesaid Edward Wightman
appearing before the aforesaid Reverend Father and other Divines, and Learned
in the Law, assisting him in Judgment, the aforesaid wicked Crimes, Heresies
and other detestable Blasphemies and Errors stubbornly and partinaciously,
knowingly, maliciously, and with an hardened heart, published, defended and
dispersed, by definitive Sentence of the said Reverend Father, with the consent
of Divines, Learned in the Law aforesaid, Justly, Lawfully and Canonically
against the said Edward Wightman in that part brought, stands Adjudged and
Pronounced an Heretic, and therefore as a diseased Sheep out of the Flock of
the Lord, lest Our Subjects he do infect by his contagion, he has decreed to
be cast out and cut off. Whereas therefore the holy Mother Church has not
further in this part what it ought more to do and prosecute, the same Reverend
Father, the same Edward Wightman as a Blasphemous and condemned Heretic, has
left to Our secular Power to be punished with condign punishment, as by the
Letters Patents of the aforesaid Reverend Father the Bishop of Coventrey and
Lichfield in this behalf thereupon made is certified unto Us into Our Chancery.
We therefore as a zelot of Justice and a Defend or of the Catholic Faith, and
willing that the holy Church and the Rights and Liberties of the same and the
Catholic Faith to Maintain and Defend, and such like Heresies and Errors every
where so much as in us lies to root out and extirpate, and Heretics so convict
to punish with condign punishment, holding that such an Heretic in the
aforesaid form convict and condemned according to the Laws and Customs of this
Our Kingdom of England in this part accustomed ought to be burned with fire,
We command thee that thou cause the said Edward Wightman being in thy custody
to be committed to the fire in some public and open place below the City
aforesaid, for the cause aforesaid, before the people, and the same Edward
Wightman in the same fire cause really to be Burned in the detestation of the
said Crime and for manifest example of other Christians, that they may not fall
into the same Crime, and this no ways omit, under the peril that shall follow
thereon. Witness, etc.

1611. Expedit' apud Westm' Nono die Martii Anno Regis Jacobi Angl' etc. Nono.
per Windebank.
THE PARDON OF Theophilus Higgons.
James R.
REX omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem. Cum nobis dat' est intelligi, Quod
Theophilus Higgons de London Clericus in parts transmarin' absque licenc'
nostra Regia emigraverit, Ibidemque duos ann' and dimidium vel eo circiter
Commorat' and cum Jesuitis and Presbyter' Conversat' fuerit, atque in eodem
temporis spatio in Seminar' Anglic' apud Doway and Sanct' Omer' aliquantisper
permanserit, Et se Ecclesiae Romanae reconciliaverit, Necnon quaedam Scandalos.
and Periculos. contra Stat' hujus Regni nostri tam Ecclesiast' quam Temporal',
and verbis and script' protulerit, and enunciaverit, atque etiam quosdam e
subdit' nostris a Religione in hoc Regno nostro stabilit' seducere and avertere
operam and vires intenderit; Postea tamen per sancta and bona media, and
praecipue ex penitent' and instinctu misericordiae and gratiae Divinae, praed'
perversitat' suam, ac falsas and opprobriosas opiniones praed' penitus
abnegaverit, Seque Religioni verae and reformat', and in hoc Regno promulgat'
and stabilit' Conformem exhibuerit. Sciatis igitur, quod nos pietate moti de
gratia nostra speciali, ac ex cert' scient' and mer' motu nostris pardonavimus
remisimus and relaxavimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis hered' and successor'
nostris pardonamus remittimus and relaxamus, praed. Theophilo Higgons de London
Clerico, seu quocunque alio nomine cognomine sive additione nominis vel
cognominis offic' art' dignitat. loc. vellocorum, idem Theophilus Higgons
censeatur vocetur sive nuncupetur, aut nuper censebatur vocabatur sive
nuncupabatur, omn. and omnimod. offens. de transeundo in parts transmarin.
absque Licenc. nostra, ibidemque commorand and cum Jesuit. and Presbyter.
conversand. ac in Seminar. Anglic. apud Doway and Sanct. Omer. permanend. atque
Ecclesiae Romanae se reconciliand. ac scandalos. aliqua contra Stat. Regni
hujus tum Ecclesiast. quam temporal. and scribend, and loquend. atque aliquos e
subdit. nostris a Religione hujus Regni nostri avertend. and seducend; Atque
omnes alias offens. delict. contempt. malefact. and transgression. quascunque
praemissa aut eorum aliquod vel aliqua in aliquo tangen. vel concernen. per
praed. Theophilum Higgons ante dat. praesentium qualitercunque. Commiss. sive
perp^trat. atque etiam omn. and omnimod. offens. proditiones felonias and
premunir. ratione alicujus vel aliquorum facti vel factor. superius mencio^^t.
con^^tis. perpetrat. vel incurs^s; Licet idem Theophil^^ Higgons de praemis.
vel aliquo premis. indictat. impetit. convict. ^^ ^inct. adjudicat. utlegat.
seu condemnat. existit vel non existit, aut inde indictar. impetir. convinc.
atting. adjudicar. utlegar. seu condemnari contigerit in futurum; Nocnonomnes
and omnimod. utlegar. si quae in ipsum Theophilum Higgons occasionibus praed.
seu earum aliqua fuerint promulgat. sive promulgand. Ac omn. and omnimod.
Judic. attinctur. conviction. condemnation. paenas mort. paenas corporal.
imprisonamen. ac omn. al. for is factur. execution. punition. and paenalitat.
quaecunque super vel versus ipsum Theophilum Higgons ratione seu occasion
praemis. sive eor. alicujus habit. fact. reddit. sive adjudicat. aut habend.
faciend. reddend. seu adjudicand; Necnon omn. and omnimod. action. sect.
querel. impetition. and demand. quaecunque quae nos versus ipsum Theophilum
Higgons ratione sive occasion praemiss. seu eor. alicujus habemus habnimus seu
in futurum habere poterimus, aut hered. sen successor. nostri habere poterint
in futur. sectamque pac. nostrae quae ad nos versus ipsum Theophilum Higgons
pertinet seu perti^ere poterit in futur. and firmam pacem, and hanc
pardonation. nostram eidem Theophilo Higgons inde damus and concedimus per
praesentes. Aliquo Statut. Act. provisione seu restrictione in contrar. inde in
aliquo non obstan. In cujus rci, etc. Toste, etc.

Fr. Bacon.
It may please Your excellent Majesty.
This Bill contains Your Majesty's gracious Pardon unto Theophilus Higgons
Clerk, for any offense or contempt in passing over the Seas, or reconciliation
to the Church of Rome, or remaining in Seminaries, or conversing with Jesuits
or Priests, or other offenses of that nature; for which he is Penitent, and
has converted and conformed himself to the Religion established in this Realm.

I have no Warrant for the drawing of this Bill, save that Sr Edward Hoby, to
whom the party bears special obligation, did by his Letter to me signify Your
Majesty's pleasure to this purpose: But because the parties conversion was so
notorious, and so generally liked, I have presumed to commend this Bill to Your
Majesty's Signature.

Fr. Bacon.


1611. Expedit' apud Westm' xxiiijo die Julij Anno Regis Jacobi Nono. per
Windebank.
THE PARDON OF Sr Eustace Heart.
James R.
REX Omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem. Sciatis, quod nos de gratia nostra speciali
ae ex certa scientia and mero motu nostris pardonavimus, remisimus and
relaxavimus ac per praesentes pro nobis haered. and successor. nostris
pardonamus, remittimus and relaxamus Eustathio Haerte de villa de Southampton
milit. seu quocunque alio nomine, cognomine seu additione nominis vel
cognominis, dignitat. Offic. loc. vel. locorum idem Eustathius Heart sciatur,
censeatur, vocetur seu nuncupetur, aut nuper sciebatur, censeabatur, vocabatur
sive nuncupabatur omnia and singula crimina and offens. Adulterii,
Fornicationis and Incontinentiae quascunque per ipsum Eustathium Heart cum
aliqua muliere sive aliquibus mulieribus ante dat. praesent. ubicunque
quandocunque quomodocunque and qualitercunque fact. commis. sive perpetrat.
Necnon omnia and singula sect. Impetitiones, actiones, fines, paenas,
amerciament. and punitiones quascunque tangen. seu concernen. praemissa seu
eorum aliquod. Except. semper extra has praesentes omnibus and singulis Rapt.
Mulier. Angl. vocat. Rapes, and omnibus and singulis Incest. and Buggeriis and
omnibus aliis criminibu^ and offensis unde aliqua Billa, Actio, querela aut
Informatio ante dat. praesen. exhibit. fuit and coram nobis and consilio nostro
in Camerae Stellat. aut aliquibus aliis Cur. nostris apud Westmonaster. aut in
aliqua vel aliquibus curiis nostris Ecclesiasticis aut coram aliquem vel
aliquos Judicem vel Judic. aut Commissionar. nostros Ecclesiastic. modo
dependet and remanet prosequend. In cujus rei, etc. Test, etc.

This contains Your Majesty's Pardon to Sr Eustace Heart Knight, of all
Adulteries, Fornications and Incontinencies committed with any woman before
this time, and also of all imprisonments, fines and punishments in respect of
the same.

It contains nevertheless an Exception of all Rapes, Incest and Buggeries,
and all Suits wherein any Bill or Suit is depending in the Court of
Star Chamber, or any other Your Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or in any
Ecclesiastical Court whatsoever.

Tho. Ridley Cancellarius Winton. Ex. Levinus Munck.
1616. Expedit' apud Westm' Undecimo die Julii Anno Regis Jacobi quarto decimo.
per Windebank.
FINIS.

