JUSTIFICATIO^ Of the Members within Doors, to the Objections and Cavils (...)
Against The carrying up to the Lords, the Engrossed Bill for the Releis and
Discharge o^ (...) ^^gulation of Goals and Goalers.
THAT ^here are every where, and will be Men querulous, bitter of Spirit,
Revengeful, and of a Moross Uncharitable Disposition, kicking at all Laws and
Religion, but what they frame to themselves, is a Truth indisputable.

That this Charitable Law should meet with Men of such at Temperament to
destroy it, is evident, and none can imagine but some of these must be in love
with Goals, and pleased with the rendering their Fellow Subjects useless to the
World, and Sacrifices to greedy Jaylors, and the interest or revenge of
Scrivenors, Attorneys, Sollicitors, Brokers, Usurers, overgrown Extortioners,
Eaters into the Ancient Fortunes of Gentlemen, to aggrandize their upstart
Qualities, looking down upon the Persons of more Honor than themselves; and by
such Moth-natur'd Vermin, kept, confined, whilst the Debtor (is put upon the
necessity of being deliberately fed by them, till a Decree in Chancery is
obtained to foreclose the equitable remains of a Noble Inheritance, or until a
Release of the Equity of a forfeited Estate is procured for a small Sum, to
discharge a poor Prisoner, that such Viperous Morgagees may domineer securely
in the morgaged Premises (to the Capital Seat whereof it is probable) the
Fathers of these overgrown Harpies have been beholden for their necessary
Sustenance:) And yet the Lobby is filled with such whispering into the Ears of
the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, and other Members, objections to, and cavils
at, a Bill proceeding with all the fairness, caution, form, and inspection that
ever passed that Honorable Assembly. And least some Worthy Members should be
captivated, it is thought, by others but necessary that all the Scruples, which
may be pretended to obstruct this Bill, having had so ripe a Production) may be
solved, that none of our generous and merciful Representatives may suffer in
their Charecter of Wisdom and Iudustry, or any Person be thought asleep, during
the passing of this so necessary an Act.

First, it is objected, that this Bill differs from the former Acts past to
this purpose.

Ans. So it was intended, for that the Defects in those Acts were foreseen, and
by this prevented, many hundreds being by that freed from their Debts, never
imprisoned; for, by that it was but bribing the Jailer, and the deceit was
effected; but by this Act the Book, Copies of the Prisoners Causes (which are
upon Record) must be produced, and Oath made by the Prisoner of the time he was
imprisoned and other evidence of his Commitment.

Object. 2. The Oath is too narrow, the Person not swearing what value the
Estate is of that he does discover to his Creditor, and swearing only that he
has not wherewith to pay the Debts, for which he is imprisoned.

Ans He Swears, That he has without any reservation discovered All such Estate
real or personal, as he has in Possession, Reversion or Remainder, of which he
is seized or possessed in his own Right, or any other Person or Persons in
trust for him; and that he has not directly or indirectly, sold leased, or
otherwise conveyed, assigned, or secured all, or any part of his Estate, to
deceive any Creditor or Creditors, and what he has been an actual Prisoners,
etc. And then comes in the Clause, that he has not wherewith to satisfy the
Debt due, or Damage, for which he is imprisoned; and the words in the Act of
22. 22 Cor.2. are sufficient to pay the Debt or Damage, and (...) Act (...) are
reserved: Here those are ^^^trained to 10 l. and if a Debtor have 100 l. and
(...) men discovers that 100 l. and is bound by this Act to give every Creditor
a Judgment: And so, if the value be in Moneys, and the Creditors will not agree
to a Dividend; if Chattels, a Fieri Facias will attack it, if Laid, and Elegit
will lay hold on it, and so what does the Debtor do, but compound for his
Liberty with all he has to diliver himself from Bondage, and the excessive
Rent he is obliged to pay to a me^ciless Keeper. Besides, it is well known to
Lawyers, that the Persons of Englishmen was not originally subject to
imprisonment f^^ Debt; and if Magma Charta be of force, so as to annul all Law
made contrary to it: Imprisonment of Men's Persons for Debt is b^t a tortious
detention; and what is here desired, is not so much a^ was allowed to a Debtor
by the Common Law, when imprisonment was not: For by the Writ De Moderata
Misericordia, in whi^^ is recited Magna Charta, and thereby the Salvo
contenemento suo, and Villanis salvo Waynagio suo, and here is saved less than
(...) has his Freehold occupie^ (...) ^^^chandize, no Villain his W^ (...)
reasonable, and was the a^ (...) on to ten times the value, the (...)

Object. 3. That it is not (...) Creditor to continue his D^ (...) week, for
the time the Cr^ (...)

Ans. That by the Act o^ (...) Clause, but by the Act of (...) said allowance
shall be paid (...) ^lor and if in case he lie the (...) Estate of the Debtor
be dis^ (...) then the Prisoner to be disch^^^^^ (...) if ever that Clause was
put (...) upon the Creditor, and hi^ (...) if that be agreeable to Chri^ (...)
principles of our Religion (...)

Object. 4. That in this B^ (...) imposed, in case of Perjury, a^

Ans. But this imposes t^ (...) standing in the Pillory with (...) in all
Courts, pay all Dama^^^ (...) imprisoned as before, till h^ (...) his Life long.

Object. 5. That this Act Regulates Jaylo^^ (...) given great sums of Money for
their Places, (...) Rents for Farming of their Goals and make man(...) to
Judges and others, for Favor to be showed (...) ^^ceptable Members of a Common
Wealth, and m^ (...) ^blesh, by Law, the Writ De di^ in Diem, (...) vantage to
the Creditor, who should he o^ (...) may be intterupted by the Liber^^, the
Debtor m^ (...) relief in equity.

Ans. This is only to take from the ^aylor, and pu^^^^ the Co^^ssioners for the
Great Seal, to allow or not allow that W^ (...) moderating the Fees and the
Writs of Habeas Corpus (...) which the beneficial Law ((...) case of Criminals)
was mad^ (...) 2. and which was then ^ooked upon worth a supp^ (...) two
hundred six thousa^^ ^our hund^^d (...) ^^^nds, an the an^ if breaking of Laws
(...)buying and selling of (...) and ga^^ing by oppression, be thought a matter
at this ^me (...) to ^e countenanced.

^astly. It may be Objected (...) too well known t^ m^ (...) A^t Pr^^titioners
in the Law, that many Per^s Marry ^r Son^^^ and Dau^hters Settle great Esstates
and lie (...) Prison (...) a Certiorari for their Souls, and there are too t^
many Pr^ th^^of.

Ans. They cannot (beside disgrace) ^ure the (...) of a Prison, the
extraordinary sums of Money pa^ (...) ^le ease, from intolerable Hardhips and
be subject (...) man^ ^ndignities put upon them, but, that th^^ would wit^^^gly
^rt with what they have in th^^r power (...) their ^arty, (...) at least
compound for what the^ have t^ (...) in the ^harge (...) a Goal, over and
above, their necessar^ ^ let t^^m continue, none can go furthe^ (...) ^w and if
they will offend, they can b^ (...) intended to help impossibilities, (...) ^s
a help and releif for those Honest (...) be most of them (...) and Country by
(...) ^ment, who are now burthen^^^ (...) the whole (...) which keeps the
Husbands usless whilst ^ chil^ren are maintained by, and chargeable (...) the
Farm for wh^^h (...) they did last belong.

BUT if nothing will satisfied the angry Rats with^^t doors, by this Bill
settled within i^ is hoped the C^lai^man will satisfy the Costs, and then let
the Wisdom of the N^ion Ju^e, whether 40000 Subjects, who in the (...)
Revolution might h^ve delivered themselves from Thraldom, an^ (...) ^de a
consi^^rable ^ure in the juncture of Affairs, are not the ^y Englishm^^ who
have had no Relief by this happy Reformation (...) And his e^ossed L^w must; be
last (in an Vnparliamentary way) (...) humo^r the^, and ^he Relief intended
must be denied. For to t^ (...) a n^w Bil^ is to ^av^ none at all.


