DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
His MAJESTY'S Most Gracious PARDON, Pleaded at Justice Hall, in the OLD-BAYLY:
On Monday the 7th. of March, Anno. Dom. 1687. And in the Third Year of His
Majesty's Reign.
AS Mercy and Compassion to miserable Miscreants, (who by a wilful Breach of
those Laws, which are set as Rules to square their Actions by, or Boundards to
their wicked thoughts, and lawless desires, have Forfeited their Lives to
Justice) is the brightest Gem, or most Resplendent Virtue, that Adorns the
Royal Power, so it has appeared in nothing more excellent, or shown its fuller
perfection, than in our Most Gracious Sovereign, as his Reiterated Goodness and
Commisseration of that kind, has manifested to the World, and amongst others,
his Princely Acts of Clemency, flowing from the Royal Favor. (This) the
Relation of which, is the Subjects of this Paper) ought to take place in the
Hearts and Minds of his Subjects, and never to be forgotten by those whom it
has snatched, even from the Gates of Death, and given a longer Date of Life; to
try whether such Mercy (as indeed, it ought to do) can reclaim them from the
Wickedness of their Ways. The Account of which, take as follows

At the Sessions of Peace, Oyer and Terminer, Held at the Sessions House in the
Old-Bayly, on the 23d. 24th. and 25th. of February last. In the Close of the
said Sessions, Monday the 7th. of this Instant March, 1687. was appointed by
the Court, for the Criminals then remaining in the Goal of Newgate, to Plead
his Majesty's Gracious Pardon, when accordingly between two and three in the
Afternoon, the Right Honorable Sir John Peake, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of
London, the Deputy Recorder, and diverse of the Aldermen; together, with the
Right Worshipful, the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, came to Justice-Hall,
whether the Prisoners being brought from Newgate, in the Custody of Major
Richardson; were set to the Bar, and being severally asked what they could
say, why they should not be Executed, upon the Sentence that had passed against
them at sundry times, etc. They one, by one, falling on their Knees, Prayed the
Benefit of His Majesty's Most Gracious Pardon, and so being brought out of the
Pound from behind the Bar. The Partys whose Names follow, fell on their Knees
in the Court whilst the Pardon was Reading, etc. viz.

Elenor Davis, Mary Stanly, Hester Sympson, Sarah Dean, Joseph Hensly, William
Wilder, John C^lverwell, John Mi^s, John Eld^id, Richard Roberts, John Dunkin,
Arabella Reeves, Elias Smith, Humphrey Payton, Thomas Wall, Mary Lush, William
Austin Hide, Edward Newgent, Thomas Fann, Edmund Anthony, Elizabeth Brockhouse,
alias Brudnel, Nicholas Jones, Elizabeth James, James Deal, alias Reynolds
Sarah Vince, John Jennings, John Reeves, Elizabeth Bamfield, alias Carter,
alias Smith, Isaac Vaughn, als. Howard, Thomas Gibbs, Richard Richardson,
Edward Skeleton, John Clark, and Elizabeth Maurice.
Richard Jonson, who was Condemned for the Murder of William Patfield, was
likewise included in this Pardon, but appearing as h^ had before done in the
Court, to be Distracted, his Friends were ordered to take Care of him, in order
to his Cure.

John Reddall, for shooting his Fellow Apprentice in the Head with a Pistol,
did not Plead, and Richard Alborough did not Plead, the R^cord being in the
Crown.

The Pardon being Read, the Court Proceeded to put the Criminals in mind of the
great Favor and Mercy they had received, through ^he Clemency, great Goodness,
and Compassion of His Most Sacred Majesty; and that they ought in an
extraordinary manner, to be sensible of that Benignity, and be exceeding
thankful for their Lives, which were given them, etc. and ^^udy for the Future,
by the Amendment of their said Lives and Conversations, in some measure to make
their Sorrow appear for what had passed, and their abhorrence of those Crimes
whereof they had been Guilty, doing what in them lay, to Render Restitutions
for the wrongs, they had done; but above all, to Repent, and be heartily sorry
for their Sins and Mis-doings, etc.

The Court then proceeded to remind them of the Crimes, whereof they had been
Convicted, which in General were Murders, Burglarys, Felonys, Horse stealing,
Coining, Robbery, and the like; after which, having expressed their hearty
thank^ for the Mercy and Favor Extended toward them; they were Re-conveyed to
the place from whence they came.

Claud de Aurange, and Roger Kenneday, who had been sometime in Newgate for
Running from their Colors, were brought to the Bar, and upon Certification
that it was their Captains desire they should be admitted to Bail, they were
accordingly Bailed.

The Prison^rs being gone out of the Sessions House, the Adjournment was made
to Guild Hall on the 4th. of April, and to Justice. Ha^on the 6th. of April
next following, and so the Court broke up.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
This may be Printed,

March the 8th. 1687. R. P.

London Printed by D. Mallet, next Door to the Sign of the Star, between
Fleet-bridge and Bridewell-bridge.


