I7 R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
HIS MAJESTY'S Most Gracious Letter TO THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND.
Published by His Majesty's Command.

JAMES R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE great Testimonies We had of your Loyalty and Affection to Our Royal Person
and Government at your last Session, (in which you not only made an humble
Offer of your Duty in ample manner, and showed your Abhorrence of the Rebellion
then raised against Us, and your Readiness on that, and all other Occasions to
stand by Us with your Lives and Fortunes, but (wisely considering how much the
Forces which former Parliaments had given Us Supplies to maintain, supported by
your Assistance, and blessed by God, were instrumental in ending that unnatural
Rebellion) you gave Us the occasion by Augmenting your Supplies to add to Our
Forces, (and consequently to your own Security) for all which as We then
returned you Our most Hearty and Royal Thanks, and considered you the Examples
to Our other Subjects of Loyalty, Duty and Affection to Us, (as you had been in
Our former Difficulties) so it stirred up in Us an Ardent Desire of making such
Returns unto you, as might every way make you find the Advantage of your
Faithfulness and Duty to Us.

It is for this End that We have again desired to meet you in this Session.

We have considered your Interest as much as Our Distance from you could bring
into Our Prospect, and those things which We found proper for it, whether in
Relation to Trade and Commerce, or Easing some things Uneasy to you amongst
yourselves, We have fully Instructed Our Commissioner (with your Advice and
Consent) to conclude so, as may be most for the General Good of that Our
Ancient Kingdom.

We have made the Opening of a Free Trade with England Our Particular Care, and
are Proceeding in it with all Imaginable Application, and are Hopeful in a
short time to have Considerable Advances made in it. We have considered the
Trouble that many are put to Daily by Prosecutions before Our Judges, or the
hazard that they ly under for their Accession to the late Rebellions: And to
show the World (even Our greatest Enemies themselves) that Mercy is Our
Inclination, and Severity what is by their Wickedness Extorted from Us, We have
sent down to be Past in your Presence Our Full and Ample Indemnity for all
Crimes Committed against Our Royal Person or Authority. And whilst We show
these Acts of Mercy to the Enemies to Our Person, Crown and Royal Dignity, We
cannot be Unmindful of Others Our Innocent Subjects, those of the Roman
Catholic Religion, who have with the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes been
always Assistant to the Crown in the worst of Rebellions and Usurpations,
though they lay under Discouragements hardly to be Named. Them We do heartily
Recommend to your Care, to the end that as they have given Good Experience of
their True Loyalty and Peaceable Behavior, so by your Assistance they may have
the Protection of Our Laws, and that Security under Our Government, which
others of Our Subjects have, not suffering them to lie under Obligations which
their Religion cannot admit of. By doing whereof you will give a Demonstration
of the Duty and Affection you have for Us, and do Us most acceptable Service.

This Love We expect you will show to your Brethren, as you see We are an
Indulgent Father to you all.

For these, and such other Matters as We conceive for Our Service, and the
Universal Good of the Nation, We have sent Our Right Trusty and Right Entirely
Beloved Cousin and Counselor, Alexander Earl of Morray, Secretary of State for
that Our Ancient Kingdom, Our Commissioner to you, believing that none will be
more acceptable than one so immediately Employed and Trusted about Our Person,
of whose Long and Faithful Services We have full Experience in every one of the
several Employments he has been in, and of whose Loyalty and Affection to Our
Person and Service We are fully convinced. To him We desire you to give entire
Credit, as One fully Instructed and Trusted by Us, from whose Experience and
Faithful Endeavors, with your Loyalty, Love and Duty to Us, We have good
Reason to expect a happy Conclusion to this Session: And you may assure your
selves in general, and every one of you in particular, That We shall have both
the general-Concern of the Nation and yours into Our most particular Regard,
which We shall express by Our Royal Favor upon all suitable Occasions. So not
only expecting your Compliance with Us, but that by the Manner of it you will
show the World your readiness to meet Our Inclinations, We bid you most
heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 12th Day of April, 1686. and of Our Reign
the Second Year. By His Majesty's Command. MELFORT.

The Parliament of Scotlands Dutiful Answer to His Majesty's Letter.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
WE do return Your Majesty our most humble and hearty Thanks, for the frequent
Marks of Your Royal Favor expressed to this Your Majesty's Ancient Kingdom upon
all Occasions; And particularly, in Your Majesty's Gracious Letter dated the
12th of April last: And Your Majesty may with full Assurance expect, That Your
Gracious Acceptance of those Services we did You in the last Session of this
Parliament, will encourage us to continue our Zeal and Firmness in this, for
Your Majesty's Service, and the Royal Interest, upon which, under God, we
acknowledge our Happiness and Preservation do entirely depend.

Your Majesty's Care of the Trade of this Kingdom (which is, at present,
exceedingly Decayed) and particularly, Your Royal Endeavors to procure us a
Free Trade with Your Kingdom of England, will very much enable us to make these
Supplies effectual, which we have so heartily and willingly undertaken for the
Security of the Crown, and Safety of the Kingdom; Nor shall the Advantages that
can arise thereby, be more acceptable to us upon any other Account, than so
far, as they may be a Testimony of Your Majesty's Kindness, and conduce to
those great Ends.

Your Majesty's Clemency, testified in the Offer of an Indemnity to these
desperate Rebels, who could have expected Pardon from no Monarch on Earth but
Your Sacred Majesty; And the greatest Aggravation of whose Crimes, lies in
opposing such Gracious and Merciful Princes, will (we hope) not only convince
your other Subjects how happy they are under Your Government, but reclaim them
from bearing any further Enmity to it; And to let them see how Extravagant, as
well as Undutiful, their Endeavors will be, in opposing Your Majesty, and Your
Royal Successors, We do again most Sincerely and Heartily offer You our Lives
and Fortunes for suppressing all such, as shall upon any Account or Pretense
whatsoever, attempt, either by private Contrivances, or open Rebellions, to
disquiet Your Glorious Reign.

As to that part of Your Majesty's Letter relating to Your Subjects of the
Roman Catholic Religion. We shall, in Obedience to Your Majesty's Commands,
and with Tenderness to their Persons, take the same into our serious and
dutiful Consideration, and go as great Lengths therein, as our Conscience will
allow; Not doubting that Your Majesty will be careful to secure the Protestant
Religion established by Law.

Your Majesty's Commissioner has, to our very great Satisfaction, signified to
us, That he is fully instructed by Your Majesty, to promote every thing which
may tend to the Improvement of the Wealth and Prosperity of this Your Ancient
Kingdom; And we hope, that by his wise Care and Conduct, this Session of
Parliament may be brought to a happy Conclusion; And to Him, seeing Your
Majesty has well judged that none could be more acceptable, We shall give that
entire Credit and Concurrence, and pay that Respect which is due to the eminent
Character which Your Majesty has been pleased to give Him; And to that constant
Loyalty and Fidelity with which He has acquitted Himself in all the former
Trusts and Employments which He has born under Your Majesty's Royal Brother,
and Your Self; Hoping that we shall give Him just Reason to report at his
Return to Your Majesty, with how much Zeal, Duty and Affection, we endeavor to
deserve the being Considered, by Your Majesty, as

(May it please Your Sacred Majesty) Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful,
And most Obedient Subjects and Servants. PERTH CANC. I. P. D. Parl.
Edinburgh, May 6. 1686.

