THE SPEECH OF King JAMES the I. TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT Upon his
ACCESSION to, AND THE HAPPY UNION Of Both the CROWNS OF ENGLAND and SCOTLAND,
Regally Pronounced, and Expressed by him to them, Die JOVIS 22th. Martii 1603.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Bailey. 1689.

TO THE READER.
THE Inducement to the Publishing of this worthy Speech, is no other than to
intimate to the World the disrelish that so Learned a King had against the
Impious Faction of Jesuitism and Popery; both which have always been looked
upon as the Enemies of our Peace and Unanimity; so that it pleased God to
appoint him in a great measure, to make us Happy in our Pious, and now well
secured Reformation.

Die JOVIS 22th. Martii 1603.
This Day the Speaker Elect, with a great Number of the Commons, returned again
to the usual place, and did there repose themselves, until his Highness being
Ascended his Royal Throne, in the Upper House did send unto them; which about
two of the Clock in the Afternoon he was pleased to do; and Mr. Speaker with
the rest of the Commons, coming into the Kings Presence, his Majesty took
occasion to Repeat the Effect of his former Speech, delivered the first Day;
with Excuse of the mistaking, upon Monday precedent.

His Majesty's Speech was to this Effect.
IT did no sooner please God, to lighten his Hand, and retent the Violence of
the devouring Angel, against the poor people of this City, but as soon did I
resolve to call this Parliament, and that for Three chief and principle
Rea^ons: The first whereof is, and which of its self, although there were no
more, is not only a sufficient, but a most full and necessary ground, and
reason for the convening of this Assembly.

The first Reason, I say is, That you who are here presently Assembled, to
represent the Body of this whole Kingdom, and of all sorts of people within the
same; may with your own Ears hear; and that I, out of mine own Mouth, may
deliver unto you, the assurance of my due thankfulness for your so joyfully,
and general Applause to the declaring, and receiving me in this Seat; (which
God by my Birthright and Lineal descent, had in the fullness of time provided
for me) and that immediately after, it pleased God to call your late Sovereign
of blessed Memory, full of days, but fuller of immortal Trophies of Honor, out
of this transitory Life; not that I am able to express her Words, or to utter
by Eloquence the vive Image of mine inward Thankfulness; but only, that out of
mine own Mouth you may rest assured, to expect that measure of thankfulness at
my Hands; which is according to the infiniteness of your deserts, and to my
inclination and ability for requital of the same. Shall I ever, nay, can I ever
be able, or rather so unable in memory, as to forget your unexpected readiness
and alacrity; your ever memorable resolution, and your most wonderful
conjunction, and harmony of your hearts, in declaring and embracing me as your
undoubted, and lawful King and Governor; or shall it ever be blotted out of my
mind, how at my first Entry into this Kingdom; the people of all sorts, Rid and
Ran, nay, rather Flew to meet me; their Eyes flaming nothing but Sparkles of
Affection; their Mouths and Tongues uttering nothing but Songs of Joy; their
Hands and Feet, and all the rest of their Members in their Gestures,
discovering a passionate Longing and Earnestness, to Meet and Embrace their New
Sovereign; Quid ergo retribuamur. Shall I allow in my self, that which I could
not bear with in another? No, I must plainly and freely confess here in all
your Audiences, I did ever naturally so far mislike a Tongue, too smooth and
^iligent in paying their Creditors with Lip payments and verbal thanks, as I
ever suspected that sort of people meant not to pay their Debtors in more
substantial sort of Coin; and therefore for expressing of my thankfulness, I
must resort unto my other two Reasons of my convening of this Parliament, by
them in Action to utter my thankfulness; both the said Reasons having but one
ground, which is the deeds whereby all the days of my Life, I am by Gods Grace
to express all my thankfulness toward you, but divided in this; That in the
first of these two, mine Actions of thanks are so inseperably conjoined with my
person, as they are become in a manner individually annexed to the same: In the
other Reason, mine Actions are such, as I may do, or leave them undone;
although by Gods Grace I hope never to be weary of the doing of them.

As to the first, it is the blessings which God has in my person bestowed on
you all; wherein I protest I do more glory at the same for your Weal, than for
any particular respect of mine own reputation, or advantage therein: The first
then of these blessings which God has jointly with my person sent unto you, is
outward peace; that is peace abroad with all Foreign Neighbors: For I thank
God I may safely say, that never since I was a King, I either received wrong
from any Christian Prince or State, or did wrong to any: I have ever praised
God, yet kept Peace and Amity with all, which have been so far tied to my
person, as at my coming here, you are Witnesses, I found the State Embarked in
a great and tedious War; and only by mine Arrival here, and by the peace in my
person; is not Amity kept where War was before; which is no small blessing to a
Christian Commonwealth; for by Peace abroad with our Neighbors, the Towns
flourish, the Merchants become Rich, the Trade increase, and the people of all
sorts of the Land, enjoy free liberty to exercise themselves in their several
vocations, without peril, or disturbance; not that I think this outward Peace
so unseperably tied to my Person, as I dare assuredly promise to my self, and
to you the certain continuance thereof: But thus far I can very well assure
you, and in the Word of a King, promise unto you, that I shall never give the
first occasion of the breach thereof; neither shall I ever be moved for any
particular, or private passion of mine, to interrupt your public Peace; unless
I be forced thereunto, either for reparation of the Honor of the Kingdom, or
else by necessity for the Weal and preservation of the same; in which Case, a
secure and honorable War must be preferred, to an unsecure and dishonorable
peace: Yet do I hope, by the experience of the by past blessing of Peace, which
God has so long ever since my Birth time bestowed upon me, that he will not be
weary to continue the same, nor repent him of his Grace toward me;
transferring that Sentence of King David's, upon his by past Victories of War
to mine of Peace.

That that God, who preserved me from the devouring Jaws of the Bear, and of
the Lion; and delivered them into my Hands, shall now also grant me Victory
over that uncircumcised Philistine: But although outward peace be a great
Blessing, yet is it as far inferior to that within, as Civil Wars are more
cruel and unnatural than Wars abroad; and therefore the second great Blessing
that God has within my Person sent unto you, is Peace within, and that in a
double form.

First, by my descent lineally out of the Loins of Henry the VII. is reunited
and confirmed in me, the Union of the Two Princely Roses of the two Houses of
Lancaster and York; whereof that King of happy Memory was the first Uniter, as
he was also the first Ground layer of the other Peace. The lamentable and
Miserable Events by the Civil and Bloody discention betwixt these two Houses,
were so great and so late, as it need not to be renewed to your Memories; which
as it was first settled and united in him, so it is now reunited and confirmed
in me, being Justly and Lineally descended, not only of that happy conjunction,
but of both the branches thereof many times before: But the Union of the two
Princely Houses, is nothing comparable to the Union of the two Ancient and
Famous Kingdoms, which is the other inward Peace annexed to my person: And here
I must crave your patiences for a little space, to give me leave to discourse
more particularly of the Benefits that do arise, of that Union which is made in
my Blood; being a matter that most properly belongs unto me to speak of, as
the Head wherein that great Body is united. And first, if we were to look no
higher than to Natural and Phisical reasons, we may be easily persuaded of the
great Benefits, that by that Union do redound to the whole Island: For if
twenty Thousand Men be a strong Army, is not the double Number hereof Forty
Thousand a double the stronger Army. If a Baron inricheth himself with double
as many Lands as he had before; is he not double the greater? Nature teaches
us, that Mountains are made of Motes, and that at the first Kingdoms being
divided, and every particular Town, or little Country that Tyrants, or Usurpers
could obtain the possession, a Seigniory a part; many of these little Kingdoms,
are now in process of time, by the Ordinance of God, joined into great
Monarchies; whereby they are become within themselves powerful, to defend
themselves from outward Invasions; their Head and Governor enabled to redeem
them from Foreign Assaults and punish private Transgressors within. Do we not
remember that this Kingdom was divided into seven little Kingdoms besides
Wales; and is it not now the stronger by their Union; and has not the Union of
Wales to England, added a greater strength thereto; which although it was a
greater Principality, was nothing comparable in Greatness, and in Power; to the
Ancient and Famous Kingdom of Scotland: But what should we stick upon any
natural appearance, when it is manifest, that God of his Almighty Providence,
has preordained it so to be: Has not God first united these Kingdoms, both in
Language, Religion, and similitude of Manners? Yea, Has he not made us all in
one Island, compassed with one Sea; and of it self by Nature so indivisible, as
almost those that were Borderers themselves in the late Borders, cannot
distinguish, nor know, or discern their own Limits: These two Countries being
separated, neither by Sea, nor by any great River, Mountain, nor other strength
of Nature, but only by little small Brooks, or demolished little Walls; so as
rather they were divided in apprehension, than in Effect; and now in the end
and fullness of time, United the Right and Title of both in my Person alike;
Lineally descended of both the Crowns, whereby it is now become like a little
World within it self, being Entrenched, and Fortifi^^ round about with a
Natural, and yet admirable strong Pond, or Ditch, whereby all the former fears
of this Nation are now quite cut off. The other part of the Island, being ever
before now, not only a place of Landing to all strangers, that were to make
Invasions here; but likewise moved by the Enemies of this State, by untimely
incursions, to make enforced diversion from their Conquests, for defending
themselves at home, and keeping sure their backdoor, as then it was called;
which was the greatest hindrance and let, that ever my Predecessors of this
Nation gave, in disturbing them from their many Famous, and Glorious Conquests
abroad; what God has enjoined then let no Man separate. I am the Husband, and
the whole Island is my lawful Wife; I am ^he Head, and it is my Body; I am the
Shepherd, and it is my Flock; I hope therefore no man will be so unreasonable,
as to think that I, that am a Christian King under the Gospel, should be a
Polygamist, and Husband to two Wifes; that I being the Head, should have a
divided, and monstrous Body; or that I being a Shepherd to so Fair a Flock,
whose Fold has no Wall to hedge it, but the four Seas should have my Flock
parted in two: But as I am assured, that no honest Subject of whatsoever degree
within my whole Dominion, is less glad of this joyful Union than I am, so may
the frivolous objection of any that would be hinderers of this Work, which God
has in my Person already established, be easily answered; which can be none,
except such as are blinded with ignorance, or self transported with malice,
being unable to live in a well Governed Commonwealth, and only delight to fish
in troubled Waters; for if they would stand upon their reputation, and
privileges of any of the Kingdoms. I ^ray you, was not both the Kingdoms
Monarchies from the beginning; and consequently could ever the body be counted
without the head, which was ever inseperably joined thereunto; so that as the
Honor and Privilege of any of the Kingdoms could not be divided from their
Sovereign; so are they now con^^nded, and joined in my Person, who am equal,
and like kindly head to you both.

When this Kingdom of England was divided into so many little Kingdoms, as I
told before; one of them behoved to edate upon another; till they were United
in one: And yet can Wiltshire, or Devonshire, which were of the West Sax^ns,
although their Kingdom was of longest durance; and did by Conquests overcome
diverse of the rest of the little Kingdoms, make claim to Priority, or Place, or
Honor before Sussex, Essex, and other Shires that was conquered by them: And
have we not the like experience in the Kingdom of France; being composed of
diverse Dutchies, and one after another Conquered by the Sword; for even as
little Brooks lose their Names, by their running and fall into Great Rivers;
and the Name of the great River swallowed up in Ocean; so by the ^onjuction of
diverse little Kingdom in one, are all these private differences, and ^uestions
swallowed up. And since the success was happy of the Saxons King^oms being
Conquered, by the Spear of Bellona, now much greater reason ^ave we to expect a
happy Issue of this greater Union, which is only fastened, and bound up by the
Wedding Ring of Astrea; and as God has made Scotland the one half of this
Island to enjoy my Birth; and the first, and most unperfect half of my Life;
and you here to enjoy the perfect, and last part thereof; so can I not think
that any would be so injurious to me; no, not in their thoughts, as to cut
asunder the one half of me from the other; but in this matter, I have far
enough insisted, resting assured in your Hearts and Minds; you all applaud this
my Discourse.

Now, although these Blessings rehearsed before, of inward and outward Peace be
great; yet, seeing that in all good things, a great part of their goodness and
estimation is lost, if they have not appearance of perpetuity, or long
continuance; so has it pleased Almighty God to accompany my Person also, with
that favor; having healthful, and hopeful Issue of my Body; whereof some are
here present, for continuance of propagation of that undoubted Right, which in
my Person; under whom I doubt not, but it will please God to prosper, and
continue for many years this Union, and all other the Blessings of inward and
outward Peace, which I have brought with me; but neither Peace outward, nor
Peace inward, nor any other blessings that can follow thereupon; nor appearance
of the perpetuity thereof, by a propagation in the Posterity, is but a weak
Pillar; and a rotten Reed to lean unto; if God do not strengthen, and by the
staff of his Blessing make them durable; for in vain does the Watchman watch
the City, if the Lord be not the principal defense thereof: In vain does the
Builder build the house, if God give not the Success; and in vain as Paul
says; does Paul Plant, and Apollo Water, if God give not the increase; for all
worldly Blessings are but like swift passing shadows, fading Flowers, or Chaff
blown before the Wind: If the profession of true Religion, and Works according
thereunto, God be not moved to maintain, and settle the Thrones of Princes: And
although, that since mine Entry into this Kingdom, I have both by meeting with
diverse Ecclesiastical Estates, and likewise by diverse Proclamations clearly
declared my mind in points of Religion; yet do I not think it amiss in this
Solemn an Audience; I should now take an occasion to discover somewhat of the
secrets of my heart in that matter; for I shall never by Gods Grace, be ashamed
to make public profession thereof, at all occasions; least God should be
ashamed to profess, and allow me before Men and Angels; especially, least that
at this time meant, might presume further upon the misknowledge of my meaning,
in troubling of this Parliament of Ours, than were more convenient. At my first
coming, although I found but one, and that which is by my self professed,
publicly Allowed, and by the Law maintained; yet I found another sort of
Religion, besides a private Sect, lurking within the bowels of this Nation; The
first is True Religion, which by me is professed, and by the Law Established:
The Second is, the falsely called Catholics; but truly Papists: The Third
which I called a Sect rather than Religion; is the Puritans and Novalists, who
do not so far differ from us in points of Religion, as in confused form of
policy and parity; being ever discontented with the present Government, and
impatient to suffer any Superiority; which makes their Sect unable to be
suffered in any well Governed Commonwealth; but as for my course toward them;
I remit it to my Proclamations made upon that Subject.

And now for the Papists; I must put a difference, betwixt mine own private
Profession of mine own Salvation; and my politic Government of the Realm, for
the Weal and quietness thereof: As for my own profession, you have your Head
now amongst you, of the same Religion as the Body is of; as I am no stranger to
you in Blood, no more am I a stranger to you in Faith, or in the matters
concerning the house of God; And although this my profession be according to
mine Education, wherein (I thank God) I sucked the Milk of Gods Truth, with the
Milk of my Nurses; yet do I here protest unto you, that I would never for such
a conceit of constancy, or other prejudicate Opinion have so firmly kept my
first profession; if I had not found it agreeable to all Reason, and to the
Rule of my Conscience; but I was never violent, nor unreasonable in my
profession.

I acknowledge the Romish Church to be our Mother Church, although defiled with
some Infirmities and Corruptions; as the Jews were, when they Crucified Christ:
and as I am none Enemy to the Life of a Sick Man, because I would have his Body
purged of ill humors; no more am I an Enemy to their Church, because I would
have them reform their Errors; not wishing the down throwing of the Temple, but
that it may be purged, and cleansed from the corruption; otherwise how can they
wish us to enter, if their house be not first made clean. But as I would be
loather to dispense in the least point of mine own Conscience, for any worldly
respect, than the foolishest precisian of them all; so would I be as sorry to
straight the oublique Government of the Bodies, and minds of all my Subjects,
to my private Opinions; nay, my mind was ever so free from Persecution, or
thralling of my Subjects in matter of Conscience, as I hope that those of that
profession in this Kingdom, have a proof since my coming, that I was so far
from increasing their Burdens with Rehoboam, as I have so much, as either time,
occasion, or Law could permit, lightened them, and even now at this time, have I
been careful to revise, and consider deeply the Laws made against them; that
some overture may be proposed to the present Parliament, for clearing these
Laws, by reason, which is the Soul of the Law, in case they have been in time
past, further, or more rigorously extended by Judges, than the meaning of the
Law was, or might tend to the hurt, as well of the innocent, as of guilty
persons: And as to the persons of my Subjects, which are of that profession, I
must divide them into two Ranks, Clericks, and Layicks: For the part of the
Layicks; certainly I ever thought them far more excusable than the other sort;
because that sort of Religion contains such an ignorant, doubtful, and
implicit kind of Faith in the Layicks, grounded upon their Church; as except
they do generally believe whatsoever their Teachers please to affirm, they
cannot be thought guilty of these particular points of Heresies, and corruption
which their Teachers do so willingly profess: And again, I must divide the same
Layicks into two Ranks that is, either quiet and well minded Men, peaceable
Subjects, who either being Old have retained their first drunken in Liquor upon
certain shamefacedness to be thought curious, or changeable, or being young
men, through evil Education have never been Nursed, or brought up, but upon
such Venom, in place of wholesome nutriment; And that sort of people, I would
be sorry to punish their Bodies for the errors of their mind; the reformation
whereof must only come of God, and the true Spirit: But the other Rank of
Layicks, who either through curiosity, affectation of Novelty, or
coffeehouse in their private humors, have changed their Coats only to be
factious stirrers of sedition, and partakers of the Commonwealth; their
backwardness in Religion gives aground to me the Magistrate, to take the
better heed to their proceeding, and to correct their obstinacy: But for the
part of the Clericks, I must directly say, and affirm, that as long as they
maintain one special point of the Doctrine; and another point of their
practice, they are no way sufferable to remain in the Kingdom.

Their points of Doctrine, is that arrogant and ambitious Supremacy of their
Head the Pope; whereby he not only claims to be spiritual Head of all
Christians, but also to have an Imperial Civil Power over all Kings and
Emperors; dethroning, or decrowning Princes with his foot, as pleases him, and
dispensing and deposing of all Kingdoms and Empires at his appetite: The other
point, which they observe in their continual practice, is the Assassinate and
Murders of Kings; thinking it no sin, but rather a matter of Salvation, to do
all Actions of Rebellion and Hostility against their Natural Sovereign Lord, if
he be once Cursed, his Subjects discharged of their Fidelity, and his Kingdom
given a Prey by that Three Crowned Monarch, or rather Monster-their Head: And
in this point I have no occasion to speak further here; saving, that I could
wish from my heart that it would please God to make me one of the Members of
such a Christian Union in Religion; as laying wilfulness aside on both Hands,
we might meet in the midst, which is the Center and Perfection of all things;
for if they would leave, and be ashamed of such New and Gross Corruptions of
theirs, as themselves cannot maintain, nor deny to be worthy of Reformation; I
would for my own part, be contented to meet them in the mid way, so that all
Novelties might be removed on either side; for as my Faith is the true Ancient
and Catholic, and Apostolic Faith, grounded upon the Scriptures, and express
Word of God, so will I ever yield all Reverence to Antiquity in the points of
Ecclesiastical policy; and by that means, shall I ever with Gods grace, keep my
self from being either an Heretic in Faith, or Schismatic in matters of
Policy: But of one thing would I have the Papists of this land be admonished,
that they presume not too much upon my lenity; Because I would be loath to be
thought a persecutor, as thereupon to think it lawful for them to increase
their number, or strength in this Kingdom; whereby, if not in my time, at Least
in the time of my Posterity they might be in hope to erect their religion
again: No, let them assure themselves, that as I am a friend to their persons
if good Subjects; So am I avowed enemy, and do denounce mortal war to their
Errors,

And that as I would be sorry to be driven by their ill behavior from the
protection and conservation of their bodies and lives, so will I never cease,
as far as I can, to tread down their Errors and wrong oppinions. For I could
not permit the increase of growing of their religion without First betraying of
my self and my own Conscience.

Secondly, this whole Isle, as well the part I am come from, as the part I
remain in, in betraying their liberties and reduceing them to the former
slavish yoke, which both had casten off before I came amongst them.

And Thirdly, the Liberty of the Crown in my Posterity, which I should leave
again under a new slavery, having found it left free to me by my Predecessors,
and therefore would I wish all good Subjects that are deceived with that
corruption, first if they find any beginning of instinction in themselves of
Knowledge and Love to the truth, to foster the same by all lawful means, and so
beware of quenching the Spirit that works within them; And if they can find
as yet no motion tending that way, to be studious, to read and confer with
learned men, and to use such means as may further their resolution; Assuring
themselves that as long as they are disconformable in religion from us they
cannot be but half my Subjects, be able to do but half service, and I to want
the best half of them which is their Souls. And here have I occasion, to speak
to you my Lords and Bishops, for as you my Lord of Durham said, very learnedly
to day in your Sermon, correction without instruction is but a Tyranny: So
ought you and all the Clergy under you to be more careful, vigilent, and
diligent, then you have been to win souls to God, as well by your exemplary
life as Doctrine; and since you see how careful they are, sporeing neither
labor pains nor eztream peril of their persons to divert (the Devil is so
busy a Bishop) ye should be the more careful and wakeful in your charges:
follow the rule prescribed you by St. Paul be careful to exhort and instruct in
Season and out of Season; and where you have been any way Sluggish before, now
waken your selves up again with a new diligence in this point, remitting the
success to God, who calling them at the second, third, tenth, and twelfth hour,
as they are alike welcome to him so shall they be to me his Leiutenant here.

The third reason of convening you here at this time, which contains such
action of my thankfullness toward you, as I may either do or leave undone; yet
shall with Gods grace press to perform all the days of my life.

It consists in these two points in making of Laws at Certain times, which is
only at such times as this in Parliament, or in the careful execution thereof
at all other times; as for the making of them, I will thus far faithfully
promise unto you, that I will ever prefer the weal of the Body of the whole
Commonwealth in making of good Laws and Constitutions to any particular or
private ends of mine, thinking ever the wealth and weal of the Commonwealth
to be my greatest weal and worldly felicity. A Point werein a lawful King does
directly differ from a Tyrant: But at this time I am only thus far to forewarn
you in that point, that you before to seek the making of too many Laws for two
special reasons; first because in Corruptissima republica plurimae leges, and
the execution of good laws is far more profitable in a Common wealth then to
Burden men's memories with the making too many of them: And next because the
making of too many Laws in one Parliament will bring in confusion for lack of
leisure wisely to deliberate before you Conclude: For the Bishop said well to
day, That to deliberation would a large time be given, but to execution a
greater promptness was required. As for the execution of good Laws it has been
very wisely and honorably foreseen and ordered by my Predecessors in this
Kingdom, in planting such a number of Judges and Magistrates in all convenient
places for the execution of the same: And therefore must I now turn me to you
that are Judges and Magistrates under me, as mine eyes and ears in this case, I
can say none otherwise to you then as Ezekias the good King of Judea said to
their Judges, remember the Thrones as you sit on are God's, neither yours nor
mine, and that as you must be answerable to me so must both you, and I are
answerable unto God for the due execution of our Offices. That place is not a
place for you to utter your affections in, you must not there love your friend
nor hate your Foe, fear the offense of the greater party, or pity the misery of
the meaner: Ye must be blind and not see distinction of persons, handless not
to receive bribes, but keep that just temper and mid course in all your
proceedings, that like a Just balance ye may neither sway to the right nor
left hand.

Three principal qualities are required in you, Knowledge, Courage, and
Sincerity, that you may discern with knowledge, execute with courage, and do
both in upright sincerity; and as for my part I do vow and protest here in the
presence of God and of this honorable Audience, I never shall be weary, nor
omit any occasion, wherein I may show my carefullness of the execution of good
Laws, and as I desire you Judges not to be weary in your Office in doing of it,
so shall I never be weary by Gods grace to take account of you, which is
properly my calling. And now having told you the three causes of my Conveneing
a Parliament, all three tending only to utter my thankfullness but in diverse
forms; the first by words, the other two by actions, I do confess that when I
have done and performed All that in this speech I have promised Inutilis sum
inutile, because the meaning of the word inutilis in that place of Scripture is
understood in doing all that service which we can to God, it is but our due and
we do nothing to God but that which we are bound to do, and in like manner when
I have done all that I can for you, I do nothing, I do nothing but that which I
am bound to do, and am accountable to God upon the contrary. For I do
acknowledge that the special and greatest point of difference, that is betwixt
a rightful King and an usurping Tyrant, is in this, That whereas the proud and
ambitious Tyrant does think his Kingdom and people are only ordained for
satisfaction of his desires and unreasonable appetites, the righteous and just
King does by the contrary acknowledge himself to be ordained for the procuring
of the wealth and prosperity of his people, and that his greatest, and
principal worldly felicity must consist in their prosperity. If you be rich I
cannot be poor, If you be happy I cannot but be fortunate, and I protest that
your welfare shall ever be my greatest care and contentment, and that I am a
servant is most true: That as I am head and Governor of all the people in my
Dominions, who are my Natural Vassals and Subjects, considering them in number
and distinct ranks, so if we will take the whole people as one Body and Mass,
then as the head, so must a religious King know himself to be ordained, for his
people, not his people for him: For though a King and people be related yet can
he be no King if he want people and Subjects, but there are many people in the
world that lack an head, wherefore I will not be ashamed to confess it, my
principal honor to be the great Servant of the Common wealth, and ever think
the prosperity thereof to be my greatest felicity as I have already said. But
as it Mass the whole body of this Kingdom with an uniform assent and harmony in
the beginning of my speech, which did so far oblige me in good will and
thankfullness of requital by their alacrity and readyness in declaring and
receiving me to that place which God had provided for me, and not any
particular persons; for then it had not been the body, so is my thankfullness
due to the whole state, for even in matter of faults, Quod a multis peccatur
impune peccatur, even so in the matter of virtuous and good deeds, what is done
by the willing consent and Harmony of the whole body, no particular person can
justly claim thanks as proper to him for the same. And therefore I must here
make a little Apology for my self, in that I could not satisfy the particular
humors of every person, that looked for some advancement or reward at my hand,
since my entry into this Kingdom.

Three kind of things, were craved of me, advancement to Honor, preferment to
Place of Credit about my person, and reward in matters of Land or (...) if I
had bestowed honor upon all, no man could have been advanced to ho^^ (...)for
the degrees of honor do consist in preferring some above their fellow^
(...)every man had the like access to my privy or Bedchamber, then no man could
(...) it, because it would not contein all. And if I had bestowed lands and
rewar^^ (...)on every man, the fountain of my liberality would be so exhausted
and dry (...) should lack means to be liberal to every man. And yet was I not
so sparing (...) I may without vanity affirm, that I have enlarged my favors
in all three d^^ (...) toward as many, or more then ever any King of England
yet did in so s^^^ (...) space; no I rather crave your pardon, that I have been
so bountiful; For (...) means of the Crown be wasted, I behoved then to
recourse to you my Su^^^^^^ and be burdensome to you which I would be loathest
to be of any King (...) for as it is true, that as I have already said, it were
a whole body, which did s^ (...) deserve at my hand, and not every particular
person of the people, yet were (...) some who took occasion, both before, and
at the time of my coming am^^^ you to give a proof of their Love and affection
toward me, not that I am any (...) doubt, that if other of my Subjects had been
in their places, and had had the occasion but they would uttered the like good
effects (so general and so great (...) the affections of ye all toward me. But
yet this having been performed by (...) special persons, I could not without
Unthankfullness, But requite them ac^^^^ingly; And therefore had I just
occasion to advance some in honor, (...) places of service about me, and by
rewarding to enable some who had de^^^^^^ well of me, and were not otherwise
able to maintain the ranks I thought (...) capable of: And others, who
although they had not particularly deserved (...) yet I found them capable and
worthy of preferment and credit, and not (...) sustain those places for which I
thought them fit without my help. Two (...) causes moved me to be so open
handed, whereof the one was reasonable and ^^nourable, but the other I will not
be ashamed to confess unto you proceed^ (...) mine own infirmity; that which
was just and honorable was that being (...) beholden to the body of the whole
State, I thought I could not refuse to let(...) some small brooks out of the
fountain of my thankfullness to the whole, (...) ^^freshing of particular
persons that were members of that multitude: The (...) which proceeded out of
mine own infirmity was the multitude and imp^ of suitors. But although reason
come by infrision in a manner yet experience g^eth with time and labor, and
therefore do I not doubt but experience in (...) coming will teach both the
particular Subjects not to be so Importune and u^^^^creet in craving, and me
not to be so easily and lightly moved in granting (...) which may be harmful to
my estate, and consequently to the whole Kingdom*

And thus having at length declared unto you my mind in all the po^^ (...)
which I called this Parliament.

My conclusion shall only be now to excuse my self, in case you have not f^^^^
such eloquence in my speech as peradventure you might have looked for a^ (...)
hands. I might if I list allege the great weight of my affairs, and my
con^^^^al business, and distraction, that I could never have leisure to think
upon w^^^ (...) had to speak before I came to the place where I was to speak;
and I might (...) allege that my first sight of this so famous and honorable
an assembly might (...) wise breed some impediment, but leaving these excuses,
I will plainly and f^ (...) in my manner tell you the true cause of it, which
is that it becomes a Ki^^ (...) my opinion, to use no other eloquence then
plainness and sincerity, by plain^^^^ ^ mean that his speech should be so clear
and void of all ambiguity that it may (...) be thrown nor rent a sunder in
contrary senses, like the old Oracle of the A^^^^^^ Gods; and by sincerity, I
understand, that uprightness and honesty which o^^^^ to be in a Kings whole
speeches and actions. That as far as a King is in ho^^^^ erected above any of
his subjects, so far should he strive in sincerity to be a^^^^ them all, and
that his tongue should be the true messenger of his great heart (...) this sort
of eloquence may you ever assuredly look for at my hands.

FINIS

