THE SATIRES OF JUVENAL, AND PERSIUS.

THE SATIRES OF Decimus Junius Juvenalis. Translated into ENGLISH VERSE.

BY Mr. DRYDEN, AND Several other Eminent Hands.

Together with the SATIRES OF Aulus Persius Flaccus.

Made English by Mr. Dryden.

With Explanatory Notes at the end of each SATIRE.

To which is Prefixed a Discourse concerning the Original and Progress of
SATIRE. Dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Dorset, etc. By Mr.
DRYDEN.

Quicquid agunt homines, votum, timor, Ira, voluptas,
Gaudia, discursus, nostri est farrago libelli.
LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Iudge's- Head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleetstreet MDCXCIII.

Where you may have Complete Sets of Mr. Dryden's Works, in Four Volumes in
Quarto, the Plays being put in the order they were Written.

TO THE Right Honorable CHARLES, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord
Chamberlain of Their Majesty's Household: Knight of the Most Noble Order of the
GARTER, etc.
My Lord,
THE Wishes and Desires of all good Men, which have attended your Lordship from
your First appearance in the World, are at length accomplished in your
obtaining those Honors and Dignities, which you have so long deserved. There
are no Factions, tho irreconcilable to one another, that are not united in
their Affection to you, and the Respect they pay you. They are equally pleased
in your Prosperity, and would be equally concerned in your Afflictions. Titus
Vespasian was not more the Delight of Human-kind. The Universal Empire made him
only more known, and more Powerful, but could not make him more beloved. He had
greater Ability of doing Good, but your Inclination to it, is not less; And
though you could not extend your Beneficence to so many Persons, yet you have
lost as few days as that Excellent Emperor; and never had his Complaint to
make when you went to Bed, that the Sun had shone upon you in vain, when you
had the Opportunity of relieving some unhappy man. This, My Lord, has justly
acquired you as many Friends, as there are Persons who have the Honor to be
known to you: Mere Acquaintance you have none: You have drawn them all into a
nearer Line: And they who have Conversed with you, are for ever after
inviolably yours. This is a Truth so generally acknowedg'd, that it needs no
Proof: It Is of the Nature of a first Principle, which is received as soon as it
is proposed; and needs not the Reformation which Descartes used to his: For we
doubt not, neither can we properly say, we think we admire and love you, above
all other men: There is a certainty in the Proposition, and we know it. With
the same Assurance I can say, you neither have Enemies, nor can scarce have
any; for they who have never heard of you, can neither Love or Hate you: And
they who have, can have no other notion of you, than that which they receive
from the Public, that you are the best of Men. After this, my Testimony can be
of no farther use, than to declare it to be Daylight at High-Noon: And all who
have the benefit of sight, can look up, as well, and see the Sun.

It Is true, I have one Privilege which is almost particular to my self, that I
saw you in the East at your first arising above the Hemisphere: I was as soon
Sensible as any Man of that Light, when it was but just shooting out, and
beginning to Travel upwards to the Meridian. I made my early Addresses to your
Lordship, in my Essay of Dramatick Poetry; and therein bespoke you to the
World: Wherein, I have the right of a First Discoverer. When I was my self, in
the Rudiments of my Poetry, without Name, or Reputation in the World, having
rather the Ambition of a Writer, than the skill; when I was Drawing the
Out-Lines of an Art without any Living Master to Instruct me in it; an Art
which had been better Praised than Studied here in England, wherein Shakespeare
who Created the Stage among us, had rather Written happily, than knowingly and
justly; and Johnson, who by studying Horace, had been acquainted with the
Rules, yet seemed to envy to Posterity that Knowledge, and like an Inventer of
some useful Art, to make a Monopoly of his Learning: When thus, as I may say,
before the use of the Loadstone, or knowledge of the Compass, I was sailing in
a vast Ocean, without other help, than the Pole Star of the Ancients, and the
Rules of the French Stage amongst the Moderns, which are extremely different
from ours, by reason of their opposite taste; yet even then, I had the
presumption to Dedicate to your Lordship: A very unfinished Piece, I must
Confess, and which only can be excused, by the little Experience of the Author,
and the Modesty of the Title, An Essay. Yet I was stronger in Prophecy than I
was in Criticism: I was Inspired to foretell you to Mankind, as the Restorer of
Poetry, the greatest Genius, the truest Judge, and the best Patron.

Good Sense and good Nature, are never separated, though the Ignorant World has
thought otherwise. Good Nature, by which I mean Beneficence and Candor, is the
Product of right Reason: Which of necessity will give Allowance to the Failings
of others, by considering that there is nothing perfect in Mankind; and by
distinguishing that which comes nearest to Excellency, tho not absolutely free
from Faults, will certainly produce a Candor in the Judge. It Is incident to an
Elevated Understanding, like your Lordships, to find out the Errors of other
men: But it is your Prerogative to pardon them; to look with Pleasure on those
things, which are somewhat Congenial, and of a remote Kindred to your own
Conceptions: And to forgive the many Failings of those, who with their wretched
Art, cannot arrive to those Heights that you possess, from a happy, abundant,
and Native Genius. Which are as inborn to you, as they were to Shakespeare; and
for ought I know to Homer; in either of whom we find all Arts and Sciences, all
Moral and Natural Philosophy, without knowing that they ever Studied them.

There is not an English Writer this day living, who is not perfectly
convinced, that your Lordship excels all others, in all the several parts of
Poetry which you have undertaken to adorn. The most Vain, and the most
Ambitious of our Age have not dared to assume so much, as the Competitours of
Themistocles: They have yielded the first place, without dispute; and have been
arrogantly content, to be esteemed as second to your Lordship; and even that
also, with a Longo, sed proximi Intervallo. If there have been, or are any, who
go farther in their Self-conceipt, they must be very singular in their Opinion:
They must be like the Officer, in a Play, who was called Captain, Lieutenant,
and Company. The World will easily conclude, whether such unattended Generals
can ever be capable of making a Revolution in Parnassus.

I will not attempt in this place, to say any thing particular of your
Lyrick-Poems, though they are the Delight and Wonder of this Age, and will be
the Envy of the next. The Subject of this Book confines me to Satire: And in
that, an Author of your own Quality, (whose Ashes I will not disturb,) has
given you all the Commendation, which his self-sufficiency could afford to any
Man: The best Good Man, with the worst-Natur'd Muse. In that Character,
methinks I am reading Iohnson's Verses to the Memory of Shakespeare: An
Insolent, Sparing, and Invidious Panegyric: Where good Nature, the most
God-like Commendation of a Man, is only attributed to your Person, and denied
to your Writings: for they are every where so full of Candor, that like
Horace, you only expose the Follies of Men, without Arraigning their Vices; and
in this excel him, That You add that pointedness of Thought, which is visibly
wanting in our Great Roman. There is more of Salt in all your Verses, than I
have seen in any of the Moderns, or even of the Ancients: But you have been
sparing of the Gaul; by which means you have pleased all Readers, and offended
none. Donn alone, of all our Countrymen, had your Talent; but was not happy
enough to arrive at your Versification. And were he Translated into Numbers,
and English, he would yet be wanting in the Dignity of Expression. That which
is the prime Virtue, and chief Ornament of Virgil, which distinguishes him from
the rest of Writers, is so conspicuous in your Verses, that it casts a shadow
on all your Contemporaries; we cannot be seen, or but obscurely, while you are
present. You equal Donn, in the Variety, Multipicity, and Choice of Thoughts;
you excel him in the Manner, and the Words. I Read you both, with the same
Admiration, but not with the same Delight. He affects the Metaphysics, not
only in his Satires, but in his Amorous Verses, where Nature only should reign;
and perplexes the Minds of the Fair Sex with nice Speculations of Philosophy,
when he should engage their hearts, and entertain them with the softnesses of
Love. In this (if I may be pardoned for so bold a truth) Mr. Cowley has Copied
him to a fault: so great a one, in my Opinion, that it throws his Mistress
infinitely below his Pindariques, and his latter Compositions; which are
undoubtedly the best of his Poems, and the most Correct. For my own part, I
must avow it freely to the World, that I never attempted any thing in Satier,
wherein I have not studied your Writings as the most perfect Model. I have
continually laid them before me; and the greatest Commendation, which my own
partiality can give to my Productions, is that they are Copies, and no farther
to be allowed, than as they have (...) (...)

True it is, that some bad Poems, though not all, carry their Owners Marks
about 'em. There is some peculiar aukardness, false Grammar, imperfect Sense,
or at the least Obscurity; some Brand or other on this Buttock, or that Ear,
that it is notorious who are the Owners of the Cattle, though they should not
Sign it with their Names. But your Lordship, on the contrary, is distinguished,
not only by the Excellency of your Thoughts* but by your Style, and Manner of
expressing them. A Painter judging of some Admirable Pi^^e, may affirm with
certainty, that it was of Holben, or Vandyke: But Vulgar Designs, and Common
Draughts, are easily mistaken, and misapplied. Thus, by my long Study of your
Lordship, I am arrived at the knowledge of your particular manner. In the Good
Poems of other Men, like those Artists, I can only say, this is like the
Draught of such a one, or like the Coloring of another. In short, I can only
be sure, that it is the Hand of a good Master: But in your Performances it is
scarcely possible for me to be deceived. If you write in your strength, you
stand revealed at the first view; and should you write under it, you cannot
avoid some Peculiar Graces, which only cost me a second Consideration to
discover you: For I may say in, with all the severity of Truth, that every Line
of yours is precious. Your Lordship's only fault is, that you have not written
more: Unless I could add another, and that yet greater, but I fear for the
Public, the Accusation would not be true, that you have written, and out of a
vicious Modesty will not Publish.

Virgil has confined his Works within the compass of Eighteen Thousand Lines,
and has not treaced many Subjects; yet he ever had, and ever will have the
Reputation of the best Poet. Martial says of him, that he could have excelled
Vasius in Tragedy, and Horace in Lyrick Poetry, but out of deference to his
Friends he attempted neither.

The same p^evalence of Genius is in your Lordship, but the World cannot pardon
your concealing it on the same consideration; because we have neither a Living
Varius, nor a Horace, in whose Excellencies both of Poems, Odes and Satires,
you had equaled them, if our Language had not yielded to the Roman Majesty,
and length of time had not added a Reverence to the Works of Horace. For good
Sense is the same in all or most Ages; and course of Time rather improves
Nature, than impairs her. What has been, may be again: Another Homer, and
another Virgil may possibly arise from those very Causes which produced the
first: Though it would be impudence to affirm that any such have yet appeared.

It Is manifest, that some particular Ages have been more happy than others in
the production of Great Men* in all sorts of Arts and Sciences: As that of
Eurypides, Sophocles, Aristophanes, and the rest for Stage-Poetry amongst the
Greeks: That of Augustus, for Heroic, Lyrick, Dramatick, Elegiaque, and indeed
all sorts of Poetry; in the Persons of Virgil, Horace, Varius, Ovid, and many
others; especially if we take into that Century the latter end of the
Commonwealth; wherein we find Varro, Lucr^tius, and Catullus: And at the same
time lived Cicero and Salust, and Caesar. A Famous Age in Modern Times, for
Learning in every kind, was that of Lorenzo de Medici, and his Son Lee the
Tenth. Wherein Painting was revived, and Poetry flourished, and the Greek
Language was restored.

Examples in all these are obvious: But what I would infer, is this; That in
such an Age it is possible some Great Genius may arise, to equal any of the
Ancients; abating only for the Language. For great Contemporaries whet and
cultivate each other: And mutual Borrowing* and Commerce, makes the Common
Riches of Learning, as it does of the Civil Government.

But suppose that Homer and Virgil were the only of their Species, and that
Nature was so much worn out in producing them, that she is never able to bear
the like again; yet the Example only holds in Heroic Poetry: In Tragedy and
Satire I offer my self to maintain against some of our Modern Critics, that
this Age and the last, particularly in England, have excelled the Ancients in
both those kinds; and I would instance in Shakespeare of the former, of your
Lordship in the latter sort.

Thus I might safely confine my self to my Native Country: But if I would only
cross the Seas, I might find in France a living Horace and a Iuvenal, in the
Person of the admirable Boileau: Whose Numbers are Excellent, whose Expressions
are Noble, whose Thoughts are Just, whose Language is Pure, whose Satire is
pointed, and whose Sense is close; What he borrows from the Ancients, he repays
with Usury of his own: in Coin as good, and almost as Universally valuable: For
setting prejudice and Partiality apart, though he is our Enemy, the Stamp of a
Louis, the Patron of all Arts, is not much inferior to the Medal of an
Augustus Caesar. Let this be said without entering into the interests of
Factions and Parties; and relating only to the Bounty of that King to Men of
Learning and Merit: A Praise so just, that even we who are his Enemies, cannot
refuse it to him.

Now if it may be permitted me to go back again, to the Consideration of Epique
Poetry, I have confessed, that no Man hitherto has reached, or so much as
approached to the Excellencies of Homer or of Virgil; I must farther add, that
Statius, the best Vers^ficator next to Virgil, knew not how to Design after
him, though he had the Model in his Eye; that Lucan is wanting both in Design
and Subject, and is besides too full of Heat, and Affectation; that amongst the
Moderns, Ariosto neither Designed Justly, nor observed any Unity of Action, or
Compass of Time, or Moderation in the Vastness of his Draught; his Style is
Luxurious, without Majesty, or Decency; and his Adventures, without the compass
of Nature and Possibility: Tasso, whose Design was Regular, and who observed
the Rules of Unity in Time and Place, more clos^ly than Virgil* yet was not so
happy in his Action; he confesses himself to have been too Lyrical, that is* to
have written beneath the Dignity of Heroic Verse, in his Episodes of
Sophr^nia, Erminia, and Armida; his Story is not so pleasing as Ariostos; he is
too flatu^^nt sometimes* and sometimes too dry; many times unequal, and almost
always forced; and besides, is full of Conceits, points of Epigram and (...);
all which are not only below the Dignity of Heroic Verse, but contrary to its
Nature: Virgil and Homer have not one of them. And those who are guilty of so
boyish an Ambition in so grave a Subject, are so far from being considered as
Heroique Poets* that they ought to be turned down from Homer to the Anthologia,
from Virgil to Martial and Owen's Epigrams, and from Spencer to Fleck^^ that
is, from the top to the bottom of all Poetry. But to return to Tasso, he
borrows from the Invention of Boyard^, and in his Alteration of his Poem, which
is infinitely for the worse, imitates Homer so very (...), that (for Example)
he gives the King of Jerusalem Fifty Sons, only because Homer had bestowed the
like number on King Priam; he kills the youngest in the same manner, and has
provided his Hero with a Patroclus, under another Name, only to bring him back
to the Wars, when his Friend was killed. The French have performed nothing in
this kind, which is not far below those two Italians, and subject to a thousand
more Reflections, without examining their Saint Lewis, their Pucelle, or their
Alarique: The English have only to boast of Spencer and Milton, who neither of
them wanted either Genius, or Learning, to have been perfect Poets; and yet
both of them are liable to many Censures. For there is no Uniformity in the
Design of Spencer: He aims at the Accomplishment of no one Action: He raises up
a Hero for every one of his Adventures; and endows each of them with some
particular Moral Virtue, which renders them all equal, without Subordination or
Preference. Every one is mot Valiant in his own Legend; only we must do him
that Justice to observe, that Magnanimity, which is the Character of Prince
Arthur, shines throughout the whole Poem; and Succors the rest, when they are
in Distress. The Original of every Knight, was then living in the Court of
Queen Elizabeth: And he attributed to each of them that Virtue, which he
thought was most conspicuous in them: An Ingenious piece of Flattery, though it
turned not much to his Account. Had he lived to finish his Poem, in the six
remaining Legends, it had certainly been more of a piece; but could not have
been perfect, because the Model was not true. But Prince Arthur, or his chief
Patron, Sir Philip Sidney, whom he intended to make happy, by the Marriage of
his Gloriana, dying before him, deprived the Poet, both of Means and Spirit, to
accomplish his Design: For the rest, his Obsolete Language, and the ill choice
of his Stanza, are faults but of the Second Magnitude: For notwithstanding the
first he is still Intelligible, at least, after a little practice; and for the
last, he is the more to be admired; that laboring under such a difficulty, his
Verses are so Numerous, so Various, and so Harmonious, that only Virgil, whom
he profestly imitated, has surpassed him, among the Romans; and only Mr. Waller
among the English.

As for Mr. Milton, whom we all admire with so much Justice, his Subject is not
that of an Heroique Poem; properly so called: His Design is the Losing of our
Happiness; his Event is not prosperous, like that of all other Epique Works:
His Heavenly Machines are many, and his Humane Persons are but two. But I will
not take Mr. Rymer's Work out of his Hands. He has promised the World a
Critique on that Author; wherein, though he will not allow his Poem for Heroic,
I hope he will grant us, that his Thoughts are elevated, his Words Sounding,
and that no Man has so happily Copied the Manner of Homer; or so copiously
translated his Grecisms, and the Latin Elegancies of Virgil. It Is true, he runs
into a flat of Thought, sometimes for a Hundred Lines together, but it is when
he is got into a Track of Scripture: His Antiquated words were his Choice, not
his Necessity; for therein he imitated Spencer, as Spencer did Chawcer. And
though, perhaps, the love of their Masters, may have transported both too far* in
the frequent use of them; yet in my Opinion, Obsolete Words may then be
laudably revived, when either they are more Sounding, or more Significant than
those in practice: And when their Obscurity is taken away, by joining other
Words to them which clear the Sense; according to the Rule of Horace, for the
admission of new Words. But in both cases, a Moderation is to be observed, in
the use of them: For unnecessary Coynage, as well as unnecessary Revival, runs
into Affectation; a fault to be avoided on either hand. Neither will I Justify
Milton for his Blank Verse, though I may excuse him, by the Example of Hannibal
Caro, and other Italians, who have used it: For whatever Causes he alleges for
the abolishing of Rhyme (which I have not now the leisure to examine) his own
particular Reason is plainly this, that Rhyme was not his Talent; he had
neither the Ease of doing it, nor the Graces of it; which is manifest in his
Iuvenilia, or Verses written in his Youth: Where his Rhyme is always
constrained and forced, and comes hardly from him at an Age when the Soul is
most pliant; and the Passion of Love, makes almost every Man a Rhymer, though not
a Poet.

By this time, My Lord, I doubt not but that you wonder, why I have run off
from my Biass so long together, and made so tedious a Digression from Satire to
Heroique Poetry. But if You will not excuse it, by the tattling Quality of Age,
which, as Sir William Davenant says, is always Narrative; yet I hope the
usefulness of what I have to say on this Subject, will qualify the remoteness
of it; and this is the last time I will commit the Crime of Prefaces; or
trouble the World with my Notions of any thing that relates to Verse. I have
then, as You see, observed the Failings of many great Wits amongst the Moderns,
who have attempted to write as Epique Poem: Besides these, or the like
Animadversions of them by other Men, there is yet a farther Reason given, why
they cannot possibly succeed, so well as the Ancients, even though we could allow
them not to be Inferior, either in Genius or Learning, or the Tongue in which
they write; or all those other wonderful Qualifications which are necessary to
the forming of a true Accomplished Heroique Poet. The fault is laid on our
Religion: They say that Christianity is not capable of those Embellishments
which are afforded in the Belief of those Ancient Heathens.

And it is true, that in the severe notions of our Faith; the Fortitude of a
Christian consists in Patience, and Suffering for the Love of God, what ever
hardships can befall him in the World; not in any great Attempt; or in
performance of those Enterprises which the Poets call Heroique; and which are
commonly the Effects of Interest, Ostentation, Pride and Worldly Honor. That
Humility and Resignation are our prime Virtues; and that these include no
Action, but that of the Soul: When as, on the Contrary, an Heroique Poem
requires, to its necessary Design, and as its last Perfection, some great
Action of War, the Accomplishment of some Extraordinary Undertaking; which
requires the Strength and Vigor of the Body, the Duty of a Soldier, the
Capacity and Prudence of a General; and, in short, as much, or more of the
Active Virtue, than the Suffering. But to this, the Answer is very Obvious. God
has placed us in our several Stations; the Virtues of a private Christian are
Patience, Obedience, Submission, and the like; but those of a Magistrate, or
General, or a King, are Prudence, Counsel, active Fortitude, coercive Power,
awful Command, and the Exercise of Magnanimity, as well as Justice. So that
this Objection hinders not, but that an Epique Poem, or the Heroique Action of
some Great Commander, Enterpris'd for the Common Good, and Honor of the
Christian Cause, and Executed happily, may be as well Written now, as it was of
old by the Heathens; provided the Poet be endu'd with the same Talents; and the
Language, though not of equal Dignity, yet as near approaching to it, as our
Modern Barbarism will allow, which is all that can be expected from our own or
any other now extant, though more Refined, and therefore we are to rest
contented with that only Inferiority, which is not possibly to be Remedied.

I wish. I could as easily remove that other difficulty which yet remains. It Is
Objected by a great French Critique, as well as an Admirable Poet, yet living,
and whom I have mentioned with that Honor, which his Merit exacts from me, I
mean Boileau, that the Machines of our Christian Religion in Heroique Poetry,
are much more feeble to Support that weight than those of Heathenism. Their
Doctrine, grounded as it was on Ridiculous Fables, was yet the Belief of the
Two Victorious Monarchies, the Grecian, and Roman. Their Gods did not only
interest themselves in the Event of Wars (which is the Effect of a Superior
Providence) but also espoused the several Parties, in a Visible Corporeal
Descent, managed their Intrigues, and Fought their Battles sometimes in
Opposition to each other: Though Virgil (more discreet than Homer in that last
Particular) has contented himself with the Partiality of his Deities, their
Favors, their Counsels or Commands, to those whose Cause they had espoused,
without bringing them to the Outrageousness of Blows. Now, our Religion (says
he) is deprived of the greatest part of those Machines; at least the most
Shining in Epique Poetry. Though St. Michael in Ariosto seeks out Discord, to
send her amongst the Pagans, and finds her in a Convent of Friars, where Peace
should Reign, which indeed is fine Satire; and Satan, in Tasso, excites
Solomon, to an Attempt by Night on the Christian Camp, and brings an Host of
Devils to his Assistance; yet the Archangel, in the former Example, when
Discord was restive, and would not be drawn from her beloved Monastery with
fair Words, has the Whip-hand of her, Drags her out with many stripes, sets
her, on Gods-name, about her business; and makes her know the difference of
Strength betwixt a Nuncio of Heaven, and a Minister of Hell: The same Angel, in
the latter Instance from Tasso (as if God had never another Messenger,
belonging to the Court, but was confined like Jupiter to Mercury, and Juno to
Iris,) when he sees his time, that is, when half of the Christians are already
killed, and all the rest are in a fair way to be Routed, stickles betwixt the
Remainders of God's Host, and the Race of Fiends; Pulls the Devils backward by
their Tails, and drives them from their quarry; or otherwise the whole business
had miscarri'd, and Jerusalem remained untaken. This, says Boileau, is a very
unequal Match for the Poor Devils; who are sure to come by the worst of it in
the Combat; for nothing is more easy, than for an Almighty Power to bring his
old Rebels to Reason, when he Pleases. Consequently, what pleasure, what
Entertainment can be raised from so pitiful a Machine? Where we see the Success
of the Battle, from the very beginning of it? Unless that, as we are
Christians, we are glad that we have gotten God on our side, to maul our
Enemies, when we cannot do the work our selves. For if the Poet had given the
Faithful more Courage, which had cost him nothing, or at least have made them
exceed the Turks in Number, he might have gained the Victory for us Christians,
without interessing Heaven in the quarrel; and that with as much ease, and as
little Credit to the Conqueror, as when a Party of a Hundred Soldiers defeats
another which consists only of Fifty.

This, my Lord, I confess is such an Argument against our Modern Poetry, as
cannot be answered by those Mediums, which have been used. We cannot hitherto
boast, that our Religion has furnished us with any such Machines, as have made
the Strength and Beauty of the Ancient Buildings.

But, what if I venture to advance an Invention of my own, to supply the
manifest defect of our new Writers: I am sufficiently sensible of my weakness,
and it is not very probable, that I should succeed in such a Project, whereof I
have not had the least hint from any of my Predecessors, the Poets, or any of
their Seconds, and Coadjutors, the Critiques. Yet we see the Art of War is
improved in Sieges, and new Instruments of Death are invented daily. Something
new in Philosophy and the Mechanics is discovered almost every Year: And the
Science of Former Ages is improved by the Succeeding. I will not detain you
with a long Preamble to that, which better Judges will, perhaps, conclude to be
little worth.

It Is this, in short, That Christian Poets have not hitherto been acquainted
with their own Strength. If they had searched the Old Testament as they ought,
they might there have found the Machines which are proper for their Work; and
those more certain in their effect, than it may be the New Testament is, in the
Rules sufficient for Salvation. The perusing of one Chapter in the Prophecy of
Daniel, and Accommodating what there they find, with the Principles of
Platonique Philosophy, as it is now Christianis'd, would have made the Ministry
of Angels as strong an Engine, for the Working up Heroique Poetry, in our
Religion, as that of the Ancients has been to raise theirs by all the Fables of
their Gods, which were only received for Tuths by the most ignorant, and
weakest of the People.

It Is a Doctrine almost Universally received by Christians, as well Protestants
as Catholics, that there are Guardian Angels appointed by God Almighty, as his
Vicegerents, for the Protection and Government of Cities, Provinces, Kingdoms,
and Monarchies; and those as well of Heathens, as of true Believers. All this
is so plainly proved from those Texts of Daniel, that it admits of no farther
Controversy. The Prince of the Persians, and that other of the Grecians, are
granted to be the Guardians and Protecting Ministers of those Empires. It
cannot be denied, that they were opposite, and resisted one another. St.
Michael is mentioned by his Name, as the Patron of the Jews, and is now taken
by the Christians, as the Protector General of our Religion. These Tutelar
Genij, who presided over the several People and Regions committed to their
Charge, were watchful over them for good, as far as their Commissions could
possibly extend. The General Purpose, and Design of all, was certainly the
Service of their Great Creator. But it is an undoubted Truth, that for Ends
best known to the Almighty Majesty of Heaven, his Providential Designs for the
benefit of his Creatures, for the Debasing and Punishing of some Nations, and
the Exaltation and Temporal Reward of others, were not wholly known to these
his Ministers; else why those Factious Quarrels, Controversies, and Battles
amongst themselves, when they were all United in the same Design, the Service
and Honor of their common Master? But being instructed only in the General,
and zealous of the main Design; and as Finite Beings, not admitted into the
Secrets of Government, the last resorts of Providence, or capable of
discovering the final Purposes of God, who can work Good out of Evil, as he
pleases; and irresistably sways all manner of Events on Earth, directing them
finally for the best, to his Creation in General, and to the Ultimate End of
his own Glory in Particular: They must of necessity be sometimes ignorant of
the Means conducing to those Ends, in which alone they can jarr, and oppose
each other. One Angel, as we may suppose the Prince of Persia, as he is called,
judging, that it would be more for God's Honor, and the Benefit of his People,
that the Median and Persian Monarchy, which delivered them from the Babylonish
Captivity, should still be uppermost: And the Patron of the Grecians, to whom
the Will of God might be more particularly Revealed, contending on the other
side, for the Rise of Alexander and his Successors, who were appointed to
punish the Backsliding Jews, and thereby to put them in mind of their Offenses,
that they might Repent, and become more Virtuous, and more Observant of the Law
Revealed. But how far these Controversies and appearing Enmities of those
glorious Creatures may be carried; how these Oppositions may best be managed,
and by what Means conducted, is not my business to show or determine: These
things must be left to the Invention and Judgment of the Poet: If any of so
happy a Genius be now living, or any future Age can produce a Man, who being
Conversant in the Philosophy of Plato, as it is now accommodated to Christian
use; for (as Virgil gives us to understand by his Example) that is the only
proper of all others for an Epique Poem, who to his Natural Endowments, of a
large Invention, a ripe Judgment, and a strong Memory, has joined the knowledge
of the Liberal Arts and Sciences, and particularly, Moral Philosophy, the
Mathematics, Geography and History, and with all these Qualifications is born
a Poet; knows, and can practice the variety of Numbers, and is Master of the
Language in which he Writes; if such a Man, I say, be now arisen, or shall
arise, I am vain enough to think, that I have proposed a Model to him, by which
he may build a Nobler, a more Beautiful and more Perfect Poem, than any yet
extant since the Ancients.

There is another part of these Machines yet wanting; but by what I have said,
it would have been easily supplied by a Judicious Writer. He could not have
failed, to add the opposition of ill Spirits to the good; they have also their
Design, ever opposite to that of Heaven; and this alone, has hitherto been the
practice of the Moderns: But this imperfect System, if I may call it such,
which I have given, will infinitely advance and carry farther that Hypothesis
of the Evil Spirits contending with the Good. For being so much weaker since
their Fall, than those blessed Beings, they are yet supposed to have a
permitted Power from God, of acting ill, as from their own depraved Nature they
have always the Will of designing it. A great Testimony of which we find in
Holy Writ, when God Almighty suffered Satan to appear in the Holy Synod of the
Angels, (a thing not hitherto drawn into Example by any of the Poets,) and also
gave him Power over all things belonging to his Servant Job, excepting only
Life.

Now what these Wicked Spirits cannot compass, by the vast disproportion of
their Forces, to those of the Superior Beings: They may by their Fraud and
Cunning carry farther, in a seeming League, Confederacy or Subserviency to the
Designs of some good Angel, as far as consists with his purity, to suffer such
an aid, the end of which may possibly be disguised, and concealed from his
finite Knowledge. This is indeed to suppose a great Error in such a Being: Yet
since a Devil can appear like an Angel of Light; since Craft and Malice may
sometimes blind for a while a more perfect Understanding; and lastly, since
Milton has given us an Example of the like nature, when Satan appearing like a
Cherub, to Vriel, the Intelligence of the Sun, Circumvented him even in his own
Province, and passed only for a Curious Traveller through those new Created
Regions, that he might observe therein the Workmanship of God, and praise him
in his Works.

I know not why, upon the same supposition, or some other, a Fiend may not
deceive a Creature of more Excellency than himself, but yet a Creature; at
least by the connivance, or tacit permission of the Omniscient Being.

Thus, my Lord, I have as briefly as I could, given your Lordship, and by you
the World a rude draught of what I have been long laboring in my Imagination.
And what I had intended to have put in practice, (though far unable for the
attempt of such a Poem) and to have left the Stage, to which my Genius never
much inclined me, for a Work which would have taken up my Life in the
performance of it. This too, I had intended chiefly for the Honor of my Native
Country, to which a Poet is parcicularly obliged: Of two Subjects, both
relating to it, I was doubtful, whether I should choose that of King Arthur,
Conquering the Saxons; which being farther distant in Time, gives the greater
Scope to my Invention: Or that of Edward the Black Prince in subduing Spain,
and Restoring it to the Lawful Prince, though a Great Tyrant, Don Pedro the
Cruel: Which for the compass of Time, including only the Expedition of one
Year: For the greatness of the Action, and its answearable Event; for the
Magnanimity of the English Hero, opposed to the Ingratitude of the person whom
he restored; and for the many Beautiful Episodes, which I had interwoven with
the principal Design, together with the Characters of the chiefest English
Persons; wherein, after Virgil and Spencer, I would have taken occasion to
represent my living Friends and Patrons of the Noblest Families, and also
shadowed the Events of future Ages, in the Succession of our Imperial Line.
With these helps, and those of the Machines, which I have mentioned; I might
perhaps have done as well as some of my Predecessors; or at least chalked out a
way, for others to amend my Errors in a like Design. But being encouraged only
with fair Words, by King Charles II, my little Sallary ill paid, and no
prospect of a future Subsistence, I was then Discouraged in the beginning of my
Attempt; and now Age has overtaken me; and Want, a more insufferable Evil,
through the Change of the Times, has wholly disenabl'd me. Though I must ever
acknowledge, to the Honor of your Lordship, and the Eternal Memory of your
Charity, that since this Revolution, wherein I have patiently suffered the Ruin
of my small Fortune, and the loss of that poor Subsistence which I had from two
Kings, whom I had served more Faithfully than Profitably to my self; then your
Lordship was pleased, out of no other Motive, but your own Nobleness, without
any Desert of mine, or the least Solicitation from me, to make me a most
bountiful Present, which at that time, when I was most in want of it, came most
seasonably and unexpectedly to my Relief. That Favor, my Lord, is of it self
sufficient to bind any Grateful Man, to a perpetual Acknowledgment, and to all
the future Service, which one of my mean Condition, can be ever able to
perform. May the Almighty God return it for me, both in Blessing you here, and
Rewarding you hereafter. I must not presume to defend the Cause for which I now
suffer, because your Lordship is engaged against it: But the more you are so,
the greater is my Obligation to you: For your laying aside all the
Considerations of Factions and Parties, to do an Action of pure disinteress'd
Charity. This is one amongst many of your shining Qualities, which distinguish
you from others of your Rank: But let me add a farther Truth, That without
these Ties of Gratitude, and abstracting from them all, I have a most
particular Inclination to Honor you; and if it were not too bold an
Expression, to say, I Love you. It Is no shame to be a Poet, though it is to be a
bad one. Augustus Caesar of old, and Cardinal Richlieu of late, would willingly
have been such; and David and Solomon were such. You, who without Flattery, are
the best of the present Age in England, and would have been so, had you been
born in any other Country, will receive more Honor in future Ages, by that one
Excellency, than by all those Honors to which your Birth has intitl'd you, or
your Merits have acquired you. Ne, forte, pudori,
Sit tibi Musa Lyrae solers, and Cantor Apollo.
I have formerly said in this Epistle, that I could distinguish your Writings
from those of any others: It Is now time to clear my self from any imputation of
Self-conceipt on that Subject. I assume not to my self any particular lights in
this Discovery; they are such only as are obvious to every Man of Sense and
Judgment, who loves Poetry, and understands it. Your Thoughts are always so
remote from the common way of thinking, that they are, as I may say, of another
Species, than the Conceptions of other Poets; yet you go not out of Nature for
any of them: Gold is never bred upon the Surface of the Ground; but lies so
hidden, and so deep, that the Mines of it are seldom found; but the force of
Waters casts it out from the Bowels of Mountains, and exposes it amongst the
Sands of Rivers; giving us of her Bounty, what we could not hope for by our
search. This Success attends your Lordship's Thoughts, which would look like
Chance, if it were not perpetual, and always of the same tenor. If I grant
that there is Care in it, it is such a Care as would be ineffectual, and
fruitless in other Men. It Is the Cariosa felicitas which Petronius ascribes to
Horace in his Odes. We have not wherewithal to imagine so strongly, so justly,
and so pleasantly: In short, if we have the same Knowledge, we cannot draw out
of it the same Quintessence; we cannot give it such a Turn, such a Propriety,
and such a Beauty. Something is deficient in the Manner, or the Words, but more
in the Nobleness of our Conception. Yet when you have finished all, and it
appears in its full Luster, when the Diamond is not only found, but the
Roughness smoothed, when it is cut into a Form, and set in Gold, then we cannot
but acknowledge, that it is the Perfect Work of Art and Nature: And every one
will be so vain, to think he himself could have performed the like, till he
attempts it. It Is just the Description that Horace makes of such a Finished
Piece: It appears so easy, Vt sibi quivis speret idem, sudet multum,
frustraque laboret, ausus idem. And besides all this, it is Your Lordships
particular Talent to lay your Thoughts so close together, that were they
closer, they would be crowded, and even a due connection would be wanting. We
are not kept in expectation of two good lines, which are to come after a long
Parenthesis of twenty bad; which is the April Poetry of other Writers, a
mixture of Rain and Sunshine by fits: You are always bright, even almost to a
fault, by reason of the excess. There is continual abundance, a Magazine of
Thought, and yet a perpetual Variety of Entertainment; which creates such an
Appetite in your Reader, that he is not cloyed with any thing, but satisfied
with all. It Is that which the Romans call Coena dubia; where there is such
plenty, yet withal so much Diversity, and so good Order, that the choice is
difficult betwixt one Excellency and another; and yet the Conclusion, by a due
Climax, is evermore the best; that is, as a Conclusion ought to be, ever the
most proper for its place. See, my Lord, whether I have not studi'd Your
Lordship with some Application: And since You are so Modest, that You will not
be Judge and Party, I appeal to the whole World, if I have not drawn Your
Picture to a great degree of likeness, though it is but in Meniature: And that
some of the best Features are yet wanting. Yet what I have done is enough to
distinguish You from any other, which is the Proposition that I took upon me to
demonstrate.

And now, my Lord, to apply what I have said, to my present Business; the
Satires of Iuvenal and Persius, appearing in this New English Dress, cannot so
properly be Inscribed to any Man as to Your Lordship, who are the First of the
Age in that way of Writing. Your Lordship, amongst many other Favors, has
given me Your Permission for this Address; and You have particularly Encouraged
me by Your Perusal and Approbation of the Sixth and Tenth Satires of Iuvenal,
as I have Translated them. My fellow Laborers, have likewise Commissioned me,
to perform in their behalf this Office of a Dedication to you; and will
acknowledge with all possible Respect and Gratitude, your Acceptance of their
Work. Some of them have the Honor to be known to your Lordship already; and
they who have not yet that happiness, desire it now. Be pleased to receive our
common Endeavors with your wonted Candor, without Intitleing you to the
Protection of our common Failings, in so difficult an Undertakeing. And allow
me your Patience, if it be not already tired with this long Epistle, to give
you from the Best Authors, the Origin, the Antiquity, the Growth, the Change,
and the Compleatment of Satire among the Romans. To Describe, if not Define,
the Nature of that Poem, with it is several Qualifications and Virtues, together
with the several sorts of it. To compare the Excellencies of Horace, Persius
and Iuvenal, and show the particular Manners of their Satires. And lastly, to
give an Account of this New Way of Version which is attempted in our
Performance. All which, according to the weakness of my Ability, and the best
Lights which I can get from others, shall be the Subject of my following
Discourse.

The most Perfect Work of Poetry, says our Master Aristotle, is Tragedy. His
Reason is, because it is the most United; being more severely confined within
the Rules of Action, Time and Place. The Action is entire of a Piece, and one,
without Episodes: The Time limited to a Natural Day: And the Place
Circumbscrib'd at least within the Compass of one Town, or City. Being exactly
Proportioned thus, and Uniform in all it is Parts, The Mind is more Capable of
Comprehending the whole Beauty of it without distraction.

But after, all these Advantages, an Heroique Poem is certainly the greatest
Work of Human Nature. The Beauties and Perfections of the other are but
Mechanical; those of the Epique are more Noble. Though Homer has limited his
Place to Troy, and the Fields about it; his Actions to Forty Eight Natural
Days, whereof Twelve are Holy Days, or Cessation from business, during the
Funerals of Patroclus. To proceed, the Action of the Epique is greater: The
Extention of Time enlarges the Pleasure of the Reader, and the Episodes give it
more Ornament, and more Variety. The Instruction is equal; but the first is
only Instructive, the latter Forms a Hero, and a Prince.

If it signifies any thing which of them is of the more Ancient Family, the
best and most absolute Heroique Poem was written by Homer, long before Tragedy
was Invented: But, if we consider the Natural Endowments, and acquired Parts
which are necessary to make an accomplished Writer in either Kind, Tragedy
requires a less and more confined Knowledge: moderate Learning, and Observation
of the Rules is sufficient, if a Genius be not wanting. But in an Epique Poet,
one who is worthy of that Name, besides an Universal Genius, is required
Universal Learning, together with all those Qualities and Acquisitions which I
have named above, and as many more as I have through haste or negligence
omitted. And after all, he must have exactly Studied Homer and Virgil, as his
Patterns, Aristotle and Horace as his Guides, and Vida and Bossu, as their
Commentators, with many others both Italian and French Critiques, which I want
leisure here to R^commend.

In a Word, what I have to say, in Relation to This Subject, which does not
Particularly concern Satire, is, That the greatness of an Heroique Poem, beyond
that of a Tragedy, may easily be discovered by observing, how few have
attempted that Work, in comparison of those who have Written Drama's; and of
those few, how small a number have Succeeded. But leaving the Critiques on
either side to contend about the preference due to this or that sort of Poetry;
I will hasten to my present business, which is the Antiquity and Origin of
Satire, according to those Informations which I have received from the Learned
Casaubon, Heinsius, Rigaltius, Dacier and the Dauphin's Iuvenal; to which I
shall add some Observations of my own.

There has been a long Dispute amongst the Modern Critiques, whether the Romans
derived their Satire from the Grecians, or first Invented it themselves. Julius
Scaliger and Heinsius, are of the first Opinion; Casaubon, Rigaltius, Dacier,
and the Publisher of the Dauphin's Iuvenal maintain the Latter. If we take
Satire in the general signification of the Word, as it is used in all Modern
Languages, for an Invective, it is certain that it is almost as old as Verse;
and though Hymns, which are praises of God, may be allowed to have been before
it, yet the defamation of others was not long after it. After God had Cursed
Adam and Eve in Paradise, the Husband and Wife excused themselves, by laying
the blame on one another; and gave a beginning to those Conjugal Dialogues in
Prose; which the Poets have perfected in Verse. The Third Chapter of Job is one
of the first Instances of this Poem in Holy Scripture: Unless we will take it
higher, from the latter end of the second; where his Wife advises him to curse
his Maker.

This Original, I confess, is not much to the Honor of Satire; but here it was
Nature, and that depraved: When it became an Art, it bore better Fruit. Only we
have learnt thus much already, that Scoffs and Revilings are of the growth of
all Nations; and consequently that neither the Greek Poets borrowed from other
People their Art of Railing, neither needed the Romans to take it from them.
But considering Satire as a Species of Poetry; here the War begins amongst the
Critics. Scaliger the Father will have it descend from Greece to Rome; and
derives the word Satyr, from Satyrus, that mixed kind of Animal, or, as the
Ancients thought him, Rural God, made up betwixt a Man and a Goat; with a
Humane Head, Hooked Nose, Powting Lips, a Bunch, or Struma under the Chin,
pricked Ears, and upright Horns; the Body shagg'd with hair, especially from
the waste, and ending in a Goat, with the legs and feet of that Creature. But
Casaubon, and his Followers, with Reason, condemn this derivation; and prove
that from Satyrus, the word Satira, as it signifies a Poem, cannot possibly
descend. For Satira is not properly a Substantive, but an Adjective; to which,
the word Lanx, in English a Charger, or large Platter, is understood: So that
the Greek Poem made according to the Manners of a Satyr, and expressing his
Qualities, must properly be called Satirical, and not Satire: And thus far it is
allowed, that the Grecians had such Poems; but that they where wholly different
in Specie, from that to which the Romans gave the Name of Satire.

Aristotle divides all Poetry, in relation to the Progress of it, into Nature
without Art: Art begun, and Art Completed. Mankind, even the most Barbarous
have the Seeds of Poetry implanted in them. The first Specimen of it was
certainly shown in the Praises of the Deity, and Prayers to him: And as they
are of Natural Obligation, so they are likewise of Divine Institution. Which
Milton observing, introduces Adam and Eve, every Morning adoring God in Hymns
and Prayers. The first Poetry was thus begun, in the wild Notes of Nature,
before the invention of Feet, and Measures. The Grecians and Romans had no
other Original of their Poetry. Festivals and Holydays soon succeeded to
Private Worship, and we need not doubt but they were enjoined by the true God
to his own People; as they were afterward imitated by the Heathens; who by the
light of Reason knew they were to invoke some Superior Being in their
Necessities, and to thank him for his Benefits. Thus the Grecian Holydays were
Celebrated with Offerings to Bacchus and Ceres, and other Deities, to whose
Bounty they supposed they were owing for their Corn and Wine, and other helps
of Life. And the Ancient Romans, as Horace tells us, paid their thanks to
Mother Earth, or Vesta, to Silvanus, and their Genius, in the same manner. But
as all Festivals have a double Reason of their Institution; the first of
Religion, the other of Recreation, for the unbending of our Minds: So both the
Grecians and Romans agreed, after their Sacrifices were performed, to spend the
remainder of the day in Sports and Merriments; amongst which, Songs and Dances,
and that which they called Wit, (for want of knowing better,) were the chiefest
Entertainments. The Grecians had a notion of Satyrs, whom I have already
described; and taking them, and the Sileni, that is the young Satyrs and the
old, for the Tutors, Attendants, and Humble Companions of their Bacchus,
habited themselves like those Rural Deities, and imitated them in their Rustic
Dances, to which they joined Songs, with some sort of rude Harmony, but without
certain Numbers; and to these they added a kind of Chorus.

The Romans also (as Nature is the same in all places) though they knew nothing
of those Grecian Demigods, nor had any Communication with Greece, yet had
certain Young Men, who at their Festivals, Danced and Sung after their uncouth
manner, to a certain kind of Verse, which they called Saturnian; what it was,
we have no very certain light from Antiquity to discover; but we may conclude,
that, like the Grecian, it was void of Art, or at least with very feeble
beginnings of it. Those Ancient Romans, at these Holydays, which were a mixture
of Devotion and Debauchery, had a Custom of reproaching each other with their
Faults, in a sort of Extempore Poetry, or rather of tunable hobling Verse; and
they answered in the same kind of gross Raillery; their Wit and their Music
being of a piece. The Grecians, says Casaubon, had formerly done the same, in
the Persons of their petulant Satyrs: But I am afraid he mistakes the matter,
and confounds the Singing and Dancing of the Satyrs, with the Rustical
Entertainments of the first Romans. The Reason of my Opinion is this; that
Casaubon finding little light from Antiquity, of these beginnings of Poetry,
amongst the Grecians, but only these Representations of Satyrs, who carried
Canisters and Cornucopias full of several Fruits in their hands, and danced
with them at their Public Feasts: And afterward reading Horace, who makes
mention of his homely Romans, jesting at one another in the same kind of
Solemnities, might suppose those wanton Satyrs did the same. And especially
because Horace possibly might seem to him, to have shown the Original of all
Poetry in general, including the Grecians, as well as Romans: Though it is
plainly otherwise, that he only described the beginning, and first Rudiments of
Poetry in his own Country. The Verses are these, which he cites from the First
Epistle of the Second Book, which was Written to Augustus.

Agricolae prisci, fortes, parvoque beati,
Condita post frumenta, levantes tempore festo
Corpus and ipsum animum spe fini^ dura ferentem,
Cum sociis operum, and pueris, and conjuge fida,
Tellurem Porco, Silvanum lacte piabant;
Floribus and vino Genium memorem brevis aevi:
Fescennina per hunc inventa licentia morem
Versibus alternis, opprobria rustica fudit.
Our Brawny Clowns of Old, who turned the soil,
Content with little, and inured to toil,
At Harvest home, with Mirth and Country Cheer
Restored their Bodies for another year:
Refreshed their Spirits, and renewed their Hope,
Of such a future Feast, and future Crop.
Then with their Fellow-joggers of the Ploughs,
Their little Children, and their faithful Spouse;
A Sow they slew to Vesta's Deity;
And kindly Milk, Silvanus, poured to thee.
With Flowers, and Wine, their Genius they adored;
A short Life, and a merry, was the word.
From flowing Cups defaming Rhymes ensue,
And at each other homely Taunts they threw.
Yet since it is a hard Conjecture, that so Great a Man as Casaubon should
misapply what Horace writ concerning Ancient Rome, to the Ceremonies and
Manners of Ancient Greece, I will not insist on this Opinion, but rather judge
in general, that since all Poetry had its Original from Religion, that of the
Grecians and Rome had the same beginning: Both were invented at Festivals of
Thanksgiving: And both were prosecuted with Mirth and Raillery, and Rudiments
of Verses: Amongst the Greeks, by those who Represented Satyrs; and amongst the
Romans by real Clowns.

For, Indeed, when I am Reading Casauban, on these two Subjects, methinks I
hear the same Story told twice over with very little alteration. Of which
Dacier taking notice, in his Interpretation of the Latin Verses which I have
Translated, says plainly, that the beginning of Poetry was the same, with a
small variety in both Countries: And that the Mother of it in all Nations, was
Devotion. But what is yet more wonderful, that most Learned Critique takes
notice also, in his Illustrations on the First Epistle of the Second Book, that
as the Poetry of the Romans, and that of the Grecians, had the same beginning
at Feasts of Thanksgiving, as it has been Observed; and the old Comedy of the
Greeks which was Invective, and the Satire of the Romans which was of the same
Nature, were begun on the very same Occasion, so the Fortune of both in process
of time was just the same; the old Comedy of the Grecians was forbidden, for
its too much License in exposing of particular Persons, and the Rude Satire of
the Romans was also Punished by a Law of the Decemviri, as Horace tells us, in
these Words, Libertasque recurrentes accepta per Annos
Lusit amabiliter, donec jam saevus apertam
In rabiem verti caepit jocus; and per honestas
Ire domos impune minax: Doluere cruento
Dente lacessiti; fuit intactis quoque cura
Condition super communi: Quinetiam Lex,
Paenaque lata, malo quae nollet carmine quemquam
Describi, vertere modum formidine fustis;
Ad benedicendum delectandumque redacti.


The Law of the Decemviri, was this. Siquis Occentassit malum Carmen, sive
Condidisit, quod Infamiam faxit, Flagitiumve alteri, Capital esto. A strange
likeness, and barely possible: But the Critiques being all of the same Opinion,
it becomes me to be silent, and submit to better Judgments than my own.

But to return to the Grecians, from whose Satyrick Drama's, the Elder Scaliger
and Heinsius, will have the Roman Satire to proceed, I am to take a View of
them first, and see if there be any such Descent from them as those Authors
have pretended.

Thespis, or whosoever he were that Invented Tragedy, (for Authors differ)
mingled with them a Chorus and Dances of Satyrs, which had before been used,
in the Celebration of their Festivals; and there they were ever afterward
retained. The Character of them was also kept, which was Mirth and Wantonness:
And this was given, I suppose, to the folly of the Common Audience* who soon
grow weary of good Sense; and as we daily see, in our own Age and Country, are
apt to forsake Poetry, and still ready to return, to Buffoonry and Farce. From
hence it came, that in the Olympique-Games, where the Poets contended for Four
Prizes, the Satyrique Tragedy was the last of them: for in the rest, the Satyrs
were excluded from the Chorus. Amongst the Plays of Eurypides, which are yet
remaining, there is one of these Satyriques, which is called the Cyclops; in
which we may see the nature of those Poems; and from thence conclude, what
likeness they have to the Roman Satire.

The Story of this Cyclops, whose Name was Polyphemus, so famous in the Grecian
Fables, was, That Ulysses, who with his Company was driven on that Coast of
Sicily, where those Cyclops Inhabited, coming to ask Relief from Silenus, and
the Satyrs, who were Herdsmen to that One-ey'd Giant, was kindly received by
them, and entertained; till being perceived by Polyphemus, they were made
Prisoners, against the Rites of Hospitality, for which Ulysses Eloquently
pleaded, were afterward put down into the Den, and some of them devoured:
After which, Ulysses having made him Drunk, when he was asleep, thrust a great
Firebrand into his Eye, and so Revenging his Dead Followers, escaped with the
remaining Party of the Living: And Silenus and the Satyrs, were freed from
their Servitude under Polyphemus, and remitted to their first Liberty, of
attending and accompanying their Patron Bacchus.

This was the Subject of the Tragedy, which being one of those that end with a
happy Event, is therefore by Aristotle, judged below the other sort, whose
Success is unfortunate. Notwithstanding which, the Satyrs, who were part of the
Dramatis Personae, as well as the whole Chorus, were properly introduced into
the Nature of the Poem, which is mixed of Farce and Tragedy. The Adventure of
Ulysses was to entertain the Judging part of the Audience, and the uncouth
Persons of Silenus, and the Satyrs, to divert the Common People, with their
gross Railleries.

Your Lordship has perceived, by this time, that this Satyrique Tragedy, and
the Roman Satire have little Resemblance in any of their Features. The very
Kinds are different: For what has a Pastoral Tragedy to do with a Paper of
Verses Satirically written? The Character and Raillery of the Satyrs is the
only thing that could pretend to a likeness: Were Scaliger and Heinsius alive
to maintain their Opinion. And the first Farces of the Romans, which were the
Rudiments of their Poetry, were written before they had any Communication with
the Greeks; or, indeed, any Knowledge of that People.

And here it will be proper to give the Definition of the Greek Satyrique Poem
from Casaubon, before I leave this Subject. The Satyrique, says he, is a
Dramatick Poem, annexed to a Tragedy; having a Chorus, which consists of
Satyrs: The Persons Represented in it, are Illustrio^s Men: The Action of it is
great; the Style is partly Serious, and partly Jocular; and the Event of the
Action most commonly is Happy.

The Grecians, besides these Satyrique Tragedies, had another kind of Poem,
which they called Silli; which were more of kin to the Roman Satire: Those
Silli were indeed Invective Poems, but of a different Species from the Roman
Poems of Ennius, Pacuvi^s, Lucilius, Horace, and the rest of their Successors.
They were so called, says Casaubon in one place, from Silenus, the
Foster-Father of Bacchus; but in another place, bethinking himself better, he
derives their Name (...), from their Scoffing and Petulancy. From some
Fragments of the Silli, written by Timon, we may find, that they were Satyrique
Poems, full of Parodies; that is, of Verses patched up from great Poets, and
turned into another Sense than their Author intended them. Such amongst the
Romans is the Famous Cento of Ausonius; where the words are Virgil's: But by
applying them to another Sense, they are made a Relation of a Wedding-Night;
and the Act of Consummation fulsomly described in the very words of the most
Modest amongst all Poets. Of the same manner are our Songs, which are turned
into Burlesque; and the serious words of the Author perverted into a ridiculous
meaning. Thus in Timon's Silli the words are generally those of Homer, and the
Tragic Poets; but he applies them Satyrically, to some Customs and Kinds of
Philosophy, which he arraigns. But the Romans not using any of these Parodies
in their Satyrs* sometimes, indeed, repeating Verses of other Men, as Persius
cites some of Nero's; but not turning them into another meaning, the Silli
cannot be supposed to be the Original of Roman Satire. To these Silli
consisting of Parodies, we may properly add, the Satires which were written
against particular Persons; such as were the lambiques of Archil^cus against
Lycambes, which Horace undoubtedly imitated in some of his Odes and Epodes,
whose Titles bear sufficient witness of it: I might also name the Invective of
Ovid against Ibis; and many others: But these are the Under-wood of Satire,
rather than the Timber Trees: They are not of General Extension, as reaching
only to some Individual Person. And Horace seems to have purged himself from
those Sple^etick Reflections in those Odes and Epodes, before he undertook the
Noble Work of Satires; which were properly so called.

Thus, my Lord, I have at length disengaged my self from those Antiquities of
Greece; and have proved, I hope, from the best Critiques, that the Roman Satire
was not borrowed from thence, but of their own Manufacture: I am now almost
gotten into my depth; at least by the help of Dacier, I am swimming toward it.
Not that I will promise always to follow him, any more than be follows
Casaubon; but to keep him in my Eye, as my best and truest Guide; and where I
think he may possibly mislead me, there to have recourse to my own lights, as I
expect that others should do by me.

Quintilian says, in plain words, Satira quidem tota, nostra est: And Horace
had said the same thing before him, speaking of his Predecessor in that sort of
Poetry, Et Gra^cis intacti Carminis Author. Nothing can be clearer than the
Opinion of the Poet, and the Orator, both the best Critics of the two best
Ages of the Roman Empire, than that Satire was wholly of Latin growth, and not
transplanted to Rome from Athens. Yet, as I have said, Scaliger, the Father,
according to his Custom, that is, insolently enough, contradict^ them both* and
gives no better Reason, than the derivation of Satyrus from (...) Salacitas;
and so from the Lechery of those Fauns, thinks he has sufficiently pro^'d, that
Satyr is derived from them. As if Wantonness and lubrici^y, were Essential to
that sort of Poem, which ought to be avoided in it. His other Allegation, which
I have already mentioned, is as pitiful: That the Satyrs carried Platters and
Canisters full of Fruit, in their (...). If they had entered empty-handed, had
they been ever the less Satyrs? Or were the Fruits and Flowers, which they
offered, any thing of kin to Satyr? Or any Argument that this Poem was
Originally Gr^cian* Causaubon judged better, and his Opinion is grounded on
sure Authority; that Satyr was derived from Satura* a Roman word, which
signifies Full, and Abundant; and full also of Variety, in which nothing is
w^nting to its due Perfection. It Is thus, says Dacier, that we lay a full
Color, when the Wool has taken the whole Tincture, and (...) in as much of the
Dye as it can receive. According to this Derivation, from Sa^^ comes Satura, or
Satira: According to the n^w spelling; as (...) and max^mus are now spelled
optimus and (...). Satura* as I have formerly noted, is an Adjective, and
relates to the word Lanx* which is understood. And this Lanx, in English a
Charger, or large Platter, was yearly filled with all sorts of Fruits, which
were offered to the Gods at their Festivals, as the Premices, or First
Gatherings. These Offerings of several sorts thus mingled, it is true, were not
unknown to the Grecians, who called them (...), a Sacrifice of all sorts of
Fruits; and (...), when they offered all kinds of Grain. Virgil has mentioned
these Sacrifices in his Georgiques.

Lancibus and pandis, fumantia reddimus Exta: And in another place, Lancesque
and liba feremus. That is, we offer the smoking Entrails in great Platters;
and we will offer the Chargers, and the Cakes.

This word Satura has been afterward applied to many other sorts of Mixtures;
as Festus calls it a kind of Olla, or hotch-potch, made of several sorts of
Meats. Laws were also called Leges Saturae; when they were of several Heads and
Titles; like our tacked Bills of Parliament. And per Saturam legem far, in
the Roman Senate, was to carry a Law without telling the Senators, or counting
Voices when they were in haste. Salust uses the word per Saturam Sententias
exquirere; when the Majority was visibly on one side. From hence it might
probably be conjectured, that the Discourses or Satyrs of Ennius, L^cilius,
and Horace, as we now call them, took their Name; because they are full of
various Matters, and are also Written on various Subjects, as Porphyrius says.
But Dacier affirms, that it is not immediately from thence that these Satyrs
are so called: For that Name had been used formerly for other things, which
bore a nearer resemblance to those Discourses of Horace. In explaining of
which, (continues Dacier) a Method is to be pursued, of which Casaubon himself
has never thought, and which will put all things into so clear a light, that no
farther room will be left for the least Dispute.

During the space of almost four hundred years, since the Building of their
City, the Romans had never known any Entertainments of the Stage: Chance and
Jollity first found out those Verses which they called Saturnian, and
Fescennine: Or rather Humane Nature, which is inclined to Poetry, first
produced them, rude and barbarous, and unpolished, as all other Operations of
the Soul are in their beginnings, before they are Cultivated with Art and
Study. However, in occasions of Merriment they were first practiced; and this
rough-cast unhewn Poetry, was instead of Stage Plays for the space of an
hundred and twenty years together. They were made extempore, and were, as the
French call them, Impromptus: For which the Tars^ans of Old were much Renowned;
and we see the daily Examples of them in the Italian Farces of Harlequin, and
Scaramucha. Such was the Poetry of that Salvage People, before it was tu^'d
into Numbers, and the Harmony of Verse. Little of the Saturnian Verses is now
remaining; we only know from Authors, that they were nearer Prose than Poetry,
without feet, or measure. They were (...), but not (...): Perhaps they might be
used in the solemn part of their Ceremonies, and the Fescennine, which were
invented after them, in their Afternoons Debauchery, because they were
scoffing, and obscence.

The Fescennine and Saturnian were the same; for as they were called Saturnian
from their Ancientness, when Saturn Reigned in Italy; they were also called
Fescennine, from Fescenina, a Town in the same Country, where they were first
practiced. The Actors with a Gross and Rustic kind of ^aillery, reproached
each other with their Failings; and at the same time were nothing sparing of it
to their Audience. Somewhat of this Custom was afterward retained in their
Saturnalia, or Feasts of Saturn, Celebrated in December; at least all kind of
freedom in Speech was then allowed to Slaves, even against their Masters; and
we are not without some imitation of it in our Christmas Gambols. Soldiers
also used those Fescennine Verses, after Measure and Numbers had been added to
them, at the Triumph of their Generals: Of which we have an Example, in the
Triumph of Julius Caesar over Gaul, in these Expressions. Caesar Gallias
subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem: Ecce Caesar nunc triumphat, qui subegit Gallias;
Nicomedes non triumphat, qui subegit Caesarem. The vapors of Wine made those
first Satirical Poets amongst the Romans; which, says Dacier, we cannot better
represent, than by imagining a Company of Clowns on a Holyday, dancing
Lubberly, and upbraiding one another in Extempore Doggrel, with their Defects
and Vices, and the Stories that were told of them in Bake-houses, and Barbers
Shops.

When they began to be somewhat better bred, and were entering, as I may say,
into the first Rudiments of Civil Conversation, they left these Hedge Notes,
for another sort of Poem, somewhat polished, which was also full of pleasant
Raillery, but without any mixture of obscenity. This sort of Poetry appeared
under the name of Satire, because of its variety: And this Satire was adorned
with Compositions of Music, and with Dances: but Lascivious Postures were
banished from it. In the Tuscan Language, says Livy, the word Hister signifies
a Player: And therefore those Actors, which were first brought from Etruria to
Rome, on occasion of a Pestilence; when the Romans were admonished to avert the
Anger of the Gods by Plays, in the Year ab Vrbe Condita, cccxc. Those Actors, I
say, were therefore called Histriones: And that Name has since remained, not
only to Actors Roman born, but to all others of every Nation. They Played not
the former extempore stuff of Fescennine Verses, or Clownish Jests; but what
they Acted, was a kind of civil cleanly Farce, with Music and Dances, and
Motions that were proper to the Subject.

In this Condition Livius Andronicus found the Stage, when he attempted first,
instead of Farces, to supply it with a Nobler Entertainment of Tragedies and
Comedies. This Man was a Grecian born, and being made a Slave by Livius
Salinator, and brought to Rome, had the Education of his Patron's Children
committed to him. Which trust he discharged, so much to the satisfaction of his
Master, that he gave him his Liberty.

Andronicus thus become a Freeman of Rome, added to his own Name that of Livius
his Master; and, as I observed, was the first Author of a Regular Play in that
Commonwealth. Being already instructed in his Native Country, in the Manners
and Decencies of the Athenian Theater, and Conversant in the Archaea Comaedia,
or old Comedy of Aristophanes, and the rest of the Grecian Poets; he took from
that Model his own designing of Plays for the Roman Stage. The first of which
was represented in the Year 514. since the building of Rome, as Tully, from the
Commentaries of Atticus, has assured us; it was after the end of the first
Punick War, the year before Ennius was born. Dacier has not carried the matter
altogether thus far; he only says, that one Livius Andronicus was the first
Stage-Poet at Rome: But I will adventure on this hint, to advance another
Proposition, which I hope the Learned will approve. And though we have not any
thing of Andronicus remaining to justify my Conjecture, yet it is exceeding
probable, that having read the Works of those Grecian Wits, his Countrymen, he
imitated not only the groundwork, but also the manner of their Writing. And how
grave soever his Tragedies might be, yet in his Comedies he expressed the way
of Aristophanes, Eupolis, and the rest, which was to call some Persons by their
own Names, and to expose their Defects to the laughter of the People. The
Examples of which we have in the forementioned Aristophanes, who turned the
wise Socrates into Ridicule; and is also very free with the management of
Cleon, Alcibiades, and other Ministers of the Athenian Government. Now if this
be granted, we may easily suppose, that the first hint of Satirical Plays on
the Roman Stage, was given by the Greeks. Not from their Satyrica, for that has
been reasonably exploded in the former part of this Discourse: But from their
old Comedy, which was imitated first by Livius Andronicus. And then Quintilian
and Horace must be cautiously Interpreted, where they affirm, that Satire is
wholly Roman; and a sort of Verse, which was not touched on by the Grecians.
The reconcilement of my Opinion to the Standard of their Judgment, is not
however very difficult, since they spoke of Satire, not as in its first
Elements, but as it was formed into a separate Work; begun by Ennius, pursued
by Lucilius, and completed afterward by Horace. The Proof depends only on
this Postulatum, that the Comedies of Andronicus, which were imitations of the
Greek, were also imitations of their Railleries, and Reflections on particular
Persons. For if this be granted me, which is a most probable Supposition, it is
easy to infer, that the first light which was given to the Roman Theatrical
Satire, was from the Plays of Livius Andronicus. Which will be more manifestly
discovered, when I come to speak of Ennius: In the mean time I will return to
Dacier.

The People, says he, ran in Crowds to these New Entertainments of Andronicus,
as to Pieces which were more Noble in their kind, and more perfect than their
former Satires, which for some time they neglected and abandoned. But not long
after, they took them up again, and then they joined them to their Comedies:
Playing them at the end of every Drama; as the French continue at this Day to
Act their Farces; in the nature of a separate Entertainment, from their
Tragedies. But more particularly they were joined to the Atellane Fables, says
Casaubon; which were Plays invented by the Osci. Those Fables, says Valerius
Maximus, out of Livy, were tempered with the Italian severity, and free from
any note of Infamy, or Obsceneness; and as an old Commentator on Iuvenal
affirms, the Exodiarii, which were Singers and Dancers, entered to entertain
the People with light Songs, and Mimical Gestures, that they might not go away
oppressed with Melancholy, from those serious Pieces of the Theater. So that
the Ancient Satire of the Romans was in Extemporary Reproaches: The next was
Farce, which was brought from Tuscany: To that Succeeded the Plays of
Andronicus, from the old Comedy of the Grecians: And out of all these, sprung
two several Branches of new Roman Satire; like different Cyens from the same
Root. Which I shall prove with as much Brevity as the Subject will allow.

A Year after Andronicus had opened the Roman Stage, with his new Drama's,
Ennius was Born: who, when he was grown to Man's Estate, having seriously
considered the Genius of the People, and how eagerly they followed the first
Satires, thought it would be worth his Pains, to refine upon the Project, and
to write Satires not to be Acted on the Theater, but Read. He preserved the
Groundwork of their Pleasantry, their Venom, and their Raillery on particular
Persons, and general Vices: And by this means, avoiding the danger of any ill
Success, in a Public Representation, he hoped to be as well received in the
Cabinet, as Andronicus had been upon the Stage. The Event was answerable to his
Expectation. He made Discourses in several sorts of Verse, vari'd often in the
same Paper; Retaining still in the Title, their Original Name of Satire. Both
in relation to the Subjects and the variety of Matters contained in them, the
Satires of Horace are entirely like them; only Ennius, as I said, con^ines not
himself to one sort of Verse, as Horace does; but taking Example from the
Greeks, and even from Homer himself, in his Margites, which is a kind of
Satire, as Scaliger observes, gives himself the License, when one sort of
Numbers comes not easily, to run into another, as his Fancy Dictates. For he
makes no difficulty, to mingle Hexameters with ^ambique Trimeters; or with
Trochaique Tetrameters; as appears by those Fragments which are yet remaining
of him: Horace has thought him worthy to be Copied; inserting many things of
his into his own Satires, as Virgil has done into his Aeneids.

Here we have Dacier making out that Ennius was the first Satyrist in that way
of Writing, which was of his Invention; that is, Satire abstracted from the
Stage, and new modeled into Papers of Verses, on several Subjects. But he will
have Ennius take the Groundwork of Satire from the first Farces of the Romans;
rather than from the formed Plays of Livius Andronicus, which were Copied from
the Grecian Comedies. It may possibly be so; but Dacier knows no more of it
than I do. And it seems to me the more probable Opinion, that he rather
imitated the ^ine Railleries of the Greeks, which he saw in the Pieces of
Andronicus, than the Coursness of his old Country men, in their Clownish
Extemporary way of jee^ing.

But besides this, it is Universally Granted, that Ennius though an Italian, was
excellently Learned in the Greek Language. His Verses were stuffed with
Fragments of it, even to a fault: And he himself believed, according to the
Pith^gor^^^ Opinion, that the Soul of Homer was transfused into him: Which
Persius observes, in his Sixth Satire: Postquam destertuit esse M^o^ides. But
this being only the private Opinion of so inconsiderable a Man as I am, I leave
it to the farther Disquisition of the Critiques, if they think it worth their
notice. Most e^ident it is, that whether he imitated the Roman Farce, or the
Greek Co^^^dies, he is to be acknowledged for the first Author of Roman Satire;
as it is properly so called; and distinguished from any sort of Stage Play.

Of Pac^vi^s, who succeeded him, there is little to be said, because there is
so little remaining of him: Only that ^e is taken to be the Nephew of Ennius,
his Sisters Son; that in probability he was instructed by his Uncle, in his way
of Sati^^, which we are told he had Copied; but what Advances he made we know
not.

Lucilius came into the World, when Pacuvius flourished most; he also made
Satires after the manner of Ennius, but he gave them a more gra^eful turn; and
endeavored to imitate more closely the vetu^ Comaedia of the Greeks: Of the
which the old Original Roman Satire had no Idea, till the time of Livius
Andronicus. And though Horace seems to have made Luciliu^ the first Author of
Satire in Verse, amongst the Romans; in these Words, Quid cum est Lucilius
ausus Primus in hun^ operis componere carmina morem: He is only thus to be
understood, That Lucilius had given a more graceful turn to the Satire of
Ennius and Pacuvius; not that he invented a new Satire of his own: And
Quintilian seems to Explain this Passage of Horace in these words; Satira
quidem tota nostra est, in qua primus insignem laudem adeptus est Lucilius.

Thus, both Horace and Quintilian, give a kind of Primacy of Honor to
Lucilius, amongst the Latin Satirists. For as the Roman Language grew more
Refined, so much more capable it was of receiving the Grecian Beauties in his
time: Horace and Quintilian could mean no more, than that Lucilius writ better
than Ennius and Pacuvius: And on the same account we prefer Horace to Lucilius:
Both of them imitated the old Greek Comedy; and so did Ennius and Pacuvius
before them. The polishing of the Latin Tongue, in the Succession of Times,
made the only difference. And Horace himself, in two of his Satires, written
purposely on this Subject, thinks the Romans of his Age, were too Partial in
their Commendations of Lucilius; who writ not only loosely, and muddily, with
little Art, and much less Care, but also in a time when the Latin Tongue was
not yet sufficiently purged from the Dregs of Barbarism; and many significant
and sounding Words, which the Romans wanted, were not admitted even in the
times of Lucretius and Cicero; of which both complain.

But to proceed, Dacier justly taxes Casaubon, for saying. That the Satires of
Lucilius were wholly different in Specie, from those of Ennius and Pacuvius.
Casaubon was led into that mistake, by Diomedes the Grammarian, who in effect
says this. Satire amongst the Romans, but not amongst the Greeks, was a biteing
invective Poem, made after the Model of the Ancient Comedy; for the
Reprehension of Vices: Such as were the Poems of Lucilius, of Horace, and of
Persius. But in former times, the Name of Satire was given to Poems, which were
composed of several sorts of Verses; such as were made by Ennius, and Pacuvius;
more fully expressing the Etymology of the word Satire, from Satura, which we
have observed. Here it is manifest, that Diomedes makes a Specifical Distinction
betwixt the Satires of Ennius, and those of Lucilius. But this, as we say in
English, is only a Distinction without a Difference; for the Reason of it, is
ridiculous, and absolutely false. This was that which cozened honest Casaubon,
who relying on Diomedes, had not sufficiently examined the Origin and Nature
of those two Satires; which were entirely the same, both in the Matter and the
Form. For all that Lucilius performed beyond his Predecessors, Ennius and
Pacuvius, was only the adding of more Politeness, and more Salt; without any
change in the Substance of the Poem: And though Lucilius put not together in the
same Satire several sorts of Verses, as Ennius did; yet he composed several
Satires, of several sorts of Verses; and mingled them with Greek Verses: One
Poem consisted only of Hexameters; and another was entirely of lambiques; a
third of Trochaiques; as is visible by the Fragments yet remaining of his
Works. In short, if the Satires of Lucilius are therefore said to be wholly
different from those of Ennius because he added much more of Beauty and
Polishing to his own' Poems, than are to be found in those before him; it will
follow from hence, that the Satires of Horace are wholly different from those
of Lucilius, because Horace has not less surpassed Lucilius in the Elegancy of
his Writing, than Lucilius surpassed Ennius in the turn and Ornament of his.
This Passage of Diomedes has also drawn Do^sa, the Son, into the same Error of
Casaubon, which, I say, not to expose the little Failings of those Judicious
Men, but only to make it appear, with how much Diffidence and Caution we are to
Read their Works; when they treat a Subject of so much Obscurity, and so very
ancient, as is this of Satire.

Having thus brought down the History of Satire from its Original, to the times
of Horace, and shown the several changes of it. I should here discover some of
those Graces which Horace added to it, but that I think it will be more proper
to defer that Undertaking, till I make the Comparison betwixt him and Iuvenal.
In the mean while, following the Order of Time, it will be necessary to say
somewhat of another kind of Satire, which also was descended from the Ancient:
It Is that which we call the Varronian Satire, but which Varro himself calls the
Menippean; because Varro, the most Learned of the Romans, was the first Author
of it, who imitated, in his Works, the Manners of Menippus the Gadarenian, who
professed the Philosophy of the Cyniques.

This sort of Satire was not only composed of several sorts of Verse, like
those of Ennius, but was also mixed with Prose; and Greek was sprinkled amongst
the Latin. Quintilian, after he had spoken of the Satire of Lucilius, adds what
follows. There is another and former kind of Satire, Composed by Terentius
Varro, the most Learned of the Romans: In which he was not satisfied alone,
with mingling in it several sorts of Verse. The only difficulty of this
Passage, is, that Quintilian tells us, that this Satire of Varro was of a
former kind. For how can we possibly imagine this to be, since Varro, who was
contemporary to Cicero, must consequently be after Lucilius? But Quintilian
meant not, that the Satire of Varro was in order of Time before Lucilius; he
would only give us to understand, that the Varronian Satire, with mixture of
several sorts of Verses, was more after the manner of Ennius and Pacuvius, than
that of Lucilius, who was more severe, and more correct; and gave himself less
liberty in the mixture of his Verses, in the same Poem.

We have nothing remaining of those Varronian Satires, excepting some
inconsiderable Fragments; and those for the most part much corrupted. The
Titles of many of them are indeed preserved, and they are generally double:
From whence, at least, we may understand, how many various Subjects were
treated by that Author. Tully, in his Academicks, introduces Varro himself
giving us some light concerning the Scope and Design of these Works. Wherein,
after he had shown his Reasons why he did not ex professo write of Philosophy,
he adds what follows. Notwithstanding, says he, that those Pieces of mine,
wherein I have imitated Menippus, though I have not Translated him, are
sprinkled with a kind of mirth, and gayety: Yet many things are there inserted,
which are drawn from the very intrails of Philosophy, and many things severely
argued: Which I have mingled with Pleasantries on purpose, that they may more
easily go down with the Common sort of Unlearned Readers. The rest of the
Sentence is so lame, that we can only make thus much out of it; that in the
Composition of his Satires, he so tempered Philology with Philosophy, that his
Work was a mixture of them both. And Tully himself confirms us in this Opinion;
when a little after he addresses himself to Varro in these words. And you your
self have composed a most Elegant and Complete Poem; you have begun Philosophy
in many Places: Sufficient to incite us, though too little to Instruct us. Thus
it appears, that Varro was one of those Writers whom they called (...),
studious of laughter; and that, as Learned as he was, his business was more to
divert his Reader, than to teach him. And he Entitled his own Satires
Menippean: Not that Menippus had written any Satires, (for his were either
Dialogues or Epistles) but that Varro imitated his Style, his Manner, and his
Facetiousness. All that we know farther of Menippus, and his Writings, which
are wholly lost; is, that by some he is esteemed, as, amongst the rest, by
Varro: By others he is noted of Cynical Impudence, and Obsc^nity: That he was
much given to those Parodies, which I have already mentioned; that is, he often
quoted the Verses of Homer and the Tragic Poets, and turned their serious
meaning into something that was Ridiculous; whereas Varro's Satires are by
Tully called Absolute, and most Elegant, and Various Poems. Lucian, who was
emulous of this Menippus, seems to have imitated both his Manners and his Style
in many of his Dialogues; where Menippus himself is often introduced as a
Speaker in them, and as a perpetual B^assoon: Particularly his Character is
expressed in the ^^ginning of that Dialogue which is called (...). But Varro,
in imitating him, avoids his impudence and ^ilthine^s, and only expresses his
witty Pleasantry.

This we may believe for certain, That as his Subjects were various, so most of
them were Tales or Stories of his own invention. Which is also manifest from
Antiquity, by those Authors who are acknowledged to have written Varro^ian
Satires, in imitation of his: Of whom the Chief is Pe^ronius Arbiter, whose
Satire, they say, is now Printing in ^olland, wholly recovered, and made
complete: When it is made public, it will easily be seen by any one Sentence,
whether it be supposititious, or genuine. Many of L^cian's Dialogues may also
properly be called Varronian Satires; particularly his True History: And
consequently the G^lde^ Ass of Apuleius, which is taken from him. Of the same
stamp is the Mock Deification of Claudius, by Se^eca: And the Symposium or
Caesar's of Julian the Emperor. Amongst the Moderns we may reckon the Eucomium
Moriae of Erasmus, Barclay's Euphormi^, and a Volume of German Authors, which
my ingenious Friend Mr. Charles Killigrew once lent me. In the English I
remember none, which are mixed with Prose, as Varro's were: But of the same
kind is Mother Hubbard's Tale in Spencer; and (if it be not too vain, to
mention any thing of my own) the Poems of Abs^lo^, and Mac Fleckno.

This is what I have to say in General of Satire: Only as Dacier has observed
before me, we may take notice, That the word Satire is of a more general
signification in Latin, than in French, or English. For amongst the Romans it
was not only used for those Discourses which decry'd Vice, or exposed Folly;
but for others also, where Virtue was recommended. But in our Modern Languages
we apply it only to invective Poems, where the very Name of Satire is
formidable to those Persons* who would appear to the World, what they are not
in themselves. For in English, to say Satire, is to mean Reflection, as we use
that word in the worst Sense; or as the French call it, more properly,
Medisance. In the Criticism of Spelling, it ought to be with i and not with y;
to distinguish its true derivation from Sat^ra, not from Satyrus. And if this
be so, then it is false spelled throughout this Book: For here it is written
Satyr. Which having not considered at the first, I thought it not worth
Correcting afterward. But the French are more nice, and never spell it any
other ways than Satire.

I am now arrived at the most difficult part of my Undertaking, which is, to
compare Horace with Iuvenal and Persius: It Is observed by Rigaltius, in his
Preface before Iuvenal, written to Thuanus, that these three Poets have all
their particular Partisans, and Favorers: Every Commentator, as he has taken
pains with any of them, thinks himself obliged to perfer his Author to the
other two: To find out their Failings, and decry them, that he may make room
for his own Darling. Such is the partiality of Mankind, to set up that Interest
which they have once espoused, though it be to the prejudice of Truth,
Morality, and common Justice. And especially in the productions of the Brain.
As Authors generally think themselves the best Poets, because they cannot go
out of themselves, to judge sincerely of their Betters: So it is with
Critiques, who, having first taken a liking to one of these Poets, proceed to
Comment on him, and to Illustrate him; after which they fall in love with their
own Labors, to that degree of blind fondness, that at length they defend and
exalt their Author, not so much for his sake as for their own. It Is a folly of
the same Nature, with that of the Romans themselves, in their Games of the
Circus; the Spectators were divided in their Factions, betwixt the Veneti and
the Prasini: Some were for the Charioteer in Blue, and some for him in Green.
The Colors themselves were but a Fancy; but when once a Man had taken pains to
set out those of his Party, and had been at the trouble of procuring Voices for
them, the Case was altered: He was concerned for his own Labor: And that so
earnestly, that Disputes and Quarrels, Animosities, Commotions, and Bloodshed,
often happened: And in the Declension of the Grecian Empire, ^the very
Sovereigns themselves engaged in it, even when the Barbarians were at their
doors; and stickled for the pre^erence of Colors, when the safety of their
People was in question. I am now, my self, on the brink of the same Precipice;
I have spent some time on the Translation of Iuvenal, and Persius: And it
behooves me to be wary, lest, for that Reason, I should be partial to them, or
take a prejudice against Horace. Yet, on the other side, I woul'd not be like
some of our Judges, who would give the Cause for a Poor Man, right or wrong:
For though that be an Error on the better hand, yet it is still a partiality:
And a Rich Man, unhear'd, cannot be concluded an Oppressor. I remember a saying
of K. Charles the Second, on Sir Matthew Hales, (who was doubtless an Incorrupt
and Upright Man) That his Servants were sure to be Cast on any Trial, which was
heard before him: Not that he thought the Judge was possibly to be bribed; but
that his Integrity might be too scrupulous: And that the Causes of the Crown
were always suspicious, when the Privileges of Subjects were concerned.

It had been much fairer, if the Modern Critiques, who have embarked in the
Quarrels of their favorite Authors, had rather given to each his proper due;
without taking from another's heap, to raise their own. There is Praise enough
for each of them in particular, without encroaching on his Fellows, and
detracting from them, or Enriching themselves with the Spoils of others. But to
come to particulars: Heinsius and Dacier, are the most principal of those, who
raise Horace above Iuvenal and Persius. Scaliger the Father, Rigaltius, and
many others, debase Horace, that they may set up Iuvenal: And Casaubon, who is
almost single, throws Dirt on Iuvenal and Horace, that he may exalt Persius,
whom he understood particularly well, and better than any of his former
Commentators; even Stelluti who succeeded him. I will begin with him, who in my
Opinion defends the weakest Cause, which is that of Persius; and laboring, as
Tacitus professes of his own Writing, to divest my self of partiality, or
prejudice, consider Persius, not as a Poet, whom I have wholly Translated, and
who has cost me more labor and time, than Iuvenal; but according to what I
judge to be his own Merit; which I think not equal in the main, to that of
Iuvenal or Horace; and yet in some things to be preferred to both of them.

First, then, for the Verse, neither Casaubon himself, nor any for him, can
defend either his Numbers, or the Purity of his Latin. Casaubon gives this
point for lost; and pretends not to justify either the Measures, or the Words
of Persius: He is evidently beneath Horace and Iuvenal, in both.

Then, as his Verse is scabrous, and hobbling, and his Words not every where
well chosen, the purity of Latin being more corrupted, than in the time of
Iuvenal, and consequently of Horace, who writ when the Language was in the
height of its perfection; so his diction is hard; his Figures are generally
too bold and daring; and his Tropes, particularly his Metaphors, insufferably
strained.

In the third place, notwithstanding all the diligence of Casaubon, Stelluti,
and a Scotch Gentleman (whom I have heard extremely commended for his
Illustrations of him:) yet he is still obscure: Whether he affected not to be
understood, but with difficulty; or whether the fear of his safety under Nero,
compelled him to this darkness in some places; or that it was occasioned by his
close way of thinking, and the brevity of his Style, and crowding of his
Figures; or lastly, whether after so long a time, many of his Words have been
corrupted, and many Customs, and Stories relating to them, lost to us; whether
some of these Reasons, or all, concurred to render him so cloudy; we may be
bold to affirm, that the best of Commentators can but guess at his Meaning, in
many passages: And none can be certain that he has divined rightly.

After all, he was a Young Man, like his Friend and Contemporary Lucan: Both of
them Men of extraordinary Parts, and great acquired Knowledge, considering
their Youth. But neither of them had arrived to that Maturity of Judgment,
which is necessary to the accomplishing of a formed Poet. And this
Consideration, as on the one hand it lays some Imperfections to their charge,
so on the other side it is a candid excuse for those Failings, which are
incident to Youth and Inexperience; and we have more Reason to wonder, how
they, who Dyed before the Thirtieth Year of their Age, could write so well, and
think so strongly; than to accuse them of those Faults, from which Humane
Nature, and more especially in Youth, can never possibly be exempted.

To consider Persius yet more closely: He rather insulted over Vice and Folly,
than exposed them, like I^venal and Horace. And as Chaste, and Modest as he is
esteemed, it cannot be denied, but that in some places, he is broad and fulsom,
as the latter Verses of the Fourth Satire, and of the Sixth, sufficiently
witness. And it is to be believed, that he who commits the same Crime often, and
without Necessity, cannot but do it with some kind of Pleasure.

To come to a conclusion, He is manifestly below Horace; because ^e borrows
most of his greatest Beauties from him: And Casaubon is so far from denying
this; that he has written a Treatise purposely concerning it; wherein he shows
a multitude of his Translations from Horace, and his imitations of him, for the
Credit of his Author; which he calls Imitatio Horatiana.

To these defects, which I casually observed, while I was Translating this
Author, Scaliger had added others: He calls him, in plain terms, a silly
Writer, and a trifler; full of Ostentation of his Learning; and after all,
unworthy to come into Competition with Iuvenal and Horace.

After such terrible Accusations, it is time to hear what his Patron Casaubon
can allege in his Defense. Instead of answering, he excuses for the most part;
and when he cannot, accuses others of the same Crimes. He deals with Scaliger,
as a Modest Scholar with a Master. He Compliments him with so much Reverence,
that one would swear he Feared him as much at least as he Respected him.
Scaliger will not allow Persius to have any Wit: Casaubon Interprets this in
the mildest Sense; and confesses his Author was not good at turning things into
a pleasant Ridicule; or in other words, that he was not a laughable Writer.
That he was ineptus, indeed, but that was, non aptissimus ad jocandum. But that
he was Ostentatious of his Learning, that, by Scaliger's good Favor, he
denies. Persius showed his Learning, but was no Boaster of it; he did
ostendere, but not ostentare; and so, he says, did Scaliger: Where, methinks,
Casaubon turns it handsomely, upon that supercilious Critic, and silently
insinuates, that he himself was sufficiently vainglorious; and a boaster of
his own Knowledge. All the Writings of this Venerable Censor, continues
Casaubon, which are (...), more golden, than Gold it self, are every where
smelling of that Thyme, which, like a Be, he has gathered from Ancient
Authors: But far be Ostentation and Vainglory from a Gentleman, so well Born,
and so Nobly Educated as Scaliger: But, says Scaliger, he is so obscure, that
he has got himself the Name of Scotinus, a dark Writer. Now, says Casaubon,
it is a wonder to me, that any thing could be obscure to the Divine Wit of
Scaliger; from which nothing could be hidden. This is indeed a strong
Compliment, but no Defense. And Casaubon, who could not but be sensible of his
Author's blind side, thinks it time to abandon a Post that was untenable. He
acknowledges that Persius is obscure in some places; but so is Plato, so is
Thucydides; so are Pindar, Theocritus, and Aristophanes amongst the Greek
Poets; and even Horace and Iuvenal, he might have added, amongst the Romans.
The Truth is, Persius is not sometimes, but generally obscure: And therefore
Casaubon, at last, is forced to excuse him, by alleging that it was se
defende^do, for fear of Nero; and that he was commanded to Write so cloudily by
Cornutus, in virtue of Holy Obedience to his Master. I cannot help my own
Opinion; I think Cornutus needed not to have Read many Lectures to him on that
Subject. Persius was an apt Scholar; and when he was bidden to be obscure, in
some places, where his Life and Safety were in question, took the same Counsel
for all his Book; and never afterward Wrote ten Lines together clearly.
Casaubon, being upon this Chapter, has not failed, we may be sure, of making a
Compliment to his own dear Comment. If Persiu^, says he, be in himself obscure,
yet my Interpretation has made him intelligible. There is no question, but he
deserves that Praise, which he has given to himself: But the Nature of the
thing, as Lucretius says, will not admit of a perfect Explanation. Besides many
Examples which I could urge; the very last Verse of his last Satire, upon which
he particularly values himself in his Preface, is not yet sufficiently
explicated. It Is true, Holiday has endeavored to justify his Construction;
but Stelluti is against it: And, for my part, I can have but a very dark Notion
of it. As for the Chastity of his Thoughts, Casaubon denies not, but that one
particular passage, in the Fourth Satire, At, si unctus cesses, etc. is not
only the most obscure, but the most obscene of all his Works: I understood it;
but for that Reason turned it over. In defense of his boistrous Metaphors, he
quotes Longinus, who accounts them as instruments of the Sublime: Fit to move
and stir up the Affections, particularly in Narration. To which it may be
replied, That where the Trope is far fetched, and hard, it is fit for nothing
but to puzzle the Understanding: And may be reckoned amongst those things of
Demosthenes, which Aeschines, called (...) not (...), that is Prodigies, not
Words. It must be granted to Casaubon, that the Knowledge of many things is
lost in our Modern Ages, which were of familiar notice to the Ancients: And
that Satire is a Poem of a difficult Nature in it self, and is not written to
Vulgar Readers. And through the Relation which it has to Comedy, the frequent
change of Persons, makes the Sense perplexed; when we can but Divine, who it is
that speaks: Whether Persius himself, or his Friend and Monitor; or, in some
places, a third Person. But Casaubon comes back always to himself, and
concludes, that if Persius had not been obscure, there had been no need of him
for an Interpreter. Yet when he had once enjoined himself so hard a Task, he
then considered the Greek Proverb, that he must (...); either eat the whole
Snail, or let it quite alone; and so, he went through with his laborious Task,
as I have done with my difficult Translation.

Thus far, my Lord, you see it has gone very hard with Persius: I think he
cannot be allowed to stand in competition, either with Iuvenal or Horace. Yet,
for once, I will venture to be so vain, as to affirm, That none of his hard
Metaphors, or forced Expressions, are in my Translation: But more of this in
its proper place, where I shall say somewhat in particular, of our general
performance, in making these two Authors English. In the mean time I think my
self obliged, to give Persius his undoubted due; and to acquaint the World,
with Casaubon, in what he has equaled, and in what excelled his two
Competitors.

A Man who is resolved to praise an Author, with any appearance of Justice,
must be sure to take him on the strongest side; and where he is least liable to
Exceptions. He is therefore obliged to choose his Mediums accordingly: Casaubon,
who saw that Persius could not laugh with a becomeing Grace, that he was not
made for jeasting, and that a merry Conceit was not his Talent, turned his
Feather, like an Indian, to another light, that he might give it the better
Gloss. Moral Doctrine, says he, and Urbanity, or well-manner'd Wit, are the two
things which constitute the Roman Satire. But of the two, that which is most
Essential to this Poem, and is as it were the very Soul which animates it, is
the scourging of Vice, and Exhortation to Virtue. Thus Wit, for a good Reason,
is already almost out of Doors: And allowed only for an Instrument, a kind of
Tool, or a Weapon, as he calls it, of which the Satyrist makes use, in the
compassing of his Design. The End and Aim of our three Rivals, is consequently
the same. But by what Methods they have prosecuted their intention, is farther
to be considered. Satire is of the nature of Moral Philosophy; as being
instructive: He therefore, who instructs most Usefully, will carry the Palm
from his two Antagonists. The Philosophy in which Persius was Educated, and
which he professes through his whole Book, is the Stoic: The most noble, most
generous, most beneficial to Humane Kind, amongst all the Sects, who have given
us the Rules of Ethiques, thereby to form a severe Virtue in the Soul; to raise
in us an undaunted Courage, against the assaults of Fortune; to esteem as
nothing the things that are without us, because they are not in our Power; not
to value Riches, Beauty, Honors, Fame, or Health, any farther than as
conveniences, and so many helps to living as we ought, and doing good in our
Generation. In short, to be always Happy, while we possess our Minds, with a
good Conscience, are free from the slavery of Vices, and conform our Actions
and Conversation to the Rules of right Reason. See here, my Lord, an Epitome of
Epictetus; the Doctrine of Zeno, and the Education of our Persius. And this he
expressed, not only in all his Satires, but in the manner of his Life. I will
not lessen this Commendation of the Stoic Philosophy, by giving you an account
of some Absurdities in their Doctrine, and some perhaps Impieties, if we
consider them by the Standard of Christian Faith: Persius has ^aln into none of
them: And therefore is free from those imputations. What he teaches, might be
taught from Pulpits, with more profit to the Audience, than all the nice
Speculations of Divinity, and Controversies concerning Faith; which are more
for the Profit of the Shepherd, than for the Edification of the Flock. Passion,
Interest, Ambition, and all their Bloody Consequences of Discord and of War,
are banished from this Doctrine. Here is nothing proposed but the quiet and
tranquillity of Mind; Virtue lodged at home, and afterward diffused in her
general Effects, to the improvement, and good of Humane Kind. And therefore I
wonder not, that the present Bishop of Salisbury, has recommended this our
Author, and the Tenth Satyr of Iuvenal, in his Pastoral Letter, to the serious
perusal and Practice of the Divines in his Diocese, as the best Common Places
for their Sermons, as the Storehouses and Magazines of Moral Virtues, from
whence they may draw out, as they have occasion, all manner of Assistance, for
the accomplishment of a Virtuous Life, which the Stoics have assigned for the
great End and Perfection of Mankind. Hererin, then it is, that Persius has
excelled both Iuvenal and Horace. He sticks to his one Philosophy: He shifts
not sides, like Horace, who is sometimes an Epicuraean, sometimes a Stoic,
sometimes an Eclectick; as his present Humor leads him: Nor declaims like
Iuvenal against Vices, more like an Orator, than a Philosopher. Persius is
every where the same: True to the Dogma's of his Master: What he has learnt, he
teaches vehemently; and what he teaches, that he Practices himself. There is a
Spirit of sincerity in all he says: You may easily discern that he is in
earnest, and is persuaded of that Truth which he inculcates. In this I am of
opinion, that he excels Horace, who is commonly in jest, and laughs while he
instructs: And is equal to Iuvenal, who was as honest and serious as Persius,
and more he could not be.

Hitherto I have followed Casaubon, and enlarged upon him; because I am
satisfied that he says no more than Truth; the rest is almost all frivolous.
For he says that Horace being the Son of a Tax-gatherer, or a Collector, as we
call it, smells every where of the meanness of his Birth, and Education: His
conceits are vulgar, like the Subjects of his Satires; that he does Plebeium
sapere; and Writes not with that Elevation, which becomes a Satyrist: That
Persius being nobly born, and of an opulent Family, had likewise the advantage
of a better Master; Cornutus being the most Learned of his time, a Man of a
most Holy Life; the chief of the Stoic Sect at Rome; and not only a great
Philosopher, but a Poet himself; and in probability a Coadjutor of Persius.
That, as for Iuvenal, he was long a Declaimer, came late to Poetry; and had not
been much conversant in Philosophy.

It Is granted that the Father of Horace was Libertinus, that is one degree
removed from his Grandfather, who had been once a Slave: But Horace, speaking
of him, gives him the best Character of a Father, which I ever read in History:
And I wish a witty Friend of mine now living had such another. He bred him in
the best School, and with the best Company of young Noblemen. And Horace, by
his gratitude to his Memory, gives a certain Testimony that his Education was
ingenuous. After this, he formed himself abroad, by the Conversation of Great
Men. Brutus found him at Athens, and was so pleased with him, that he took him
thence into the Army, and made him Tribunus Militum, a Colonel in a Legion,
which was the Preferment of an Old Soldier. All this was before his
Acquaintance with Mecenas, and his introduction into the Court of Augustus, and
the familiarity of that great Emperor: Which, had he not been well-bred
before, had been enough to civilize his Conversation, and render him
accomplished, and knowing in all the Arts of Complacency and good behavior;
and, in short, an agreeable Companion for the retired hours and privacies of a
Favorite, who was first Minister. So that, upon the whole matter, Persius may
be acknowledged to be equal with him, in those respects, though better born, and
Iuvenal inferior to both. If the Advantage be any where, it is on the side of
Horace; as much as the Court of Augustus Caesar, was superior to that of Nero.
As for the Subjects which they treated, it will appear hereafter, that Horace
writ not vulgarly on vulgar Subjects: Nor always chose them. His Style is
constantly accommodated to his Subject, either high or low: If his fault be too
much lowness, that of Persius is the fault of the hardness of his Metaphors,
and obscurity: And so they are equal in the failings of their Style; where
Iuvenal manefestly Triumphs over both of them.

The Comparison betwixt Horace and Iuvenal is more difficult; because their
Forces were more equal: A Dispute has always been, and ever will contin^e,
betwixt the Favorers of the two Poets. Non nostrum est tantas componere lites.
I shall only venture to give my own Opinion, and leave it for better Judges to
determine. If it be only argued in general, which of them was the better Poet;
the Victory is already gained on the side of Horace. Virgil himself must yield
to him in the delicacy of his Turns, his choice of Words, and perhaps the
Purity of his Latin. He who says that Pindar is inimitable, is himself
inimitable in his Odes. But the Contention betwixt these two great Masters, is
for the Prize of Satire. In which Controversy, all the Odes, and Epodes of
Horace are to stand excluded. I say this, because Horace has written many of
them Satirically, against his private Enemies: Yet these, if justly considered,
are somewhat of the Nature of he Greek Silli, which were Invectives against
particular Sects and Persons. But Horace had purged himself of this Choler,
before he entered on those Discourses, which are more properly called the Roman
Satire: He has not now to do with a Lyce, a Canidi^, a Cassius Severus, or a
Menas; but is to correct the Vices and the Follies of his Time, and to give the
Rules of a Happy and Virtuous Life. In a word, that former sort of Satire,
which is known in England by the Name of Lampoon, is a dangerous sort of
Weapon, and for the most part Unlawful. We have no Moral right on the
Reputation of other Men. It Is taking from them, what we cannot^ restore to
them. There are only two Reasons, for which we may be permitted to write
Lampoons; and I will not promise that they can always justify us: The first is
Revenge, when we have been affronted in the same Nature, or have been any ways
notoriously abused, and can make our selves no other Reparation. And yet we
know, that, in Christian Charity, all Offenses are to be forgiven; as we expect
the like Pardon for those which we daily commit against Almighty God. And this
Consideration has often made me tremble when I was saying our Savior's Prayer;
for the plain Condition of the forgiveness which we beg, is the pardoning of
others the Offenses which they have done to us: For which Reason I have many
times avoided the Commission of that Fault; even when I have been notoriously
provoked. Let not this, my Lord, pass for Vanity in me: For it is truth. More
Libels have been written against me, than almost any Man now living: And I had
Reason on my side, to have defended my own Innocence: I speak not of my Poetry,
which I have wholly given up to the Critics; let them use it, as they please;
Posterity, perhaps, may be more favorable to me: For Interest and Passion,
will lie buried in another Age: And Partiality and Prejudice be forgotten. I
speak of my Morals, which have been sufficiently aspersed: That only sort of
Reputation ought to be dear to every honest Man, and is to me. But let the
World witness for me, that I have been often wanting to my self in that
particular; I have seldom answered any scurrilous Lampoon: When it was in my
power to have exposed my Enemies: And being naturally vindicative, have
suffered in silence; and possessed my Soul in quiet.

Any thing, though never so little, which a Man speaks of himself, in my Opinion,
is still too much, and therefore I will wave this Subject; and proceed to give
the second Reason, which may justify a Poet, when he writes against a
particular Person; and that is, when he is become a Public Nuisance. All
those, whom Horace in his Satires, and Persius and Iuvenal have mentioned in
theirs, with a Brand of infamy, are wholly such. It Is an Action of Virtue to
make Examples of vicious Men. They may and ought to be upbraided with their
Crimes and Follies: Both for their own amendment, if they are not yet
incorrigible; and for the Terror of others, to hinder them from falling into
those Enormities, which they see are so severely punished, in the Persons of
others: The first Reason was only an Excuse for Revenge: But this second is
absolutely of a Poet's Office to perform: But how few Lampooners are there now
living, who are capable of this Duty! When they come in my way, it is impossible
sometimes to avoid reading them. But, good God, how remote they are in common
Justice, from the choice of such Persons as are the proper Subject of Satire!
And how little Wit they bring, for the support of their injustice! The weaker
Sex is their most ordinary Theme: And the best and fairest are sure to be the
most severely handled. Amongst Men, those who are prosperously unjust, are
Entitled to a Panegyric. But afflicted Virtue is insolently stabbed with all
manner of Reproaches. No Decency is considered, no fulsomness omitted; no Venom
is wanting, as far as dullness can supply it. For there is a perpetual Dearth
of Wit; a Barrenness of good Sense, and Entertainment. The neglect of the
Readers, will soon put an end to this sort of scribbling. There can be no
pleasantry where there is no Wit: No Impression can be made, where there is no
Truth for the Foundation. To conclude, they are like the Fruits of the Earth in
this unnatural Season: The Corn which held up its Head, is spoiled with
rankness: But the greater part of the Harvest is laid along, and little of good
Income, and wholesome Nourishment is received into the Barns. This is almost a
digression, I confess to your Lordship; but a just indignation forced it from
me. Now I have removed this Rubbish, I will return to the Comparison of Iuvenal
and Horace.

I would willingly divide the Palm betwixt them; upon the two Heads of Profit
and Delight, which are the two Ends of Poetry in general. It must be granted by
the Favorers of Iuvenal, that Horace is the more Copious, and Profitable in
his Instructions of Humane Life. But in my particular Opinion, which I set not
up for a Standard to better Judgments, Iuvenal is the more delightful Author. I
am profited by both, I am pleased with both; but I owe more to Horace for my
Instruction; and more to Iuvenal, for my Pleasure. This, as I said, is my
particular Taste of these two Authors: They who will have either of them to
excel the other in both qualities, can scarce give better Reasons for their
Opinion, than I for mine: But all unbiased Readers, will conclude, that my
Moderation is not to be Condemned: To such Impartial Men I must appeal: For
they who have already formed their Judgment, may justly stand suspected of
prejudice; and tho all who are my Readers, will set up to be my Judges, I enter
my Caveat against them, that they ought not so much as to be of my Jury. Or, if
they be admitted, it is but Reason, that they should first hear, what I have to
urge in the Defense of my Opinion.

That Horace is somewhat the better Instructor of the two, is proved from
hence, that his Instructions are more general: Iuvenals's more limited. So that
granting, that the Counsels which they give, are equally good for Moral Use;
Horace, who gives the most various Advice, and most applicable to all
Occasions, which can occurr to us, in the course of our Lives; as including in
his Discourses, not only all the Rules of Morality, but also of Civil
Conversation; is, undoubtedly, to be preferred to him, who is more
circumscribed in his Instructions, makes them to fewer People, and on fewer
Occasions, than the other. I may be pardoned for using an Old Saying, since
it is true, and to the purpose, Bonum quo communius, eo melius. Iuvenal,
excepting only his first Satire, is in all the rest confined, to the exposing
of some particular Vice; that he lashes, and there he sticks. His Sentences are
truly shining and instructive: But they are sprinkled here and there. Horace is
teaching us in every Line, and is perpetually Moral; he had found out the Skill
of Virgil, to hide his Sentences: To give you the Virtue of them, without
showing them in their full extent: Which is the Ostentation of a Poet, and not
his Art: And this Petronius charges on the Authors of his Time, as a Vice of
Writing, which was then growing on the Age. Ne Sententiae extra Corpus
Orationis emineant: He would have them weaved into the Body of the Work, and
not appear embossed upon it, and striking directly on the Reader's view. Folly
was the proper Quarry of Horace, and not Vice: And, as there are but few
Notoriously Wicked Men, in comparison with a Shoal of Fools, and Fops; so it is
a harder thing to make a Man Wise, than to make him Honest: For the Will is
only to be reclaimed in the one; but the Understanding is to be informed in the
other. There are Blind-sides and Follies, even in the Prosessors of Moral
Philosophy; and there is not any one Sect of them that Horace has not exposed.
Which, as it was not the Design of Iuvenal, who was wholly employed in lashing
Vices, some of them the most enormous that can be imagined; so perhaps, it was
not so much his Talent. Omne vafer vitium ridenti Flaccus amico, tangit, and
admissus circum praecordia ludit. This was ^he Commendation which Persius gave
him: Where by Vitium, he means those little Vices, which we call Follies, the
defects of Humane Understanding, or at most the Peccadillos of Life, rather
than the Tragical Vices, to which Men are hurried by their unruly Passions and
exorbitant Desires. But in the word omne, which is universal, he concludes,
with me, that the Divine Wit of Horace, left nothing untouched; that he entered
into the inmost Recesles of Nature; found out the Imperfections even of the
most Wise and Grave, as well as of the Common People: Discovering, even in the
great Trebatius, to whom he addresses the first Satire, his hunting after
Business, and following the Court, as well as in the Persecutor Crispinus, his
impertinence and importunity. It Is true, he exposes Crispinus openly, as a
common Nuisance: But he rallies the other, as a Friend, more finely. The
Exhortations of Persius are confined to Noblemen: And the Stoic Philosophy, is
that alone, which he recommends to them: Iuvenal Exhorts to particular Virtues,
as they are opposed to those Vices against which he declaims: But Horace laughs
to shame, all Follies, and insinuates Virtue, rather by familiar Examples, than
by the severity of Precepts.

This last Consideration seems to incline the Balance on the side of Horace,
and to give him the preference to Iuvenal, not only in Profit, but in Pleasure.
But, after all, I must confess, that the Delight which Horace gives me, is but
languishing. Be pleased still to understand, that I speak of my own Taste only:
He may Ravish other Men; but I am too stupid and insensible, to be tickled.
Where he barely grins himself, and, as Scaliger says, only shows his white
Teeth, he cannot provoke me to any Laughter. His Urbanity, that is, his Good
Manners, are to be commended, but his Wit is faint; and his Salt, if I may dare
to say so, almost insipid. Iuvenal is of a more vigorous and Masculine Wit, he
gives me as much Pleasure as I can bear: He fully satisfies my Expectation, he
Treats his Subject home: His Spleen is raised, and he raises mine: I have the
Pleasure of Concernment in all he says; He drives his Reader along with him;
and when he is at the end of his way* I willingly stop with him: If he went
another Stage, it would be too far, it would make a Journey of a Progress, and
turn Delight into Fatigue. When he gives over, it is a sign the Subject is
exhausted; and the Wit of Man can carry it no farther. If a Fault can be justly
found in him; it is that he is sometimes too luxuriant, too redundant; says more
than he needs, like my Friend the Plain Dealer, but never more than pleases.
Add to this, that his Thoughts are as just as those of Horace, and much more
Elevated. His Expressions are Sonorous and more Noble; his Verse more numerous,
and his Words are suitable to his Thoughts; sublime and lofty. All these
contribute to the Pleasure of the Reader, and the greater the Soul of him who
Reads, his Transports are the greater. Horace is always on the Amble, Iuvenal
on the Gallop: But his way is perpetually on Carpet Ground. He goes with more
impetuosity than Horace; but as securely; and the swiftness adds a more lively
agitation to the Spirits. The low Style of Horace, is according to his Subject;
that is generally grovelling. I question not but he could have raised it. For
the First Epistle of the Second Book, which he writes to Augustus, (a most
instructive Satire concerning Poetry,) is of so much Dignity in the Words, and
of so much Elegancy in the Numbers, that the Author plainly shows, the Sermo
Pedestris, in his other Satires, was rather his Choice than his Necessity. He
was a Rival to Lucilius his Predecessor; and was resolved to surpass him in his
own Manner. Lucilius, as we see by his remaining Fragments, minded neither his
Style nor his Numbers, nor his purity of words, nor his run of Verse. Horace
therefore copes with him in that humble way of Satire. Writes under his own
force, and carries a dead Weight, that he may match his Competitor in the Race.
This I imagine was the chief Reason, why he minded only the clearness of his
Satire, and the cleanness of Expression, without ascending to those heights, to
which his own vigor might have carried him. But limiting his desires only to
the Conquest of Lucilius, he had his Ends of his Rival, who lived before him;
but made way for a new Conquest over himself, by Iuvenal his Successor. He
could not give an equal pleasure to his Reader, because he used not equal
Instruments. The fault was in the Tools, and not in the Workman. But
Versification, and Numbers, are the greatest Pleasures of Poetry: Virgil knew
it, and practiced both so happily; that for ought I know, his greatest
Excellency is in his Diction. In all other parts of Poetry, he is faultless;
but in this he placed his chief perfection. And give me leave, my Lord, since I
have here an apt occasion, to say, that Virgil, could have written sharper
Satires, than either Horace or Iuvenal, if he would have employed his Talent,
that way. I will produce a Verse and half of his, in one of his Eclogues, to
justify my Opinion: And with Comma's after every Word, to show, that he has
given almost as many lashes, as he has written Syllables. It Is against a bad
Poet; whose ill Verses he describes. Non tu, in triviis, indocte, solebas,
stridenti, miserum, stipula, disperdere carmen? But to return to my purpose,
when there is any thing deficient in Numbers, and Sound, the Reader is uneasy,
and unsatisfi'd; he wants something of his Complement, desires somewhat which
he finds not: And this being the manifest defect of Horace, it is no wonder,
that finding it supplied in Iuvenal, we are more Delighted with him. And
besides this, the Sauce of Iuvenal is more poignant, to create in us an
Appetite of Reading him. The Meat of Horace is more nourshing; but the Cookery
of Iuvenal more exquisite; so that, granting Horace to be the more general
Philosopher; we cannot deny, that Iuvenal was the greater Poet, I mean in
Satire. His Thoughts are sharper, his Indignation against Vice is more
vehement; his Spirit has more of the Commonwealth Genius; he treats Tyranny,
and all the Vic^s attending it, as they deserve, with the utmost rigor: And
consequently, a Noble Soul is better pleased with a Zealous Vindicator of Roman
Liberty; than with a T^mporizing Poet, a well Manner'd Court Slave, and a Man
who is often afraid of Laughing in the right place: Who is ever decent, because
he is naturally servile. After all, Horace had the disadvantage of the Times in
which he lived; they were better for the Man, but worse for the Satirist. It Is
generally said, that those Enormous Vices, which were practiced under the Reign
of Domitian, were unknown in the Time of Augustus Caesar. That therefore
Iuvenal had a larger Field, than Horace. Little Follies were out of doors, when
Oppression was to be scourged instead of Avarice: It was no longer time to turn
into Ridicule, the false Opinions of Philosophers; when the Roman Liberty was
to be asserted. There was more need of a Brutus in Domitian's Days, to redeem
or mend, than of a Horace, if he had then been Living, to Laugh at a
Fly-Catcher. This Reflection at the same time excuses Horace, but exalts
Iuvenal. I have ended, before I was aware, the Comparison of Horace and
Iuvenal, upon the Topiques of Instruction and Delight; and indeed I may safely
here conclude that commonplace: For if we make Horace our Minister of State in
Satire, and Iuvenal of our private Pleasures: I think the latter has no ill
bargain of it. Let Profit have the pre-eminence of Honor, in the End of
Poetry. Pleasure, though but the second in degree, is the first in favor. And
who would not choose to be loved better, rather than to be more esteemed? But I
am entered already upon another Topique; which concerns the particular Merits
of these two Satirists. However, I will pursue my business where I left it: And
carry it farther than that common observation of the several Ages, in which
these Authors Flourished. When Horace writ his Satires, the Monarchy of his
Caesar was in its newness; and the Government but just made easy to the
Conquered People. They could not possibly have forgotten the Usurpation of that
Prince upon their Freedom, nor the violent Methods which he had used, in the
compassing of that vast Design: They yet remembered his Proscriptions, and the
Slaughter of so many Noble Romans, their Defendors. Amongst the rest, that
horrible Action of his, when he forced Livia from the Arms of her Husband, who
was constrained to see her Married, as Dion relates the Story; and, big with
Child as she was, conveyed to the Bed of his insulting Rival. The same Dion
Cassius gives us another instance of the Crime before mentioned: That Cornelius
Sisenna, being reproached in full Senate, with the Licentious Conduct of his
Wife, returned this Answer; That he had Married her by the Counsel of Augustus:
Intimating, says my Author, that Augustus had obliged him to that Marriage,
that he might, under that covert, have the more free access to her. His
Adulteries were still before their Eyes, but they must be patient, where they
had not power. In other things that Emperor was Moderate enough: Propriety was
generally secured; and the People entertained with public Shows, and
Donatives, to make them more easily digest their lost Liberty. But Augustus,
who was conscious to himself, of so many Crimes which he had committed, thought
in the first place to provide for his own Reputation, by making an Edict
against Lampoons and Satires, and the Authors of those defamatory Writings,
which my Author Tacitus, from the Law-Term, calls famosos libellos.

In the first Book of his An^als, he gives the following Account of it, in
these Words. Primus Augustus cogniti^^em de famosis libellis specie legis ejus,
tractavit; commotus Cass^i Severi libidine, qua viros faeminasque inlustres,
procacibus scriptis diffamaverat. Thus in English* Augustus was the first, who
under the color of that Law took Cognizance of Lamp^ons; being provoked to it,
by the pe^ulancy of Cossius Severus, who had defamed many Illu^^rious Persons
of both Sexes, in his Writings. The Law to which Tacitus refers, was Lex laesae
Majestatis; commonly called, for the sake of brevity* Maje^^as; or as we say,
High Treason: He means not that this Law had not been Enacted formerly: For it
had been made by the Decemviri, and was inscribed amongst the rest in the
Twelve Tables: To prevent the aspersion of the Roman Majesty; either of the
People themselves, or their Religion, or their Magistrates: And the
in^ringement of it was Capital: That is, the Offender was Whipped to Death, with
the Fasces, which were born before their Chief Officers of Rome. But Augustus
was the first, who restored that intermitted Law. By the words* under col^ur of
that Law, He insinuates that Augustus caused it to be Ex^cut^d, on pretense of
those Libels, which were written by Cassius Severus, against the Nobility: But
in Truth, to save himself, from such ce^^at^ry Verses. Suetonius likewise makes
mention of it thus. Sparsos de (...) in Curia ^amosos libellos, nec expavit,
and magna cura redarguit: A^ (...) requisitis quidem Auctoribus, id modo
censuit, cognoscendum post (...) de iis qui libellos aut carmina ad infamiam
cujuspi^^ s^b alieno nomine ^dant. Agustus was not afraid of Libels, says that
Author: Yet he took all care imaginable to have them answered; and the^ decr^^^
that for the time to come, the Authors of them should be punished. But (...) it
yet more clear, according to my Sense, that this (...) for his own sake durst
not permit them* Fecit id (...); and quasi gratificaretur Populo Romano, and
Primoribus urbis; sed revera ut sibi consuleret: Nam ^abuit in animo,
comprimere nimiam qu^rundam procacitatem in loquendo, a qua nec ipse exemptus
suit. Nam suo nomine compescere erat invidiosum, sub alieno facile and utile.
Ergo specie legis tractavit, quast Populi Romani Majestas inf^maretur. This, I
think is a sufficient Comment on that Passage of Tacitus. I will ^dd only by
the way, that the whole Family of the Caesar's, and all their Relations were
included in the Law; because the Majesty of the Romans in the time of the
Empire was wholly in that House: Omnia Caesar erat: They were all accounted
sacred, who belonged to him. As for Cassius Severus. he was contemporary with
Horace; and was the same Poet against whom he Writes in his Epods, under this
Title, In Cassium Severum Maledicum Poetam: Perhaps intending to kill two
Crows, according to our Proverb, with one Stone; and Revenge both himself and
his Emperor together.

From hence I may reasonably conclude, That Ag^stus, who was not altogether so
Good as he was Wise, had some by respect, in the Enacting of this Law: For to
do any thing for nothing, was not his Maxim, Horace, as he was a Courtier,
complied with the Interest of his Master, and avoiding the Lashing of greater
Crimes, confined himself to the ridiculing of Petty Vices, and common Follies:
Excepting only some reserved Cases, in his Odes and Epods, of his own
particular Quarrels; which either with permission of the Magistrate or without
it, every Man will Revenge, though I say not that he should; for prior laesit, is
a good excuse in the Civil Law, if Christianity had not taught us to forgive.
However he was not the proper Man to arraign great Vices, at least if the
Stories which we hear of him are true, that he Practiced some, which I will not
here mention, out of honor to him. It was not for a Clodius to accuse
Adulterers, especially when Augustus was of that number: So that though his Age
was not exempted from the worst of Villainies, there was no freedom left to
reprehend them, by reason of the Edict. And our Poet was not fit to represent
them in an odious Character, because himself was dipped in the same Actions. Upon
this account, without farther insisting on the different tempers of Iuvenal and
Horace, I conclude, that the Subjects which Horace chose for Satire, are of a
lower nature than those of which Iuvenal has written.

Thus I have treated in a new Method, the Comparison betwixt Horace, Iuvenal,
and Persius; somewhat of their particular manner belonging to all of them is
yet remaining to be considered. Persius was Grave, and particularly opposed his
Gravity to Lewdness, which was the Predominant, Vice in Nero's Court, at the
time when he published his Satires, which was before that Emperor fell into
the excess of Cruelty. Horace was a Mild Admonisher, a Court Satirist, fi^ for
the gentle Times of Augustus, and more fit, for the Reasons which I have
already given. Iuvenal was as proper for his Times, as they for theirs. His was
an Age that deserved a more severe Chastisement. Vices were more gross and
open, more flagitious, more encouraged by the Example of a Tyrant; and more
protected by his Authority. Therefore, wheresoever Iuvenal mentions Nero, he
means Domitian, whom he dares not attack in his own Person, but Scourges him by
Proxy. Heinsius urges in praise of Horace, that according to the Ancient Art
and Law of Satire, it should be nearer to Comedy, than to Tragedy; Not
declaiming against Vice, but only laughing at it. Neither Per^ius, nor Iuvenal
were ignorant of this, for they had both studied Horace. And the thing it self
is plainly true. But as they had read Horace, they had likewise read Lucilius,
of whom Per^ius says secuit Vrbem; and genuinum fregit in illis; meaning Mutius
and Lupus: And Iuvenal also mentions him in these words, Ense velut stricto,
quoties Lucilius ardens I^fremuit, etc. So that they thought the imitation of
Lucilius was more proper to their purpose than that of Horace. They changed
Satire, says Holiday; but they changed it for the better: For the business
being to Reform great Vices, Chastisement goes farther than Admonition; whereas
a perpetual Grinn, like that of Horace, does rather anger than amend a Man.

Thus far that Learned Critic, Bart^n Holiday, whose Interpretation, and
Illustrations of Iuvenal are as Excellent, as the Verse of his Translation and
his English are lame and pitiful. For it is not enough to give us the meaning of
a Poet, which I acknowledge him to have performed most faithfully; but he must
also imitate his Genius, and his Numbers: as far a the English will come up to
the Elegance of the Original. In few words, it is only for a Poet to Translate a
Poet. Holiday and Stapylt^^ had not enough considered this, when they attempted
Iuvenal: But I forbear Reflections; only I beg leave to take notice of this
Sentence, where Holiday says, A perpetual Grinn, like that of Horace, rather
angers than amends a Man. I cannot give him up the Manner of Horace in low
Satire so easily: Let the Chastisements of Iuvenal be never so necessary for
his new kind of Satire; let him declaim as wittily and sharply as he pleases,
yet still the nicest and most delicate touches of Satire consist in fine
Raillery. This, my Lord, is your particular Talent, to which even Iuvenal could
not arrive. It Is not Reading, it is not imitation of an Author, which can
produce this fineness: It must be inborn, it must proceed from a Genius, and
particular way of thinking, which is not to be taught; and therefore not to be
imitated by him who has it not from Nature: How easy it is to call Rogue and
Villain, and that wittily? But how hard to make a Man appear a Fool, a
Blockhead, or a Knave, without using any of those opprobrious terms? To spare
the grossness of the Names, and to do the thing yet more severely, is to draw a
full Face, and to make the Nose and Cheeks stand out, and yet not to employ any
depth of Shadowing. This is the Mystery of that Noble Trade; which yet no
Master can teach to his Apprentice: He may give the Rules, but the Scholar is
never the nearer in his practice. Neither is it true, that this fineness of
Raillery is offensive. A witty Man is tickled while he is hurt in this manner*
and a Fool feels it not. The occasion of an Offense may possibly be given, but
he cannot take it. If it be granted that in effect this way does more Mischief;
that a Man is secretly wounded, and though he be not sensible himself, yet the
malicious World will find it for him: Yet there is still a vast difference
betwixt the slovenly Butchering of a Man, and the fineness of a stroke that
separates the Head from the Body, and leaves it standing in its place. A man
may be capable, as Jack Ketche's Wife said of his Servant, of a plain piece of
Work, a bare Hanging; but to make a Malefactor die sweetly, was only belonging
to her Husband. I wish I could apply it to my self, if the Reader would be kind
enough to think it belongs to me. The Character of Zimri in my Absalom, is, in
my Opinion, worth the whole Poem: It Is not bloody, but it is ridiculous enough.
And he for whom it was intended, was too witty to resent it as an injury. If I
had railed, I might have suffered for it justly: But I managed my own Work more
happily, perhaps more dexterously. I avoided the mention of great Crimes, and
applied my self to the representing of Blind-sides, and little Extravagancies:
To which, the wittier a Man is, he is generally the more obnoxious. It
succeeded as I wished; the Jest went round, and he was laughed at in his turn
who began the Frolic.

And thus, My Lord, you see I have preferred the Manner of Horace, and of your
Lordship, in this kind of Satire, to that of Iuvenal; and I think, reasonably.
Holiday ought not to have Arraigned so Great an Author, for that which was his
Excellency and his Merit: Or if he did, on such a palpable mistake, he might
expect, that some one might possibly arise, either in his own Time, or after
him, to rectify his Error, and restore to Horace, that Commendation, of which
he has so unjustly robbed him. And let the Manes of Iuvenal forgive me, if I
say, that this way of Horace was the best, for amending Manners, as it is the
most difficult. His was, an Ense rescindendum; but that of Horace was a
Pleasant Cure, with all the Limbs preserved entire: And as our Mountebanks tell
us in their Bills, without keeping the Patient within Doors for a Day. What
they promise only, Horace has effectually Performed: Yet I contradict not the
Proposition which I formerly advanced: Iuvenal's Times required a more painful
kind of Operation: But if he had lived in the Age of Horace, I must needs
affirm, that he had it not about him. He took the Method which was prescribed
him by his own Genius* which was sharp and eager; he could not Rally, but he
could Declame: And as his provocations were great, he has revenged them
Tragically. This notwithstanding, I am to say another Word, which, as true as
it is, will yet displease the partial Admirers of our Horace. I have hinted it
before; but it is time for me now to speak more plainly.

This Manner of Horace is indeed the best; but Horace has not executed it,
altogether so happily, at least not often. The Manner of Iuvenal is confessed
to be Inferior to the former; but Iuvenal, has excelled him in his Performance.
Iuvenal has railed more wittily than Horace has rallied. Horace means to make
his Reader Laugh; but he is not sure of his Experiment. Iuvenal always intends
to move your Indignation; and he always brings about his purpose. Horace, for
ought I know, might have tickled the People of his Age; but amongst the Moderns
he is not so Successful. They who say he Entertains so Pleasantly, may perhaps
value themselves on the quickness of their own Understandings, that they can
see a Jest farther off than other men. They may find occasion of Laughter, in
the Wit-battel of the Two Buffoons, Sarmentus and Cicerrus: And hold their
sides for fear of bursting, when Rupilius and Per^ius are Scolding. For my own
part, I can only like the Characters of all Four, which are judiciously given:
But for my heart I cannot so much as smile at their Insipid Raillery. I see not
why Per^ius should call upon Brutus, to revenge him on his Adversary: And that
because he had killed Julius Caesar, for endeavoring to be a King, therefore he
should be desired to Murder Rupilius, only because his Name was Mr. King. A
miserable Clench, in my Opinion, for Horace to Record: I have heard honest Mr.
Swan make many a better, and yet have had the Grace to hold my Countenance. But
it may be Puns were then in Fashion, as they were Wit in the Sermons of the
last Age, and in the Court of King Charles the Second. I am sorry to say it,
for the sake of Horace; but certain it is, he has no fine Palate who can feed
so heartily on Garbidge.

But I have already wearied my self, and doubt not but I have tired your
Lordships Patience, with this long rambling, and I fear, trivial Discourse.
Upon the one half of the Merits, that is, Pleasure, I cannot but conclude that
Iuvenal was the better Satirist: They who will descend into his particular
Praises, may find them at large, in the Dissertation of the Learned Rigaltius
to Thuanus. As for Per^ius, I have given the Reasons, why I think him Inferior
to both of them. Yet I have one thing to add on that Subject.

Barten Holiday, who Translated both Iuvenal and Per^ius; has made this
distinction betwixt them, which is no less true than Witty; that, in Per^ius
the difficulty is to find a Meaning; in Iuvenal, to choose a Meaning: So Crabbed
is Persius, and so Copious is Iuvenal: So much the Understanding is employed in
one; and so much the Judgment in the other. So difficult it is, to find any
Sense in the former, and the best Sense of the latter.

If, on the other side, any one suppose I have commended Horace below his
Merit, when I have allowed him but the Second Place, I desir^ him to consider,
if Iuvenal, a Man of Excellent Natural Endowments, besides the advantages of
Diligence and Study, and coming after him, and Building upon his Foundations
might not probably, with all these helps, surpass him? And whether it be any
dishonor to Horace, to be thus surpassed; since no Art, or Science, is at once
begun and perfected, but that it must pass first through many hands, and even
through several Ages? If Lucilius could add to Ennius, and Horace to Lucilius,
why, without any diminution to the Fame of Horace, might not Iuvenal give the
last perfection to that Work? Or rather, what disreputation is it to Horace,
that Iuvenal Excels in the Tragical Satyr, as Horace does in the Comical? I
have read over attentively, both Heinsius and Dacier, in their Commendations of
Horace: But I can find no more in either of them, for the preference of him to
Iuvenal, than the Instructive Part; the Part of Wisdom, and not that of
Pleasure; which therefore is here allowed him, notwithstanding what Scaliger
and Rigaltius have pleaded to the contrary for Iuvenal. And to show I am
Impartial, I will here Translate what Dacier has said on that Subject.

I cannot give a more just Idea of the Two Books of Satires, made by Horace*
than by compairing them to the Statues of the Sileni, to which Al^ibiades
compares Socrates, in the Symposium. They were Figures, which had nothing of
agreeable, nothing of Beauty on their outside: But when any one took the Pains
to open them, and search into them, he there found the Figures of all the
Deities So, in the Shape that Horace Presents himself to us, in his Satires, we
see nothing at the first View, which deserves our Attention. It seems that he
is rather an Amusement for Children, than for the serious consideration of Men.
But when we take away his Crust, and that which hides him from our sight; when
we discover him to the bottom, then we find all the Divinities in a full
Assembly: That is to say, all the Virtues, which ought to be the continual
exercise of those, who seriously endeavor to Correct their Vices.

It Is easy to Observe, that Dacier, in this Noble Similitude, has confined the
Praise of his Author, wholly to the Instructive Part: The commendation turns on
this, and so does that which follows.

In these Two Books of Satire, it is the business of Horace to instruct us how
to combat our Vices, to regulate our Passions, to follow Nature, to give Bounds
to our desires, to Distinguish betwixt Truth and Falsehood, and betwixt our
Conceptions of Things, and Things themselves. To come back from our prejudicate
Opinions, to understand exactly the Principles and Motives of all our Actions;
and to avoid the Ridicule, into which all men necessarily fall, who are
Intoxicated with those Notions, which they have received from their Masters;
and which they obstinately retain, without examining whether or no they are
founded on right Reason.

In a Word, he labors to render us happy in relation to our selves, agreeable
and faithful to our Friends, and discreet, serviceable, and well bred in
relation to those with whom we are obliged to live, and to converse. To make
his Figures Intelligible, to conduct his Readers through the Labyrinth of some
perplexed Sentence, or obscure Parenthesis, is no great matter. And as
Epictetus says, there is nothing of Beauty in all this, or what is worthy of a
Prudent Man. The Principal business, and which is of most Importance to us, is
to show the Use, the Reason, and the Proof of his Precepts.

They who endeavor not to correct themselves, according to so exact a Model;
are just like the Patients, who have open before them a Book of Admirable
Receipts, for their Diseases, and please themselves with reading it, without
Comprehending the Nature of the Remedies; or how to apply them to their Cure.

Let Horace go off with these Enco^iums, which he has so well deserved.

To conclude the contention betwixt our Three Poets, I will use the Words of
Virgil, in his Fifth Aeneid, where Aeneas proposes the Rewards of the
Foot-Race, to the Three first, who should reach the Goal. Tres praemia primi,
accipient; flavaque Caput nectentur Oliva: Let these Three Ancients be
preferred to all the Moderns; as first arriving at the Goal: Let them all be
Crowned as Victours; with the Wreath that properly belongs to Satire. But,
after that, with this distinction amongst themselves, Primus equum phaleris
in^ignem, Victor habeto. Let Iuvenal Ride first in Triumph. Alter Amazoniam,
pharetram; plenamque Sagittis Threiciis, lato quam circumplectitur auro
Balteus, and tereti subnectit Fibula gemma. Let Horace who is the Second, and
but just the Second, carry off the Quivers, and the Arrows; as the Badges of
his Satire, and the Golden Belt, and the Diamond Button. Tertius, Argolico hoc
Clypeo contentus abito. And let Per^ius, the last of the first Three Worthies,
be contented with this Grecian Shield, and with Victory not only over all the
Grecians, who were Ignorant of the Roman Satire, but over all the Moderns in
Succeeding Ages; excepting Boileau and your Lordship.

And thus, I have given the History of Satire, and derived it as far as from
Ennius, to your Lordship; that is, from its first Rudiments of Barbarity, to
its last Polishing and Perfection: Which is, with Virgil, in his Address to
Augustus; -- nomen fama tot far per annos,
Tithoni prima quot abest ab origin Caesar.
I said only from Ennius; but I may safely carry it higher, as far as Livius
Andronicus; who, as I have said formerly, taught the first Play at Rome in the
Year ab urbe condita, 514. I have since desired my Learned Friend, Mr.
Maidwell, to compute the difference of Times, betwixt Aristophanes, and Livius
Andronicus; and he assures me, from the best Chronologers, that Plutus, the
last of Aristophanes's his Plays, was Represented at Athens, in the Year of the
97th Olympiad; which agrees with the Year Vrbis Conditae 364: So that the
difference of Years betwixt Aristophanes and Andronicus is 150; from whence I
have probably deduced, that Livius Andronicus, who was a Grecian, had read the
Plays of the Old Comedy, which were Satirical, and also of the New; for
Menander was fifty Years before him, which must needs be a great light to him,
in his own Plays; that were of the Satirical Nature. That the Romans had Farces
before this, it is true; but then they had no Communication with Greece: So that
Andronicus was the first, who wrote after the manner of the Old Comedy, in his
Plays; he was imitated by Ennius, about Thirty Years afterward. Though the
former writ Fables; the latter, speaking properly, began the Roman Satire.
According to that Description, which Iuvenal gives of it in his First; Quicquid
ag^^t homines votum, timor, i^a, voluptas, gaudia, discursus, nostri est
farrage libelli. This is that in which I have made bold to differ from
Casaubon, Rigaltius, Dacier, and indeed, from all the Modern Critiques, that
not Ennius, but Andronicus was the First; who by the Archaea Comedia of the
Greeks, added many Beauties to the first Rude and Barbarous Roman Satire: Which
sort of Poem, though we had not derived from Rome, yet Nature teaches it Mankind,
in all Ages, and in every Country.

It Is but necessary, that after so much has been said of Satire, some
Definition of it should be given. Heinsius, in his Dissertations on Horace,
makes it for me, in these words; Satire is a kind of Poetry, without a Series
of Action, invented for the purging of our Minds; in which Humane Vices,
Ignorance, and Errors, and all things besides, which are produced from them, in
every Man, are severely Reprehended; partly Dramatically, partly Simply, and
sometimes in both kinds of speaking; but for the most part Figuratively, and
Occultly; consisting in a low familiar way, chiefly in a sharp and pungent
manner of Speech; but partly, also, in a Facetious and Civil way of Jesting; by
which, either Hatred, or Laughter, or Indignation is moved. -- Where I cannot
but observe, that this obscure and perplexed Definition, or rather Description
of Satire, is wholly accommodated to the Horatian way; and excluding the Works
of Iuvenal and Per^ius, as foreign from that kind of Poem: The Clause in the
beginning of it (without a Series of Action) distinguishes Satire properly from
Stage Plays, which are all of one Action, and one continued Series of Action.
The End or Scope of Satire is to purge the Passions; so far it is common to the
Satires of Iuvenal and Persius: The rest which follows, is also generally
belonging to all three; till he comes upon us, with the Excluding Clause (
consisting in a low familiar way of Speech) which is the proper Character of
Horace; and from which, the other two, for their Honor be it spoken, are far
distant. But how come Lowness of Style, and the Familiarity of Words to be so
much the Propriety of Satire, that without them, a Poet can be no more a
Satirist, than without Risibility he can be a Man? Is the fault of Horace to be
made the Virtue, and Standing Rule of this Poem? Is the Grande Sophos of
Persius, and the Sublimity of Iuvenal to be circumscribed, with the meanness of
Words and vulgarity of Expression? If Horace refused the pains of Numbers, and
the loftiness of Figures, are they bound to follow so ill a Precedent? Let him
walk a Foot with his Pad in his Hand, for his own pleasure; but let not them be
accounted no Poets, who choose to mount, and show their Horsmanship, Holiday is
not afraid to say, that there was never such a fall, as from his Odes to his
Satires, and that he, injuriously to himself, untuned his Harp. The Majestique
way of Per^ius and Iuvenal was new when they began it; but it is old to us; and
what Poems have not, with Time, received an Alteration in their Fashion? Which
Alteration, says Holiday, is to aftertimes, as good a Warrant as the first.
Has not Virgil changed the Manners of Homer's Hero's in his Aeneis? certainly
he has, and for the better. For Virgil's Age was more Civilized, and better
Bred; and he writ according to the Politeness of Rome, under the Reign of
Augustus Caesar; not to the Rudeness of Agamemnon's Age, or the Times of Homer.
Why should we offer to confine free Spirits to one Form, when we cannot so much
as confine our Bodies to one Fashion of Apparel? Would not Donn's Satires,
which abound with so much Wit, appear more Charming, if he had taken care of
his Words, and of his Numbers? But he followed Horace so very close, that of
necessity he must fall with him: And I may safely say it of this present Age,
That if we are not so great Wits as Donn, yet, certainly, we are better Poets.

But I have said enough, and it may be, too much on this Subject. Will your
Lordship be pleased to prolong my Audience, only so far, till I tell you my own
trivial Thoughts, how a Modern Satire should be made. I will not deviate in the
least from the Precepts and Examples of the Ancients, who were always our best
Masters. I will only illustrate them, and discover some of the hidden Beauties
in their Designs, that we thereby may form our own in imitation of them. Will
you please but to observe, that Persius, the least in Dignity of all the Three,
has, notwithstanding, been the first, who has discovered to us this important
Secret, in the designing of a perfect Satire; that it ought only to treat of
one Subject; to be confined to one particular Theme; or, at least, to one
principally. If other Vices occur in the management of the Chief, they should
only be transiently lashed, and not be insisted on, so as to make the Design
double. As in a Play of the English Fashion, which we call a Tragecomedy, there
is to be but one main Design: And though there be an Under-plot, or Second Walk
of Comical Characters and Adventures, yet they are subservient to the Chief
Fable, carried along under it, and helping to it; so that the Drama may not
seem a Monster with two Heads. Thus the Copernican Systeme of the Planets makes
the Moon to be moved by the motion of the Earth, and carried about her Orb, as
a Dependant of hers: Mascardi in his Discourse of the Doppia favola, or
Double-tale in Plays, gives an Instance of it, in the famous Pastoral of
Guarini, called Il Pastor Fido; where Corisca and the Satyr are the
Under-parts: Yet we may observe, that Corisca is brought into the Body of the
Plot, and made subservient to it. It Is certain, that the Divine Wit of Horace,
was not ignorant of this Rule, that a Play, though it consists of many parts,
must yet be one in the Action, and must drive on the Accomplishment of one
Design; for he gives this very Precept, Sit quodvis simplex duntaxat and unum;
yet he seems not much to mind it in his Satires, many of them consisting of
more Arguments than one; and the second without dependence on the first.
Casaubon has observed this before me, in his Preference of Persius to Horace:
And will have his own beloved Author to be the first, who found out, and
introduced this Method of confining himself to one Subject. I know it may be
urged in defense of Horace, that this Unity is not necessary; because the very
word Satura signifies a Dish plentifully stored with all variety of Fruits and
Grains. Yet Iuvenal, who calls his Poems a Farrago, which is a word of the same
signification with Satura; has chosen to follow the same Method of Per^ius, and
not of Horace: And Boileau, whose Example alone is a sufficient Authority, has
wholly confined himself, in all his Satires, to this Unity of Design. That
variety which is not to be found in any one Satire, is, at least, in many,
written on several occasions. And if Variety be of absolute necessity in every
one of them, according to the Etymology of the word; yet it may arise naturally
from one Subject, as it is diversely treated, in the several Subordinate
Branches of it; all relating to the Chief. It may be illustrated accordingly
with variety of Examples in the Subdivisions of it; and with as many Precepts
as there are Members of it; which altogether may complete that Olla, or
Hotch-potch, which is properly a Satire.

Under this Unity of Theme, or Subject, is comprehended another Rule for
perfecting the Design of true Satire. The Poet is bound, and that ex Officio,
to give his Reader some one Precept of Moral Virtue; and to caution him against
some one particular Vice or Folly* Other Virtues, subordinate to the first, may
be recommended, under that Chief Head; and other Vices or Follies may be
scourged, besides that which he principally intends. But he is chiefly to
inculcate one Virtue, and insist on that. Thus Iuvenal in every Satire,
excepting the first, ties himself to one principal Instructive Point, or to the
shunning of Moral Evil. Even in the Sixth, which seems only an Arraignment of
the whole Sex of Womankind; there is a latent Admonition to avoid Ill Women, by
showing how very few, who are Virtuous and Good, are to be found amongst them.
But this, though the Wittiest of all his Satires, has yet the least of Truth or
Instruction in it. He has run himself into his old declamatory way, and almost
forgotten, that he was now setting up for a Moral Poet.

Persius is never wanting to us in some profitable Doctrine, and in exposing
the opposite Vices to it. His kind of Philosphy is one, which is the Stoique;
and every Satire is a Comment on one particular Dogma of that Sect; unless we
will except the first, which is against bad Writers; and yet even there he
forgets not the Precepts of the Porch. In general, all Virtues are every where
to be praised, and recommended to Practice; and all Vices to be reprehended,
and made either Odious or Ridiculous; or else there is a Fundamental Error in
the whole Design.

I have already declared, who are the only Persons that are the Adequate Object
of Private Satire, and who they are that may properly be exposed by Name for
public Examples of Vices and (...); and therefore I will trouble your Lordship
no farther with them. Of the best and finest manner of Satire, I have said
enough in the Comparison betwixt Iuvenal and Horace: It Is that sharp,
well-manner'd way, of laughing a Folly out of Countenance, of which your
Lordship is the best Master in this Age. I will proceed to the Versification,
which is most proper for it, and add somewhat to what I have said already on
that Subject. The sort of Verse which is called Burlesque, consisting of Eight
Syllables, or Four Feet, is that which our Excellent Hudibras has chosen. I
ought to have mentioned him before, when I spoke of Donn; but by a slip of an
Old Man's Memory he was forgotten. The Worth of his Poem is too well known to
need my Commendation, and he is above my Censure: His Satire is of the
Varronian kind, though unmixed with Prose. The choice of his Numbers is
suitable enough to his Design, as he has managed it. But in any other Hand, the
shortness of his Verse, and the quick returns of Rhyme, had debased the Dignity
of Style. And besides, the double Rhyme, (a necessary Companion of Burlesque
Writing) is not so proper for Manly Satire, for it turns Earnest too much to
Jest, and gives us a Boyish kind of Pleasure. It tickles aukwardly with a kind
of pain, to the best sort of Readers; we are pleased ungratefully, and, if I
may say so, against our liking. We thank him not for giving us that
unseasonable Delight, when we know he could have given us a better, and more
solid. He might have left that Task to others, who not being able to put in
Thought, can only make us grin with the Excrescence of a Word of two or three
Syllables in the Close. It Is, indeed, below so great a Master to make use of
such a little Instrument. But his good Sense is perpetually shining through all
he writes; it affords us not the time of finding Faults: We pass through the
Levity of his Rhyme, and are immediately carried into some admirable useful
Thought. After all, he has chosen this kind of Verse; and has written the best
in it: And had he taken another, he would always have excelled. As we say of a
Court-Favourite, that whatsoever his Office be, he still makes it uppermost,
and most beneficial to himself.

The quickness of your Imagination, my Lord, has already prevented me; and you
know beforehand, that I would prefer the Verse of ten Syllables, which we call
the English Heroique, to that of Eight. This is truly my Opinion. For this sort
of Number is more Roomy. The Thought can turn it self with greater ease, in a
larger compass. When the Rhyme comes too thick upon us; it streightens the
Expression; we are thinking of the Close, when we should be employed in
adorning the Thought. It makes a Poet giddy with turning in a Space too narrow
for his Imagination. He loses many Beauties without gaining one Advantage. For
a Burlesque Rhyme, I have already concluded to be none; or if it were, it is
more easily purchased in Ten Syllables than in Eight: In both occasions it is as
in a Tennis-Court, when the Strokes of greater force, are given, when we strike
out, and play at length. Tassone and Boileau have left us the best Examples of
this way, in the Secchia Rapita, and the Lutrin. And next them Merlin Coccajus
in his Baldus. I will speak only of the two former, because the last is written
in Latin Verse. The Secchia Rapita, is an Italian Poem; a Satire of the
Varronian kind. It Is written in the Stanza of Eight, which is their Measure for
Heroique Verse. The Words are stately, the Numbers smooth, the Turn both of
Thoughts and Words is happy. The first ^ix lines of the Stanza seem Majestical
and Severe: but the two last turn them all, into a pleasant Ridicule. Boileau,
if I am not much deceived, has modeled from hence, his famous Lutrin. He had
read the Burlesque Poetry of Scarron, with some kind of Indignation, as witty
as it was, and found nothing in France that was worthy of his Imitation. But he
Copied the Italian so well, that his own may pass for an Original. He writes it
in the French Heroique Verse, and calls it an Heroique Poem: His Subject is
Trivial, but his Verse is Noble. I doubt not but he had Virgil in his Eye, for
we find many admirable Imitations of him, and some Parodies; as particularly
this Passage in the Fourth of the En^ids. Nec tibi Diva Parens; generis nec
Dardanus Auctor,
Per^ide; sed duris genuit te cautibus horrens*
Caucasus; Hyrcanaeque admorunt ubera tigres.
Which he thus Translates, keeping to the Words, but altering the Sense. Non,
ton Pere a Paris, ne fut point Boulanger:
Et tu n'es point du sang de Gervais Horloger:
Ta Mere ne fut point la Maitresse d'un Coche;
Caucase dans ses flancs, te forma d'une Roche:
Vne Tigresse affre^se, en quelque Antre ecarte
Te fit, avec son laict, succer sa Cruaute.
And, as Virgil in his Fourth Georgique of the Bees, perpetually raises the
Lowness of his Subject by the Loftiness of his Words; and ennobles it by
Comparisons drawn from Empires, and from Monarchs. Admiranda tibi levium
spectacula rerum,
Magnanimosque Duces, totiusque ordine gentis
Mores and studia, and populos, and praelia dica^.
And again, Sed Genus immortale manet; multosque per annos
Stat fortuna domus, and avi numerantur avorum.
We see Boileau pursuing him in the same flights; and scarcely yielding to his
Master. This, I think, my Lord, to be the most Beautiful, and most Noble kind
of Satire. Here is the Majesty of the Heroique, finely mixed with the Venom of
the other; and raising the Delight which otherwise would be flat and vulgar, by
the Sublimity of the Expression. I could say somewhat more of the Delicacy of
this and some other of his Satires; but it might turn to his Prejudice, if
'twere carried back to France.

I have given Your Lordship, but this bare hint, in what Verse, and in what
manner this sort of Satire may best be managed. Had I time, I could enlarge on
the Beautiful Turns of Words and Thoughts; which are as requisite in this, as
in Heroique Poetry it self; of which this Satire is undoubtedly a Species. With
these Beautiful Turns I confess my self to have been unacquainted, till about
Twenty Years ago, in a Conversation which I had with that Noble Wit of
Scotland, Sir George Mackenzy: He asked me why I did not imitate in my Verses,
the turns of Mr. Waller, and Sir John Denham; of which, he repeated many to me:
I had often read with pleasure, and with some profit, those two Fathers of our
English Poetry; but had not seriously enough considered those Beauties which
give the last perfection to their Works. Some sprinklings of this kind, I had
also formerly in my Plays, but they were casual, and not designed. But this
hint, thus seasonably given me, first made me sensible of my own wants, and
brought me afterward to seek for the supply of them in other English Authors.
I looked over the Darling of my youth, the Famous Cowley; there I found instead
of them, the Points of Wit, and Quirks of Epigram, even in the Davideis, a
Heroic Poem, which is of an opposite nature to those Puerilities; but no
Elegant turns, either on the word, or on the thought. Then I consulted a
Greater Genius, (without offense to the Manes of that Noble Author) I mean
Milton. But as he endeavors every where to express Homer, whose Age had not
arrived to that fineness, I found in him a true sublimity, lofty thoughts,
which were clothed with admirable Grecisms, and ancient words, which he had
been digging from the Mines of Chaucer, and of Spencer, and which, with all
their rusticity, had somewhat of Venerable in them. But I found not there
neither that for which I looked. At last I had recourse to his Master, Spencer,
the Author of that immortal Poem, called the Fairy-Queen; and there I met with
that which I had been looking for so long in vain. Spencer had studi'd Virgil
to as much advantage as Milton had done Homer. And amongst the rest of his
Excellencies had Copied that. Looking farther into the Italian, I found Tasso
had done the same; nay more, that all the Sonne^s in that Language are on the
turn of the first thought; which Mr. Walsh, in his late ingenious Preface to
his Poems has ob^erv'd. In short, Virgil, and Ovid are the two Principal
Fountains of them in (...) Poetry. And the French at this day are so fond of
them, that they judge them to be the first Beauties. Delicate, and bien turn,
are the highest Commendations, which they bestow, on somewhat which they think
a Masterpiece.

An Example of the turn on Words amongst a thousand others, is that, in the
last Book of Ovid's Metamorphoses.

He^ quantum seelus est, in viscera, viscera condi!
Congestoque ^vidum pinguescere corpore corpus;
Alteri^sque Animantem, Animantis vivere ^^to.
An Example on the turn both of Thoughts and Words, is to be found in (...); in
the Complaint of Ariadne, when she was left by Theseus.

T^m jam nulla viro juranti faemina credat;
N^lla viri speret Sermones esse ^ideles:
Qui dum aliquid cupiens animus pr^egestit apisci,
Nil metuunt jurare; nihil promittere par^^nt.
Sed ^imul ^c cupidae mentis s^tiata libido est,
Dicta nihil metuere; nihil perjuria curant.
An extraordinary turn upon the words, is that in Ovid's Epistolae Her^^d^m, of
(...) to Pha^^.

(...),
(...).
Lastly, a turn which I cannot say is absolutely on Words, for the Thought
turns with them, is in the Fourth (...) of Virgil; where (...) is to receive
his Wife from Hell, on express Condition not to (...) her ^^ll she was come on
Earth.

(...)
Ignoscenda quidem, scirent si ignoscere Manes.
I will not burden your Lordship with more of them; for I write to a Master,
who understands them better than my (...). But I may (...) them to be great
Beauties: I might descend also to the ^^^^nick Beauties of Heroiok V^rse; but
we have yet no English Prof^^^, not so much as a (...) Dictionary, or a
Grammar; so that our Language is in a manner Barbarous; and what Government
will (...) any one, or more, who are capable or Resining it, I know not* But
nothing under a Public Expense can go through with it. And I rather fear a
declination of the Language, than hope an advancement of (...)

I am (...) speaking to you, my Lord; though in all probability, you are
already out of hearing. Nothing which my (...) can produce, is worthy of this
long attention. But I am come to the last Petition of Abraham; If there be
(...) Lines, in this (...) Preface, spare it for their sake; and also spare the
next City, because it is but a little one.

(...) some Gentlemen who have succeeded very happily in their Undertaking; let
their Excellencies atone for my Imperfections, and those of my Sons. I have
perused some of the Satires, which are done by other Hands: And they seem to me
as perfect in their kind, as any thing I have seen in English Verse. The common
way which we have taken, is not a Literal Translation, but a kind of
Paraphrase; or somewhat which is yet more loose, betwixt a Paraphrase and
Imitation. It was not possible for us, or any Men, to have made it pleasant,
any other way. If rendering the exact Sense of these Authors, almost line for
line* had been our business, Barten Holiday had done it already to our hands:
And, by the help of his Learned Notes and Illustrations, not only of Iuvenal,
and Persius, but what yet is more obscure, his own Verses might be understood.

But he wrote for Fame, and wrote to Scholars: We write only for the Pleasure
and Entertainment, of those Gentlemen and Ladies, who tho they are not Scholars
are not Ignorant: Persons of Understanding and good Sense; who not having been
conversant in the Original, or at least not having made Latin Verse so much
their business, as to be Critiques in it, would be glad to find, if the Wit of
our Two great Authors, be answerable to their Fame, and Reputation in the
World. We have therefore endeavored to give the Public all the Satisfaction
we are able in this kind.

And if we are not altogether so faithful to our Author, as our Predecessors
Holiday and Stapylton, yet we may Challenge to our selves this praise, that we
shall be far more pleasing to our Readers. We have followed our Authors, at
greater distance; though not Step by Step, as they have done. For oftentimes they
have gone so close, that they have trod on the Heels of Iuvenal and Persius;
and hurt them by their too near approach. A Noble Author would not be persu'd
too close by a Translator. We lose his Spirit, when we think to take his Body.
The grosser Part remains with us, but the Soul is flown away, in some Noble
Expression or some delicate turn of Words, or Thought. Thus Holiday, who made
this way his choice, seized the meaning of Iuvenal; but the Poetry has always
escaped him.

They who will not grant me, that Pleasure is one of the Ends of Poetry, but
that it is only a means of compassing the only end, which is Instruction; must
yet allow that without the means of Pleasure, the Instruction is but a bare and
dry Philosophy. A crude preparation of Morals, which we may have from Aristotle
and Epictetus, with more profit than from any Poet* Neither Holiday nor
Stapylton, have imitated Iuvenal, in the Poetical part of him, his Diction and
his Elocution. Nor had they been Poets, as neither of them were; yet in the way
they took, it was impossible for them to have Succeeded in the Poetique part.

The English Verse, which we call Heroique, consists of no more than Ten
Syllables; the Latin Hexameter sometimes rises to Seventeen; as for example,
this Verse in Virgil, Pulverulenta putrem sonitu quatit ungula Campum. Here is
the difference, of no less than Seven Syllables in a line, betwixt the English
and the Latin. Now the Medium of these, is about Fourteen Syllables; because
the Dactyle is a more frequent foot in Hexameters than the Spondee.

But Holiday, without considering that he Writ with the disadvantage of Four
Syllables less in every Verse, endeavors to make one of his Lines, to
comprehend the Sense of one of Iuvenal's. According to the falsity of the
Proposition, was the Success. He was forced to crowd his Verse with ill
sounding Monosyllables, of which our Barbarous Language affords him a wild
plenty: And by that means he arrived at his Pedantick end, which was to make a
literal Translation: His Verses have nothing of Verse in them, but only the
worst part of it* the Rhyme: And that, into the bargain, is far from good. But
which is more Intolerable* by cramming his ill chosen, and worse sounding
Monosyllables so close together; the very Sense which he endeavors to explain,
is become more obscure, than that of his Author. So that Holiday himself cannot
be understood, without as large a Commentary, as that which he makes on his Two
Authors. For my own part, I can make a shift to find the meaning of Iuvenal
without his Notes: but his Translation is more difficult than his Author. And
I find Beauties in the Latin to recompense my Pains; but in Holiday and
Stapylton, my Ears, in the First Place, are mortally o^^ended; and then their
Sense is so perplexed, that I return to the Original, as the more pleasing
task, as well as the more easy.

This must be said for our Translation, that if we give not the whole Sense of
Iuvenal, yet we give the most considerable Part of it: We give it, in General,
so clearly, that few Notes are sufficient to make us Intelligible: We make our
Author at least appear in a Poetique Dress. We have actually made him more
Sounding, and more Elegant, than he was before in English: And have endeavored
to make him speak that kind of English, which he would have spoken had he lived
in England, and had Written to this Age. If sometimes any of us (and it is but
seldom) make him express the Customs and Manners of our Native Country, rather
than of Rome; it is, either when there was some kind of Analogy, betwixt their
Customs and ours; or when, to make him more easy to Vulgar Understandings, we
gave him those Manners which are familiar to us. But I defend not this
Innovation, it is enough if I can excuse it. For to speak sincerely, the Manners
of Nations and Ages, are not to be confounded: We should either make them
English, or leave them Roman. If this can neither be defended, nor excused, let
it be pardoned, at least, because it is acknowledged; and so much the more
easily, as being a fault which is never committed without some Pleasure to the
Reader.

Thus, my Lord, having troubled You with a tedious Visit, the best Manners will
be shown in the least Ceremony. I will slip away while Your Back is turned, and
while You are otherwise employed: with great Confusion, for having entertained
You so long with this Discourse; and for having no other Recompense to make
You, than the Worthy Labors of my Fellow-Undertakers in this Work; and the
Thankful Acknowledgments, Prayers, and perpetual good Wishes of,

My Lord, Your Lordships, Most Obliged, Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant.
JOHN DRYDEN.
Aug. 18. 1692.

A TABLE TO JUVENAL.
THE Dedication to the Earl of Dorset. -- The First Satire. Translated By Mr.
Dryden. Page 1 Notes on the First Satire. Page 14 The Second Satire. Translated
By Mr. Tate. Page 17 Notes on the Second Satire. Page 29 The Third Satire.
Translated By Mr. Dryden. Page 30 Notes on the Third Satire. Page 53 The Fourth
Satire. Translated By Mr. -- Page 55 Notes on the Fourth Satire. Page 68 The
Fifth Satire. Translated By Mr. W. Bowls. Page 71 Notes on the Fifth Satire.
Page 83 The Sixth Satire. Translated By Mr. Dryden. Page 85 Notes on the Sixth
Satire. Page 123 The Seventh Satire. Translated By Mr. Charles Dryden. Page 127
Notes on the Seventh Satire. Page 142 The Eighth Satire. Translated By Mr. G.
Stepney. Page 145 Notes on the Eighth Satire. Page 167 The Ninth Satire.
Translated By Mr. Step. Hervey. Page 175 Notes on the Ninth Satire. Page 187
The Tenth Satire. Translated By Mr. Dryden. Page 189 Notes on the Tenth Satire.
Page 214 The Eleventh Satire. Translated By Mr. Congreve. Page 215 Notes on the
Eleventh Satire. Page 234 The Twelfth Satire. Translated By Mr. Power. Page 237
Notes on the Twelfth Satire. Page 249 The Thirteenth Satire. Translated By Mr.
Creech. Page 252 Notes on the Thirteenth Satire. Page 271 The Fourteenth
Satire. Translated By Mr. J. Dryden Iun. Page 273 Notes on the Fourteenth
Satire. Page 292 The Fifteenth Satire. Translated By Mr. Tate. Page 297 Notes
on the Fifteenth Satire. Page 306 The Sixteenth Satire. Translated By Mr.
Dryden. Page 309 Notes on the Sixteenth Satire. Page 315
The TABLE to PERSIUS.
TO Mr. Dryden on his Translation of Perius, by Mr. Congreve. The First Satire
of Persius. Page Page 1 Notes on the First Satire. Page 17 The Second Satire.
Page 19 Notes on the Second Satire. Page 27 The Third Satire. Page 28 Notes on
the Third Satire. Page 43 The Fourth Satire. Page 45 Notes on the Fourth
Satire. Page 54 The Fifth Satire. Page 57 Notes on the Fifth Satire. Page 72
The Sixth Satire. Page 75 Notes on the Sixth Satire. Page 85


ERRATA.
IN the Eleventh SATIRE, Page 227. Line 221. Read for ill, unpleasant.

THE FIRST SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. DRYDEN.
Argument of the first Satyr.
THE Poet gives us first a kind of humorous Reason for his Writing: That being
provoked by hearing so many ill Poets rehearse their Works, he does himself
Justice on them, by giving them as bad as they bring. But since no man will
rank himself with ill Writers, it is easy to conclude, that if such Wretches
could draw an Audience, he thought it no hard matter to excel them, and gain a
greater esteem with the Public. Next he informs us more openly* why he rather
addicts himself to Satyr, than any other kind of Poetry. And here he discovers
that it is not so much his indignation to ill Poets, as to ill Men, which has
prompted him to write. He therefore gives us a summary and general view of the
Vices and Follies reigning in his time. So that this first Satyr is the natural
Groundwork of all the rest. Herein he confines himself to no one Subject, but
strikes indifferently at all Men in his way: In every following Satyr he has
chosen some particular Moral which he would inculcate; and lashes some
particular Vice or Folly, (An Art with which our Lampooners are not much
acquainted.) But our Poet being desirous to reform his own Age, and not daring
to attempt it by an Overt act of naming living Persons, inveighs only against
those who were infamous in the times immediately preceding his, whereby he not
only gives a fair warning to Great Men, that their Memory lies at the mercy of
future Poets and Historians, but also with a finer stroke of his Pen, brands
even the living, and personates them under dead men's Names.

I have avoided as much as I could possibly the borrowed Learning of Marginal
Notes and Illustrations, and for that Reason have Translated this Satyr
somewhat largely. And freely own (if it be a fault) that I have likewise
omitted most of the Proper Names, because I thought they would not much edify
the Reader. To conclude, if in two or three places I have deserted all the
Commentators, it is because I thought they first deserted my Author, or at least
have left him in so much obscurity, that too much room is left for guessing.

THE FIRST SATYR.
STill shall I hear, and never quit the Score,
Stunned with hoarse COdrus, or it may be Cordus, a bad Poet who wrote the Life
and Actions of Theseus.
Codrus Theseid, over and over?
Shall this Man's Elegies and to others Play
Unpunished Murder a long Summer's day?
Huge Telephus, the Name of a Tragedy.
Telephus, a formidable page,
Cries Vengeance; and Orestes, another Tragedy.
Orestes's bulky rage
Unsatisfied with Margins closely writ,
Foams over the Covers, and not finished yet.
No Man can take a more familiar note
Of his own Home, than I of Vulcan's Grott,
Or Some Commentators take this Grove to be ^ Place where Poets were used to
repeat their Works to the People, but more probably, both this and Vulcan's
Grott, or Cave, and the rest of the Places and Names here mentioned, are only
meant for the Common Places of Homer, in his Iliads and Odysses.
Mars his Grove, or hollow winds that blow
From Aetna's top, or tortured Ghosts below.
I know by rote the Famed Exploits of Greece;
The Centaurs fury, and the Golden Fleece;
Through the thick shades the Eternal Scribler bauls;
And shakes the Statues on their Pedestals.
The The best and worst; that is, the best and the worst Poets.
best and worst on the same Theme employs
His Muse, and plagues us with an equal noise.
Provoked by these Incorrigible Fools,
I left declaiming in pedantick Schools;
Where, with Men-boys, I strove to get Renown,
Advising This was one of the Themes given in the Schools of Rhetoricians, in
the deliberative kind; Whether Sylla should lay down the Supreme Power of
Dictatorship, or still keep it.
Sylla to a private Gown.
But, since the World with Writing is possessed,
I Will versifie in spite; and do my best
To make as much waste Paper as the rest.
But why I lift aloft the Satyrs Lucilius, the first Satyrist of the Romans,
who wrote long before Horace.
Rod,
And tread the Path which famed Lucilius trod,
Attend the Causes which my Muse have led:
When Sapless Eunuchs mount the Marriage Bed,
When Mevia, a Name put for any Impudent or Mannish Woman.
Mannish Mevia that two handed Whore,
Astride on Horseback hunts the Tuscan Boar,
When all our Lords are by his Wealth outvy'd,
Whose Iuvenal's Barber now grown Wealthy.
Razour on my callow-beard was tried:
When I behold the Spawn of conquered Nile
Crispinus Crispinus, an Egyptian Slave; now by his Riches transformed into a
Nobleman.
, both in Birth and Manners vile,
Pacing in pomp, with Cloak of Tyrian dye
Changed often a day for needless Luxury;
And finding often occasion to be fan'd,
Ambitious to produce his Lady-hand;
Charged The Romans were grown so Effeminate in Iuvenal's time, that they wore
light Rings in the Summer, and heavier in the Winter.
with light Summer-rings his fingers sweat,
Unable to support a Gem of weight:
Such fulsom Objects meeting every where,
It Is hard to write, but harder to forbear.
To view so lewd a Town, and to refrain,
What Hoops of Iron could my Spleen contain!
When Matho, a Famous Lawyer, mentioned in other Places by Iuvenal and Martial.
pleading Matho, born abroad for Air,
With his Fat Paunch fills his new fashioned Chair,
And after him the Wretch in Pomp conveyed,
Whose Evidence his Lord and Friend betrayed,
And but the wished Occasion does attend
From the poor Nobles the last Spoils to rend,
Whom even Spies dread as their Superior Fiend,
And bribe with Presents, or, when Presents fail,
They send their prostituted Wives for bail:
When Night-performance holds the place of Merit,
And Brawn and Back the next of Kin disherit;
For such good Parts are in Preferment's way,
The Rich Old Madam never fails to pay,
Her Legacies by Nature's Standard given,
One gains an Ounce, another gains Eleven:
A dear-bought Bargain, all things duly weighed,
For which their thrice Concocted Blood is paid.
With looks as wan, as he who in the Brake
At unawares has trod upon a Snake.
Or played At Lions; a City in France, where Annual Sacrifices and Games were
made in Honor of Augustus Caesar.
at Lions a declaiming Prize,
For which the Vanquished Rhetorician Dies.
What Indignation boils within my Veins,
When perjured Guardians, proud with Impious Gains,
Choke up the Streets, too narrow for their Trains!
Whose Wards by want betrayed, to Crimes are led
Too soul to Name, too fulsom to be read!
When he who pill'd his Province scapes the Laws,
And keeps his Money though he lost his Cause:
His Fine begged off, contemns his Infamy,
Can rise at twelve, and get him Drunk e're three:
Enjoys his Exile, and, Condemned in vain,
Leaves thee, Here the Poet complains that the Governors of Provinces being
accused for their unjust Exactions, though they were condemned at their Trials,
yet got off by Bribery.
prevailing Province, to complain?
Such Villainies roused Horace, who wrote Satyrs: It Is more Noble, says our
Author, to imitate him in that way, than to write the Labors of Hercules, the
Sufferings of Diomedes and his Followers, or the Flight of Dedalus who made the
Labyrinth, and the Death of his Son Icarus.
Horace into Wrath;
And it is more Noble to pursue his Path,
Than an Old Tale of Diomede to repeat,
Or laboring after Hercules to sweat,
Or wandering in the winding Maze of Creet.
Or with the winged Smith aloft to fly,
Or fluttering Perish with his foolish Boy.
With what Impatience must the Muse behold
The Wife by her procuring Husband sold?
For though the Law makes Null the Adulterer's Deed
Of Lands to her, the Cuckold may succeed.
Who his taught Eyes up to the Cieling throws,
And sleeps all over but his wakeful Nose.
When he dares hope a Colonel's Command,
Whose Coursers kept, ran out his Father's Land;
Who yet a Stripling Nero's Chariot drove,
Whirled over the Streets, while his vain Master strove
With boasted Art to please his Nero Married Sporus an Eunuch; though it may be
the Poet meant Nero's Mistress in Man's Apparel.
Eunuch-Love.
Would it not make a modest Author dare
To draw his Table Book within the Square,
And fill with Notes, when lolling at his ^ase
Mecenas-like Mecenas is often Taxed by Seneca and others, for his Effeminacy.
, the happy Rogue he sees
Born by Six wearied Slaves in open View,
Who Cancelled an old Will, and forged a New:
Made wealthy at the small expense of Signing
With a wet Seal, and a fresh Interlining.
The Lady, next, requires a lashing Line,
Who squeezed a Toad into her Husband's Wine:
So well the fashionable Medicine thrives,
That now it is Practiced even by Country Wives:
Poys'ning without regard of Fame or Fear:
And spotted Corpse are frequent on the Bier.
Would thou to Honors and Preferments climb,
Be bold in Mischief, dare some mighty Crime,
Which Dungeons, Death, or Banishment deserves:
For Virtue is but dryly Praised, and Sterves.
Great Men, to great Crimes, owe their Plate Embost,
Fair Palaces, and Furniture of Cost;
And high Commands: A Sneaking Sin is lost.
Who can behold that rank Old Letcher keep
His Son's Corrupted Wife, The meaning is, that the very consideration of such
a Crime, will hinder a Virtuous Man from taking his Repose.
and hope to sleep?
Or that Male-Harlot, or that unfledged Boy,
Eager to Sin, before he can enjoy?
If Nature could not, Anger would indite
Such woeful stuff as I or S -- ll write.
Count from the time, since Old Deucalion and Pyrrha, when the World was
drowned, escaped to the top of Mount Parnassus; and were commanded to restore
Mankind by throwing Stones over their Heads: The Stones he threw became Men,
and those she threw became Women.
Deucalion's Boat,
Raised by the Flood, did on Parna^^us Float;
And scarcely Mooring on the Cliff, implored
An Oracle how Man might be restored;
When softened Stones and Vital Breath ensued,
And Virgins Naked were by Lovers Viewed;
What ever since that Golden Age was done,
What Humane Kind desires, and what they shun,
Rage, Passions, Pleasures, Impotence of Will,
Shall this Satirical Collection fill.
What age so large a Crop of Vices bore,
Or when was Avarice extended more?
When were the Dice with more Profusion thrown?
The well filled Fob, not emptied now alone,
But Gamesters for whole Patrimonies play;
The Steward brings the Deeds which must convey
The lost Estate: What more than Madness reigns,
When one short sitting many Hundreds Drains,
And not enough is left him to supply
Board-Wages, or a Footman's Livery?
What Age so many Summer-Seats did see?
Or which, of our Forefathers fared so well
As on seven Dishes at a private Meal?
Clients of Old were Feasted; now a poor
Divided Dole is dealt at the outward Door;
Which by the Hungry Rout is soon dispatched:
The Paltry Largess, too, severely watched
E're given; and every Face observed with Care,
That no intruding Guest Usurp a share.
Known, you Receive: The Crier calls aloud
Our Old Nobility of Trojan Blood,
Who gape among the Crowd for their precarious Food.
The Praetors, and the Tribunes Voice is heard;
The Freedman justles and will be preferred;
First come, first served, he Cries; and I, in spite
Of your Great Lordships, will Maintain my Right.
Tho born a Slave, tho The Ears of all Slaves were bored as a Mark of their
Servitude; which Custom is still usual in the East Indies, and in other Parts,
even for whole Nations; who bore Prodigious holes in their Ears, and wear vast
Weights at them.
my torn Ears are bored,
It Is not the Birth, it is Money makes the Lord.
The Rents of Five fair Houses I receive;
What greater Honors can the Purple give?
The The poor Patrician; the poor Nobleman.
Poor Patrician is reduced to keep
In Melancholy Walks a Grazier's Sheep:
Not Pallas, a Slave freed by Claudius Caesar, and raised by his Favor to
great Riches. Licinius was another Wealthy Freedman, belonging to Augustus.
Pallas nor Licinius had my Treasure;
Then let the Sacred Tribunes wait my leisure.
Once a Poor Rogue, it is true, I trod the Street,
And trudged to Rome upon my Naked Feet:
Gold is the greatest God; though yet we see
No Temples raised to Mony's Majesty,
No Altars fuming to her Power Divine,
Such as to Valor, Peace, and Virtue Shine,
And Faith, and Concord: Perhaps the Storks were used to build on the top of
the Temple dedicated to Concord.
where the Stork on high
Seems to Salute her Infant Progeny:
Presaging Pious Love with her Auspicious Cry.
But since our Knights and Senators account
To what their sordid begging Vails amount,
Judge what a wretched share the Poor attends,
Whose whole Subsistence on those Alms depends!
Their Houshold-Fire, their Raiment, and their Food,
Prevented He calls the Roman Knights, and^* Harpies, or Devourers: In those
Days the Rich made Doles intended for the Poor: But the Great were either so
Covetous, or so Needy, that they came in their Litters to demand their shares
of the Largess; and thereby prevented, and consequently starved the Poor.
by those Harpies; when a wood
Of Litters thick besiege the Donor's Gate,
And begging Lords, and teeming Ladies wait
The promised Dole: Nay some have learned the trick
To beg for absent persons; feign them sick,
Close mewed in their Sedans, for fear of air:
And for their Wives produce an empty Chair.
This is my Spouse: Dispatch her with her share.
It Is The meaning is, that Noblemen would cause empty Litters to be carried to
the Giver's Door, pretending their Wives were within them: It Is Galla, that is,
my Wife: the next words Let her Ladyship but peep, are of the Servant who
distributes the Dole; Let me see her, that I may be sure she is within the
Litter. The Husband answers, she is asleep, and to open the Litter would
disturb her Rest.
Galla: Let her Ladyship but peep:
No, Sir, it is pity to disturb her sleep.
Such fine Employments our whole days divide:
The Salutations of the Morning-tide
Call up the Sun; those ended, to the Hall
We wait the Patron, hear the Lawyers baul,
Then The Poet here tells you how the Idle passed their time; in going first to
the Levees of the Great, then to the Hall, that is, to the Temple of Apollo, to
hear the Lawyers Plead, then to the Marketplace of Augustus, where the Statues
of the Famous Romans were set in Ranks on Pedestals: Amongst which Statues were
seen those of Foreigners, such as Arabs, etc. who for no desert, but only on
the Account of their Wealth, or Favor, were placed amongst the Noblest.
to the Statues; where amidst the Race
Of Conquering Rome, some Arab shows his Face
Inscribed with Titles, and profanes the place.
Fit to be pissed against, and somewhat more.
The Great Man, home conducted, shuts his door;
Old Clients, wearied out with fruitless care,
Dismiss their hopes of eating, and despair.
Though much against the grain, forced to retire,
Buy Roots for Supper, and provide a Fire.
Mean time his Lordship lolls within at ease,
Pamp'ring his Paunch with Foreign Rarities:
Both Sea and Land are ransacked for the Feast,
And his own Gut the sole invited Guest.
Such Plate, such Tables, Dishes dressed so well,
That whole Estates are swallowed at a Meal.
Even Parasites are banished from his Board:
(At once a sordid and luxurious Lord:)
Prodigious Throat, for which whole Boars are dressed;
(A Creature formed to furnish out a Feast.)
But present Punishment pursues his Maw,
When surfeited and swelled, the Peacock raw
He bears into the Bath; whence want of Breath,
Repletions, Apoplex, intestate Death.
His Fate makes Table-talk, divulged with scorn,
And he, a Jest, into his Grave is born.
No Age can go beyond us: Future Times
Can add no farther to the present Crimes.
Our Sons but the same things can wish and do;
Vice is at stand, and at the highest flow.
Then Satyr spread thy Sails; take all the winds can blow.
Some may, perhaps, demand what Muse can yield
Sufficient strength for such a spacious Field?
From whence can be derived so large a Vein,
Bold Truths to speak, and spoken to maintain;
When God-like Freedom is so far bereft
The Noble Mind, that scarce the Name is left?
E're Scandalum Magnatum was begot,
No matter if the Great forgave or not:
But if that honest license now you take,
If, into Rogues Omnipotent, you rake,
Death is your Doom, impail'd upon a Stake:
Smeared over with Wax, and set on fire, to light
The Streets, and make a dreadful blaze by night.
Shall They who drenched three Uncles in a draught
Of poisonous Juice, be then in Triumph brought,
Make Lanes among the People where they go,
And, mounted high on downy Chariots, throw
Disdainful glances on the Crowd below?
Be silent, and beware if such you see;
It Is Defamation but to say, That Is He!
Againt A Poet may safely write an Heroic Poem, such as that of Virgil, who
describes the Duel of Turnus and Aeneas; or of Homer, who Writes of Achilles
and Hector; or the death of Hylas the Catamite of Hercules; who stooping for
Water, dropped his Pitcher, and fell into the Well after it. But it is dangerous
to write Satyr like Lucilius.
bold Turnus the Great Trojan Arm,
Amidst their strokes the Poet gets no harm:
Achilles may in Epique Verse be slain,
And none of all his Myrmidons complain:
Hylas may drop his Pitcher, none will cry;
Not if he drown himself for company:
But when Lucilius brandishes his Pen,
And flashes in the face of Guilty Men,
A cold Sweat stands in drops on every part;
And Rage succeeds to Tears, Revenge to Smart.
Muse be advised; it is past consid'ring time,
When entered once the dangerous Lists of Rhyme:
Since none the Living-Villains dare implead,
Arraign them in the Persons of the Dead.
The End of the First Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE FIRST SATYR
COdrus, or it may be Cordus, a bad Poet who wrote the Life and Actions of
Theseus.

Telephus, the Name of a Tragedy.

Orestes, another Tragedy.

Mars his Grove. Some Commentators take this Grove to be ^ Place where Poets
were used to repeat their Works to the People, but more probably, both this and
Vulcan's Grott, or Cave, and the rest of the Places and Names here mentioned,
are only meant for the Common Places of Homer, in his Iliads and Odysses.

The best and worst; that is, the best and the worst Poets.

Advising Sylla, etc. This was one of the Themes given in the Schools of
Rhetoricians, in the deliberative kind; Whether Sylla should lay down the
Supreme Power of Dictatorship, or still keep it.

Lucilius, the first Satyrist of the Romans, who wrote long before Horace.

Mevia, a Name put for any Impudent or Mannish Woman.

Whose Razour, and c. Iuvenal's Barber now grown Wealthy.

Crispinus, an Egyptian Slave; now by his Riches transformed into a Nobleman.

Charged with light Summer Rings, etc. The Romans were grown so Effeminate in
Iuvenal's time, that they wore light Rings in the Summer, and heavier in the
Winter.

Matho, a Famous Lawyer, mentioned in other Places by Iuvenal and Martial.

At Lions; a City in France, where Annual Sacrifices and Games were made in
Honor of Augustus Caesar.

Prevailing Province, etc. Here the Poet complains that the Governors of
Provinces being accused for their unjust Exactions, though they were condemned
at their Trials, yet got off by Bribery.

Horace, who wrote Satyrs: It Is more Noble, says our Author, to imitate him in
that way, than to write the Labors of Hercules, the Sufferings of Diomedes and
his Followers, or the Flight of Dedalus who made the Labyrinth, and the Death
of his Son Icarus.

His Eunuch-Love. Nero Married Sporus an Eunuch; though it may be the Poet
meant Nero's Mistress in Man's Apparel.

Mecenas-like: Mecenas is often Taxed by Seneca and others, for his Effeminacy.

And hope to sleep: The meaning is, that the very consideration of such a
Crime, will hinder a Virtuous Man from taking his Repose.

Deucalion and Pyrrha, when the World was drowned, escaped to the top of Mount
Parnassus; and were commanded to restore Mankind by throwing Stones over their
Heads: The Stones he threw became Men, and those she threw became Women.

Though my torn Ears are bored: The Ears of all Slaves were bored as a Mark of
their Servitude; which Custom is still usual in the East Indies, and in other
Parts, even for whole Nations; who bore Prodigious holes in their Ears, and
wear vast Weights at them.

The poor Patrician; the poor Nobleman.

Pallas, or Licinius. Pallas, a Slave freed by Claudius Caesar, and raised by
his Favor to great Riches. Licinius was another Wealthy Freedman, belonging to
Augustus.

Where the Stork on high, etc. Perhaps the Storks were used to build on the top
of the Temple dedicated to Concord.

Prevented by those Harpies: He calls the Roman Knights, and^* Harpies, or
Devourers: In those Days the Rich made Doles intended for the Poor: But the
Great were either so Covetous, or so Needy, that they came in their Litters to
demand their shares of the Largess; and thereby prevented, and consequently
starved the Poor.

It Is Galla, etc. The meaning is, that Noblemen would cause empty Litters to be
carried to the Giver's Door, pretending their Wives were within them: It Is
Galla, that is, my Wife: the next words Let her Ladyship but peep, are of the
Servant who distributes the Dole; Let me see her, that I may be sure she is
within the Litter. The Husband answers, she is asleep, and to open the Litter
would disturb her Rest.

Next to the Statues, etc. The Poet here tells you how the Idle passed their
time; in going first to the Levees of the Great, then to the Hall, that is, to
the Temple of Apollo, to hear the Lawyers Plead, then to the Marketplace of
Augustus, where the Statues of the Famous Romans were set in Ranks on
Pedestals: Amongst which Statues were seen those of Foreigners, such as Arabs,
etc. who for no desert, but only on the Account of their Wealth, or Favor,
were placed amongst the Noblest.

Against bold Turnus, etc. A Poet may safely write an Heroic Poem, such as
that of Virgil, who describes the Duel of Turnus and Aeneas; or of Homer, who
Writes of Achilles and Hector; or the death of Hylas the Catamite of Hercules;
who stooping for Water, dropped his Pitcher, and fell into the Well after it. But
it is dangerous to write Satyr like Lucilius.

THE SECOND SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. TATE.
ARGUMENT OF THE Second Satyr.
The Poet, in this Satyr, inveighs against the Hypocrisy of the Philosophers,
and Priests of his Time: the Effeminacy of Military Officers, and Magistrates.
Which Corruption of Manners in General, and more Particularly of Unnatural
Vices, he imputes to the Atheistical Principle that then prevailed.

THE SECOND SATYR.
I AM sick of Rome, and wish my self conveyed
Where freezing Seas obstruct the Merchants Trade,
When Hypocrites read Lectures, and a Sot,
Because into a Gown and Pulpit got,
Tho surfeit-gorg'd, and reeking from the Stews,
Nothing but Abstinence for's Theme will choose.
The Rakehells too pretend to Learning -- Why?
Chrysippus Statue decks their Library.
Who makes his Closet finest is most Read;
The Dolt that with an Aristotle's Head,
Carved to the Life, has once adorned his Shelf,
Straight sets up for a Stagyrite himself.
Precise their Look, but to the Brothel come,
You Will know the Price of Philosophic Bum.
You Would swear, if you their Bristled Hides surveyed,
That for a Bear's Caresses they are made;
Yet of their Obscene Part they take such care,
That (like Baboons) they still keep Podex bare;
To see it so sleek and trimmed the Surgeon smiles,
And scarcely can for laughing lance the Piles.
Since Silence seems to carry Wisdom's Power,
The affected Rogues, like Clocks, speak once an Hour.
Those grizled Locks which Nature did provide,
In plenteous growth, their Asses Ears to hide,
The formal Slaves reduce to a degree
Short of their Eyebrows. -- Now I honor Thee,
Thee Peribonius, thou professed He-Whore,
And all thy Crimes impute to Nature's Score:
Thou, as in Harlots Dress thou art attired,
For ought I know, with Harlots Itch art fired,
Thy Form seems for the Pathick Trade designed,
And generously thou do own thy Kind.
But what of those lewd Miscreants must become,
Who Preach Morality and Shake the Bum?
Varillus cries, shall I fear Sextus Doom,
Whose Haunches are the common Sink of Rome?
Let him cry Blackmoor-Devil, whose skin is white,
And Bandy-Legs, who treads himself upright;
Let him reprove that is Innocent -- In vain
The Gracchi of Sedition must complain.
'Twou'd make you swear the Planets from their Spheres,
Should Verres peach Thieves, Milo Murderers,
Clodius tax Bawds, Cethegus Catiline,
Or Supposed by some, to be Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus; but by others (more
probably) Augustus, Anthony, and Lepidus.
Scylla's Pupils Scylla's Rules decline.
Yet we have seen a Modern Magistrate
Restore those rigid The Lex Iulia against Adultery.
Laws that did create
In Mars and Venus dread; himself the while,
With impious Drugs and Potions, did beguile
The teeming Iulia's Womb, and thence did wrest
Crude Viz. Deformed, and so resembling Domitian.
Births, that yet the Incestuous Sire confessed.
How shall such Hypocrites Reform the State,
On whom the Brothels can Recriminate?
Of this we have an Instance great and new
In a Cock-Zealot of this Preaching Crew,
Whose late Harangue the gaping Rabble drew.
His Theme, as Fate would have't, was Fornication,
And as in the fury of his Declamation,
He cried, Why sleeps the Julian Law, that awed
This Vice? -- Laronia, an industrious Bawd,
(As Bawds will run to Lectures) nettled much
To have her Copyhold so nearly touched,
With a disdainful Smile, replied, Blessed Times,
That made thee Censor of the Age's Crimes!
Rome now must needs Reform, and Vice be stopped,
Since a Third Cato from the Clouds is dropped.
But tell me, Sir, what Perfume strikes the Air
From your most Reverend Neck o'regrown with Hair?
For modestly we may presume, I trow,
It Is not your Natural Grain -- The Price I Would know,
And where it is sold; direct me to the Street,
And Shop, for I with no such Essence meet.
Let me entreat you, Sir, for your own sake,
Use Caution, and permit the Laws to take
A harmless Nap, left the The Law so called, from Scantinius, against whom it
was put in Execution.
Scantinian wake.
Our wise Forefathers took their Measures right,
Nor wreak'd on Fornicators all their spite,
But left a Limbo for the Sodomite.
If you Commission-Courts must needs erect
For Manners, put the Test to your own Sect.
But you by Number think your selves secure,
While our thin Squadron must the Brunt endure.
With grief I must confess our Muster's few,
And much with Civil Broils impaired, while you
Are to the Devilish and to each other true.
Your Penal Laws against Us are enlarged,
On whom no Crimes, like what you act, are charged.
Flavia may now and then turn up for Bread,
But chastely with Catulla lies a Bed.
Your Hispo acts both Sexes parts, before
A Fornicator; and behind, a Whore:
We never invade your Walks; the Clients Cause
We leave to your confounding and the Laws.
If now and then an Amazonian Dame
Dares fight a public Prize, it is sure less shame,
Than to behold your unnerv'd Sex set in
To Needle Work, and like a Damsel Spin.
How Hister's Bondsman his sole Heir became,
And his conniving Spouse so rich a Dame,
Is known; that Wife with Wealth must needs be sped,
Who is content to make a Third in Bed.
You Nymphs that would to Coach and Six arrive,
Marry, keep Counsel, and you are sure to thrive!
Yet these Obnoxious Men, without Remorse,
Against our Tribe will put the Laws in force,
Clip the Dove's Wing, and give the Vulture course.
Thus spoke the Matron -- The convicted Crew
From so direct a Charge like Lightning flew.
It must be so -- Nor, vain Metellus, shall
From Rome's Tribunal, thy Harangues prevail
Against Harlotry, while thou art clad so thin,
That through thy Cobweb-Robe we see thy Skin
As thou Declaim'st -- Fabulla is, you say,
A Whore -- I own it; so's Carsinia;
Rank Prostitutes, therefore without remorse
Punish the Strumpets, give the Law its course:
But when you have sentenced them, Metellus, know
They Would blush t'appear so loosly Dressed as you.
You say the Dog Star reigns, whose ^ultry Fire
Melts you to death even in that light Attire;
Go naked then, 'twere better to be mad,
(Which has a priv'ledge) than so lewdly clad!
How would our Mountain Sires, returned from Plow
Or Battle, such a Silken Judge allow?
Can thou restore old Manners, or retrench
Rome's Pride, who come transparent to the Bench?
This Mode in which thou singly do appear,
By thy Example shall get footing here,
Till it has quite depraved the Roman Stock
As one infected Sheep confounds the Flock.
Nor will this Crime, Metellus, be thy worst,
No Man e're reached the heights of Vice at first:
For Vice like Virtue by Degrees must grow;
Thus, from this wanton Dress, Metellus, thou
With those Supposed to be the College of Priests, appointed by Domitian to
Celebrate the Quinquatria to Minerva.
polluted Priests at last shall join,
Who Female Chaplets round their Temples twine,
And with Because here Women were Excluded from the Mysteries, as Men were
elsewhere from Ceres's Worship.
perverted Rites profane the Goddess Shrine.
Where such vile Practices 'twixt Males are past,
As makes our Matrons lewd Nocturnals chaste.
Cotyttus The Goddess of Impudence Worshipped at Athens. A Strumpet in her Life
time, that used to Dance Naked with most Obscene Gestures.
Orgies scarce are more obscene,
For thus the Effeminate Priests themselves demean.
With Jet-black Pencils one his Eyebrows dies,
And adds new Fire to his lascivious Eyes:
Another in a Glass- Priapus swills,
While twisted Gold his platted Tresses fills;
A Female Robe, and to complete the Farce,
His An Instance of Extraordinary Effeminacy, it being the Custom for only
Women to Swear by Goddesses; the Men by Jove, Hercules, etc.
Servant not by Jove but Juno swears.
One holds a Mirror, pathick Otho's Shield,
In which he viewed before he marched to Field,
Nor Ajax with more Pride his sevenfold Targe did wield*
Oh Noble Subject for new Annals fit,
In musty Fame's Records unmention'd yet!
A Looking-Glass must load the Imperial Car,
The most important Carriage of the War!
Galba to kill he thought a Gen'ral's Part,
But, as a Courtier, used the nicest Art
To keep his Skin from Tan: before the Fight
Would paint, and set his soiled Complexion right.
A Softness which Semiramis never knew,
When once she had the Field and Foe in view,
Nor Egypt's Queen, when she from Actium flew.
No chaste Discourse their Festivals afford,
Obsceneness is the Language of their Board:
Soft lisping Tones, taught by some bald-pate Priest,
For skillful Palate, Master of the Feast.
A Pack of Prostitutes, un-nerv'd, and rife
For the operation of a Alluding to the Priests of the Phrygian Goddesses, who
were castrated.
Phrygian Knife;
For from such Pathicks 'twere but just to take
Those Manly Parts, of which no use they make.
Gracchus, it is said, gave to his Trumpeter
Four Hundred Sesterce's -- For what? -- in Dower.
The Motion's liked, the Parties are agreed;
And for Performance seal a formal Deed;
Guests are bespoke, a Wedding-Supper made,
The wonted Joy is wished, that done --
The He-Bride in his Bridegroom's Arms is laid!
O Peers of Rome! need these stupendous Times
A Viz. The One to Punish, the Other to Expiate such Unnatural Crimes.
Censer or Aruspex for such Crimes?
The Prodigy less Monstrous would appear,
If Women Calves, or Heifers Lambs should bear!
In Bridal Robe and Veil the Pathick's dressed,
Who He means one of the Salii, or Priests of Mars, who carried his Shield and
Implements, and was Brawny enough to Dance under them at his Festival.
C^elestia Martis Arma ferunt Salii. Ov. Fast. 3.
bore the pondrous Shield at M^rs his Feast.
Mars, Father of Romulus, who Founded Rome.
Father of Rome, say what detested Clime
Taught Latian Shepherds so abhorred a Crime?
Say, thundering Mars, from whence the Nettle sprung,
Whose Venom first thy Noble Offspring stung?
Behold! a Man by Birth and Fortune Great
Weds with a Man; yet from the Etherial Seat
No rattling of thy Brazen Wheels we hear,
Nor is Earth pierced with thy avenging Spear!
Oh! if thy Jurisdiction ( Mars) falls short
To punish Mischiefs of so vast import,
Complain to Jove, and move the higher Court.
For shame redress this Scandal, or resign
Thy Province to some Power that is more Divine.
To Morrow early in Quirinus Vale
I must attend -- Why? -- Thereby hangs a Tale,
A Male-Friend's to be married to a Male.
It Is true the Wedding's carried privately,
The Parties being at present somewhat shy;
But that they own the Match, e're long you will hear,
And see it in the Public Register.
But one sore grief does ^hese He^ Brides perplex;
Though they deb^^e, they cannot change their Sex;
Nor yet, by help of all their wicked Art,
Bring Offspring to secure their Husband's Heart.
Nature too much in the dire Embrace is forced,
But never joins Influence with Desires so cursed:
Incestuous Births, and Monst^rs may appear,
But teeming Males not Earth nor Hell can bear.
Yet Gra^^hus, thou degenerate Son of Fame,
Thy Pranks are stigmatized with greater blame:
Theirs was a priva^e, thine an open Shame.
Who like a Fencer on a Public Stage,
Have made thy self the Scandal of the Age.
Nor can Ro^^^'s Noblest Blood with thine compare,
While thou ma^'st P^stime for the Theater.
To what dir^ (...) can we assign these Crimes,
But to that reigning Atheism of the Times?
Ghosts, Stygian Lakes, and Frogs with croaking Note,
And Charon wafting Souls in leaky Boat,
Are now thought Fables, to fright Fools conceived.
Or Children, and by Children scarce believed.
Yet give thou Credit. What can we suppose
The Temperate Curii, and the Scipio's;
What will Fabricius or Camillus think,
When they behold, from their Elisium's brink,
An Atheist's Soul to last Perdition sink?
How will they from the assaulted Banks rebound,
And wish for Sacred Rites to purge the unhallowed ground.
In vain, O Rome! thou do thy Conquest boast
Beyond the Orcades short-nighted Coast,
Since free the conquered Provinces remain
From Crimes that thy Imperial City stain:
Yet Rumor speaks, if we may credit Fame,
Of one Armenian Youth, who since he came
Has learned the impious Trade; and does exceed
The lewdest Pathicks of our Roman Breed.
Blessings of Commerce! he was sent, it is said,
For Breeding hither: And he is fairly bred.
Fly Foreign Youths from our polluted Streets,
And, e're unmanned, regain your Native Seats;
Lest, while for Traffic here too long you stay,
You learn at last to trade the Italian way;
And, with cursed Merchandise returning home,
Stock all your Country with the Emrods, called in Latin, Ficu^.
Figs of Rome.
The End of the Second Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE SECOND SATYR.
Supposed by some, to be Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus; but by others (more
probably) Augustus, Anthony, and Lepidus.

The Lex Iulia against Adultery.

Viz. Deformed, and so resembling Domitian.

The Law so called, from Scantinius, against whom it was put in Execution.

Supposed to be the College of Priests, appointed by Domitian to Celebrate the
Quinquatria to Minerva.

Perverted Rites. Because here Women were Excluded from the Mysteries, as Men
were elsewhere from Ceres's Worship.

Cotyttus Orgies. The Goddess of Impudence Worshipped at Athens. A Strumpet in
her Life time, that used to Dance Naked with most Obscene Gestures.

An Instance of Extraordinary Effeminacy, it being the Custom for only Women to
Swear by Goddesses; the Men by Jove, Hercules, etc.

Alluding to the Priests of the Phrygian Goddesses, who were castrated.

Viz. The One to Punish, the Other to Expiate such Unnatural Crimes.

He means one of the Salii, or Priests of Mars, who carried his Shield and
Implements, and was Brawny enough to Dance under them at his Festival.
C^elestia Martis Arma ferunt Salii. Ov. Fast. 3.

Mars, Father of Romulus, who Founded Rome.

Emrods, called in Latin, Ficus.

THE THIRD SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE Third Satyr.
The Story of this Satyr speaks it self. Umbritius, the supposed Friend of
Juvenal, and himself a Poet, is leaving Rome; and retiring to Cumae. Our Author
accompanies him out of Town. Before they take leave of each other, Umbritius
tells his Friend the Reasons which oblige him to lead a private life, in an
obscure place. He complains that an honest man cannot get his bread at Rome.
That none but Flatterers make their Fortunes there: That Grecians and other
Foreigners, raise themselves by those sordid Arts which he describes, and
against which ^e bitterly inveighs. He reckons up the several Inconveniences
which arise from a City life; and the many Dangers which attend it. Upbraids
the Noblemen with Covetousness, for not Rewarding good Poets; and arraigns the
Government for starving them. The great Art of this Satyr is particularly
shown, in Common Places; and drawing in as many Vices, as could naturally fall
into the compass of it.

THE THIRD SATYR.
Grieved tho I am, an Ancient Friend to lose,
I like the Solitary Seat he chose:
In quiet CVmae, a small City in Campania, near Puteoli, or Puzzolo as it is
called. The Habitation of the C^maean Sybil.
Cumae fixing his Repose:
Where, far from Noisy Rome secure he Lives,
And one more Citizen to Sybil gives.
The Road to Another little Town in Campanio, near the Sea: A pleasant Place.
Bajae, and that soft Recess
Which all the Gods with all their Bounty bless.
Tho I in A small Barren Island belonging to the Kingdom of Naples.
Prochyta with greater ease
Could live, than in a Street of Palaces.
What Scene so De^art, or so full of Fright,
As towering Houses tumbling in the Night,
And Rome on Fire beheld by its own Blazing Light?
But worse than all, the clatt'ring Tiles; and worse
Than thousand Padders, is the Poet's Curse.
Rogues that The Poets in Iuvenal's time, used to rehearse their Poetry in
August.
in Dog Days cannot Rhyme forbear;
But without Mercy read, and make you hear.
Now while my Friend just ready to depart,
Was packing all his Goods in one poor Cart;
He stopped a little at the Conduit-Gate,
Where The second King of Rome; who made their Laws, and instituted their
Religion.
Numa modeled once the Roman State,
In Mighty Councels with his Nymph. Aegeria, a Nymph, or Goddess; with whom
Numa feigned to converse by Night; and to be instructed by her, in modeling his
Superstitions.
Nymphs retired:
Though now the Sacred Shades and Founts are hired
By Banished Jews, who their whole Wealth can lay
In ^ smal^ Basket, on a Wisp of Hay*
Yet such our Avarice is, that every Tree
Pays for his Head; not Sleep it self is free:
Nor Place* nor Persons now are Sacred held*
From their own Grove the Muses are expelled.
Into this lonely Vale our Steps we bend,
I and my sullen discontented Friend:
The Marble Caves, and Aquaeducts we view;
But how Adult, rate now, and different from the true!
How much more Beauteous had the Fountain been
Embellish't with her first Created Green,
Where Crystal Streams through living Turf had run*
Contented with an Urn of Native Stone!
Then thus Vmbricius, (with an Angry Frown,
And looking back on this degenerate Town,)
Since Noble Arts in Rome have no suppor^,
And ragged Virtue not a Friend at Court,
No Profit rises from the ungrateful Stage,
My Poverty increasing with my Age,
It Is time to give my just Disdain a vent,
And, Cursing, leave so base a Government.
Where Where Daedalus, etc. Meaning at C^m^e.
Dedal^^ his borrowed Wings laid by*
To that obscure, Retreat I choose to fly:
While yet few furrows on my Face are seen,
While I walk upright, and Old Age is green,
And Lache^is; one of the three Desti^ies, whose Office was to spin the Life of
every Man: as it was of Clotho to hold the Distaff, and Atropos to cut the
Thread.
Lachesis has somewhat left to spin.
Now, now 'tis^ time to quit this cursed place;
And hide from Villains my too honest Face:
Here let Any debauched wicked Fellow who gains by the times.
Arturius live, and such as he;
Such Manners will with such a Town agree.
Knaves who in full Assemblies have the knack
Of turning Truth to Lies, and White to Black:
Can hire large Houses, and oppress the Poor
By farmed Excise; can cleanse the Common-shoare;
And rent the Fishery; can bear the dead;
And teach their Eyes dissembled Tears to shed:
All this for Gain; for Gain they sell their very Head.
These Fellows (see what Fortune's power can do)
Were once the Minstrels of a Country Show:
Followed the Priz^s through each paltry Town,
By Trumpet-Cheek^, and Bloated Faces known.
But now, grown rich, on drunken Holy Days,
At their own Costs exhibit Public Plays;
Where influenced by the Rabble's bloody will,
With With Thumbs ben^ backward. In a Prize of Sword-Players, when one of the
Fencers had the other at his Mercy, the Vanquished Party implored the Clemency
of the Spectators. If they thought he deserved it not, they held up their
Thumbs and bent them backwards, in sign of Death.
Thumbs bent back, they popularly kill.
From thence returned, their sordid Avarice rake^
In Excrements again, and hires the Jakes.
Why hire they not the Town, not every thing,
Since such as they have Fortune in a String?
Who, for her pleasure, can her Fools advance;
And toss 'em topmost on the Wheel of Chance.
What Is Rome to me, what business have I there,
I who can neither Lie nor falsely Swear?
Nor Praise my Patron's undeserving Rhimes,
Nor yet comply with him, nor with his Times;
Unskilled in Schemes by Planets to foreshow
Like Canting Rascals, how the Wars will go*
I neither will, nor can Prognosticate
To the young gaping Heir, his Father's Fate*
Nor in the En^rails of a Toad have pried,
Nor carried Bawdy Presents to a Bride*
For want of these Town Virtues, thus, alone,
I go conducted on my way by none:
Like a dead Member from the Body rent;
Maimed and unuseful to the Government.
Who now is loved, but he who loves the Times,
Conscious of close Intrigues* and dipped in Crimes:
Laboring with Secrets which his Bosom burn,
Yet never must ^o public light return;
They get Reward alone who can Betray:
For keeping honest Counsels none will pay.
He who can Praetor in Sicily, Contemporary with Cicero; by whom accused of
oppressing the Province, he was Condemned: His Name is u^'d here for any Rich
Vicious Man.
Verres, when he will, accuse,
The Purse of Verres may at Pleasure use:
But let not all the Gold which Tagu^, a Famous River in Spain, which
discharges it self into the Ocean near Lisbone in Portugal. It was held of old,
to be full of Golden Sands.
Tagus hides,
And pays the Sea in Tributary Tides,
Be Bribe sufficient to corrupt thy Breast;
Or violate with Dreams thy peaceful rest.
Great Men with jealous Eyes the Friend behold,
Whose secrecy they purchase with their Gold.
I haste to tell thee, nor shall Shame oppose,
What Confidents our Wealthy Romans chose:
And whom I most abhor: To speak my Mind,
I hate, in Rome, a Grecian Town to find:
To see the Scum of Greece transplanted here,
Received like Gods, is what I cannot bear.
Nor Greeks alone, but Syrians here abound,
Obscene Orontes, the greatest River of Syria: The P^et here puts the River for
the Inhabitans of Syria.
Orontes diving under Ground,
Conveys Tyber; the River which runs by Rom^
his Wealth to Tyber's hungry Shoars,
And fattens Italy with Foreign Whores:
Hither their crooked Harps and Customs come;
All find Receipt in Hospitable Rome.
The Barbarous Harlots crowd the Public Place:
Go Fools, and purchase an unclean Embrace;
The painted Mitre court, and the more painted Face.
Old First King of Rome; Son of Mars, as the Poets feign, the first Romans were
Originally Herdsmen.
Romulus, and Father Mars look down,
Your Herdsman Primitive, your homely Clown
Is turned a Beau in a loose ^awdry Gown.
His once unke^^'d, and horrid Locks, behold
Stilling sweet Oil; his Neck inchain'd with Gold:
Aping the Foreigners, in every Dress;
Which, bought at greater cost, becomes him less.
Mean time they wisely leave their Native Land,
From Sycion, Samos, and from Al^band,
And Amydon, to Rome they Swarm in Shoals*
So Sweet and Easy is the Gain from Fools.
Poor Refugies at first, they purchase here:
And, soon as Denizen'd, they domineer.
Grow to the Great, a flattering Servile Rout:
Work themselves inward* and their Patrons out*
Quick Witted, Brazen-^ac'd, with fluent Tongues*
Patient of Labors, and dissembling Wrongs.
Riddle me this, and guess him if you can,
Who bears a Nation in a single Man?
A Cook, a Conjurer, a Rhetorician*
A Painter, (...), a Geometrician,
A Dancer on the Ropes, and a Physician.
All things the hungry Greek exactly knows:
And bid him go to Heaven, to Heaven he goes.
In short, no S^y^hian. Moor, or Thr^cian Born,
But But in that Town, etc. He means Athens; of which, Pallas the Goddess of
Arms and Arts was Patroness.
in that Town which Arms and Arts adorn.
Shall he be pla^'d above me at the Board,
In Purple Clothed* and lolling like a Lord?
Shall he before me ^ign, whom the other Day
A small-craft Vesse^ hi^her did convey;
Where, stowed (...) Prunes* and rotten Figs, he lay?
How little is (...) Privilege become
Of being born a Citizen of Rome!
The Greeks get all by fulsom Flatteries;
A most peculiar Stroke they have at Lies.
They make a Wit of th^^r Insipid Friend;
His blobber-Lips and beetle-Brows commend:
His long Crane Neck, and narrow Shoulders (...);
You Would think they were describing Hercules.
A creaking Voice for a clear Tr^bble goes;
Tho harsher than a Cock that Treads and Crows.
We can as grossly Praise; but, to our Grief,
No Flattery but from Grecia^s gains Belief.
Besides these Qualities, we must agree
They Mimick better on the Stage than we:
The Wife, the Whore, the Shepherdess they Play,
In such a Free, and such a Graceful way,
That we believe a very Woman shown;
And fancy something unde^neath the Gown.
But not Antiochus and Stratocles, two Famous Grecian Mimicks, or Actors in the
Poet's time.
(...), nor S^ra^^cl^s,
Our Ears and Ravished Eyes can only please:
The Nation is composed of such as these.
All Greece is one Comm^dian: Laugh, and they
Return it louder than an As^ can bray:
Grieve, and they Grieve; if you Weep silently,
There seems a silent Echo in their Eye:
They cannot Mourn like you; but they can Cry.
Call for a Fire, their Winter Clo^^hs they take:
Begin but you to shiver, and they shake:
In Frost and Snow, if you complain of Heat,
They rub the unswea^ing Brow, and Swear they Sw^eat.
We live not on the Square with such as th^s^:
Such are our Betters who can better please:
Who Day and Night are like a Looking-Glass;
Still ready to reflect their Patron's Face.
The Panegyric Hand, and lifted Eye,
Prepared for some new Piece of Flattery.
Even Nastiness, Occasions will afford:
They praise a belching, or well-pissing Lord.
Besides there is nothing Sacred, nothing free
From bold Attempts of their rank Leachery.
Through the whole Family their labors run;
The Daughter is debauched, the Wife is won;
Nor scapes the Bridegroom, or the blooming Son.
If none they find for their lewd purpose fit,
They with the Walls and very Floors commit.
They search the Secrets of the House, and so
Are worshipped there, and feared for what they know.
And, now we talk of Grecians, cast a view
On what, in Schools, their Men of Morals do:
A rigid A Rigid Stoic, etc. P^blius Egnatius a Stoic, falsely accused Bareas
Soranus; as Tacitus tells us.
Stoic his own Pupil slew.
A Friend, against a Friend, of his own Cloth,
Turned Evidence, and murdered on his Oath.
What room is left for Romans, in a Town
Where Grecians Rule, and Cloaks control the Gown?
Some Diphilus, and Protogenes, etc. Were Grecians living in Rome.
Diphilus, or some Protogenes,
Look sharply out, our Senators to seize:
Engross 'em wholly, by their Native Art,
And fear no Rivals in their Bubbles heart:
One drop of Poison in my Patron's Ear,
One slight suggestion of a senseless fear,
Infused with cunning, serves to ruin me:
Disgraced and banished from the Family.
In vain forgotten Services I boast;
My long dependence in an hour is lost:
Look round the World, what Country will appear,
Where Friends are left with greater ease than here?
At Rome (nor think me partial to the Poor)
All Offices of ours are out of Door:
In vain we rise, and to their Levees run;
My Lord himself is up, before, and gone:
The Praetor bids his Lictors mend their pace;
Lest his Colleague outstrip him in the Race:
The childless Matrons are, long since, awake;
And, for Affronts, the tardy Visits take.
It Is frequent, here, to see a freeborn Son
On the left hand of a Rich Hireling run:
Because the wealthy Rogue can throw away,
For half a Brace of Bouts, a Tribune's pay:
But you, poor Sinner, tho you love the Vice,
And like the Whore, demurr upon the Price:
And, frighted with the wicked Sum, forbear
To lend a hand, and help her from the Chair.
Produce a Witness of unblemished life,
Holy as Numa, or as Numa's Wife,
Or Or him who ^ad, etc. Lucius Metellus the High Priest; who when the Temple
of Vesta was on Fire, saved the Palladium.
him who bid the unhallowed Flames retire;
And snatched the trembling Goddess from the Fire:
The Question is not put how far extends
His Piety, but what he yearly spends:
Quick, to the Business; how he Lives and Eats;
How largely Gives, how splendidly he Treats:
How many thousand Acres feed his Sheep,
What are his Rents, what Servants does he keep?
The Account is soon cast up; the Judges rate
Our Credit in the Court, by our Estate.
Swear by our Gods, or those the G^eeks adore,
Thou art as sure Forsworn, as thou art Poor:
The Poor must gain their Bread by Perjury:
And even the Gods, that other Means deny,
In Conscience must absolve 'em, when they lie.
Add, that the Rich have still a Gibe in store:
And will be monstrous witty on the Poor:
For the torn Surtout and the ^atter'd Vest,
The Wretch and all his Wardrobe are a Jest:
The greasy Gown, s^lly'd with often turning,
Gives a good hint, to say The Man's in Mourning:
Or if the Shoo be ripped, or patches put,
He Is wounded! see the Plaster on his Foot.
Want is the Scorn of every Wealthy Fool:
And Wit in Rags is turned to Ridicule.
Pack hence, and from the Covered Benches rise,
(The Master of the Ceremonies cries)
This is no place for you, whose small Estate
Is not the Value of the settled Rate:
The Sons of happy Punks, the Pandars Heir,
Are priviledg'd to sit in triumph there;
To clap the first, and rule the Theater.
Up to the Galleries, for shame, retreat:
For, by the For by the Roscian Law, etc. Roscius a Tribune, who ordered the
distinction of Places in Public Shows, betwixt the Noblemen of Rome and the
Plebeians.
Roscian Law, the Poor can claim no Seat.
Who ever brought to his rich Daughter's Bed
The Man that poll'd but Twelve-pence for his Head?
Who ever named a poor Man for his Heir*
Or called him to assist the Judging Chair?
The Poor were wise, who by the Rich oppressed,
Withdrew, and sought a Sacred Place of Rest.
Once they did well, to free themselves from Scorn;
But had done better never to return.
Rarely they rise by Virtues aid, who lie
Plunged in the d^pth of helpless Poverty.
At Rome it is worse: where House-rent by the Year,
And Servants Bellies cost so Dev'llish dear;
And Tavern Bills run high for hungry Cheer.
To drink or eat in Earthen Ware we scorn,
Which cheaply Country Cupboards does adorn:
And coarse blew Hoods on Holydays are worn.
Some distant parts of Italy are known,
Where Where none but only dead Men, etc. The meaning is, that Men in some
parts of Italy never wore a Gown (the usual Habit of the Romans) till they were
buried in one.
none, but only dead Men, wear a Gown:
On Theaters of Turf, in homely State,
Old Plays they act, old Feasts they Celebrate:
The same rude Song returns upon the Crowd;
And, by Tradition, is for Wit allowed.
The Mimick Yearly gives the same Delights:
And in the Mother's Arms the Clownish Infant frights.
Their Habits (undistinguished, by degree)
Are plain, alike; the same Simplicity,
Both on the Stage, and in the Pit, you see.
In his white Cloak the Magistrate appears;
The Country Bumpkin the same Liv'ry wears.
But here, Attired beyond our Purse we go,
For useless Ornament and flaunting Show:
We ^ake on ^rust, in Purple Robes to shine;
And Poor, are yet Ambitious to be fine.
This is a common Vice; tho all things here
Are sold, and sold unconscionably dear.
What will you give that Cossus is here taken for any great Man.
Cossus may but view
Your Face, and in the Crowd distinguish you;
May take your Incense like a gracious God;
And answer only with a Civil Nod?
To please our Patrons, in this vicious Age,
We make our Entrance by the Favorite Page:
Shave his first down, and when he Polls his Hair,
The Consecrated Locks to Temples bear:
Pay Tributary Cracknels, which he sells;
And, with our Offerings, help to raise his Va^ls.
Who fears, in Country Towns, a House's fall,
Or to be caught betwixt a riven Wall?
But we Inhabit a weak City, here;
Which Buttresses and Props but scarcely bear:
And it is the Village Masons daily Calling,
To keep the World's Metropolis from falling.
To cleanse the Gutters, and the Chinks to close;
And, for one Night, secure his Lord's Repose.
At Cumae we can sleep, quite round the Year:
Nor Falls, nor Fires, nor Nightly Dangers fear;
While rolling Flames from Roman Turrets fly,
And the pale Citizens for Buckets cry.
Thy Neighbor has removed his Wretched Store
(Few Hands will rid the Lumber of the Poor)
Thy own third Story smoaks; while thou, supine,
Art drenched in Fumes of undigested Wine.
For if the lowest Floors already burn,
Cock-lofts and Garrets soon will take the Turn.
Where Where the tame Pigeons, etc. The Romans used to breed their ^ame
Pigeons in their Garrets.
thy tame Pigeons next the Tiles were bred,
Which in their Nests unsafe, are timely fled.
Codrus, a Learned Man, very poor: by his Books supposed to be a Poet. For, in
all probability, the Heroic Verses here mentioned, which Rats and Mice
devoured, were Homer's Works.
Codrus had but one Bed, so short to boot,
That his short Wife's short Legs hung dangling out*
His Cup-board's Head, six Earthen Pitchers graced,
Beneath 'em was his Trusty Tankard placed:
And, to support this Noble Plate, there lay
A bending Chiron cast from honest Clay:
His few Greek Books a rotten Chest contained;
Whose Covers much of mouldiness complained:
Where Mice and Rats devoured Poetic Bread;
And with Heroic Verse luxuriously were fed.
It Is true, poor Codrus nothing had to boast,
And yet poor Codrus all that Nothing lost.
Begged naked through the Streets of wealthy Rome;
And found not one to feed, or take him home.
But if the Palace of Arturius burn,
The Nobles change their Clothes, the Matrons mourn;
The City Praetor will no Pleadings hear;
The very Name of Fire we hate and fear:
And look aghast, as if the Gauls were here.
While yet it burns, the officious Nation flies,
Some to condole, and some to bring supplies:
One sends him Marble to rebuild; and one
White naked Statues of the Parian Stone:
The Work of Polyclete, that seem to live;
While others, Images for Altars give:
One Books and Skreens, and Pallas to the Breast;
Another Bags of Gold; and he gives best.
Childless Arturius, vastly rich before,
Thus by his Losses multiplies his Store:
Suspected for Accomplice to the Fire,
That burnt his Palace but to build it higher.
But, could you be content to bid adieu
To the dear Playhouse, and the Players too,
Sweet Country Seats are purchased every where,
With Lands and Gardens, at less price, than here
You hire a darksom Doghole by the year.
A small Convenience, decently prepared,
A shallow Well, that rises in your yard,
That spreads his easy Crystal Streams around;
And waters all the pretty spot of Ground.
There, love the Fork; thy Garden cultivate;
And give thy frugal Friends He means Herbs, Roots, Fruits, and Sallads.
a Pythagorean Treat.
It Is somewhat to be Lord of some small Ground;
In which a Lizard may, at least, turn round.
It Is frequent, here, for want of sleep to dye;
Which Fumes of undigested Feasts deny;
And, with imperfect heat, in languid Stomachs fry.
What House secure from noise the poor can keep,
When even the Rich can scarce afford to sleep?
So dear it costs to purchase Rest in Rome;
And hence the sources of Diseases come.
The Drover who his Fellow-drover meets,
In narrow passages of winding Streets;
The Waggoners, that curse their standing Teams,
Would wake even drousie Drusus from his Dreams.
And yet the Wealthy will not brook delay;
But sweep above our Heads, and make their way;
In lofty Litters born, and read, and write,
Or sleep at ease: The Shutters make it Night.
Yet still he reaches, first, the Public Place:
The prease before him stops the Client's pace.
The Crowd that follows, crush his panting sides:
And trip his heels; he walks not, but he rides.
One ^lbows him, one justles in the Shole:
A Rafter breaks his Head, or Chairman's Pole:
Stockin'd with loads of fat Town-dirt he goes;
And some Rogue-Souldier, with his Hob-nail'd Shoos,
Indents his Legs behind in bloody rows.
See with what Smoke our Doles we celebrate:
A hundred Ghests, invited, walk in state:
A hundred hungry Slaves, with their Dutch Kitchins wait.
Huge Pans the Wretches on their heads must bear;
Which scarce Gygantick Corbulo. Corbulo was a Famous General in Nero's time,
who Conquered Armenia; and was afterward put to Death by that Tyrant, when he
was in Greece, in reward of his great Services. His Stature was not only tall,
above the ordinary Size; but he was also proportionably strong.
Gygantick Corbulo could rear:
Yet they must walk upright beneath the load;
Nay run, and running, blow the sparkling flames abroad.
Their Coats, from botching newly brought, are torn:
Unweildy Timber Trees, in Wagons born,
Stretched at their length, beyond their Carriage lie;
That nod, and threaten ruin from on high.
For, should their Axel break, its overthrow
Would crush, and pound to dust, the Crowd below:
Nor Friends their Friends, nor Sires their Sons could know:
Nor Limbs, nor Bones, nor Carcass would remain;
But a mash'd heap, a Hotchpotch of the Slain.
One vast destruction; not the Soul alone,
But Bodies, like the Soul, invisible are flown.
Mean time, unknowing of their Fellows Fate,
The Servants wash the Platter, scour the Plate,
Then blow the Fire, with puffing Cheeks, and lay
The Rubbers, and the Bathing-sheets display;
And oil them first; and each is handy in his way.
But he, for whom this busy care they take,
Poor Ghost, is wandering by the Stygian Lake:
Affrighted with The Ferry-Man's, etc. Charon the Ferry-Man of Hell; whose Fare
was a Halfpenny for every Soul.
the Ferryman's grim Face;
New to the Horrors of that uncouth place:
His passage begs with unreguarded Prayer:
And wants two Farthings to discharge his Fare.
Return we to the Dangers of the Night;
And, first, behold our Houses dreadful height:
From whence come broken Potsherds tumbling down;
And leaky Ware, from Garret Windows thrown:
Well may they break our Heads, that mark the flinty Stone.
^Tis want of Sense to sup abroad too late;
Unless thou first have settled thy Estate.
As many Fates attend, thy Steps to meet,
As there are waking Windows in the Street.
Bless the good Gods, and think thy chance is rare
To have a Piss-pot only for thy share.
The scouring Drunkard, if he does not fight
Before his Bedtime, takes no rest that Night.
Passing the tedious Hours in greater pain
Than The Friend of Achilles, was Patroclus who was slain by Hector.
stern Achilles, when his Friend was slain:
It Is so ridiculous, but so true withal,
A Bully cannot sleep without a Braul.
Yet tho his youthful Blood be fired with Wine,
He wants not Wit, the Danger to decline:
Is cautious to avoid the Coach and Six,
And on the Lacquies will no Quarrel fix.
His Train of Flambeaus, and Embroidered Coat
May Privilege my Lord to walk secure on Foot.
But me, who must by Moonlight homeward bend,
Or lighted only with a Candle's end,
Poor me he fights, if that be fighting, where
He only Cudgels, and I only bear.
He stands, and bids me stand: I must abide;
For he is the stronger, and is Drunk beside.
Where did you whet your Knife to Night, he cries,
And shred the Leeks that in your Stomach rise?
Whose windy Beans have stuff't your Guts, and where
Have your black Thumbs been dipped in Vinegar?
With what Companion Cobbler have you fed,
On old Ox-cheeks, or He-Goats tougher Head?
What, are you Dumb? Quick with your Answer, quick;
Before my Foot Salutes you with a Kick.
Say, in what nasty Cellar, under Ground,
Or what Church Porch your Rogueship may be found?
Answer, or Answer not, it is all the same:
He lays me on, and makes me bear the blame.
Before the Bar, for beating him, you come;
This is a Poor Man's Liberty in Rome.
You beg his Pardon; happy to retreat
With some remaining Teeth, to chew your Meat.
Nor is this all: for, when Retired, you think
To sleep securely; when the Candles wink,
When every Door with Iron Chains is barred,
And roaring Taverns are no longer heard;
The Ruffian Robbers, by no Justice awed,
And unpaid Cutthroat Soldiers are abroad.
Those Venal Souls, who hardened in each ill
To save Complaints and Prosecution, kill.
Chased from their Woods and Bogs the Padders come
To this vast City, as their Native Home:
To live at ease, and safely sculk in Rome.
The Forge in Fetters only is employed;
Our Iron Mines exhausted and destroyed
In Shackles; for these Villains scarce allow
Goads for the Teams, and Plough-shares for the Plough.
Oh happy Ages of our Ancestors,
Beneath Beneath the Kings, etc. Rome was Originally Ruled by Kings; till for
the Rape of Lucretia, Tarquin the proud was expelled. After which it was
Governed by two Consuls, Yearly chosen: but they oppressing the People, the
Commoners Mutiny'd; and procured Tribunes to be Created; who defended their
Privileges, and often opposed the Consu ar Authority, and the Senate.
the Kings and Tribunitial Powers!
One Jayl did all their Criminals restrain;
Which, now, the Walls of Rome can scarce contain.
More I could say; more Causes I could show
For my departure; but the Sun is low:
The Waggoner grows weary of my stay;
And whips his Horses forwards on their way.
Farewell; and when, like me, overwhelmed with care,
You to your own Aquinum, was the Birthplace of Iuvenal.
Aquinum shall repair,
To take a mouthful of sweet Country air,
Be mindful of your Friend; and send me word,
What Joys your Fountains and cool Shades afford:
Then, to assist your Satyrs, I will come:
And add new Venom, when you write of Rome.
The End of the Third Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE THIRD SATYR.
CVmae, a small City in Campania, near Puteoli, or Puzzolo as it is called. The
Habitation of the C^maean Sybil.

Bajae; Another little Town in Campanio, near the Sea: A pleasant Place.

Prochyta: A small Barren Island belonging to the Kingdom of Naples.

In Dog Days. The Poets in Iuvenal's time, used to rehearse their Poetry in
August.

Numa. The second King of Rome; who made their Laws, and instituted their
Religion.

Nymph. Aegeria, a Nymph, or Goddess; with whom Numa feigned to converse by
Night; and to be instructed by her, in modeling his Superstitions.

Where Daedalus, etc. Meaning at C^m^e.

Lachesis; one of the three Destinies, whose Office was to spin the Life of
every Man: as it was of Clotho to hold the Distaff, and Atropos to cut the
Thread.

Arturius. Any debauched wicked Fellow who gains by the times.

With Thumbs bent backward. In a Prize of Sword-Players, when one of the
Fencers had the other at his Mercy, the Vanquished Party implored the Clemency
of the Spectators. If they thought he deserved it not, they held up their
Thumbs and bent them backwards, in sign of Death.

Verres, Praetor in Sicily, Contemporary with Cicero; by whom accused of
oppressing the Province, he was Condemned: His Name is u^'d here for any Rich
Vicious Man.

Tagus, a Famous River in Spain, which discharges it self into the Ocean near
Lisbone in Portugal. It was held of old, to be full of Golden Sands.

Orontes, the greatest River of Syria: The P^et here puts the River for the
Inhabitans of Syria.

Tyber; the River which runs by Rom^

Romulus; First King of Rome; Son of Mars, as the Poets feign, the first Romans
were Originally Herdsmen.

But in that Town, etc. He means Athens; of which, Pallas the Goddess of Arms
and Arts was Patroness.

Antiochus and Stratocles, two Famous Grecian Mimicks, or Actors in the Poet's
time.

A Rigid Stoic, etc. Publius Egnatius a Stoic, falsely accused Bareas Soranus;
as Tacitus tells us.

Diphilus, and Protogenes, etc. Were Grecians living in Rome.

Or him who had, etc. Lucius Metellus the High Priest; who when the Temple of
Vesta was on Fire, saved the Palladium.

For by the Roscian Law, etc. Roscius a Tribune, who ordered the distinction of
Places in Public Shows, betwixt the Noblemen of Rome and the Plebeians.

Where none but only dead Men, etc. The meaning is, that Men in some parts of
Italy never wore a Gown (the usual Habit of the Romans) till they were buried
in one.

Cossus is here taken for any great Man.

Where the tame Pigeons, etc. The Romans used to breed their ^ame Pigeons in
their Garrets.

Codrus, a Learned Man, very poor: by his Books supposed to be a Poet. For, in
all probability, the Heroic Verses here mentioned, which Rats and Mice
devoured, were Homer's Works.

A Pythagorean Treat: He means Herbs, Roots, Fruits, and Sallads.

Gygantick Corbulo. Corbulo was a Famous General in Nero's time, who Conquered
Armenia; and was afterward put to Death by that Tyrant, when he was in Greece,
in reward of his great Services. His Stature was not only tall, above the
ordinary Size; but he was also proportionably strong.

The Ferry-Man's, etc. Charon the Ferry-Man of Hell; whose Fare was a
Halfpenny for every Soul.

Stern Achilles. The Friend of Achilles, was Patroclus who was slain by Hector.

Beneath the Kings, etc. Rome was Originally Ruled by Kings; till for the Rape
of Lucretia, Tarquin the proud was expelled. After which it was Governed by two
Consuls, Yearly chosen: but they oppressing the People, the Commoners Mutiny'd;
and procured Tribunes to be Created; who defended their Privileges, and often
opposed the Consu ar Authority, and the Senate.

Aquinum, was the Birthplace of Iuvenal.

THE FOURTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE.
ARGUMENT OF THE Fourth Satyr.
The Poet in this Satyr first brings in Cri^pinus, whom be had a lash at in his
first Satyr, and whom he promises here not to be forgetful of for the future.
He exposes his monstrous Prodigality and Luxury in giving the Price of an
Estate for a Barbel^ and from thence takes occasion to introduce the principal
Subject, and true Design of this Satyr, which is grounded upon a ridiculous
Story of a Turbut presented to Domitian, of so vast a bigness that all the
Emperor's Scullery had not a Dish large enough to bold it: Upon which the
Senate in all haste is summoned, to Consult in this Exigency, what is fittest
to be done. The Poet gives us a Particular of the Senators Names, their
distinct Characters, and Speeches, and Advice; and after much and wise
Consultation, an Expedient being found out and agreed upon, he dismisses the
Senate, and concludes the Satyr.

THE FOURTH SATYR.
ONce more Crispinus called upon the Stage,
(Nor shall once more suffice) provokes my Rage
A Monster, to whom every Vice lays claim
Without one Virtue to redeem his Fame.
Feeble and Sick, yet strong in Lust alone,
The rank Adult're^ preys on all the Town,
All but the Widows nauseous Charms go down.
What matter then how stately is the Arch
Where his tired Mules flow with their Burden march?
What matter then how thick and long the Shade
Through which by sweating Slaves he is conveyed?
How many Acres near the City Walls,
Or new-built Palaces his own he calls?
No ill Man's happy: least of all is he
Whose study it is to corrupt Chastity;
The incestuous Brute, who the veiled Vestal Maid
But lately to his impious Bed betrayed,
Who for her Crime, IF Laws their course, etc. Ought to descend, etc. Crispinus
had deflour'd a Vestal Virgin, but by his Favor with Domitian, she escaped the
Punishment due to her Offense; which was to be buried alive by Numa's Law; as
may be seen in Livy, l. 1. and is more particularly described in Plutarch's
Life of Numa.
if Laws their Course might have,
Ought to descend alive into the Grave.
But now of slighter Faults; and yet the same
By others done, the Censors Justice claim.
For what good Men ignoble count and base,
Is Virtue here, and does Crispinus grace:
In this ^e's safe whatever (...)
The Person is more odious than the Crime.
And so all Satyr's lost. The Lavish Slave
Six Six thousand of the Roman Sestertii, which makes six Sestertia, according
to our Account, 46 l. 17 s. 6 d.
thousand Pieces for a Barbel gave,
A Sesterce for each Pound it weighed, as they
Give out that hear great things, but greater say.
If by this Bribe well-plac'd, he would ^nsnare
Some sapless Usurer that wants an Heir,
Or if this Present the sly Cou^^^^ meant,
Should to some Punk of Quality be (...),
That in her easy Chair in state does ride,
The Glasses all drawn up on every side,
I Would praise his Cunning; but expect not this,
For his own Gut he bought the stately Fish.
Now even Apicius. A Man for Gluttony and Prodigality famous even to a Proverb,
who having spent most of his vast Estate upon his Gut, for fear of want
poisoned himself, Senec.
Apicius Frugal seems, and Poor,
Outvy'd in Luxury unknown before.
Gave you, Crispinus, you this mighty Sum?
You, that, for want of other Rags, did come
In your own Country Paper wrapped, to Rome.
Do Scales and Fins bear Price to this Excess?
You might have bought the Fisherman for less.
For less some Provinces whole (...)
Nay Part of Italy, near the Adriatic Gulf, where Land it seems, was very
cheap, either for the barrenness and cragged height of the Mountains, or for
the unwholsomness of the Air, and the Wind Atabulus. Horac. Lib. 1. Sat. 5.
Montes Apulia notos -- quos torret Atabulus and quos Nunquam erepsemus, etc.
in Apulia, if you bargain well,
A Manor would cost less than such a (...)
What think we then of his The Emperor Domitian.
Luxurious Lord?
What Banquers loaded that Imperial Board?
When in one Dish, that taken from the rest
His constant Table would have hardly mist,
So many Sesterces were swallowed down
To stuff one Sc^rlet coated Court (...)
Whom Rome of all her Knights now Chiefest gre^^^,
From crying stinking ^ish about her Streets.
Begin, Calliope, but not to sing^
Plain, Honest Truth we for our Subject b^ing.
Help then, ye young Pierian Maids, to ^ell
A downright Narrative of what befell.
Afford me willingly your Sacred aids,
Me that have called you young, me that have styled you Maids.
When he, with whom The Flavian Race decayed. Domitian was the last and worst
of the Flavian Family, which tho at first obscure, yet had produced great and
good Men. Reipublica nequaquam paenitenda, says Sueton. 9. For of this Family
were Vespasian and Titus.
the (...) Race decayed,
The groaning World with Iron Scepter swayed,
When Domitian, who could not so much as bear with Patience the mention of
baldness* tho in Jest only, and objected to another, as Suetonius in his Life
tells us. And who, for his Cruelty, is here called a second Nero.
a bald Nero Reigned, and servile Rome obeyed.
Where Venus Shrine does fair Ancona grace,
A Turbut taken of Prodigious Space,
Filled the extended Net, not less than those
That dull Maeotis does with Ice enclose,
Till conquered by the Sun's prevailing Ray,
It opens to the Pontick Sea their way;
And throws them out unweildy with their Growth;
Fat with long ease, and a whole Winte^'s sloth.
The wise Commander of the Boat and Lines,
For The Emperor Domitian called so, either from his Instituting the College
of the Alban Priests, of whom he was as it were, Chief; or for taking upon him
the Office of Pontifex Maximus in the Condemnation of the Vestal Virgin
Cornetia; or, more generally, because often the Emperors assumed both the Title
and Office of High Priest.
our High Priest the stately Prey designs;
For who that Lordly Fish durst sell or buy,
So many Spies and Court-Informers nigh?
No Shore but of this Vermin Swarms does bear,
Searchers of Mud and Sea-weed! that would swear
The Fish had long in Caesar's Ponds been fed,
And from its Lord undutifully fled;
So, justly ought to be again restored:
Nay, if you credit Sage Palphurius and Armillatus. Both Men of Consular
Degree: Lawyers, and Spies, and Informers, and so Favorites of Domitian.
Palphurius word,
Or dare rely on Armillatus Skill,
Whatever Fish the vulgar Fry excel
Belong to Caesar, wheresoe'er they swim,
By their own worth confiscated to him.
The Boatman then shall a wise Present make,
And give the Fish before the Seizers take.
Now sickly Autumn to dry Frosts gave way,
Cold Winter raged, and fresh preserved the Prey,
Yet with such haste the busy Fisher flew,
As if a hot South Wind Corruption blew:
And now he reached the Lake, What remains of Alba, etc. Alba longa built by
Ascanius, about fifteen Miles from Rome, was destroyed after by Tullus
Hostilius, the Temples only excepted, (Live. l. 1.) The Albans upon this their
Misfortunes neglecting their Worship, were by sundry Prodigies commanded to
restore their Ancient Rites, the chief of which was the keeping perpetually
burning the Vestal Fire, which was brought thither by Aenaeas and his Trojans
as a fatal Pledge of the perpetuity of the Roman Empire.
where what remains
Of Alba, still her Ancient Rites retains,
Still Worships Vesta, There was a more stately Temple erected to Vesta at Rome
by Numa, than this of Alba, where the same Ceremonies were used.
tho an humbler way,
Nor lets the hallowed Trojan Fire decay.
The wondering Crowd that to strange Sights resort,
And choked a while his Passage to the Court,
At length gives way; open flies the Pallace-Gate,
The Turbut enters in, without The Senate always so called. Patres Conscripti.
the Fathers wait.
The Boatman straight does to Aftrides press,
And thus presents his Fish, and his Address.
Accept, Dread Sir, this Tribute from the Main,
Too great for private Kitchins to contain.
To your glad Genius sacrifice this day,
Let common Meats respectfully give way.
Haste to unload your Stomach to receive
This Turbut, that for you did only live,
So long preserved to be Imperial Food,
Glad of the Net, and to be taken proud.
How fulsom this! how gross! yet this takes well,
And the vain Prince with empty Pride does swell.
Nothing so monstrous can be said or feigned
But with Belief and Joy is entertained,
When to his Face the worthless Wretch is praised,
Whom vile Court-Flattery to a God has raised.
But oh hard Fate! the Palace stores no Dish
Afford capacious of the mighty Fish.
To sage Debate are summoned all the Peers
His Trusty and much hated Counselors,
In whose pale look that ghastly Terror sat
That haunts the dangerous Friendships of the Great.
Some say that of the People of this Country, which is a part of Illyricum, the
Romans made their Cryers, because of their loud Voices. Others take Liburnus
for the proper Name of one Man -- Liburnus that the Senate called.
The loud Liburnian that the Senate called,
Run, run, he is set, he is set, no sooner baul'd,
But with his Robe snatched up in haste, does come
Pegasus, A Citizen of Alba, a very Learned Lawyer, and Prefect or Chief
Magistrate of Rome. He calls him here Bailiff: As if Rome, by Domitian's
Cruelty, had so far lost its Liberty and Privileges, that it now was no better
than a Country Village, and fit to be Governed by no better than a Bailiff.
Bailiff of affrighred Rome.
What more were Praefects then? the Best he was,
And faithfullest Expounder of the Laws.
Yet in ill times thought all things managed best,
When Justice Exercised her Sword the least.
Old Crispus, (Vibius Crispus.) This was he that made the known Jest upon
Domitian's killing Flies. When one day Domitian being alone in his Closet, and
being asked whether there was any one left within with the Emperor, he answered
No, not so much as a Fly. The Names and Characters of most of these Senators
here mentioned may be found in Suetonius' Life of Domitian, and in Tacitus.
Old Crispus next, Pleasant though Old, appears,
His Wit, nor Humor, yielding to his years.
His Temper mild, good Nature joined with Sense,
And Manners charming as his Eloquence.
Who fitter for a useful Friend than he,
To the Great Ruler of the Earth and Sea,
If as his Thoughts were Just his Tongue were free
If it were safe to vent his Generous Mind
To Rome's dire Plague and Terror of Mankind*
If cruel Power could softning Council bear,
But what is so tender as a Tyrant's Ear?
With whom whoever, tho a Favorite spoke,
At every Sentence set his Life at stake,
Tho the Discourse were of no weightier things,
Than sultry Summers or unhealthful Springs.
This well he knew, and therefore never tried,
With his weak Arms to stem the stronger Tide.
Nor did all Rome, grown Spiritless, supply
A Man that for bold Truth durst bravely dye.
So safe by wise complying silence, he
Even in that Court did fourscore Summers see.
Next him Acilius, tho his Age the same,
With eager haste to the Grand Council came.
With him a Youth, unworthy of the Fate
That did too near his growing Virtues wait,
Urged by the Tyrant's Envy, Fear, or Hate.
(But it is long since Old Age began to be
In Noble Blood no less than Prodigy,
Whence it is I Would rather be of Of an obscure and unknown Family.
Giants Birth
A Pigmy-Brother to those Sons of Earth.)
Unhappy Youth! whom from his destined End
No well dissembled Madness could defend;
When Naked in the Alban Theater,
In Lybian Bears he fixed his Hunting Spear.
Who sees not now through the Lord's thin disguise
That long seemed Fools to prove at last more wise?
That State-Court trick is now too open laid,
Who now admires the It Is a known Story, how Brutus finding that his own
Brother and some of the most considerable Men of Rome had been put to Death by
Tarquinius Superbus, counterfeited himself a Madman or Fool, and so avoided the
Tyrant's Cruelty, till he had gained a fit time to destroy him, revenge his
Brother's and Countrymens Deaths, and free Rome.
part old Brutus Played?
Those honest times might swallow this pretense
When ^In those Ancient and more simple times, when it was the Custom never to
shave their Beards: For 400 Years there was no such thing as a Barber heard of
in Rome.
the King's Beard was deeper than his Sense.
Next Rubrius came, For Domitian's Cruelty reached even to the common People,
and those of lower Birth, which (in the end of this Satyr) the Poet tells us,
caused his Destruction.
tho not of Noble Race,
With equal marks of Terror in his Face.
Pale with the gnawing Guilt and inward Shame
Of an old Crime that is not fit to name.
Worse, yet in Scandal taking more delight,
Than Nero, who wrote a Satyr upon Quintianus, whom he charges with his own
Prof^igate Lewdness, and Debauchery. Tacit. Annal. 15.
the vile Pathick that durst Satyr write.
Montanus Belly next, advancing slow
Before the sweating Senator did go.
Crispinus after, but much sweeter comes,
Sented with costly Oils and Eastern Gums,
More than would serve two Funerals for Perfumes.
Then Pompey, none more skilled in the Court Game
Of cutting Throats with a soft Whisper, came.
Next Fuscus, he who many a peaceful day
For Cornelius Fu^cus, a Noble Man of no manner of Experience, or more
knowledge in War Affairs than what he had studied in his own Country
Retirement, was yet by Domitian twice sent with an Army against the Dacians, in
the last of which his Army was defeated, and himself slain.
Dacian Vultures was reserved a Prey,
Till having studied War enough at home,
He led abroad the unhappy Arms of Rome.
Cunning Vejento next, and by his side
Bloody Catullus, leaning on his Guide,
Decrepit, yet a furious Lover he,
And deeply smit with Charms he could not see.
A Monster, that even this worst Age outvies,
Conspicuous, and above the common size.
A blind base Flatterer, The common stands for Beggars.
from some Bridge or Gate
Raised to murdering Minister of State.
Deserving still to beg upon the Road,
And bless each passing Wagon and its Load!
None more admired the Fish; He in its Praise
With Zeal his Voice, with Zeal his Hands did raise,
But to the left all his fine things did say,
Whilst on his right the unseen Turbut lay.
So he the Famed Cilician Fencer praised,
And at each hit with Wonder seemed amazed.
So did the Scenes and Stage Machines admire,
And Boys that flew through Canvas Clouds in Wyre.
Nor came Vejento short; but as inspired
By thee, Bellona, by thy Fury fired,
Turns Prophet: See, the Mighty Omen, see,
He cries, of some Illustrious Victory!
Some Captive King, Thee his new Lord shall own.
Or from his British Chariot headlong thrown
The Arviragus. One of the Ancient British Kings.
Proud Arviragus came tumbling down!
The Monsters Foreign. He makes the Flatterer call the sharp Fins rising on
the Fishes back, Spears; and to signify and portend that Domitian shall stick
the like in some Foreign Enemy.
Mark the pointed Spears
That from thy Hand on his pierced Back he wears?
Who Nobler could, or plainer things presage?
Yet one thing escaped him, the Prophetic Rage
Showed not the Turbut's Country, not its Age.
At length by Caesar the grand Question's put:
My Lords, your Judgment: Shall the Fish be cut?
Far be it, far from us! Montanus cries,
Let Us not dishonor thus the Noble Prize!
A Pot of finest Earth, thin, deep, and wide
Some Some skilful Potter. Alluding to the old Fable of Prometheus, whose skill
in this Art was such, that he made a Man of Clay.
Skilful quick Prometheus must provide.
Clay and the forming Wheel prepare with speed!
But, Caesar, be it from henceforth decreed,
That Potters on the Royal Progress wait
TO assist in these Emergencies of State.
This Council pleased; nor could it fail to take
So fit, so worthy of the Man that spoke.
The old Court Riots he remembered well,
Could Tales of Nero's Midnight Suppers tell,
When Falern Wines the laboring Lungs did fire,
And to new Dainties kindled false Desire.
In Arts of Eating none more early Trained,
None in my time had equal Skill attained.
He whither The Cirecean Promontory, named from Circe that lived there, on the
Shore of Campania.
Circe's Rock his Oysters bore,
Or The Lucrine Lake. Between Bajae and Puteoli.
Lucrine Lake, or The Rutupian Shore. Rutupae or Rutupi, an Ancient Towns Name
on the Kentish Shore, supposed to be our Richborough. These were all Famous in
those times for Oysters.
the Rutupian Shore
Knew at first taste, nay at first sight could tell
A Crab or Lobster's Country by its Shell.
They rise, and straight all with respectful Awe,
At the word given, obsequiously withdraw,
Whom full of eager haste, surprise, and fear,
Our mighty Prince had summoned to appear;
As if some News he would of the Catti tell,
Or that the fierce Sicambrians did Rebel:
As if Expresses from all Parts had come
With fresh Alarms threatening the Fate of Rome.
What Folly this! but oh! that all the rest
Of his dire Reign had thus been spent in Jest!
And all that time such Trifles had employed
In which so many Nobles he destroyed!
He safe, they unrevenged, to the disgrace
Of the surviving, tame, Patrician Race!
But when he dreadful to the Rabble grew,
Him, who so many Lords had slain, they slew.
The End of the Fourth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE FOURTH SATYR.
IF Laws their course, etc. Ought to descend, etc. Crispinus had deflour'd a
Vestal Virgin, but by his Favor with Domitian, she escaped the Punishment due
to her Offense; which was to be buried alive by Numa's Law; as may be seen in
Livy, l. 1. and is more particularly described in Plutarch's Life of Numa.

Six thousand Pieces Six thousand of the Roman Sestertii, which makes six
Sestertia, according to our Account, 46 l. 17 s. 6 d.

Now even Apicius. A Man for Gluttony and Prodigality famous even to a Proverb,
who having spent most of his vast Estate upon his Gut, for fear of want
poisoned himself, Senec.

Nay in Apulia. Part of Italy, near the Adriatic Gulf, where Land it seems,
was very cheap, either for the barrenness and cragged height of the Mountains,
or for the unwholsomness of the Air, and the Wind Atabulus. Horac. Lib. 1. Sat.
5. Montes Apulia notos -- quos torret Atabulus and quos Nunquam erepsemus, etc.

His Luxurious Lord. The Emperor Domitian.

The Flavian Race decayed. Domitian was the last and worst of the Flavian
Family, which tho at first obscure, yet had produced great and good Men.
Reipublica nequaquam paenitenda, says Sueton. 9. For of this Family were
Vespasian and Titus.

A bald Nero. Domitian, who could not so much as bear with Patience the mention
of baldness* tho in Jest only, and objected to another, as Suetonius in his
Life tells us. And who, for his Cruelty, is here called a second Nero.

Our High Priest, The Emperor Domitian called so, either from his Instituting
the College of the Alban Priests, of whom he was as it were, Chief; or for
taking upon him the Office of Pontifex Maximus in the Condemnation of the
Vestal Virgin Cornetia; or, more generally, because often the Emperors assumed
both the Title and Office of High Priest.

Palphurius and Armillatus. Both Men of Consular Degree: Lawyers, and Spies,
and Informers, and so Favorites of Domitian.

What remains of Alba, etc. Alba longa built by Ascanius, about fifteen Miles
from Rome, was destroyed after by Tullus Hostilius, the Temples only excepted,
(Live. l. 1.) The Albans upon this their Misfortunes neglecting their Worship,
were by sundry Prodigies commanded to restore their Ancient Rites, the chief of
which was the keeping perpetually burning the Vestal Fire, which was brought
thither by Aenaeas and his Trojans as a fatal Pledge of the perpetuity of the
Roman Empire.

Tho an humbler way. There was a more stately Temple erected to Vesta at Rome
by Numa, than this of Alba, where the same Ceremonies were used.

The Fathers. The Senate always so called. Patres Conscripti.

The loud Liburnian. Some say that of the People of this Country, which is a
part of Illyricum, the Romans made their Cryers, because of their loud Voices.
Others take Liburnus for the proper Name of one Man -- Liburnus that the Senate
called.

Pegasus, Bailiff. A Citizen of Alba, a very Learned Lawyer, and Prefect or
Chief Magistrate of Rome. He calls him here Bailiff: As if Rome, by Domitian's
Cruelty, had so far lost its Liberty and Privileges, that it now was no better
than a Country Village, and fit to be Governed by no better than a Bailiff.

Old Crispus, (Vibius Crispus.) This was he that made the known Jest upon
Domitian's killing Flies. When one day Domitian being alone in his Closet, and
being asked whether there was any one left within with the Emperor, he answered
No, not so much as a Fly. The Names and Characters of most of these Senators
here mentioned may be found in Suetonius' Life of Domitian, and in Tacitus.

Of Giants Birth. Of an obscure and unknown Family.

The Part old Brutus played. It Is a known Story, how Brutus finding that his
own Brother and some of the most considerable Men of Rome had been put to Death
by Tarquinius Superbus, counterfeited himself a Madman or Fool, and so avoided
the Tyrant's Cruelty, till he had gained a fit time to destroy him, revenge his
Brother's and Countrymens Deaths, and free Rome.

When the King's Beard. In those Ancient and more simple times, when it was the
Custom never to shave their Beards: For 400 Years there was no such thing as a
Barber heard of in Rome.

Tho not of Noble Race, with equal Marks of Terror. For Domitian's Cruelty
reached even to the common People, and those of lower Birth, which (in the end
of this Satyr) the Poet tells us, caused his Destruction.

The vile Pathick. Nero, who wrote a Satyr upon Quintianus, whom he charges
with his own Prof^igate Lewdness, and Debauchery. Tacit. Annal. 15.

For Dacian Vultures. Cornelius Fuscus, a Noble Man of no manner of Experience,
or more knowledge in War Affairs than what he had studied in his own Country
Retirement, was yet by Domitian twice sent with an Army against the Dacians, in
the last of which his Army was defeated, and himself slain.

From Bridge or Gate. The common stands for Beggars.

The Proud Arviragus. One of the Ancient British Kings.

Mark the pointed Spears. He makes the Flatterer call the sharp Fins rising on
the Fishes back, Spears; and to signify and portend that Domitian shall stick
the like in some Foreign Enemy.

Some skilful quick Prometheus. Some skilful Potter. Alluding to the old Fable
of Prometheus, whose skill in this Art was such, that he made a Man of Clay.

Circe's Rock. The Cirecean Promontory, named from Circe that lived there, on
the Shore of Campania.

The Lucrine Lake. Between Bajae and Puteoli.

The Rutupian Shore. Rutupae or Rutupi, an Ancient Towns Name on the Kentish
Shore, supposed to be our Richborough. These were all Famous in those times for
Oysters.

THE FIFTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. W. BOWLS.
ARGUMENT OF THE Fifth Satyr.
The Poet disswades a Parasite from frequenting the Tables of Great Men, where
he is certain to be Treated with the highest Scorn and Contempt: And, at the
same time, Inveighs against the Luxury and Insolence of the Roman Nobility.

THE FIFTH SATYR.
IF hard'nd by Affronts, and still the same,
Lost to all Sense of Honor, and of Shame,
Thou yet can love to haunt the Great Man's Board,
And think no Supper good but with a Lord:
If yet thou can hold out, and suffer more,
Than lewd A Buffoon and Parasite of Augustus Caesar. The same perhaps with
that Sarmentus in Horace. Sat. 3. l. 1.
Sarmentus, or vile Galba bore,
Thy Solemn Oath ought to be set aside:
But sure the Belly's easily supplied.
Suppose, what frugal Nature would suffice,
Suppose that wanting, Hunger is not nice.
Is no Where common Beggars used to place themselves.
Bridge vacant, no convenient Seat,
Where thou may cringe, and gnaw thy broken Meat,
And with a Matt, and Crutch, and ty'd-up Leg,
More Honestly and Honorably Beg?
First, if he please to say, sit down, and smile,
Behold the full Reward of all thy to^!
All thy Old Services are largely paid,
And thou a Proud and Happy Man art made.
See! of thy boasted Friendship, see the Fruits!
And these too he upbraids, and these imputes.
If after two cold Months thy Lord think fit,
His poor neglected Client to admit,
And say, Sup with me, thou have thy desire,
Be thankful, Mortal, and no more require.
Thus Blessed, must It was the Custom in Rome for the Clients to attend their
Patrons, to salute them in the Morning. Virgil, Martial, etc.
Trebius to his Levees run,
When the Stars languish near the rising Sun;
Break off sweet slumbers, drowsy, and undrest,
To show his Zeal, and to prevent the rest;
Run to prevent the fawning humble Train,
While slow That Constellation otherwise called the Bear, which appearing
always above the Horizon, is said by the Poets never to descend into the Sea.
The meaning is, that Trebius was forced to run early in the Morning, by the
light of those Stars.
Boots drives his frozen Wain.
Perhaps the generous Entertainment may
For all the State, and dear Attendance pay.
For him is kept a Liquor more Divine,
You Spunges must be Drunk with Lees of Wine,
Drunk for your Patron's Pleasure, and his Jest;
Then raving like a A Priest of Cybele.
Corybas possessed,
Thou and the Freed-Men first begin to jarr;
From mutual Jeers the Prelude to the War,
Thou and thy Fellow Parisites engage,
And Battle with a Troop of Servants wage;
Then Glasses, and Saguntine Pitchers fly,
And broken Pates discolored Napkins dye.
While happy he, stretched on his Couch, supine
Looks on with scorn, and drinks old generous Wine, From Setia a Town of
Campania, renowned for the best Wines.

Pressed from the Grape, when Warlike Rome was free,
But kindly, never sends one Glass to thee.
Perhaps to morrow he may change his Wine,
And drink old sparkling Alban, or Setine,
Whose Title, and whose Age, with mould o're-grown,
The good old Cask for ever keeps unknown:
Such Thrasea and Helvidius his Sons-in-Law, Men of great Virtue, Constancy,
and Zeal for the Liberty of their Country; they were both oppressed by Nero,
Thrasea put to death, and Helvidius banished: Tacitus has related at large the
Charge and Accusation of Thrasea, with what bravery he received the Order by
which he was commanded to dye, and being allowed his choice, opened his Veins
with these words, Libemus Iovi Liberatori. Annal. Lib. 16. They are said here
to have solemnly observed the Birth-days of Brutus and Cassius, the Deliverers
of their Country; which may perhaps be true, tho it be not objected among many
things of this kind in Tacitus.
bold Helvidius drank, and Thrasca crowned
With Garlands, when the flowing Bowls went round
On Brutus Birthday: And to raise Delight,
To please at once the Taste, and charm the Sight,
He in bright Amber drinks, or brighter Gold,
And Cups with shining Berils set does hold.
Thou art not suffered or to Touch or Taste;
And if thou dare, a Guard on thee is placed
To watch the Gems. This may perhaps surprise,
But, Sir, you will pardon, they are Stones of Price.
For Virro does, as many do of late,
Gems from his Fingers to his Cups translate,
Which the bold An Allusion to that of Virgil describing Aeneas Stellatus,
iaspide fulva Ensis erat.
Youth, to Dido's Love preferred,
Wore on the Scabbard of his shining Sword.
Thou may at distance gaze, and sigh in vain,
A cracked black Pot's reserved for thee to drain.
If his Blood boil, and the adventitious Fire
Raised by high Meats, and higher Wines, require
To temper and allay the burning heat,
Waters are brought, which by Decoction get
New coolness, such plain Nature does not know,
Not Ice so cool, nor Hyperborean Snow.
Did I complain but now, and justly too,
That the same Wine is not allowed to you?
Another Water's reached you, when you call,
From Hands of Moorish Footmen, lean and tall;
The grim Attendance he assigns t'affright
Rather than wait; Rogues who would scare by night,
If met among the Tombs; the ghastly Slaves
Look as if newly started from their Graves.
Before himself the Flower of Asia stands,
To watch his Looks, and to receive Commands.
A The Romans mightily affected to be served by beautiful Boys, whom they
bought at vast rates. Martial, etc.
Boy of such a Price as had undone
Old Roman Kings, and drained the Treasure of a Crown.
If thou or any of thy Tribe want Wine,
Look back, and give thy Ganimedes the sign.
The lovely Boy, and bought at such a rate,
Is much too handsome, and too proud to wait
On the despised and poor: Will he descend
To give a Glass to a declining Friend?
No, his good Mien, his Youth, and blooming Face
Tempt him to think, that with a better grace
Himself might sit, and thou supply his place.
Behold there yet remains, which must be born,
Proud Servants more insufferable Scorn.
With what disdain another gave thee Bread!
The meanest Wretches are with better fed:
The impenetrable Crust thy Teeth defies;
And Petrified with Age securely lies:
Hard, moldy, black: If thou presume to invade,
With sacrilegious hands, thy Patron's Bread,
There stands a Servant ready to chastise
Your Insolence, and teach you to be Wise.
Will you, a bold Intruder, ever learn
To know your Basket, and your Bread discern?
It Is just, ye Gods! and what I well deserve,
Why did not I more honorably starve?
Did I for this abandon Wife and Bed?
For this, alas! by vain Ambition led,
Through cold One of the seven Hills on which Rome was built.
Esquiliae run so often, and bear
The Storms and Fury of the Vernal Air,
And then with Cloak wet through attend, and dropping hair?
See! by the tallest Servant born on high,
A Sturgeon fills the largest Dish and Eye! The Authors whom I have the
opportunity to consult, are not agreed what Fish is meant by Squilla; I have
translated it Sturgeon, I confess at random, but it may serve as well.

With how much Pomp he is placed upon the Board!
With what a Tail and Breast salutes his Lord!
With what Expense and Art, how richly dressed!
Garnished with 'Sparagus, himself a Feast!
Thou art to one small dismal Dish confined,
A Crab ill dressed, and of the vilest Kind.
He on his own Fish pours the noblest Oil,
The product of A Town in Campania, famous for the best Oil.
Venatrum's happy Soil.
That to your marcid dying Herbs assigned,
By the rank Smell and Taste betrays its Kind,
By Moors imported, and for Lamps alone designed.
Well rubbed with this when The Name of a King of Mauritania: But here must be
understood as the Name of any Noble Moor.
Boccar comes to Town,
He makes the Theaters and Baths his own,
All round from him, as from the infected run,
The poisonous stink even their own Serpents shun.
Behold a Muller even from Cor^u brought!
Or near the Rocks of A Town of Sicily.
Ta^rominium caught.
Since our own Seas no longer can supply,
Exhausted by our boundless Luxury:
The secret Deep can no Protection give,
No Tyrrhene Fish is suffered now to live
To his just growth. The Provinces from far
Furnish our Kitchins, and revenge our War.
Baits for the Rich, and Childless they supply;
Aurelia thence must sell, and One of those whom the Romans called
H^^redipetae; who courted and presented the Rich and Childless, in hope to
become their Heirs.
Len^s buy.
The largest Lamprey which their Seas afford
Is made a Sacrifice to Virro's Board.
When Auster to the Aeoli^n Caves retires
With dropping Wings, and murmuring there respires,
Rash daring Nets, in hope of such a Prize,
Charibdis, and the creacherous Deep despise.
An Eel for you remains, in The Fish of Tyber were for this Reason thought the
worst in Italy.
Tiber bred,
With foulest Mud, and the rank Ordure fed,
Discharged by Common-Shoars from all the Town;
No secret passage was to him unknown;
In every noisome Sink the Serpent slept,
And through dark Vaults often to Suburra crept.
One word to Virro now, if he can bear,
And it is a Truth which he is not used to hear;
No Man expects, (for who so much a Sot
Who has the times he lives in so forgot?)
What Seneca, what Piso used to send,
To raise, or to support a sinking Friend.
Those God-like Men, to wanting Virtue kind,
Bounty well-plac'd preferred, and well designed,
To all their Titles, all that height of Power,
Which turns the Brains of Fools, and Fools alone adore.
When your Poor Client is condemned to attend,
It Is all we ask, receive him like a Friend,
At least, let him be easy if you can,
Let him be Treated like a Freeborn Man.
Descend to this, and then we ask no more,
Rich to your self, to all beside be Poor.
Near him is placed, the Liver of a Goose,
That part alone which Luxury would choose,
A Boar entire, and worthy of the Sword
Of The Story of the Cale^onian Bo^r* slain by Meleager, is to be found,
Metamor. lib. 8.
Meleager, smoaks upon the board*
Next Mushroms, larger when the Clouds descend
In fruitful showers, and desired Rainy and thundering Springs produce abundance
of Mushroms, and were therefore desired. Pliny Lib. 19.
Thunders re^d
The vernal Air. No more Plow up the ground,
O Rome was supplied with great Quantities of Corn from Africa, and of Mushroms
too it seems.
Lybia, where such Mushroms can be ^ound,
Aledius The Name of a Glutton or Parasite.
cries, but furnish us with store
Of Mushroms, and import thy Corn no more*
Mean while thy indignation yet to raise,
The Carver dancing round each Dish surveys,
With flying Knife, and as his Art directs,
With proper gestures every Fowl dissects,
A thing of so great moment to their Taste*
That one false slip had surely marred the Feast.
If thou dare murmur, if thou dare complain
With Freedom, like a Roman Gentleman,
You Are seized immediately by his Commands,
And dragged, like The Name of a famous Thief, who stole the Oxen of Hercules,
and drew them into his Den backwards; but was slain by Hercules, and dragged out
by the Heels. Aeneid. 8.
Cacus, by Herculean Hands,
Out from his presence. When does Haughty he,
Descend to take a Glass once touched by thee?
That Wretch were lost, who should presume to think
He might be free, who durst say, come, Sir, drink,
Will any Freedom here from you be born,
Whose Clothes are threadbare* and whose Cloaks are torn?
Would any God or God-like Man below, The Census Equestris, about 3125 l.
English. Roscius Otho made a Law, that whereas before Roman Gentlemen and
Commons sat promiscuously in the Theaters, there should be Fourteen Seats or
Benches apart for those who were worth that Sum.

Four hundred thousand Sesterces bestow!
How mightily would Trebius be improved,
How much a Friend to Virre, how beloved?
Will Trebius Fat of this? What Sot attends
My Brother, who Carves to my best of Friends?
O Sesterces, this Honor's done to you!
You are his Friends, and you his Brethren too.
Would thou become his Patron and his Lord?
Would thou be in thy turn by him adored?
No young An allusion to that of Dido, Si quis mihi parvulus aula* ^^deret
Aen^as. The meaning is, thou must have no Child to de^eat hi^ hopes of becoming
thy Heir.
Aeneas in thy Hall must play,
Nor sweeter Daughter lead thy Heart astray.
O how a Barren Wife does recommend!
How dear, how pleasant is a Childless Friend?
But if thy Mycale, thy Teeming Wife
Pour out three Boys, the Comfort of thy Life;
He Ironically.
too will in the prattling Nest rejoice,
Farthings, and Nuts provide, and various Toys
For the young smiling Parasites, the wanton Boys.
He viler Friends with doubtful Mushroms treats,
Secure for you, himself Champignons eats;
Such Claudius loved, of the same sort and taste,
Till His Wife Agrippina gave him a poisoned one of which he died. See that
ingenious Satyr of Seneca, Cla^dij Apocolocyntosis.
Agrippina kindly gave the last.
To him are ordered, and those happy few
Whom Fate has raised above contempt and you,
Most fragrant Fruits, such in The Gardens of Alcinous, King of the Phaeacians,
are renowned in Homer and all Antiquity.
Phaeacian Gardens grew;
Where a perpetual Autumn ever smiled,
And Golden Apples loaded Branches filled.
By such swift Atalanta was Betrayed,
The vegetable Gold soon stopped the flying Maid^
To you such scab'd harsh Fruit is given, as raw
Young Soldiers at their Exercisings gnaw,
Who trembling learn to throw the Fatal Dart,
And under Rods of rough Cen^urions smart*
Thou take all this as done to save Expense,
No! it is on purpose done to give offense*
What Comedy, what Farce can more delight,
Than grinning Hunger, and ^he pleasing sight
Of your bilk'd Hopes? No! He Is, resolved t'extort
Tears from your Eyes: It Is barbarous jest and sport.
Thou think thy self Companion of the Great,
Art Free and Happy in thy own conceit.
He thinks you are tempted by the attractive smell
Of his warm Kitchen, and he judges well.
For In the following Lines there is in the Original Reference to the Custom of
Roman Children, wearing for distinction of their Quality, the Bulla aurea or
Corsacca. I have translated them according to the intent and sense of the Poet,
without allusion to those Customs; which being unknown to mere English Readers,
would have only made the Translation as obscure as the Original.
who so naked, in whose empty Veins
One single drop of Noble Blood remains;
What Freeborn Man, who, tho of Mungrel strain,
Would twice support the Scorn, and proud Disdain
With which those Idols you adore, the Great,
Their wretched Vassals and Dependants treat?
O Slaves most abject! you still gaping sit,
Devouring with your Eyes each pleasing Bit;
Now sure we Parasites at last shall share
That Boar, and now that Wild-Fowl, or that Hare:
Thus you expecting gaze, with your Teeth set;
With your Bread ready, and your Knives well wheat;
Demure and silent; but, alas! in vain;
He mocks your Hunger, and derides your Pain.
If you can bear all this, and think him kind,
You well deserve the Treatment which you find.
At last thou will beneath the Of so many Indignities.
Burden bow,
And, glad, receive the I know the Commentators give another sense of these
last Lines, but I take them to allude to the manner of the Manumission of
Slaves, which was done by giving them a touch or blow on the Head, by their
lord or the Praetor, with a Wand called Vindicta; and thus the meaning will be
that Trebius, weari'd at last, will be glad to be discharged from the Slavery
of attending, where he finds such usage.
Manumitting blow
On thy shaved slavish Head; mean while attend,
Worthy of such a Treat, and such a Friend.
The End of the Fifth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE FIFTH SATYR.
SArmentus. A Buffoon and Parasite of Augustus Caesar. The same perhaps with
that Sarmentus in Horace. Sat. 3. l. 1.

Where common Beggars used to place themselves.

It was the Custom in Rome for the Clients to attend their Patrons, to salute
them in the Morning. Virgil, Martial, etc.

That Constellation otherwise called the Bear, which appearing always above the
Horizon, is said by the Poets never to descend into the Sea. The meaning is,
that Trebius was forced to run early in the Morning, by the light of those
Stars.

A Priest of Cybele.

From Setia a Town of Campania, renowned for the best Wines.

Thrasea and Helvidius his Sons-in-Law, Men of great Virtue, Constancy, and
Zeal for the Liberty of their Country; they were both oppressed by Nero,
Thrasea put to death, and Helvidius banished: Tacitus has related at large the
Charge and Accusation of Thrasea, with what bravery he received the Order by
which he was commanded to dye, and being allowed his choice, opened his Veins
with these words, Libemus Iovi Liberatori. Annal. Lib. 16. They are said here
to have solemnly observed the Birth-days of Brutus and Cassius, the Deliverers
of their Country; which may perhaps be true, tho it be not objected among many
things of this kind in Tacitus.

An Allusion to that of Virgil describing Aeneas Stellatus, iaspide fulva Ensis
erat.

The Romans mightily affected to be served by beautiful Boys, whom they bought
at vast rates. Martial, etc.

One of the seven Hills on which Rome was built.

The Authors whom I have the opportunity to consult, are not agreed what Fish
is meant by Squilla; I have translated it Sturgeon, I confess at random, but it
may serve as well.

A Town in Campania, famous for the best Oil.

The Name of a King of Mauritania: But here must be understood as the Name of
any Noble Moor.

A Town of Sicily.

One of those whom the Romans called H^^redipetae; who courted and presented
the Rich and Childless, in hope to become their Heirs.

The Fish of Tyber were for this Reason thought the worst in Italy.

The Story of the Cale^onian Bo^r* slain by Meleager, is to be found, Metamor.
lib. 8.

Rainy and thundering Springs produce abundance of Mushroms, and were therefore
desired. Pliny Lib. 19.

Rome was supplied with great Quantities of Corn from Africa, and of Mushroms
too it seems.

The Name of a Glutton or Parasite.

The Name of a famous Thief, who stole the Oxen of Hercules, and drew them into
his Den backwards; but was slain by Hercules, and dragged out by the Heels.
Aeneid. 8.

The Census Equestris, about 3125 l. English. Roscius Otho made a Law, that
whereas before Roman Gentlemen and Commons sat promiscuously in the Theaters,
there should be Fourteen Seats or Benches apart for those who were worth that
Sum.

An allusion to that of Dido, Si quis mihi parvulus aula* ^^deret Aen^as. The
meaning is, thou must have no Child to de^eat hi^ hopes of becoming thy Heir.

Ironically.

His Wife Agrippina gave him a poisoned one of which he died. See that
ingenious Satyr of Seneca, Cla^dij Apocolocyntosis.

The Gardens of Alcinous, King of the Phaeacians, are renowned in Homer and all
Antiquity.

In the following Lines there is in the Original Reference to the Custom of
Roman Children, wearing for distinction of their Quality, the Bulla aurea or
Corsacca. I have translated them according to the intent and sense of the Poet,
without allusion to those Customs; which being unknown to mere English Readers,
would have only made the Translation as obscure as the Original.

Of so many Indignities.

I know the Commentators give another sense of these last Lines, but I take
them to allude to the manner of the Manumission of Slaves, which was done by
giving them a touch or blow on the Head, by their lord or the Praetor, with a
Wand called Vindicta; and thus the meaning will be that Trebius, weari'd at
last, will be glad to be discharged from the Slavery of attending, where he
finds such usage.

THE SIXTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE Sixth Satyr.
This Satyr, of almost double length to any of the rest, is a bitter invective
against the fair Sex. It Is, indeed, a Commonplace, from whence all the Moderns
have notoriously stolen their sharpest Raileries. In his other Satyrs the Poet
has only glanced on some particular Women, and generally scourged the Men. But
this he reserved wholly for the Ladies. How they had offended him I know not:
But upon the whole matter he is not to be excused for imputing to all, the
Vices of some few amongst them. Neither was it generously done of him, to
attack the weakest as well as the fairest part of the Creation: Neither do I
know what Moral he could reasonably draw from it. It could not be to avoid the
whole Sex, if all had been true which he alleges against them: for that had
been to put an end to Humane Kind. And to bid us beware of their Artifices, is
a kind of silent acknowledgment, that they have more wit than Men: which turns
the Satyr upon us, and particularly upon the Poet; who thereby makes a
Complement, where he meant a Libel. If he intended only to exercise his Wit, he
has forfeited his Judgment, by making the one half of his Readers his mortal
Enemies: And amongst the Men, all the happy Lovers, by their own Experience,
will disprove his Accusations. The whole World must allow this to be the
wi^tiest of his Satyrs; and truly he had need of all his parts, to maintain
with so much violence, so unjust a Charge. I am satisfied he will bring but few
over to his Opinion: And on that Consideration chiefly I ventured to translate
him. Though there wanted not another Reason, which was, that no one else would
undertake it: At least, Sir, C. S. who could have done more right to the
Author, after a long delay, at length absolutely refused so ungrateful an
employment: And every one will grant, that the Work must have been imperfect
and lame, if it had appeared without one of the Principal Members belonging to
it. Let the Poet therefore bear the blame of his own Invention; and let me
satisfy the World, that I am not of his Opinion. Whatever his Roman Ladies
were, the English are free from all his Imputations. They will read with Wonder
and Abhorrence, the Vices of an Age, which was the most Infamous of any on
Record. They will bless themselves when they behold those Examples related of
Domitian's time: They will give back to Antiquity those Monsters it produced:
And believe with reason, that the Species of those Women is extinguished; or at
least, that they were never ^ere propagated. I may safely therefore proceed to
the Argument of a Satyr, which is no way relating to them: And first observe,
that my Author makes their Lust the most Heroic of their Vices: The rest are
in a manner but digression. He skims them over; but he dwells on this; when he
seems to have taken his last leave of it, on the sudden he returns to it: It Is
one Branch of it in Hippia, another in Messalina, but Lust is the main Body of
the Tree. He begins with this Text in the first line, and takes it up with
Intermissions to the end of the Chapter. Every Vice is a Loader; but that^s a
Ten. The Fillers, or intermediate Parts, are their Revenge; their Contriva^ces
of secret Crimes; their Arts to hide them; their Wit to excuse them; and their
Impudence to own them, when they can no longer be kept secret. Then the Persons
to whom they are most addicted; and on whom they commonly bestow the last
Favors. As Stage Players, Fiddlers, Singing-Boys, and Fencers. Those who pass
for Chaste amongst them, are not really so; but only for their vast Dowries, are
rather suffered, than loved by their own Husbands. That they are Imperious,
Domineering, Scolding Wives: Set up for Learning and Criticism in Poetry; but
are false Judges. Love to speak Greek (which was then the Fashionable Tongue,
as French is now with us.) That they plead Causes at the Bar, and play Prizes
at the Bear-Garden. That they are Gossips and News-Mongers: Wrangle with their
Neighbors abroad, and beat their Servants at home. That they lie in for new
Faces once a Month: are slattish with their Husbands in private; and Paint and
Dress in Public for their Lovers. That they deal with Jews, Diviners, and
Fortune Tellers: Learn the Arts of Miscarrying, and Barrenness. Buy Children,
and produce them for their own. Murder their Husbands Sons, if they stand in
their way to his Estate: and make their Adulterers his Heirs. From hence the
Poet proceeds to show the Occasions of all these Vices; their Original, and how
they were introduced in Rome, by Peace, Wealth, and Luxury. In conclusion, if
we will take the word of our malicious Author; Bad Women are the general
standing Rule; and the Good, but some few Exceptions to it.

THE SIXTH SATYR.
IN IN the Golden Age: when Saturn Reigned.
Saturn's Reign, at Nature's Early Birth,
There was that Thing called Chastity on Earth;
When in a narrow Cave, their common shade,
The Sheep the Shepherds and their Gods were laid:
When Reeds and Leaves, and Hides of Beasts were spread
By Mountain Huswifes for their homely Bed,
And Mossy Pillows raised, for the rude Husband's head.
Unlike the Niceness of our Modern Dames
(Affected Nymphs with new Affected Names:)
The Cynthia's and the Lesbia's of our Years,
Who for a Sparrow's Death dissolve in Tears.
Those first unpolisht Matrons, Big and Bold,
Gave Suck to Infants of Gygantick Mold;
Rough as their Savage Lords who Ranged the Wood,
And Acorns were the Bread of Mankind, before Corn was found.
Fat with Akorns Belcht their windy Food.
For when the World was Bucksom, fresh, and young*
Her Sons were undebauch'd, and therefore strong;
And whether Born in kindly Beds of Earth,
Or struggling from the Teeming Oaks to Birth,
Or from what other Atoms they begun,
No Sires they had, or if a Sire the Sun.
Some thin Remains of Chastity appeared
Even When Jove had driven his Father into Banishment, the Silver Age began,
according to the Poets.
under Jove, but Jove without a Beard:
Before the servile Greeks had learnt to Swear
By Heads of Kings; while yet the Bounteous Year
Her common Fruits in open Plains exposed,
E're Thieves were feared, or Gardens were enclosed:
At length Uneasy Justice, etc. The Poet makes Justice and Chastity Sisters;
and says that they ^^ed to Heaven together; and left Earth for ever.
uneasy Justice upwards flew,
And both the Sisters to the Stars withdrew;
From that Old Era Whoring did begin,
So Ven'rably Ancient is the Sin.
Adult'rers next invade the Nuptial State,
And Marriage-Beds creak'd with a Foreign Weight;
All other Ills did Iron times adorn;
But Whores and Silver in one Age were Born*
Yet thou, they say, for Marriage do provide:
Is this an Age to Buckle with a Bride?
They say thy Hair the Curling Art is taught,
The Wedding-Ring perhaps already bought:
A Sober Man like thee to change his Life!
What Fury would possess thee with a Wife?
Art thou of every other Death bereft,
No Knife, no Ratsbane, no kind Halter left?
(For every Noose compared to Hers is cheap)
Is there no City Bridge from whence to leap?
Would thou become her Drudge who do enjoy,
A better sort of Bedfellow, thy Boy?
He keeps thee not awake with nightly Brawls,
Nor with a begged Reward, thy Pleasure palls:
Nor with insatiate heavings calls for more,
When all thy Spirits were drained out before.
But still Vrsidius Courts the Marriage-Bait,
Longs for a Son, to settle his Estate,
And takes no Gifts, tho every gapeing Heir
Would gladly Grease the Rich Old Batchelour.
What Revolution can appear so strange,
As such a Leacher, such a Life to change?
A rank, notorious Whoremaster, to choose
To thrust his Neck into the Marriage Noose!
He who so often in a dreadful fright
Had in a Coffer escaped the jealous Cuckold's sight,
That he to Wedlock, dotingly betrayed,
Should hope, in this lewd Town, to find a Maid!
The Man's grown Mad: To ease his Frantic Pain,
Run for the Surgeon; breathe the middle Vein:
But let a Heyfer with Gilt Horns be led
To Juno, Regent of the Marriage Bed,
And let him every Deity adore,
If his new Bride prove not an arrant Whore*
In Head and Tail, and every other Pore.
On When the Roman Women were forbidden to bed with their Husbands.
Ceres feast, restrained from their delight,
Few Matrons, there, but Curse the tedious Night:
Few whom their Fathers dare Salute, such Lust
Their Kisses have, and come with such a Gust.
With Ivy now Adorn thy Doors, and Wed;
Such is thy Bride, and such thy Genial Bed.
Think thou one Man, is for one Woman meant?
She, sooner, with one ^ye would be content.
And yet, it is noised, a Maid did once appear
In some small Village, tho Fame says not where;
It Is possible; but sure no Man she found;
'Twas desert, all, about her Father's Ground:
And yet some Lustful God might there make bold:
Are Of whom more Fornicating Stories are told, than any of the other Gods.
Jove and Mars grown impotent and old?
Many a fair Nymph has in a Cave been spread,
And much good Love, without a Feather-Bed.
Whither would thou to choose a Wi^e resort,
The Park, the Mall, the Playhouse, or the Court?
Which way soever thy Adventures fall
Secure alike of Chastity in all.
One sees a Dancing Master Capring high,
And Raves, and Pisses, with pure Ecstasy:
Another does, with all his Motions, move,
And Gapes, and Grins, as in the feat of Love:
A third is Charmed with the new Opera Notes,
Admires the Song, but on the Singer Doats:
The Country Lady, in the Box appears,
Softly She Warbles over, all she hears;
And sucks in Passion, both at Eyes, and Ears.
The rest, (when now the long Vacation's come,
The noisie Hall and Theaters grown dumb)
Their Memories to refresh, and cheer their hearts*
In borrowed Breaches act the Players parts.
The Poor, that scarce have wherewithal to eat,
Will pinch, to make the Singing-Boy a Treat.
The Rich, to buy him, will refuse no price:
And stretch his Quail-pipe till they crack his Voice.
Tragedians, acting Love, for Lust are sought:
(Tho but the Parrots of a Poet's Thought.)
The Pleading Lawyer, tho for Counsel used,
In Chamber-practice often is refused.
Still thou will have a Wife, and father Heirs;
(The product of concurring Theaters.)
Perhaps a Fencer did thy Brows adorn,
And a young Sword-man to thy Lands is born.
Thus Hippia loathed her old Patrician Lord,
And left him for a Brother of the Sword:
To wondering She fled to Egypt; which wondered at the Enormity of her Crime.
Pharos with her Love she fled,
To show one Monster more than Africa bred:
Forgetting House and Husband, left behind,
Even Children too; she sails before the wind;
False to 'em all, but constant to her Kind.
But, stranger yet, and harder to conceive,
She could the Playhouse, and the Players leave.
Born of rich Parentage, and nicely bred,
She lodged on Down, and in a Damask Bed;
Yet, daring now the Dangers of the Deep,
On a hard Mattress is content to sleep.
E're this, it is true, she did her Fame expose:
But that, great Ladies with great Ease can lose.
The tender Nymph could the rude Ocean bear:
So much her Lust was stronger than her Fear.
But, had some honest Cause her Passage pressed,
The smallest hardship had disturbed her breast:
Each Inconvenience makes their Virtue cold:
But Womankind, in Ills, is ever bold.
Were she to follow her own Lord to Sea,
What doubts and scruples would she raise to stay?
Her Stomach sick, and her head giddy grows;
The Tar and Pitch are naus^ous to her Nose.
But in Love's Voyage nothing can offend;
Women are never Sea-sick with a Friend.
Amidst the Crew, she walks upon the board;
She eats, she drinks, she handles every Cord:
And, if she spews, it is thinking of her Lord.
Now ask, for whom her Friends and Fame she lost?
What Youth, what Beauty, could the Adult'rer boast?
What was the Face, for which she could sustain
To be called Mistress to so base a Man?
The Gallant, of his days had known the best:
Deep Scars were seen indented on his breast;
And all his battered Limbs required their needful rest.
A Promontory Wen, with griesly grace,
Stood high, upon the Handle of his Face:
His blear Eyes ran in gutters to his Chin;
His Beard was Stubble, and his Cheeks were thin.
But 'twas his Fencing did her Fancy move;
It Is Arms and Blood and Cruelty they love.
But should he quit his Trade, and sheath his Sword,
Her Lover would begin to be her Lord.
This was a private Crime; but you shall hear
What Fruits the Sacred Brows of Monarchs bear:
The He tells the Famous Story of Messalina, Wife to the Emperor Claudius.
good old Sluggard but began to snore,
When from his side up rose the Imperial Whore:
She who preferred the Pleasures of the Night
To Pomps, that are but impotent delight,
Strode from the Palace, with an eager pace,
To cope with a more Masculine Embrace:
Muffl'd she marched, like Juno in a ^lowd,
Of all her Train but one poor Weneh allowed,
One whom in Secret Service she could trust;
The Rival and Companion of her Lust.
To the known Brothel-house she takes her way;
And for a nasty Room gives double pay;
That Room in which the rankest Harlot lay:
Prepared for fight, expectingly she lies,
With heaving Breasts, and with desiring Eyes:
Still as one drops, another takes his place,
And baffled still succeeds to like disgrace.
At length, when friendly darkness is expired,
And every Strumpet from her Cell retired,
She lags behind, and lingering at the Gate,
With a repining Sigh, submits to Fate:
All Filth without and all a Fire within,
Tired with the Toil, unsated with the Sin.
Old Caesar's Bed the modest Matron seeks;
The steam of Lamps still hanging on her Cheeks
In Ropy Smut; thus foul, and thus bedight,
She brings him back the Product of the Night.
Now should I sing what Poisons they provide;
With all their Trumpery of Charms beside:
And all their Arts of Death, it would be known
Lust is the smallest Sin the Sex can own.
Caesinia, still, they say, is guiltless found
Of every Vice, by her own Lord Renowned:
And well she may, she brought ten thousand Pound,
She brought him wherewithal to be called chaste;
His Tongue is tied in Golden Fetters fast*
He Sighs, Adores, and Courts her every Hour;
Who would not do as much for such a Dower?
She writes Love Letters to the Youth in Grace;
Nay tip^ the wink before the Cuckold's Face;
And might do more: Her Portion makes it good:
Wealth Wealth has the Privilege, etc. His meaning is, that a Wife who brings
a large Dowry may do what she pleases, and has all the Privileges of a Widow.
has the Privilege of Widow-hood.
These Truths with his Example you disprove,
Who with his Wife is monstrously in Love:
But know him better; for I heard him Swear
It Is not that She Is his Wife, but that She Is Fair.
Let her but have three Wrinkles in her Face,
Let her Eyes Lessen, and her Skin unbrace,
Soon you will hear the Saucy Steward say,
Pack up with all your Trinkets, and away:
You grow Offensive both at Bed and Board,
Your Betters must be had to please my Lord.
Mean time She Is absolute upon the Throne;
And knowing time is Precious, loses none:
She must have Flocks of Sheep, with Wool more Fine
Than Silk, and Vinyards of the Noblest Wine:
Whole Droves of Pages for her Train she Craves;
And sweeps the Prisons for attending Slaves.
In short, whatever in her Eyes can come,
Or others have abroad, she wants at home.
When Winter shuts the Seas, and fleecy Snows
Make Houses white, she to the Merchant goes:
Rich Crystals of the Rock She takes up there,
Huge Agat Vases, and old China Ware:
Then A Ring of great Price, which Herod Agrippa gave to his Sister Berenice.
He was King of the Jews, but Tributary to the Romans.
Be^enice's Ring her Finger proves,
More Precious made by her incestuous Loves*
And infamously Dear: A Brother's Bribe,,
Even Gods Anointed, and of Judah's Tribe:
Where barefoot they approach the Sacred Shrine,
And think it only Sin, to Feed on Swine.
But is none worthy to be made a Wife
In all this Town? Suppose her free from strife,
Rich, Fair, and Fruitful: of Unblemished Life:
Chaste as the Sabines, whose prevailing Charms
Dismissed their Husbands, and their Brothers Arms.
Grant her, besides, of Noble Blood, that ran
In Ancient Veins, e're Heraldry began:
Suppose all these, and take a Poet's word,
A Black Swan is not half so Rare a Bird.
A Wife, so hung with Virtues, such a freight;
What Mortal Shoulders could support the weight!
Some Country Girl, scarce to a Curtsey bred,
Would I much rather than Mother to the Gracchi, of the Family of the Cornelit;
from whence Scipio the Affrican was descended, who Triumphed over Hannibal.
Cornelia Wed:
If Supercilious, Haughty, Proud, and Vain,
She brought her Father's Triumphs, in her Train.
Away with all your Carthaginian State,
Let vanquished Hannibal without Doors wait,
Too burly and too big, to pass my narrow Gate.
Oh O Paean, etc. He alludes to the known Fable of Ni^be in Ovid. Amphion was
her Husband: Paean is Apollo, who with his Arrows killed her Children, because
she boasted that she was more fruitful than Latona, Apollo's Mother.
Paean, cries Amphion, bend thy Bow
Against my Wife, and let my Children go:
But sullen Paean shoots, at Sons and Mothers too.
His Niobe and all his Boys he lost;
Even her, who did her numerous Offspring boast,
As Fair and Fruitful as the Sow that carried
The The thirty Pigs, etc. He alludes to the white Sow in Virgil, who farrow'd
thirty Pigs.
Thirty Pigs at one large Litter Farrow'd.
What Beauty or what Chastisty can bear
So great a Price, if stately and severe
She still insults, and you must still adore;
Grant that the Hony's much, the ^all is more,
Upbraided with the Virtues she displays,
Sev'n Hours in Twelve, you loath the Wife you Praise.
Some Faults, tho small, intolerable grow:
For what so Nau^eous and Affected too,
As those that think they due Perfection want,
Who have not learnt to Lisp the Women then learnt Greek, as ours speak French.
Greci^n Cant?
In Greece, their whole Accomplishments they seek:
Their Fashion, Breeding, Language, must be Greek.
But Raw, in all that does to Rome belong,
They scorn to cultivate their Mother Tongue.
In Greek they flatter, all their Fears they speak,
Tell all their Secrets, nay, they Scold in Greek:
Even in the Feat of Love, they use that Tongue*
Such Affectations may become the Young:
But thou, Old Hag of Threescore Years and Three,
Is showing of thy Parts in Greek, for thee?
(...)! All those tender words
The Momentary trembling Bliss affords,
The kind soft Murmurs of the private Sheets,
Are Bawdy, while thou speak in public Streets.
Those words have Fingers; and their force is such.
They raise the Dead, and mount him with a touch.
But all Provocatives from thee are vain;
No blandishment the slackened Nerve can strain.
If then thy Lawful Spouse thou can not love,
What reason should thy Mind to Marriage move?
Why all the Charges of the Nuptial Feast,
Wine and Deserts, and Sweetmeats to digest;
The indoweing Gold that buys the dear Delight;
Given for thy first and only happy Night?
If thou art thus Uxoriously inclined,
To bear thy Bondage with a willing mind,
Prepare thy Neck, and put it in the Yoke:
But for no mercy from thy Woman look.
For tho, perhaps, she loves with equal Fires,
To Absolute Dominion she aspires;
Joys in the Spoils, and Triumphs over thy Purse;
The better Husband makes the Wife the worse.
Nothing is thine to give, or fell, or buy,
All Offices of Ancient Friendship dye;
Nor have thou leave to make a Legacy.
By All the Romans, even the most Inferior, and most Infamous sort of them,
had the Power of making Wills.
thy Imperious Wife thou art bere^t
A Privilege, to Pimps and Panders left;
Thy Testament's her Will: Where she prefers
Her Ruffians, Drudges and Adultere's,
Adopting all thy Rivals for thy Heirs*
Go Go drag that Slave, etc. These are the words of the Wife.
drag that Slave to Death; Your Reason why, etc. The Answer of the Husband.
your Reason, why
Should the poor Innocent be doomed to Dye?
What proofs? for, when Man's Life is in debate*
The Judge can never too long deliberate.
Call'st Call'st thou that Slave a Man? The Wife again.
thou that Slave a Man? the Wife replies:
Proved, or unprov'd, the Crime, the Villian Dies.
I have the Sovereign Power to save or kill;
And give no other Reason but my Will.
Thus the She-Tyrant Reigns, till pleased with change*
Her wild Affections to New Empires Range:
Another Subject-Husband she desires;
Divorced from him, she to the first retires,
While the last Wedding-Feast is scarcely over;
And Garlands hang yet green upon the Door.
So still the Reckoning rises; and appears
In total Sum, Eight Husbands in Five Years.
The Title for a Tombstone might be fit;
But that it would too commonly be writ*
Her Mother Living, hope no quiet Day;
She sharpens her, instructs her how to Flea
Her Husband bare, and then divides the Prey.
She takes Love Letters, with a Crafty smile,
And, in her Daughter's Answer, mends the style.
In vain the Husband sets his watchful Spies;
She Cheats their cunning, or she bribes their Eyes.
The Doctor's called; the Daughter, taught the Trick,
Pretends to Faint; and in full Health is Sick.
The Panting Stallion at the Closet-Door
Hears the Consult, and wishes it were over,
Can thou, in Reason, hope, a Bawd so known
Should teach her other Manners than her own?
Her Interest is in all the Advice she gives:
It Is on the Daughter's Rents the Mother lives.
No Cause is tried at the Litigious B^^*
But Women Plaintiffs or Defendants are*
They form the Process, all the Briefs they write*
The Topics furnish, and the Pleas indite:
And teach the Toothless Lawyer how to Bite*
They turn Virago's too; the Wrastler's toyl^
They try, and Smear their Naked Limbs with Oil:
Against the Post, their wicker Shields they crush,
Flourish the Sword, and at the Pl^stron push.
Of every Exercise the Mannish Crew
Fulfils the Parts, and often Excels us, too*
Prepared not only in feigned Fights* to engage,
But rout the Gladiators on the Stage*
What sense of shame in such a Breast can lie,
Inured to Arms, and her own Sex to fly?
Yet to be wholly Man she would disclaim;
To quit her tenfold Pleasure at the Game,
For frothy Praises, and an Empty Name.
Oh what a decent Sight, it is to behold,
All thy Wife's Magazine by Auction sold!
The Belt, the crested Plume, the several Suits
Of Armor, and the Spanish Leather Boots!
Yet these are they, that cannot bear the heat
Of figured Silks, and under Sarcenet sweat.
Behold the Strutting Amazonian Whore,
She stands in Guard with her right Foot before:
Her Coats Tucked up; and all her Motions just,
She stamps, and then Cries hah at every thrust:
But laugh to see her tired with many a bout,
Call for the Pot, and like a Man Piss out.
The Ghosts of Ancient Romans, should they rise,
Would grin to see their Daughters play a Prize.
Besides, what endless Brawls by Wifes are bred:
The Cur^ain-Lecture makes a Mournful Bed.
Then, when she has thee sure within the Sheets,
Her Cry begins, and the whole Day repeats.
Conscious of Crimes her self, she teyzes first;
Thy Servants are accused; thy Whore is cursed;
She Acts the jealous, and at Will she cries:
For Women's Tears are but the sweat of Eyes.
Poor Cuckold-Fool, thou think that Love sincere,
And suck'st between her Lips, the falling Tear:
But search her Cabinet and thou shall find
Each Tiller there, with Love Epistles lined.
Suppose her taken in a close embrace,
This you would think so manifest a Case,
No Rhetoric could defend, no Impudence outface:
And yet even then she Cries the Marriage Vow,
A mental Reservation must allow;
And there is a silent bargain still implied,
The Parties should be pleased on either side:
And both may for their private needs provide.
Tho Men your selves, and Women us you call,
Yet Homo is a Common Name for all.
There Is nothing bolder than a Woman Caught;
Guilt gives 'em Courage to maintain their Fault.
You ask from whence proceed these monstrous Crimes;
Once Poor, and therefore Chaste in former times,
Our Matrons were: No Luxury found room
In low-rooft Houses, and bare Walls of Lome;
Their Hands with Labor hardened while 'twas Light,
And Frugal sleep supplied the quiet Night.
While pinch't with want, their Hunger held 'em straight:
When A Famous Carthaginian Captain; who was upon the point of Conquering the
Romans.
Hannibal was Hovering at the Gate:
But wanton now, and lolling at our Fase,
We suffer all the invet'rate ills of Peace;
And wastful Riot, whose Destructive Charms
Revenge the vanquished World, of our Victorious Arms.
No Crime, no Lustful Postures are unknown;
Since Poverty, our Guardian-God, is gone:
Pride, Laziness, and all Luxurious Arts,
Pour like a Deluge in, from Foreign Parts:
Since Gold Obscene, and Silver found the way,
Strange Fashions with strange Bullion to convey,
And our plain simple Manners to betray.
What care our Drunken Dames to whom they spread?
Wine, no distinction makes of Tail or Head.
Who lewdly Dancing at a Midnight-Ball,
For hot Eringoes, and Fat Oysters call:
Full Brimmers to their Fuddled Noses thrust;
Brimmers the last Provocatives of Lust.
When Vapors to their swimming Brains advance,
And double Tapers on the Tables Dance.
Now think what Bawdy Dialogues they have,
What Tullia talks to her confiding Slave;
At Modesty's old Statue: when by Night,
They make a stand, and from their Litters light;
The Good Man early to the Levee goes,
And treads the Nasty Paddle of his Spouse.
The Secrets of the The good Goddess. At whose Feasts no Men were to be present.
Goddess named the Good,
Are even by Boys and Barbers understood:
Where the Rank Matrons, Dancing to the Pipe,
Gig with their Bums, and are for Action ripe;
With Music raised, they spread abroad their Hair;
And toss their Heads like an enamored Mare:
Laufella lays her Garland by, and proves
The mimick Leachery of Manly Loves.
Ranked with the Lady, the cheap Sinner lies;
For here not Blood, but Virtue gives the prize.
Nothing is feigned, in this Venereal Strife;
It Is downright Lust, and Acted to the Life.
So full, so fierce, so vigorous, and so strong;
That, looking on, would make old Who lived three hundred Years.
Nestor Young.
Impatient of delay, a general sound,
An universal Groan of Lust goes round;
For then, and only then, the Sex sincere is found.
Now is the time of Action; now begin,
They cry, and let the lusty Lovers in.
The Whoresons are asleep; Then bring the Slaves
And Watermen, a Race of strong-back'd Knaves.
I wish, at least, our Sacred Rights were free
From those Pollutions of Obscenity:
But it is well known What Singer, etc. He alludes to the Story of P. Clodius,
who, disguised in the Habit of a Singing Woman, went into the House of Caesar,
where the Feast of the Good Goddess was Celebrated; to find an opportunity with
Caesar's Wife Pompeia.
what Singer, how disguised
A lewd audacious Action enterpriz'd;
Into the Fair with Women mixed, he went,
Armed with a huge two-handed Instrument;
A grateful Present to those holy Quires,
Where the Mouse guilty of his Sex retires;
And even Male-Pictures modestly are vaild;
Yet no Profaneness on that Age prevailed.
No Scoffers at Religious Rites were ^ound;
Tho now, at every Altar they abound.
I hear your cautious Counsel, you would say*
Keep close your Women, under Lock and Key:
But, who shall keep those Keepers* Women, nursed
In Craft, begin with those, and Bribe 'em first.
The Sex is turned all Whore; they Love the Game*
And Mistresses, and Maids, are both the same.
The poor Og^lnia* on the Poet's day,
Will borrow Clothes, and Chair, to see the Play:
She, who before, had Mortgaged her Estate;
And Pawned the last remaining piece of Plate.
Some, are reduced their utmost Shifts to try:
But Women have no shame of Poverty.
They live beyond their stint; as if their store
The more exhausted, would increase the more:
Some Men, instructed by the Laboring Ant,
Provide against the Extremities of want;
But Womankind, that never knows a mean,
Down to the Dregs their sinking Fortune drain:
Hourly they give, and spend, and wast, and wear;
And think no Pleasure can be bought too dear.
There are, who in soft Eunuchs, place their Bliss;
To shun the scrubbing ^f a Bearded Kiss:
And escape Abortion; but their solid joy
Is He taxes Women with their loving Eunuchs, who can get no Children; but adds
that they only love such Eunuchs, as are g^elded when they are already at the
Age of Manhood.
when the Page, already past a Boy,
Is Capon'd late; and to the G^elder shown,
With his two Pounders, to Perfection grown.
When all the Navel-string could give, appears;
All but the Beard; and that is the Barber's loss not theirs.
Seen from afar, and famous for his ware,
He strut, into the Bath, among the Fair:
The admiring Crew to their Devotions fall;
And, kneeling, on their The God of Lust.
new Priapus call.
Kerv'd for his Lady's use, with her he lies;
And let him drudge for her, if thou art wise;
Rather than trust him with thy Favorite Boy;
He proffers Death in proffering to enjoy.
If Songs they love, the Singer's Voice they force
Beyond his Compass, till his Quail-Pipe's hoarse:
His Lute and Lyre, with their embrace is worn;
With Knots they trim it, and with Gems adorn:
Run over all the Strings, and Kiss the Case;
And make Love to it, in the Master's place.
A certain Lady once, of high Degree,
To Ianus Vowed, and Vesta's Deity,
That A Famous Singing Boy.
Pollio might, in Singing, win the Prize;
Pollio the Dear; the Darling of her, Eyes:
She Prayed, and Bribed; what could she more have done
For a Sick Husband, or an only Son?
With her Face veiled, and heaving up her hands,
The shameless Suppliant at the Alta^ stands:
The Forms of Prayer she solemnly pursues;
And, pale with Fear, the offered Entrails views.
Answer, ye Powers: For, if you heard her Vow,
Your Godships, sure, had little else to do.
This is not all; for That such an Actor whom they love might obtain the Prize.
Actors, they implore:
An Impudence unknown to Heaven before.
The He who inspects the Entrails of the Sacrifice, and from thence, foretells
the Successor.
Aruspex, tired with this Religious Rout,
Is forced to stand so long, he gets the Gout.
But suffer not thy Wife abroad to roam:
If she love Singing, let her Sing at home;
Not strut in Streets, with Amazonian* ^ace;
For that is to Cuckold thee, before thy Face.
Their endless Itch of News, comes next in play;
They vent their own; and hear what others say.
Know what in Thrace, or what in France is done;
The Intrigues betwixt the Stepdam, and the Son.
Tell who Loves who, what Favors some partake;
And who is Jilted for another's sake.
What pregnant Widow, in what Month was made;
How often she did, and doing, what she said.
She first, beholds the raging Comet rise:
Knows whom it threatens, and what Lands destroys.
Still, for the newest News, she lies in wait;
And takes Reports, just entering at the Gate.
Wrecks, Floods, and Fires; whatever she can meet,
She spreads; and is the Fame of every Street.
This is a Grievance; but the next is worse;
A very Judgment, and her Neighbors Curse.
For, if their barking-Dog, disturb her ease,
No Prayer can bend her, no Excuse appease.
The unmanner'd Malefactor, is Arraigned;
But first the Master, who the Curr Maintained,
Must feel the scourge: By Night she leaves her Bed;
By Night her Bathing Equipage is led.
That Marching Armies a less noise create;
She moves in Tumult, and she Swea's in State.
Mean while, her Guests their Appetites must keep;
Some gape for Hunger, and some gasp for Sleep.
At length she comes, all flushed, but e're she sup,
Swallows a swinging Preparation-Cup;
And then, to clear her Stomach, spews it up.
The Deluge-Vomit, all the Floor o'reflows;
And the sour savor nauseates every Nose.
She Drinks again; again she spews a Lake;
Her wretched Husband sees, and dares not speak:
But mutters many a Curse, against his Wife;
And Damns himself, for choosing such a Life.
But of all Plagues, the greatest is untold;
The Book-Learn'd Wife, in Greek and Latin bold.
The Critick-Dame, who at her Table sits;
Homer and Virgil quotes, and weighs them Wits;
And pities Didoes Agonizing Fits.
She has so far the ascendant of the Board;
The Prating Pedant puts not in one Word:
The Man of Law is Non-plust, in his Surte;
Nay every other Female Tongue is mute.
Hammers, and beating Anvils, you would Swear;
And The God of Smiths.
Vulcan with his whole Militia there.
Tabours The Ancients thought that with such sounds, they could bring the Moon
out of her Eclipse.
and Trumpets cease; for she alone
Is able to Redeem the laboring Moon.
Even Wit's a burden, when it talks too long:
But she, who has no Continence of Tongue,
Should walk in Breeches, and should wear a Beard;
And mix among the Philosophic Herd.
O what a midnight Curse has he, whose side
Is pestered with a A Woman who has learned Logic.
Mood and Figure Bride!
Let mine, ye Gods, (if such must be my Fate)
No Logic Learn, nor History Translate:
But rather be a quiet, humble Fool:
I hate a Wife, to whom I go to School.
Who climbs the Grammar-Tree; distinctly knows
Where Noun, and Verb, and Participle grows;
Corrects her Country Neighbor; and, a Bed,
For breaking A Woman-Grammarian, who corrects her Husband for speaking false
Latin, which is called breaking Priscian's Head.
Priscian's, breaks her Husband's Head.
The Gaudy Gossip, when she is set agog,
In Jewels dressed, and at each Ear a Bob,
Goes flaunting out, and in her trim of Pride,
Thinks all she says or does, is justified.
When Poor, she is s^arce a tolerable Evil;
But Rich, and Fine, a Wife's a very Devil.
She duly, once a Month, renews her Face;
Mean time, it lies in Dawb, and hid in Grease;
Those are the Husband's Nights; she craves her due,
He takes fat Kisses, and is stuck in Glue.
But, to the Loved Adult'rer when she steers,
Fresh from the Bath, in brightness she appears:
For him the Rich Arabia sweats her Gum;
And precious Oils from distant Indies come.
How Haggardly so e're she looks at home.
The Eclipse then vanishes; and all her Face
Is opened, and restored to every Grace.
The Crust removed, her Cheeks as smooth as Silk;
Are polished with a wash of Asses Milk;
And, should she to the farthest North be sent,
A Train That is, of she Asses.
of these attend her Banishment.
But, had thou seen her Plaistred up before,
'Twas so unlike a Face, it seemed a Sore.
It Is worth our while, to know what all the day
They do; and how they pass their time away.
For, if o're-night, the Husband has been slack,
Or counterfeited Sleep, and turned his Back,
Next day, be sure, the Servants go to wrack.
The Chambermaid and Dresser, are called Whores;
The Page is stripped, and beaten out of Doors.
The whole House suffers for the Master's Crime;
And he himself, is warned, to wake another time.
She hires Tormentors, by the Year; she Treats
Her Visitours, and talks; but still she beats.
Beats while she Paints her Face, surveys her Gown,
Casts up the days Account, and still beats on:
Tired out, at length, with an outrageous Tone,
She bids 'em, in the Devil's Name, begone.
Compared with such a Proud, Insulting Dame,
Sicilian Are grown to a Proverb in Latin, for their Cruelty.
Tyrants may renounce their Name.
For, if she hasts abroad, to take the Air,
Or goes to Isis, Church, (the Bawdy, House of Prayer,)
She hurries all her Handmaids to the Task;
Her Head, alone, will twenty Dressers ask.
Psecas, the chief, with Breast and Shoulders bare,
Trembling, considers every Sacred Hair;
If any Stragler from his Rank be found,
A pinch must, for the Mortal Sin, compound.
Psecas is not in Fault: But, in the Glass,
The Dame's Offended at her own ill Face.
That Maid is Banished; and another Girl
More dextrous, manages the Comb, and Curl:
The rest are summoned, on a point so nice;
And first, the Grave Old Woman gives Advice*
The next is called, and so the turn goes round,
As each for Age, or Wisdom, is Renowned:
Such Counsel, such delib'rate care they take,
As if her Life and Honor lay at stake.
With Curls, on Curls, they build her Head before;
And mount it with a Formidable Tower. This dressing up the Head so high, which
we call a Tower, was an Ancient way amongst the Romans.

A Gyantess she seems; but, look behind,
And then she dwindles to the Pigmy kind.
Duck-leg'd, short-wasted, such a Dwarf she is,
That she must rise on Tip-toes for a Kiss.
Mean while, her Husband's whole Estate is spent;
He may go bare while she receives his Rent.
She minds him not; she lives not as a Wife,
But like a Bawling Neighbor, full of Strife:
Near him, in this alone, that she extends
Her Hate, to all his Servants, and his Friends.
Bellona's Priests, an Eunuch at their Head,
About the Streets a mad Procession lead;
The Bellona's Priests were a sort of Fortune Tellers; and the High Priest an
Eunuch.
Venerable Guelding, large, and high,
O're-looks the Herd of his inferior Fry.
His awkward Clergymen about him prance;
And beat the Timbrels to their Mystic Dance.
Guiltless of Testicles, they tear their Throats*
And squeak, in Treble, their Unmanly (...).
Mean while, his Cheeks the Myter'd Prophet swells;
And Dire Presages of the Year foretells*
Unless with Eggs (his Priestly hire) they have
To Expiate, and avert the Autumnal blast.
And A Garment was given to the Priest, which he threw into the River; and
that, they thought, bore all the Sins of the People, which were drowned with it.
add beside a murrey colored Vest,
Which, in their places, may receive the Pest:
And, thrown into the Flood, their Crimes may bear,
to purge the unlucky Omens of the Year.
The Astonished Matrons pay, before the rest;
That Sex is still obnoxious to the Priest.
Through ye they beat, and plunge into the Stream,
If so the God has warned 'em in a Dream.
Weak in their Limbs, but in Devotion strong,
On their bare Hands and Feet they crawl along;
A whole Fields length, the Laughter of the Throng.
Should Io (Io's Priest I mean) Command
A Pilgrimage to Meroe's burning Sand,
Through Desares they would seek the secret Spring;
And Holy Water, for Lustration, bring.
How can they pay their Priests too much respect,
Who Trade with Heaven and Earthly Gains neglect?
With him, Domestic Gods Discourse by Night;
By Day, attended by his Quire in white.
The Bald-pate Tribe runs madding through the Street,
And Smile to see with how much ease they Cheat.
The Ghostly Sire forgives the Wife's Delights,
Who Sins, through Frailty, on forbidden Nights:
And Tempts her Husband, in the Holy Time,
When Carnal Pleasure is a Mortal Crime.
The Sweating Image shakes its Head; but he
With Mumbled Prayers Attones the Deity.
The Pious Priesthood the Fat Goose receive,
And they once Bribed, the Godhead must forgive.
No sooner these remove, but full of Fear,
A Gypsy Jewess whispers in your Ear,
And begs an Alms: An High-Priest's Daughter she
Versed in their Talmud, and Divinity;
And Prophesies beneath a shady Tree.
Her Goods a Basket, and old Hay her Bed,
She strouls, and Telling Fortunes, gains her Bread:
Farthings, and some small Monys, are her Fees;
Yet she Interprets all your Dreams for these.
Foretells the Estate, when the Rich Uncle Dies,
And sees a Sweetheart in the Sacrifice.
Such Toys, a Pigeons Entrails can disclose;
Which yet the Armenian Augur far outgoes:
In Dogs, a Victim more obscene, he rakes;
And Murdered Infants, for Inspection, takes:
For Gain, his Impious Practice he pursues;
For Gain will his Accomplices Accuse.
More Credit, yet, is to Chaldaeans are thought to have been the first
Astrologers.
Chaldeans given;
What they foretell, is deemed the Voice of Heaven.
Their Answers, as from Hammon's Altar, come;
Since now the Delphian Oracles are dumb.
And Mankind, ignorant of future Fate,
Believes what fond Astrologers relate.
Of these the most in vogue is he, who sent
Beyond Seas, is returned from Banishment.
His Art who to Otho succeeded Galba in the Empire; which was foretold him by
an Astrologer.
Aspiring Otho sold;
And sure Succession to the Crown foretold.
For his Esteem, is in his Exile placed;
The more Believed, the more he was Disgraced.
No Astrologick Wizard Honor gains,
Who has not often been Banished, or in Chains.
He gets Renown, who, to the Halter near,
But narrowly escapes, and buys it dear.
From him your Wife enquires the Planets Will;
When the black Iaundies shall her Mother Kill:
Her Sister's and her Unckle's end, would know;
But, first, consults his Art, when you shall go.
And, what is the greatest Gift that Heaven can give,
If, after her, the Adult'rer shall live,
She neither knows, nor cares to know the rest;
If Mars and Saturn are the two Unfortunate Planets; Jupiter and Venus, the two
Fortunate.
Mars and Saturn shall the World infest;
Or Jove and Venus, with their Friendly Rays,
Will interpose, and bring us better days.
Beware the Woman, too, and shun her Sight,
Who, in these Studies, does her self Delight.
By whom a greasy Almanac is born,
With often handling, like chaft Amber, worn:
Not now consulting, but consulted, she
Of the Twelve Houses, and their Lords, is free.
She, if the Scheme a fatal Journey show,
Stays safe at Home, but lets her Husband go.
If but a Mile she Travel out of Town,
The Planetary Hour must first be known:
And lucky moment; if her Eye but aches
Or itches, its Decumbiture she takes.
No Nourishment receives in her Disease,
But what the Stars, and A Famous Astrologer, an Egyptian.
Ptolomy shall please.
The middle sort, who have not much to spare,
To Chiromancers cheaper Art repair,
Who clap the pretty Palm, to make the Lines more fair.
But the Rich Matron, who has more to give,
Her Answers from the The Brachmans are Indian Philosophers, who remain to this
day; and hold, after Pythagoras, the Translation of Souls from one body to
another.
Brachman will receive:
Skilled in the Globe and Sphere, he Gravely stands,
And, with his Compass, measures Seas and Lands,
The Poorest of the Sex, have still an Itoh
To know their Fortunes, equal to the Rich.
The Dairy-Maid enquires, if she shall take
The trusty Tailor, and the Cook forsake.
Yet these, tho Poor, the Pain of Childbed bear;
And, without Nurses, their own Infants rear:
You seldom hear of the Rich Mantle, spread
For the Babe, born in the great Lady's Bed.
Such is the Pow'^ of Herbs; such Arts they use
To make them Barren, or their Fruit to lose.
But thou, whatever Slops she will have bought,
Be thankful, and supply the deadly Draught:
Help her to make Manslaughter; let her bleed,
And never want for Savin at her need.
For, if she holds till her nine Months be run,
Thou may be Father to His meaning is, help her to any kind of Slops, which
may cause her to miscarry; for fear she may be brought to Bed of a Black-moor,
which thou, being her Husband, art bound to Father; and that Bastard may by
Law, Inherit thy Estate.
an Aethiop's Son:
A Boy, who ready gotten to thy hands,
By Law is to Inherit all thy Lands:
One of that hue, that should he cross the way,
His The Romans thought it ominous to see a Blackmoor in the Morning, if he
were the first Man they met.
Omen would discolor all the day.
I pass the Foundling by, a Race unknown,
At Doors exposed, whom Matrons ma^e their own;
And into Noble Families advance,
A Nameless Issue, the blind work of Chance.
Indulgent Fortune does her Care employ,
And, smiling, broods upon the Naked Boy:
Her Garment spreads, and laps him in the Fold,
And covers, with her Wings, from nightly Cold:
Gives him her Blessing; puts him in a way;
Sets up the Farce, and laughs at her own Play.
Him she promotes; she favors him alone,
And makes Provision for him, as her own.
The craving Wife, the force of Magic tries,
And Philte^s for the unable Husband buys:
The Potion works not on the part designed,
But turns his Brain, and stupifies his Mind.
The sotted Moon-Calf gapes, and staring on,
Sees his own Business by another done:
A long Oblivion, a benumming Frost,
Constrains his Head; and Yesterday is lost:
Some nimbler Juice would make him foam, and rave,
Like that Wife to Caius Caligula, the great Tyrant: It Is said she gave him a
Love-Potion, which flying up into his Head, distracted him; and was the
occasion of his committing so many Acts of Cruelty.
Caesonia to her Caius gave:
Who, plucking from the Forehead of the Fool
His Mother's Love, infused it in the Bowl:
The boiling Blood ran hissing in his Veins,
Till the mad Vapor mounted to his Brains.
The The Story is in Homer; where Juno borrowed the Girdle of Venus, called
Cestos; to make Jupiter in love with her, while the Grecians and Trojans were
fighting, that he might not help the latter.
Thund'rer was not half so much on Fire,
When Juno's Girdle kindled his Desire.
What Woman will not use the Poys'ning Trade,
When Caesar's Wife the Precedent has made?
Let Agrippina was the Mother of the Tyrant Nero, who Poisoned her Husband
Claudius, that Nero might Succeed, who was her Son, and not Britannicus, who
was the Son of Claudius, by a former Wife.
Agripina's Mushroom be forgot;
Given to a Slav'ring, Old, unuseful Sot;
That only closed the driveling Dotard's Eyes;
And sent his Godhead downward to the Skies.
But this fierce Potion, calls for Fire and Sword;
Nor spares the Commons, when it strikes the Lord:
So many Mischiefs were in one combined;
So much one single Poys'ner cost Mankind.
If Stepdames seek their Sons in Law to kill,
It Is Venial Trespass; let them have their Will:
But let the Child, entrusted to the Care
Of his own Mother, of her Bread beware:
Beware the Food she reaches with her Hand;
The Morsel is intended for thy Land.
Thy Tutour be thy Taster, e're thou Eat;
There Is Poison in thy Drink, and in thy Meat.
You think this feigned; the Satyr in a Rage
Struts in the Buskins, of the Tragic Stage.
Forgets his Business is to Laugh and Bite;
And will, of Deaths, and dire Revenges Write.
Would it were all a Fable, that you Read;
But The Widow of Drymon Poisoned her Sons, that she might S^cceed to their
Estate: This was done either in the Poet's time, or just before it.
Drymon's Wife pleads Guilty to the Deed.
I, (she confesses,) in the Fact was caught;
Two Sons dispatching, at one deadly Draught.
What Two, Two Sons, thou Viper, in one day?
Yes sev'n, she cries, if sev'n were in my way.
Medea's Medea, out of Revenge to Jason who had forsaken her, killed the
Children which she had by him.
Legend is no more a Lie;
Our Age adds Credit to Antiquity.
Great Ills, we grant, in former times did Reign:
And Murders then were done: but not for Gain.
Less Admiration to great Crimes is due,
Which they through Wrath, or through Revenge pursue.
For, weak of Reason, impotent of Will,
The Sex is hurried headlong into Ill:
And, like a Cliff from its foundations torn,
By raging Earthquakes, into Seas is born.
But those are Fiends, who Crimes from thought begin;
And, cool in Mischief, meditate the Sin.
They Read the Example of a Pious Wife,
Redeeming, with her own, her Husband's Life;
Yet, if the Laws did that Exchange afford,
Would save their Lapdog sooner than their Lord.
Where e're you walk, the Who were fifty Sisters, Married to fifty young Men,
their Cousin-Germans; and killed them all on their Wedding-Night, excepting
Hipermnestra, who saved her Husband Linus.
Belides you meet;
And The Wife of Agamemnon, who, in favor to her Adulterer Estgyhus, was
consenting to his Murder.
Clytemnestra's grow in every Street:
But here is the difference; Agamemnon's Wife
Was a gross Butcher, with a bloody Knife:
But Murder, now, is to perfection grown:
And subtle Poisons are employed alone:
Unless some Antidote prevents their Arts,
And lines with Balsom all the Noble parts:
In such a case, reserved for such a need,
Rather than fail, the Dagger does the Deed.
The End of the Sixth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE SIXTH SATYR.
IN the Golden Age: when Saturn Reigned.

Fat with Acorns: Acorns were the Bread of Mankind, before Corn was found.

Under Jove: When Jove had driven his Father into Banishment, the Silver Age
began, according to the Poets.

Uneasy Justice, etc. The Poet makes Justice and Chastity Sisters; and says
that they ^^ed to Heaven together; and left Earth for ever.

Ceres Feast. When the Roman Women were forbidden to bed with their Husbands.

Jove and Mars. Of whom more Fornicating Stories are told, than any of the
other Gods.

Wondering Pharos. She fled to Egypt; which wondered at the Enormity of her
Crime.

He tells the Famous Story of Messalina, Wife to the Emperor Claudius.

Wealth has the Privilege, etc. His meaning is, that a Wife who brings a large
Dowry may do what she pleases, and has all the Privileges of a Widow.

Berenice's Ring. A Ring of great Price, which Herod Agrippa gave to his Sister
Berenice. He was King of the Jews, but Tributary to the Romans.

Cornelia. Mother to the Gracchi, of the Family of the Cornelit; from whence
Scipio the Affrican was descended, who Triumphed over Hannibal.

O Paean, etc. He alludes to the known Fable of Ni^be in Ovid. Amphion was her
Husband: Paean is Apollo, who with his Arrows killed her Children, because she
boasted that she was more fruitful than Latona, Apollo's Mother.

The thirty Pigs, etc. He alludes to the white Sow in Virgil, who farrow'd
thirty Pigs.

The Grecian Cant. Women then learnt Greek, as ours speak French.

All the Romans, even the most Inferior, and most Infamous sort of them, had
the Power of making Wills.

Go drag that Slave, etc. These are the words of the Wife.

Your Reason why, etc. The Answer of the Husband.

Call'st thou that Slave a Man? The Wife again.

Hannibal. A Famous Carthaginian Captain; who was upon the point of Conquering
the Romans.

The good Goddess. At whose Feasts no Men were to be present.

Nestor. Who lived three hundred Years.

What Singer, etc. He alludes to the Story of P. Clodius, who, disguised in the
Habit of a Singing Woman, went into the House of Caesar, where the Feast of the
Good Goddess was Celebrated; to find an opportunity with Caesar's Wife Pompeia.

He taxes Women with their loving Eunuchs, who can get no Children; but adds
that they only love such Eunuchs, as are g^elded when they are already at the
Age of Manhood.

Priapus. The God of Lust.

Pollio. A Famous Singing Boy.

That such an Actor whom they love might obtain the Prize.

The Auruspex. He who inspects the Entrails of the Sacrifice, and from thence,
foretells the Successor.

Vulcan. The God of Smiths.

Tabours and Trumpets, etc. The Ancients thought that with such sounds, they
could bring the Moon out of her Eclipse.

A Mood and Figure-Bride. A Woman who has learned Logic.

A Woman-Grammarian, who corrects her Husband for speaking false Latin, which
is called breaking Priscian's Head.

A Train of these. That is, of she Asses.

Sicilian Tyrants. Are grown to a Proverb in Latin, for their Cruelty.

This dressing up the Head so high, which we call a Tower, was an Ancient way
amongst the Romans.

Bellona's Priests were a sort of Fortune Tellers; and the High Priest an
Eunuch.

And add beside, etc. A Garment was given to the Priest, which he threw into
the River; and that, they thought, bore all the Sins of the People, which were
drowned with it.

Chaldaeans are thought to have been the first Astrologers.

Otho succeeded Galba in the Empire; which was foretold him by an Astrologer.

Mars and Saturn are the two Unfortunate Planets; Jupiter and Venus, the two
Fortunate.

Ptolomy. A Famous Astrologer, an Egyptian.

The Brachmans are Indian Philosophers, who remain to this day; and hold, after
Pythagoras, the Translation of Souls from one body to another.

To an Aethiop's Son. His meaning is, help her to any kind of Slops, which may
cause her to miscarry; for fear she may be brought to Bed of a Black-moor,
which thou, being her Husband, art bound to Father; and that Bastard may by
Law, Inherit thy Estate.

His Omen, etc. The Romans thought it ominous to see a Blackmoor in the
Morning, if he were the first Man they met.

Caesonia, Wife to Caius Caligula, the great Tyrant: It Is said she gave him a
Love-Potion, which flying up into his Head, distracted him; and was the
occasion of his committing so many Acts of Cruelty.

The Thunderer, etc. The Story is in Homer; where Juno borrowed the Girdle of
Venus, called Cestos; to make Jupiter in love with her, while the Grecians and
Trojans were fighting, that he might not help the latter.

Agrippina was the Mother of the Tyrant Nero, who Poisoned her Husband
Claudius, that Nero might Succeed, who was her Son, and not Britannicus, who
was the Son of Claudius, by a former Wife.

The Widow of Drymon Poisoned her Sons, that she might Succeed to their Estate:
This was done either in the Poet's time, or just before it.

Medea, out of Revenge to Jason who had forsaken her, killed the Children which
she had by him.

The Belides. Who were fifty Sisters, Married to fifty young Men, their
Cousin-Germans; and killed them all on their Wedding-Night, excepting
Hipermnestra, who saved her Husband Linus.

Clytemnestra. The Wife of Agamemnon, who, in favor to her Adulterer Estgyhus,
was consenting to his Murder.

THE SEVENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. CHARLES DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE Seventh Satyr.
The Hope and Encouragement of all the Learned, is only reposed in Caesar;
whether in Domitian, Nerva, or Trajan, is left doubtful by the Poet. The
Nobility, which in Reason ought to Patronize Poetry, and Reward it, are now
grown sordidly Covetous; and think it enough for them barely to praise Writers,
or to Write ill Verses themselves. This gives occasion to our Author, to
lament likewise, the hard Fortune and Necessities of other Arts, and their
Professors. Particularly Historians, Lawyers, Rhetoricians, and Grammarians.

THE SEVENTH SATYR.
ON Caesar all our Studies must depend;
For Caesar is alone the Muses Friend:
When now the Celebrated Wits, for need
Hire Bagnio's, to the Cryer's Trade succeed,
Or get their own, by Baking other's Bread:
Or by the Porter's Lodge with Beggars wait,
For greazy Fragments at the Great Man's Gate.
It Is better, so; if thy Poetic Fob
Refuse to pay an Ordinary's Club;
And much more Honest, to be hired, and stand
With Auctionary Hammer in thy Hand,
Provoking to give more, and knocking thrice
For the sold Household Stuff, or Picture's price;
Exposing Play-Books, full of Fustian Lines,
Or the dull Libraries of Dead Divines.
Even this is better, tho it is hardly got,
Than be a Perjured Witness of a Plot,
To Swear he saw three inches through a Door;
As Asiatick Evidences Swore;
Who hither coming, out at Heels and Knees,
For this had Pensions, Titles, and Degrees.
Henceforward let no Poet fear to Starve,
Caesar will give, if we can but deserve.
Tune all your Lyres, the Monarch's Praise invites
The laboring Muse; and vast Reward excites.
But if from other hands than his, you think
To find supply, it is loss of Pen and Ink:
Let Flames on your unlucky Papers prey,
Or Moths through written Pages eat their way:
Your Wars, your Loves, your Praises, be forgot,
And make of all an Universal blot.
The Muses ground is barren Desert all;
If no support from Caesar's Bounty fall;
The rest is empty Praise, an Ivy Crown,
Or the lean A Statue Erected in Honor of a Poet.
Statue of a starved Renown.
For now the cunning Patron never pays;
But thinks he gives enough in giving Praise,
Extols the Poem, and the Poet's Vein,
As Boys admire the Peacok's Gaudy Train:
Mean while thy Manhood, fit for Toils and Wars,
Patient of Seas, and Storms, and Household Cares,
Ebbs out apace, and all thy Strength impairs.
Old Age, with silent pace, comes creeping on,
Nauseates the Praise, which in her Youth she won,
And hates the Muse by which she was undone.
The Tricks of thy base Patron now behold,
To spare his Purse, and save his darling Gold;
In his own Coin the Starving Wit he Treats;
Himself makes Verses, which himself repeats,
And yields to Homer, on no other score
Than that he lived a Thousand Years before.
But if, to Fame alone, thou do pretend,
The Miser will his empty Palace lend;
Set wide his Doors, adorned with plated Brass,
Where droves, as at a City-gate may pass;
A spacious Hall afford thee to rehearse,
And send his Clients to applaud thy Verse;
But not one Far^^ing to defray the costs
Of Carpenters, the In which the Poets Rehearsed.
Pulpit, and the Posts.
House-room that costs him nothing, he bestow^
Yet still we Scribble on, tho still we lose:
We drudge, and cultivate with care, a Ground
Where no return of Gain was ever found:
The Charms of Poetry our Souls bewitch;
The Curse of Writing is an endless Itch.
But he whose Noble Genius is allowed;
Who with stretched Pinions soars above the crow'd;
Who mighty Thought can cloth with Manly Dress,
He, whom I fancy, but can never e^press;
Such, such a Wit, tho rarely to be found,
Must be secure from Want, if not abound.
Nice is his make, impatient of the War,
Avoiding Business, and abhorring Care;
He must have Groves; and lonely Fountains choose,
And easy Solitudes to bait his Muse;
Unvex'd with thought of Wants, which may betide,
Or for to Morrow's Dinner to provide.
Horace A Famous Poet, who was in great Favor with the Emperor Augustus
Caesar, by the means of his Patron Mecaenas.
never wrote but with a Rosy Cheek;
His Belly pampered, and his Sides were sleek.
A Wit should have no care; or this alone,
To make his rising Numbers justly run.
Phoebus and Bacchus, those two Jolly Gods,
Bear no Starved Poets to their Blessed Abodes.
It Is not for Hungry Wit, with Wants controlled,
The Face of Jove in Council to behold:
Or fierce One of the three Furies.
Alecto, when her Brand she tossed,
Betwixt the Trojan, and Rutilian Host:
If Virgil's Suit A Favorite to Augustus, and a great Patron of Poets.
Mecenas had not sped,
And sent Mecenas his Boy; with whom Virgil was in Love.
Alexis to the Poet's Bed;
The Crested Snakes had dropped upon the ground
And the loud Trumpet languish'd in the sound.
Yet we expect that A poor Tragic Poet.
Lappa's Muse should please,
As much as did Immortal An excellent Poet of Athens, who wrote Greek Tragedies.
Sophocles:
When he his Dishes and his Clothes has sent
To Pawn, for payment of a Quarter's Rent:
His Patron A Rich Nobleman of Rome.
Numitor will nothing lend,
Pleads want of Money to his wretched Friend,
Yet can large Presents to his Harlot send:
Can purchase a tame Lion, and can Treat
The Kingly Slave with several sorts of Meat:
It seems, he thinks the Expense is more, to Feast
The Famished Poet, than the Hungry Beast.
Lucan A great Poet, who was put to Death by Nero, partly out of Envy to his
Poetry, partly, for being in a Plot with his Uncle Seneca and Piso.
, content with Praise, may lie at ease
In costly Grots, and marble Palaces:
But to Poor A poor Poet.
Bassus what avails a Name,
To starve on Compliments, and empty Fame?
All Rome is pleased, when Sirnam'd Papinius, a Famous Poet in the ti^^ of
Caesar Domitian.
Statius will Rehearse,
And longing Crowds expect the promised Verse:
His lofty Numbers with so great a gust
They hear, and swallow with such eager Lust:
But, while the common Suffrage Crowned his Cause,
And broke the Benches with their loud Applause;
His Muse had Starved, had not a piece unread,
And by a Paris, a Famous Actor; and Favorite to Domitian; the Patron of
Statius.
Player bought, supplied her Bread.
He could dispose of Honors, and Commands,
The Power of Rome, was in an Actor's Hands,
The Peaceful Gown, and Military Sword:
The bounteous Play'r out-gave the pinching Lord.
And would Thou, Poet, rise before the Sun.
And to his Honor's lazy Levee run?
Stick to the Stage; and leave thy fordid Peer;
And yet Heaven knows, it is earned with hardship there.
The former Age, did one Mecenas see,
One giving Lord of Happy Memory.
Th^n, then, 'twas worth a Writer's pains, to pine,
Look Pale, and all The Romans Celebrated their gr^^t Holydays, called (...) in
December; when every one Drank freely; and the Slaves were in a manner, Masters.
December taste no Wine.
Such is the Poet's Lot: What luckier Fate
Does on the Works of Grave Historians wait?
More time they spend, in greater Toils engage;
Their Volumes swell beyond the thousandth Page:
For thus the Laws of History Command;
And much good Paper suffers in their Hand.
What Harvest rises from this labored Ground?
Where they get Pence, a Or rather a public Notary.
Clerk can get a Pound.
A lazy Tribe, just of the Poet's pitch,
Who think themselves above the growing Rich.
Next show me the well-lung'd In those times the Lawyers got little.
Civilian's Gain,
Who bears in Triumph an Artillery Train
Of Chancery Libels; opens first the Cause,
Then with a Picklock-Tongue perverts the Laws;
Talks loud enough in Conscience for his Fee,
Takes care his Client, all his Zeal may see;
Twitch'd by the Sleeve, he Mouths it more and more,
Till with white froth his Gown is slaver'd over.
Ask what he gains by all this Lying Prate,
A Captain's Plunder, trebbles his Estate.
The Magistrate assumes his Awful Seat;
Stand forth Alluding to that of Ovid; consedere Duces, etc.
pale Ajax, and thy Speech repeat:
Assert thy Clients Freedom; bawl, and tear
So loud, thy Country-Judge at least may hear,
If not discern; and when thy Lungs are sore,
Hang up the When an Orator had won a Cause; a Garland was hung up, before his
Door.
Victor's Garland at thy Door:
Ask, for what Price thy Venial Tongue was sold;
A rusty Gammon of some sev'n Years old:
Tough, withered Treuffles, in English, called Ground Chest-nuts, or Pignuts:
but perhaps the Author means Onyons, or Scallions.
Treuffles; ropy Wine, a Dish
Of shotten Herrings, or stale stinking Fish.
For four times talking, if one piece thou take,
That must be cantled, and the Judge go snack.
It Is true, A Rich Lawyer.
Emilius takes a five-fold Fee,
Tho some plead better, with more Law than he:
But then he keeps his Coach, six Flanders Mares
Draw him in State, when ever he appears:
He shows his Statue too, where placed on high,
The Ginnet, underneath him, seems to fly;
While with a lifted Spear, in Armor bright,
His aiming Figure meditates a Fight.
With Arts like these, Rich Matho when he speaks,
Attracts all Fees, and little Lawyers breaks.
Tongillus, very Poor, has yet an Itch
Of gaining Wealth, by feigning to be Rich;
Baths often, and in State, and proudly vain,
Sweeps through the Streets, with a long dirty Train:
From thence, with Lackeys running by his side,
High on the backs of brawny Slaves will ride,
In a long Litter, through the Marketplace;
And with a nod the distant Rabble grace:
Clad in a Gown, that glows with Tyrian dye,
Surveys Rich Movables with curious Eye,
Beats down the Price, and threatens still to buy.
Nor can I wonder at such Tricks as these,
The Purple Garments raise the Lawyer's Fees:
And sell him dearer to the Fool that buys;
High Pomp, and State, are useful Properties.
The Luxury of Rome will know no end;
For still the less we have, the more we spend.
Trust Eloquence to show our parts, and Breeding!
Not The greatest Orator that ever Rome Bred.
T^lly now could get Ten Groats by Pleading;
Unless the Diamond glittered on his Hand;
Wealth's all the Rhetoric Clients understand:
Without large Equipage, and loud Expense,
The Prince of Orators would scarce speak Sense.
Paulus Was a Rich Lawyer, Basilus and Gallus were very poor.
, who with Magnificence did Plead,
Grew Rich, while Tattered Gallus Begged his Bread.
Who to Poor Basilus his Cause would trust,
Tho never so full of pity, never so just*
His Clients, unregarded, claim their due:
For Eloquence in Rags was never true.
Go Wretch, thy pleadings into France and Africa were then, Famous for great
Lawyers, and fat Fees.
Africa send;
Or France, where Merit never needs a Friend.
But oh, what stock of Patience wants the Fool,
Who wastes his Time and Breath in Teaching School!
To hear the Speeches of declaiming Boys,
Deposing Tyrants with Eternal noise:
Sitting, or standing, still confined to roar
In the same Verse, the same Rules over and over:
What kind the Speech, what colors, how to purge
Objections, state the Case, and Reasons urge.
All would Learn these; but at the Quarter day,
Few Parents will the Pedant's Labor pay.
Pay, Sir, for what? The Scholar knows no more
At six Months end, than what he knew before:
Taught, or Untaught, the Dunce is still the same,
Yet still the wretched Master bears the blame.
Once every week, poor Hannibal is mauled;
The Theme is given, and straight the Council's called,
Whether he should to Rome directly go
To reap the Fruit of the dire The Victory obtained by Hannibal at Cannae;
after which, if he h^d immediately attempted Rome, in all probability, he had
carried it.
overthrow;
Or into Quarters put his harrass'd Men
Till Spring returns, and take the Field again,
The Murdered Master cries, would Parents hear
But half that stuff, which I am bound to bear,
For that Revenge I Will quit the whole Arrear.
The same Complaints most other Pedants make;
Plead real Causes, and the feigned forsake:
Medea's A notable Sorceress, Daughter of Aetes King of Colchos, and Wife to
Jason, who left her afterward, and Married another.
Poison, Iason's Perjury,
And Daughter of (...) King of (...), was Ravished by Tereus King of Thrace,
who cut out her Tongue that she might not disclose the Secret.
Philomela's Rape, are all laid by;
The Accusing Phaedra Wife of Theseus, who fell in Love with her Son in Law
Hippolytus, and because she could not obtain her ends of him, Accused him to
his Father that he would have forced her.
Stepdame, and the Son Accused:
But if my Friendly Counsel might be used,
Let not the Learned, this course or the other try,
But, leaving both, profess plain Poverty:
And show his In any Dole, made by the Emperor or one of the City Magistrates,
the poor Citizens had each a Talley given them; which they showed first, and
then received their proportion.
Tally for the dole of Bread,
With which the Parish-Poor are daily fed:
Even that exceeds the price of all thy pains.
Now look into the Music Master's gains,
Where Noble Youth at vast Expense is Taught:
But Eloquence not valued at a Groat.
On sumptuous Baths the Rich their Wealth bestow,
Or some expensive airy Portico;
Where safe from Showers, they may be Born in State,
And free from Tempests, for fair Weather wait:
Or rather, not expect the clearing Sun,
Through thick and thin, their Equipage must run:
Or staying, it is not for their Servants sake,
But that their Mules no prejudice may take.
At the Walks end, behold, how raised on high,
A Banquet-House salutes the Southern Sky;
Where from afar, the Winter Sun displays
The milder influence of his weakened Rays.
The Cook, and Sewer, each his Tallent tries;
In various Figures Scenes of Dishes rise:
Besides, a Master-Cook, with greazy Fist,
Dives in Luxurious Sawces to the Wrist*
Amidst this wastful Riot, there accrews
But poor Ten Shillings for A Famous Man both in Rhetoric and Oratory, who
Taught School in the times of Galba, Domitian, and Trajan, and received his
Salary out of the Emperor's Treasury.
Quintilian's dues:
For, to Breed up the Son to common Sense
Is evermore the Parents least Expense.
From whence then comes Quintilian's vast Estate?
Because he was the Darling Son of Fate;
And Luck, in scorn of Merit made him Great.
Urge not the Example of one single Man,
As rare as a white Crow, or sable Swan,
Quintilian's Fate was to be counted Wise,
Rich, Noble, Fair, and in the State to rise:
Good Fortune graced his Action, and his Tongue;
His Colds became him, and when Hoarse he Sung.
O, there is strange difference, what Planets shed
Their influence, on the Newborn Infant's Head!
It Is Fate that casts the Dice, and as she flings,
Of Kings makes Pedants, and of Pedants Kings.
What made (...) was Lieutenant to Marc Antony; and the first who beat the
Parthians in three Battles.
Ventidius rise, and Here is meant Tullus Servius, one of the Roman Kings.
Tullus Great,
But their kind Stars, and hidden Power of Fate?
Few Pedagogues, but Curse the Barren Chair;
Like Thrasymachus, a Rhetorician of Carthage, who Hanged himself by Reason of
his Poverty.
Him, who Hanged himself for mere Despair
And Poverty; Secundus Carinas; who ws Banished from Rome, by the Emperor
Caligula, for declaiming against Tyrants.
or Him, whom Caius sent
For liberty of Speech to Banishment.
Even Socrates in Rags at Athens Taught,
And wanted to When Socrates was Condemned to Dye by Poison, he wanted Money to
pay for the juice of Hemlock which he was ^o Drink; and desired one of his
Friends, to lay it down for him, and satisfy the Fees of the Executioner.
defray the deadly Draught.
In Peace, ye Shades of our Great Grandsires rest,
No heavy Earth your Sacred Bones molest:
Eternal Spring, and rising Flowers Adorn
The Relics of each Venerable Urn,
Who Pious Reverence to their Tutors paid,
As Parents Honored, and as Gods Obeyed.
Achilles The Son of Peleus and Thetis, who had Chiron the Centaur for his
Tutor.
, grown in Stature, feared the Rod,
And stood Corrected at the Centaur's Nod;
His Tender Years in Learning did employ,
And promised all the Hero in the Boy.
The Scene's much altered in the Modern School,
The Boys of Rufus call their Master Fool;
A just called Tully an Allobroge; as if his Latin were Barbarous, and not
truly Roman.
Revenge on him, who durst defame
The Merit of Immortal Tully's Name.
But ask, what Fruit A poor Grammarian, but of great esteem.
Palemon's pains have earned,
Or who, has paid the price of what he Learned;
Though Grammar profits less than Rhetoric are,
Yet even in those his Usher claims a share;
Besides the Servants Wages must be paid:
Thus of a little, still a less is made:
As Merchants Gains come short, of half the Mart,
For he who drives their Bargains, dribs a part.
The Covetous Father now includes the Night,
And Cov'nants, thou shall Teach by Candlelight;
When puffing Smiths, and every painful Trade
Of Handycrafts in peaceful Beds are laid:
Then, thou art bound to smell on either hand
As many stinking Lamps, as Schoolboys stand;
Where Horace could not Read in his own sullied Book:
And Sirnam'd Maro; the Favorite Poet of Augustus C^sar.
Virgil's Sacred Page is all besmeared with Smoke:
But when thou Dun'st their Parents, seldom they
Without a Suit before the Here is meant Tribunus Aerarius, who took cognizance
only of Causes of less moment, not the Tribunus Pl^bis, as Britannicus imagined.
Tribune, pay,
And yet hard Laws upon the Master lay.
Be sure he knows exactly Grammar Rules,
And all the best Historians Read in Schools;
All Authors, every Poet to an hair;
That, asked the Question, he may scarce Despair,
To tell, who Nursed Was Father of Aeneas the Trojan, who was the Founder of
Rome.
Anchises; or to Name
Anchemolus's The Son of Rhaetus, a King in Italy, Ravished his Stepmother
Casperia.
Stepmother, and whence she came:
How long A King of Sicily; who kindly Entertained Aenaeas in his Voyage.
Acestes lived, what stores of Wine
He gave to the departing Trojan Line.
Bid him besides, his daily pains employ
To form the Tender Manners of the Boy;
And work him, like a Waxen Babe, with Art
To perfect Symmetry, in every part:
To be his better Parent, to beware
No young obscenities his Strength impair,
No mutual filth; to mark his Hands and Eyes,
Distorted with Unnatural Ecstasies:
This be thy Task; and yet for all thy pains
At the Years end, expect no greater gains,
Than what The People were used at their Sword-plays, to gather Money for the
Conqueror.
a Fencer at a Prize, obtains.
The End of the Seventh Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE SEVENTH SATYR.
A Statue Erected in Honor of a Poet.

( Pulpit.) In which the Poets Rehearsed.

( Horace.) A Famous Poet, who was in great Favor with the Emperor Augustus
Caesar, by the means of his Patron Mecaenas.

One of the three Furies.

( Mecenas.) A Favorite to Augustus, and a great Patron of Poets.

Mecenas his Boy; with whom Virgil was in Love.

Rubraenus Lapp. A poor Tragic Poet.

( Sophocles.) An excellent Poet of Athens, who wrote Greek Tragedies.

( Numitor.) A Rich Nobleman of Rome.

( Lucan.) A great Poet, who was put to Death by Nero, partly out of Envy to
his Poetry, partly, for being in a Plot with his Uncle Seneca and Piso.

Salejus Bassus. A poor Poet.

Statius. Sirnam'd Rapinius, a Famous Poet in the time of Caesar Domitian.

Paris, a Famous Actor; and Favorite to Domitian; the Patron of Statius.

The Romans Celebrated their gr^^t Holydays, called (...) in December; when
every one Drank freely; and the Slaves were in a manner, Masters.

Or rather a public Notary.

In those times the Lawyers got little.

Alluding to that of Ovid; consedere Duces, etc.

When an Orator had won a Cause; a Garland was hung up, before his Door.

Treuffles, in English, called Ground Chest-nuts, or Pignuts: but perhaps the
Author means Onyons, or Scallions.

Emilius. A Rich Lawyer.

Marcus Tullius Cicero. The greatest Orator that ever Rome Bred.

Paulus. Was a Rich Lawyer, Basilus and Gallus were very poor.

France and Africa were then, Famous for great Lawyers, and fat Fees.

The Victory obtained by Hannibal at Cannae; after which, if he had immediately
attempted Rome, in all probability, he had carried it.

( Medea.) A notable Sorceress, Daughter of Aetes King of Colchos, and Wife to
Jason, who left her afterward, and Married another.

( Philomela.) Daughter of Pandion King of Athens, was Ravished by Tereus King
of Thrace, who cut out her Tongue that she might not disclose the Secret.

( Stepdame) Phaedra Wife of Theseus, who fell in Love with her Son in Law
Hippolytus, and because she could not obtain her ends of him, Accused him to
his Father that he would have forced her.

In any Dole, made by the Emperor or one of the City Magistrates, the poor
Citizens had each a Talley given them; which they showed first, and then
received their proportion.

Quintilian. A Famous Man both in Rhetoric and Oratory, who Taught School in
the times of Galba, Domitian, and Trajan, and received his Salary out of the
Emperor's Treasury.

Uentidius Bassus was Lieutenant to Marc Antony; and the first who beat the
Parthians in three Battles.

( Tullus) Here is meant Tullus Servius, one of the Roman Kings.

( Him.) Thrasymachus, a Rhetorician of Carthage, who Hanged himself by Reason
of his Poverty.

( Or Him.) Secundus Carinas; who ws Banished from Rome, by the Emperor
Caligula, for declaiming against Tyrants.

When Socrates was Condemned to Dye by Poison, he wanted Money to pay for the
juice of Hemlock which he was to Drink; and desired one of his Friends, to lay
it down for him, and satisfy the Fees of the Executioner.

( Achilles.) The Son of Peleus and Thetis, who had Chiron the Centaur for his
Tutor.

Rufus called Tully an Allobroge; as if his Latin were Barbarous, and not
truly Roman.

( Palemon.) A poor Grammarian, but of great esteem.

( Virgil) Sirnam'd Maro; the Favorite Poet of Augustus Caesar.

( Tribune) Here is meant Tribunus Aerarius, who took cognizance only of Causes
of less moment, not the Tribunus Plebis, as Britannicus imagined.

Anchises. Was Father of Aeneas the Trojan, who was the Founder of Rome.

Anchemolus. The Son of Rhaetus, a King in Italy, Ravished his Stepmother
Casperia.

A King of Sicily; who kindly Entertained Aenaeas in his Voyage.

The People were used at their Sword-plays, to gather Money for the Conqueror.

THE EIGHTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. G. STEPNY, Fellow of Trinity College in
CAMBRIDGE.
ARGUMENT OF THE Eighth Satyr.
In this Satyr, the Poet proves that No^ility do^s not confist in Statues and
Pedigrees, but in Honorable and Good Actions: He lashes Rubellius Plancus, for
being Insolent, by Reason of his High ^irth; and lays do^n ^n I^sta^ce t^^t
(...) ought to make the like Judgment of Men, as we do of Horses, who are
valued rather according to their Personal Qualities, than by the Race of whence
they co^^. He ad^ises his N^ble Friend Ponticus (to whom he Dedicates the
Satyr) to lead a Virtuous Life, dissuading him from Debauchery, Luxury,
Oppression, Cruelty, and other Vices, by his severe Censures on Lateranus,
Damasippus, Gr^cchus, Nero, Catiline; And in Opposition to these, displays the
worth of Persons Meanly Born, such as Cicero, Marius, Servius Tullius, and the
Decii.

THE EIGHTH SATYR.
What Is the advantage, or the real Good,
In traceing from the Source our ancient Blood?
To have our Ancestors in Paint or Stone
Preserved as Relics, or, like Monsters, shown?
The Brave Aemilii, as in Triumph placed,
The Virtuous Curii, half by Time defaced;
Corvinus, with a mouldring Nose, that bears
Injurious Scars, (the sad Effects of Years;)
And Galba grinning without Nose or Ears?
Vain are their Hopes, who fancy to inherit
By Trees of Pedigrees, of Fame, or Merit;
Tho plodding Heralds through each Branch may trace
Old Captains and Dictators of their Race,
While their Ill Lives that Family belie,
And grieve the Brass which stands dishonored by.
It Is mere Burlesque, that to our Generals praise,
Their Progeny immortal Statues raise,
Yet (far from that old Gallantry) delight
To game before their Images all night,
And steal to Bed at the approach of day,
The hour when these their Ensigns did display.
Why should soft THE Family of the Fabii were descended of Hercules (in Honor
of whom the Romans built a Temple in the Foro Boario.) Fabius Maximus in
remembrance of his Services in the Wars, against the People of Provence,
Languedoc, Dauphiny* and other Provinces of France (formerly known by the Name
of Allobroges) was Surnamed Allobrogicus; which Title his Son would have
assumed, whom our Author here Censures, as a Man of an Effeminate Person, a
profligate Life, and of Dangerous Practices.
Eabius impudently bear
Names gained by Conquests in the Gallic War?
Why lays he claim to Hercules his Strain,
Yet dares be Base, Effeminate, and Vain?
The glorious Altar to that Hero built,
Adds but a greater Luster to his Guilt,
Whose tender Limbs, and polisht Skin, disgrace
The grisly Beauty of his Manly Race;
And who by practicing the dismal skill
Of Poys'ning, and such treacherous ways to kill,
Makes his unhappy Kindred-Marble sweat,
When his degenerate Head by theirs is set.
Long Galleries of Ancestors, and all
Those Follies which ill-grace a Country-Hall,
Challenge no Wonder or Esteem from me;
"Virtue alone is true Nobility.
Live therefore well: To Men and Gods appear,
Such as Good Brave and Virtuous Romans.
Paulus, Cossus, Drusus were;
And in thy Consular triumphal Show,
Let These before thy Father's Statues go;
Place 'em before the The Rods and Ax, which were carried in Processions, as
Badges of the Consular Dignity.
Ensigns of the State,
As choosing rather to be Good than Great.
Convince the World that you're devout and true,
Be just in all you say, and all you do;
Whatever be your Birth, you're sure to be
A Peer of the first Magnitude to me:
Rome for your sake shall push her Conquests on,
And bring Such as Getulicus, Africanus, Numantinus, Creticus.
New Titles home from Nations won,
To Dignifie so Eminent a Son:
With your blessed Name shall every Region sound,
Loud as mad Egypt, when her Priests have found
A new Osyris, for teaching the Egyptians Husbandry, had a Temple built at
Memphis; where he was Worshipped in the shape of an Ox, which the Priests used to
Drown at a certain Age; and gave out, their God was withdrawn, and absented
himself for a few Days; during which time 'twas their Custom to go Mourning and
searching up and down, till they found another Ox to supply his place, and then
they broke out with these Exclamations, We have found him, let us rejoice.
Osyris, for the Ox they drowned.
But who will call those Noble, who deface,
By meaner Acts, the Glories of their Race;
Whose only Title to their Father's Fame
Is couched in the dead Letters of their Name?
A Dwarf as well may for a Giant pass;
A Negro for a Swan; a Crook-back'd Lass
Be called Europa; and a Cur may bear
The Name of Tiger, Lion, or what-e're
Denotes the Noblest or the Fiercest Beast:
Be therefore careful, lest the World in jest
Should thee just so with the Mock-titles greet,
Of Camerinus, or of Conquered Crete.
To whom is this Advice and Censure due?
Rubellius Plancus, it is applied to you;
Who think your Person second to Divine,
Because descended from the Drusian Line;
Tho yet you no Illustrious Act have done
To make the World distinguish Iulia's Son
From the vile Offspring of a Trull, who sits
By the Town-Wall, and for her Living knits.
You are poor Rogues (you cry) the baser Scum
And inconsiderable Dregs of Rome;
Who know not from what Corner of the Earth
The obscure Wretch, who got you, stole his Birth:
Mine, I derive from Cecrops The first King of Athens.
-- May your Grace
Live, and enjoy the Splendor of your Race --.
Yet of these base Plebeians we have known
Some, who, by charming Eloquence, have grown
Great Senators, and Honors to that Gown:
Some at the Bar with Subtilty defend
The Cause of an unlearned Noble Friend;
Or on the Bench the knotty Laws untye:
Others their stronger Youth to Arms apply,
Go to Euphrates, or those Forces join
Which Garrison the Conquests near the Rhine.
While you, Rubellius, on your Birth rely;
Tho you resemble your Great Family
No more, than those rough Statues on the Road
(Which we call Mercuries) are like that God:
Your Blockhead tho excels in this alone,
You are a Living Statue, that of Stone.
Great Son of Troy, who ever praised a Beast
For being of a Race above the rest,
But rather meant his Courage, and his Force?
To give an Instance -- We commend an Horse
(Without regard of Pasture, or of Breed)
For his undaunted Mettle and his speed;
Who I have taken the Liberty to give this Simile a Modern Air, because it
happens to agree exactly with the Humor of our Author.
wins most Plates with greatest ease, and first
Prints with his Hoofs his Conquest on the Dust.
But if fleet Dragon's Progeny at last
Proves jaded, and in frequent Matches cast,
No favor for the Stallion we retain,
And no respect for the Degenerate strain;
The worthless Brute is from New Market brought,
And at an under-rate in Smith-Field bought,
To turn a Mill, or drag a Loaded Life
Beneath two Panniers, and a Baker's Wife.
That we may therefore you, not yours, admire;
First, Sir, some Honor of your own acquire;
Add to that Stock which justly we bestow
On those (Meaning your Ancestors.) Rubellius Plancus.
Blessed Shades to whom you all things owe.
This may suffice the Haughty Youth to shame,
Whose swelling Veins (if we may Credit Fame)
Burst almost with the Vanity and Pride,
That their Rich Flood to Nero's is allied:
The Rumour's likely; for "We seldom find
"Much sense with an Exalted Fortune joined.
But, Ponticus, I would not you should raise
Your Credit by Hereditary praise;
Let your own Acts Immortalize your Name;
"'It Is Poor relying on another's Fame;
For, take the Pillars but away, and all
The Superstructure must in Ruins fall;
As a Vine droops, when by Divorce removed
From the Embraces of the Elm she loved.
Be a good Soldier, or upright Trustee,
An Arbitrator from Corruption free,
And if a Witness in a doubtful Cause,
Where a bribed Judge means to elude the Laws;
Tho Phalaris was a Tyrant of Agrigentum in Sicily; to flatter whose Cruelty,
Perillus invented a Brazen Bull, wherein People might be Roasted alive, and
their Cries were not unlike the bellowings of an Ox: But the Tyrant had the
Justice to reward the Artizen as he deserved, by making him first try the
Experiment.
Phalaris his Brazen Bull were there,
And He would dictate what he would have yuo swear,
Be not so Profligate, but rather choose
To guard your Honor, and your Life to lose,
Rather than let your Virtue be betrayed;
Virtue, the Noble Cause for which you're made.
"Improperly we measure Life by Breath; This and the 7 following Verses are a
sort of Paraphrase upon 2 lines of the Original, which I was forced to enlarge,
because the sense of the Author is too close and obscure.

"Such do not truly Live who merit Death;
Tho they their wanton Senses nicely please
With all the Charms of Luxury and Ease;
Tho mingled Flowers adorn their careless Brow,
And round 'em costly Sweets neglected flow;
As if they in their Funeral State were laid,
And to the World, as they are to Virtue, Dead.
When (Speaking to Ponticus)
You the Province you expect, obtain,
From Passion and from Avarice refrain;
Let our Associates Poverty provoke
Thy generous Heart not to increase their Yoke,
Since Riches cannot rescue from the ^nave,
Which claims alike the Monarch and the Slave
To what the Laws enjoin, submission pay*
And what the Senate shall Command, Obey;
Think what Rewards upon the Good attend,
And how those fall unpitied who offend:
Tutor and Capito may Warnings be,
Who felt the Thunder of the States Decree
For robbing the Cilicians, tho they
(Like lesser Pikes) only subsist on Prey.
But what avails the Rigor of their Doom?
Which cannot future violence overcome,
Nor give the Miserable Province ^ase*
Since what one Plund'rer left, the next will seize*
Cherippus (Any poor Man who is Oppressed.)
then, in time your self bethink,
And what your Rags will yield by Auction, sink;
Never put your self to Charges to complain
Of Wrongs which (...) you did sustain;
Make not a Voyage to detect the Theft,
"'It Is mad to Lavish what their Rapine lest.
When Rome at first our Rich Allies subdued,
From gentle Taxes Noble Spoils accru'd;
Each wealthy Province, but in part Oppressed,
Thought the Loss trivial, and enjoyed the rest.
All Treasuries did then with Heaps abound;
In every Wardrobe costly Silks were found;
The least Apartment of the meanest House
Could all the wealthy Pride of Art produce;
Pictures which from Famous Painters, Statuaries, and other Artizens.
Parrhasius did receive
Motion and warmth; and Statues taught to live;
Some Famous Painters, Statuaries, and other Artizens.
Polyclete's, some Myron's Work declared,
In others Famous Painters, Statuaries, and other Artizens.
Phidia's Masterpiece appeared;
And crowding Plate did on the Cupboard stand,
Embossed by curious Famous Painters, Statuaries, and other Artizens.
Mentor's artful hand.
Prizes like these Oppressors might invite,
These Dolabella's Rapine did excite,
These Proconsuls of Asia and Sicily.
Anthony for his own Theft thought fit,
Verres for these did Sacrilege commit;
And when their Reigns were ended, Ships full Fraught
The hidden Fruits of their Exaction brought,
Which made in Peace, a Treasure Richer far,
Than what is Plundered in the Rage of War.
This was of Old; But our Confederates now
Have nothing left but Oxen for the Plough,
Or some few Mares reserved alone for Breed;
Yet lest this provident Design succeed,
They drive the Father of the Herd away,
Making both Stallion, and his Pasture, Prey.
Their Rapine is so abject and profane,
They nor from Trifles, nor from Gods refrain;
But the poor Lares from the Niches seize,
If they be little images that please.
Such are the Spoils which now provoke their Theft,
And are the greatest, Nay they are all that is left.
Thus may Returning to Ponticus.
You The Inhabitants of these places were Effeminate, and easy to be enslaved.
Corinth, or weak Rhodes oppress,
Who dare not bravely what they feel, redress:
(For how can Fops thy Tyranny control
"Smooth Limbs are symptoms of a servile Soul)
But Trespass not too far on sturdy Spain,
Sclavonia, France; thy Gripes from those restrain,
Who with their The People of Africa, who supplied Rome with Corn.
sweat Rome's Luxury maintain;
And send us Plenty, while our wanton day
Is lavished at the Circus, or the Play.
For, should you to Extortion be inclined,
Your Cruel Guilt will little Booty find,
Since gleaning Marius Priscus.
Marius has already seized
All that from Sunburned Africa can be squees'd.
But above all, "Be careful to withold
"Your Tallons from the Wretched and the Bold;
"Tempt not the Brave and Needy to Despair;
"For, tho your Violence should leave 'em bare
"Of Gold and Silver, Swords and Darts remain,
"And will Revenge the Wrongs which they sustain,
"The Plundered still have Arms. --
Think not the Precept I have here laid down
A fond, uncertain Notion of my own;
No, it is a Sibyl's Leaf what I relate,
As fixed and sure, as the Decrees of Fate.
Let none but Men of Honor you attend;
Choose him that has most Virtue for your Friend,
And give no way to any Darling Youth
To sell your Favor, and pervert the Truth.
Reclaim your Wife from stroling up and down,
To all Assizes, and through every Town,
With Claws like Harpies, eager for the Prey;
(For which your Justice, and your Fame will pay*)
Keep your self free from Scandals such as these;
Then Trace your Birth from The first King of the Latins.
Picus, if you please:
If he is too Modern, and your Pride aspire
To seek the Author of your Being higher,
Choose any Titan who the Gods withstood*
To be the Founder of your Ancient blood,
Prometheus, and that Race before the flood,
Or any other Story you can find
From Heralds, or in Poets, to your mind.
But should you prove Ambitious, Lustful, Vain;
Or could you see with Pleasure and Disdain,
Rods broke on our Associates bleeding backs,
And Heads-Men laboring till they blunt their Ax:
Your Father's Glory will your Sin proclaim,
And to a clearer Light expose your shame;
"For, still more public scandal Vice extends,
"As he is Great and Noble who offends.
How dare The Poet in this place speaks neither to Rubellius nor Pontic^^, but
in general to any Perjured, or Debauched Nobleman.
you then your high Extraction plead?
Yet blush not when you go to forge a Deed,
In the same Temple which your Grandsire built,
Making his Statue privy to the Guilt.
Or in a Bawdy Masquerade are led
Muffled by Night to some polluted Bed.
Fat Lateranus does his Revels keep
Where his Forefathers peaceful Ashes sleep;
Driving himself a Chariot down the Hill,
And (tho a Consul) links himself the Wheel:
To do him Justice, it is indeed by Night,
Yet the Moon sees, and every smaller light
Pries as a Witness of the shameful sight:
Nay when his Year of Honor's ended, soon
He Will leave that nicety, and mount at Noon;
Nor blush should he some Grave Acquaintance meet,
But, (proud of being known) will Jerk and Greet:
And when his Fellow-Beasts are weary grown,
He Will play the Groom, give Oats, and rub 'em down.
If after Numa P^mpilius (the Second King of Rome) the better to Civilize the
savage Humor of the People, first introduced among them the fear and Worship
of the Gods, and instituted the Rites and Ceremonies of Priests, Oaths, and
Sacrifices.
Numa's Ceremonial way
He at Jove's Altar would a Victim slay,
To no clean Goddess he directs his Prayers*
But by Hippona was the Goddess of Jockies and Horses.
Hippona most Devoutly Swears,
Or some rank Deity whose filthy face
We suitably over stinking Stables place.
When he has run his length, and does begin
To steer his course directly for the Inn
(Where they have watched, expecting him all night)
A greasy Syrian, e're he can alight,
Presents him Essence, while his courteous Host
(Well knowing nothing by good breeding's lost)
Tags every Sentence with some fawning word,
Such as My King, My Prince, at least My Lord;
And a tight Maid, e're he for Wine can ask,
Guesses his Meaning, and unoils the Flask.
Some (Friends to Vice) industriously defend
These innocent Diversions, and pretend
That I the Tricks of Youth too roughly blame,
Alleging that, when young, we did the same.
I grant we did; yet when that age was past,
The frolic Humor did no longer last;
We did not cherish and indulge the Crime:
What Is foul in acting, should be left in time.
It Is true, some faults, of course, with Childhood end,
We therefore wink at Wags when they offend*
And spare the Boy, in hopes the Man may mend.
But Lateranus (now his vigorous age
Should prompt him for his Country to engage,
The Circuit of our Empire to extend,
And all our Lives, in Caesar's, to defend)
Mature in Riots, places his Delight
All day in plying Bumpers, and at night
Reels to the Bawds, over whose Doors are set
Pictures and Bills, with Here are Whores to let.
Should any desperate unexpected Fate
Summon all Heads and Hands to guard the State,
Caesar, send quickly to secure the Ostia, the Mouth of the River Tyber.
Port;
But where is the General? Where does he resort?
Send to the Sutler's; There you're sure to find
The Bully matched with Rascals of his Kind,
Quacks, Coffin-Makers; Fugitives and Sailers;
Rooks, Common-Souldiers, Hangmen, Thieves and Tailers;
With Cybele's Priests, who, wearied with Processions,
Drink there, and sleep with Knaves of all Professions.
A Friendly Gang! each equal to the best*
And all, who can, have liberty to jest*
One Flaggon walks the round, (that none should think
They either change, or stint him of his drink)
And lest Exceptions may for Place be found,
Their Stools are all alike, their Table round.
What think you, Ponticus, your self might do,
Should any Slave, so lewd, belong to you?
No doubt, you would send the Rogue in Fetters bound,
To work in Bridewell, or to Plough your Ground:
But, Nobles, you who Trace your Birth from Troy,
Think, you the great Prerogative enjoy
Of doing ill, by Virtue of that Race;
As if what we esteem in Cobblers base,
Would the high Family of Brutus grace.
Shameful are these Examples, yet we find
(To Rome's Disgrace) far worse than these behind:
Poor Damasippus, whom we once have known
Fluttering with Coach and Six about the Town,
Is forced to make the Stage his last retreat,
And Pawns his Voice, the All he has, for Meat:
For now he must (since his Estate is lost)
Or represent, or be himself, a Ghost:
And Lentulus Acts Hanging with such Art,
Were I a Judge, he should not Feign the part.
Nor would I their Vile insolence acquit,
Who can with Patience, nay Diversion, sit,
Applauding my Lord's Buffoonry for Wit.
And clapping Farces, Acted by the Court,
While the Peers Cuff, to make the Rabble sport:
Or Hirelings, at a Prize, their Fortunes try;
Certain to fall unpitied if they Dye;
Since none can have the favorable Thought
That to Obey a Tyrant's Will they Fought,
But that their Lives they willingly expose,
Bought by the Praetors to adorn their shows.
Yet say the Stage and Lists were both in sight,
And you must either choose to Act, or Fight;
Death never sure bears such a ghastly shape,
That a rank Coward basely would escape
By playing a foul Harlot's jealous Tool,
Or a feigned Andrew to a real Fool.
Yet a Peer-Actor is no monstrous thing,
Since Rome has owned a Meaning Nero, whom he Censures severely in the Pages
following, Fig. 33.
Fiddler for a King:
After such Pranks, the World it self at best
May be imagined nothing but a Jest.
Go This Period is perplexed, and I fear will not be understood in our Language,
being only a Description of the Roman Gladiators, who were of two sorts, and
had different Names according to the Arms and Habit they appeared with, one
fought with a Cymiter in his right Hand* a Target on his left Arm, and an
Helmet on his Head; he was called Mirmillo, or Secutor. The other wore a short
Coat without Sleeves* called Tunica; a Hat on his Head; he carried in his right
Hand a Javelin Fork'd like a Trident, called Fuscina; and on his left Arm a
Nett, in which he endeavored to catch his Adversary, and from thence was
called Retiarius. The meaning of the Poet, is, to reprehend Gracchus (whom he
had before rebuked in the 2d Satyr) for 3 Vices at once: For his Baseness, for
as much as being a Nobleman he will condescend to fight upon the public
Theater: For his Impudence, in not choosing an Habit which might have kept him
Disguised, and hindered him from being known: And for his Cowardice, in running
away.
to the Lists where Feats of Arms are shown,
There you will find Gracchus, (from Patrician,) grown
A Fencer, and the Scandal of the Town.
Nor will he the Mirmillo's Weapons bear,
The Modest Helmet he Disdains to wear;
As Retiarius he Attacks his Foe;
First waves his Trident ready for the throw,
Next casts his Net, but neither levelled right,
He stares about, exposed to public sight,
Then places all his safety in his flight.
Room for the Noble Gladiator! See
His Coat and Hatband show his Quality;
Thus when at last the brave Mi^millo knew
'Twas Gracchus was the Wretch he did pursue,
To Conquer such a Coward grieved him more,
Than if he many Glorious Wounds had bore.
Had For the clearer understanding of what follows, it may be Necessary to give
a short Abridgment of Nero's Cruelties, Follies, and End: Which may be found at
large in his Life, written by Suetonius and Tacitus, and in the Continuation
which Mr. Saville has added to his Translation of the last of these Authors, by
way of Supplement to what is wanting betwixt the Annals and the History. But I
shall only relate what I find mentioned in this Satyr, and shall begin with his
Parricides.
we the freedom to express our Mind,
There Is not a Wretch so much to Vice inclined,
But will own Upon suspicion that Seneca his Tutor, had some Knowledge of the
Conspiracy which Piso was carrying on against his Person, Nero laid hold on
this Opportunity to Rid himself of the uneasy Censurer of his Vices, yet
allowed him the liberty of choosing the Manner of his Death. Seneca was
apprehensive of Pain, and therefore desired to have his Veins opened, which he
judged might be the most easy and pleasant Method of Dying: But finding it too
tedious, he prevailed with his Friend and Physician, Annaeus Statius, to give
him a Draught of Poison; which too operating very slowly, by Reason his Veins
were exhausted, and his Limbs chilled, the Standers by, to make quicker
dispatch, smothered him with the steem of an hot Bath. Iuvenal not unjustly
places this Murder of Seneca among Nero's Parricides, since a Tutor ought to be
esteemed as a Civil Parent.
Seneca did far excel
His Pupil, by whose Tyranny he fell:
To expiate whose Complicated Guilt,
With some Proportion to the Blood he spilt,
Rome This bold Thought and Expression of Iuvenal is grounded on the Roman Laws
whereby Par^icides were Condemned to be sowed up in a Bag (called Cule^s) with
a Cock, a Monkey, a Serpent, and a Dog, and thrown together into the Sea, or
any Neighboring River. This Punishment of drowning in a Sack* is still used in
several Parts of Germany, but without the Company of those Creatures
abovementioned.
should more Serpents, Apes, and Sacks provide
Than one, for the Compendious Parricide.
It Is true The Story of Orestes (betwixt whom and Nero, Iuvenal would draw a
Parallel) is this; his Mother Clytemnestra finding her Husband Agamemnon was
returned alive from the Siege of Troy, and fearing he might Revenge her Amors
with Egystheus, with whom she had lived in Adultery during her Husband's
absence, she thought the safest way might be, to Assassinate Agamemnon, by the
help of Egystheus, at his first Reception, and before he could suspect such an
attempt. The manner how they dispatched him, is reported differently. Some
Auth^rs relate that as he was changing his Linen, he was stifled in a Shirt
^ow^d together at the Neck. But Homer in the 4th and 11th Books of his Odyssea,
where he describes this Murder, is of Iuvenal's Opinion, that he was killed at
a Banquet, when he little expected such Treatment. Egystheus after this Murder
Married Clytemnestra, and Usurped the Kingdom of Mycena 7 Years: During which
time Orestes grew up to Man's Estate, and by the instigation of his Sister
Electra, and the Assistance of some Neighboring Princes, marched from Athens,
Destroyed and Murdered the Usurper; and at last, under pretense of being Mad,
stabbed his Mother. Homer (as well as our Author) justifies this Revenge, as
being undertaken by the Advice of the Gods: And Paterculus infers they must
needs have approved the Action, since Orestes (after it) lived long, and
Reigned Happily.
Orestes a like Crime did Act;
Yet weigh the Cause, there is difference in the Fact:
He Nero could not suffer his Mother Agrippina, because of her encroaching on
his Government; for which Reason he made frequent Attempts upon her Life, but
without success, till at last Anicetus his Bondsman undertook to stab her, which
she perceiving, and guessing by whose Orders he came, clapped her hand upon her
Belly, and bid him (with great presence of Mind) strike there, supposing it
deserved that Punishment for bearing such a Monster.
slew his Mother at the God's Command,
They bid him strike, and did direct his Hand
To punish falsehood, and appease the Ghost
Of his poor Father treacherously lost,
Just in the Minute when the flowing Bowl
With a full Tide enlarged his Cheerful Soul.
Yet killed he not his Britannicus (his Brother by Adoption) was Poisoned by
his Orders, out of jealousy lest he should supplant him. And Antonia
(Claudius's Daughter) was Executed under pretense of a Conspiracy, but in truth
because she refused to Marry Nero after the Death of Poppaea.
Sister, or his He ordered his first Wife Octavia to be publicly Executed,
upon a false Accusation of Adultery, and killed his second Wife Poppaea, when
she was big with Child, by a kick on the Belly.
Wife,
Nor He caused Rufinus Crispinus, Son to Poppaea, to be Drowned as he was
Fishing; and Aulus Plancus, a Relation of his Mothers, to be killed because she
was fond of him.

I need mention no more of these unnatural Murders, but go on to his other
Extravagancies.


aimed at any near Relation's Life:
Orestes He was Industrious to be esteemed the best Musician of his Age; and at
his Death regretted nothing more sensibly, than that the World should lose so
great a Master. To maintain this Reputation, he frequently condescended to Act
and Sing upon the Theater among the ordinary Comedians, and took a journey to
Greece on purpose to try his skill against the most Famous Artists of that
Country; from whom he bore away the Garland (which was the usual Recompense of
the first performer) returned to Rome in Triumph, as if he had Conquered a
Province; and ordered both the Garland and Instrument to be hung up among the
Banners and Honors of his Family.
, in the Heat of all his Rage,
Never played, or Sung upon a public Stage;
Never He had likewise a great Vanity toward being thought a good Poet, and
made Verses on the Destruction of Troy, called Troica; and it is reported he
burnt Rome to be more lively and natural in his Description: Tho it is more
probable he destroyed the Old-fashioned Buildings* out of dislike to the
narrowness and crookedness of the Streets, and to have the Honor of rebuilding
the City better, and calling it by his own Name.
on Verse did his wild Thoughts employ,
To paint the horrid Scene of burning Troy,
Like Nero, who to raise his Fancy higher,
And finish the great Work, set Rome on Fire.
Such These monstrous Frolicks and Cruelties could not but make his People
weary of his Government. Virginius Rufus, who was his Lieutenant General in
Gaul, by the Assistance of Iunius Vindex (a Nobleman of that Country) soon
persuaded the Armies under his Command to fall from their Allegiance; and
solicited Sergius Galba, who was Lieutenant General in Spain, to do the like,
by offering him the Empire in favor of Mankind; which he at last accepted,
upon intimation that Nero had issued out secret Orders to dispatch him; and
Marched with all the Forces he could gather, toward Rome. Nero not being in a
Condition to oppose such Troops, fell into Despair, which turned to an
uncertainty what Measures to take, whether to Poison himself, or beg Pardon of
the People, or endeavor to make his Escape. The last of these Methods seemed
most Advisable; he therefore put himself into Disguise, and crept with four
Attendants only into a poor Cottage; where perceiving he was pursued, as a
Sacrifice to the Public Vengeance, and apprehending the Rabble would Treat him
Barbarously, if he fell into their Hands; with much ado he resolved to Stab
himself.
Crimes make Treason just, and might compel
Virginius, Vindex, Galba, to Rebel:
For what could Nero's self have acted worse,
To aggravate the Wretched Nation's Curse.
These are the blessed Endowments, Studies, Arts,
Which Exercise our mighty Emperor's parts;
Such Frollicks with his Roving Genius suit,
On He was Industrious to be esteemed the best Musician of his Age; and at his
Death regretted nothing more sensibly, than that the World should lose so great
a Master. To maintain this Reputation, he frequently condescended to Act and
Sing upon the Theater among the ordinary Comedians, and took a journey to
Greece on purpose to try his skill against the most Famous Artists of that
Country; from whom he bore away the Garland (which was the usual Recompense of
the first performer) returned to Rome in Triumph, as if he had Conquered a
Province; and ordered both the Garland and Instrument to be hung up among the
Banners and Honors of his Family.
Foreign Theaters to prostitute
His Voice and Honor, for the poor Renown
Of putting all the Grecian Actors down,
And winning at a Wake their Parsley-Crown.
Let He was Industrious to be esteemed the best Musician of his Age; and at his
Death regretted nothing more sensibly, than that the World should lose so great
a Master. To maintain this Reputation, he frequently condescended to Act and
Sing upon the Theater among the ordinary Comedians, and took a journey to
Greece on purpose to try his skill against the most Famous Artists of that
Country; from whom he bore away the Garland (which was the usual Recompense of
the first performer) returned to Rome in Triumph, as if he had Conquered a
Province; and ordered both the Garland and Instrument to be hung up among the
Banners and Honors of his Family.
this Triumphal Chaplet find some place
Among the other Trophies of thy Race;
By the Domitii's Statues shall be laid
The Habit and the Mask in which you played
Antigone's, or bold Thyestes part,
(While your wild Nature little wanted Art)
And on the Marble Pillar shall be hung
The Lute to which the Royal Mad^mn Sung.
Who, Catiline's Conspiracy is a Story too well known to be insisted on: He was
of a Noble Family, but by his Extravagancies had reduced himself to great want,
which engaged him in bad Practices. The Roman Armies were then pursuing
Conquests in remote Provinces, which Catiline judged the most seasonable
opportunity for undertaking some desperate Design: He therefore entered into a
Conspiracy with Cethegus, Lentulus, and other Senators, and Persons
considerable by their Births and Employments, to make themselves absolute
Masters of their Country, by seizing the Senate, plundering the Treasury, and
burning the City.
Catiline, can boast a Nobler Line,
Than thy lewd Friend Cethegus his, and thine?
Yet you took Arms, and did by Night conspire
To set our Houses, and our Gods on Fire:
(An Enterprise which might indeed become
Our Enemies, the Gauls, not Sons of Rome,
To recompense whose Barbarous intent
Pitched Incendiaries by the Roman Law were wrapped in a Pitched Coat (which they
called Tunica Molesta) and Burnt alive: As we see by Tacitus Ann. 16. 44. Where
Nero after having set Rome on Fire, lays the blame and Punishment on the
Christians, by ordering them, with a Cruel jest, to be Light up, and serve as
Torches when it was dark.
Shirts would be too mild a Punishment)
But One Fulvia (whom Livy calls a Common Whore, tho Plutarch makes her pass
for a Lady of Quality) came to have some knowledge of this Enterprise, and
discovered it to Cicero, (a Person whom Paterculus elegantly calls Vir^m
novitatis Nobilissimae; since he was a Man of Mean Parentage, Born at Arpinum,
an inconsiderable Town among the Volscians, but by his Eloquence raised himself
to the chief Dignities of State, and happened to be Consul at that time) who
assembled the Senate, and by a severe Oration accused and convicted Catiline:
However he, with a few of his Party* found means to make his escape toward
Tuscany, and put himself at the Head of some Troops which Manlius had got
together in those Parts, threatening publicly that he would put out the Fire of
the City by the Ruins of it. In the mean time Cethegus, Lentulus, and several
other Accomplices were seized and strangled in Prison by order of the Senate, at
Cato's persuasion: And Caius Antonius Nepos, who was joint-Consul with Tully,
Marched with what Forces he could raise against Catiline, who in a sharp Battle
was killed upon the Spot with most of his Followers, and (as Paterculus
observes) Quem spiritum supplicio debuerat, praelio reddidit.
Tully, our wise Consul, watched the blow,
With care discovered, and disarmed the Foe:
Tully, the humble Mushroom, scarcely known:
The lowly Native of a Country Town,
(Who till of late could never reach the height
Of being Honored as a Roman Knight)
Throughout the trembling City placed a Guard,
Dealing an equal share to every Ward,
And by the peaceful Robe got more renown
Within our Walls, than Young Octavius won
By A Promontory of Epirus, near the Island Leucas, where Antony and Cleopatra
were Ruined by a Famous Sea Fight.
Victories at Actium, or the Plain
Of Thessaly The Fields near Philippi, in Thessaly, where Brutus and Cassius
were defeated.
discolored by the Slain:
Him therefore Rome in gratitude decreed
The Father of his Country, which he freed.
Marius Caius Marius, was likewise Born at Arpinum, and of such poor Parents,
that he was first a Plowman, then a Common Soldier, yet at last by his Merit
arrived to the highest Employments. One while he was Consul (for that Honor
was 7 times conferred on him) the Cimbria^s attempted to make an Incursion into
Italy; But he killed 140000 of them, and made 60000 Prisoners; For which
Victory, a Triumph was ordained him by the Senate; but to decline the Envy
which might be raised by his Good Fortune, he solicited that Q. Luctatius
Catulus, his Colleague, who was of a Noble Family, might be permitted to Triumph
with him, tho he had no share in the Action.
(another Consul we admire)
In the same Village Born, first Plowed for Hire;
His next Advance was to the Soldiers Trade,
Where, if he did not nimbly ply the Spade,
His Surly Officer never failed to Crack
His Knotty Cudgel on his tougher back.
Yet he alone secured the tottering State,
Withstood the Cimbrians, and redeemed our Fate:
So when the Eagles to their Quarry flew
(Who never such a Goodly Banquet knew)
Only a second Laurel did adorn
His Colleague Catulus, tho Nobly Born;
He shared the Pride of the Triumphal Bay,
But Marius won the Glory of the Day.
From Among the Romans there was a Superstition, that if their General would
consent to be Devoted, or Sacrificed to Jupiter, Mars, the Earth, and the
Infernal Gods, all the Misfortunes which otherwise might have happened to his
Party, would by his Death be transferred on their Enemies. This Opinion was
confirmed by several successful Instances, particularly two, in the Persons of
the Decii, Father and Son here mentioned. The first being Consul with Manlius
in the Wars against the Latins, and perceiving the Left Wing, which he
Commanded, gave back, he called out to Valerius the High Priest to perform on
him the Ceremony of Consecration, (which we find described by Livy in his 8th
Book) and immediately spurred his Horse into the thickest of his Enemies
Forces, where he was killed, and the Roman Army gained the Battle. His Son Died
in the same manner in the War against the Gauls, and the Romans likewise
obtained the Victory.
a mean Stock the Pious Decii came,
Small their Estates, and Vulgar was their Name;
Yet such their Virtue, that their Loss alone
For Rome and all our Legions did Atone;
Their Countries Doom, they by their own, retrieved,
Themselves more worth than all the Host they saved.
The Servius Tullus was Son to Oriculana, whom Iuvenal calls a Serving-Maid,
but Livy supposes her to have been Wife to a Prince of Corniculum, who was
killed at the taking of the Town, and his Wife was carried away Captive by
Tarquinius Priscus, and presented as a Slave to his Wi^e Tanaquil, in whose
Service she was delivered of this Tullus. The Family had a great Respect for
the Child, because of a Lambent Fire they observed to play about his Head while
he slept, which was interpreted as an Omen of his future Greatness; therefore
care was taken of his Education, and at last he was Contracted to the King's
Daughter: Whereupon A^cus Martius his 2 Sons (who were the true Heirs of the
Crown) fearing this Marriage might hinder their Succession, hired two Shepherds
to Assassinate Tarquinius, which they undertook, but could not Execute so
dexterously as was expected; for, the King lived some days after the blow was
given, during which time Tanaquil caused the Gates of the Palace to be kept
shut, and amused the People (who were eager on a new Election) with assurances
that the Wound was not Mortal, That the King was in a fair way of Recovery, and
till he could appear abroad, required them to pay Obedience to Servius Tullius:
Who by this means first got possession of the Government in the King's Name,
and after his Death Usurped it 44 Years in his own. At last he was forced out
of the Senate by Lucius Tarquinius, thrown down Stairs, and Murdered by his
Orders. Livy adds this Commendation, That with him Iusta ac legitima regna
occiderunt; which agrees with Iuvenal's calling him The last good King; For,
Tarquin, who Reigned 25 Years after him, was hated for his Pride and Cruelty,
and for the Barbarous Rape which his Son Sextus committed on Lucretia, Wise to
Collatinus; who by the help of L. Iunius Brutus revenged this injury, by
driving Tarquin and his whole Race out of Rome, which from that time began to
be Governed by Consuls; and the better to secure their Liberty, Brutus
Administered an Oath by which the Romans obliged themselves never to suffer any
more Kings, and made a Decree (which proved fatal to his Family) whereby it was
declared a Capital Crime in any Person who should endeavor by any means to
bring back the Tarquins. However they gave not over their Pre^ensions, but send
Ambassadors under pretense of soliciting that their Estates at least might be
restored them, but underhand to insinuate themselves among the loose Young
Noblemen (who grew weary of a Commonwealth, because the Rigor of their new
Laws did not tolerate that licentious way of living which they enjoyed under
the Government of their Kings) and to concert with them the best Methods
toward their Restoration. This Design was first proposed to the Aquilii and
Vitellii: The last of these were Brothers to Brutus his Wife, and by that
Alliance easily engaged Titus and Tiberius (two Sons he had by her) in the
Conspiracy, the sum of which was, That the Gates of the City should be left
open for the Tarquins to enter in the Nightime; and that the Ambassadors
might be assured of their sincerity, each Member of the Cabal delivered them,
the Night before they were to return, Letters under their own hands for the
Tarquins, with Promises to this effect.
last good King whom willing Rome obeyed,
Was the poor Offspring of a Captive Maid;
Yet he those Robes of Empire justly bore
Which Romulus our Sacred Founder wore:
Nicely he gained, and well Possessed the Throne,
Not for his Father's Merits but his own,
And Reigned, himself a Family alone.
When Tarquin, who Reigned 25 Years after him, was hated for his Pride and
Cruelty, and for the Barbarous Rape which his Son Sextus committed on Lucretia,
Wi^e to Collatinus; who by the help of L. Iunius Brutus revenged this injury,
by driving Tarquin and his whole Race out of Rome, which from that time began
to be Governed by Consuls; and the better to secure their Liberty, Brutus
Administered an Oath by which the Romans obliged themselves never to suffer any
more Kings, and made a Decree (which proved fatal to his Family) whereby it was
declared a Capital Crime in any Person who should endeavor by any means to
bring back the Tarquins. However they gave not over their Precensions, but send
Ambassadors under pretense of soliciting that their Estates at least might be
restored them, but underhand to insinuate themselves among the loose Young
Noblemen (who grew weary of a Commonwealth, because the Rigor of their new
Laws did not tolerate that licentious way of living which they enjoyed under
the Government of their Kings) and to concert with them the best Methods
toward their Restoration. This Design was first proposed to the Aquilii and
Vitellii: The last of these were Brothers to Brutus his Wife, and by that
Alliance easily engaged Titus and Tiberius (two Sons he had by her) in the
Conspiracy, the sum of which was, That the Gates of the City should be left
open for the Tarquins to enter in the Nightime; and that the Ambassadors
might be assured of their sincerity, each Member of the Cabal delivered them,
the Night before they were to return, Letters under their own hands for the
Tarquins, with Promises to this effect.
Tarquin, his proud Successor, was quelled,
And with him Lust and Tyranny expelled;
The Consuls Titus and Tiberius (two Sons he had by her) in the Conspiracy, the
sum of which was, That the Gates of the City should be left open for the
Tarquins to enter in the Nightime; and that the Ambassadors might be assured
of their sincerity, each Member of the Cabal delivered them, the Night before
they were to return, Letters under their own hands for the Tarquins, with
Promises to this effect.
Sons (who for their Countries good,
And to Inhaunce the Honor of their Blood,
Should have asserted what their L. Iunius Brutus revenged this injury, by
driving Tarquin and his whole Race out of Rome, which from that time began to
be Governed by Consuls; and the better to secure their Liberty, Brutus
Administered an Oath by which the Romans obliged themselves never to suffer any
more Kings, and made a Decree (which proved fatal to his Family) whereby it was
declared a Capital Crime in any Person who should endeavor by any means to
bring back the Tarquins. However they gave not over their Precensions, but send
Ambassadors under pretense of soliciting that their Estates at least might be
restored them, but underhand to insinuate themselves among the loose Young
Noblemen (who grew weary of a Commonwealth, because the Rigor of their new
Laws did not tolerate that licentious way of living which they enjoyed under
the Government of their Kings) and to concert with them the best Methods
toward their Restoration. This Design was first proposed to the Aquilii and
Vitellii: The last of these were Brothers to Brutus his Wife, and by that
Alliance easily engaged Titus and Tiberius (two Sons he had by her) in the
Conspiracy, the sum of which was, That the Gates of the City should be left
open for the Tarquins to enter in the Nightime; and that the Ambassadors
might be assured of their sincerity, each Member of the Cabal delivered them,
the Night before they were to return, Letters under their own hands for the
Tarquins, with Promises to this effect.
Father won;
And, to confirm that Liberty, have done
Actions which Horatius Cocles being Posted to guard a Bridge, which he
perceived the Enemy would soon be Maste^ of, he stood resolutely and opposed
part of their Army, while the Party he Commanded, repassed the Bridge, and
broke it down after them; and then threw himself, Armed as he was, into the
Tyber, and escaped to the City.
Cocles might have wished his own;
What might to Mutius Scaevola went into the Enemies Camp with a Resolution to
kill their King Porsenna, but instead of striking him, stabbed one of his
Guards; and being brought before the King, and finding his Error, in
indignation he burned off his Right hand as a Penalty for his mistake.
Mutius wonderful appear;
And what bold Clelia, a Roman Virgin, who was given to Porsenna as an Hostage,
made her escape from the Guards, and swam over the Tyber.
Clelia might with Envy hear)
Opened the Gates, endeavoring to restore
Their Banished King, and Arbitrary Power.
Whilst a poor Vindicius, a Slave who waited at Table, by chance overheard part
of their Discourse; and comparing these Circumstances with some others he had
observed in their former Conferences, he went straight to the Consul's, and
told what he had discovered. Orders were immediately issued out for searching
the Ambassadors, the Letters abovementioned were intercepted, the Criminals
seized, and the proof being evident against them, they suffered the Punishment
(which was newly introduced) of being tied Naked to a Stake, where they were
first (...) by the Lictors, then Beheaded: And Brutus, by Virtue of his Office,
was unhappily obliged to see this Rigorous Sentence Executed on his old
Children.

To pursue the Story; the Tarquins finding their Plot had miscarried, and
fearing nothing could be done by treachery, struck up an Alliance with Porsenna
King of Thuscany, who pretending to restore them by open force, marched with a
numerous Army, and besieged Rome: But was soon surpised with three such
Instances of the Roman Bravery, in the Persons of Cocles, Mutius, and Clelia,
that he withdrew his Army, and courted their Friendship.


Slave, with scarce a Name, betrayed
The horrid Ills these well-born Rogues had laid;
Who therefore for their Treason justly bore
The Rods and Ax, never used in Rome before.
If you have strength Achilles Arms to bear,
And Courage to sustain a Ten Years War;
Tho foul The ugly Buffoon of the Grecian Army.
Thersites got thee, thou shall be
More loved by all, and more esteemed by me,
Than if by chance you from some Hero came,
In nothing like your Father but his Name.
Boast then your Blood, and your long Lineage stretch
As high as Rome, and its great Founders reach;
You Will find, in these Hereditary Tales,
Your Ancestors the scum of broken Jayls:
And Romulus finding the City, called by his Name, not sufficiently Peopled,
established an Asylum, or Sanctuary, where all Outlaws, Vagabonds, and
Criminals of what Nature soever, who could make their escape thither, might
live in all freedom and security.
Romulus, your Honors Ancient source,
But a Poor Shepherds The Author either means the Bastard of Mars, and R^ea
Sylvia, a Vestal Virgin, of whose Rape we have a Relation in the beginning of
Ovid's 3d Book de Fastis, or a Parricide, for killing his Brother Remus.
Boy, or something worse.
The End of the Eighth Satyr.
Advertisement.
THE Translator of Juvenal's 8th Satyr industrously avoided imposing upon the
Reader, and perplexing the Printer with tedious Commonplace Notes; but finding
toward the latter End many Examples of Noblemen who disgraced their Ancestors
by Vicious Practices, and of Men Meanly Born who innobled their Families by
Virtuous and Brave Actions, he thought some Historical Relations were necessary
toward rendering those Instances more Intelligible; which is all he pretends to
by his Remarks. He would gladly have left out the heavy passage of the Mirmillo
and Retiarius, which he Honestly Confesses he either does not rightly
understand, or cannot sufficiently explain. If he has not confined himself to
the strict Rules of Translation, but has frequently taken the liberty of
Imitating, Paraphrasing, or Reconciling the Roman Customs to our Modern Usage*
He hopes this freedom is Pardonable, since he has not used it, but when he
found the Original flat, obscure, or defective; and where the Humor and
Connection of the Author might naturally allow of such a Change.

EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE EIGHTH SATYR.
THE Family of the Fabii were descended of Hercules (in Honor of whom the
Romans built a Temple in the Foro Boario.) Fabius Maximus in remembrance of his
Services in the Wars, against the People of Provence, Languedoc, Dauphiny* and
other Provinces of France (formerly known by the Name of Allobroges) was
Surnamed Allobrogicus; which Title his Son would have assumed, whom our Author
here Censures, as a Man of an Effeminate Person, a profligate Life, and of
Dangerous Practices.

Brave and Virtuous Romans.

The Rods and Ax, which were carried in Processions, as Badges of the Consular
Dignity.

Such as Getulicus, Africanus, Numantinus, Creticus.

Osyris, for teaching the Egyptians Husbandry, had a Temple built at Memphis;
where he was Worshipped in the shape of an Ox, which the Priests used to Drown at
a certain Age; and gave out, their God was withdrawn, and absented himself for
a few Days; during which time 'twas their Custom to go Mourning and searching
up and down, till they found another Ox to supply his place, and then they
broke out with these Exclamations, We have found him, let us rejoice.

The first King of Athens.

I have taken the Liberty to give this Simile a Modern Air, because it happens
to agree exactly with the Humor of our Author.

(Meaning your Ancestors.) Rubellius Plancus.

Phalaris was a Tyrant of Agrigentum in Sicily; to flatter whose Cruelty,
Perillus invented a Brazen Bull, wherein People might be Roasted alive, and
their Cries were not unlike the bellowings of an Ox: But the Tyrant had the
Justice to reward the Artizen as he deserved, by making him first try the
Experiment.

Page 152. Improperly we measure Life by Breath, etc. This and the 7 following
Verses are a sort of Paraphrase upon 2 lines of the Original, which I was
forced to enlarge, because the sense of the Author is too close and obscure.

(Speaking to Ponticus)

(Any poor Man who is Oppressed.)

Famous Painters, Statuaries, and other Artizens.

Proconsuls of Asia and Sicily.

Returning to Ponticus.

The Inhabitants of these places were Effeminate, and easy to be enslaved.

The People of Africa, who supplied Rome with Corn.

Marius Priscus.

The first King of the Latins.

The Poet in this place speaks neither to Rubellius nor Pontic^^, but in
general to any Perjured, or Debauched Nobleman.

Numa Pompilius (the Second King of Rome) the better to Civilize the savage
Humor of the People, first introduced among them the fear and Worship of the
Gods, and instituted the Rites and Ceremonies of Priests, Oaths, and Sacrifices.

Hippona was the Goddess of Jockies and Horses.

Ostia, the Mouth of the River Tyber.

Meaning Nero, whom he Censures severely in the Pages following, Fig. 33.

This Period is perplexed, and I fear will not be understood in our Language,
being only a Description of the Roman Gladiators, who were of two sorts, and
had different Names according to the Arms and Habit they appeared with, one
fought with a Cymiter in his right Hand* a Target on his left Arm, and an
Helmet on his Head; he was called Mirmillo, or Secutor. The other wore a short
Coat without Sleeves* called Tunica; a Hat on his Head; he carried in his right
Hand a Javelin Fork'd like a Trident, called Fuscina; and on his left Arm a
Nett, in which he endeavored to catch his Adversary, and from thence was
called Retiarius. The meaning of the Poet, is, to reprehend Gracchus (whom he
had before rebuked in the 2d Satyr) for 3 Vices at once: For his Baseness, for
as much as being a Nobleman he will condescend to fight upon the public
Theater: For his Impudence, in not choosing an Habit which might have kept him
Disguised, and hindered him from being known: And for his Cowardice, in running
away.

For the clearer understanding of what follows, it may be Necessary to give a
short Abridgment of Nero's Cruelties, Follies, and End: Which may be found at
large in his Life, written by Suetonius and Tacitus, and in the Continuation
which Mr. Saville has added to his Translation of the last of these Authors, by
way of Supplement to what is wanting betwixt the Annals and the History. But I
shall only relate what I find mentioned in this Satyr, and shall begin with his
Parricides.

Upon suspicion that Seneca his Tutor, had some Knowledge of the Conspiracy
which Piso was carrying on against his Person, Nero laid hold on this
Opportunity to Rid himself of the uneasy Censurer of his Vices, yet allowed him
the liberty of choosing the Manner of his Death. Seneca was apprehensive of
Pain, and therefore desired to have his Veins opened, which he judged might be
the most easy and pleasant Method of Dying: But finding it too tedious, he
prevailed with his Friend and Physician, Annaeus Statius, to give him a Draught
of Poison; which too operating very slowly, by Reason his Veins were exhausted,
and his Limbs chilled, the Standers by, to make quicker dispatch, smothered him
with the steem of an hot Bath. Iuvenal not unjustly places this Murder of
Seneca among Nero's Parricides, since a Tutor ought to be esteemed as a Civil
Parent.

This bold Thought and Expression of Iuvenal is grounded on the Roman Laws
whereby Par^icides were Condemned to be sowed up in a Bag (called Cule^s) with
a Cock, a Monkey, a Serpent, and a Dog, and thrown together into the Sea, or
any Neighboring River. This Punishment of drowning in a Sack* is still used in
several Parts of Germany, but without the Company of those Creatures
abovementioned.

The Story of Orestes (betwixt whom and Nero, Iuvenal would draw a Parallel)
is this; his Mother Clytemnestra finding her Husband Agamemnon was returned
alive from the Siege of Troy, and fearing he might Revenge her Amors with
Egystheus, with whom she had lived in Adultery during her Husband's absence,
she thought the safest way might be, to Assassinate Agamemnon, by the help of
Egystheus, at his first Reception, and before he could suspect such an attempt.
The manner how they dispatched him, is reported differently. Some Auth^rs
relate that as he was changing his Linen, he was stifled in a Shirt ^ow^d
together at the Neck. But Homer in the 4th and 11th Books of his Odyssea, where
he describes this Murder, is of Iuvenal's Opinion, that he was killed at a
Banquet, when he little expected such Treatment. Egystheus after this Murder
Married Clytemnestra, and Usurped the Kingdom of Mycena 7 Years: During which
time Orestes grew up to Man's Estate, and by the instigation of his Sister
Electra, and the Assistance of some Neighboring Princes, marched from Athens,
Destroyed and Murdered the Usurper; and at last, under pretense of being Mad,
stabbed his Mother. Homer (as well as our Author) justifies this Revenge, as
being undertaken by the Advice of the Gods: And Paterculus infers they must
needs have approved the Action, since Orestes (after it) lived long, and
Reigned Happily.

Nero could not suffer his Mother Agrippina, because of her encroaching on his
Government; for which Reason he made frequent Attempts upon her Life, but
without success, till at last Anicetus his Bondsman undertook to stab her, which
she perceiving, and guessing by whose Orders he came, clapped her hand upon her
Belly, and bid him (with great presence of Mind) strike there, supposing it
deserved that Punishment for bearing such a Monster.

He ordered his first Wife Octavia to be publicly Executed, upon a false
Accusation of Adultery, and killed his second Wife Poppaea, when she was big
with Child, by a kick on the Belly.

Britannicus (his Brother by Adoption) was Poisoned by his Orders, out of
jealousy lest he should supplant him. And Antonia (Claudius's Daughter) was
Executed under pretense of a Conspiracy, but in truth because she refused to
Marry Nero after the Death of Poppaea.

He caused Rufinus Crispinus, Son to Poppaea, to be Drowned as he was Fishing;
and Aulus Plancus, a Relation of his Mothers, to be killed because she was fond
of him.

I need mention no more of these unnatural Murders, but go on to his other
Extravagancies.

He was Industrious to be esteemed the best Musician of his Age; and at his
Death regretted nothing more sensibly, than that the World should lose so great
a Master. To maintain this Reputation, he frequently condescended to Act and
Sing upon the Theater among the ordinary Comedians, and took a journey to
Greece on purpose to try his skill against the most Famous Artists of that
Country; from whom he bore away the Garland (which was the usual Recompense of
the first performer) returned to Rome in Triumph, as if he had Conquered a
Province; and ordered both the Garland and Instrument to be hung up among the
Banners and Honors of his Family.

He had likewise a great Vanity toward being thought a good Poet, and made
Verses on the Destruction of Troy, called Troica; and it is reported he burnt
Rome to be more lively and natural in his Description: Tho it is more probable
he destroyed the Old-fashioned Buildings* out of dislike to the narrowness and
crookedness of the Streets, and to have the Honor of rebuilding the City
better, and calling it by his own Name.

These monstrous Frolicks and Cruelties could not but make his People weary of
his Government. Virginius Rufus, who was his Lieutenant General in Gaul, by
the Assistance of Iunius Vindex (a Nobleman of that Country) soon persuaded the
Armies under his Command to fall from their Allegiance; and solicited Sergius
Galba, who was Lieutenant General in Spain, to do the like, by offering him the
Empire in favor of Mankind; which he at last accepted, upon intimation that
Nero had issued out secret Orders to dispatch him; and Marched with all the
Forces he could gather, toward Rome. Nero not being in a Condition to oppose
such Troops, fell into Despair, which turned to an uncertainty what Measures to
take, whether to Poison himself, or beg Pardon of the People, or endeavor to
make his Escape. The last of these Methods seemed most Advisable; he therefore
put himself into Disguise, and crept with four Attendants only into a poor
Cottage; where perceiving he was pursued, as a Sacrifice to the Public
Vengeance, and apprehending the Rabble would Treat him Barbarously, if he fell
into their Hands; with much ado he resolved to Stab himself.

Catiline's Conspiracy is a Story too well known to be insisted on: He was of a
Noble Family, but by his Extravagancies had reduced himself to great want,
which engaged him in bad Practices. The Roman Armies were then pursuing
Conquests in remote Provinces, which Catiline judged the most seasonable
opportunity for undertaking some desperate Design: He therefore entered into a
Conspiracy with Cethegus, Lentulus, and other Senators, and Persons
considerable by their Births and Employments, to make themselves absolute
Masters of their Country, by seizing the Senate, plundering the Treasury, and
burning the City.

Incendiaries by the Roman Law were wrapped in a Pitched Coat (which they called
Tunica Molesta) and Burnt alive: As we see by Tacitus Ann. 16. 44. Where Nero
after having set Rome on Fire, lays the blame and Punishment on the Christians,
by ordering them, with a Cruel jest, to be Light up, and serve as Torches when
it was dark.

One Fulvia (whom Livy calls a Common Whore, tho Plutarch makes her pass for a
Lady of Quality) came to have some knowledge of this Enterprise, and discovered
it to Cicero, (a Person whom Paterculus elegantly calls Vir^m novitatis
Nobilissimae; since he was a Man of Mean Parentage, Born at Arpinum, an
inconsiderable Town among the Volscians, but by his Eloquence raised himself to
the chief Dignities of State, and happened to be Consul at that time) who
assembled the Senate, and by a severe Oration accused and convicted Catiline:
However he, with a few of his Party* found means to make his escape toward
Tuscany, and put himself at the Head of some Troops which Manlius had got
together in those Parts, threatening publicly that he would put out the Fire of
the City by the Ruins of it. In the mean time Cethegus, Lentulus, and several
other Accomplices were seized and strangled in Prison by order of the Senate, at
Cato's persuasion: And Caius Antonius Nepos, who was joint-Consul with Tully,
Marched with what Forces he could raise against Catiline, who in a sharp Battle
was killed upon the Spot with most of his Followers, and (as Paterculus
observes) Quem spiritum supplicio debuerat, praelio reddidit.

A Promontory of Epirus, near the Island Leucas, where Antony and Cleopatra
were Ruined by a Famous Sea Fight.

The Fields near Philippi, in Thessaly, where Brutus and Cassius were defeated.

Caius Marius, was likewise Born at Arpinum, and of such poor Parents, that he
was first a Plowman, then a Common Soldier, yet at last by his Merit arrived
to the highest Employments. One while he was Consul (for that Honor was 7
times conferred on him) the Cimbria^s attempted to make an Incursion into
Italy; But he killed 140000 of them, and made 60000 Prisoners; For which
Victory, a Triumph was ordained him by the Senate; but to decline the Envy
which might be raised by his Good Fortune, he solicited that Q. Luctatius
Catulus, his Colleague, who was of a Noble Family, might be permitted to Triumph
with him, tho he had no share in the Action.

Among the Romans there was a Superstition, that if their General would consent
to be Devoted, or Sacrificed to Jupiter, Mars, the Earth, and the Infernal
Gods, all the Misfortunes which otherwise might have happened to his Party, would
by his Death be transferred on their Enemies. This Opinion was confirmed by
several successful Instances, particularly two, in the Persons of the Decii,
Father and Son here mentioned. The first being Consul with Manlius in the Wars
against the Latins, and perceiving the Left Wing, which he Commanded, gave
back, he called out to Valerius the High Priest to perform on him the Ceremony
of Consecration, (which we find described by Livy in his 8th Book) and
immediately spurred his Horse into the thickest of his Enemies Forces, where he
was killed, and the Roman Army gained the Battle. His Son Died in the same
manner in the War against the Gauls, and the Romans likewise obtained the
Victory.

Servius Tullus was Son to Oriculana, whom Iuvenal calls a Serving-Maid, but
Livy supposes her to have been Wife to a Prince of Corniculum, who was killed
at the taking of the Town, and his Wife was carried away Captive by Tarquinius
Priscus, and presented as a Slave to his Wi^e Tanaquil, in whose Service she
was delivered of this Tullus. The Family had a great Respect for the Child,
because of a Lambent Fire they observed to play about his Head while he slept,
which was interpreted as an Omen of his future Greatness; therefore care was
taken of his Education, and at last he was Contracted to the King's Daughter:
Whereupon A^cus Martius his 2 Sons (who were the true Heirs of the Crown)
fearing this Marriage might hinder their Succession, hired two Shepherds to
Assassinate Tarquinius, which they undertook, but could not Execute so
dexterously as was expected; for, the King lived some days after the blow was
given, during which time Tanaquil caused the Gates of the Palace to be kept
shut, and amused the People (who were eager on a new Election) with assurances
that the Wound was not Mortal, That the King was in a fair way of Recovery, and
till he could appear abroad, required them to pay Obedience to Servius Tullius:
Who by this means first got possession of the Government in the King's Name,
and after his Death Usurped it 44 Years in his own. At last he was forced out
of the Senate by Lucius Tarquinius, thrown down Stairs, and Murdered by his
Orders. Livy adds this Commendation, That with him Iusta ac legitima regna
occiderunt; which agrees with Iuvenal's calling him The last good King; For,
Tarquin, who Reigned 25 Years after him, was hated for his Pride and Cruelty,
and for the Barbarous Rape which his Son Sextus committed on Lucretia, Wise to
Collatinus; who by the help of L. Iunius Brutus revenged this injury, by
driving Tarquin and his whole Race out of Rome, which from that time began to
be Governed by Consuls; and the better to secure their Liberty, Brutus
Administered an Oath by which the Romans obliged themselves never to suffer any
more Kings, and made a Decree (which proved fatal to his Family) whereby it was
declared a Capital Crime in any Person who should endeavor by any means to
bring back the Tarquins. However they gave not over their Pre^ensions, but send
Ambassadors under pretense of soliciting that their Estates at least might be
restored them, but underhand to insinuate themselves among the loose Young
Noblemen (who grew weary of a Commonwealth, because the Rigor of their new
Laws did not tolerate that licentious way of living which they enjoyed under
the Government of their Kings) and to concert with them the best Methods
toward their Restoration. This Design was first proposed to the Aquilii and
Vitellii: The last of these were Brothers to Brutus his Wife, and by that
Alliance easily engaged Titus and Tiberius (two Sons he had by her) in the
Conspiracy, the sum of which was, That the Gates of the City should be left
open for the Tarquins to enter in the Nightime; and that the Ambassadors
might be assured of their sincerity, each Member of the Cabal delivered them,
the Night before they were to return, Letters under their own hands for the
Tarquins, with Promises to this effect. (44) Tarquin, who Reigned 25 Years
after him, was hated for his Pride and Cruelty, and for the Barbarous Rape
which his Son Sextus committed on Lucretia, Wi^e to Collatinus; who by the help
of L. Iunius Brutus revenged this injury, by driving Tarquin and his whole Race
out of Rome, which from that time began to be Governed by Consuls; and the
better to secure their Liberty, Brutus Administered an Oath by which the Romans
obliged themselves never to suffer any more Kings, and made a Decree (which
proved fatal to his Family) whereby it was declared a Capital Crime in any
Person who should endeavor by any means to bring back the Tarquins. However
they gave not over their Precensions, but send Ambassadors under pretense of
soliciting that their Estates at least might be restored them, but underhand
to insinuate themselves among the loose Young Noblemen (who grew weary of a
Commonwealth, because the Rigor of their new Laws did not tolerate that
licentious way of living which they enjoyed under the Government of their
Kings) and to concert with them the best Methods toward their Restoration.
This Design was first proposed to the Aquilii and Vitellii: The last of these
were Brothers to Brutus his Wife, and by that Alliance easily engaged Titus and
Tiberius (two Sons he had by her) in the Conspiracy, the sum of which was, That
the Gates of the City should be left open for the Tarquins to enter in the
Nightime; and that the Ambassadors might be assured of their sincerity, each
Member of the Cabal delivered them, the Night before they were to return,
Letters under their own hands for the Tarquins, with Promises to this effect.
(46) L. Iunius Brutus revenged this injury, by driving Tarquin and his whole
Race out of Rome, which from that time began to be Governed by Consuls; and the
better to secure their Liberty, Brutus Administered an Oath by which the Romans
obliged themselves never to suffer any more Kings, and made a Decree (which
proved fatal to his Family) whereby it was declared a Capital Crime in any
Person who should endeavor by any means to bring back the Tarquins. However
they gave not over their Precensions, but send Ambassadors under pretense of
soliciting that their Estates at least might be restored them, but underhand
to insinuate themselves among the loose Young Noblemen (who grew weary of a
Commonwealth, because the Rigor of their new Laws did not tolerate that
licentious way of living which they enjoyed under the Government of their
Kings) and to concert with them the best Methods toward their Restoration.
This Design was first proposed to the Aquilii and Vitellii: The last of these
were Brothers to Brutus his Wife, and by that Alliance easily engaged Titus and
Tiberius (two Sons he had by her) in the Conspiracy, the sum of which was, That
the Gates of the City should be left open for the Tarquins to enter in the
Nightime; and that the Ambassadors might be assured of their sincerity, each
Member of the Cabal delivered them, the Night before they were to return,
Letters under their own hands for the Tarquins, with Promises to this effect.
(45) Titus and Tiberius (two Sons he had by her) in the Conspiracy, the sum of
which was, That the Gates of the City should be left open for the Tarquins to
enter in the Nightime; and that the Ambassadors might be assured of their
sincerity, each Member of the Cabal delivered them, the Night before they were
to return, Letters under their own hands for the Tarquins, with Promises to
this effect.

Vindicius, a Slave who waited at Table, by chance overheard part of their
Discourse; and comparing these Circumstances with some others he had observed
in their former Conferences, he went straight to the Consul's, and told what he
had discovered. Orders were immediately issued out for searching the
Ambassadors, the Letters abovementioned were intercepted, the Criminals seized,
and the proof being evident against them, they suffered the Punishment (which
was newly introduced) of being tied Naked to a Stake, where they were first
(...) by the Lictors, then Beheaded: And Brutus, by Virtue of his Office, was
unhappily obliged to see this Rigorous Sentence Executed on his old Children.

To pursue the Story; the Tarquins finding their Plot had miscarried, and
fearing nothing could be done by treachery, struck up an Alliance with Porsenna
King of Thuscany, who pretending to restore them by open force, marched with a
numerous Army, and besieged Rome: But was soon surpised with three such
Instances of the Roman Bravery, in the Persons of Cocles, Mutius, and Clelia,
that he withdrew his Army, and courted their Friendship.

Horatius Cocles being Posted to guard a Bridge, which he perceived the Enemy
would soon be Maste^ of, he stood resolutely and opposed part of their Army,
while the Party he Commanded, repassed the Bridge, and broke it down after
them; and then threw himself, Armed as he was, into the Tyber, and escaped to
the City.

Mutius Scaevola went into the Enemies Camp with a Resolution to kill their
King Porsenna, but instead of striking him, stabbed one of his Guards; and
being brought before the King, and finding his Error, in indignation he burned
off his Right hand as a Penalty for his mistake.

Clelia, a Roman Virgin, who was given to Porsenna as an Hostage, made her
escape from the Guards, and swam over the Tyber.

Romulus finding the City, called by his Name, not sufficiently Peopled,
established an Asylum, or Sanctuary, where all Outlaws, Vagabonds, and
Criminals of what Nature soever, who could make their escape thither, might
live in all freedom and security.

The Author either means the Bastard of Mars, and R^ea Sylvia, a Vestal Virgin,
of whose Rape we have a Relation in the beginning of Ovid's 3d Book de Fastis,
or a Parricide, for killing his Brother Remus.

* The ugly Buffoon of the Grecian Army.

THE NINTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY STEPHEN HERVEY, Esquire
ARGUMENT OF THE Ninth Satyr.
Juvenal here (in Dialogue with Nevolus) exposes the detestable Vice then
Practiced in Rome, and the Covetousness of a Rich Old Citizen, which so
prevaild over his Pleasure, that he would not Gratify the Drudge who had so
often Obliged him in the lewd Enjoyment of his Desire.

THE NINTH SATYR.
IUV. TELL me why, saunt'ring thus from Place to Place,
I meet thee (Nevolus) with a Clouded Face?
What Humane Ills can urge to this degree;
Not Vanquished A Phrygian, who challenging Apollo at Music, was overcome, and
flead alive for his Presumption.
Marsyas had a Brow like thee,
Nor Ravola so sneaked and hung his Head,
Caught with that lewd Bawd Rhodope in Bed:
Our Grand Beau A Fop in Rome, that had run out his Estate.
Pollio seemed not half so sad
When not a Dram could in Rome be had.
When treble Use he proffered for a Friend
And tempting Bribes did to the Scriv'ners send
Yet none he found so much a Fool to lend.
Hard Fate! untroll'd is now the Charming Dye,
The Playhouse and the Parks unvisited must lie;
The Beauteous Nymph in vain he does adore,
And his guilt Chariot Wheels must Roll no more.
But why these frightful Wrinckles in thy Prime?
That show old Age so long before the time,
At lowest Ebb of Fortune when you lay
(Contented then) how Merry was the Day.
But oh the Curse of wishing to be Great:
Dazzled with Hope we cannot see the Cheat;
Where wild Ambition in the Heart we find,
Farewell Content and Quiet of the Mind.
For Glittering Clouds we leave the solid Shore,
And wonted Happiness returns no more;
'Till such aspiring Thoughts had filled thy Breast,
No Man so pleasant, such a cheerful Guest;
So Brisk, so Gay, of that engaging Air,
No Mirth was Crowned 'till Nevolus was there:
The Scene's now changed, that frolic Genius fled,
And Gloomy Thought seems entered in its stead;
Thy Clothes worn out, not Hands nor Linen clean,
And thy bare Skin through the large Rents is seen;
Thy Locks uncomb'd like a rough Wood appear,
And every Part seems suited to thy Care.
Where now that labored Niceness in thy Dress,
And all those Arts that did the Spark express?
A look so Pale no Quartane ever gave,
Thy dwindled Legs seem crawling to a Grave:
When we are touched with some important Ill,
How vainly silence would our Grief conceal!
Sorrow nor Joy can be disguised by Art,
Our Foreheads blab the Secrets of our Heart;
By which (alas) it is evident and plain
Thy Hopes are dashed, and thy Endeavors vain;
And yet it is strange! But lately thou went known
For the most envied Stallion of the Town.
What conscious The Temples, and Images of their Gods, were (by Night) the
Common Places of Assignation.
Shrine, what Cell by thee unsought,
Where Love's dark Pleasures might be sold and bought?
From Human View you hid these Deeds of Lust,
But Gods in Brass and Marble you could trust:
Ceres To the Temple of Ceres, only the Chaste and strictest Matrons were
admitted, etc.
her self not escaped, for where can be
From Bawds and Prostitutes an Altar free?
Nor did thou only for the Females burn,
The Husband and the Wife succeeded in their Turn.

NEV. This Life I own to some has Prosperous been,
But I have no such Golden Minutes seen:
Right have you hit the Cause of my Distress,
None has Earned more, and been Rewarded less:
All I can gain is but a Threedbare Coat,
And that with utmost Pains and Drudging got;
Some Single Money too, but that (alas)
Broken and Counterfeit will hardly pass.
Whilst others, pampered in their shameless Pride,
Are served in Plate, and in their Chariots Ride;
Tell me what Mortal can his Grief contain,
That has, like me, such Reason to complain?
On Fate alone Man's Happiness depends,
To parts concealed Fate's prying Power extends:
And if our Stars of their Kind Influence fail,
The Gifts of Nature, what will they avail?
The Gifts of Nature! Curse upon the Thought,
By that alone I am to Ruin brought.
Old Virro did the Fatal Secret hear,
(But Curse on Fame that bore it to his Ear)
What soft Address his wooing did begin?
What Oaths what Promises to draw me in?
Scarce could they fail to make a Virgin Sin.
Who would not then swear Nevolus had sped,
And Golden Showers were dropping on his Head?
But oh this Wretch, this Prodigy behold!
A Slave at once to Leachery and Gold!
For in the Act of his lewd Brutal joy,
Sirrah! My Rogue (he cries) mine own dear Boy!
My Lad, my Life! already ask for more?
I paid last Bout, and you must quit the Score:
"Poor five A small Coin among the Romans.
Sestertia have been all my Gains,
"And what is that for such detested Pains?
Was it an Ease and Pleasure, cou'd'st thou say
(Where Nature's Law forbids) to force my way
To the digested Meals of yesterday?
The Slave more toiled and harrass'd will be found,
Who Digs his Master's Buttocks, than his Ground:
But sure old Virro thinks himself a Boy,
Whom Jove once more might languish to enjoy:
Sees not his withered Face and grizly Hair,
But would be thought Smooth, Charming, Soft, and Fair:
With Female Pride would have his Love be sought,
And every Smile with a Rich Present bought.
Say, Goat, for whom this Mass of Wealth you heap?
For whom thy hoorded Bags in silence sleep?
Apulian Farms for the Rich Soil admired?
And thy large Fields where Falcons may be tired?
Thy Fruitful Vineyards on Campanian Hills?
(Tho none drinks less, yet none more Vessels fills)
From such a Store it is barbarous to grudge
A small Relief to your Exhausted Drudge:
Weigh well the matter, were not fitter much
The Poor Inhabitants of yonder Thatch
Called me their Lord (who to Extremes am driven)
Than to some worthless Sycophant be given?
(Yet what smooth Sycophant by thee can gain?
When Lust it self strikes thy Flint-Heart in vain?)
A Beggar! Fie! it is Impudence, (he cried)
And such mean shifting Answers still replied;
But Rent unpaid, says Beg till Virro Grant;
(How ill does Modesty consist with Want?)
My single Boy (like A Giant of Sicily, and one of the Cyclops, who had but one
Eye, and that in his forehead, which Ulysses by craft put out, and escaped from
him, etc.
Polyphemus Eye)
Mourns his harsh Fate, and Weeps for a Supply.
One will not do, hard Labored and hard Fed,
How then shall Hungry two expect their Bread?
What shall I say, when rough December Storms?
When Frosts, and Snow, have crampt their Naked Arms
What Comforts without Money can I bring?
Will they be satisfied to think on Spring?
These Motives urged to his Obdurate Mind,
Is casting Water to the adverse Wind;
But one thing yet, base Wretch, I must impart,
Thy self shall own, ungrateful as thou art;
At your Entreaties, had not I obeyed;
Still your deluded Wife had been a Maid:
Down on the Bridal-bed a Maid she lay,
A Maid she rose, at the approaching Day.
Another Night, thy lumpish Love she tried,
But still she rose, a Virgin, and a Bride:
What could have touched her more! away she flung,
And every Street of thy lost Manhood rung.
Her speaking Eyes, were full of thy Disgrace;
And her vexed Thoughts abhorred the cold Embrace.
Such wrongs, what Wishing Woman could have born?
In Rage, the Marriage Articles were torn:
Yet when she vowed, to see thy Face no more,
And Heartless, thou stood'st whining at the Door,
I met the Angry Fair, all over Charms,
And caught her flying from thy Frozen Arms:
Much Pains it cost to Right the injured Dame;
A whole Night's Vigor, to repair thy shame:
Witness your self, who heard the laboring Bed,
And shrieks at the departing Maidenhead:
"Thus many a Spouse, who would her Choice recant;
"Is kept Obedient by a Kind Gall^nt*
Now, could you shift all this and pass it over,
Yet (Monster) I have left one Instance more.
Think, if so well her Business I have done,
As that Night's service may produce a Son,
Our Roman Laws great Privilege afford
To him that stands a Father on Record:
Thy self, it is true, a Cuckold thou must own,
But that Reproach is in my Breast alone,
To me the Pleasure be, to thee the Fame,
My Brat shall thy Abilities proclaim;
And free thee ever, from Inglorious Shame.
Let circling Wreaths adorn thy crowded Door,
Matrons, and Girls, shall hoot at thee no more,
But Stories to thy lasting Credit raise,
While fumbling Fribbles grudge thy borrowed Praise.

IUV. True, Nevolus, most aptly you complain,
But tho your Griefs are just, they are in vain;
Your Service past, he does with Scorn forget,
And seeks some other Fool, like thee, to cheat.

NEV. Beware, my Friend, and what I now reveal,
As the great Secret of thy Life conceal,
A lustful Pathick, when he turns a Foe;
He gives like Destiny a wardless Blow*
His Crimes are such, they will not bear a Jest,
And Fire and Sword, pursue the (...) Breast.
For sweet Revenge no Drugs will be too Dear,
In Lust, a Miser, but a Spendthrift here.
Then slight him not, nor with his Scandal sport,
But be as Mute as was the The Areopagus, or Court of Justice at Athens, where
they gave Sentence by Characters and Signs, etc.
Athenian Court.

IUV. Dull The common Name of a Shepherd, which he applies to Nevolus, for his
ignorance and simplicity, in thinking the Vices of Great Men can be concealed.
Corydon! Art thou so stupid grown,
To think a Rich Man's Faults can be unknown?
Has he not Slaves about him? Would not they
Rejoice, and Laugh, such Secrets to betray?
What more Effectual to Revenge their Wrongs?
Than the unbounded Freedom of their Tongues?
Or grant it possible to silence those,
Dumb Beasts and Statues would his Crimes expose:
Try to imprison the resistless Wind,
So swift is Guilt, so hard to be confined;
Tho crafty Tears, should cast a Vail between,
Yet in the Dark, his Vices would be seen:
And there is a Lust in Man no Charm can tame,
Of loudly Publishing our Neighbor's Shame;
On Eagles Wings immortal Scaridals fly,
While Virtuous Actions are but Born, and Dye.
Let us live well, were it alone for This,
The baneful Tongues of Servants to despise,
Slander (the worst of Poisons) ever finds
An easy Entrance, to ignoble Minds:
And they whose Vicious Lives, such Abject Foes mu^t fear,
More mean and wretched far than their own Slaves appear.

NEV. Your Counsel's Good and Useful, it is confessed;
But (oh) to me it is in vain addressed:
Let the Great Man, whom gaping Crowds attend,
Fear a scourged Slave, or a dissembling Friend;
No matter what I do, or what I say,
I have no Spies about me to betray:
And you advise me now my time is lost,
And all my Hopes of Prosperous Hours are crossed;
My full-blown Youth already fades apace,
(Of our short Being, it is the shortest space.)
While melting Pleasures in our Arms are found,
While Lovers smile^ and while the Bowl goes round;
While in surprising Joys intranc'd we lie,
Old Age creeps on us, e're we think it nigh.

IUV. Fear not, thy Trade will never find an End,
While you The 7 Hills on which Rome was built.
Hills stand thou can not want a Friend;
By Land, and Sea, from every Point they come,
Then dread no Dearth of Prostitutes at Rome.

NEV. Tell this to Happier Men, for I am sped;
If all my Drudging can procure me Bread.
Ye Deities! The Substitutes of Heav^n!
To whom the Guide of Humane Life is given;
At whose loved Altars, with an ample Zeal,
(Tho slender Sacrifice) I daily kneel,
His Ebbing Hours let your Poor Suppliant see
From the mean Crutch, and a Thatcht Cottage free;
No shameful Want, nor troublesome Disease,
But easy Death approaching by degrees;
Necessity supplied, would Comfort bring:
Yet constant Store, would be a Glorious thing:
To Treat a Friend, methinks, I would afford,
While Silver Bowls stand smiling on my Board:
And when the Cares of Rome to Pleasure yield;
Two M^^sia, a place near Tusca^y, famous for the great (...) and strength of
the Inhabit^^^^^.
Maesian Slaves should bear me to the Field:
Where, on their Brawny Shoulders mounted high,
While the Brave Youth their various Manhood try,
I would the Thrones of Emperors defy.
Superfluous Wealth, and Pomp, I not desire;
But what Content, and Decency require.
Then might I live by my own Surly Rules,
Not forced to Worship Knaves, and flatter Fools.
And thus secured of Ea^e, by s^unning strife,
With Pleasure would I Sail down the swift Stream of Life.
But, oh ridiculous vain Wish for one
Already lost, and doomed to be undone.
Alas! what Hope remains! For to my Prayers,
Regardless Fortune stops her wounded Ears;
As to the Mermaids on the Coast of Sicily, whose Charms Ulysses (being
forewarned) avoided by stopping his Mariners Ears with Wax, and so Sailed by
them securely; at which Disappointment they threw themselves into the Sea, and
were turned into Rocks, etc. Hom. Odyss. l. 12.
Sirens Charms, Ulysses Mariners.

The End of the Ninth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE NINTH SATYR.
A Phrygian, who challenging Apollo at Music, was overcome, and flead alive
for his Presumption.

A Fop in Rome, that had run out his Estate.

The Temples, and Images of their Gods, were (by Night) the Common Places of
Assignation.

To the Temple of Ceres, only the Chaste and strictest Matrons were admitted,
etc.

A small Coin among the Romans.

A Giant of Sicily, and one of the Cyclops, who had but one Eye, and that in
his forehead, which Ulysses by craft put out, and escaped from him, etc.

The Areopagus, or Court of Justice at Athens, where they gave Sentence by
Characters and Signs, etc.

The common Name of a Shepherd, which he applies to Nevolus, for his ignorance
and simplicity, in thinking the Vices of Great Men can be concealed.

The 7 Hills on which Rome was built.

M^^sia, a place near Tusca^y, famous for the great (...) and strength of the
Inhabit^^^^^.

Mermaids on the Coast of Sicily, whose Charms Ulysses (being forewarned)
avoided by stopping his Mariners Ears with Wax, and so Sailed by them securely;
at which Disappointment they threw themselves into the Sea, and were turned
into Rocks, etc. Hom. Odyss. l. 12.

THE TENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE Tenth Satyr.
The Poet's Design in this Divine Satyr, (...) represent the various Wishes and
Desires of Mankind; and to set out the Folly of 'em. He runs through all the
several Heads of Riches, Honors, Eloquence, Fame for Martial Achievements,
Long-Life, and Beauty; and gives Instances in Each, how frequently they have
proved the Ruin of Those that Owned them. He concludes therefore, that since we
generally choose so ill for our selves^ (...) it to the Gods, to make the choice
for us. All we can safely ask of Heaven, lies within a very small Compass. It Is
but Health of Body and Mind -- And if we have these, it is not much matter, what
we want besides: For we have already enough to make us Happy.

THE TENTH SATYR.
LOOK round the Habitable World, how few
Know their own Good; or knowing it, pursue.
How void of Reason are our Hopes and Fears!
What in the Conduct of our Life appears
So well designed, so luckily begun,
But, when we have our wish, we wish undone?
Whole Houses, of their whole Desires possessed,
Are often Ruined, at their own Request.
In Wars, and Peace, things hurtful we require,
When made Obnoxious to our own Desire.
With Laurels some have fatally been Crowned;
Some who the depths of Eloquence have found,
In that unnavigable Stream were Drowned.
The MIlo, of Crotona; who for a Trial of his strength, going to rend an Oak,
perished in the Attempt: for his Arms were caught in the Trunk of it; and he
was devoured by Wild Beasts.
Brawny Fool, who did his Vigor boast;
In that Presumeing Confidence was lost^
But more have been by Avarice oppressed,
And Heaps of Money crowded in the Chest:
Unwieldy Sums of Wealth, which higher mount
Than Files of Marshalled Figures can account.
To which the Stores of Craesus, in the Scale,
Would look like little Dolphins, when they sail
In the vast Shadow of the British Whale.
For this, in Nero's Arbitrary time,
When Virtue was a Guilt. and Wealth a Crime,
A Troop of Cut-Th^oat Guards were sent, to seize
The Rich Men's Goods, and gut their Palaces:
The Mob, Commissioned by the Government,
Are seldom to an Empty Garret, sent.
The Fearful Passenger, who Travels late,
Charged with the Carriage of a Paltry Plate,
Shakes at the Moonshine shadow of a Rush;
And sees a Red-Coat rise from every Bush:
The Beggar Sings, even when he sees the place
Beset with Thieves, and never mends his pace.
Of all the Vows, the first and chief Request
Of each, is to be Richer than the rest:
And yet no doubts the Poor Man's Draught control;
He dreads no Poison in his homely Bowl.
Then fear the deadly Drug, when Gems Divine
Enchase the Cup, and sparkle in the Wine.
Will you not now, the pair of Sages praise,
Who the same End pursued, by several Ways?
One pitied, one contemned the Woeful Times:
One laughed at Follies, one lamented Crimes:
Laughter is easy; but the Wonder lies
What stores of Brine supplied the Weepers Eyes.
Democritus, could feed his Spleen, and shake
His sides and shoulders till he felt 'em ache;
Tho in his Country Town, no Lictors were;
Nor Rods nor Ax nor Tribune did appear:
Nor all the Foppish Gravity of show
Which cunning Magistrates on Crowds bestow:
What had he done, had he beheld, on high
Our Praetor seated, in Mock Majesty;
His Chariot rolling over the Dusty place
While, with dumb Pride, and a set formal Face,
He moves, in the dull Ceremonial track,
With Jove's Embroidered Coat upon his back:
A Suit of Hangings had not more oppressed
His Shoulders, than that long, Laborious Vest.
A heavy Gugaw, (called a Crown,) that spread
About his Temples, drowned his narrow Head:
And would have crushed it, with the Massy Freight,
But that a sweating Slave sustained the weight:
A Slave in the same Chariot seen to ride,
To mortify the mighty Madman's Pride.
Add now the Imperial Eagle, raised on high,
With Golden Beak (the Mark of Majesty)
Trumpets before, and on the Left and Right,
A Cavalcade of Nobles, all in White:
In their own Natures false, and flattering Tribes^
But made his Friends, by Places and by Bribes.
In his own Age Democritus could find
Sufficient cause to laugh at Humane kind:
Learn from so great a Wit; a Land of Bogs
With Ditches fenc'd^ a Heaven Fat with Fogs,
May form a Spirit fit to sway the State;
And make the Neighboring Monarchs fear their Fate.
He laughs at all the Vulgar Cares and Fears;
At their vain Triumphs, and their vainer Tears:
An equal Temper in his Mind he found,
When Fortune flattered him, and when she frowned.
It Is plain from hence that what our Vows request,
Are hurtful things, or Useless at the best.
Some ask for Envied Power; which public Hate
Pursues, and hurries headlong to their Fate:
Down go the Titles; and the Statue Crowned,
Is by base Hands in the next River Drowned.
The Guiltless Horses, and the Chariot Wheel
The same Effects of Vulgar Fury feel:
The Smith prepares his Hammer for the Stroke,
While the Lung'd Bellows hissing Fire provoke;
Sejanus Sejanus was Tiberius's first Favorite; and while he continued so, had
the highest Marks of Honor bestowed on him; Statues and Trium^ phal Chariots
were every where erected to him. But as soon as he fell into Disgrace with the
Emperor, these were all immediately dismounted; and the Senate and Common
People insulted over him as meanly, as they had sawn'd on him before.
almost first of Roman Names,
The great Sejanus crackles in the Flames:
Formed in the Forge, the Pliant Brass is laid
On Anvils; and of Head and Limbs are made,
Pans, Cans, and Pispots, a whole Kitchen Trade.
Adorn your Doors with Laurels; and a Bull
Milk white and large, lead to the Capitol;
Sejanus with a Rope, is dragged along;
The Sport and Laughter of the giddy Throng!
Good Lord, they Cry, what Ethiop Lips he has,
How foul a Snout, and what a hanging Face?
By Heaven I never could endure his sight;
But say, how came his Monstrous Crimes to Light?
What is the Charge, and who the Evidence
(The Savior of the Nation and the Prince?)
Nothing of this; but our Old Caesar sent
A Noisie Letter to his Parliament:
Nay Sirs, if Caesar writ, I ask no more
He Is Guilty; and the Question's out of Door.
How goes the Mob, (for that is a Mighty thing.)
When the King's Trump, the Mob are for the King:
They follow Fortune, and the Common Cry
Is still against the Rogue Condemned to Dye.
But the same very Mob; that Rascal crowd
Had cried Sejanus, with a Shout as loud;
Had his Designs, (by Fortune's favor Blessed.)
Suc^eded, and the Prince's Age oppressed.
But long, long since, the Times have changed their Face,
The People grown Degenerate and base:
Not suffered now the Freedom of their choice,
To make their Magistrates, and sell their Voice.
Our Wise Forefathers, Great by Sea and Land,
Had once the Power, and absolute Command;
All Offices of Trust, themselves disposed;
Raised whom they pleased, and whom they pleased, Deposed.
But we who give our Native Rights away,
And our Enslaved Posterity betray,
Are now reduced to beg an Alms, and go
On Holidays to see a Puppet show.
There was a Damned Design, cries one, no doubt;
For Warrants are already Issued out:
I met Brutidius in a Mortal fright:
He Is dipped for certain, and plays least in sight:
I fear the Rage of our offended Prince,
Who thinks the Senate slack in his defense!
Come let us haste, our Loyal Zeal to show,
And spurn the Wretched Corpse of Caesar's Foe:
But let our Slaves be present there, lest they
Accuse their Masters, and for Gain betray.
Such were the Whispers of those jealous Times,
About Sejanus Punishment, and Crimes.
Now tell me truly, would thou change thy Fate
To be, like him, first Minister of State?
To have thy Levees Crowded with resort,
Of a depending, gaping, servile Court:
Dispose all Honors, of the Sword and Gown,
Grace with a Nod, and Ruin with a Frown;
To hold thy Prince in Pupill-Age and sway,
That Monarch, whom the Mastered World obey?
While he, intent on secret Lusts alone,
Lives to himself, abandoning the Throne;
Coopt The Island of Capreae, which lies about a League out at Sea from the
Campanian Shore, was the Scene of Tiberius's Pleasures in the latter part of
his Reign. There he lived for some Years with Diviners, Soothsayers, and worse
Company -- And from thence, dispatched all his Orders to the Senate.
in a narrow Isle, observing Dreams
With flattering Wisards, and erecting Schemes!
I well believe, thou wou'd'st be Great as he;
For every Man's a Fool to that Degree:
All wish the dire Prerogative to kill;
Even they would have the Power, who want the Will:
But would thou have thy Wishes understood,
To take the Bad together with the Good?
Would thou not rather choose a small Renown,
To be the May'^ of some poor Paltry Town,
Bigly to Look, and Bath rou^ly to speak;
To pound false Weights, and scanty Measures break?
Then, grant we that Sejanus went astray,
In every Wish, and knew not how to pray:
For he who grasped the World's exhausted Store
Yet never had enough, but wished for more,
Raised a Top-heavy Tower, of monst'rous height,
Which Mouldering, crushed him underneath the Weight.
What did the mighty Pompey's Fall beget?
And ruined Julius Caesar, who got the better of P^mpey, that was styled the
Great.
him, who Greater than the Great,
The stubborn Pride of Roman Nobles broke;
And bent their Haughty Necks beneath his Yoke?
What else, but his immoderate Lust of Power,
Pray^rs made, and granted in a Luckless Hour:
For few Usurpers to the Shades descend
By a dry Death, or with a quiet End.
The Boy, who scarce has paid his Entrance down
To his proud Pedant, or declined a Noun,
(So small an Elf, that when the days are foul,
He and his Satchel must be born to School,)
Yet prays and hopes and aims at nothing less,
To Demosthenes and Tully, both dyed for their Oratory. Demosthenes gave
himself Poison, to avoid being carried to Antipater; one of Alexander's
Captains, who had then made himself Master of Athens. Tully was Murdered by M.
Antony's Order, in Return, for those Invectives he had made against him.
prove a Tully, or Demosthenes:
But both those Orators; so much Renowned,
In their own Depths of Eloquence were Drowned:
The Hand and Head were never lost, of those
Who dealt in Dogrel, or who punn'd in Prose:
Fortune The Latin of this Couplet is a Famous Verse of Tully's, in which he
sets out the Happiness of his own Consulship; Famous for the Vanity, and the
ill Poetry of it. For Tully as he had a good deal of the one, so he had no
great share of the other.
foretun'd the Dying Notes of Rome:
Till I, thy Consul sole, consol'd thy Doom.
His Fate had crept below the lifted Swords,
Had all his Malice been to Murder words.
I rather would be Maevius, Thrash for Rhimes
Like his, the scorn and scandal of the Times,
Than The Orations of Tully, against M. A^^ony, were styled by him Philippics,
in imitation of Demosthenes; who had given that Name before to those he made
against Philip of Macedon.
that Philippique, fatally Divine,
Which is inscribed the Second, should be Mine.
Nor he, the Wonder of the Grecian throng,
Who drove them with the Torrent of his Tongue,
Who shook the Theaters, and swayed the State
Of Athens, found a more Propitious Fate.
Whom, born beneath a boding Horoscope,
His Sire, the Blear-eyed Vulcan of a Shop,
From Mars his Forge, sent to Minerva's Schools,
To learn the unlucky Art of wheedling Fools.
With Itch of Honor, and Opinion, Vain,
All things beyond their Native worth we strain:
The This is a Mock-Account of a Roman Triumph.
Spoils of War, brought to Feretrian Jove,
An empty Coat of Armor hung above
The Conquerours Chariot, and in Triumph born,
A Streamer from a boarded Gally torn,
A Chap-^^ln Beaver loosly hanging by^
The cloven Helm, an Ar^h of Victory^
On whose high Unequal sits a Captive Foe
And sighing casts a Mournful Look below;
Of every Nation, each Illustrious Name,
Such Toys as these have cheated into Fame:
Exchanging solid Quiet, to obtain
The Windy satisfaction of the Brain.
So much the Thirst of Honor Fires the Blood;
So many would be Great, so few be Good.
For who would Virtue for her self regard,
Or Wed, without the Portion of Reward?
Yet this Mad Chase of Fame, by few pursued,
Has drawn Destruction on the Multitude:
This Avarice of Praise in Times to come,
Those long Inscriptions, crowded on the Tomb,
Should some Wild Fig Tree take her Native bent,
And heave below the gaudy Monument,
Would crack the Marble Titles, and disperse
The Characters of all the lying Verse.
For Sepulchers themselves must crumbling fall
In times Abyss, the common Grave of all.
Great Hannibal within the Balance lay;
And tell how many Pounds his Ashes weigh;
Whom Afric was not able to contain,
Whose length runs Level with the Atlantic main,
And wearies fruitful Nilus, to convey
His Sun-beat Waters by so long a way;
Which Ethiopia's double Clime divides,
And Elephants in other Mountains hides.
Spain first he won, the P^raeneans past,
And steepy Alps, the Mounds that Nature cast:
And with Corroding Juices, as he went,
A passage through the living Rocks he rent.
Then, like a Torrent, rolling from on high,
He pours his headlong Rage on Italy;
In three Victorious Battles overrun;
Yet still uneasy, Cries there is nothing done:
Till, level with the Ground, their Gates are laid;
And Punick Flags, on Roman Towers displaid.
Ask what a Face belonged to this high Fame;
His Picture scarcely would deserve a Frame:
A Sign-Post Dawber would disdain to pain^
The one Eyed Hero on his Elephant.
Now what is his End, O Charming Glory, say
What rare fifth Act, to Crown this huffing Play?
In one deciding Battle overcome,
He flies, is banished from his Native home:
Begs refuge in a Foreign Court, and there
Attends his mean Petition to prefer:
Repulsed by surly Grooms, who wait before
The sleeping Tyrant's interdicted Door^
What wondrous sort of Death, has Heaven designed
Distinguished from the Herd of Humane Kind,
For so untamed, so turbulent a Mind!
Nor Swords at hand, nor hissing Darts afar,
Are doomed to Avenge the tedious blood^ War,
But Poison, drawn through a Rings hollow plate,
Must finish him; a sucking Infant's Fate.
Go, climb the rugged Alps, Ambitious Fool,
To please the Boys, and be a Theme at School.
One World suffis^d not Alexander's Mind;
Coop't up, he seemed in Earth and Seas confined:
And, struggling, stretched his restless Limbs about
The narrow Globe, to find a passage out.
Yet, entered in the Babylon, where Alexander died.
Brick-built Town, he tried
The Tomb, and found the strait dimensions wide:
"Death only this Mysterious Truth unfolds,
"The mighty Soul, how small a Body holds.
Old Xerxes, is represented in History, after a very Romantic Manner;
affecting Fame beyond Measure, and doing the most Extravagant things, to
compass it. Mount Athos made a Prodigious Promontory in the AEgaean Sea: He is
said to have cut a Channel through it, and to have Sailed round it. He made a
Bridge of Boats over the Hellespont, where it was three Miles broad: ^And
ordered a Whipping for the Winds and Seas, because they had once crossed his
Designs, as we have a very solemn account of it in Herodotus. But, after all
these vain Boasts, he was shamefully beaten by Themistocles at Salamis; and
returned home, leaving most of his Fleet behind him.
Greece a Tale of Athos would make out,
Cut from the Continent, and Sailed about;
Seas hid with Navies, Chariots passing over
The Channel, on a Bridge from shore to shore:
Rivers, whose depth no sharp beholder sees,
Drunk, at an Armies Dinner, to the Lees;
With a long Legend of Romantic things,
Which, in his Cups, the Bowsy Poet sings.
But how did he return, this haughty Brave
Who whipped the Winds, and made the Sea his Slave?
(Though Neptune took unkindly to be bound;
And Eurus never such hard usage found
In his Eolian Prisons under ground;)
What God so mean even Mercury, who was a God of the lowest size, and employed
always in Errands between Heaven and Hell. And Mortals used him accordingly:
For his Statues were anciently placed, where Roads met; with Directions on the
Fingers of 'em, pointing out the several ways to Travelers.
he who points the way,
So Merciless a Tyrant to Obey!
But how returned he, let us ask again?
In a poor Skiff he passed the bloody Main,
Choked with the slaughtered Bodies of his Train.
For Fame he prayed, but let the Event declare
He had no mighty penn'worth of his Prayer.
Jove grant me length of Life, and Years good store?
Heap on my bending Back, I ask no more.
Both Sick and Healthful, Old and Young, conspire
In this one silly, mischievous desire.
Mistaken Blessing which Old Age they call,
It Is a long, nasty, darksom Hospital.
A ropy Chain of Rhumes; a Visage rough,
Deformed, Unfeatur'd, and a Skin of Buff.
A stitch-fal'n Cheek, that hangs below the Jaw;
Such Wrinckles, as a skillful Hand would draw
For an old Grandam Ape, when, with a Grace,
She sits at squat, and scrubs her Leathern Face.
In Youth, distinctions infinite abound;
No Shape, or Feature, just alike are found;
The Fair, the Black, the Feeble, and the Strong;
But the same foulness does to Age belong,
The self same Palsy, both in Limbs, and Tongue.
The Skull and Forehead one Bald Barren plain;
And Gums unarmed to Mumble Meat in vain:
Besides the Eternal Drivel, that supplies
The dropping Beard, from Nostrils, Mouth, and Eyes.
His Wife and Children loath him, and, what is worse,
Himself does his offensive Carrion Curse!
Flatt'rers forsake him too; for who would kill
Himself, to be Remembered in a Will?
His taste, not only palled to Wine and Meat,
But to the Relish of a Nobler Treat.
The limber Nerve, in vain provoked to rise,
Inglorious from the Field of Battle flies:
Poor Feeble Dotard, how could he advance
With his Blew-head-piece, and his broken Lance?
Add, that endeavoring still without effect,
A Lust more sordid justly we suspect.
Those Senses lost, behold a new defeat;
The Soul, dislodging from another seat.
What Music, or Enchanting Voice, can cheer
A Stupid, Old, Impenetrable Ear?
No matter in what Place, or what Degree
Of the full Theater he sits to see;
Cornets and Trumpets cannot reach his Ear:
Under an Actor's Nose, he is never near.
His Boy must bawl, to make him understand
The Hour of the Day, or such a Lord's at hand:
The little Blood that creeps within his Veins,
Is but just warmed in a hot Feaver's pains.
In fine, he wears no Limb about him found:
With Sores and Sicknesses, beleaguered round:
Ask me their Names, I sooner could relate
How many Drudges on Salt Hippia wait;
What Crowds of Patients the Town Doctor kills,
Or how, last fall, he raised the Weekly Bills.
What Provinces by Basilus were spoiled,
What Herds of Heirs by Guardians are beguiled:
How many bouts a Day that Bitch has tried;
How many Boys that Pedagogue can ride!
What Lands and Lordships for their Owners know,
My Quondam Barber, but his Worship now.
This Dotard of his broken Back complains,
One his Legs fail, and one his Shoulders pain:
Another is of both his Eyes bere^t;
And Envies who has one for Aiming left.
A Fifth with trembling Lips expecting stands;
As in his Childhood, crammed by others hands;
One, who at sight of Supper opened wide
His Jaws before, and Whetted Grinders tried;
Now only Yawns, and waits to be supplied:
Like a young Swallow, when with weary Wings,
Expected Food, her fasting Mother brings.
His loss of Members is a heavy Curse,
But all his Faculties decayed, a worse!
His Servants Names he has forgotten quite:
Knows not his Friend who supped with him last Night:
Not even the Children, he Begot and Bred;
Or his Will knows 'em not: For, in their stead,
In Form of Law, a common Hackney Jade,
Sole Heir, for secret Services, is made:
So lewd, and such a battered Brothel Whore,
That she defies all Comers, at her Door.
Well, yet suppose his Senses are his own,
He lives to be chief Mourner for his Son:
Before his Face his Wife and Brother burns;
He Numbers all his Kindred in their Urns.
These are the Fines he pays for living long;
And dragging tedious Age, in his own wrong:
Griefs always Green, a Household still in Tears,
Sad Pomps: A Threshold thronged with daily Biers;
And Liveries of Black for Length of Years.
Next to the Raven's Age, the Pylian Nestor, King of Pylus; who was 300 Years
old, according to Homer's account, at least, as he is understood by his
Expositors.
King
Was longest lived of any two-leg'd thing;
Blessed, to Defraud the Grave so long, to Mount
His The Ancients counted by their Fingers. Their Left Hands served 'em till
they came up to an Hundred. After that, they used their Right, to express all
greater Numbers.
Numbered Years, and on his Right Hand Count;
Three Hundred Seasons, guzling Must of Wine:
But, hold a while, and hear himself Repine
At Fates Unequal Laws; and at the Clue
Which, The Fates were three Sisters, which had all some peculiar Business
assigned 'em by the Poets, in Relation to the Lives of Men. The First held the
Distaff; the Second Spun the Thread; and the Third cut it.
Merciless in length, the midmost Sister drew.
When his Brave Son upon the Funeral Pyre,
He saw extended, and his Beard on Fire;
He turned, and Weeping, asked his Friends, what Crime
Had Cursed his Age to this unhappy Time?
Thus Mourned Old Peleus for Achilles slain,
And thus Vlysses's Father did complain.
How Fortunate an End had Priam made,
Among his Ancestors a mighty shade,
While Troy yet stood: When Hector with the Race
Of Royal Bastards might his Funeral Grace:
Amidst the Tears of Trojan Dames inurn'd,
And by his Loyal Daughters, truly mourned.
Had Heaven so Blessed him, he had Died before
The fatal Fleet to Sparta Paris bore.
But mark what Age produced; he lived to see
His Town in Flames his falling Monarchy:
In fine, the feeble Sire, reduced by Fate,
To change his Scepter for a Sword, too late,
His Whilst Troy was Sacking by the Greeks. Old King Priam is said to have
Buckled on his Armor, to oppose 'em. Which he had no sooner done, but he was
met by Pyrrhus, and Slain before the Altar of Jupiter, in his own Palace, as we
have the Story finely told, in Virgil's 2d AEneid.
last Effort before Jove's Altar tries;
A Soldier half, and half a Sacrifice:
Falls like an Ox, that waits the coming blow;
Old and unprofitable to the Plough.
At Hecuba, his Queen, escaped the Swords of the Grecians, and outlived him. It
seems, she behaved her self so fiercely, and uneasily to her Husband's
Murderers, while she lived, that the the Poets thought fit to turn her into a
Bitch, when she died.
least, he Died a Man, his Queen furviv'd;
To Howl, and in a barking Body lived.
I hasten to our own; Nor will relate
Great Mithridates, after he had disputed the Empire of the World for 40 Years
together, with the Romans, was at last deprived of Life and Empire by Pompey
the Great.
Mithridates, and Rich Craesus, in the midst of his Prosperity, making his
Boast to S^l^n, how Happy he was, received this Answer from the Wi^e Man, That
on One could pronounce himself Happy, till he saw what his End should be^^ Th^^
truth of this Craesus found, when he was put in Chains by Cyrus, and Condemned
to die.
Craessus Fate;
Whom Solon wisely Counseled to attend,
The Name of Happy, till he knew his End.
That Marius was an ^xile, that he fled
Was taken, in Ruined Carthage begged his Bread,
All these were owing to a Life too long:
For whom had Rome beheld so Happy, Young!
High in his Chariot and with Laurel Crowned,
When he had led the Cimbrian Captives round
The Roman Streets; descending from his State,
In that Blessed Hour he should have begged his Fate:
Then, then he might have died of all admired,
And his Triumphant Soul with Shouts expired.
Campania, Pompey, in the midst of his Glory, fell into a Dangerous Fit of
Sickness, at Naples. A great many Cities then made Public Supplicat^ons for
him. He Recovered,^ was beaten at Pharsalia, fled to Ptolomy King of Egypt;
and, instead of receiving Protection at his Court, had his Head ^truck off by
his Order, to please Caesar.
Fortunes Malice to prevent,
To Pompey an indulgent Favor sent:
But public Prayers imposed on Heaven, to give
Their much Loved Leader an unkind Reprieve.
The Cities Fate and his, conspired to save
The Head, reserved for an Egyptian Slave.
Cethegus, Cethegus was one that conspired with Catiline, and was put to Death
by the Senate.
tho a Traitor to the State,
And Tortured, escaped this Ignominious Fate:
And Sergius, Catiline died Fighting.
who a bad Cause bravely tried,
All of a Piece, and undiminish'd Died.
To Venus, the fond Mother makes a Prayer,
That all her Sons and Daughters may be Fair:
True, for the Boys a Mumbling Vow she sends;
But, for the Girls, the Vaulted Temple rends:
They must be finished Pieces: It Is allowed
Diana's Beauty made Latona Proud;
And pleased, to see the Wondering People Pray
To the New-rising Sister of the Day.
And yet Lucretia's Fate would bar that Vow:
And Fair Virginia was killed by her own Father, to prevent her being exposed
to the Lust of Appius Claudius, who had Ill Designs upon her. The Story at
large is in Livy's Third Book; and it is a remarkable one, as it gave occasion
to the putting down the Power of the Decemviri; of whom Appius was one.
Virginia would her Fate bestow
On Rutila; and change her Faultless Make
For the foul rumple of Her Camel back.
But, for his Mother's Boy, the Beau, what frights
His Parents have by Day, what Anxious Nights!
Form joined with Virtue is a sight too rare:
Chaste is no Epithete to suit with Fair.
Suppose the same Traditionary strain
Of Rigid Manners, in the House remain;
Inveterate Truth, an Old plain Sabine's Heart;
Suppose that Nature, too, has done her part;
Infused into his Soul a sober Grace,
And blushed a Modest Blood into his Face;
(For Nature is a better Guardian far,
Than Saucy Pedants, or dull Tutors are:)
Yet still the Youth must never arrive at Man;
(So much Almighty Bribes, and Presents, can:)
Even with a Parent, where Persuasions fail,
Money is impudent, and will prevail.
We never Read of such a Tyrant King,
Who guelt a Boy deformed, to hear him Sing.
Nor Nero, in his more Luxurious Rage,
E're made a Mistress of an ugly Page:
Sporus, his Spouse, nor Crooked was, nor Lame
With Mountain Back, and Belly, from the Game
Cross-barr'd: But both his Sexes well became.
Go, boast your Springal, by his Beauty Cursed
To ^lls; nor think I have declared the worst:
His Form procures him Journey-Work; a strife
Betwixt Town-Madams, and the Merchant's Wife:
Guess, when he undertakes this public War,
What furious Beasts offended Cuckolds are.
Adult'rers are with Dangers round beset;
Born under Mars, they cannot escape the Net;
And from Revengeful Husbands often have tried
Worse handling, than severest Laws provide:
One stabs, one slashes, one, with Cruel Art,
Makes Colon suffer for the Peccant part.
But your Endymion, your smooth, Smock-fac'd Boy,
Unrivaled, shall a Beauteous Dame enjoy:
Not so: One more Salacious, Rich, and Old,
Out-bids, and buys her Pleasure for her Gold:
Now he must Moil, and Drudge, for one he loathes:
She keeps him High, in Equipage, and Clothes:
She Pawns her Jewels, and her Rich Attire,
And thinks the Workman worthy of his Hire:
In all things else immoral, stingy, mean;
But, in her Lusts, a Conscionable Queen.
She may be handsome, yet be Chaste, you say:
Good Observator, not so fast away:
Did it not cost the Hippolytus the Son of Theseus, was loved by his Mother in
Law ^haedria. But he not complying with her, she procured his Death.
Modest Youth his Life,
Who shunned the Embraces of his Father's Wife?
And was not the other Bellerophon, the Son of King Glaucus, residing sometime at
the Court of Paetus King of the Argives, the Queen, Sthenobaea, fell in Love
with him. But he refusing her, she turned the Accusation upon Him; and he
narrowly escaped Paetus's Vengeance.
Stripling forced to fly,
Who, coldly, did his Patron's Queen deny;
And pleaded Laws of Hospitality?
The Ladies charged 'em home, and turned the Tail:
With shame they redn'd, and with spite grew Pale.
^Tis Dangerous to deny the longing Dame;
She loses Pity, who has lost her Shame.
Now Messalina, Wife to the Emperor Claudius, Infamous for her Lewdness. She
set her Eyes upon C. S^lius, a fine Youth; forced him to quit his own Wife, and
Marry her with all the Formalities of a Wedding, whilst Claudius Caesar was
Sacrificing at Hostia. Upon his Return, he put both Silius and her to Death.
Silius wants thy Counsel, give Advice;
Wed Caesar's Wife, or Dye^ the Choice is nice.
Her Comet-Eyes she darts on every Grace;
And takes a fatal liking to his Face.
Adorned with Bridal Pomp she sits in State;
The ^^blick Notaries and (...) wait:
The Genial Bed is in the Garden dressed;
The ^ortion paid, and every Rite expressed,
Which in a Roman Marriage is professed.
It Is no stolen Wedding, this; rejecting awe,
She scorns to Marry, but in Form of Law:
In this moot case, your Judgment: To refuse
Is present Death, besides the Night you lose.
If you consent, it is hardly worth your pain;
A Day or two of Anxious Life you gain:
Till loud Reports through all the Town have part,
And reach the Prince: For Cuckolds hear the last.
Indulge thy Pleasure, Youth, and take thy swing:
For not to take, is but the self same thing:
Inevitable Death before thee lies;
But looks more kindly through a Ladies Eyes.
What then remains? Are we deprived of Will?
Must we not Wish, for fear of wishing Ill?
Receive my Counsel, and securely move;
Entrust thy Fortune to the Powers above.
Leave them to manage for thee, and to grant
What their unerring Wisdom sees thee want:
In Goodness as in Greatness they excel;
Ah that we loved our selves but half so well!
We, blindly by our headstrong Passions led,
Are hot for Action, and desire to Wed;
Then wish for Heirs: But to the Gods alone
Our future Offspring, and our Wives are known;
The audacious Strumpet, and ungracious Son.
Yet, not to rob the Priests of pious Gain,
That Altars be not wholly built in vain;
Forgive the Gods the rest, and stand confined
To Health of Body, and Content of Mind:
A Soul, that can securely Death defy,
And count it Nature's Privilege, to Dye;
Serene and Manly, hardened to sustain
The load of Life, and Exercised in Pain;
Guiltless of Hate, and Proof against Desire;
That all things weighs, and nothing can admire:
That dares prefer the Toils of Hercules
To Dalliance, Banquets, and Ignoble ease.
The Path to Peace is Virtue: What I show,
Thy Self may freely, on Thy Self bestow:
Fortune was never Worshipped by the Wi^e;
But, set aloft by Fools, Usurps the Skies.
The End of the Tenth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE TENTH SATYR.
MIlo, of Crotona; who for a Trial of his strength, going to rend an Oak,
perished in the Attempt: for his Arms were caught in the Trunk of it; and he
was devoured by Wild Beasts.

Sejanus was Tiberius's first Favorite; and while he continued so, had the
highest Marks of Honor bestowed on him; Statues and Trium^ phal Chariots were
every where erected to him. But as soon as he fell into Disgrace with the
Emperor, these were all immediately dismounted; and the Senate and Common
People insulted over him as meanly, as they had sawn'd on him before.

The Island of Capreae, which lies about a League out at Sea from the Campanian
Shore, was the Scene of Tiberius's Pleasures in the latter part of his Reign.
There he lived for some Years with Diviners, Soothsayers, and worse Company --
And from thence, dispatched all his Orders to the Senate.

Julius Caesar, who got the better of P^mpey, that was styled the Great.

Demosthenes and Tully, both dyed for their Oratory. Demosthenes gave himself
Poison, to avoid being carried to Antipater; one of Alexander's Captains, who
had then made himself Master of Athens. Tully was Murdered by M. Antony's
Order, in Return, for those Invectives he had made against him.

The Latin of this Couplet is a Famous Verse of Tully's, in which he sets out
the Happiness of his own Consulship; Famous for the Vanity, and the ill Poetry
of it. For Tully as he had a good deal of the one, so he had no great share of
the other.

The Orations of Tully, against M. A^^ony, were styled by him Philippics, in
imitation of Demosthenes; who had given that Name before to those he made
against Philip of Macedon.

This is a Mock-Account of a Roman Triumph.

Babylon, where Alexander died.

Xerxes, is represented in History, after a very Romantic Manner; affecting
Fame beyond Measure, and doing the most Extravagant things, to compass it.
Mount Athos made a Prodigious Promontory in the AEgaean Sea: He is said to have
cut a Channel through it, and to have Sailed round it. He made a Bridge of
Boats over the Hellespont, where it was three Miles broad: ^And ordered a
Whipping for the Winds and Seas, because they had once crossed his Designs, as
we have a very solemn account of it in Herodotus. But, after all these vain
Boasts, he was shamefully beaten by Themistocles at Salamis; and returned home,
leaving most of his Fleet behind him.

Mercury, who was a God of the lowest size, and employed always in Errands
between Heaven and Hell. And Mortals used him accordingly: For his Statues were
anciently placed, where Roads met; with Directions on the Fingers of 'em,
pointing out the several ways to Travelers.

Nestor, King of Pylus; who was 300 Years old, according to Homer's account, at
least, as he is understood by his Expositors.

The Ancients counted by their Fingers. Their Left Hands served 'em till they
came up to an Hundred. After that, they used their Right, to express all
greater Numbers.

The Fates were three Sisters, which had all some peculiar Business assigned
'em by the Poets, in Relation to the Lives of Men. The First held the Distaff;
the Second Spun the Thread; and the Third cut it.

Whilst Troy was Sacking by the Greeks. Old King Priam is said to have Buckled
on his Armor, to oppose 'em. Which he had no sooner done, but he was met by
Pyrrhus, and Slain before the Altar of Jupiter, in his own Palace, as we have
the Story finely told, in Virgil's 2d AEneid.

Hecuba, his Queen, escaped the Swords of the Grecians, and outlived him. It
seems, she behaved her self so fiercely, and uneasily to her Husband's
Murderers, while she lived, that the the Poets thought fit to turn her into a
Bitch, when she died.

Mithridates, after he had disputed the Empire of the World for 40 Years
together, with the Romans, was at last deprived of Life and Empire by Pompey
the Great.

Croesus, in the midst of his Prosperity, making his Boast to Solon, how Happy
he was, received this Answer from the Wise Man, That no One could pronounce
himself Happy, till he saw what his End should be. The truth of this Croesus
found, when he was put in Chains by Cyrus, and Condemned to die.

Pompey, in the midst of his Glory, fell into a Dangerous Fit of Sickness, at
Naples. A great many Cities then made Public Supplications for him. He
Recovered, was beaten at Pharsalia, fled to Ptolomy King of Egypt; and,
instead of receiving Protection at his Court, had his Head struck off by his
Order, to please Caesar.

Cethegus was one that conspired with Catiline, and was put to Death by the
Senate.

Catiline died Fighting.

Virginia was killed by her own Father, to prevent her being exposed to the
Lust of Appius Claudius, who had Ill Designs upon her. The Story at large is in
Livy's Third Book; and it is a remarkable one, as it gave occasion to the
putting down the Power of the Decemviri; of whom Appius was one.

Hippolytus the Son of Theseus, was loved by his Mother in Law Phaedria. But he
not complying with her, she procured his Death.

Bellerophon, the Son of King Glaucus, residing sometime at the Court of Paetus
King of the Argives, the Queen, Sthenobaea, fell in Love with him. But he
refusing her, she turned the Accusation upon Him; and he narrowly escaped
Paetus's Vengeance.

Messalina, Wife to the Emperor Claudius, Infamous for her Lewdness. She set
her Eyes upon C. Silius, a fine Youth; forced him to quit his own Wife, and
Marry her with all the Formalities of a Wedding, whilst Claudius Caesar was
Sacrificing at Hostia. Upon his Return, he put both Silius and her to Death.

THE ELEVENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. WILLIAM CONGREUE.
ARGUMENT OF THE Eleventh Satyr.
The Design of this Satyr is to expose and reprehend all manner of Intemperance
and Debauchery; but more particularly touches that Exorbitant Luxury used by
the Romans, in (...) him: Very Artfully preparing him, with what he was to
expect from his Treat^ by begin^ng the Satyr, with a particular Invective
against the Vanity and Folly of some Persons, who having but Mean Fortunes in
the World, attempted (...) Quality. He shows us, the Miserable End of such
Spend-thri^s and Gluttons; with the Manner and Courses, which they took, to
bring themselves to it^ advising Men to live within Bounds, and to Proportion
their Inclinations, to the Extent of their Fortune. He gives his Friend a Bill
of Fair, of (...) takes Occasion to reflect upon the Temperance and Frugality
of the Greatest Men, in Former Ages: To which he opposes the Riot and
Intemperance of the present; attributing to the latter, a visible Remisness, in
the Care of Heaven over the Roman State. He instances some lewd Practices at
their Feasts, and by the by, touches the Nobility, with making Vice and
Debauchery the chiefest of their Pleasures. He concludes with a repeated
Invitation to his Friend; advising Him (in one particula^ so^^ (...) freely) to
a neglect of all Cares and Disquiets, for the present; and a moderate use of
Pleasures for the future.

THE ELEVENTH SATYR.
IF Noble The Name of a very Eminent Person in Rome: But here it is meant to
signify any one of Great Wealth and Quality.
Atticus, make plent^ous F^asts,
And with Lu^uriou^ F^^d indulge his Guests:
His Wealth and Quality, support the Treat;
In him nor is it Luxury, bu^ State.
But when Poor One who by his own Extravagant Gluttony, was at length reduced
to the most shameful Degree of Poverty. This likewise, is here made use of, as
a Common Name to all Beggarly Gluttons, such whose unreasonable Appetites
remain after their Estates are Consumed.
Rutilus spends all his worth,
In hopes of setting one good Di^^er so^^h;
It Is downright Madness; for what greaten Jests,
Than Begging Glutt'ns, or than Beggars Feasts?
But Rutilus, is so No^orios g^own.
That he is the common Theme of all the Town.
A Man, in his full Tide of Youthful Blood,
Able for Arms, and for his Country's good;
Urged Sometimes Persons were compelled, by the Tyranny of Nero, to Practice
the Trade of Fencing, and to Fight upon the Stage, for his Inhumane Diversion;
otherwise, seldom any but Common Slaves or Condemned Malefactors were so
employed: Which made it the greater Reflection, on any Person who either
Voluntarily, or forced by his own Extravagance, for a Livelihood (like Rutilus)
applied himself to that wretched Trade.

Restrained by no Advice.

Hinting, that though he was not compelled to such a Practice of Fencing; yet
it was a shame that he was suffered to undertake it, and not advised, or
commanded by the Magistracy, to the contrary

.
by no Pow'^, restrained by no Advice,
But following his own Inglo^io^s choice:
Amongst common Fe^ce^s, Practices the Trade,
That End debasing, for which A^ms were made;
Arms, which to Man^ ne're-dying Fame afford,
But his (...) is owi^g to ^i^ S^^^^^
Many there are of the same Of the same wretched kind, viz. Reduced to Poverty
by riotous living.
wretched Kind,
Whom, their despairing Creditors, may find
Lurking in Shambles; where with borrowed Coin
They buy choice Meats, and in cheap plenty Dine.
Such, whose sole Bliss, is Eating; who can give
But that one Brutal Reason why they ^ive^
And yet what is more ridiculous: Of these
The Poorest Wretch, is still most hard to please;
And he, whose thin Transparent Rags, declare
How much, his tattered Fortune wants repair,
Would ransack every Element, for choice
Of every Fish and Fowl, at any Price;
If brought from far, it very Dear has cost,
It has a Flavor then, which pleases most,
And he devours it with a greater gust.
In Riot, thus, while Money lasts, he lives,
And that exhausted, still new Pledges gives;
Till forced of mere Necessity, to Eat,
He comes to Pawn his Dish, to buy his Meat.
Nothing of Silver, or of Gold he spares,
Not what his Mother's Sacred Image bears;
The broken Broken, or desaced: that it might not be discovered to be his
Mother's Picture, when exposed to Sale.
Relick, he with speed devours,
As he would all the rest of's Ancestors,
If wrought in Gold, or if exposed to Sale,
Th^y'd pay the Price of one Luxurious Meal.
Thus certain Ruin, treads upon his Heels,
The Stings of Hunger, soon, and Want he feels;
And thus is he reduced at length, to serve
Fencers, for Miserable Scraps, or starve.
Imagine now, you see a splendid Feast:
The Question is, at whose Expense it is Dressed.
In great A Noble Roman, who lived Hospitably.
Ventidius, we, the Bounty prize;
In Rutilus, the Vanity despise.
Strange Ignorance! That the same Man, who knows
How far yond' Mount, above this Molehill shows,
Should not perceive a difference as great,
Between small Incomes and a vast Estate!
From Heaven, to Mankind, sure, that Rule was sent,
Of Know thy Self, and by some God was meant
To be our never-erring Pilot here,
Through all the various Courses, which we steer.
Thersites An Impudent, Deformed, Ill-Tongu'd Fellow (as Homer describes him.
Iliad 2.) who accompanied the Grecian Army to the Siege of Troy; where he took
a Privilege often to rail and snarl at the Commanders. Some relate, that at
last Achilles, for his sawciness, killed h^ with a blow of his Fist. Therefore
we are not to understand Iuvenal, here, as relating a matter of Fact; but
Ther^ites is used here, to signify any body of the same kind: As before,
Attic^s and Rutilus. The meaning is, that such as he, ought not (neither would
he, had he been present) have presumed to oppose Ajax and Ulysses in contending
for Achille^ his Armor. See his Character admirably improved by Mr. Dryden in
his Tragedy of Truth found too late.
, tho the most presumptuous Greek,
Yet durst not for Achilles Armor speak;
When scarce The most Eloquent of all the Grecian Princes. After Achilles
Death; Aja^ a sam'd Grecian Warrior pretended to his Armor; Ulysses opposed
him, before a Council of War, and by his admirable Eloquence obtained the
Prize. Ovid. Metam. 13.
Ulysses had a good pretense,
With all the advantage of his Eloquence.
Who-e're attempts weak Causes to support,
Ought to be very sure, he is able for it;
And not mistake strong Lungs, and Impudence;
For Harmony of Words, and force of Sense:
Fools only make Attempts beyond their Skill;
A Wise-Man's Pow'r's the Limit of his Will.
If Fortune, has a Niggard been to thee^
Devote thy self to Thrift, not Luxury;
And Wisely make that kind of Food, thy choice,
To which Necessity confines thy Price.
Well may they fear some Miserable End,
Whom Gluttony and Want, at once attend;
Whose large voracious Throats have swallowed All,
Both Land and Stock, Interest and Principal:
Well may they fear, at length, vile Brought to that pass, by his Gluttony;
that he was forced to ^ell his Ring, the Mark of Honor and Distinction, worn
by Roman Knights.
Pollio's Fate,
Who sold his very Ring, to purchase Meat;
And tho a Knight, amongst common Slaves now stands
Begging an Alms, with undistinguisht Hands.
Sure sudden Death, to such should welcome be,
On whom, each added Year heaps Misery,
Scorn, Poverty, Reproach and Infamy.
But there are steps, in Villainy, which these
Observe to tread and follow, by degrees.
Money they borrow, and from all that lend,
Which, never meaning to restore, they spend;
But that and their small Stock of Credit gone,
Lest Rome should grow too warm, from thence they run:
For of late Years, ^tis no more Scandal grown,
For Debt and Roguery, to quit the Town;
Than in the midst of Summer's scorching ^reat,
From Crowds, and Noise, and Business to retreat.
One only Grief such Fugitives can find,
Reflecting on the pleasures left behind;
The Plays, and loose Diversions of the place,
But not one Blush appears for the Disgrace.
Never was of Modesty so great a Dearth,
That out of Countenance Virtue's fled from Earth;
Baffled, exposed to ridicule and scorn,
She Is with The Goddess of Justice, whom the Poets feign to have fled to Heaven
after the Golden-Age. Vlti^a Caelest^^ Terras Astraea reliquit. Ovid.
Astraea gone, never to return.
This Day, my Ievenal's Friend, to whom he makes an invitation and Addresses
this Satyr.
Persicus, thou shall perceive
Whether, my self I keep those Rules I give.
Or else, an unsuspected Glutton live;
If moderate fare and abstinence, I prize
In public, yet in private Gormondize.
Evander's A Prince of Arcadi^, who unluckily killing his Father, forsook his
own Country and came into Italy: (...) in that place^ where afterward Rome was
built. Virgil, AE^. 8. te^^s us that he entertained both Hercules and AEneas,
when he was in a low Condition.
Feast revived, to Day thou wilt see,
The Poor Evander, I, and thou shall be
Alcides Alcides. Hercules, so called from his Grandfather Alc^^^^s.
and AEneas both to me.
Mean time, I send you now your Bill of Fare;
Be not surpised, that it is all homely cheer:
For nothing from the Shambles I provide,
But from my own small Farm, the tendrest Kid
And Fattest of my Flock, a suckling yet,
That never had Nourishment, but from the Teat;
No bitter Willow Tops, have been its Food,
Scarce Grass; its Veins have more of Milk than Blood.
Next that, shall Mountain Sparagus be laid,
Pulled by some plain, but cleanly Country-Maid.
The largest Eggs, yet warm within the Nest,
Together with the Hens, which laid 'em, dressed;
Clusters of Grapes, preserved for half a Year,
Which, plump and fresh as on the Vines appear;
Apples, of a Ripe Flavor, Fresh and Fair,
Mixed with the Syrian, and the Signian Pear,
Mellow'd by Winter, from their cruder Juice,
Light of Digestion now and fit for use.
Such Food as this, would have been heretofore
Accounted Riot, in a Senator:
When the good (...) A Great Man who had been three times Consul of Rome, and
had Triumphed over many Kings; yet as great an Example of Temperance as Courage.
Curious, thought it no Disgrace,
With his own Hands, a few small Herbs to Dress;
And from his little Garden, culled a Feast,
Which Fettered Slaves would now disdain to Taste;
For scarce a Slave, but has to Dinner now,
The well-dress'd A Dish in great esteem amon^ the Romans. -- Nil (...). Horat.
Paps, of a Fat Pregnant Sow.
But heretofore, 'twas thought a sumptuous Treat,
On Birth-Days, Festivals, or Days of State;
A Salt, dry Flitch of Bacon to prepare;
If they had fresh Meat, 'twas Delicious fare!
Which rarely happened, and 'twas highly Prized
If If they killed a S^^rifice, and (...) Flesh remained to spare, it was
prized (...) an accide^tal ra^^^y.
ought was left of what they Sacrificed.
To Entertainments of this Kind, would come
The Worthiest and the Greatest Men in Rome;
Nay seldom any at such Treats were seen,
But those who had at least thrice Consid. By the Tyranny of Tarquinius
Superbus, (the last Roman^ King) the very Name of King, became hateful to the
People. After his Expulsion, they as^embled, and resolved to commit the
Government^ f^^ the future^ into the Hands of two Persons, who were to be
chosen every Year anew^ and whom they called Consuls.
Consuls been,
Or the Was a General chosen upon some emergent occasion; his Office was
limited to 6 Months; which time expired, (if occa^sion were) they chose
another, or continued the same, by a new Election. The Dictator, differed in
nothing from a King, but in his Name, and the duration of his Authority: His
Power being full as great, but his Name not so hateful to the Romans.
Dictator's Office had discharged,
And now from Honorable Toil enlarged;
Retired to Husband and Manure their Land,
Humbling themselves to those they might Command.
Then might you have seen the good old General haste,
Before the appointed It was accounted greediness and shame^ul, to eat before
the usual Hour, which was their Ninth Hour; and our 3 a Clock, Afternoon. But
upon Festival Days, it was permitted them to prevent the ordinary Hour; and
always excusable in old People.
Hour, to such a Feast;
His Spade aloft, as 'twere in Triumph held,
Proud of the Conquest of some stubborn Field.
Oh then, when pious Consuls bore the sway!
When Couchant Vice, all pale and trembling lay!
Our Were two great Officers, part of whose business was to inspect the Lives
and Manners of Men; they had Power even to degrade Knights, and exclude
Senators, when guilty of great Misdemeanors: And in former days they were so
strict, that they stood in awe one of another.
Censors then were Subject to the Law,
Even Power it self, of Justice stood in awe.
It was not then, a Roman's chiefest thought,
Where largest Tortoise-Shells were to be bought,
Where Pearls, might of the greatest Price be had,
And shining Jewels to adorn his The manner of the Romans Eating, was to lie
upon Beds or Couches about the Table, which formerly were made of plain Wood,
but afterward at great Expense, adorned with Tortoise-Shells, Pearls, and
Ivory.
Bed,
That he at Vast Expense might loll his Head.
Plain was his Couch, and only Rich his Mind;
Contentedly he slept, as cheaply, as he Dined.
The Soldier then, in The Romans copied their Luxury from the Greeks; the
imitation of whom, was among them as fashionable, as of the French among us.
Which occasions this saying, with so much Indignation in our Poet, Sat. 3. --
Non possum far, Quirites,
Graecam Vrbem --

Grecian Arts unskilled,
Returning Rich with Plunder, from the Field:
If Cups of Silver, or of Gold he brought,
With Jewels set, and exquisitely wrought,
To Glorious Trappings, straight the Plate he turned,
And with the Glittering Spoil, his Horse adorned;
Or else a Helmet for himself he made,
Where various Warlike Figures were inlaid:
The Roman-Wolf, suckling the Romul^s and Remus. Twins, and Founders of the
Roman Empire; whom the Poets feign were Nursed by a Wolf: The Woman's name being
Lupa.
Twins was there;
And Mars himself, Armed with his Shield and Spear;
Hovering above his Crest, did dreadful show,
As threatening Death, to each resisting Foe.
No use of Silver, but in Arms was known,
Splendid they were in War, and there alone.
No side-boards then, with gilded Plate were dressed,
No sweating Slaves, with Massy Dishes pressed;
Expensive Riot, was not understood,
But Earthen-Platters held their homely Food.
Who would not Envy them, that Age of Bliss,
That sees with Shame the Luxury of This?
Heaven unwearied then, did Blessings pour,
And pitying Jove, foretold each dangerous hour;
Mankind were then familiar with the God,
He snuff'd their Incense, with a gracious Nod;
And would have still been bounteous, as of Old,
Had we not left him for that Devil Gold.
His Golden Formerly the Statues of the Gods were made of Clay: But now of
Gold. Which Extravagance, was displeasing even to the Gods themselves.
Statues, hence the God have driven:
For well he knows, where our Devotion's given,
It Is Gold we Worship, though we pray to Heaven.
Woods of our own afforded Tables then,
Though none can please us now, but from Iapan.
Invite my Lord to Dine, and let him have
The nicest Dish, his Appetite can crave;
But let it on an Oaken Board be set,
His Lordship will grow Sick and cannot Eat:
Something's amiss, he knows not what to think,
Either your Ven'son's rank, or The Romans used to anoint themselves with sweet
Ointments, at their Feasts, immediately after bathing.
Ointments stink.
Order some other Table to be brought,
Something, at great expense in India bought,
Beneath whose Orb, large yawning Panthers lie,
Carved on rich Pedestals of Ivory was in great esteem among them, and
preferred to Silver.
Ivory:
He finds no more of that offensive smell,
The Meat recovers, and my Lord grows well.
An Ivory Table is a certain whet;
You would not think how heartily he will Eat^
As if new Vigor to his Teeth were sent,
By Sympathy from those of the Elephant.
But such fine Feeders, are no Guests for me:
Riot, agrees not with Frugality;
Then, that Unfashionable Man am I,
With me they would Starve, for want of Ivory:
For not one inch, does my whole House afford,
Not in my very Tables, or Chess-board;
Of common Bone, the Handles of my Knives
Are made, yet no ill Taste it gives
To what I Carve, nor is there ever left
Any unsav'ry haut-gust, from the Haft:
A hearty welcome, to plain wholesome Meat,
You Will find, but served up in no formal state;
No Sew'rs, nor dextrous Carvers have I got,
Such as by skilful There were in Rome, professors of the Art of Carving; who
taught publicly in Schools. Of this kind, Trypherus was the most Famous.
Trypherus are taught:
In whose Famed Schools, the various forms appear
Of Fishes, Beasts, and all the Fowls o'th Air;
And where, with blunted Knives, his Scholars learn
How to diffect, and the nice Joints discern;
While all the Neighb'rhood are with noise oppressed,
From the harsh Carving of his wooden Feast.
On me attends a raw unskilful Lad.
On Fragments fed, in homely Garments clad,
At once my Carver, and my Cup Bearer.
Ganymede;
With diligence, he will serve us while we Dine,
And in plain Beechen Vessels, fill our Wine.
No Beauteous Boys I keep, from Whence pretty Boys were brought to Rome, and
so^d publicly i^ the Markets, to vile uses.
Phrygia brought,
No Catamites, by shameful Panders taught:
Only to me, two Homebred Youths belong,
Unskilled in any, but their Mother Tongue;
Alike in Feature both, and Garb appear,
With Honest Faces, though with uncurl'd Hair.
This day, thou shall my Rural Pages see,
For I have drest'em both to wait on thee.
Of Country Swains they both were Born, and one
My Ploughman's is, the other my Shepherd's Son;
A cheerful Sweetness, in his Looks he has,
And Innocence unartful in his Face:
Tho sometimes sadness will o're-cast the Joy,
And gentle Sighs, break from the tender Boy;
His absence from his Mother, often he will mourn,
And with his Eyes, look wishes to return,
Longing to see his tender Kids, again,
And feed his Lambs upon the flowery plain;
A modest Blush he wears, not formed by Art,
Free from deceit his Face, and full as free his Heart.
Such Looks, such Bashfulness, might well adorn
The Cheeks of Youths that are more Nobly born,
But Noblemen, those humble Graces scorn.
This Youth, to day shall my small Treat attend,
And only he, with Wine shall serve my Friend,
With Wine from his own Country brought, and made
From the same Vines, beneath whose fruitful shade
He and his wanton Kids have often played.
But you, perhaps expect a modish Feast,
With Amorous Songs and An usual part of the Entertainment^ when Great Men
Feasted, to have wanton Women Dance after a lascivious manner
Wanton Dances graced;
Where sprightly Females, to the middle bare,
Trip lightly over the ground, and frisk in Air,
Whose pliant Limbs, in fifty postures move,
And twine, and bound, as in the Feat of Love:
Such Sights, the languid Nerves to Action stir,
And Jaded Lust, springs forward with this Spur.
Virtue Virtue would shrink, to hear this leudness told,
Which Husbands, now, do with their Wives behold.
These lines in Iuvenal, Spectent hos nuptae, juxta recubante marito,
Quod pudeat narasse aliquem praesentibus ipfis.
in some late Editions, are placed nearer the latter end of this Satyr: And in
the order of this Translation, would so have followed, after Line. 349. viz.
Such shows as these, were not for us designed,
But vig'^ous Touth to active sports inclined.
But I have continued 'em in this place after Lubin. Besides the Example of the
Learned Holyday for the same position; agreeing better here, in my mind, with
the sense both before and after. For the Megalensian Games consisting chiefly
of Races, and such like Exercises; I cannot conceive where the extraordinary
cause of shame lay in Female Spectators: But it was a manifest Immodesty, for
'em to lie by their Husbands, and see the lewd Actions of their own Sex, in the
manner described.


would shrink, to hear this Lewdness told,
Which Husbands, now, do with their Wives^ behold;
A needful help, to make 'em both approve
The dry Embraces, of long-wedded Love.
In Nuptial Cinders, this revives the fire,
And turns their mutual loathing, to Desire^
But she, who by her Sexes Charter, must
Have double Pleasure paid, feels double Lust;
Apace she warms, with an immod'rate Heat,
Strongly her Bosom heaves, and Pulses beat;
With glowing Cheeks, and trembling Lips she lies,
With Arms expanded, and with Naked Thighs,
Sucking in Passion both at Ears and Eyes.
But this becomes not me, nor my Estate;
These, are the Vicious Follies of the Great.
Let him who does on Ivory Tables Dine,
Whose Marble Floors, with Drunken Spawlings shine;
Let him lascivious Songs and Dances have,
Which or to see, or hear, the lewdest Slave,
The vilest Prostitute in all the Stews,
With bashful indignation would refuse.
But Fortune, there, extenuates the Crime;
What Is Vice in me, is only Mirth in him:
The Fruits which Murder, Cards, or Dice afford,
A Vestal Ravished, or a M^^ro^ W^or'd^
Are laudable Diversions in a Lord.
But my poor Entertainment, is designed
T'afford you Pleasures of another kind:
Yet with your Taste, your Hearing shall be fed,
And Homero's Sacred Lines, and Virgil's Read;
Either of whom does all Mankind excel,
Tho which exceeds the other, none can tell^
It matters not, with what ill Tone they are S^ng,
Verse so subli^^ly good, no Voice can wrong.
Now then^ be all thy weighty Cares away,
The Jealousies and Fears, and while you may
To Peace and soft Repose, give all the day.
From thoughts of Debt, or any worldly Ill
Be free, be all uneasy Passions still.
What tho thy Wife, do with the Morning light,
(When thou in vain has toiled and drudg'd all Night)
Steal from thy Bed and House, abroad to roam,
And having gorged her Lust, come reeking home;
Fleck'd in her Face, and with disordered Hair,
Her Garments ruffled, and her Bosom bare;
With Ears still tingling, and her Eyes on fire,
Half drowned in Lust, still burning in Desire:
Whilst you are forced to wi^k and seem con^^^^,
Swelling with Passion, which you dare not vent;
Nay if you would be free, (...) Night alla^^^^^,
You must seem Fond, and Doting on her Charms,
Take her (the last of twenty) to your Arms.
Let this, and every other anxious thou^^^,
At the entrance of my Threshold be f^rgot;
All thy Domestic Griefs, at Home be left,
Thy Wife's Adult'ry, with ^hy (...) The^^^
And (the most racking Thought, which can intrude^)
Forget false Friends and their (...).
Let us our peaceful Mirth at Home begin,
While Games in Honor of Cybele, the Mother of the Gods. She was called (...),
Magna Matter, and from thence these Games Megalesia, or Ludi Megalenses; they
began upon the 4th of Apr^^, and continued 6 days.
Megalensian Shows, are in the The place where those Games were celebrated.
Circus seen:
There (to the Bane of Horses) in high State
The An Officer not unlike our Mayor or Sheriff. He was to oversee these
Sports; and sat in great State, while they were Acting; to the Destruction of
many Horses, which were spoiled in running the Races.
Praetor sits, on a Triumphal Seat;
Vainly with Ensigns, and with Robes adorned,
As if with Conquest, from the Wars returned.
This day all Rome, (if I may be allowed,
Without Offense to such a numerous Crowd,
To say all Rome) will in the Circus sweat;
Echoes already do their shouts repeat:
Methinks I hear the cry -- Away, away;
The In running the Races in the Circus, with Horses in Chariots; there were
four distinct, Factions, known by their Liveries: Which were Green, a kind of
Russet-Red, White, and Blue. One of these Factions was always favored by the
Court, and at this time probably the Green. Which makes our Poet sancy he hears
the shouts, for Joy, of their Party. Afterward Domitian added two more, the
Golden and Purple Factions.
Green, have won the Honor of the day.
Oh, should these Sports, be but one year forborne,
Rome, would in Tears her loved Diversion mourn;
For that would now, a cause of Reflecting on the immoderate Fondness the
Romans had for such Shows.
Sorrow yield,
Great, as the loss of (...). A small Town, near which Hannibal obtained a
great Victory over the Romans: In that Ba^tel were slain 40000 Me^, and so many
Gentlemen, that he sent 3 bushels full of Rings to Carthage, as a Token of his
Victory.
Cannae's fatal Field.
Such Shows as these, were not for us designed,
But vigorous Youth to active Sports inclined.
On Beds of Roses laid, let us repose,
While round our Heads refreshing Ointment flows;
Our Aged Limbs we'll bask, in Phoebus Rays,
And live this day devoted to our Ease.
Early to day, we'll to the Bath repair,
Nor need we now the common See the Notes at Fig. 19.
Censure fear:
On Festivals, it is allowed no Crime
To Bathe, and Eat, before the usual time;
But that continued, would a loathing give,
Nor could you thus, a week together live:
For, frequent use, would the Delight exclude;
Pleasure's a toil, when constantly pursued.
The End of the Eleventh Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE ELEVENTH SATYR.
ATticus. The Name of a very Eminent Person in Rome: But here it is meant to
signify any one of Great Wealth and Quality.

Rutilus. One who by his own Extravagant Gluttony, was at length reduced to the
most shameful Degree of Poverty. This likewise, is here made use of, as a
Common Name to all Beggarly Gluttons, such whose unreasonable Appetites remain
after their Estates are Consumed.

Urged by no Power, restrained by no Advice.

Sometimes Persons were compelled, by the Tyranny of Nero, to Practice the
Trade of Fencing, and to Fight upon the Stage, for his Inhumane Diversion;
otherwise, seldom any but Common Slaves or Condemned Malefactors were so
employed: Which made it the greater Reflection, on any Person who either
Voluntarily, or forced by his own Extravagance, for a Livelihood (like Rutilus)
applied himself to that wretched Trade.

Restrained by no Advice.

Hinting, that though he was not compelled to such a Practice of Fencing; yet
it was a shame that he was suffered to undertake it, and not advised, or
commanded by the Magistracy, to the contrary.

Of the same wretched kind, viz. Reduced to Poverty by riotous living.

The broken Relick. Broken, or defaced: that it might not be discovered to be
his Mother's Picture, when exposed to Sale.

Ventidius. A Noble Roman, who lived Hospitably.

Thersites. An Impudent, Deformed, Ill-Tongu'd Fellow (as Homer describes him.
Iliad 2.) who accompanied the Grecian Army to the Siege of Troy; where he took
a Privilege often to rail and snarl at the Commanders. Some relate, that at
last Achilles, for his sawciness, killed h^ with a blow of his Fist. Therefore
we are not to understand Iuvenal, here, as relating a matter of Fact; but
Ther^ites is used here, to signify any body of the same kind: As before,
Attic^s and Rutilus. The meaning is, that such as he, ought not (neither would
he, had he been present) have presumed to oppose Ajax and Ulysses in contending
for Achille^ his Armor. See his Character admirably improved by Mr. Dryden in
his Tragedy of Truth found too late.

Ulysses. The most Eloquent of all the Grecian Princes. After Achilles Death;
Aja^ a sam'd Grecian Warrior pretended to his Armor; Ulysses opposed him,
before a Council of War, and by his admirable Eloquence obtained the Prize.
Ovid. Metam. 13.

Pollio. Brought to that pass, by his Gluttony; that he was forced to ^ell his
Ring, the Mark of Honor and Distinction, worn by Roman Knights.

Astraea. The Goddess of Justice, whom the Poets feign to have fled to Heaven
after the Golden-Age. Vltimaelestum Terras Astraea reliquit. Ovid.

Perficus. Ievenal's Friend, to whom he makes an invitation and Addresses this
Satyr.

Evander. A Prince of Arcadi^, who unluckily killing his Father, forsook his
own Country and came into Italy: (...) in that place^ where afterward Rome was
built. Virgil, AE^. 8. te^^s us that he entertained both Hercules and AEneas,
when he was in a low Condition.

Alcides. Hercules, so called from his Grandfather Alc^^^^s.

Curious Dentatus. A Great Man who had been three times Consul of Rome, and had
Triumphed over many Kings; yet as great an Example of Temperance as Courage.

A Dish in great esteem among the Romans. -- Nil Vulva pulcrius ampla.
Horat.

If they killed a S^^rifice, and (...) Flesh remained to spare, it was prized
(...) an accide^tal ra^^^y.

Consid. By the Tyranny of Tarquinius Superbus, (the last Roman^ King) the very
Name of King, became hateful to the People. After his Expulsion, they
as^embled, and resolved to commit the Government^ f^^ the future^ into the
Hands of two Persons, who were to be chosen every Year anew^ and whom they
called Consuls.

Dictator. Was a General chosen upon some emergent occasion; his Office was
limited to 6 Months; which time expired, (if occa^sion were) they chose
another, or continued the same, by a new Election. The Dictator, differed in
nothing from a King, but in his Name, and the duration of his Authority: His
Power being full as great, but his Name not so hateful to the Romans.

Before the appointed Hour. It was accounted greediness and shameful, to eat
before the usual Hour, which was their Ninth Hour; and our 3 a Clock,
Afternoon. But upon Festival Days, it was permitted them to prevent the
ordinary Hour; and always excusable in old People.

Censors. Were two great Officers, part of whose business was to inspect the
Lives and Manners of Men; they had Power even to degrade Knights, and exclude
Senators, when guilty of great Misdemeanors: And in former days they were so
strict, that they stood in awe one of another.

The manner of the Romans Eating, was to lie upon Beds or Couches about the
Table, which formerly were made of plain Wood, but afterward at great Expense,
adorned with Tortoise-Shells, Pearls, and Ivory.

Grecian Arts. The Romans copied their Luxury from the Greeks; the imitation of
whom, was among them as fashionable, as of the French among us. Which occasions
this saying, with so much Indignation in our Poet, Sat. 3. -- Non possum far,
Quirites
Graecam Vrbem --


Romulus and Remus. Twins, and Founders of the Roman Empire; whom the Poets
feign were Nursed by a Wolf: The Woman's name being Lupa.

Formerly the Statues of the Gods were made of Clay: But now of Gold. Which
Extravagance, was displeasing even to the Gods themselves.

The Romans used to anoint themselves with sweet Ointments, at their Feasts,
immediately after bathing.

Ivory was in great esteem among them, and preferred to Silver.

Trypherus. There were in Rome, professors of the Art of Carving; who taught
publicly in Schools. Of this kind, Trypherus was the most Famous.

Ganymede. Cup Bearer.

Phrygia. Whence pretty Boys were brought to Rome, and sold publicly in the
Markets, to vile uses.

An usual part of the Entertainment^ when Great Men Feasted, to have wanton
Women Dance after a lascivious manner

Virtue would shrink, to hear this leudness told,
Which Husbands, now, do with their Wives behold.
These lines in Iuvenal, Spectent hos nuptae, juxta recubante marito,
Quod pudeat narasse aliquem praesentibus ipsis.
in some late Editions, are placed nearer the latter end of this Satyr: And in
the order of this Translation, would so have followed, after Line. 349. viz.
Such shows as these, were not for us designed,
But vigorous Youth to active sports inclined.
But I have continued 'em in this place after Lubin. Besides the Example of the
Learned Holyday for the same position; agreeing better here, in my mind, with
the sense both before and after. For the Megalensian Games consisting chiefly
of Races, and such like Exercises; I cannot conceive where the extraordinary
cause of shame lay in Female Spectators: but it was a manifest Immodesty, for
'em to lie by their Husbands, and see the lewd Actions of their own Sex, in the
manner described.

Megalensian Shows. Games in Honor of Cybele, the Mother of the Gods. She was
called (...), Magna Matter, and from thence these Games Megalesia, or Ludi
Megalenses; they began upon the 4th of Apr^^, and continued 6 days.

Circus. The place where those Games were celebrated.

Praetor. An Officer not unlike our Mayor or Sheriff. He was to oversee these
Sports; and sat in great State, while they were Acting; to the Destruction of
many Horses, which were spoiled in running the Races.

The Green have won the Honor of the Day. In running the Races in the Circus,
with Horses in Chariots; there were four distinct, Factions, known by their
Liveries: Which were Green, a kind of Russet-Red, White, and Blue. One of these
Factions was always favored by the Court, and at this time probably the Green.
Which makes our Poet sancy he hears the shouts, for Joy, of their Party.
Afterward Domitian added two more, the Golden and Purple Factions.

Reflecting on the immoderate Fondness the Romans had for such Shows.

(...). A small Town, near which Hannibal obtained a great Victory over the
Romans: In that Ba^tel were slain 40000 Me^, and so many Gentlemen, that he
sent 3 bushels full of Rings to Carthage, as a Token of his Victory.

See the Notes at Fig. 19.

THE TWELFTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. THOMAS POWER, Fellow of Trinity College
in CAMBRIDGE.
ARGUMENT OF THE Twelfth Satyr.
^

THE TWELFTH SATYR.
THis Day's, this joyful Day's Solemnity
Does with my Birth-Days more than equal vi^*
Of Grassy Turves the rural Altars reared,
Expect the Firstlings of the Flock, and Heard;
To Royal The Queen of the Gods; so called by the Poets, as being Wife to
Jupiter, who was the Supreme Deity of the Greeks and Romans. By the Warlike
Maid, is meant Pallas or Minerva, the Goddess of Learning and War. They had
their peculiar Sacrifices appointed them in the Rituals or Books of Ceremonies
of the Ancients: White Bulls were offered to Jupiter; white Cows to Juno and
Minerva. The Poet, though not able to undergo the Charge of so great a Sacrifice,
yet willing to show his Devotion, and pay his Vow for his Friend's safe
arrival, proportionable to his Estate, offers to Juno an Ewelamb, another to
Minerva, and to Jupiter a young Bullock.
Juno, and the Warlike Maid,
Shall in a Lamb to each my Vows be paid;
A Steer, of the first Head in the whole Drove,
Reserve we Sacred to On Mount Capitol, otherwise called the Tarpeian Hill,
from the Ves^al Virgin Tarpeia that betrayed it to the Sabines, Jupiter had a
Temple, whence he was Named Tarpeian and Capitoline.
Tarpeian Jove:
Forward he bounds his Rope's extended length,
With pushing front; proud since he tried his strength,
And budding Horns against an adverse Oak;
Fit for the Altar, and the Fatal Stroke.
Were but my Fortunes equal to my Mind,
My bounteous Love more Nobly had designed,
A Bull high fed should fall the Sacrifice;
One of A Fat sensual Lady, noted as infamous for keeping a Player. Sat. 6.
Hispulla's huge prodigious size:
Not one of those our Neighboring Pastures feed,
But of (...) A River that divides Tuscany and Vmbria, whose Water, as Pliny
relates, makes the Cows, that drink of it, calve their young White: Whence the
Romans, as Virgil and Claudian observe, were plentifully furnished with
Sacrifices for Jupiter Capitoline.
Clitumnus whitest, Sacred breed;
The lively tincture of whose gushing Blood
Should clearly prove the Richness of his Food:
A Neck so strong, so large, as would demand
The speeding blow of some The grandis minister of Iuvenal, some interpret in a
sense referring to the Quality of the Person, as if the Chief Pontif, and not
one of the Popa's, or ordinary Officers, was to give the blow: But as it is
unseemly to make the Chief Pontif descend to so mean an Office; so it is more
probable the Poet meant not the Dignity, but the size and strength of the
Person.
uncommon hand.
This for my Friend, or more I would perform;
Who, danger free, still trembles at the Storm,
Presenting Forms so hideous to his sight,
As safety scarce allays the wild affright.
First from a Cloud, that Heaven all o'recast,
With glance so swift the subtle Lightning past
As split the Sail-Yards; trembling, and half Dead
Each thought the blow was levelled at his Head:
The flaming Shrouds so dreadful did appear,
All judged a wreck could no proportion bear.
So Fancy paints, so does the Poet write,
When he would work a Tempest to the height.
This danger past, a second does succeed;
Again with pity, and attention heed:
No less this second, though of different kind;
Such as, in The Egyptian Goddess, looked upon by Merchants and Seamen as their
Patroness; to whom they made their Vows in their extremity. The Custom was for
those that escaped to hang up on the Walls of her Temple the Picture of a Wreck
or Storm, which was called a Votive Table; and her Votaries, it seems, were so
numerous, that she was forced to employ a whole Company of Painters in her
Service.
Isis Temple, you may find
On votive Tablets, to the Life portrayed;
Where Painters are employed, and earn their Bread.
What Painters in their liveli'st Draughts express,
May be a Copy of my Friend's distress.
For now a Sea into the Hold was got;
Wave upon Wave another Sea had wrought,
And nigh o're-set the Stern on either side:
The Hoary Pilot his best skill appl'yd;
But useless all when he despairing found,
Catullus then did with the Winds compound.
Just as the A proper Simile, and good Moral allusion, but the Ground is wholly
fabulous; and has experimentally been proved so by Sestius a Physician, as it
stands related by Pliny. Dr. Brown, in his Book of Vulgar Errors, says, that
the Testicles, properly so called, are ^eated inwardly upon the Loins; and
therefore it were not only a fruitless attempt, but an impossible Act, to
castrate it self: And might be an hazardous Practice of Art, if at all
attempted by others.
Beaver, that wise thinking Brute,
Who, when hard hunted on a close pursuit,
Bites off his Stones, the cause of all the strife,
And pays 'em down a Ransom for his Life.
Over with all, he Cries, with all that is mine;
Without reserve I freely all resign.
Rich Garments, Purple died in Grain, go over;
No soft Augustus his great Favorite; and Patron to Virgil and Horace. Iuvenal
here taxes him of being over soft and delicate; which Horace has done too, though
covertly, and under another Name.
Mecaenas ever choicer wore:
And others of that Fleece, that never died,
Or stained by Art, is Rich in Nature's Pride;
Such, as its Tincture from the Soil does bear*
By noble Springs improved, and In Boetick Spain (now Andaluzia and the best
part of Granada) the Sheeps Fleeces are naturally of a color betwixt Red and
Black, resembling the Purple Dye, which the Ancients imputed to the goodness of
the Air and the Soil: And they put a great value on it, as we do now on the
Spanish Wool for its fineness.
Boetick Air.
Nor stopped he so, but over went his Plate
Made by A great Master in the Art of Graving.
Parthenius, followed by a great
And Massy Goblet, a two Gallon draught,
Might set a thirsty Centaur when he quaft,
Or drench the Wife of Fuscus was a Judge, mentioned in the last Satyr, noted
by Martial for a Drunkard; as his Wife is here by Iuvenal in the good Company
of Pholus the Centaur.
Fuscus: Add to these
Baskets of Baskets of Britain, Bascauda, the British word for a Basket, was
by the Romans made Latin. They so much fancied the Baskets of our Island, that
they would claim the Invention to themselves. Mart. Lib. 14. Barbara de Pictis
veni Bascauda Britannis,
Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma suam.
From British Picts the barbarous Basket came,
But now Rome gladly would the invention claim.

Britain, Rarities of Greece,
A set of Plate most artfully imbost,
No less a Bribe than what A strong fortified City of Thrace, not to be taken
by a Storm or Siege. Philip of Macedon made a considerable Present of Plate to
Lasthenes, who was entrusted with the Government of it by the Athenians; and
he, being corrupted with so great a Bribe, treacherously surrendered it to
Philip.
Olynthus cost.
Show me the Man, that other he, would dare
His very Life and Soul to Gold prefer:
Now Money serves not Life's most Noble Ends,
But slavish Life imperious Wealth attends.
Thus most of the Ship's Freight went over Board,
Yet all this Wast could small Relief afford;
So fierce the Storm* Necessity at last
Does loudly call to ease her of her Mast:
Hard is the Case, and Dangerous the Distress,
When what we would preserve, we must make less.
Go now, go trust the Wind's uncertain breath,
Removed four Fingers from approaching Death;
Or seven at most, when thickest is the board:
Go with Provision, Biscuit, Brandy stored;
But if you reasonably hope to speed,
You must produce your Ax in time of need.
Now when the Sea grew Calm, the Winds were laid,
And the pleased The Destinies; they were three Sisters, Clotho, Lachesis and
Atropos perpetually employed in Spinning: If the Thread, they Spun, was White;
it was a sign of Life and Prosperity: If Black; of Death and Adversity.
Parcae spun a whiter Thread;
When Fate propitious sent a gentle Gale;
The shattered Vessel, with one wretched Sail,
Beside what Gowns and Coats her Crew could lend
To help her on her Course, did homeward bend:
The South Wind lessening still, the Sun appears;
And into lively Hope converts their fears:
And now, in prospect sweet, his cheerful light
The Near them was built Alba Longa by Ascanius, who left his Stepmother
Lavinia, in the City of Lavinium, built by his Father Aeneas, and called by her
Name. Ascanius called his own City Longa from the long Form of it, and Alba
from the White Sow with Thirty Pigs Sucking her, that was seen by the Trojans,
a little after their Landing; and where the City was built according to the
Command of the Oracle. Virg.
Alban Cliffs confesses to their sight;
Where Alba's Pile Iulus founding reared,
When to Lavinium he that Seat preferred;
And called it Alba, from the white Sow named,
That for her Thirty Sucking Pigs was famed.
At last within the mighty Mole she gets,
Our Pharos was a Port in Egypt famous for its Watchtower, wherein were
placed Lights for the benefit and direction of Sailors by Night: Iuvenal calls
the Port of Ostia, where Tiber disburthens its self into the Sea, the Tuscan
Pharos: It was designed by Augustus after the Model of that in Egypt: Claudius
Caesar, as Suetonius says, carried on, and finished the Mole, with vast labor
and charges* having for eleven years together kept 30000 Men at work upon it.
It was afterward repaired by Trajan.
Tuscan Pharos, that the mid Sea meets
With its embrace, and leaves the Land behind:
A Work so wondrous Nature never designed.
Through it the joyful Steers-Man clears his way,
And comes to Anchor in its inmost Bay;
Where smallest Vessels ride* and are secured,
And the It was a Custom among the Ancients, when in Distress at Sea, to invoke
the aid of some God or other, with a solemn Vow of cutting off their Hair, and
offering it to him, as an acknowledgment to whose assistance they owed their
safety. To this St Paul probably alludes. Act. 27. 34. There shall not an Hair
of your Head perish: As if he had said; they should not need to vow their Hair;
for without such a Vow, and the performance of it, they should all escape.
Shorn Saylors boast what they endured.
Go then, my Boys, the Sacred Rites prepare;
With awful silence and attention hear:
With Bran the Knives, with Flowers the Altars dress*
And in your Diligence your Zeal express.
I Will follow straight, and, having paid my Vows,
Thence home again, where Chaplets wreath the brows
Of all my little Wa^^n D^iti^s;
And Incense shall Domestic Jove appease:
My shining Household Gods shall revel there*
And all the Colors of the Violet wear.
All Is right; my P^rtal shines with verdant Bays*
And Consecrated (...) early blaze.
Suspect me (...), (...) of Design,
Far (...) from any Thought of mine:
My Altars (...) not for so ^ase an end,
Catullus, though a Father, is my Friend,
And his three Children (...) a Foreign Claim.
Who on a Friend so hopeless, such a Name
As Father, would a (...) He^ bestow?
Or on such (...) a Quail forego?
If Two rich Men, both of them Childless; which made the Heraedipetae or
Legacy-Hunters present them, and ply them with Gift upon Gift; in hopes to be
considered in their Will. Tacitus makes mention of them both: The first he
calls African; the other Cruspilina.
Paccius or (...) a Vei^,
The Temples streigh^ are (...) with a Train
Of fawning Rascals, utt'ring each his Prayer;
Nothing's too precious for a Life so dear:
A Hecatomb is scarce enough to bleed:
And but an Elephant's no common Breed,
Nor seen, nor known in Italy, before
They were Transported from the Africa Shore;
Since which, in the Ru^ilian Forest reared,
They range at large, great Caesar's Royal Heard*
As once they learnt King Pyrr^us to obey;
And with Submission to our Consuls sway,
Or Tyrian Hannibal's, part of the War
In Turrets on their Backs they used to bear:
Could Novius or Two crafty designing Knaves, visiters of the Sick Gallita or
Paccius.
Pacuvius but procure
These Ivory Elephants so called from their stupendous bigness; and Ivory
Teeth.
Portents, Death should seal 'em sure
A Victim for Gallita; nothing less
The greatness of their Friendship can express.
Pacuvius, were he not by Law withstood,
Would manifest his own in Humane Blood;
The best, the loveliest Slaves of either Sex,
To serve his Complement, should yield their Necks:
Nay to that height the wicked Rogue proceeds,
His The Story in short is this. The Grecian Fleet lying Wind-bound at Aulis,
the Oracle was consulted, and Answer returned; no Wind could be had for their
purpose, unless Agamemnon, Commander in chief in the Expedition, would offer up
his Daughter Iphigenia to appease Diana's anger, that was offended with the
Greeks for killing an Hind Consecrated to her. Agamemnon, for the public good,
brings his Daughter to the Altar; but the Goddess, relenting, conveyed her away
to the Taurick Chersonese, and substituted an Hind in her place. The
application of this to Pacuvius is obvious enough.
Iphigenia, his Daughter, bleeds
If need require; tho he was sure to find
No Dext'rous slight to change her for a Hind.
My Fellow Citizen I must commend,
For what is a Fleet to a bequeathing Friend?
For, if he chance to escape this dismal bout,
The former Legatees are blotted out;
Upon Pacuvius all must be conferred;
So great a Merit claims no less Reward:
Pacuvius struts it, and triumphant goes
In the dejected Crowd of Rival Foes:
You see the Fruit of his projecting Brain,
In offering up his Daughter to his Gain.
As great as The prodigious Sums he extorted from the Provinces by unreasonable
Taxes, Confiscations, etc. are almost incredible. He gave no Office without
this charge: Thou know what I want, let us make it our business, that no
body may have any thing.
Nero's Plunder be his Store;
High, Mountain high, be pil'd the shining Ore;
Then may he Life to Grown now to a Proverb: Who lived, as Homer says, to
complete the third Age of Man. The word Age is an equivocal Term, and diversely
taken by many; but if we take it in its full extent, as it comprehends an
hundred years, it will serve very well Iuvenal's purpose.
Nestor's Age extend,
Nor ever be, nor ever find a Friend.
The End of the Twelfth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE TWELFTH SATYR.
TO Royal Juno. The Queen of the Gods; so called by the Poets, as being Wife to
Jupiter, who was the Supreme Deity of the Greeks and Romans. By the Warlike
Maid, is meant Pallas or Minerva, the Goddess of Learning and War. They had
their peculiar Sacrifices appointed them in the Rituals or Books of Ceremonies
of the Ancients: White Bulls were offered to Jupiter; white Cows to Juno and
Minerva. The Poet, though not able to undergo the Charge of so great a Sacrifice,
yet willing to show his Devotion, and pay his Vow for his Friend's safe
arrival, proportionable to his Estate, offers to Juno an Ewelamb, another to
Minerva, and to Jupiter a young Bullock.

Tarpeian Jove. On Mount Capitol, otherwise called the Tarpeian Hill, from the
Ves^al Virgin Tarpeia that betrayed it to the Sabines, Jupiter had a Temple,
whence he was Named Tarpeian and Capitoline.

Hispalla's. A Fat sensual Lady, noted as infamous for keeping a Player. Sat. 6.

Clitumnus A River that divides Tuscany and Vmbria, whose Water, as Pliny
relates, makes the Cows, that drink of it, calve their young White: Whence the
Romans, as Virgil and Claudian observe, were plentifully furnished with
Sacrifices for Jupiter Capitoline.

Uncommon Hand. The grandis minister of Iuvenal, some interpret in a sense
referring to the Quality of the Person, as if the Chief Pontif, and not one of
the Popa's, or ordinary Officers, was to give the blow: But as it is unseemly
to make the Chief Pontif descend to so mean an Office; so it is more probable
the Poet meant not the Dignity, but the size and strength of the Person.

Isis Temple. The Egyptian Goddess, looked upon by Merchants and Seamen as
their Patroness; to whom they made their Vows in their extremity. The Custom
was for those that escaped to hang up on the Walls of her Temple the Picture of
a Wreck or Storm, which was called a Votive Table; and her Votaries, it seems,
were so numerous, that she was forced to employ a whole Company of Painters in
her Service.

Just as the Beaver. A proper Simile, and good Moral allusion, but the Ground
is wholly fabulous; and has experimentally been proved so by Sestius a
Physician, as it stands related by Pliny. Dr. Brown, in his Book of Vulgar
Errors, says, that the Testicles, properly so called, are ^eated inwardly upon
the Loins; and therefore it were not only a fruitless attempt, but an
impossible Act, to castrate it self: And might be an hazardous Practice of Art,
if at all attempted by others.

Soft Mecaenas. Augustus his great Favorite; and Patron to Virgil and Horace.
Iuvenal here taxes him of being over soft and delicate; which Horace has done
too, though covertly, and under another Name.

Boetick Air. In Boetick Spain (now Andaluzia and the best part of Granada) the
Sheeps Fleeces are naturally of a color betwixt Red and Black, resembling the
Purple Dye, which the Ancients imputed to the goodness of the Air and the Soil:
And they put a great value on it, as we do now on the Spanish Wool for its
fineness.

Parthenius. A great Master in the Art of Graving.

The Wife of Fuscus. Fuscus was a Judge, mentioned in the last Satyr, noted by
Martial for a Drunkard; as his Wife is here by Iuvenal in the good Company of
Pholus the Centaur.

Baskets of Britain, Bascauda, the British word for a Basket, was by the
Romans made Latin. They so much fancied the Baskets of our Island, that they
would claim the Invention to themselves. Mart. Lib. 14. Barbara de Pictis veni
Bascauda Britannis,
Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma suam.
From British Picts the barbarous Basket came,
But now Rome gladly would th'invention claim.


Olynthus cost. A strong fortified City of Thrace, not to be taken by a Storm
or Siege. Philip of Macedon made a considerable Present of Plate to Lasthenes,
who was entrusted with the Government of it by the Athenians; and he, being
corrupted with so great a Bribe, treacherously surrendered it to Philip.

Parcae Spun. The Destinies; they were three Sisters, Clotho, Lachesis and
Atropos perpetually employed in Spinning: If the Thread, they Spun, was White;
it was a sign of Life and Prosperity: If Black; of Death and Adversity.

Alban Cliffs. Near them was built Alba Longa by Ascanius, who left his
Stepmother Lavinia, in the City of Lavinium, built by his Father Aeneas, and
called by her Name. Ascanius called his own City Longa from the long Form of
it, and Alba from the White Sow with Thirty Pigs Sucking her, that was seen by
the Trojans, a little after their Landing; and where the City was built
according to the Command of the Oracle. Virg.

Our Tuscan Pharos. Pharos was a Port in Egypt famous for its Watchtower,
wherein were placed Lights for the benefit and direction of Sailors by Night:
Iuvenal calls the Port of Ostia, where Tiber disburthens its self into the Sea,
the Tuscan Pharos: It was designed by Augustus after the Model of that in
Egypt: Claudius Caesar, as Suetonius says, carried on, and finished the Mole,
with vast labor and charges* having for eleven years together kept 30000 Men
at work upon it. It was afterward repaired by Trajan.

Shorn Sailors. It was a Custom among the Ancients, when in Distress at Sea, to
invoke the aid of some God or other, with a solemn Vow of cutting off their
Hair, and offering it to him, as an acknowledgment to whose assistance they
owed their safety. To this St Paul probably alludes. Act. 27. 34. There shall
not an Hair of your Head perish: As if he had said; they should not need to vow
their Hair; for without such a Vow, and the performance of it, they should all
escape.

If Paccius or Gallita. Two rich Men, both of them Childless; which made the
Heraedipetae or Legacy-Hunters present them, and ply them with Gift upon Gift;
in hopes to be considered in their Will. Tacitus makes mention of them both:
The first he calls African; the other Cruspilina.

Novius or Pacuvius. Two crafty designing Knaves, visiters of the Sick Gallita
or Paccius.

Ivory Portents. Elephants so called from their stupendous bigness; and Ivory
Teeth.

His Iphigenia. The Story in short is this. The Grecian Fleet lying Wind-bound
at Aulis, the Oracle was consulted, and Answer returned; no Wind could be had
for their purpose, unless Agamemnon, Commander in chief in the Expedition,
would offer up his Daughter Iphigenia to appease Diana's anger, that was
offended with the Greeks for killing an Hind Consecrated to her. Agamemnon, for
the public good, brings his Daughter to the Altar; but the Goddess, relenting,
conveyed her away to the Taurick Chersonese, and substituted an Hind in her
place. The application of this to Pacuvius is obvious enough.

As Nero's Plunder. The prodigious Sums he extorted from the Provinces by
unreasonable Taxes, Confiscations, etc. are almost incredible. He gave no
Office without this charge: Thou know what I want, let us make it our
business, that no body may have any thing.

To Nestor's Age. Grown now to a Proverb: Who lived, as Homer says, to complete
the third Age of Man. The word Age is an equivocal Term, and diversely taken by
many; but if we take it in its full extent, as it comprehends an hundred years,
it will serve very well Iuvenal's purpose.

THE THIRTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE, BY Mr. THOMAS CREECH, Fellow of All Souls
College in OXFORD.
ARGUMENT OF THE Thirteenth Satyr.
Corvinus had trusted one of his Old Friends and Acquaintance with a Bag of
Money; this Friend denies the Trust, and forswears it too: Corvinus is very
much disturbed at this Cheat, storms and rages, accuses Providence, and is
ready to conclude that God takes no care of Things below, because some Sudden
and Remarkable Vengeance did not fall upon this perjured false Wretch: Juvenal
hearing of Corvinus's Loss, and unmanly Behavior, writes this Satyr to him,
both to comfort him after his Loss, and instruct him how to bear it; and thence
takes occasion to speak of the Vileness, and Villainy of his Times. He begins
with the Condition of the wicked Man; and tells him; i. That the Sinner must
needs hate himself; and, ii. That he will be hated by all Mankind. iii. He puts
Corvinus in mind that he has a good Estate, and that this Loss will not break
him. iv. and, v. That a great many have suffered the like Misfortunes; that
Cheats were common; his Loss but little, and therefore not to be resented with
so violent a Passion. Hence, vi. He expatiates on the Vileness of the Times;
And, vii. compares his Age with the Golden One, which he tediously describes.
viii. He continues his Reflections on the genera^ Wickedness of the Times: ix.
Makes some Observations on the Confidence of some Sinners: And, x. Endeavors
to give some account of this: He observes that some are Atheists. xi. Others
believe a God, but fancy the Money they get by their Perjury will do them more
good, than the Punishments he inflicts will do them harm: At least, xii. that
God is Merciful, they may be pardon^ d, or escape in the Crowd of Sinners; since
some are forgiven, and all do not meet with Punishments equal to their Deserts.
xiii. He Corrects his Friend for his Atheistical Passion, and rude Accusations
of Providence; And, xiv. advises him to be more Cool, and consider, That, xv.
such Cheats are common, and he has suffered no more than other Men; And xvi.
that every Day he may meet with greater Crimes, which require his Concernment.
That, xvii. his Passion is Idle and Fruitless; because Revenge, which is the
only end of Passion, will do him no good, it will not retrieve his Loss, and
besides is an Argument of a Base Mind, and Mean Temper. Then coming closer to
his Point, he tells him, xviii. The Wicked are severely punished by their own
Consciences; xix. Vengeance waits upon them: And, xx. describes the Miserable
Life, and Terrible Death of the Wicked Man. And, xxi. closes all with observing
that few Men stop at their first Sin, but go on till their Crimes provoke
Providence: And therefore, xxii. Corvinus need not fear but this Perjured
Friend of his would do so too, and then be should see some remarkable Judgment
fall upon him.

THE THIRTEENTH SATYR.
I.
H^ that commi^s a Sin, shall SOme Read, Extemplo quodcunque malum, etc.
quickly find
The pressing Guilt lie heavy on his Mind;
Though Bribes or Favor shall assert his Cause,
Pronounce him (...), and elu'de the La^s:
None quits himself, his own impartial Thought
Will (...) and (...) will record the Fault.
II.
This first the Wicked f^els* Then public Hate
Pursues the (...), and proves the Villain's Fate.
III.
But more, Corvinus, thy Estate can bear
A greater Loss, and not implore thy (...);
Thy (...) sufficient, and thy Wealth too great
To feel the Damage of a Potty Cheat.
IV.
Nor are such Losses to the World unknown,
A rare Example, and thy Chance alone;
Most feel them, and in Fortune's L^tt^ry li^s
A heap of Blanks, like this, for one small Prize.
V.
Abate thy Passion, nor too much complain,
Grief should be forced, and it becomes a Man
To let it rise no higher than his Pain:
But you, too weak the slightest loss to bear,
Too delicate the common Fate to (...),
Are on the Fre^ of Passion, Boil and Rage,
Bacause, in so Debaucht and Vile an Age,
Thy Friend and Old Acquaintance dares disown
The Gold you lent him, and forswear the Loan.
What, start at this? When Sixty Years have spread
Their gray Experience over thy hoary Head!
Is this the All observing Age could Gain,
Or have Thou known the World so long in vain?
Let Stoics Ethics haughty Rules advance,
To combat Fortune, and to conquer Chance;
Yet Happy those, though not so Learned, are thought,
Whom Life instructs, who by Experience taught,
For new to come from past Misfortunes look;
Nor shake the ^oke, which galls the more it is shook*
VI.
What Day's so Sacred, but its Rest's profaned
By violent Robbers, or by Murders stained?
Here hired Assassins for their Gain invade,
And treacherous Poys'ner urge their Fatal Trade.
Good Men are scarce, the I^st are thinly sown,
They thrive but ill, nor can they last when grown.
And should we count them, and our Store compile,
Yet Thebes had but seven Gates, and the River Nile but seven Mouths.
(...) more Gates would show, more Mouths the Nile.
Worse than the Iron Age, and wretched Times
Roll on; and Use has so improved our Crimes,
That baffled Nature knows not how to frame
A Metal base enough to give the Age a Name:
Yet you exclaim, as loud as those that Praise
For Scraps and Coach-hire a Young Noble's Plays;
You thunder, and, as Passion rouls along,
Call Heaven and Earth to witness to your Wrong.
Gray Headed Infant! and in vain grown Old!
Art Thou to learn that in Another's Gold
Lie Charms resistless? That all laugh to find
Unthinking Plainness so o're-spread thy Mind,
That Thou could seriously persuade the Crowd
To keep their Oaths, and to believe a God?
VII.
This They could do whilst Saturn filled the Throne,
E're Juno burnisht, or Young Jove was grown;
E're private He left Ida's close retreat,
Or made Rebellion by Example great:
And whilst his Hoary Sire to Latium fled
Usurped his Empire, and defiled his Bed.
Whilst Gods dined singly, and few Feasts above,
No Beauteous Hebe mixed the Wine with Love;
No Phrygian Boy: But Vulean stained the Pole
With Sooty Hands, and filled the sparing Bowl.
E're Gods grew numerous, and the Heavenly Crowd
Pressed wretched Atlas with a lighter load:
E're Chance unenvied Neptune's Lot confined
To rule the Ocean, and oppose the Wind:
E're Proserpine with Pluto shared the Throne,
E're Furies lasht, or Ghosts had learned to Groan:
But free from Punishment as free from Sin
The Shades lived jolly, and without a King.
Then Vice was rare; ^'en Rudeness kept in awe
Felt all the rigor of avenging Law;
And had not Men the Hoary Heads revered,
Or Boys paid Reverence when a Man appeared,
Both must have died, though That is, were of better Quality, and had more
Wealth. Skins and Acorns being the primitive Clothes and Food, according to the
Poets.
Richer Skins they wore,
And saw more heaps of (...) in their store:
Four years Advance did such Respect engage,
And Youth was Reverenced then like sacred Age.
VIII.
Now if one Honest Man I chance to view,
Contemning Interest, and to Virtue true;
I rank him with the Prodigies of Fame,
With Plough'd-up Fishes, and with Icy Flame;
With Things which start from Nature's common Rules,
With Bearded Infants, and with Te^ming Mules:
As much amazed at the prodigious sign,
As if I saw If a swarm of Bees pitched upon a Temple, it was looked upon as an
Omen of some very great Mischief.
Bees clustered on a Shrine;
A Shower of Stones, or Rivers changed to Blood
Roll wondrous Waves, or urge a Milky Flood.
IX.
A little Sum you Mourn, whilst Most have met
With twice the Loss, and by as Vile a Cheat:
By treacherous Friends, and secret Trust betrayed,
Some are undone; Nor are the Gods our Aid.
Those Conscious Powers we can with ^ase comtemn,
If hid from Men, we trust our Crimes with them.
Observe the Wretch who has his Faith forsook,
How clear his Voice, and how assured his Look!
Like Innocence, and as ser^nely bold
As Truth, how loudly He forswears they Gold!
By Neptune's Trident, by the Bolts of Jove,
And all the Magazine of Wrath above.
Nay more, in Curses He goes boldly on,
He Dams himself, and thus devotes his Son:
If I Am forsworn, you injured Gods renew
Thyestes Thyestes was treated with a Ha^h made of his own Son.
Feast; and prove the Fable true.
X.
Some think that Chance rules all, that Nature streets
The moving Seasons, and turns round the Years.
These run to every Shrine, These boldly swea^,
And keep no Faith, because they know no (...).
XI.
Another doubts, but as his Doubts decline,
He dreads just Vengeance, and he starts at Sin;
He owns a God: And yet the Wretch forswears;
And thus he Reasons to relieve his Fears.
Let An Egyptian Goddess, supposed to be much concerned in inflicting
Diseases, and Maladies on Mankind.
Isis Rage, so I securely hold
The Coin forsworn, and keep the ravished Gold;
Let Blindness, Lameness come; are Legs and Eyes
Of equal Value to so great a Prize?
Would starving An Excellent Footman, who wan the Prize in the Olympian Games.
Ladas, had he leave to choose,
And were not frantic, the Rich Gout refuse?
For can the Glory of the swistest pace
Procure him Food? Or can he Feast on Praise?
XII.
The Gods take Aim before they strike their blow,
Though sure their Vengeance, yet the Stroke is slow;
And should at every Sin their Thunder fly,
I Am yet secure, nor is my Danger nigh:
But they are Gracious, but their Hands are free,
And who can tell but they may reach to Me?
Some they forgive, and every Age relates
That equal Crimes have met unequal Fates;
That Sins alike, unlike Rewards have found,
And whilst This Villain's Crucified, The other's Crowned.
The Man that shivered on the brink of Sin,
Thus steeled and hardened ventures boldly in;
Dare Him to swear, He with a cheerful Face
Flies to the Shrine, and bids Thee mend thy pace;
He urges, goes before Thee, shows the way,
Nay pulls Thee on, and chides Thy dull delay:
For Confidence in Sin, when mixed with Zeal,
Seems Innocence, and looks to most as well.
XIII.
Thus like the waggish Slave in -- Play,
He spreads the Net, and takes the easy Prey.
You Rage and Storm, and Blasphemously loud,
As A famous Crier in the Grecian Army, whose single voice was as loud as that
of fifty Men together.
Stentor bellowing to the Grecian Crowd,
Or Homer says that Mars being wounded by Diomedes, made as great an outcry,
as ten thousand Men shouting to the Battle.
Homer's Mars with too much warmth exclaim;
Jove, do Thou hear, and is thy Thunder tame?
Were Thou all Brass, thy Brazen Arm should rage,
And fix the Wretch a Sign to future Age:
Else why should Mortals to thy Feasts repair,
Spend useless Incense, and more useless Prayer?
Bathyllus A Fiddler and a Player: But put here for any idle Scoundrel, or
insignificant Fellow.
Statue at this rate may prove
Thy equal Rival, or a greater Jove.
XIV.
Be cool, my Friend, and hear my Muse dispense
Some Sovereign Comforts, drawn from Common Sense;
Not fe^cht from Stoics rigid Schools, nor wrought
By Epicurus more indulgent Thought;
Who led by Nature, did with ease pursue
The Rules of Life; guessed best, though missed the True.
A desperate Wound must skillful Hands employ,
But thine is curable by A Surgeon of no great Credit and Reputation.
Philip's Boy.
XV.
Look over the present and the former time,
If no Example of so Vile a Crime
Appears, then Mourn; admit no kind Relief,
But beat thy Breast, and I applaud thy Grief.
Let Sorrow then appear in all her State,
Keep Mournful silence, and shut fast thy Gate.
Let solemn Grief on Money lost attend,
Greater than waits upon a dying Friend;
None feigns, none acted Mourning's forced to show,
Or squeeze his Eyes to make that Torrent flow,
For Money lost demands a heartier due;
Then Tears are real, and the Grief is true.
But if at each Assize, and Term, we try
A thousand Rascals of as deep a Dye;
If Men forswear the Deeds and Bonds they draw,
Though Signed with all formality of Law,
And though the Writing and the Seal proclaim
The barefaced Perjury, and fix the shame;
Go Fortune's Darling, nor expect to bear
The common Lot, but to avoid thy share!
Heaven's Favorite Thou, for better Fates designed,
Than we the Dregs and Rubbish of Mankind!
XVI.
This petty Sinner scarce deserves thy Rage,
Compared with the great Vill^^^s of the Age.
Here hired Assassins kill, there Sulphur thrown,
By treacherous Hands, destroys the frighted Town.
Bold Sacrilege, invading things Divine,
Breaks through a Temple, or destroys a Shrine,
The Reverened Goblets, and the ancient Plate,
Those grateful Presents of a Conquering State,
Or pious King; or if the Shrine be poor,
The Image spoils: Nor is the God secure.
One seizes Neptune's Beard, one Castor's Crown,
Or Jove himself, and melts the Thunderer down.
Here Poys'ners murder, there the impious Son,
With whom a guiltless The Villain that killed his Father was to be put into a
Bag with a Dog, a Cock, a Serpent, and an Ape, and thrown into the Sea.
Ape is doomed to drown,
Prevents old Age, and with a hasty blow
Cuts down his Sire, and quickens Fates too slow.
Yet what are these to those vast heaps of Crimes,
Which make the greatest B^siness of our Times,
Which Terms prolong, and which from Morn to Night
Amaze the Iuries* and the Judges fright?
Attend the Court, and thou shall briefly find
In that one place the Manners of Mankind;
Hear the Indictments, then return again,
Call thy self Wretch, and, if thou dar'ft, complain.
Whom midst the Alps do hanging throats surprise?
Who stares in Germany at watchet Eyes?
Or who in Meroe, when the Breast reclined,
Hangs over the Shoulder to the Child behind,
And bigger than the Boy? For Wonder's lost
When Things grow common, and are found in most.
When Cranes invade, his little Sword and Shield
The Pigmy takes, and straight attends the Field;
The Fight's soon over; the Cranes descend, and bear
The sprawling Warriors through the liquid Air:
Now here, should such a Fight appear to view,
All Men would split, the Sight would please whilst new:
There none's concerned, where every day they fight,
And not one Warrior is a Foot in height.
XVII.
But shall the Villain escape? Shall Perjury
Grow Rich and Safe, and shall the Cheat be free?
Had thou full power (Rage asks no more) to kill,
Or measure out his Torments by thy Will;
Yet what could thou, Tormentor, hope to gain?
Thy Loss continues, unrepaid by Pain,
Inglorious Comfort thou shall poorly meet,
From his mean Blood. But oh Revenge is sweet.
Thus think the Crowd, who, eager to engage,
Take quickly fire, and kindle into rage;
Who never consider, but, without a pause,
Make up in Passion what they want in Cause.
Not so mild Philosophers of great Credit, and Worth.
Thales, not Chrysippus thought,
Nor that Good Man, who drank the poisonous Draught
With Mind serene; and could not wish to see
His Vile Accuser drink as deep as He:
Exalted Socrates! Divinely brave!
Injured He fell, and dying He forgave,
Too Noble for Revenge; which still we find
The weakest Frailty of a feeble Mind;
Degenerous Passion, and for Man too base,
It seats its Empire in the Female Race,
There Rages; and, to make its blow secure,
Puts Flattery on, until he Aim be sure.
XVIII.
But why must those be thought to escape, that feel
Those Rods of Scorpions, and those Whips of Steel
Which Conscience shakes, when she with Rage controuls,
And spreads Amazing Terrors through their Souls?
Not sharp Revenge, not Hell it self can find
A fiercer Torment, than a Guilty Mind,
Which Day and Night does dreadfully accuse,
Condemns the Wretch, and still the Charge renews.
XIX.
A trusted Spartan was inclined to Cheat*
(The Coin looked lovely, and the Bag was great,
Secret the Trust) and with an Oath defend
The Prize, and baffle his deluded Friend:
But weak in Sin, and of the God^ afraid,
And (...) well versed in the forswearing Trade,
He goes to Delphos; humbly begs advice,
And thus the Priestess by Command replies:
Expect sure Vengeance by the Gods decreed,
To punish Thoughts, not yet improved to Deed.
At this he started, and forbore to swear,
Not out of Conscience of the Sin, but Fear.
Yet Plagues en^u'd, and the contagious Sin
Destroyed himself, and ruined all his Kin.
Thus suffered He for the imperfect Will
To sin, and bare Design of doing ill:
For he that but conceives a Crime in thought,
Contracts the danger of an Actual Fault:
Then what must he expect that still proceeds
To fi^^^h Sin, and work up Thoughts to Deeds*
XX.
Perpetual Anguish fills his anxious Breast,
Not stopped by Business, nor composed by Rest:
No Music chears him, and no Feasts can please,
He sits like discontented Damocles having very much extolled the Happiness of
Kings, in the presence of Dionysius King of Syracuse; Dionysius invited him to
Dinner, placed him in a rich Throne, and gave him a very splendid
Entertainment; but just over his Head hung a Sword by a Hair, with the point
downward.
Damocles,
When by the sportive Tyrant wisely shown
The dangerous Pleasures of a flattered Throne.
Sleep flies the Wretch, or when his Care's oppr^st,
And his tossed Lambs are wearied into rest,
Then Dreams invade, the injured Gods appear,
All armed with Thunder, and awake his Fear.
What frights him most, in a Gigantick size,
Thy sacred Image flashes in his Eyes;
These shake his Soul, and, as they boldly press,
Bring out his Crimes; and force him to confess.
This Wretch will start at every flash that flies,
Grow pale at the first murmur of the Skies,
E're Clouds are formed, and Thunder roars, afraid,
And A Philosopher, who thought all things were by Chance.
Epicurus can afford no aid;
His Notions fail: And the destructive Flame
Commissioned falls, not thrown by Chance, but Aim:
One Clap is past, and now the Skies are clear,
A short reprieve, but to increase his Fear:
Whilst Arms Divine, revenging Crimes below,
Are gathering up to give the greater Blow.
But if a Fever fires his sulphurous Blood,
In every Fit he feels the Hand of God,
And Heaven-born Flame: Then, drowned in deep Despair,
He dares not offer one repenting Prayer;
Nor vow one Victim to preserve his Breath,
Amazed he lies, and sadly looks for Death:
For how can Hope with desperate Guilt agree?
And the worst Beast is worthier Life than He.
XXI.
He that once Sins, like him that slides on Ice,
Goes swiftly down the slippery ways of Vice;
Though Conscience checks Him, yet, those rubs gone over,
He slides on smoothly, and looks back no more;
What Sinners finish where they first begin?
And with one Crime content their Lust to Sin?
Nature, that, rude and in her first Essay,
Stood boggling at the roughness of the way,
Used to the Road, unknowing to return,
Goes boldly on, and loves the Path when worn.
XXII.
Fear not, but pleased with this successful Bait,
Thy Perjured Friend will quickly tempt his Fate;
He will go on, until his Crimes provoke
The Arm Divine to strike the Fatal Stroke;
Then thou shall see him plunged, when least he fears,
At once accounting for his deep Arrears;
Sent to those narrow Isles, which thronged we see
With mighty Exiles, once secure as He;
Drawn to the Gallows, or condemned to Chains:
Then thou shall tri^mph in the Villain's pains,
Enjoy his Groans; and with a grateful Mind
Confess that Heaven is neither Deaf nor Blind.
The End of the Thirteenth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE THIRTEENTH SATYR.
SOme Read, Extemplo quodcunque malum, etc.

Thebes had but seven Gates, and the River Nile but seven Mouths.

That is, were of better Quality, and had more Wealth. Skins and Acorns being
the primitive Clothes and Food, according to the Poets.

If a swarm of Bees pitched upon a Temple, it was looked upon as an Omen of some
very great Mischief.

Thyestes was treated with a Ha^h made of his own Son.

Isis. An Egyptian Goddess, supposed to be much concerned in inflicting
Diseases, and Maladies on Mankind.

Ladas. An Excellent Footman, who wan the Prize in the Olympian Games.

Stentor. A famous Crier in the Grecian Army, whose single voice was as loud as
that of fifty Men together.

Homer says that Mars being wounded by Diomedes, made as great an outcry, as
ten thousand Men shouting to the Battle.

Bathyllus. A Fiddler and a Player: But put here for any idle Scoundrel, or
insignificant Fellow.

A Surgeon of no great Credit and Reputation.

The Villain that killed his Father was to be put into a Bag with a Dog, a
Cock, a Serpent, and an Ape, and thrown into the Sea.

Philosophers of great Credit, and Worth.

Damocles having very much extolled the Happiness of Kings, in the presence of
Dionysius King of Syracuse; Dionysius invited him to Dinner, placed him in a
rich Throne, and gave him a very splendid Entertainment; but just over his Head
hung a Sword by a Hair, with the point downward.

A Philosopher, who thought all things were by Chance.

THE FOURTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. JOHN DRYDEN, Junior.
ARGUMENT OF THE Fourteenth Satyr.
Since Domestic Examples easily corrupt our Youth, the Poet prudently exhorts
all Parents, that they themselves should abstain from evil practices: Amongst
which, (...) chi^fly poin^s at Dice and Gam^ng, Ta^erns, Drunkenness, and
Cruelty, which they exercised upon their Slaves. Lest after their pernicious
Example, their Sons should copy them in their Vices, and become Gamesters,
Drunkards, and Tyrants, Lestrigons, and Canibals to their Servants. For if the
Father, says Juvenal, love the Box and Dice, the Boy will be given to an
it^hing Elbow: Neither is it to be expected, that the Daughter of Larga the
Adu^^ress, should (...) more contineut than her Mother: Since we are all by
Nature, more apt to receive ill impressions than good; and are besides more
pliant in our Infancy and Youth, than when we grow up to riper years. Thus we
are more apt to imitate a Catiline, than a Brutus, or the Uncle of Brutus, Cato
Ulicensis. For these Reasons he is instant with all (...), that they permit not
their Children, to bear lascivious words, and that they Banish Pimps, Whores
and Parasites from their Houses. If they are careful, says the Poet, when they
make an invitation to their Friends, that all things shall be clean* and set in
order; much more it is their Duty to their Children, that nothing appear
corrupt or undecent in their Family. Storks and Vultures, because they are fed
by the Old Ones, with Snakes, and Carrion, naturally, and without instruction,
feed on the same uncleanly Diet. But the Generous Eaglet, who is taught by her
Parent, to fly at Hares, and sowse on Kids, disdains afterward to pursue a
more ignoble Game. Thus the Son of Centronius was prone to the Vice of raising
Stately Structures, beyond his Fortune; because his Father had ruined himself
by Building. He whose Father is a Jew, is Naturally prone to Superstition, and
the Observation of his Country Laws. From hence the Poet descends to a Satyr
against Avarice, which he esteems to be of worse Example than any of the
former. The remaining part of the Poem is wholly employed on this Subject, to
show the Misery of this Vice. He concludes with limiting our desire of Riches
to a certain Measure; which he confines within the compass of what Hunger and
Thirst and Cold require for our preservation and subsistence: With which
Necessaries if we are not contented, then the Treasures of Craesus, of the
Persian King, or of the Eunuch Narcissus, who commanded both the Will and the
Fortunes of Claudius the Emperor, would not be sufficient, to satisfy the
greediness of our Desires.

THE FOURTEENTH SATYR. To his Friend Fuscinus.
FVscinus, those Ill Deeds that fully Fame,
And lay such Blots upon an Honest Name,
In Blood once Tainted, like a Current run
From the lewd Father, to the lewder Son.
If Gaming does an Aged Sire entice,
Then my Young Master swiftly learns the Vice,
And shakes, in Hanging-Sleeves, the little Box and Dice.
Thus the Voluptuous Youth bred up to dress
For his Fat Grandsire, some Delicious Mess;
In Feeding High, his Tutor will surpass,
As Heir Apparent of the Gourmand Race.
And, should a Thousand Grave Philosophers
Be always hollowing Virtue in his Ears,
They would at last their loss of Time lament,
And give him over for Glutton in Descent.
Can Cruel RVtilus, some Person in the Poets time, noted for his Cruelty.
Rutilus, who loves the Noise
Of Whips far better than a Syren's Voice,
Can Polyphemus a Famous Giant with one Eye, and a Cannibal.
Polyphemus, or Antiphates, a King of the Lestrygons, who were all Men-Eaters.
I doubt not but the Laestrigons, who were a People of Italy, learnt this Diet
of King Saturn, when he hid himself among 'em, and gave this Example by making
a Meals-meat of his own Children.
Antiphates,
Who gorge themselves with Man, can such as These
Set up to teach Humanity, and give
By their Example, Rules for Us to live?
Can They preach up Equality of Birth,
And tell Us how we all began from Earth?
The Inhumane By this Lord, is still meant the same Cruel Ratilus.
Lord, who with a Cruel gust
Can a Red Fork in his Slave's Forehead thrust;
Because the unlucky Criminal was caught
With little Theft of two course Supposed Bath-Rubbers: The Romans were great
Bathers.
Towels fraught?
Can He a Son to soft Remorse incite,
Whom Country Goals, where they kept their working Slaves in great numbers.
Goals, and Blood, and Butchery delight?
Who would expect the Daughter should be other
Than Common Punk, if Larga, a fictitious Name for some very common Buttock.
Larga be the Mother?
Whose Lovers Names in order to run over
The Girl took Breath full thirty times, and more:
She, when but yet a tender Minx, began
To hold the Door, but now sets up for Man,
And to her Gallants, in her own Handwriting,
Sends Billets-douxs of the Old Baud's Inditeing.
So Nature Prompts; so soon we go astray,
When old Experience puts us in the Way
Our Green Youth Copies what Gray Sinners Act;
When Venerable Age commends the Fact.
Some Sons, indeed, some very few, we see,
Who keep themselves from this Infection free,
Whom Gracious Heaven for Nobler Ends designed,
Their Looks erected, and their Clay refined.
The Rest are all by bad Example led,
And in their Father's slimy Track they tread.
Is It not enough we should our selves undo,
But that our Children we must Ruin too?
Children, like tender Osiers take the bow,
And as they first are Fashioned, always grow.
By Nature, headlong to all Ills we run,
And Virtue, like some dreadful Monster, shun.
Survey the World, and where one Cato of Vtica, a Roman Patriot, who slew
himself, rather than he would submit to Julius Caesar.
Cato Shines,
Count a degenerate Herd of Catiline, a Plotter against the Commonwealth of
Rome.
Catilines.
Suffer no lewdness or undecent Speech,
The Appartment of the tender Youth to reach;
Far be from thence the Glutton Para^ite, a Greek Word, among the Romans used
for a Flatterer, and Feast-Hunter. This sort of Creature the^ slighted in those
days, and used very scurvily, terming such a one an V^bra, that is, a shadow,
and Apparition, etc.
Parasite,
Singing his Drunken Katches all the Night;
But farther still be Woman; Woman first
Was Evils Cause, her self of Ills the worst.
Boys even from Parents may this Reverence claim;
For when thou do at some Vile Action aim,
Say, should the harmless Child withold thy Hand,
Would it not put thy Fury to a stand?
Then may we not conclude the Sire unjust
Who (when his Son or'ecome with Drink and Lust,
Is by the This Censor of good Manners, was an Officer of confiderable Power in
Rome; in some respects not unlike our Midnight Magistrate; but not altogether
so saucy.
Censor of Good Manners caught,
And suffers Public Penance for his Earth)
Rails, and Reviles, land turns him out of Door,
For what himself so often has done before?
A Son so Copied from his Vice, so much
The very same in every little touch;
That should he not Resemble too his Life,
The Father justly might suspect his Wife.
This very Reverend Letcher, quite worn out
With Rheumatisms, and Crippled with his Gout,
Forgets what he in Youthful Times has done,
And swinges his own Vices in his Son.
To entertain a Guest, with what a care
Would he his Household Ornaments prepare;
Harass his Servants, and O'reseer stand,
To keep 'em Working with a threatning^ Wand:
Clean all my Plate, he cries, let not not one stain
Sully the Figured Silver, or the Plain;
Rub all the Floors, make all the Pillars Bright,
No hanging Cobwebs leave to shock the Sight.
O Wretched Man, is all this Hurry made
On this Account, because thou art afraid
A dirty Hall or Entry should Offend
(...)
(...)
(...)
If to some The Old Romans were careful to breed up their Sons so, that
afterward they might be useful to their Country in Peace, or War, or ploughing
the Ground: Vtilis agris, (as Iuvenal has it.) An Exercise that would break the
Hearts of our Modern Beaux.
Useful Art he be not brad,
He grows (...)
For what (...)
In Age we are by second Nature Prone.
The callow Storks with Lizard and with Snake
Are fed, and soon as e're to Wing they take,
At sight those Animals for Food pursue,
The first delicious Bit they ever knew.
Even so it is Nature in the Vulture's breed,
On Dogs and Human Carcasses to feed.
Jove's The Eagle, so called for the great Service he did Jupiter, in bringing
Ganymede, a Lovely Boy, on his Back to him.
Bird will sowse upon the timorous Hare,
And tender Kids with his sharp Tallons tear,
Because such Food was laid before him first,
When from his Shell the laboring Eaglet burst.
Centronius Centronius, a Famous Extravagant Architect, who with his Son (who
took after him) built away all his Estate, and had so many Palaces at last,
that he was too poor to live in any of 'em.
does high costly Villa's raise
With Grecian Marble, which the sight amaze:
Some stand upon Cajeta's winding shore,
At Tybur's Tower, and at Praeneste more.
The Dome of Hercules and Fortune show
To his tall Fabrics like small Cots below:
So much his Palaces o're-look 'em all,
As gelt Posides The Palace of the Eunuch Posides. As in Virg. Iam proximus
ardet -- Vcalegon.
does our Capitol.
His Son builds on, and never is content,
Till the last Farthing is in Structure spent.
The Jews, like their bigoted Sires before,
By gazing on the Clouds their Iuvenal, though he was wise enough to laugh at his
own Country Gods, yet had not, or would not have, a right Notion of the True
Deity, which makes him ridicule the Jews manner of Worship.
God adore:
So Superstitious, that they will sooner Dine
Upon the Flesh of Men, than that of Swine.
Our Roman Customs they contemn and jear,
But learn and keep their Country Rites with fear.
That Worship only they in Reverence have,
Which in dark Volumes their Great Moses gave.
Ask 'em the Road, and they shall point you wrong,
Because you do not to their Tribe belong.
They Will not betray a Spring to quench your Thirst,
Unless you show 'em Circumcision first.
So they are taught, and do it to obey
Their Fathers, who observe the Sabbath Day.
Young Men to imitate all Ills are Prone,
But are compelled to Avarice alone:
For then in Virtue's shape they follow Vice;
Because a true Distinction is so nice,
That the base Wretch who hoards up all he can,
Is Praised, and called a Careful, Thrifty Man:
The Fabled This Dragon was Guardian of the Golden Fleece, which hung in the
Temple of Mars at Cholchos; and hereby hangs a Tale, or a long Story of Jason
and Medea, with which I will not trouble you.
Dragon never guarded more
The Golden Fleece, than he his ill-got Store:
What a profound Respect where e're he goes
The Multitude to such a Monster shows?
Each Father cries, "My Son, Example take,
"And led, by this Wise Youth, thy Fortunes make,
"Who Day and Night never ceased to toil and sweat,
"Drudg'd like a Smith, and on the Anvil beat,
"Till he had Hammered out a Vast Estate.
"Side with that Sect who learnedly deny
"That e're Content was joined with Poverty;
"Who Measure Happiness by Wealth increased,
"And think the Mony'd Man alone is Blessed.
Parents the little Arts of saving teach,
E're Sons the Top of Avarice can reach;
When with false Weights their Servants Guts they cheat,
And pinch their own to cover the Deceit:
Keep a stail Crust till it looks Blue, and think
Their Flesh never fit for Eating till it stink;
The least remains of which they Mince, and Dress
It over again to make another Mess:
Adding a Leek, whose every String is told,
For fear some Pilf'ring Hand should make too bold:
And with a Mark distinct, Seal up a Dish
Of thrice-boil'd Beans, and Putrid Summer Fish:
A Beggar on the Beggars took their Stations then, as they do now, in the
greatest Thorow-fares, which were their Bridges, of which there were many over
the River Tyber in Rome.
Bridge would loath such Food,
And send it to be washed in Tyber's Flood.
But, to what End these ways of sordid Gain?
It shows a manifest unsettled Brain,
Living, to suffer a low starving Fate,
In Hopes of dying in a Wealthy State.
For, as thy strutting Bags with Money rise,
The Love of Gain is of an equal size:
Kind Fortune does the Poor Man better Bless,
Who tho he has it not, desires it less.
One Villa therefore is too little thought;
A larger Farm at a vast Price is bought:
Uneasy still within these narrow bounds,
Thy next Design is on thy Neighbors Grounds:
His Crop invites, to full Perfection grown,
Thy own seems thin, because it is thy own:
The Purchase therefore is Demanded straight,
And if he will not Sell, or makes thee wait,
A Teem of Oxen in the Night are sent,
(Starved for the purpose, and with Labor spent)
To take Free Quarter, which in one half Hour
The Pains and Product of a Year devour:
Then, some are basely Bribed to vow it looks
Most plainly done by Thieves with Reaping-hooks:
Such mean Revenge, committed underhand,
Has Ruined many an Acre of good Land.
What if Men talk, and whispers go about,
Pointing the Malice and its Author out?
He values not what they can say, or do;
For who will dare a Mony'd Man to sue?
Thus he would rather Cursed, and Envied be,
Than Loved, and Praised in Honest Poverty.
But to possess a Long and Happy Life,
Freed from Diseases, and secure from Strife.
Give me, ye Gods, the product of one The Field of Mars, or Campus Martius,
which was the greatest part of the Roman Empire when in its Infancy under
Romulus and Tatius the Sabine, his Copartner, admitted for the sake of the Fair
Ladies he brought along with him.
Field
As large as that which the first Romans Tilled;
That so I neither may be Rich nor Poor,
And having just enough, not covet more.
'Twas then, Old Soldiers covered over with Scars,
(The Marks of Pyrrhus King of the Epirots, a formidable Enemy to the Romans,
though at last overcome by 'em. He Died a very little Death (as it is the Fate of
some Heroes) being Martyred by the fall of a Tyle from a House.
Pyrrhus, or the Wars against the Carthaginians.
Punick Wars,)
Thought all past Services rewarded well,
If to their share at last two Acres fell:
(Their Countries frugal Bounty;) so of old
Was Blood, and Life, at a low-Market sold.
Yet, then, this little spot of Earth, well Tilled,
A numerous Family with Plenty filled;
The good old Man and Thrifty Huswife spent
Their Days in Peace, and Fatten'd with Content,
Enjoyed the Dr^gs of Life, and lived to see
A long descending Healthful Progeny.
The Men were Fashioned in a larger Mould,
The Women fit for Labor, Big and Bold.
Gygantick Hinds, as soon as Work was done,
To their huge Pots of Boiling Pulse would run:
Fell too, with eagar joy, on homely Food;
And their large Veins beat strong with wholesome Blood.
Of old, two Acres were a bounteous Lot,
Now, scarce they s^rve to make a Garden-Plot.
From hence the greatest part of Ills descend,
When Lust of getting more will have no End:
That, still our weaker Passions does Command,
And puts the Sword and Poison in our Hand.
Who covets Riches, cannot brook delay,
But Spurs and bears down all that stops his way:
Nor Law, nor checks of Conscience will he hear,
When in hot scent of Gain, and full Carreer.
But hark, how Ancient Marsus, a thrifty Husbandman, from whom the Marsi were
so called, a laborious People some 15 Miles distant from Rome.
Marsus did advise;
My Sons, let these small Cots and Hills suffice:
Let us the Harvest of our Labor eat;
It Is Labor makes the coursest Diet sweet:
Thus much to the kind Rural Gods we owe,
Who pitied Suffering Mortals long ago;
When on harsh Mankind fed on Acorns, till Ceres the Goddess of Corn instructed
them to sow Grain.
Acorns Hungrily they Fed,
And gave 'em nicer Palats, better Bread.
The Country Peasant meditates no harm,
When clad with Skins of Beasts to keep him warm:
In Winter Weather, unconcerned, he goes
Almost Knee-deep through Mire, in clumsey Shoes:
Vice dwells in Palaces, is Richly Dressed,
There glows in Scarlet, and the Tyrian Vest:
The Wiser Ancients these Instructions gave:
But now a Covetous old Crafty Knave,
At dead of Night shall rowse his Son, and cry;
Turn out, you Rogue, how like a Beast you lie:
Go, Buckle to the Law, is this an Hour
To stretch your Limbs? You Will never be Chancellor:
Or else your self to Laelius recommend,
To such broad Shoulders Some General Officer in the Roman Army.
Laelius is a Friend:
Fight under him, there is Plunder to be had;
A Captain is a very gainful Trade:
And when in Service your best Days are spent,
In time you may Command a Regiment*
But if the Trumpet's clangour you abhor,
And dare not be an Alderman of War;
Take to a Shop, behind a Counter lie,
Cheat half in half; none Thrive by Honesty:
Never reflect upon the sordid Ware
Which you expose, be Gain your only care.
He that grows Rich by scowring of a Sink,
Gets where-withal to justify the stink.
This Sentence, worthy Jove himself, Record
As true, and take it on a Poet's Word:
*To Have Money, is a necessary Task,
*From whence it is got the World will never ask.
Taught by their Nurses little Children get
This saying, sooner than their Alphabet.
What care a Father takes to teach his Son
With ill-timed Industry, to be undone!
Leave him to Nature, and you will quickly find
The tender Cock'ril takes just after Kind:
The forward Youth will without driving go*
And learn t'outshoot you in your proper Bow,
As much as Ajax his own Sire, excelled,
And was the Brawnier Block-head in the Field.
Let Nature in the Boy but stronger grow,
And all the Father soon it self will show:
When first the down appears upon his Chin,
For a small Sum he Swears through Thick and Thin;
At Ceres Altar vents his Purjury.
And Blasts her Holy Image with a Lie:
If a Rich Wife he Marries, in her Bed
She Is found by Dagger or by Poison, Dead.
While Merchants make long Voyages by Sea
To get Estates, he cuts a shorter Way.
In mighty Mischiefs little Labor lies:
I never Counseled this the Father cries:
But still, base Man, he Copied this from Thee:
Thine was the Prime, Original Villainy.
For he who covets Gain to such excess,
Does by dumb Signs himself as much express,
As if in Words at l^ngth he showd his Mind:
The bad Example made him Sin by Kind.
But who can Youth, let loose to Vice, restrain?
When once the hard-mouthed Horse has got the Rein,
He Is past thy Power to stop; Young Phaeton,
By the Wild Coursers of his Fancy drawn,
From East to North, irregularly hurled,
First set on Fire himself, and then the World.
Astrologers assure long Life, you say,
Your Son can ^^ll you better much than they,
Your Son and Heir whose Hopes your Life delay.
Poison will work against the Stars, beware;
For every Meal an Antidote prepare:
And let Archig^n^s some Cordial bring
Fit for a Wealthy Father, or a King.
What sight more Pleasant, in his Public Shows
Did ever Praetor on the Stage Expose,
Than are such Men as every Day we see,
Whose chief Mishap, and only Misery
Is to be over-stock'd with ready Coin,
Which now they bring to Watchful Castor's Not that the Shrine was secured by
the care of the God Castor, for Iuvenal knew their Gods could have no such
thing as Care; but it was lined with a strong Guard of Soldiers, who had an
Eye to their God as well as their Moneys, lest he should be stolen, or unrigg'd,
as Mars was. Our Poet calls him watchful Castor jearingly.
Shrine;
Since Mars, whom we the great Revenger call,
Lost his own Helmet, and was stripped of all.
It Is time dull Theaters we should forsake,
When busy Men much more Diversion make.
The Tumblers gambols some delight afford,
No less the nimble Caperer on the Cord;
But These are still insipid Stuff to Thee,
Cooped in a Ship, and tossed upon the Sea.
Base Wretch, exposed by thy own Covetous Mind
To the Deaf Mercy of the Waves and Wind.
The Dancer on the Rope, with doubtful Tread,
Gets where-withal to Cloth and buy him Bread,
Nor covets more than Hunger to prevent;
But nothing less than Millions Thee content:
What Shipwrecks and dead Bodies choke the Sea;
The Numerous Fools that were betrayed by Thee!
For at the Charming Call of powerful Gain,
Whole Fleets equipped appear upon the M^in,
And spite of The first a South-west, the latter, as we term it at Sea, a
strong Levant.
Lybian and The first a South-west, the latter, as we term it at Sea, a strong
Levant.
Ca^pathian Gale,
Beyond the limits of known Earth they Sail.
A Labor worth the while, at last to brag
(When safe returned, and with a strutting Bag,)
What Finny Sea-Gods thou have had in view,
More than our Lying Poets ever knew.
What several Madnesses in Men appear!
Orestes Orestes, said to be haunted by Furies, for Killing his Mother
Clytemnestra, the Wife of Agamemnon.
runs from fancied Furies here;
Ajax Ajax the Son of Telamon, who ran mad, because Agamemnon gave the Armor
of Achilles from him to Ulysses. But the mistaking Agamemnon, or his Brother
Menelaus, for Oxen, or Oxen for them, was not so gross; for they were both
famously Horned: And if Report says true, Ajax need not have spared Ulysses,
since Penelope knew which of her Suitors could shoot best in her Husband's Bow.
belabours there an harmless Ox,
And thinks that Agamemnon feels the Knocks.
Nor is indeed that Man less Mad than These,
Who Fraights a Ship to venture on the Seas:
With one frail interposing Plank to save
From certain Death rolled on by every Wave:
Yet Silver makes him all this Toil Embrace,
Silver, with Titles stamped, and a dull Monarchs Face.
When gathering Clouds over shadow all the Skies,
And shoot quick Lightnings, Weigh, my Boys, he cries
A Summers Thunder, soon it will be past!
Yet, hardy Fool, this Night may prove thy last;
When thou (thy Ship o're-whelm'd with Waves,) shall be
Forced to plunge Naked in the Raging Sea;
Thy Teeth hard pressed, a Purseful of dear Gold,
The last Remains of all thy Treasure, hold.
Thus he --
Whose Sacred Hunger, all the Stores that lie
In Yellow Tagus, a River in Spain, said to be full of Gold Sand. This Tagus
has lost his good Qualities time out of mind, or the Spaniard has coined it
dry, for now they fetch their Gold from the Indies, and then other Nations
fetch it from them.
Tagus could not satisfy;
Does now in Tattered Clothes at some Lanes End
A Painted Storm for Charity Extend.
With Care and Trouble great Estates we gain,
When got, we keep 'em with more Care and Pain.
Rich Some noted Rich Man in Rome.
Licinus his Servants ready stand,
Each with a Water-Bucker in his Hand,
Keeping a Guard, for fear of Fire, all Night,
Yet Licinus is always in a Fright.
His curious Statues; Amber-Works, and Plate,
Still fresh increasing Pangs of Mind create.
The Diogenes, a snarling Dog-Philosopher (for there have been Dog-Philosophers
as well as Poets in Doggrel.)
Naked Cynick's Jar never Flames; if broken
It Is quickly sodder'd, or a new bespoken.
When Alexander^ first beheld the Face
Of the Great Cynick in that narrow space;
His own Condition thus he did lament:
How much more Happy thou, that art content
To live within this little Hole, than I
Who after Empire, that vain Quarry, fly;
Grappling with Dangers where-foe're I roam,
While thou have all the Conquered World at Home.
Fortune a Goddess is to Fools alone,
The Wise are always Masters of their own.
If any ask me what would satisfy
To make Life easy, thus I would reply.
As much as keeps out Hunger, Thirst, and Cold;
Or what contented Socrates and Epicurus two Wise Philosophers, contented with
the bare Necessaries of Life: The first of these was esteemed the best Moral
Philosopher, the latter the best Natural.
Socrates of Old:
As much as made Wise Epicurus Blessed,
Who in small Gardens spacious Realms Possessed;
This is what Nature's Wants may well suffice:
He that would more, is Covetous, not Wise.
But since among Mankind so few there are
Who will conform to Philosophic fare;
Thus much I will indulge thee for thy ease,
And mingle something of our Times to please.
Therefore enjoy a Plentif^l Estate;
As much as will a Knight of Rome create
By Roscian Law; so called from Roscius Otho Tribune of the People, who made a
Law, that none should fit in the 14 first Seats of the Theater, unless they
were worth 4 Hundred Sestertiums, per annum, that is above 3 Thousand pounds of
our Moneys, and these were esteemed Noblemen, ipso facto.
Roscian Law: And if that will not do,
Double, and take as much as will make Two;
Nay Three, to satisfy the last Desire;
But if to more than this thou do Aspire;
Believe me all the Riches of the East,
The Wealth of Cr^sus cannot make thee Blessed:
The Treasure Claudius the 5th Caesar, who had no better luck in a Wife than
his Predecessors, Julius and Augustus, and most of the Great Men in History.
Claudius to Narcissus gave,
Would make thee, Claudius like, an Errant Slave;
Who to obey his mighty Minions Will,
Did his loved Empress Messalina kill.
The End of the Fourteenth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE FOURTEENTH SATYR.
RVtilus, some Person in the Poets time, noted for his Cruelty.

Polyphemus a Famous Giant with one Eye, and a Cannibal.

Antiphates, a King of the Lestrygons, who were all Men-Eaters. I doubt not but
the Laestrigons, who were a People of Italy, learnt this Diet of King Saturn,
when he hid himself among 'em, and gave this Example by making a Meals-meat of
his own Children.

By this Lord, is still meant the same Cruel Ratilus.

Supposed Bath-Rubbers: The Romans were great Bathers.

Country Goals, where they kept their working Slaves in great numbers.

Larga, a fictitious Name for some very common Buttock.

Cato of Vtica, a Roman Patriot, who slew himself, rather than he would submit
to Julius Caesar.

Catiline, a Plotter against the Commonwealth of Rome.

Parasite, a Greek Word, among the Romans used for a Flatterer, and
Feast-Hunter. This sort of Creature the^ slighted in those days, and used very
scurvily, terming such a one an V^bra, that is, a shadow, and Apparition, etc.

This Censor of good Manners, was an Officer of confiderable Power in Rome; in
some respects not unlike our Midnight Magistrate; but not altogether so saucy.

The Old Romans were careful to breed up their Sons so, that afterward they
might be useful to their Country in Peace, or War, or ploughing the Ground:
Vtilis agris, (as Iuvenal has it.) An Exercise that would break the Hearts of
our Modern Beaux.

Jove's Bird: The Eagle, so called for the great Service he did Jupiter, in
bringing Ganymede, a Lovely Boy, on his Back to him.

Centronius, a Famous Extravagant Architect, who with his Son (who took after
him) built away all his Estate, and had so many Palaces at last, that he was
too poor to live in any of 'em.

Iuvenal, though he was wise enough to laugh at his own Country Gods, yet had
not, or would not have, a right Notion of the True Deity, which makes him
ridicule the Jews manner of Worship.

Page 280. As Gelt Posides, viz. The Palace of the Eunuch Posides. As in Virg.
Iam proximus ardet -- Vcalegon.

This Dragon was Guardian of the Golden Fleece, which hung in the Temple of
Mars at Cholchos; and hereby hangs a Tale, or a long Story of Jason and Medea,
with which I will not trouble you.

Beggars took their Stations then, as they do now, in the greatest
Thorow-fares, which were their Bridges, of which there were many over the River
Tyber in Rome.

Field, viz. The Field of Mars, or Campus Martius, which was the greatest part
of the Roman Empire when in its Infancy under Romulus and Tatius the Sabine,
his Copartner, admitted for the sake of the Fair Ladies he brought along with
him.

Pyrrhus King of the Epirots, a formidable Enemy to the Romans, though at last
overcome by 'em. He Died a very little Death (as it is the Fate of some Heroes)
being Martyred by the fall of a Tyle from a House.

Wars against the Carthaginians.

Marsus, a thrifty Husbandman, from whom the Marsi were so called, a laborious
People some 15 Miles distant from Rome.

Mankind fed on Acorns, till Ceres the Goddess of Corn instructed them to sow
Grain.

Some General Officer in the Roman Army.

Not that the Shrine was secured by the care of the God Castor, for Iuvenal
knew their Gods could have no such thing as Care; but it was lined with a
strong Guard of Soldiers, who had an Eye to their God as well as their Moneys,
lest he should be stolen, or unrigg'd, as Mars was. Our Poet calls him watchful
Castor jearingly.

Libyan and Carpathian Gale. The first a South-west, the latter, as we term it
at Sea, a strong Levant.

Orestes, said to be haunted by Furies, for Killing his Mother Clytemnestra,
the Wife of Agamemnon.

Ajax the Son of Telamon, who ran mad, because Agamemnon gave the Armor of
Achilles from him to Ulysses. But the mistaking Agamemnon, or his Brother
Menelaus, for Oxen, or Oxen for them, was not so gross; for they were both
famously Horned: And if Report says true, Ajax need not have spared Ulysses,
since Penelope knew which of her Suitors could shoot best in her Husband's Bow.

Tagus, a River in Spain, said to be full of Gold Sand. This Tagus has lost his
good Qualities time out of mind, or the Spaniard has coined it dry, for now
they fetch their Gold from the Indies, and then other Nations fetch it from
them.

Some noted Rich Man in Rome.

Naked Cynick. Diogenes, a snarling Dog-Philosopher (for there have been
Dog-Philosophers as well as Poets in Doggrel.)

Socrates and Epicurus two Wise Philosophers, contented with the bare
Necessaries of Life: The first of these was esteemed the best Moral
Philosopher, the latter the best Natural.

Roscian Law; so called from Roscius Otho Tribune of the People, who made a
Law, that none should fit in the 14 first Seats of the Theater, unless they
were worth 4 Hundred Sestertiums, per annum, that is above 3 Thousand pounds of
our Moneys, and these were esteemed Noblemen, ipso facto.

Claudius the 5th Caesar, who had no better luck in a Wife than his
Predecessors, Julius and Augustus, and most of the Great Men in History.

THE FIFTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL,
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. TATE.
ARGUMENT OF THE Fifteenth Satyr.
In this Satyr against the Superstition and Cruelty of the Egyptians, it is
probable our Author had his Old Friend Crispinus (who was of that Country) in
his Eye; and to whom he had paid his Respects more than once before. The Scene
is now removed from Rome, which shows our Author a professed Enemy of Vice
wheresoever he meets with it. But if by the Change of Place, his Subject and
Performance in this Satyr, be (as some think) more Barren than in his others
(the People being obscure and mean Rabble, whose Barbarous Fact he relates) We
find in it however, sprinklings of the same Moral Sentiments and Reflections,
that Adorn the rest.

THE FIFTEENTH SATYR.
HOW Egypt, mad with Superstition grown,
Makes Gods of Monsters, but too well is known:
One Sect, Devotion to Nile's THE Crocodile.
Serpent pays;
Others to A sort of Bird in those Parts, that is a great destroyer of Serpents.
Ibis that on Serpents preys.
Where, Thebes in Baeotia had seven Gates, this in Egypt an Hundred, and
therefore called Hecatompylus.
Thebes, thy Hundred Gates lie unrepair'd,
And where maimed This Colossus, or Marble Statue of Memnon held a Harp in its
Hand, which uttered Musical sounds, when struck by the Beams of the rising Sun;
which Strabo tells us, that he both saw and heard, but confesses he is not able
to Assign the Cause. He adds, that one half of this Statue was fallen in an
Earthquake, from which Mutilation and Continuance of the strange Sound
(supposed to proceed from Magic) our Author says, Dimidio magicae resonant ubi
Memnone Chordae.
Memnon's Magic Harp is heard,
Where These are Mouldring lest, the So^s combine
With Pious Care a Monkey to Enshrine!
Fish-Gods you will meet with Fins and Scales over grown;
Diana's Dogs adored in every Town,
Her Dogs have Temples, but the Goddess none!
It Is Mortal Sin an Onion to devour,
Each Clove of Garlic, is a Sacred Power.
Religious Nations sure and Blessed Abodes,
Where every Orchard is o're-run with Gods.
To Kill, is Murder, Sacrilege to Eat
A Kid or Lamb* -- Man's Flesh is lawful Meat!
Of such a Practice when Homer introduces Ulysses Shipwreckt at the Island
Corcyra, and Treated by Alcinous, who there Reigned King of the Phaeaks. At
whose Table he recited the following Passages.
Ulysses told,
What think you? Could A^inous Guests, withold
From Scorn or Rage? Shall we (cries one) permit
This lewd Ro^ancer and his Bantring Wit?
Nor on Charybdis Rock beat out his Brains,
Or send him to the Cyclops whom he feigns.
Of Scylla's Dogs, and stranger Flams than these,
Cyan^'s The Symplegades, two Rocks in the Mouth of the Bosphorus, which being
at like distance from each other, seem to strike upon one another, as the
Sailers pass by them.
Rocks that justle in the Seas,
Of Winds in Bags (for Mirths sake) let him tell
And of his Mates turned Swine by Circe' s spel^,
But Men to Eat Men Humane Faith supasses:
This Trav'ler takes us Islanders for Asses.
Thus the incred'lous Phaeac (having yet
Drank but one Round) replied in sober Fret.
Nor without Reason truly, since the Board
(For Proof of the Fact had but Ulysses Word.)
What I relate's more strange, and even exceeds
All Registers of Purple Tyrants Deeds;
Portentous Mischiefs They but* singly Act,
A Multitude conspired to this more horrid Fact.
Prepare, I say, to hear of such a Crime
As Tragic Poets, since the Birth of Time,
Never feigned, a thronging Audience to Amaze;
But true, and perpetrated in our Days.
Ombus and Tentyr Neighboring Towns, of late
Broke into Outrage of deep-fester'd Hate.
A Grutch in both, time out of Mind, begun,
And mutually bequeathed from Sire to Son.
Religious spite and Pious Spleen bred first
This Quarrel, which so long the Big^ts Nursed.
Each calls the others God a Senseless Stock,
His own, Divine; tho from the self-same Block
One Carver framed them, differing but in Shape,
A Serpent this resembling, that an Ape.
The Tentyrites to execute their Crime
Think none so proper, as a Sacred Time;
Which called to Ombites forth to Public Rites,
Sev'n Days they spent in Feasts, sev'n sleepless Nights.
(For Scoundrel as these Wretched Ombites be
Canopus A City in Egypt, infamous for Riots and Debauchery.
they exceed in Luxury)
Them Rev'ling thus the Tentyrites invade,
By giddy Heads and stagg'ring Legs betrayed:
Strange odds! where Crop-Sick Drunkards must engage
A Hungry Foe, and Armed with sober Rage.
At first both Parties in Reproaches Jar,
And make their Tongues the Trumpets of the War.
Words break no Bones, and in a Railing Fray,
Women and Priests can be as stout as They.
Words serve but to inflame our Warlike Lists,
Who wanting Weapons clutch their Horny Fists.
Yet thus make shift to exchange such Furious Blows,
Scarce one escapes with more than half a Nose.
Some stand their Ground with half their Visage gone*
But with the Remnant of a Face Fight on.
Such Transformed Spectacles of Horror grow,
That not a Mother her ow^ Son would know*
One Eye, remaining, for the other spies,
Which now on Earth a trampled Gelly lies.
Yet hitherto both Parties think the Fra^
But Mockery of War, mere Children's Play:
Tho, Traversing, with Streams of Blood they meet,
They tread no Carkase yet beneath their Feet.
And Scandal think it to have none Slain outright
Between two Hosts that for Religion Fight.
This whets their Rage to search for Stones, as large
As they could lift, or with both Hands discharge.
Not (altogether) of a size, if matched
With those which Ajax once or Turnus snatched
For their Defense, or by Tydides thrown
That brusht Aeneas Crest and struck him down*
Of Weight would make two Men strein hard to Raise,
Such Men as lived in honest Alluding to that of Homer in the Iliad. (...).
Homer's Days:
Whom Giants yet to us we must allow,
Dwindled into a Race of Pygmies now;
The Mirth and Scorn of Gods, that see us Fight,
Such little Wasps, and yet so full of spite:
For bulk mere Insects, yet in Mischief strong*
And, spent so ill, our short Life's much too long!
Fresh Forces now of T^^tyrites, from Town,
With Swords and Darts, to Aid their Friends, come down.
Who with fleet Arrows levelled from a far,
E're They themselves app^ach'd, secure the War.
Hard set before, what could the Ombites do?
They fly; their pressing Foes as fast pursue.
An Ombite Wretch (by headlong have betrayed,
And falling down in the Rout) is Prisoner made.
Whose Flesh, torn off by Lumps, the Ravenous Foe
In Morsells cut, to make it further go.
His Bones clean Picked, his very Bones they gnaw;
No Stomack's baulkt because the Corpse is raw.
TO had been lost Time to Dress him -- keen Desire
Supplies the want of Kettle, Spit, and Fire.
( Prometheus Ghost is sure o're-joy'd to see
His Heav'n-sto^n Fire from such disaster free.
Nor seems the sparkling Element less pleased than he)
The Guests are found too numerous for the Treat,
But all, it seems, who had the Luck to Eat,
Swear they never tasted more Delicious Meat.
They swear, and such good Palates you should trust,
Who doubts the Relish of the first free gust?
Since one who had in the Rear excluded been,
And could not for a Taste of the Flesh come in,
Licks the soild Earth, which he thinks full as good;
While reeking with a mangl^d Om^i^'s Blood.
The In the Town Caliguris, besieged by Metellus.
Vascons once with Man's Flesh (as it is sed)
Kept Life and Soul together -- grant they did.
Their Case was different; with long Siege distressed,
And all Extremities of War oppressed.
(For Miserable to the last Degree,
The Excuse of such a Practice ought to be)
With Creatures, Vermin, Herbs, and Weeds sustained,
While Creatures, Vermin, Herbs, or Weeds remained:
Till to such meagre Spectacles reduced,
As even Compassion in the Foe produced:
Acquitted by the Manes of the Dead,
And Ghosts of Carcasses on which they Fed.
By The Principal of the Stoics.
Zeno's, Doctrine we are taught, it is true.
For Life's support no harmless thing to do.
But Zeno never to the Vascons read;
('It Is since their Days that Civil Arts have spread:
'Twas lately British Lawyers, from the Gaul
Learnt to Harrangue, and Eloquently bawl.
Thule hopes next to improve her Northern Style,
And Plant (where yet no Spring did ever Smile
With Flowers of Rhetoric her Frozen Isle.)
That Brave, the Vascons, were we must confess,
Who Fortitude preserved in such Distress.
Yet not the Brightest their Example Shines,
Eclipsed by the more Noble The Confederates of Rome, who being besieged by
Hannibal for eight Months, and having suffered all Extremities, at last,
erected one great Pile, in which they burnt themselves with their Dead; as
also, all their Goods, to leave the Enemy no Plunder.
Saguntines;
Who both the Foe, and Famine to beguile,
For Dead and Living raised one common Pile.
Maeotis first did Impious Rites devise
Of Treating God's with Humane Sacrifice*
But Salvage Egypt's Cruelty exceeds
The The Temple of Diana Taurica, where they Sacrificed Strangers.
Scythian Shrine, where, tho the Captive Bleeds,
Secure of Burial when his Life is fled,
The Murdering Knife'sthrown by, when once the Victim's Dead.
Did Famine to this Monst'rous Fact compel,
Or did the Miscreants try this Conj'ring Spell,
In time of Drought to make the Nile to swell?
Amongst the rugged Cimbrians, or the Race
Of Gauls, or fiercer Tartars can you Trace
An outrage of Revenge like This, pursued
By an Effeminate Scoundrel Multitude.
Whose utmost Daring is to cross the Nile
In Painted Boats, to fright the Crocodile.
Can Men, or more resenting Gods, invent,
Or Hell inflict Proportioned Punishment
On Varlets who could Treat Revenge and Spite
With such a Feast as Famine's self would fright.
Compassion proper to Mankind appears,
Which Nature Witnessed when she let us Tears.
Of tender Sentiments we only give
Those Proofs: To Weep in our Prerogative;
To show by pitying Looks, and melting Eyes*
How with a Suffering Friend we Sympathize!
Nay, Tears will even from a Wronged Orphan slide,
When his false Guardian at the Bar is tried:
So tender, so unwilling to Accuse,
So often the Roses on his Cheek bedews,
So soft his Tresses, filled with trickling Pearl,
You Would doubt his Sex, and take him for a Girl.
B'Impulse of Nature (tho to us unknown
The Party be) we make the Loss our own;
And Tears steal from our Eyes, when in the Street
With some betrothed Virgin's Hearse we meet,:
Or Infant's Funeral, from the cheated Womb
Conveyed to Earth, and Cradled in a Tomb.
Who can all Sense of Others Ills escape
Is but a Brute at best in Humane shape.
This Natural Piety did first refine
Our Wit, and raised our Thoughts to Things Divine:
This proves our Spirit of the Gods descent,
While that of Beasts is Prone and down-ward bent.
To them but Earth-born Li^e they did dispense,
To us, for mutual Aid, Caelestial Sense.
From straggling Mountainers, for Public Good,
To Rank in Tribes and quit the Salvage Wood.
Houses to build, and them contiguous make,
For cheerful Neighborhood and (...) sake.
In War, a Common Standard to Erect,
A Wounded Friend in Battle to Protect,
The Summons take of the same Trumpet's Call
To Sally from one Port or Man on public Wall.
But Serpents now more An^ty maintain!
From spotted Skins the Leopard does refrain:
No weaker Lion's by a stronger slain.
Nor, from his larger Tu^ks, the Forest Bore
Commission takes his Brother Swine to Gore.
Tiger with Tiger, Bear with Bear you will find
In Leagues Offensive and Defensive joined.
But lawless Man, the Anvil dares profane,
And Forged that Steel by which a Man is slain!
Which Earth, at first, for Plowshares did afford;
Nor yet the Smith had learnt to form a Sword.
An impious Crew we have beheld, whose Rage
Their Enemies very Life could not Assuage,
Unless they Banquet on the Wretch they slew,
Devour the Corpse and lick the Blood they drew!
What think you would Pythagoras have sed
Of such a Feast, or to what Desert fled?
Who Flesh of Animals refused to Eat,
Nor held all sorts of Pulse for lawful Meat.
The End of the Fifteenth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE FIFTEENTH SATYR.
THE Crocodile.

A sort of Bird in those Parts, that is a great destroyer of Serpents.

Thebes in Baeotia had seven Gates, this in Egypt an Hundred, and therefore
called Hecatompylus.

This Colossus, or Marble Statue of Memnon held a Harp in its Hand, which
uttered Musical sounds, when struck by the Beams of the rising Sun; which
Strabo tells us, that he both saw and heard, but confesses he is not able to
Assign the Cause. He adds, that one half of this Statue was fallen in an
Earthquake, from which Mutilation and Continuance of the strange Sound
(supposed to proceed from Magic) our Author says, Dimidio magicae resonant ubi
Memnone Chordae.

Homer introduces Ulysses Shipwreckt at the Island Corcyra, and Treated by
Alcinous, who there Reigned King of the Phaeaks. At whose Table he recited the
following Passages.

The Symplegades, two Rocks in the Mouth of the Bosphorus, which being at like
distance from each other, seem to strike upon one another, as the Sailers pass
by them.

A City in Egypt, infamous for Riots and Debauchery.

Alluding to that of Homer in the Iliad. (...).

In the Town Caliguris, besieged by Metellus.

The Principal of the Stoics.

The Confederates of Rome, who being besieged by Hannibal for eight Months, and
having suffered all Extremities, at last, erected one great Pile, in which they
burnt themselves with their Dead; as also, all their Goods, to leave the Enemy
no Plunder.

The Temple of Diana Taurica, where they Sacrificed Strangers.

THE SIXTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL, Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE Sixteenth Satyr.
The Poet in this Satyr, proves, that the Condition of a Soldier is much
better than that of a Countr^man* First* beca^se a Coun^ry^an ^owever
A^^ron^ed, Provoked, and St^uck ^im^^lf, dares not strike a Soldier: Who is
only to be judged by a Court Martial. And by (...) Law of Camillus, which
obliges him not to Quarrel without the (...) and quick dispatch: Whereas, the
Townsman or Peasant, is delaid in his suit by frivolous Pretenses, and not sure
of Justice when he is heard in the Court. The Soldier is also Priviledg'd to
make a Will; and to give away his Estat^ which he got in War, to whom he
pleases, without Consideration of Parentage, or Relations; which is denied to
all other Romans. This Satyr was written by Juvenal, when he was a Commander in
Egypt: It Is certainly his, tho I think it not finished. And if it be well
observed, you will find ^e intended an Invective against a standing Army.

THE SIXTEENTH SATYR.
WHat vast Prerogatives, my Gallus* are
Accrewing to the mighty Man of War*
For, if into a lucky Camp I light,
Tho raw in Arms, and yet afraid to to Fight*
Befriend me my good Stars, and all goes right.
One Happy Hour is to a Soldier better
Than Mother JVno was Mother to Mars the God of War: Venus was his Mistress.
Juno's recommending Letter*
Or Venus* when to Mars she wo^'d prefer
My Suit, and own the Kindness done to Her.
See what Our Common Privileges are*
As first no Saucy (...) shall dare
To strike a Soldier, nor when struck, resent
The wrong, for fear of farther Punishment*
Not tho his Teeth are beaten out, his Eyes
Hang by a String, in Bumps his Forehead rise,
Shall He presume to mention his Disgrace,
Or Beg amends for his demolished Face.
A Booted Judge shall sit to try his Cause
Not by the Statute, but by Martial-Laws;
Which old Camillus; (who being first Banished, by his ungrateful Countrymen
the Romans, afterward returned, and freed them from the Gauls,) made a Law,
which prohibited the Soldiers from Quarrelling without the Camp, lest upon
that pretense, they might happen to be absent, when they ought to be on Duty.
Camillus ordered to confine
The Brawls of Soldiers to the Trench and Line:
A Wise Provision; and from thence it is clear
That Officers a Soldiers Cause should hear:
And taking cognizance of Wrongs received,
An Honest Man may hope to be rel^ev'd.
So far it is well: But with a General cry
The Regiment will rise in Mutiny,
The Freedom of Their Fellow Rogue demand,
And, if re^us'd, will threaten to Disband.
Withdraw thy Action, and depart in Peace;
The Remedy is worse than the Disease:
Thi^ Cause is worthy This Cause is worthy him, etc. The Poet Names a Modenese
Lawyer, whom he calls Vagellius; who was so Impudent that he would Plead any
Cause, right or wrong, without Shame or Fear.
him who in the Hall
Would for his Fee, and for his Client bawl:
But would Thou Friend who have two Legs alone,
(Which Heaven be Praised, Thou yet may call Thy own,)
Would Thou to run the Gantlet These expose
To a whole Company of The Roman Soldiers wore Plates of Iron under their
Shoos, or stuck them with Nails; as Countrymen do now.
Hob-nail'd Shoos?
Sure the good Breeding of Wife Citizens
Should teach 'em more good Nature to their Shins.
Besides, whom can Thou think so much thy Friend*
Who dares appear thy Business to defend?
Dry up thy Tears, and Pocket up the Abuse,
Nor put thy Friend to make a bad excuse:
The Judge cries out, your Evidence produce.
Will He, who saw the Soldier's Mutton Fist,
And saw Thee mauled, appear within the List;
To witness Truth? When I see one so Brave,
The Dead, think I, are risen from the Grave;
And with their long Spade Beards, and Matted Hair,
Our honest Ancestors, are come to take the Air.
Against a Clown, with more security,
A Witness may be brought to swear a Lie,
Than, tho his Evidence ^e, Full and Fair,
To vouch a Truth against a Man of War,
More Benefits remain, and claimed as Rights,
Which are a standing Armies Perquisites.
If any Rogue vexatious Suits advance
Against me for my known Inheritance,
Enter by Violence my Fruitful Grounds,
Or take the Sacred Landmark from my Bounds,
Those Bounds, which with Procession and with Prayer*
And Landmarks were used by the Romans, almost in the same manner, as now: And
as we go once a Year in Procession, about the Bounds of Parishes, and renew
them, so they offered Cakes upon the Stone, or Landmark.
Offered Cakes, have been my Annual care:
Or if my Debtors do not keep their day,
Deny their Hands, and then refuse to pay;
I must with Patience all the Terms attend,
Among the common Causes that depend
Till mine is called; and that long looked for day
Is still encumbered with some new delay:
Perhaps The Courts of Judicature were hung, and spread; as with us: But spread
only before the Hundred Judges were to sit, and judge Public Causes, which
were called by Lot.
the Cloth of State is only spread,
Some of the Quorum may be Sick a Bed;
That Judge is Hot, and do'ffs his Gown, while This
Over Night was Bowsy, and goes out to Piss:
So many Rubs appear, the time is gone
For hearing, and the tedious Suit goes on:
But Buff, and Belt Men; never know these Cares,
No Time; nor Trick of Law their Action Bars:
Their Cause They to an easier Issue put;
They will be heard, or They ^ug out, and cut.
Another Branch of their Revenue still
Remains beyond their boundless Right to kill,
Their The Rom^n Soldiers had the Privilege of making a Will, in their
Father's Lifetime: Of what they had purchac'd in the Wars, as being no part of
their Patrimony. By this Will they had Power of excluding their own Parents,
and giving the Estate so gotten to whom they pleased. Therefore, says the Poet,
Coranus, (a Soldier Contemporary with Iuvenal, who had raised his Fortune by
the Wars) was Courted by his own Father, to make him his Heir.
Father yet alive, impour'd to make a Will.
For, what their Prowess Gained, the Law declares
Is to themselves alone and to their Heirs:
No share of that goes back to the begettor;
But if the Son fights well, and Plunders better,
Like stout Coranus, his old shaking Sire
Does a Remembrance in his Will desire:
Inquisitive of Fights, and longs in vain
To find him in the Number of the Slain:
But still he lives, and rising by the War
Enjoyes his Gains, and has enough to spare:
For it is a Noble General's prudent part
To cherish Valor, and reward Desert:
Let him be daubed with Lace, live High, and Whore;
Sometimes be Lowzy, but be never Poor.
The End of the Sixteenth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE SIXTEENTH SATYR.
JVno was Mother to Mars the God of War: Venus was his Mistress.

Camillus; (who being first Banished, by his ungrateful Countrymen the Romans,
afterward returned, and freed them from the Gauls,) made a Law, which
prohibited the Soldiers from Quarrelling without the Camp, lest upon that
pretense, they might happen to be absent, when they ought to be on Duty.

This Cause is worthy him, etc. The Poet Names a Modenese Lawyer, whom he calls
Vagellius; who was so Impudent that he would Plead any Cause, right or wrong,
without Shame or Fear.

Hob nailed Shoos. The Roman Soldiers wore Plates of Iron under their Shoos,
or stuck them with Nails; as Countrymen do now.

Landmarks were used by the Romans, almost in the same manner, as now: And as
we go once a Year in Procession, about the Bounds of Parishes, and renew them,
so they offered Cakes upon the Stone, or Landmark.

The Courts of Judicature were hung, and spread; as with us: But spread only
before the Hundred Judges were to sit, and judge Public Causes, which were
called by Lot.

The Rom^n Soldiers had the Privilege of making a Will, in their Father's
Lifetime: Of what they had purchac'd in the Wars, as being no part of their
Patrimony. By this Will they had Power of excluding their own Parents, and
giving the Estate so gotten to whom they pleased. Therefore, says the Poet,
Coranus, (a Soldier Contemporary with Iuvenal, who had raised his Fortune by
the Wars) was Courted by his own Father, to make him his Heir.

THE SATIRES OF Aulus Persius Flaccus.

Made ENGLISH BY Mr. DRYDEN.

Saepius in Libro memoratur Persius uno
Quam levis in tota Marsus Amazonide.
Mart. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane,
near Fleet Street. 1693.

TO Mr. DRYDEN, ON HIS TRANSLATION OF PERSIUS.
AS when of Old Heroique Story tells
Of Knights Imprisoned long by Magic Spells;
Till future Time, the destined Hero send,
By whom, the dire Enchantment is to end:
Such seems this Work, and so reserved for thee,
Thou great Revealer of dark Poesy.
Those sullen Clouds, which have for Ages past,
Over Persius's too-long-suff'ring Muse been cast,
Disperse, and fly before thy Sacred Pen,
And, in their room, bright tracks of light are seen.
Sure Phoebus self, thy swelling Breast inspires,
The God of Music, and Poetique Fires:
Else, whence proceeds this great Surprise of Light!
How dawns this day, forth from the Womb of Night!
Our Wonder, now, does our past Folly show,
Vainly Contemning what we did not know:
So, Unbelievers impiously despise
The Sacred Oracles, in Mysteries.
Persius, before, in small Esteem was had,
Unless, what to Antiquity is paid;
But like Apocrypha, with Scruple read,
(So far, our Ignorance, our Faith misled)
'Till you, Apollo's darling Priest thought fit
To place it, in the Poet's Sacred Writ.
As Coin, which bears some awful Monarchs Face,
For more than its Intrinsic Worth will pass:
So your bright Image, which we here behold,
Adds Worth to Worth, and dignifies the Gold.
To you, we, all this following Treasure owe,
This Hippocrene, which from a Rock did flow.
Old Stoic Virtue, cl^d in rugged lines,
Polished by you, in Mod^rn Brillant shines:
And as before, for Persius^ our Esteem,
To his Antiquity was paid, not him:
So now, whatever Praise, from as is due,
Belongs not to Old Persius, but the New.
For still Obscure, to us no Light he gives;
Dead in himself, in you alone he lives.
So, Stubborn Flints, their inward heat conceal,
'Till Art and Force, the unwilling Sparks reveal;
But through your Skill, from those small Seeds of Fire,
Bright Flames arise, which never can Expire.
Will. Congreve.
THE FIRST SATYR OF Aulus Persius Flaccus.
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE PROLOGUE TO THE FIRST SATYR.
The Design of the Author was to conceal his Name and Quality. He lived in the
dangerous Times of the Tyrant Nero; and aims particularly at him, in most of
his Satyrs* For which Reason, though he was a Roman Knight, and of a plentiful
Fortune, he would appear in this Prologue, but a Beggarly Poet, who ^rites for
Bread. After this, he breaks into the Business of the first Satyr: which is,
chiefly to decry the Poetry then in Fashion; and the Impudence of those, who
were endeavoring to pass their Stuff upon the World.

PROLOGUE TO THE First Satyr.
I Never did on cleft PErnassus, and Helicon, were Hills Consecrated to the
Muses; and the supposed place of their abode. Pernassus was forked on the top;
and from Helicon ran a Stream; the Spring of which, was called the Muses Well.
Pernassus dream;
Nor taste the sacred Heliconian Stream:
Nor can remember when my Brain inspired*
Was, by the Muses, into madness fired.
My share in Pale Pyrene, a Fountain in Corinth; Consecrated also to the Muses.
Pyrene I resign:
And claim no part in all the Mighty Nine.
Statues The Statues of the Poets, were Crowned with Ivy about their Brows.
, with winding Ivy crowned, belong
To nobler Poets, for a nobler Song:
H^edless of Verse, and hopeless of the Crown,
Scarce half a Wit, and more than half a Clown,
Before the Before the Shrine; that is* before the Shrine of Apollo* in his
Temple at Rome, called the Palati^e.
Shrine I lay my rugged Numbers down.
Who taught the Parrot Human Notes to try,
Or with a Voice endu'd the chatt'ring Pie?
'Twas witty Want, fierce Hunger to appease:
Want taught their Masters, and their Masters these*
Let Gain, that gilded Bait, be hung on high,
The hungry Wirlings have it in their Eye:
Pies, Crows, and Daws, Poetic Presents bring:
You say they squeak; but they will swear they Sing.
ARGUMENT OF THE First Satyr.
I need not repeat, that the chief aim of the Author is against bad Poets, in
this Satyr. But I must add, that he includes also bad Orators, who began at
that Time, (as Petronius in the beginning of his Book tells us,) to enervate
Manly Eloquence, by Tropes and Figures, ill placed, and worse applied. Among^st
the Poets, Persius Covertly strikes at Nero; some of whose Verses he recites
with Scorn and Indignation. He also takes notice of the Noblemen and their
abominable Poetry, who in the Luxury of their Fortune, set up for Wits, and
Judges. The Satyr is in Dialogue, betwixt the Author and his Friend or
Monitor; who dissuades him from this dangerous attempt of exposing Great Men.
But Persius, who is of a free Spirit, and has not forgotten that Rome was once
a Commonwealth, breaks through all those difficulties, and boldly Arraigns the
fulfe Judgment of the Age in which he Lives. The Reader may observe that our
Poet was a Stoic Philosopher; and that all his Moral Sentences, both here, and
in all the rest of his Satyrs, are drawn from the Dogma's of that Sect.

THE FIRST SATYR.
In Dialogue betwixt the Poet and his Friend, or Monitor.
PERSIUS. HOW anxious are our Cares; and yet how vain
The bent of our desires!

FRIEND. Thy Spleen contain:
For none will read thy Satyrs.

PERSIUS. This to Me?

FRIEND. None; or what is next to none; but two or three.
It Is hard, I grant.

PERSIUS. It Is nothing; I can bear
That paltry Scriblers have the Public Ear:
That this vast universal Fool, the Town,
Should cry up Nothing is remaining of Atticus Labeo, (so he is called by the
Learned Casaubon) Nor is the mentioned by any other Poet, besides Persius:
Casaubon, from an old Commentator on Persius, says that he made a very Foolish
Translation of Homer's Iliads.
Labeo's Stuff, and cry me down.
They damn themselves; nor will my Muse descend
To clap with such, who Fools and Knaves commend*
Their Smiles and Censures are to me the same:
I care not what they praise, or what they blame.
In full Assemblies let the Crowd prevail:
I weigh no Merit by the common Scale.
The Conscience is the Test of every Mind;
Seek not thy self, without thy self, to find.
But where is that Roman? -- Somewhat I would say,
But Fear; -- Let Fear, for once, to Truth give way.
Truth lends the Stoic Courage: when I look
On Humane Acts, and Real in Nature's Book,
From the first Pastimes of our Infant Age,
To elder Cares, and Man's severer Page;
When stern as Tutors, and as Uncles hard,
We lash the Pupil, and defraud the Ward:
Then, then I say -- or would say, if I durst --
But thus provoked, I must speak out, or burst.

FRIEND. Once more forbear.

PERSIUS. I cannot rule my Spleen;
My scorn Rebels, and tickles me within.
First, to begin at Home, our Authors write
In lonely Rooms, secured from public sight;
Whether in Prose or Verse, it is all the same:
The Prose is Fustian, and the Numbers lame.
All Noise, and empty Pomp, a storm of words,
Laboring with sound, that little Sense affords.
They He describes a Poet preparing himself to Rehearse his Works in public:
which was commonly performed in August. A Room was hired, or lent by some
Friend; a Scaffold was raised, and a Pulpit placed for him, who was to hold
forth; who borrowed a new Gown* or scoured his old one; and Adorned his Ears
with Jewels, etc.
Comb, and then they order every Hair:
A Gown, or White, or Scoured to whiteness, wear:
A Birthday Jewel bobbing at their Ear*
Next, gargle well their Throats; and thus prepared,
They mount, a God's Name, to be seen and heard
From their high Scaffold; with a Trumpet Cheek:
And Ogling all their Audience e're they speak.
The nauseous Nobles* even the Chief of Rome,
With gaping Mouths to these Rehearsals come,
And pant with Pleasure, when some lusty line
The Marrow pierces, and invades the Chine.
At open fulsom Bawdry they rejoice;
And slimy Jests applaud with broken Voice.
Base Prostitute, thus do thou gain thy Bread?
Thus do thou feed their Ears, and thus art fed?
At his own filthy stuff he grins, and brays:
And gives the sign where he expects their praise.
Why have I Learned, say thou, if thus confined*
I choke the Noble Vigor of my Mind?
Know, my wild Trees of that kind, grow wild in many parts of Italy; and make
their way through Rocks: Sometimes splitting the Tomb-stones.
Fig Tree, which in Rocks is bred,
Will split the Quarry, and shoot out the Head*
Fine Fruits of Learning! Old Ambitious Fool,
Dare thou apply that Adage of the School;
As if it is nothing worth that lies concealed*
And Science is not Science till Revealed?
Oh, but it is Brave to be Admired, to see
The Crowd, with pointing Fingers, cry That Is he:
That Is he, whose wondrous Poem is become
A Lecture for the Noble Youth of Rome!
Who, by their Fathers, is at Feasts Renowned:
And often quoted, when the Bowls go round.
Full gorged and flushed, they wantonly Rehearse:
And add to Wine the Luxury of Verse.
One, clad in Purple, not to lose his time,
Eats, and recites some lamentable Rhyme:
Some Senceless Phyllis, in a broken Note;
Snuffling at Nose, or croaking in his Throat:
Then, Graciously, the mellow Audience Nod:
Is not the Immortal Author made a God?
Are not his Manes blessed, such Praise to have?
Lies not the Turf more lightly on his Grave?
And Roses (while his loud Applause they Sing,)
Stand ready from his Sepulcher to spring?
All these, you cry, but light Objections are;
Mere Malice, and you drive the Jest too far.
For does there Breath a Man, who can reject
A general Fame, and his own Lines neglect?
In Ianus like, etc. Ianus was the first King of Italy; who refug'd Saturn,
when he was expelled by his Son Jupiter from Cr^et; (or as we now call it
Candia.) From his Name, the first Month of the Year is called January. He was
Pictured with two Faces, one before* and one behind: As regarding the past
time, and the future. Some of the Mythologists, think he was No^h, for the
Reason given above.
C^dar Tablets worthy to appear;
That need not Fish, or Franckincense to fear?
Thou, whom I make the adverse part to bear,
Be answered thus: If I, by chance, succeed
In what I Write, (and that is a chance indeed;)
Know, I am not so stupid, or so hard*
Not to feel Praise, or Fames deserved Reward:
But this I cannot grant, that thy Appl^use
Is my Works ultimate, or only Cause*
Prudence can never propose so mean a prize:
For mark what Vanity within it lies.
Like Labeo's Iliads; in whose Verse i^ found
Nothing but trifling care, and empty sound*
Such little Elegies as Nobles Write;
Who would be Poets, in Apollo's spite.
Them and their woeful Works the Muse defies:
Products of Citron Beds, and Golden Canopies*
To give thee all thy due, thou have the Heart
To make a Supper, with a fine dessert;
And, to thy threed-bare Friend, a cast old Suit impart.
Thus Bribed, thou thus bespeak'st him, tell me Friend
(For I love Truth, nor can plain Speech offend,)
What says the World of me and of my Muse?
The Poor dare nothing tell, but flattering News:
But shall I speak? thy Verse is wretched Rhyme;
And all thy Labors are but loss of time.
Thy strutting Belly swells; thy Pau^ch is high;
Thou Writ'st not, but thou Pissest Poetry*
All Authors, to their own defects, are blind;
Had thou but, Ianus like, a Face behind,
To see the People, what sp^ay-Mouths they make;
To mark their Finge^s, pointed at thy back;
Their Tongues loll'd out, a foot beyond the pitch,
When most a thirst, of an Apulian Bitch:
But Noble Scriblers are with Flattery fed;
For none dare find their Faults, who Eat their Bread.
To pass the Poets of Patrician Blood,
What is it the common Reader takes for good?
The Verse in fashion, is, when Numbers flow;
Soft without Sense, and without Spirit ^low:
So smooth and equal, that no sight can ^ind
The Rive^, where the polished piece was joined.
So even all, with such a steady view,
As if he shut one Eye to level true.
Whether the Vulgar Vice his Satyr stings.
The Peoples Riots, or the Rage of Kings,
The gentle Poet is alike in all;
His Reader hopes no rise, and fears no fall.

FRIEND. Hourly we see, some Raw Pin-feather'd t^ing
Attempt to mount, and Fights, and Heroes sing;
Who, for false quantities, was whipped at School
But the other day, and breaking Grammar Rule.
Whose trivial Art was never tried, above
The bare description of a Native Grove: The Romans wrote on Cedar, and Cypre^^
Tables, in regard of the duration of the Wood: III Verses might justly be
afraid of Franckincense; for the Papers in which they were Written, were fit
for nothing but to wrap it up.

Who knows not how to praise the Country store*
The Feasts, the Basket^* nor the fatted Bore;
Nor paint the flowery Fields, that pain^ themselves before*
Where Romulus was Bred, and Products of Citron Beds, etc. Writings of
Noblemen, whose Bedsteds were of the Wood of Citron.
Qui^^iu^ Born,
Whose shining Plough-share was in Furrows worn*
Met by his trembling Wife, returning Home,
And Rustically Joy'd, as Chief of Rome:
She wiped the Sweat, from the Dictator's Brow;
And, over his Back, his Robe did rudely throw;
The Lictors bore, in State, their Lord's Triumphant Plough.
Some, love to hear the Fustian Poet roar;
And some on Antiquated Authors pore:
Rummage for Sense; and think those only good
Who labor most, and least are understood.
When thou shall see the Blear-eyed Fa^hers Teach
Their Sons, this harsh and moldy sort of Speech;
Or others new affected ways to try,
Of wanton smoothness, Female Poetry;
One would enquire, from whence this mo^ley Stil^
Did first our Roman Purity defile:
For our Old Dotards cannot keep their Seat;
But leap and catch at all that is obsolete.
Others, by Foolish O^tentation fed,
When called before the Bar, to save their Head,
Bring trifling Tropes, instead of solid Sense:
And mind their Figures more than their Defense.
Are pleased to hear their thick-scull'd Judges cry
Well moved, oh finely said, and decently!
Theft, (says the Accuser) to thy Charge I lay
O Pedius! What does gentle* Where Romulus etc.. He speaks of the Country in
the foregoing Verses; the Praises of which, are the most easy Theme for Poets:
but which a bad Poet cannot Naturally describe: Then he makes a digression* to
Romulus, the first King of Rome, who had a Rustical Education; and enlarges
upon Quintius Cincinnatus, a Roman Senator; who was called from the Plough, to
be Dictator of Rome.
Pedius say?
Studious to please the Genius of the Times,
With Periods, Points, and Tropes; he slurs* his Crimes:
"He Robbed not, but he Borrowed from the Poor;
"And took but with intention to restore.
He lards with flourishes his long Harangue;
It Is fine, say thou; what to be Praised and Hang?
Effeminate Roman, shall such Stuff prevail
To tickle thee, and make thee wag thy Tail?
Say, should a Shipwrack'd Saylor sing his woe,
Would* thou be moved to pity, or bestow
An Alms? What Is more prepost'rous than to see
A Merry Beggar? Mirth in Misery?

PERSIUS. He seems a Trap, for Charity, to lay:
And cons by Night, his Lesson for the day.

FRIEND. But to raw Numbers, and unfinished Verse,
Sweet sound is added now, to make it Terse:
"'It Is tagg'd with Rhyme, like In Periods, etc. Persius here names Antitheses,
or seeming Contradiction; which in this place are meant for Rhetorical
Flourishes, as I think, with Casaubon.
Berecynthian Atys,
"The mid part chimes with Art, which never flat is.
"The Dolphin brave, that cut the liquid Wave,
"Or He who in his line, can chine the long-rib'd Apennine.

PERSIUS. All this is Dogrel Stuff:

FRIEND. What if I bring
A Nobler Verse? Berecynthian Atys; or Attin, etc. Foolish Verses of Nero,
which the Poet repeats; and which cannot be Translated properly into English.
Arms and the Man I sing.

PERSIUS. Why name you Virgil with such Fops as these?
He Is truly great; and must for ever please.
Not fierce, but awful is his Manly Page;
Bold is his Strength, but sober is his Rage.

FRIEND. What Poems think you soft? and to be read
With languishing regards, and bending Head?

PERSIUS. " Arms and the Man, etc. The first line of Virgil's Aeneids.
Their crooked Horns the Mimallonian Crew
"With Blasts inspired: and Bassaris who slew
"The scronful Calf, with Sword advanced on high,
"Made from his Neck his haughty Head to fly.
"And Maenas, when with Ivy-bridles bound,
"She led the spotted Lynx, then Evion rung around;
"Evion from Woods and Floods repairing Ecchos sound.
Could such rude Lines a Roman Mouth become,
Were any Manly Greatness left in Rome?
Maenas Their crooked Horns, etc. Other Verses of Nero, that were mee^ bombast.
I only Note; that the Repetition of these and the former Verses of Ner^, might
justly give the Poet a caution to conceal his Name.
and Arys in the Mouth were bred;
And never hatched within the laboring Head.
No Blood, from bitten Nails, those Poems drew:
But churn'd, like Spettle, from the Lips they flew.

FRIEND. It Is Fustian all; it is execrably bad:
But if they will be Fools, must you be mad?
Your Satyrs, let me tell you, are too fierce;
The Great will never bear so blunt a Verse.
Their Doors are Barred against a bitter flout:
Snarl, if you please, but you shall snarl without*
Expect such Pay as railing Rhymes deserve,
You Are in a very hopeful way to sterve.

PERSIUS. Rather than so, uncensur'd let 'em be:
All, all is admirably well for me.
My harmless Rhyme shall escape the dire disgrace
Of Common-shores, and every pissing place.
Two Maenas and Atys. Poems on the Maenad^s, who were Priestesses of Bacchus;
and of Atys, who made himself an Eunuch, to attend on the Sacrifices of Cybele,
called Berecynthia by the Poets; she was Mother of the Gods.
painted Serpents shall, on high, appear;
It Is Holy Ground; you must not Urine here.
This shall be writ to fright the Fry away,
Who draw their little Bawbles, when they play.
Two painted Serpents, etc. Two Snakes twined with each other, were painted on
the Walls, by the Ancients, to show the place was Holy.
Yet old Lucilius never feared the times;
But lashed the City, and di^^ected Crimes.
Mutius and Lupus both by Name he brought;
He mouthed 'em, and betwixt his Grinders caught.
Unlike in method, with concealed design,
Did crafty Horace his low Numbers join:
And, with a ^ly insinuating Grace,
Laughed at his Friend, and looked him in the Face:
Would raise a Blush, where secret Vice he found;
And tickle, while he gently prob'd the Wound.
With seeming Innocence the Crowd beguiled;
But made the desperate Passes, when he smiled.
Could he do this, and is my Muse controlled
By Servile Awe? Born free, and not be bold?
At least, I Will dig a hole within the Ground;
And to the trusty Earth commit the sound:
The Reeds shall tell you what the Poet fears,
King Yet old Lucilius, etc. Lucilius wrote long before Horace; who imitates
his manner of Satyr, but far excels him, in the design.
Midas has a Snout, and Asses Ears.
This mean conceit, this darling Mystery,
Which thou think nothing, Friend thou shall not buy*
Nor will I change, for all the flashy Wit,
That flattering Labeo in his Iliads writ.
King Midas, etc. The Story is vulgar, that Midas King of Phrygia, was made
judge betwixt Apollo and Pan, who was the best Musician; he gave the prize to
Pan; and Apollo in revenge gave him Asses Ears* He wore his Hair long to hide
them* but his ^arber discovering them, and not daring to divulge the secret,
dug a hole in the ground, and whispered into it: the place was marshy; and when
the R^eds grew up, they repeated the words which were spoken by the Barber* By
Midas* the Poet meant Nero.
Thou, if there be a thou, in this base Town,
Who dares, with angry Eupolis, to frown;
He, who, with bold Cratinus, is inspired
With Zeal, and equal Indignation fired;
Who, at enormous Villainy, turns pale,
And steers against it with a full-blown Sail,
Like Aristophanes; let him but smile
On this my honest Work, tho writ in homely Style:
And if two Lines or three in all the Vein
Appear less drossy, read those Lines again.
May they perform their Author's just Intent;
Glow in thy Ears, and in thy Breast ferment.
But, from the reading of my Book and me,
Be far ye Foes of Virtuous Poverty:
Who Eupolis and Cr^tinus, as also Aristophanes mentioned afterward, were all
Athenian Poets; who wrote that sort of Comedy, which was called the old Comedy,
where the People were Named, who were Satyriz'd by those Authors.
Fortune's fault upon the Poor can throw;
Point at the tattered Coat, and ragged Shoe;
Lay Nature's failings to their Charge; and ^eer
The dim weak Eyesight, when the Mind is clear.
When thou thy self, thus insolent in State,
Art but, perhaps, some Country Magistrate;
Whose Power extends no farther than to speak
Big on the Bench, and scanty Weights to break.
Him, also, for my Censor I disdain,
Who thinks all Science, as all Virtue vain:
Who counts Geometry, and Numbers, Toys:
And Who Fortunes fault, etc. The People of Rome in the time of Persius were
apt to scorn the Grecia^ Philosophers, particularly the Cinicks and Stoics,
who were the poorest of them.
with his Foot, And with his foot, etc. Arithmetic and Geometry were Taught,
on floors which were strewn with dust, or sand; in which the Numbers* and
Diagrams were made and drawn, which they might strike out again at Pleasure.
the Sacred Dust destroys.
Whose Pleasure is to see a Strumpet tear
A Cynicks Beard, and lug him by the Hair.
Such, all the Morning, to the Pleadings run;
But, when the Business of the Day is done,
On Dice, and Drink, and Drabs, they spend their Afternoon.

EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE PROLOGUE.
PErnassus, and Helicon, were Hills Consecrated to the Muses; and the supposed
place of their abode. Pernassus was forked on the top; and from Helicon ran a
Stream; the Spring of which, was called the Muses Well.

Pyrene, a Fountain in Corinth; Consecrated also to the Muses.

Statues, etc. The Statues of the Poets, were Crowned with Ivy about their
Brows.

Before the Shrine; that is, before the Shrine of Apollo, in his Temple at
Rome, called the Palati^e.

EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE FIRST SATYR.
LAbeo's Stuff. Nothing is remaining of Atticus Labeo, (so he is called by the
Learned Casaubon) Nor is the mentioned by any other Poet, besides Persius:
Casaubon, from an old Commentator on Persius, says that he made a very Foolish
Translation of Homer's Iliads.

They Comb, etc. He describes a Poet preparing himself to Rehearse his Works in
public: which was commonly performed in August. A Room was hired, or lent by
some Friend; a Scaffold was raised, and a Pulpit placed for him, who was to
hold forth; who borrowed a new Gown* or scoured his old one; and Adorned his
Ears with Jewels, etc.

My wild Fig Tree: Trees of that kind, grow wild in many parts of Italy; and
make their way through Rocks: Sometimes splitting the Tomb-stones.

Ianus like, etc. Ianus was the first King of Italy; who refug'd Saturn, when
he was expelled by his Son Jupiter from Cr^et; (or as we now call it Candia.)
From his Name, the first Month of the Year is called January. He was Pictured
with two Faces, one before* and one behind: As regarding the past time, and the
future. Some of the Mythologists, think he was No^h, for the Reason given above.

The Romans wrote on Cedar, and Cypre^^ Tables, in regard of the duration of
the Wood: III Verses might justly be afraid of Franckincense; for the Papers in
which they were Written, were fit for nothing but to wrap it up.

Products of Citron Beds, etc. Writings of Noblemen, whose Bedsteds were of the
Wood of Citron.

Where Romulus etc.. He speaks of the Country in the foregoing Verses; the
Praises of which, are the most easy Theme for Poets: but which a bad Poet
cannot Naturally describe: Then he makes a digression* to Romulus, the first
King of Rome, who had a Rustical Education; and enlarges upon Quintius
Cincinnatus, a Roman Senator; who was called from the Plough, to be Dictator of
Rome.

In Periods, etc. Persius here names Antitheses, or seeming Contradiction;
which in this place are meant for Rhetorical Flourishes, as I think, with
Casaubon.

Berecynthian Atys; or Attin, etc. Foolish Verses of Nero, which the Poet
repeats; and which cannot be Translated properly into English.

Arms and the Man, etc. The first line of Virgil's Aeneids.

Their crooked Horns, etc. Other Verses of Nero, that were mee^ bombast. I only
Note; that the Repetition of these and the former Verses of Ner^, might justly
give the Poet a caution to conceal his Name.

Maenas and Atys. Poems on the Maenad^s, who were Priestesses of Bacchus; and
of Atys, who made himself an Eunuch, to attend on the Sacrifices of Cybele,
called Berecynthia by the Poets; she was Mother of the Gods.

Two painted Serpents, etc. Two Snakes twined with each other, were painted on
the Walls, by the Ancients, to show the place was Holy.

Yet old Lucilius, etc. Lucilius wrote long before Horace; who imitates his
manner of Satyr, but far excels him, in the design.

King Midas, etc. The Story is vulgar, that Midas King of Phrygia, was made
judge betwixt Apollo and Pan, who was the best Musician; he gave the prize to
Pan; and Apollo in revenge gave him Asses Ears* He wore his Hair long to hide
them* but his ^arber discovering them, and not daring to divulge the secret,
dug a hole in the ground, and whispered into it: the place was marshy; and when
the R^eds grew up, they repeated the words which were spoken by the Barber* By
Midas* the Poet meant Nero.

Eupolis and Cr^tinus, as also Aristophanes mentioned afterward, were all
Athenian Poets; who wrote that sort of Comedy, which was called the old Comedy,
where the People were Named, who were Satyriz'd by those Authors.

Who Fortunes fault, etc. The People of Rome in the time of Persius were apt to
scorn the Grecia^ Philosophers, particularly the Cinicks and Stoics, who were
the poorest of them.

And with his foot, etc. Arithmetic and Geometry were Taught, on floors which
were strewn with dust, or sand; in which the Numbers* and Diagrams were made
and drawn, which they might strike out again at Pleasure.

THE SECOND SATYR OF Aulus Persius Flaccus.
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE Second Satyr.
This Satyr, contains a most Grave, and Philosophical Argument, concerning
Prayers and Wishes. Undoubtedly, it gave occasion to Juvenal's Tenth Satyr; And
both of them had their Original from one of Plato's Dialogues, called the
second Alcibiades. Our Author has induced it with great mastery of Art; by
taking his rise, from the Birthday of his Friend; on which occasions. Prayers
were made, and Sacrifices offered by the Native. Persius commending first the
Purity of his Friend's Vows, descends to the Impious and Immoral Requests of
others. The Satyr is divided into three parts. The first is the Exordium to
Macrinus, which the Poet confines within the compass of four Verses, the second
relates to the matter of the Prayers and Vows, and an enumeration of those
things, wherein Men commonly Sinned against right Reason, and Offended in their
Requests. The Third part consists, in showing the repugnancies of those Prayers
and Wishes, to those of other Men, and inconsistencies with themselves. He
shows the Original of these Vows, and sharply inveighs against them: And
Lastly, not only corrects the false Opinion of Mankind concerning them; but
gives the True Doctrine of all Addresses made to Heaven; and how they may be
made acceptable to the Powers above, in excellent Precepts; and more worthy of
a Christian than a Heathen.

THE SECOND SATYR.
Dedicated to his Friend Plotius Macrinus on his Birthday.
LET this auspicious Morning be expressed
With a white The Romans were used to mark their Fortunate Days, or any thing
that luckily befell 'em, with a White Stone which they had from the Island
Creta; and their Unfortunate with a Coal.
Stone, distinguished from the rest:
White as thy Fame, and as thy Honor clear;
And let new Joys attend, on thy new added year.
Indulge thy Genius, and overflow thy Soul,
Till thy Wit sparkle, like the cheerful Bowl.
Pray; for thy Prayers the Test of Heaven will bear;
Nor need'st thou take the Gods aside, to hear*
While others, even the Mighty Men of Rome,
Big swelled with Mischief, to ^he Temples come*
And in low Murmurs, and with costly Smoke,
Heavens Help, to prosper their black Vows, invoke.
So boldly to the Gods Mankind reveal,
What from each other they, for shame, conceal.
Give me Good Fame, ye Powers, and make me Just:
Thus much the Rogue to Public Ears will trust:
In private then: -- When will thou, mighty Jove,
My Wealthy Uncle from this World remove?
Or -- O thou Thund'rer's Son, great Hercules was thought to have the Key and
Power of bestowing all hidden Treasure.
Hercules,
That once thy bounteous Deity would please
To guide my Rake, upon the chinking sound
Of some vast Treasure, hidden underground!
Oh were my Pupil fairly knocked of the head;
I should possess the Estate, if he were dead!
He Is so far gone with Rickets, and with th'Evil,
That one small Dose would send him to the Devil.
This is my Neighbor Nerius his third Spouse,
Of whom in happy time he rids his House.
But my Eternal Wife! -- Grant Heaven I may
Survive to see the Fellow of his Day!
Thus, that thou may the better bring about
Thy Wishes, thou art wickedly devout:
In Tiber ducking thrice, by break of day,
To wash the Obscenities of The Ancients thought themselves tainted and
polluted by Night it self, as well as bad Dreams in the Night, and therefore
purified themselves by washing their Heads and Hands every Morning; which
Custom the Turks observe to this day.
Night away.
But prithee tell me, ('it is a small Request)
With what ill thoughts of Jove art thou possessed?
Would thou prefer him to some Man? Suppose
I dipped among the worst, and Stai^s chose?
Which of the two would thy wi^e Head declare
The trustier Tutor to an Orphan Heir?
Or, put it thus: -- Unfold to Staius, straight,
What to Jove's Ear thou did impart of late:
He Will stare, and* O Good Jupiter! will cry,
Can thou indulge him in this Villainy!
And think thou, Jove himself, with patience then,
Can hear a Prayer condemned by wicked men?
That, void of Care, he lolls supine in state,
And leaves his Business to be done by Fate?
Because his Thunder splits some burly T^ee,
And is not darted at thy House and Thee?
Or that his Vengeance falls not at the time,
Just at the Perpetration of thy Crime;
And makes Thee a sad Object of our Eyes,
Fit for When any one was Thunderstruck, the Soothsayer (who is here called
Ergenna) immediately repaired to the place, to expiate the displeasure of the
Gods, by sacrificing two Sheep.
Ergenna's Prayer, and Sacrifice?
What well-fed Offering to appease the God,
What powerful Present, to procure a Nod,
Have thou in store? What Bribe have thou prepared,
To pull him, thus unpunished, by the Beard?
Our Superstitions with our life begin:
Th'Obscene old Grandam, or the next of Kin,
The Newborn Infant from the Cradle takes,
And first of Spettle a The Poet laughs at the superstitious Ceremonies which
the Old Women made use of in their Lustration of Purification Days, when they
named their Children, which was done on the Eighth day to Females, and on the
Ninth to Males.
Lustration makes:
Then in the Spawl her Middle Finger dips,
Anoints the Temples, Forehead, and the Lips;
Pretending force of Witchcraft to prevent,
By virtue of her nasty Excrement.
Then dandles him with many a muttered Prayer;
That Heaven would make him some rich Miser's Heir;
Lucky to Ladies, and, in time, a King*
Which to insure, she adds a length of Navel-string.
But no fond Nurse is fit to make a Prayer;
And Jove, if Jove be wise, will never hear;
Not though she prays in white, with lifted hands:
A Body made of Brass the Crone demands
For her loved Nurseling, strung with Nerves of Wire;
Tough to the last, and with no toil to tire:
Unconscionable Vows! which, when we use,
We teach the Gods, in Reason, to refuse.
Suppose They were indulgent to thy Wish;
Yet the fat Entrails, in the spacious Dish,
Would stop the Grant: The very overcare,
And nauseous pomp, would hinder half the Prayer.
Thou hop'st with Sacrifice of Oxen slain,
To compass Wealth, and bribe the God of Gain,
To give thee Flocks and Herds, with large increase:
Fool! to expect 'em from a Bullock's Grease!
And think, that when the fatten'd Flames aspire,
Thou see the accomplishment of thy desire!
Now, now, my bearded Harvest gilds the plain,
The scanty Folds can scarce my Sheep contain,
And showers of Gold come pouring in amain!
Thus dreams the Wretch, and vainly thus dreams on,
Till his lank Purse declares his Money gone.
Should I present thee with rare figured Plate,
Or Gold as rich in Workmanship as Weight;
O how thy rising heart would throb and beat,
And thy left side, with trembling pleasure, sweat!
Thou measur'st by thy self the Powers Divine;
Thy Gods are burnished Gold, and Silver is their Shrine.
Thy puny Godlings of inferior Race;
Whose humble Statues are content with Brass.
Should some of These, in It was the Opinion both of Grecians and Romans, that
the Gods, in Visions or Dreams, often revealed to their Favorites a Cure for
their Diseases, and sometimes those of others. Thus Alexander dreamt of an Herb
which cured Ptolomy. These Gods were principally Apollo and Esculapius; but, in
after times, the same Virtue and Good Will was attributed to Isis and Osiris.
Which brings to my remembrance an odd passage in Sir Tho. Brown's Religio
Medici, or in his vulgar Errors; the sense whereof is, That we are beholding,
for many of our Discoveries in Physic, to the courteous Revelation of Spirits.
By the Expression of Visions purged from Phlegm, our Author means such Dreams
or Visions, as proceed not from Natural Causes, or Humors of the Body; but
such as are sent from Heaven; and are, therefore, certain Remedies.
Visions purged from fl^am,
Foretell Events, or in a Morning Dream;
Even those thou would in Veneration hold;
And, if not Faces, give 'em Beards of Gold.
The Priests, in Temples, now no longer care
For Brazen Vessels, in which the Public Treasures of the Romans was kept: It
may be the Poet means only old Vessels, which were all called (...) from the
Greek Name of Saturn. Note also, that the Roman Treasury was in the Temple of
Saturn.
Saturn's Brass, or Under Numa the second King of Rome, and for a long time
after him, the Holy Vessels for Sacrifice were of Earthen Ware; according to
the Superstitious Rites which were introduced by the same Numa: Tho afterward,
when Memmius had taken Corinth, and Paulus Emilius had conquered Macedonia,
Luxury began amongst the Romans; and then their Utensils of Devotion were of
Gold and Silver, etc.
Numa's Earthen-ware;
Or Vestal Urns, in each Religious Rite:
This wicked Gold has put 'em all to flight.
O Souls, in whom no heavenly Fire is found,
Fat Minds, and ever grovelling on the ground!
We bring our Manners to the blessed Abodes,
And think what pleases us, must please the Gods.
Of Oil and Casia one the Ingredients takes,
And, of the Mixture, a rich Ointment makes:
Another finds the way to dye in Grain:
And make The Wool of Calabria was of the f^^est sort in Italy; as Iuvenal
also tells us. The Tyrian Stain, is the Purple Color died at Tyrus; and I
suppose, but dare not positively affirm, that the richest of that Dye was
nearest our Crimson; and not Scarlet, or that other Color more approaching to
the Blue. I have not room to justify my Conjecture.
Calabrian Wool receive the Tyrian Stain:
Or from the Shells their Orient Treasure takes,
Or, for their golden Ore, in Rivers rakes;
Then melts the Mass: All these are Vanities!
Yet still some Profit from their Pains may rise:
But tell me, Priest, if I may be so bold,
What are the Gods the better for this Gold?
The Wretch that offers from his wealthy Store
These Presents, bribes the Powers to give him more:
As Those Baby-Toys were little Babies, or Poppets, as we call them; in Latin
Pupae; which the Girls, when they came to the Age of puberty, or Child^
bearing, offered to Venus; as the Boys at Fourteen or Fifteen years of age
offered their Bullae. or Bosses.
Maids to Venus offer Baby-Toys,
To bless the Marriage Bed with Girls and Boys.
But let us for the Gods a Gift prepare,
Which the Great Man's Great Chargers cannot bear*
A Soul, where Laws both Humane and Divine,
In Practice more than Speculation shine:
A genuine Virtue, of a vigorous kind,
Pure in the last recesses of the Mind:
When with such Offerings to the Gods I come;
A A Cake of Barley, or course Wheat-Meal, with the Bran in it: The meaning is,
that God is pleased with the pure and spotless heart of the Offerer; and not
with the Riches of the Offering* Laberius in the Fragments of his Mimes, has a
Verse like this; Pur as, Deus, non plenas a^picit manus. -- What I had
forgotten before, in its due place* I must here tell the Reader; That the first
half of this Satyr was translated by one of my Sons, now in Italy: But I
thought so well of it, that I let it pass without any Alteration.
Cake, thus given, is worth a Hecatomb.
The End of the Second Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE SECOND SATYR.
WHite Stone. The Romans were used to mark their Fortunate Days, or any thing
that luckily befell 'em, with a White Stone which they had from the Island
Creta; and their Unfortunate with a Coal.

Hercules was thought to have the Key and Power of bestowing all hidden
Treasure.

The Ancients thought themselves tainted and polluted by Night it self, as well
as bad Dreams in the Night, and therefore purified themselves by washing their
Heads and Hands every Morning; which Custom the Turks observe to this day.

When any one was Thunderstruck, the Soothsayer (who is here called Ergenna)
immediately repaired to the place, to expiate the displeasure of the Gods, by
sacrificing two Sheep.

The Poet laughs at the superstitious Ceremonies which the Old Women made use
of in their Lustration of Purification Days, when they named their Children,
which was done on the Eighth day to Females, and on the Ninth to Males.

In Visions purged from Fleam, etc. It was the Opinion both of Grecians and
Romans, that the Gods, in Visions or Dreams, often revealed to their Favorites
a Cure for their Diseases, and sometimes those of others. Thus Alexander dreamt
of an Herb which cured Ptolomy. These Gods were principally Apollo and
Esculapius; but, in after times, the same Virtue and Good Will was attributed
to Isis and Osiris. Which brings to my remembrance an odd passage in Sir Tho.
Brown's Religio Medici, or in his vulgar Errors; the sense whereof is, That we
are beholding, for many of our Discoveries in Physic, to the courteous
Revelation of Spirits. By the Expression of Visions purged from Phlegm, our
Author means such Dreams or Visions, as proceed not from Natural Causes, or
Humors of the Body; but such as are sent from Heaven; and are, therefore,
certain Remedies.

For Saturn's Brass, etc. Brazen Vessels, in which the Public Treasures of the
Romans was kept: It may be the Poet means only old Vessels, which were all
called Krnia from the Greek Name of Saturn. Note also, that the Roman Treasury
was in the Temple of Saturn.

Numa's Earthen-ware. Under Numa the second King of Rome, and for a long time
after him, the Holy Vessels for Sacrifice were of Earthen Ware; according to
the Superstitious Rites which were introduced by the same Numa: Tho afterward,
when Memmius had taken Corinth, and Paulus Emilius had conquered Macedonia,
Luxury began amongst the Romans; and then their Utensils of Devotion were of
Gold and Silver, etc.

And make Calabrian Wool, etc. The Wool of Calabria was of the f^^est sort in
Italy; as Iuvenal also tells us. The Tyrian Stain, is the Purple Color died at
Tyrus; and I suppose, but dare not positively affirm, that the richest of that
Dye was nearest our Crimson; and not Scarlet, or that other Color more
approaching to the Blue. I have not room to justify my Conjecture.

As Maids to Venus, etc. Those Baby-Toys were little Babies, or Poppets, as we
call them; in Latin Pupae; which the Girls, when they came to the Age of
puberty, or Child^ bearing, offered to Venus; as the Boys at Fourteen or
Fifteen years of age offered their Bullae. or Bosses.

A Cake thus given, etc. A Cake of Barley, or course Wheat-Meal, with the Bran
in it: The meaning is, that God is pleased with the pure and spotless heart of
the Offerer; and not with the Riches of the Offering* Laberius in the Fragments
of his Mimes, has a Verse like this; Pur as, Deus, non plenas a^picit manus. --
What I had forgotten before, in its due place* I must here tell the Reader;
That the first half of this Satyr was translated by one of my Sons, now in
Italy: But I thought so well of it, that I let it pass without any Alteration.

THE THIRD SATYR OF Aulus Persius Flaccus.
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY MR. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE Third Satyr.
Our Author has made two Satyrs concerning Study; the First and the Third: The
First related to Men; This to Young Students, whom he desired to be Educated in
the Stoic Philosophy: He himself sustains the Person of the Master, or
Praeceptor, in this admirable Satyr. Where he upb^aids the You^h of Sloth, and
Negligen^e in learning. Yet he begins with one Scholar reproaching his Fellow
Students with late rising to their Books. After which he takes upon him the
other part, of the Teacher. And addressing himself particularly to Young
Noblemen, tells them, That, by reason of their High Birth, and the Great
Possessions of their Fathers, they are careless of adorning their Minds with
Precepts of Moral Philosophy: And withal inculcates to them the Miseries which
will attend them in the whole Course of their Life, if they do not apply
themselves betimes to the Knowledge of Virtue, and the End of their Creation,
which he pathetically insinuates to them. The Title of this Satyr, in some
Ancient Manuscripts, was The Reproach of Idleness; tho in others of the
Scholiasts, it is inscribed, Against the Luxury and Vices of the Rich. In both
of which the Intention of the Poet is pursued; but principally in the former.

I remember I translated this Satyr, when I was a Kings-Scholar at Westminster
School, for (...) Thursday Nights Exercise; and believe that it, and many other
of my Exercises of this nature, in English Verse, are still in the Hands of my
Learned Master, the Reverend Doctor Busby.

THE THIRD SATYR.
IS this thy daily course? the glaring Sun
Breaks in at every Chink: The Cattle run
To Shades, and Noon^ tide Rays of Summer shun.
Yet plunged in Sloth we lie; and snore supine,
As filled with Fumes of undigested Wine.
This grave Advice some sober Student bears;
And loudly rings it in his Fellows Ears.
The yawning Youth, scarce half awake, essays
His lazy Limbs and dozy Head to raise:
Then rubs his gummy Eyes, and scrubs his Pate;
And cries I thought it had not been so late:
My Clothes, make haste: why when! if none be near,
He mutters first, and then begins to swear:
And brays aloud, with a more clamorous note,
Than an Arcadian Ass can stretch his throat.
With much ado, his Book before him laid,
And The Students used to write their Notes on Parchments; the inside, on which
they wrote, was white; the other side was Hairy: And commonly yellow.
Quintilian reproves this Custom, and advises rather Table-books, lined with
Wax, and a Style, like that we use in our Vellum Table-books, as more easy.
Parchment with the smoother side displayed;
He takes the Papers; lays 'em down again;
And, with unwilling Fingers, tries the Pen:
Some peevish quarrel straight he strives to pick;
His Quill writes double, or his Ink's too thick;
Infuse more water; now it is grown so thin
It sinks, nor can the Character be seen.
O Wretch, and still more wretched every day!
Are Mortals born to sleep their lives away!
Go back to what thy Infancy began,
Thou who were never meant to be a Man:
Eat Pap and Spoon-meat; for thy Gugaws cry;
Be sullen, and refuse the Lullaby.
No more accuse thy Pen; but charge the Crime
On Native Sloth, and negligence of time.
Think thou thy Master, or thy Friends to cheat?
Fool, it is thy self, and that is a worse deceit.
Beware the public Laughter of the Town;
Thou spring'st a Leak already in thy Crown.
A flaw is in thy ill-bak'd Vessel found;
It Is hollow, and returns a jarring sound.
Yet, thy moist Clay is pliant to Command;
Unwrought, and easy to the Potter's hand:
Now take the Mold; now bend thy Mind to feel
The first sharp Motions of the Forming Wheel.
But thou have Land; a Country Seat, secure
By a just Title; costly Furniture;
A Before eating, it was Customary, to cut off some part of the Meat; which was
first put into a Pan, or little Dish; then into the Fire; as an Offering to the
Household Gods: This they called a Libation.
Fuming-Pan thy Lares to appease:
What need of Learning when a Man's at ^ase?
If this be not enough to swell thy Soul,
Then please thy Pride, and search the Herald's Roll:
Where thou shall find thy famous Pedigree
Drawn The Thuscans were accounted of most Ancient Nobility. Horace observes
this, in most of his Compliments to Mecenas; who was derived from the Old Kings
of Tuscany, now the Dominion of the Great Duke.
from the Root of some old Thuscan Tree;
And thou, a Thousand, off, a Fool of long Degree.
Who, clad in The Roman Knights, attired in the Robe called Trabea; were
Summoned by the Censor, to appear before him; and to Salute him, in passing by,
as their Names were called over. They led their Horses in their hand. See more
of this, in Pompey's Life, written by Plutarch.
Purple, can thy Censor greet;
And, loudly, call him Cousin, in the Street.
Such Pagcantry be to the People shown:
There boast thy Horse's Trappings, and thy own:
I know thee to thy Bottom; from within
Thy shallow Center, to thy ou^most Skin:
Do thou not blush to live so like a Beast;
So trim, so dissolute, so loosely dressed?
But, it is in vain: The Wretch is drenched too deep;
His Soul is stupid, and his Heart asleep:
Fatten'd in Vice; so callous, and so gross;
He sins, and sees not; senseless of his Loss.
Down goes the Wretch at once; unskilled to swim;
Hopeless to bubble up, and reach the Water's Brim.
Great Father of the Gods, when, for our Crimes,
Thou send'st some heavy Judgment on the Times;
Some Tyrant-King, the Terror of his Age,
The Type, and true Vicegerent of thy Rage;
Thus punish him: Set Virtue in his Sight,
With all her Charms adorned; with all her Graces bright:
But set her distant; make him pale to see
His Gains out-weigh'd by lost Felicity!
Sicilian Some of the Sicilian Kings were so great Tyrants; that the Name is
become Proverbial. The Brazen Bull is a known Story of Phalaris, one of those
Tyrants; who when Perillus, a famous Artist, had presented him with a Bull of
that Metal hollowed within, which when the Condemned Person was enclosed in it,
would render the sound of a Bull's roaring, caused the Workman to make the
first Experiment. Docuitque suum mugire Iuvencum.
Tortures, and the Brazen Bull,
Are Emblems, rather than express the Full
Of what he feels: Yet what he fears, is more:
The He alludes to the Story of Damocles, a Flatterer of one of those Sicilian
Tyrants, namely Dionysius. Damocles had infinitely extolled the Happiness of
Kings. Dionysius to convince him of the contrary, invited him to a Feast; and
Clothed him in Purple: But caused a Sword, with the point downward, to be hung
over his Head, by a Silken Twine; which, when he perceived he co^'d Eat nothing
of the Delicates that were set before him.
Wretch, who sitting at his plenteous Board,
Looked up, and viewed on high the pointed Sword
Hang over his Head, and hanging by a Twine,
Did with less Dread, and more securely Dine.
Even in his Sleep he starts, and fears the Knife;
And, trembling, in his Arms, takes his Accomplice Wife*
Down, down he goes; and from his Darling-Friend
Conceals the Woes his guilty Dreams portend.
When I was young, I like a lazy Fool,
Would blear my Eyes with Oil, to stay from School:
Averse from Pains, and loath to learn the Part
Of C^to, dying with a dauntless Heart:
Though much, my Master, that stern Virtue praised,
Which, over the Vanquisher, the Vanquished raised:
And my pleased Father came, with Pride, to see
His Boy defend the Roman Liberty.
But then my Study was to Cog the Dice;
And dext'rously to throw the lucky Sice:
To shun Ames-Ace, that swept my Stakes away;
And watch the Box, for f^ar they should convey
False Bones, and put upon me in the Play.
Careful, besides, the Whirling Top to whip;
And drive her giddy, till she fell asleep.
Thy Years are ripe, nor art thou yet to learn
What Is Good or Ill, and both their Ends discern:
Thou, The Stoics taught their Philosophy, under a Porticus, to secure their
Scholars from the Weather. Zeno was the Chief of that Sect.
in the Stoic Porch, severely bred,
Have heard the Dogma's of great Zeno read:
Where on the Walls, by A Famous Painter; who drew the Pi^tures of the Medes
and Persians, Conquered by Miltiades, Themistocles, and other Athenian
Captains, on the Walls of the Portico, in their Natural Habits.
Polignotus Hand,
The Conquered Medians in Trunk-Breeches stand.
Where the Shorn Youth, to Midnight-Lectures rise,
Roused from their Slumbers, to be early wise:
Where the coarse Cake, and homely Husks of Beans,
From pamp'ring Riot the young Stomach weans:
And, Pithagoras of Samos, made the allusion of the Y, or Greek Upsilon, to
Vice and Virtue. One side of the Letter being broad, Characters Vice, to which
the ascent is wide and easy. The other side represents Virtue; to which the
Passage is strait, and difficult: And perhaps our Savior might al^o allude to
this, in those Noted words of the Evangelist, The way to Heaven, etc.
where the Samian Y, directs thy Steps to run,
To Virtue's Narrow Steep, and Broad-way Vice to shun.
And yet thou snor'st; thou draw'st thy Drunken Breath,
Sour with Debauch; and sleep'st the Sleep of Death.
Thy Chaps are fallen, and thy Frame dis-joyn'd:
Thy Body as dissolved as is thy Mind.
Have thou not, yet, proposed some certain End,
To which thy Life, thy every Act may tend?
Have thou no Mark, at which to bend thy Bow;
Or like a Boy pursu'st the Carrion Crow
With Pellets, and with Stones from Tree to Tree:
A fruitless Toil, and liv'st Extempore?
Watch the Disease in time: For, when within
The Dropsy rages, and extends the Skin,
In vain for Hellebore the patient Cries;
And Fees the Doctor; but too late is wise:
Too late, for Cure, he proffers half his Wealth:
Conq^est and Guibbons cannot give him Health.
Learn Wretches; learn the Motions of the Mind:
Why you were made, for what you were designed;
And the great Moral End of Humane Kind.
Study thy self: What Rank, or what degree
The wise Creator has ordained for thee:
And all the Offices of that Estate
Perform; and with thy Prudence guide thy Fate.
Pray justly, to be heard: Nor more desire
Than what the Decencies of Life require.
Learn what thou ow'st thy Country, and thy Friend;
What Is requisite to spare, and what to spend:
Learn this; and after, envy not the store
Of the Greaz'd Advocate, that Grinds the Poor
Fat Casaubon here Notes, that among all the Romans, who were brought up to
Learning, few besides the Orators, or Lawyers, grew Rich.
Fees from the defended Vmbrian The Martians and Vmbrians, were the most
Plentiful, of all the Provinces in Italy.
draws;
And only gains the wealthy Clients Cause.
To whom the Marsians more Provision send,
Than he and all his Family can spend.
Gammons that give a relish to the taste;
And potted Fowl, and Fish come in so fast,
That, e're the first is out, the second stinks:
And moldy Mother gathers on the brinks^
But, here, some Captain of the Land, or Fleet,
Stout of his hands, but of a Soldiers Wit;
Cries, I have sense to serve my turn, in store;
And he is a Rascal who pretends to more.
Dammce, what-e're those Book-learn'd Blockheads say.
Solon's the veriest Fool in all the Play.
Top-heavy Drones, and always looking down,
(As over-Ballasted within the Crown!)
Mutt'ring, betwixt their Lips, some Mystic thing,
Which, well examined, is flat Conjuring.
Mere Madmen's Dreams: For, what the Schools have taught
Is only this, that nothing can be brought
From nothing; and what is, can never be turned to naught.
Is it for this they study? to grow pale,
And miss the Pleasures of a Glorious Meal;
For this, in Rags accouter'd, they are seen,
And made the May Game of the public spleen?
Proceed, my Friend, and rail: But hear me tell
A story, which is just thy Parallel.
A Spark, like thee, of the Man-killing Trade,
Fell sick; and thus to his Physician said;
Methinks I am not right in every part;
I feel a kind of trembling at my Heart:
My Pulse unequal, and my Breath is strong;
Besides, a filthy Fur upon my Tongue.
The Doctor heard him, exercised his skill;
And, after, bad him for four Days be still.
Three Days he took good Counsel, and began
To mend, and look like a recov'ring Man:
The fourth, he could not hold from Drink; but sends
His Boy to one of his old trusty Friends:
Adjuring him, by all the Powers Divine,
To pity his Distress, who could not Dine
Without a Flaggon of his healing Wine.
He drinks a swilling Draught: And, lined within,
Will supple, in the Bath, his outward skin:
Whom should he find, but his Physician there;
Who, wisely, bad him once again b^ware.
Sir, you look Wan, you hardly draw your Breath,
Drinking is Dangerous, and the Bath is Death:
It Is Nothing, says the Fool; but, says the Friend,
This Nothing, Sir, will bring you to your end.
Do I not see your Dropsy-Belly swell?
Your yellow Skin? -- No more of that; I Am well.
I have already Buried two or three
That stood betwixt a fair Estate and me,
And, Doctor, I may live to Bury thee.
Thou tell me, I look ill; and thou look worse:
Iv'e done, says the Physician; take your Course.
The laughing Sot, like all unthinking Men,
Baths and gets Drunk; then Baths and Drinks again:
His Throat half throtled with Corrupted Fleam,
And breathing through his Jaws a belching steam:
Amidst his Cups with fainting shivering seized,
His Limbs dis-jointed, and all over diseased,
His hand refuses to sustain the bowl:
And his Teeth chatter, and his Eye Balls roll:
T^ll, with his Meat; he vomits out his Soul:
Then, Trumpets, Torches, and a tedious Crew
Of Hireling Mourners, for his Funeral due.
Our Dear departed Brother lies in State;
His The Romans were Buried withoout the City; for which Reason the Poet says,
that the Dead man's heels were stretched out toward the Gate.
Heels stretched out, and pointing to the Gate:
And Slaves, now manumis'd, on their dead Master wait.
They hoyst him on the Bier, and deal the Dole;
And there is an end of a Luxurious Fool.
But, what is thy fulsom Parable to me?
My Body is from all Diseases free:
My temperate Pulse does regularly beat;
Feel, and be satisfied, my Hands and Feet:
These are not cold, nor those Oppressed with heat.
Or lay thy hand upon my Naked Heart,
And thou shall find me Hale in every part.
I grant this true: But, still, the deadly wound
Is in thy Soul: It Is there thou art not sound:
Say, when thou see a heap of tempting Gold,
Or a more tempting Harlot do behold;
Then, when she casts on thee a sidelong glance,
Then try thy Heart; and tell me if it Dance.
Some Course cold Salade is before thee set:
Bread, with the Bran perhaps, and broken Meat;
Fall on, and try thy Appetite to eat.
These are not Dishes for thy dainty Tooth:
What, have thou got an Ulcer in thy Mouth?
Why stand'st thou picking? Is thy Pallat sore?
That Beat, and Radishes will make thee roar?
Such is the unequal Temper of thy Mind;
Thy Passions, in extremes, and unconfined:
Thy Hair so bristles with unmanly Fears;
As Fields of Corn, that rise in bearded Ears*
And, when thy Cheeks with flushing Fury glow,
The rage of boiling Caldrons is more slow;
When fed with fuel and with flames below.
With foam upon thy Lips, and sparkling Eyes,
Thou say, and do, in such outrageous wise;
That Orestes was Son to Agamemnon and Clitemnestra. Agamemnon, at his return
from the Trojan Wars, was slain by Aegysthus, the Adulterer of Clitemnestra.
Orestes to revenge his Fathers Death, slew both Aegysthus and his Mother: For
which he was punished with Madness, by the Eumenides, or Furies, who
continually haunted him.
mad Orestes, if he saw the show,
Would swear thou were the Madder of the Two.
The End of the Third Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE THIRD SATYR.
AND Parchement, etc. The Students used to write their Notes on Parchments; the
inside, on which they wrote, was white; the other side was Hairy: And commonly
yellow. Quintilian reproves this Custom, and advises rather Table-books, lined
with Wax, and a Style, like that we use in our Vellum Table-books, as more
easy.

A Fumeing-Pan, etc. Before eating, it was Customary, to cut off some part of
the Meat; which was first put into a Pan, or little Dish; then into the Fire;
as an Offering to the Household Gods: This they called a Libation.

Drawn from the Root, etc. The Thuscans were accounted of most Ancient
Nobility. Horace observes this, in most of his Compliments to Mecenas; who was
derived from the Old Kings of Tuscany, now the Dominion of the Great Duke.

Who Clad in Purple, etc. The Roman Knights, attired in the Robe called Trabea;
were Summoned by the Censor, to appear before him; and to Salute him, in
passing by, as their Names were called over. They led their Horses in their
hand. See more of this, in Pompey's Life, written by Plutarch.

Sicilian Tortures, etc. Some of the Sicilian Kings were so great Tyrants; that
the Name is become Proverbial. The Brazen Bull is a known Story of Phalaris,
one of those Tyrants; who when Perillus, a famous Artist, had presented him
with a Bull of that Metal hollowed within, which when the Condemned Person was
enclosed in it, would render the sound of a Bull's roaring, caused the Workman
to make the first Experiment. Docuitque suum mugire Iuvencum.

The Wretch who fitting, etc. He alludes to the Story of Damocles, a Flatterer
of one of those Sicilian Tyrants, namely Dionysius. Damocles had infinitely
extolled the Happiness of Kings. Dionysius to convince him of the contrary,
invited him to a Feast; and Clothed him in Purple: But caused a Sword, with
the point downward, to be hung over his Head, by a Silken Twine; which, when he
perceived he co^'d Eat nothing of the Delicates that were set before him.

Thou, in the Stoic Porch, etc. The Stoics taught their Philosophy, under a
Porticus, to secure their Scholars from the Weather. Zeno was the Chief of that
Sect.

Polygnotus, A Famous Painter; who drew the Pi^tures of the Medes and Persians,
Conquered by Miltiades, Themistocles, and other Athenian Captains, on the Walls
of the Portico, in their Natural Habits.

And where the Samian Y, etc. Pithagoras of Samos, made the allusion of the Y,
or Greek Upsilon, to Vice and Virtue. One side of the Letter being broad,
Characters Vice, to which the ascent is wide and easy. The other side
represents Virtue; to which the Passage is strait, and difficult: And perhaps
our Savior might al^o allude to this, in those Noted words of the Evangelist,
The way to Heaven, etc.

Fat Fees, etc. Casaubon here Notes, that among all the Romans, who were
brought up to Learning, few besides the Orators, or Lawyers, grew Rich.

The Martians and Vmbrians, were the most Plentiful, of all the Provinces in
Italy.

His Heels stretched out, etc. The Romans were Buried withoout the City; for
which Reason the Poet says, that the Dead man's heels were stretched out
toward the Gate.

That Mad Orestes. Orestes was Son to Agamemnon and Clitemnestra. Agamemnon, at
his return from the Trojan Wars, was slain by Aegysthus, the Adulterer of
Clitemnestra. Orestes to revenge his Fathers Death, slew both Aegysthus and his
Mother: For which he was punished with Madness, by the Eumenides, or Furies,
who continually haunted him.

THE FOURTH SATYR OF Aulus Persius Flaccus.
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE Fourth Satyr.
Our Author, living in the time of Nero, was Contemporary and Friend to the
Noble Poet Lucan; both of them, were sufficiently sensible, with all Good Men,
how Unskilfully he managed the Commonwealth: And perhaps might guess at his
future Tyranny, by some Passages, during the latter part of his first five
years* tho he broke not out, into his greater Excesses, while he was restrained
by the Counsels and Authority of Seneca. Lucan has not spared him in the Poem
of his Pharsalia: For his very Complement looked asquint, as well as Nero.
Persius has been bolder, but with Caution likewise. For here, in the Person of
Young Alcibiades, he arraigns his Ambition of meddling with State Affairs,
without Judgment or Experience. It Is probable that he makes Seneca in this
Satyr, sustain the part of Socrates, under a borrowed Name. And, withal,
discovers some secret Vices of Nero, concerning his Lust, his Drunkenness and
his Effeminacy, which had not yet arrived to public Notice. He also reprehends
the Flattery of his Courtiers, who endeavored to make all his Vices pass for
Virtues. Covetousness was undoubtedly none of his Faults; but it is here
described as a Veyl cast over the True Meaning of the Poet, which was to
Satyrise his Prodigality, and Voluptuousness; to which he makes a transition. I
find no Instance in History, of that Emperor's being a Pathique; tho Persius
seems to brand him with it. From the two Dialogues of Plato, both called
Alcibiades, the Poet took the Arguments, of the Second and Third Satyr, but he
inverted the order of them: For the third Satyr is taken from the first of
those Dialogues.

The Commentatours before Casaubon, were ignorant of our Author's secret
meaning; and thought he had only written against Young Noblemen in General, who
were too forward in aspiring to public Magistracy: But this Excellent
Scholiast has unravelled the whole Mystery: And made it apparent, that the
Sting of the Satyr, was particularly aimed at Nero.

THE FOURTH SATYR.
WHo-e're thou art, whose forward years are bent
On State Affairs, to guide the Government;
Hear, first, what SOcrates, whom the Oracle of Delphos praised, as the wisest
Man of his Age; lived in the time of the Peloponnesian War. He, finding the
Uncertainty of Natural Philosophy, applied himself wholly to the Moral. He was
Master to Xenophon and Plato; and to many of the Athenian Young Noblemen;
amongst the rest, to Alcibiades, the most lovely Youth, then, living;
Afterward a Famous Captain; whose Life is written by Plutarch.
Socrates, of old, has said
To the loved Youth, whom he, at Athens, bred.
Tell me, thou Pupil, to great Pericles was Tutor, or rather Overseer of the
Will of Clinias, Father to Alcibiades. While Pericles lived, who was a wise
Man, and an Excellent Orator, as well as a Great General, the Athenians had the
better of the War.
Pericles,
Our second hope, my Alcibiades,
What are the grounds, from whence thou do prepare
To undertake, so young, so vast a Care?
Perhaps thy Wit: (A Chance not often heard,
That Parts and Prudence, should prevent the Beard:)
It Is seldom seen that, Senators so young,
Know when to speak, and when to hold their Tongue.
Sure thou art born to some peculiar Fate;
When the mad People rise against the State,
To look them into Duty: And command
An awful Silence with thy lifted hand.
Then to bespeak 'em thus: Athenians, know
Against right Reason all your Counsels go;
This is not Fair; nor Profitable that;
Nor the other Question Proper for Debate.
But thou, no doubt, can set the business right;
And give each Argument its proper weight:
Know, with an equal hand, to hold the Scale:
See where the Reasons pinch, and where they fail:
And where Exceptions, over the general Rule, prevail.
And, taught by Inspiration, in a trice,
Can That is by Death. When the Judges would Condemn a Malefactor, they cast
their Votes into an Urn; as according to the Modern Custom, a Ballotting-Box.
If the Suffrages were marked with (...) they signified the Sentence of Death to
the Offender; as, being the first Letter of (...), which in English is Death.
punish Crimes; and brand offending Vice.
Leave; leave to fathom such high points as these;
Nor be ambitious, e're thy time, to please:
Unseasonably Wise, till Age, and Cares;
Have formed thy Soul, to manage Great Affairs.
Thy Face, thy Shape, thy Outside, are but vain:
Thou have not strength such Labors to sustain:
Drink The Poet would say; that such an ignorant Young Man, as he here
describes, is fitter to be governed himself, than to go^ern others. He
therefore advises him to drink Hellebore, which purges the Brain.
Hellebore, my Boy, drink deep, and purge thy brain.
What aim'st thou at, and whither tends thy Care,
In what thy utmost Good? Delicious Fare;
And, then, to Sun thy self in open air.
Hold, hold; are all thy empty Wishes such?
A good old Woman would have said as much.
But thou art nobly born; it is true; go boast
Thy Pedigree, the thing thou valu'st most:
Besides thou art a Beau: What Is that, my Child?
A Fop, well dressed, extravagant, and wild:
She, that cries Herbs, has less impertinence;
And, in her Calling, more of common sense.
None, none descends into himself; to find
The secret Imperfections of his Mind:
But every one is Eagle-ey'd, to see
Another's Faults, and his Deformity.
Say, do thou know The Name of Vectidius is here used Appellatively to
signify any Rich Covetous Man; though perhaps there might be a Man of that
Name then living. I have Trans^ted this passage Paraphrastically, and loosely:
And leave it for those to look on, who are not unlike the Picture.
Vectidius? Who, the Wretch
Whose Lands beyond the Sabines largely stretch;
Cover the Country; that a sailing Kite
Can scarce o'reflye 'em, in a day and night?
Him, do thou mean, who, spite of all his store,
Is ever Craving, and will still be Poor?
Who cheats for Halfpence, and who doffs his Coat,
To save a Farthing in a Ferry-Boat?
Ever a Glutton, at another's Cost,
But in whose Kithin dwells perpetual Frost?
Who eats and drinks with his Domestic Slaves;
A verier Hind than any of his Knaves?
Born, with the Curse and Anger of the Gods,
And that indulgent Genius he defrauds?
At Harvest-home, and on the Sheering-Day,
When he should Pan the God of Shepherds, and Pales the Goddess presiding over
rural Affairs; whom Virgil invocates in the beginning of his Second Georgique.
I give the Epithete of Better* to Ceres; because she first taught the Use of
Corn for Bread, as the Poets tell us. Men, in the first rude Ages, feeding only
on Acorns, or Mast, instead of Bread.
Thanks to Pan and Pales pay,
And better Ceres; trembling to approach
The little Barrel, which he fears to broach:
He 'says the Wimble, often draws it back,
And deals to thirsty Servants but a smack.
To a short Meal, he makes a tedious Grace,
Before the Barley Pudding comes in place:
Then, bids fall on; himself, for saving Charges,
A peeled sliced Onyon eats, and tipples Verjuice.
Thus fares the Drudge: But thou, whose life's a Dream
Of lazy Pleasures, take a worse Extreme.
It Is all thy business, business how to shun;
To bas'k thy naked Body in the Sun;
Suppling thy stiffen'd Joints with fragrant Oil:
Then, in thy spacious Garden, walk a while,
To suck the Moisture up, and soak it in:
And this, thou think, but vainly think, unseen.
But, know, thou art observed: And there are those
Who, if they durst, would all thy secret sins expose.
The Our Author here taxes Nero, covertly, with that effeminate Custom, now
used in Italy, and especially by Harlo^^, of smoothing their Bellies, and
taking off the Hairs, which grow about their Secrets. In Nero's times they were
pulled off with Pincers; but now they use a Past, which applied to those Parts,
when it is removed, carries away with it those Excrescencies.
depilation of thy modest part:
Thy Catamite, the Darling of thy Heart,
His Engine-hand, and every leuder Art.
When, prone to bear, and patient to receive,
Thou take the pleasure, which thou can not give.
With odorous Oil, thy head and hair are sleek:
And then thou kemb'st the Tuzzes on thy Cheek:
Of these thy Barbers take a costly care;
While thy salt Tail is overgrown with hair.
Not all thy Pincers, nor unmanly Arts,
Can smooth the roughness of thy shameful parts.
Not The Learned Holiday, (who has made us amends for his bad Poetry in this
and the rest of these Satyrs, with his excellent Illustrations,) here tells us,
from good Authority, that the Number Five, does not allude to the Five Fingers
of one Man, who used (...) off the Hairs before mentioned; but to Five Strong
Men, such as were skillful in the five robust Exercises, then in Practice at
Rome, and were performed in the Circus, or public place, ordained for them.
These five he reckons up, in this manner. 1. The Caestus, or Whirlbatts,
described by Virgil, in his fifth Eneid: And this was the most dangerous of all
the rest. The 2d was the Foot-race, The Third the Discus; like the throwing a
weighty Ball; a sport now used in Cornwall, and other parts of England: We may
see it daily practiced in Red-Lyon-Fields. The Fourth was the Saltus, or
Leaping: And the Fifth Wrestling Naked, and besmeared with Oil. They who were
Practiced in these five Manly Exercises, were called (...).
five, the strongest that the Circus breeds,
From the rank Soil can root those wicked Weeds.
Tho, suppled first with Soap, to ease thy pain,
The stubborn Fern springs up, and sprouts again.
Thus others we with Defamations wound,
While they stab us; and so the Jest goes round.
Vain are thy Hopes, to escape censorious Eyes;
Truth will appear, through all the thin Disguise:
Thou have an Ulcer, which no Leach can heal;
Tho thy broad Shoulder-belt the Wound conceal.
Say thou art sound and hale in every part;
We know, we know thee rotton at thy heart.
We know thee sullen, impotent, and proud:
Nor can thou cheat thy That is, thou can not deceive thy Obscene part,
which is weak, or Impotent, tho thou make Ostentation of thy Performances
with Women.
Nerve, who cheat'st the Crowd.
But, when they praise me, in the Neighborhood,
When the pleased People take me for a God,
Shall I refuse their Incense? Not receive
The loud Applauses which the Vulgar give?
If thou do Wealth, with longing Eyes, behold;
And, greedily, art gaping after Gold;
If some alluring Girl, in gliding by,
Shall tip the wink, with a la^civious Eye,
And thou, with a con^enting glance, reply;
If thou, thy own Solicitor become,
And bid'st arise the lumpish Pendulum:
If thy lewd Lust provokes an empty storm,
And prompts to more than Nature can perform;
If, with thy Persius durst not have been so bold with Nero, as I dare now; and
therefore there is only an intimation of that in him, which I publicly speak:
I mean of Nero's walking the Streets by Night, in disguise; and committing all
sorts of Outrages: For which he was sometimes well beaten.
Guards, thou scour'st the Streets by night,
And do in Murders, Rapes, and Spoils delight;
Please not thy self, the flattering Crowd to hear;
It Is fulsom stuff, to feed thy itching Ear.
Reject the nauseous Praises of the Times:
Give thy base Poets back their cobbled Rhymes:
Survey thy That is, look into thy self; and examine thy own Conscience, there
thou shall find, that how wealthy soever thou appear'st to the World, yet thou
art but a Beggar; because thou art destitute of all Virtues; which are the
Riches of the Soul. This also was a Paradox of the Stoic School.
Soul, not what thou do appear,
But what thou art; and find the Beggar there.
The End of the Fourth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE FOURTH SATYR.
SOcrates, whom the Oracle of Delphos praised, as the wisest Man of his Age;
lived in the time of the Peloponnesian War. He, finding the Uncertainty of
Natural Philosophy, applied himself wholly to the Moral. He was Master to
Xenophon and Plato; and to many of the Athenian Young Noblemen; amongst the
rest, to Alcibiades, the most lovely Youth, then, living; Afterward a Famous
Captain; whose Life is written by Plutarch.

Pericles was Tutor, or rather Overseer of the Will of Clinias, Father to
Alcibiades. While Pericles lived, who was a wise Man, and an Excellent Orator,
as well as a Great General, the Athenians had the better of the War.

Can punish Crimes, etc. That is by Death. When the Judges would Condemn a
Malefactor, they cast their Votes into an Urn; as according to the Modern
Custom, a Ballotting-Box. If the Suffrages were marked with (...) they
signified the Sentence of Death to the Offender; as, being the first Letter of
(...), which in English is Death.

Drink Hellebore, etc. The Poet would say; that such an ignorant Young Man, as
he here describes, is fitter to be governed himself, than to go^ern others. He
therefore advises him to drink Hellebore, which purges the Brain.

Say, do thou know Vectidius, etc. The Name of Vectidius is here used
Appellatively to signify any Rich Covetous Man; though perhaps there might be
a Man of that Name then living. I have Trans^ted this passage Paraphrastically,
and loosely: And leave it for those to look on, who are not unlike the Picture.

When He should thanks, etc. Pan the God of Shepherds, and Pales the Goddess
presiding over rural Affairs; whom Virgil invocates in the beginning of his
Second Georgique. I give the Epithete of Better* to Ceres; because she first
taught the Use of Corn for Bread, as the Poets tell us. Men, in the first rude
Ages, feeding only on Acorns, or Mast, instead of Bread.

The depilation of thy modest part, etc. Our Author here taxes Nero, covertly,
with that effeminate Custom, now used in Italy, and especially by Harlo^^, of
smoothing their Bellies, and taking off the Hairs, which grow about their
Secrets. In Nero's times they were pulled off with Pincers; but now they use a
Past, which applied to those Parts, when it is removed, carries away with it
those Excrescencies.

Not five the Strongest, etc. The Learned Holiday, (who has made us amends for
his bad Poetry in this and the rest of these Satyrs, with his excellent
Illustrations,) here tells us, from good Authority, that the Number Five, does
not allude to the Five Fingers of one Man, who used (...) off the Hairs before
mentioned; but to Five Strong Men, such as were skillful in the five robust
Exercises, then in Practice at Rome, and were performed in the Circus, or
public place, ordained for them. These five he reckons up, in this manner. 1.
The Caestus, or Whirlbatts, described by Virgil, in his fifth Eneid: And this
was the most dangerous of all the rest. The 2d was the Foot-race, The Third the
Discus; like the throwing a weighty Ball; a sport now used in Cornwall, and
other parts of England: We may see it daily practiced in Red-Lyon-Fields. The
Fourth was the Saltus, or Leaping: And the Fifth Wrestling Naked, and besmeared
with Oil. They who were Practiced in these five Manly Exercises, were called
(...).

Thy Nerve, etc. That is, thou can not deceive thy Obscene part, which is
weak, or Impotent, tho thou make Ostentation of thy Performances with Women.

If with thy Guards, etc. Persius durst not have been so bold with Nero, as I
dare now; and therefore there is only an intimation of that in him, which I
publicly speak: I mean of Nero's walking the Streets by Night, in disguise;
and committing all sorts of Outrages: For which he was sometimes well beaten.

Survey thy Soul, etc. That is, look into thy self; and examine thy own
Conscience, there thou shall find, that how wealthy soever thou appear'st to
the World, yet thou art but a Beggar; because thou art destitute of all
Virtues; which are the Riches of the Soul. This also was a Paradox of the
Stoic School.

THE FIFTH SATYR OF Aulus Persius Flaccus.
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE Fifth Satyr.
The judicious Casaubon, in his Proem to this Satyr tells us, that Aristophanes
the Grammarian, being asked, what Poem of Archilochus his Iambicks he preferred
before the rest, answered, the longest. His answer may justly be applied to this
Fifth Satyr; which, being of a greater length than any of the rest, is also, by
far, the most instructive. For this Reason, I have selected it from all the
others; and inscribed it to my Learned Master Doctor Busby; to whom I am not
only oblig^d my self, for the best part of my own Education, and that of my two
Sons; but have also received from him the first and truest Taste of Persius.
May he be pleased to find in this Translation, the Gratitude, or at least some
small Acknowledgment of his unworthy Scholar, at the distance of 42 Years, from
the time when I departed from under his Tuition.

This Satyr consists of two distinct Parts: The first contains the Praises of
the Sto^ck Philosopher Cornutus, Master and Tutor to our Persius. It also
declares the Love and Piety of Persius, to his well-deserving Master: And the
Mutual Friendship which continued betwixt them, after Persius was now grown a
Man. As also his Exhortation to Young Noblemen, that they would enter
themselves into his Institution. From hence he makes an artful Transition into
the second Part of his Subject* Wherein he first complains of the Sloth of
Scholars; and afterward persuades them to the pursuit of their true Liberty:
Here our Author excellently Treats that Paradox of the Stoics, which affirms,
that the Wise or Virtuous Man is only Free; and that all Vicious Men, are
Naturally Slaves. And, in the Illustration of this Dogma, he takes up the
remaining part of this inimitable Satyr.

THE FIFTH SATYR.
Inscribed to The Reverend Dr. Busby. The Speakers Persius, and Cornutus.
PERS. OF ancient use to Poets it belongs,
To wish themselves an hundred Mouths and Tongues:
Whether to the well-lung'd Tragedians Rage,
They recommend their Labors of the Stage,
Or sing the Parthian, when transfixed he lies,
Wrenching the Roman Javelin from his thighs.

CORN. And why wou'd'st thou these mighty Morsels choose,
Of Words unchaw'd, and fit to choke the Muse?
Let Fustian Poets with their Stuff be gone,
And suck the Mists that hang over Helicon;
When PRogne was Wife to Tereus, King of Thracia: Tereus fell in Love with
Philomela, Sister to Progne; ravished her, and cut out her Tongue: In Revenge
of which Progne killed Itys, her own Son by Tereus; and served him up at a
Feast, to be eaten by his Father.
Progne's or Thyestes and Atre^s were Brothers, both Kings: Atre^s to Revenge
himself of his unnatural Brother, killed the Sons of Thyestes; and invited him
to eat them.
Thyestes's Feast they write;
And, for the mouthing Actor, Verse indite*
Thou neither, like a Bellows, swell'st thy Face,
As if thou were to blow the burning Mass
Of melting Ore; nor can thou strain thy Throat;
Or murmur in an undistinguished Note;
Like rolling Thunder till it breaks the Cloud,
And rattling Nonsense is discharged aloud.
Soft Elocution does thy Style renown;
And the sweet Accents of the peaceful Gown:
Gentle or sharp, according to thy choice,
To laugh at Follies, or to lash at Vice.
Hence draw thy Theme; and to the Stage permit
Raw-head, and Bloody-Bones, and Hands and Feet.
Ragousts for Tereus or Thyestes dressed;
It Is Task enough for thee t'expose a Roman Feast.

PERS. It Is not, indeed, my Talent to engage
In lofty Trifles, or to swell my Page
With Wind and Noise; but freely to impart,
As to a Friend, the Secrets of my heart:
And, in familiar Speech, to let thee know
How much I love thee; and how much I owe.
Knock on my Heart; for thou have skill to find
If it sound solid, or be filled with Wind;
And, through the veil of words, thou view'st the naked Mind.
For this a hundred Voices I desire;
To tell thee what an hundred Tongues would tire;
Yet never could be worthily expressed,
How deeply thou art seated in my Breast.
When first my By the Childish Robe, is meant the Praetexta, or first Gowns
which the Roman Children of Quality wore: These were W^lted with Purple: And on
those Welts were fastened the Bullae; or little Bells; which when they came to
the Age of Puberty, were hung up, and Consecrated to the Lares, or Household
Gods.
Childish Robe resigned the charge;
And left me, unc^^fin'd, to live at large;
When now my golden B^lla (hung on high
To Household Gods) declared me past a Boy;
And my The first Shields which the Roman Youths wore, were white, and without
any Impress, or Device on them; to show they had yet Achieved nothing in the
Wars.
white Shield proclaimed my Liberty:
When, with my wild Companions, I could roll
From Street to Street, and sin without control;
Just at that Age, when Manhood set me free;
I then deposed my self, and left the Reins to thee.
On thy wise Bosom I reposed my Head;
And, by my better Socrates, by the Oracle was declared to be the wisest of
Mankind: He instructed many of the Athenian Young Noblemen, in Morality; and
amongst the rest, Alcibiades.
Socrates, was bred.
Then, thy straight Rule, set Virtue in my sight;
The crooked Line reforming by the right.
My Reason took the bent of thy Command;
Was formed and polished by thy skilful hand:
Long Summer-days thy Precepts I rehearse;
And Winter-nights were short in our converse:
One was our Labor, one was our Repose*
One frugal Supper did our Studies close*
Sure on our Birth some friendly Planet shone:
And, as our Astrologers divide the Heaven into Twelve parts, according to the
Number of the 12 Signs of the Zodiac: The Sign or Constellation which rises in
the East, at the Birth of any Man, is called, the Ascendant: Persius,
therefore, judges that Cornutus and he had the same, or a like Nativity.
Souls, our Horoscope was one:
Whether the The Sign of Gemini.
mounting Twins did Heaven adorn,
Or, with the rising The Sign of Libra.
Balance, we wore born;
Both have the same Impressions from abov^;
And both have Astrologers have an Axiom, that whatsoever Saturn ties, is
loosed by Jupiter: They account Saturn to be a Planet of a Malevolent Nature;
and Jupiter of a Propitious Influence.
Saturn's rage, repelled by love.
(...)
Has given Thee an Ascend(...) ^o're my Mind.

CORN. Nature is ever various in her Frame:
Each has a different Will; and few the same:
The greedy Merchants, led by lucre, run
To the parched Indies, and the rising Sun;
From thence hot Pepper, and rich Drugs they bear,
Bart'ring for Spices, their Italian Ware.
The lazy Glutton safe at home will keep;
Indulge his Sloth, and batten with his Sleep:
One bribes for high Preferments in the State,
A second shakes the Box, and sit up late:
Another shakes the Bed; dissolving there,
Till Knots upon his Gouty Joints appear,
And Chalk is in his crippled Fingers found;
Rots like a Doddard Oak, and piecemeal falls to ground.
Then, his lewd Follies he would late repent:
And his past years, that in a Mist were spent.

PERS. But thou art pale, in nightly Studies, grown:
To make the Zeno was the great Master of the Stoic Philosophy: And Cleanthes
was second to him, in Reputation: Cornutus, who was Master or Tutor to Persius,
was of the same School.
Stoic Institutes thy own:
Thou long with studious Care have tilled our Youth;
And sown our well purged Ears with wholesome Truth:
From thee both old and young, with profit, learn
The bounds of Good and Evil to discern*

CORN. Unhappy he who does this Work adjourn;
And to To Morrow would the s^arch delay;
His lazy Morrow will be like to day.

PERS. But is one day of Ease too much to borrow?

CORN. Yes sure: For Yesterday was once To Morrow.
That Yesterday is gone, and nothing gained;
And all thy fruitless days will thus be drained:
For thou have more To Morrows yet to ask,
And wilt be ever to begin thy Task:
Who, like the hindmost Chariot Wheels, art cursed;
Still to be near; but never to reach the first.
O Freedom! first Delight of Humane Kind!
Not that which Bondmen from their Masters find,
The When a Slave was made free; he had the Privilege of a Roman Born; which
was to have a share in the Donatives or Doles of Bread, etc. which were
Distributed, by the Magistrates amongst the People.
Privilege of Doles; nor yet t'inscribe
Their Names in The Roman People was Distributed into several Tribes: He who
was made free was enrolled into some one of them; and thereupon enjoyed the
common Privileges of a Roman Citizen.
this or the other Roman Tribe:
That false Enfranchisement, with ease is found:
Slaves are The Master, who intended to infranchise a Slave, carried him before
the City Praetor, and turned him round, using these words; I will that this Man
be free.
made Citizens, by turning round.
How, replies one, can any be more free?
Here Is Dama, once a Groom of low degree,
Not worth a Farthing, and a Sot beside;
So true a Rogue, for lying's sake he ly'd
But, with a turn, a Freeman he became;
Now Slaves had only one Name before their Freedom: After it, they were
admitted to a Praenomen, like our Christened Names: so Dama* is now called
Marcus Dama.
Marcus Dama is his Worship's Name*
Good Gods! who would refuse to lend a Sum,
If Wealthy Marcus Surety will become!
Marcus is made a Judge, and for a Proof
Of Certain Truth, He said it, is enough.
A Will is to be proved; put in your Claim;
It Is clear, if At the Proof of a Testament, the Magistrates were to subscribe
their Names; as allowing the Legality of the Will.
Marcus has subscribed his Name*
This is Slaves, when they were set free, had a Cap given them, in Sign of
their Liberty.
true Liberty, as I believe*
What farther can we from our Caps receive,
Than as we please, without Control to live?
Not more to Brutus freed the Roman People from the Tyranny of the Tarquins;
and changed the Form of the Government, into a glorious Commonwealth.
Noble Brutus could b^long.
Hold, says the Stoic, your Assumption's wrong:
I grant true Freedom you have well defined:
But living as you list, and to your mind,
Are loosely tacked* and must be left behind.
What, since the Praetor did my Fetters loose,
And left me freely at my own dispose,
May I not live without Control or Awe,
Excepting still the The Text of the Roman Laws, was written in Red Letters;
which was called the Rubric; Translated here, in more general words, The
Letter of the Law.
Letter of the Law?
Hear me with patience, while thy Mind I free
From those fond Notions of false Liberty:
It Is not the Praetor's Province to bestow
True Freedom; no^ to teach Mankind to know
What to our selves, or to our Friends we owe.
He could not set thee free from Cares and Strise*
Nor give the Reins to a lewd vicious life:
As well he for an Ass a Harp might string;
Which is against the Reason of the thing:
For Reason still is whispering in your Ear,
Where you are sure to fail, the Attempt forbear.
No need of Public Sanctions, this to bind,
Which Nature has implanted in the Mind:
Not to pursue the Work, to which we are not designed.
Unskilled in Hellebore, if thou shou'd'st try,
To mix it, and mistake the Quantity,
The Rules of Physic would against thee cry.
The High-stoo'd Ploughman, should he quit the Land,
To take the Pilot's Rudder in his hand,
Artless of Stars, and of the moving Sand,
The Gods would leave him to the Waves and Wind
And think all Shame was lost in Human-Kind.
Tell me, my Friend, from whence had thou the skill,
So nicely to distinguish Good from Ill?
Or by the sound to judge of Gold and Brass;
What piece is Tinkers Metal, what will pass?
And what thou art to follow, what to fly,
This to condemn, and that to ratify*
When to be Bountiful, and when to Spare,
But never Craving, or oppressed with Care?
The Baits of Gifts, and Money to despise,
And look on Wealth with undesirng Eyes?
When thou can truly call these Virtues thine,
Be Wise and Free, by Heaven's consent and mine*
But thou, who lately of the common strain,
Were one of us, if still thou do retain
The same ill Habits, the same Follies too,
Gloss'd over only with a Saint-like show,
Then I resume the freedom which I gave,
Still thou art bound to Vice, and still a Slave.
Thou can not wag thy Finger, or begin
The least light motion, but it tends to si^*
How Is this? Not wag my Finger, he replies?
No, Friend; nor fuming Gums, nor Sacrifice,
Can ever make a Madman free, or wise.
"Virtue and The Stoics held this Poradox, That any one Vice, or Notorious
Folly, which they called Madness, hindered a Man from being Virtuous: That a
Man was of a piece, without a Mixture; either wholly Vicious, or Good; one
Virtue or Vice, according to them, including all the rest.
Vice are never in one Soul:
"A Man is wholly Wise, or wholly is a Fool.
A heavy Bumpkin, taught with daily care,
Can never dance three steps with a becoming air.

PERS. In spite of this my Freedom still remains.

CORN. Free, what and fettered with so many Chains?
Can thou no other Master understand*
Than The Praetor held a Wand in his hand; with which he softly struck the
Slave on the Head, when he declared him free.
him that freed thee, by the P^aetor's Wand?
Should he, who was thy Lord, command thee now,
With a harsh Voice, and supercilious Brow,
To servile Duties, thou wou'd'st fe^r no more*
The Gallows* and the Whip are out of door.
But if thy Passions lord it in thy Breast,
Art thou not still a Slave, and still oppressed*
Whether alone, or in thy Harlot's Lap,
When thou wou'd'st take a lazy Morning's Nap;
Up, up, says Avarice; thou snor'st again,
Stretchest thy Limbs, and yawn'st, but all in vain;
The Tyrant Lucre no denial takes;
At his Command the unwilling Sluggard wakes:
What must I do, he cri^s? What, says his Lord?
Why rise, make ready, and go straight aboard:
With Fish, from Euxine Seas, thy Vessel freight;
Flax, Castor, Coan Wines, the precious Weight
Of Pepper, and Sabean Incense, take
With thy own hands, from the tired Camel's back:
And with Post-haste thy running Markets make.
Be sur^ to turn the Penny, lie and swear,
Ti^ wholesome sin: But Jove, thou say, will hear?
Swear, Fool, or starve; for the Dilemma's even:
A Tradesman thou! and hope to go to Heaven?
Resolved for Sea* the Slaves thy Baggage pack;
Each saddled* with his Burden on his back:
Nothing retards thy Voyage, now* unless
Thy other Lord forbids; Voluptuousness*
And he may ask thi^ civil Question* Friend*
What do thou make a Shipboord? ^o what end*
Art thou of Bethlem's Noble College free*
Stark, staring mad; that thou wou'd'st tempt the Sea?
Cubb'd in a Cabin, on a Mattress laid,
On a Brown George, with lousy Swobbers fed,
Dead Wine that stinks of the Boracchio, sup
From a fowl Jack, or greasy Maple Cup?
Say, wou'd'st thou bear all this, to raise thy store
From Six in the Hundred, to Six Hundred more?
Indulge; and to thy Genius freely give:
For, not to live at ease, is not to live:
Death stalks behind thee, and each flying Hour
Does some loose Remnant of thy Life devour.
Live, while thou liv'st: For Death will makes us all,
A Name, a nothing but an Old Wife's Tale.
Speak; will thou Avarice, or Pleasure choose
To be thy Lord: Take one, and one refuse.
But both, by turns, the Rule of thee will have:
And thou, betwixt 'em both, wilt be a Slave.
Nor think when once thou have resisted one,
That all thy Marks of Servitude are gone:
The struggling Greyhound gnaws his Leash in vain;
If, when it is broken, still he drags the Chain.
Says This alludes to the Play of Terence, called the Eunuch; which was
excellently imitated of late in English, by Sir Charles Sedley: In the first
Scene of that Comedy, Phoedria was introduced with his Man Pamphilus,
Discoursing, whether he should leave his Mistress Thais, or return to her, now
that she had invited him.
Phaedria to his Man, Believe me, Friend,
To this uneasy Love I Will put an End:
Shall I run out of all? My Friends Disgrace,
And be the first lewd unthrift of my Race?
Shall I the Neighbors Nightly rest invade
At her deaf Doors, with some vile Serenade?
Well have thou freed thy self, his Man replies;
Go, thank the Gods; and offer Sacrifice.
Ah, says the Youth, if we unkindly part,
Will not the Poor fond Creature break her Heart?
Weak Soul! And blindly to Destruction led!
She break her Heart! She Will sooner break your Head.
She knows her Man, and when you Rant and Swear
Can draw you to her, with a single Hair.
But shall I not return? Now, when she Sues?
Shall I my own, and her Desires refuse?
Sir, take your Course: But my Advice is plain:
Once freed, it is Madness to resume your Chain.
Ay; there is the Man, who loosed from Lust and Pelf,
Less to the Praetor owes, than to himself.
But write him down a Slave, who, humbly proud,
With Presents begs Preferments from the Crowd;
That early He who sued for any Office, amongst the Romans was called a
Candidate; because he wore a white Gown: And sometimes Chalked it, to make it
appear whiter. He rose early, and went to the Levees of those who headed the
People: Saluted also the Tribes severally, when they were gathered together, to
choose their Magistrates; and Distributed a Largess amongst them, to engage them
for their Voices: Much resembling our Elections of Parliament Men.
Suppliant who salutes the Tribes,
And sets the Mob to scramble for his Bribes:
That some old Dotard, sitting in the Sun,
On Holydays may tell, that such a Feat was done:
In future times this will be counted rare.
Thy Superstition too may claim a share:
When Flowers are strewn, and Lamps in order placed,
And Windows with Illuminations graced,
On The Commentators are divided, what Herod this was, whom our Author
mentions: Whether Herod the Great, whose Birth^ day might possibly be
Celebrated, after his Death, by the Herodians, a Sect amongst the Jews, who
thought him their Messiah; or Herod Agrippa, living in the Author's time, and
after it. The latter seems the more probable Opinion.
Herod's Day; when sparkling Bouls go round,
And Tunny's Tails in savoury Sauce are drowned,
Thou mutter'st Prayers obscene; nor do refuse
The Fasts and Sabbaths of the curtailed Jews.
Then a cracked The Ancients had a Superstition, contrary to ours, concerning
Egg-shells: They thought that if an Egg-shell were cracked, or a Hole bored in
the bottom of it, they were Subject to the Power of Sorcery: We as vainly,
break the bottom of an Egg-shell, and cross it, when we have eaten the Egg;
lest some Hag should make use of it, in bewitching us, or sailing over the Sea
in it, if it were whole.

The rest of the Priests of Isis, and her one-ey'd, or squinting Priestess, is
more largely treated in the Sixth Satyr of Iuvenal, where the Superstitions of
Women are related.


Eggshell thy sick Fancy frights:
Besides the Childish Fear of Walking Sprights.
Of o'regrown Guelding Priests thou art afraid;
The Timbrel, and the Squintifego Maid
Of Isis, awe thee; lest the Gods, for sin,
Should, with a swelling Dropsy, stuff thy skin:
Unless three Garlic Heads the Curse avert,
Eaten each Morn, devoutly, next thy heart.
Preach this among the brawny Guards, say thou,
And see if they thy Doctrine will allow:
The dull fat Captain, with a Hound's deep throat,
Would bellow out a Laugh, in a Base Note:
And prize a hundred Zeno's, ^ust as much
As a clipped Sixpence, or a Schilling Dutch.

The End of the Fifth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE FIFTH SATYR.
PRogne was Wife to Tereus, King of Thracia: Tereus fell in Love with
Philomela, Sister to Progne; ravished her, and cut out her Tongue: In Revenge
of which Progne killed Itys, her own Son by Tereus; and served him up at a
Feast, to be eaten by his Father.

Thyestes and Atre^s were Brothers, both Kings: Atre^s to Revenge himself of
his unnatural Brother, killed the Sons of Thyestes; and invited him to eat them.

By the Childish Robe, is meant the Praetexta, or first Gowns which the Roman
Children of Quality wore: These were W^lted with Purple: And on those Welts
were fastened the Bullae; or little Bells; which when they came to the Age of
Puberty, were hung up, and Consecrated to the Lares, or Household Gods.

The first Shields which the Roman Youths wore, were white, and without any
Impress, or Device on them; to show they had yet Achieved nothing in the Wars.

Socrates, by the Oracle was declared to be the wisest of Mankind: He
instructed many of the Athenian Young Noblemen, in Morality; and amongst the
rest, Alcibiades.

Astrologers divide the Heaven into Twelve parts, according to the Number of
the 12 Signs of the Zodiac: The Sign or Constellation which rises in the East,
at the Birth of any Man, is called, the Ascendant: Persius, therefore, judges
that Cornutus and he had the same, or a like Nativity.

The Sign of Gemini.

The Sign of Libra.

Astrologers have an Axiom, that whatsoever Saturn ties, is loosed by Jupiter:
They account Saturn to be a Planet of a Malevolent Nature; and Jupiter of a
Propitious Influence.

Zeno was the great Master of the Stoic Philosophy: And Cleanthes was second
to him, in Reputation: Cornutus, who was Master or Tutor to Persius, was of the
same School.

When a Slave was made free; he had the Privilege of a Roman Born; which was
to have a share in the Donatives or Doles of Bread, etc. which were
Distributed, by the Magistrates amongst the People.

The Roman People was Distributed into several Tribes: He who was made free was
enrolled into some one of them; and thereupon enjoyed the common Privileges of
a Roman Citizen.

The Master, who intended to infranchise a Slave, carried him before the City
Praetor, and turned him round, using these words; I will that this Man be free.

Slaves had only one Name before their Freedom: After it, they were admitted to
a Praenomen, like our Christened Names: so Dama* is now called Marcus Dama.

At the Proof of a Testament, the Magistrates were to subscribe their Names; as
allowing the Legality of the Will.

Slaves, when they were set free, had a Cap given them, in Sign of their
Liberty.

Brutus freed the Roman People from the Tyranny of the Tarquins; and changed
the Form of the Government, into a glorious Commonwealth.

The Text of the Roman Laws, was written in Red Letters; which was called the
Rubric; Translated here, in more general words, The Letter of the Law.

The Stoics held this Poradox, That any one Vice, or Notorious Folly, which
they called Madness, hindered a Man from being Virtuous: That a Man was of a
piece, without a Mixture; either wholly Vicious, or Good; one Virtue or Vice,
according to them, including all the rest.

The Praetor held a Wand in his hand; with which he softly struck the Slave on
the Head, when he declared him free.

This alludes to the Play of Terence, called the Eunuch; which was excellently
imitated of late in English, by Sir Charles Sedley: In the first Scene of that
Comedy, Phoedria was introduced with his Man Pamphilus, Discoursing, whether he
should leave his Mistress Thais, or return to her, now that she had invited him.

He who sued for any Office, amongst the Romans was called a Candidate; because
he wore a white Gown: And sometimes Chalked it, to make it appear whiter. He
rose early, and went to the Levees of those who headed the People: Saluted also
the Tribes severally, when they were gathered together, to choose their
Magistrates; and Distributed a Largess amongst them, to engage them for their
Voices: Much resembling our Elections of Parliament Men.

The Commentators are divided, what Herod this was, whom our Author mentions:
Whether Herod the Great, whose Birth^ day might possibly be Celebrated, after
his Death, by the Herodians, a Sect amongst the Jews, who thought him their
Messiah; or Herod Agrippa, living in the Author's time, and after it. The
latter seems the more probable Opinion.

The Ancients had a Superstition, contrary to ours, concerning Egg-shells: They
thought that if an Egg-shell were cracked, or a Hole bored in the bottom of it,
they were Subject to the Power of Sorcery: We as vainly, break the bottom of an
Egg-shell, and cross it, when we have eaten the Egg; lest some Hag should make
use of it, in bewitching us, or sailing over the Sea in it, if it were whole.

The rest of the Priests of Isis, and her one-ey'd, or squinting Priestess, is
more largely treated in the Sixth Satyr of Iuvenal, where the Superstitions of
Women are related.

THE SIXTH SATYR OF Aulus Persius Flaccus.
Translated into ENGLISH VERSE BY Mr. DRYDEN.
ARGUMENT OF THE Sixth Satyr.
This Sixth Satyr Treats an admirable Commonplace of M^ral Philosophy; of the
true Use of Riches. They are certainly intended by the Power who bestows them,
as Instruments and (...) betwixt these, is the Opinion of the Stoics: Which
is, That Riches may be Useful to the leading a Virtuous Life; In case we
rightly understand how to Give according to right Reason; and how to receive
what is given us by others. The (...) Virtue, that Persius writes in this
Satyr: Wherein he not only shows the lawful Use of Riches, but also sharply
inveighs against the Vices which are opposed to it: And especially of th^se,
which consist in the Defects of Giving or Spending; or in the Abuse of Riches.
He writes to Caesius Bassus his Friend, and a Poet also. Enquires first of his
Health and Studies; and afterward informs him of his own; and where he is now
resident. He gives an account of himself, that he is endeavoring by little and
little to wear off his Vices; and particularly, that he is combating Ambition,
and the Desire of Wealth. He dwells upon the latter Vice: And being sensible,
that few Men either Desire, or Use Riches as they ought, he endeavors to
convince them of their Folly; which is the main Design of the whole Satyr.

THE SIXTH SATYR.
To Caesius Bassus, a Lyrick Poet.
HAS Winter caused thee, Friend, to change thy Seat,
And seek, in All the Studious, and particularly the Poets, about the end of
August, began to set themselves on Work: Refraining from Writing, during the
Heats of the Summer. They wrote by Night; and sat up the greatest part of it.
For which Reason the Product of their Studies, was called their Elucubrations;
or Nightly Labors. They who had Country Seats retired to them, while they
Studied: As Persius did to his, which was near the Port of the Moon in Etruria;
and Bassus to his, which was in the Country of the Sabines, nearer Rome.
Sabine Air, a warm retreat?
Say, do thou yet the Roman Harp command?
Do the Strings Answer to thy Noble hand?
Great Master of the Muse, inspired to Sing
The Beauties of the first Created Spring;
The Pedigree of Nature to rehearse;
And sound the Maker's Work, in equal Verse:
Now, This proves Caesius Bassus to have been a Lyrick Poet: It Is said of him,
that by an Eruption of the Flameing Mountain Vesuvius, near which the greatest
part of his Fortune lay, he was Burnt himself, together with all his Writings.
sporting on thy Lyre, the Loves of Youth,
Now Virtuous Age, and venerable Truth:
Expressing justly, Sapho's wanton Art
Of Odes; and Pindar's more Majestic part^
For me, my warmer Constitution wants
More cold, than our Ligurian Winter grants;
And, therefore, to my Native Shores retired,
I view the Coast old Ennius once admired;
Where Clifts on either side their points display;
And, after, opening in an ampler way,
Afford the pleasing Prospect of the Bay.
It Is worth your while, O Romans, to regard
The Port of Luna; says our Learned Bard:
Who, in I call it a Drunken Dream of Ennius; not that my Author in this place
gives me any encouragement for the Epithete; but because Horace, and all who
mention Ennius, say he was an Excessive Drinker of Wine. In a Dream, or Vision,
call you it which you please, he thought it was revealed to him, that the Soul
of Pithagoras was Transmigrated into him: As Pithagoras, before him believed,
that himself had been Euphorbus in the Wars of Troy. Commentators differ in
placing the order of this Soul, and who had it first. I have here given it to
the Peacock; because it looks more according to the Order of Nature, that it
should lodge, in a Creature of an Inferior Species; and so by Gradation rise
to the informing of a Man. And Persius favors me, by saying that Ennius was
the Fifth from the Pithagorean Peacock.
a Drunken Dream, beheld his Soul
The Fifth within the Transmigrating roll:
Which first a Peacock, then Euphorbus was,
Then Homer next, and next Pythagoras;
And last of all the Line did into Enniu^ pass.
Secure and free from Business of the State;
And more secure of what the vulgar Prate,
Here I enjoy my private Thoughts; nor care
What Rots for Sheep the Southern Winds prepare:
Survey the Neighboring Fields, and not repine,
When I behold a larger Crop than mine:
To see a Beggar's Brat in Riches flow,
Adds not a Wrinckle to my even Brow;
Nor, envious at the sight, will I forbear
My plentious Bowl, nor bate my bounteous Cheer.
Nor yet unseal the Dregs of Wine that st^nk
Of Cask; nor in a nasty Flaggon Drink;
Let others stuff their Guts with homely fare;
For Men of different Inclinations are,
Tho born, perhaps, beneath one co^^on Stat.
In minds and manners Twins opposed ^e ^ee
In the same Sign, almost the same Degree:
One, Frugal, on his Birthday fears to dine:
Does at a Penny's co^t in Herbs repine,
And hardly dares to dip his Fingers in the Brine.
Prepared as Priest of his own Rites, to stand,
He sprinkles Pepper with a sparing hand.
His Jolly Brother, opposite in sense,
Laughs at his Thrift; and lavish of Expense,
Quaffs, Crams, and Guttles, in his own defense.
For me, I Will use my own; and take my share;
Yet will not Turbots for my Slaves prepare:
Nor be so nice in taste my self, to know
If what I swallow be a Thrush or no.
Live on thy Annual Income! Spend thy store;
And freely grind, from thy full Threshing-Floor;
Next Harvest promises as much or more.
Thus I would live: But Friendship's holy Band,
And Offices of kindness hold my hand:
My Perhaps this is only a fine Transition of the Poet, to introduce the
business of the Satyr; and not, that any such Accident had happened to one of
the Friends of Persius. But^ however, this is the most Poetical Description of
any in our Author: And since he and Lucan were so great Friends, I know not but
Lucan might help him, in two or three of these Verses, which seem to be written
in his style; certain it is, that besides this Description of a Shipwreck, and
two Lines more, which are at the End of the Second S^tyr, our Poet has written
nothing Elegantly. I will therefore Transcribe both the passages, to justify
my Opinion. The following are the last Verses saving one of the Second Satyr.

Compositum jus, fasque animi; sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctu^ generoso pectus honesto:
The others are those in this present Satyr, which are subjoined.

-- trabe rupta. Bruttia Saxa
Prendit Amicus inops: Remque omnem, surdaque vota
Co^didit Ionio: Iacet ipse in Littore; and ^na
Ingentes de puppe Dei: Iamque obvia Mergis
Costa ratis lacerae. --

Friend is Shipwrecked on the Brutian S^rand.
His Riches in ^h' Ioni^^ Main are lost:
And he himself stands shivering on the Coast;
Where, destitute of help, forlorn, and bare,
He wearies the Deaf Gods with Fruitless Pray'^.
Their Images, the Relics of the W^ack,
Torn from the Naked Poop, are tided back,
By the wild Waves, and ^udely thrown ashore,
Lie impotent: Nor can themselves restore.
The Vessel sticks and shows her opened ^ide,
And on her shatte^'d Mast the Mews in Triumph ride.
From The Latin is, Nunc and de Cespite vivo, frange aliquid. Casaubon only
opposes the Cespes vivus, which word for word, is the living Turf, to the
Harvest or Annual Income: I suppose the Poet rather means, sell a piece of Land
already Sown; and give the Money of it to my Friend who has lo^t all by
Shipwreck: That is, do not stay till thou have Reaped: but help him
immediately, as his Wants require.
thy new hope and from thy growing store,
Now lend Assistance, and relieve the Poor.
Come; do a Noble Act of Charity:
A Pittance of thy Land will set him free.
Let him not bear the Badges of a Wrack
Nor Holiday Translates it a Green Table: The sense is the same; for the Table
was painted of the Sea Color; which the Shipwrecked Person carried on his
back^ expressing his Losses thereby, to excite the Charity of the Spectators.
beg with a blue Table on his back
Nor tell me, that thy frowning Heir will say,
It Is mine that Wealth thou squander'st thus away;
What is it to thee, if he neglect thy Urn;
Or The Bodies of the Rich before they were burnt, were Imbalm'd with Spices;
or rather Spices were put into the Urn, with the Relics of the Ashes. Our
Author here Names Cinnamun^ and Cassia, which Cassia, was sophisticated with
Cherry Gum: And probably enough by the Jews; who Adulterate all things which
they sell. But whether the Ancients were acquainted with the Spices of the
Molucca Islands, Ceylon, and other parts of the Indies; or whether their Pepper
and Cinnamon, etc. were the same with ours, is another Question. As for
Nutmegs, and Mace, it is plain, that the Latin Names of them are Modern.
without Spices lets thy Body burn?
If Odours to thy Ashes he refuse,
Or buys Corrupted Cassia from the Jews?
All these, the wiser Bestius will reply,
Are empty Pomp, and Deadmen's Luxury:
We never knew this vain Expense, before
Th'effeminated Grecians brought it over:
Now Toys and Trifles from their Athens come:
And Dates and Pepper have unsinnew'd Rome.
Our sweating Hinds their Sallads, now, defile;
Infecting homely Herbs with fragrant Oil.
But, to thy Fortune be not thou a Slave;
For what have thou to fear beyond the Grave?
And thou who gap'st for my Estate, draw near;
For I would whisper somewhat in thy Ear.
Hear'st thou the News, my Friend? th'Express is come
With Laurell'd Letters from the Camp to Rome:
Caesar The Caesar here mentioned is Caius Caligula; who affected to Triumph
over the Germans, whom he never Conquered; as he did over the Britains. And
accordingly sent Letters wrapped about with Laurels, to the Senate, and the
Empress Caesonia, whom I here cal^ Queen; though I know that name was not used
amongst the Romans: But the word Empress would not stand in that Verse: For
which Reason I Adjourned it to another. The Dust which was to be swept away
from the Altars, was either the A^hes which were left there; after the last
Sacrifice for Victory; or might perhaps mean the Dust or Ashes, which were left
on the Altars, si^ce some former Defeat of the Romans, by the Germans: After
which overthrow, the Altars had been neglected.
Salutes the Queen and Senate thus;
My Arms are, on the Rhine, Victorious.
From Mourning Altars sweep the Du^t away:
Cease Fasting, and proclaim a Fat Thanksgiving Day.
The Caesonia Wife to Caius Caligula, who afterward, in the Reign of Claudius,
was proposed, but ineffectually, to be Married to him; after he had Executed
Messallina, for Adultery.
goodly Empress, Jollily inclined,
Is, to the welcome Bearer, wondrous kind:
And, setting her Goodhousewifry aside,
Prepares for all the Pageantry of Pride.
The He means only such, as were to pass for Germans, in the Triumph:^ Large
Body'd Men, as they are still; whom the Empress Clothed New, with Course
Garments; for the greater Ostentation of the Victory.
Captive Germans, of Gygantick size,
Are ranck'd in order, and are clad in frize:
The Spoils of Kings, and Conquered Camps we boast,
Their Arms in Trophies hang, on the Triumphal post.
Now, for so many Glorious Actions done,
In Foreign parts, and mighty Battles won;
For Peace at Home, and for the public Wealth
I mean to Crown a Bowl, to Caesar's Health:
Besides, in Gratitude for such high matters*
Know A hundred pair of Gladiators, were beyond the Purse of a private Man to
give: Therefore this is only a threatening to his Heir, that he could do what he
pleased with his Estate.
I have vowed two hundred Gladiators.
Say, would thou hinder me from this Expense?
I Disinherit thee if thou dare take Offense.
Yet more a public Largess I design
Of Oil, and Pyes to make the People dine:
Control me not for fear I change my Will;
And yet methinks I hear thee grumbling still,
You give as if you were the Persian King;
Your Land does no such large Revenues bring.
Well; on my Terms thou will not be my Heir,
If thou car'st little, less shall be my care:
Were none of all my Father's Sisters lest;
Nay were I of my Mother's Kin bereft;
None by an Uncle's, or a Grandam's side,
Yet I could some adopted Heir provide.
I need but take my Journey half a day
From haughty Rome, and at Aricea stay;
Where Fortune throws poor M^^ius in my way.
Him will I choose: What him, of humble Birth,
Obscure, a Foundling, and a Son of Earth?
Obscure! Why prithee what am I? I know^
My Father, Grandsire, and great Grandsire too:
If farther I derive my Pedigree,
I can but guess beyond the fourth degree.
The rest of my forgotten Ancestors,
Were Sons of Earth, like him, or Sons of Whores.
Yet why shou'd'st thou, old covetous Wretch, aspir^
To be my Heir, who might have been my Sire?
In Nature's Race, shou'd'st thou demand of me
My Why shou'd'st thou, who art an Old Fellow, hope to outlive me, and be my
Heir, who am much Younger? He who was first, in the Course, or Race, delivered
the Torch, which he carried, to him who was Second.
Torch, when I in course run after thee?
Think I approach thee, like the God of Gain^
With Wings on Head, and Heels, as Poets ^eign:
Thy moderate Forune from my Gift receive:
Now fairly take it, or as fairly leave:
But take it as it is, and a^k no more:
What, when thou have embezel'd all thy store?
Where^s all thy Father left? It Is true, I grant,
Some I have mortgaged, to supply my want:
The Legacies of Tadius too are flown:
All spent, and on the self same Errand gone.
How little then to my poor share will fall?
Little indeed, but yet that little's all.
Nor tell me, in a dying Father's tone,
Be careful still of the main chance, my Son;
Put out the Principal, in ^rusty hands:
Live of the Use; and never dip thy Lands:
But yet what is left for me? What Is left, my Friend,
Ask that again, and all the rest I spend.
Is not my Fortune at my own Command?
Pour Oil; and pour it with a plenteous hand,
Upon my Sallads, Boy: Shall I be fed
With sodden Nettles, and a singed Sow's head?
It Is Holyday; provide me better Cheer:
It Is Holyday, and shall be round the Year.
Shall I my Household Gods, and Genius, cheat,
To make him rich, who grudges me my Meat?
That he may loll at ease; and pampered high,
When I am laid, may feed on Giblet Pie?
And when his throbbing Lust extends the Vein,
Have wherewithal his Whores to entertain?
Shall I in homespun Cloth be clad, that he
His Paunch in triumph may before him see.
Go Miser, go; for Lucre sell thy Soul;
Truck Wares for Wares, and trudge from Pole to Pole:
That Men may say, when thou art dead and gone,
See what a vast Estate he left his Son!
How large a Family of Brawny Knaves,
Well fed, and fat as Who were Famous, for their Lustiness; and being, as we
call it, in good likeing. They were set on a Stall when they were exposed to
Sale; to show the good Habit of their Body; and made to play Tricks before the
Buyers, to show their Activity and Strength.
Capadocian Slaves!
Increase thy Wealth, and double all thy Store;
It Is done: Now double that, and swell the score;
To every thousand add ten thousand more.
Then say, Chrysippus the Stoic, invented a kind of Argument, consisting of
more than three Propositions; which is called Sorites; or a heap. But as
Chrysippus could never bring his Propositions to a certain stint: So neither
can a Covetous Man, bring his Craving Desires to any certain Measure of Riches,
beyond which, he could not wish for any more.
Chrysippus, thou who wou'd'st confine
Thy Heap, where I shall put an end to mine.
The End of the Sixth Satyr.
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE SIXTH SATYR.
AND seek, in Sabine Air, etc. All the Studious, and particularly the Poets,
about the end of August, began to set themselves on Work: Refraining from
Writing, during the Heats of the Summer. They wrote by Night; and sat up the
greatest part of it. For which Reason the Product of their Studies, was called
their Elucubrations; or Nightly Labors. They who had Country Seats retired to
them, while they Studied: As Persius did to his, which was near the Port of the
Moon in Etruria; and Bassus to his, which was in the Country of the Sabines,
nearer Rome.

Now sporting on thy Lyre, etc. This proves Caesius Bassus to have been a
Lyrick Poet: It Is said of him, that by an Eruption of the Flameing Mountain
Vesuvius, near which the greatest part of his Fortune lay, he was Burnt
himself, together with all his Writings.

Who, in a Drunken Dream, etc. I call it a Drunken Dream of Ennius; not that my
Author in this place gives me any encouragement for the Epithete; but because
Horace, and all who mention Ennius, say he was an Excessive Drinker of Wine. In
a Dream, or Vision, call you it which you please, he thought it was revealed to
him, that the Soul of Pithagoras was Transmigrated into him: As Pithagoras,
before him believed, that himself had been Euphorbus in the Wars of Troy.
Commentators differ in placing the order of this Soul, and who had it first. I
have here given it to the Peacock; because it looks more according to the Order
of Nature, that it should lodge, in a Creature of an Inferior Species; and so
by Gradation rise to the informing of a Man. And Persius favors me, by saying
that Ennius was the Fifth from the Pithagorean Peacock.

My Friend is Shipwrecked on, etc. Perhaps this is only a fine Transition of
the Poet, to introduce the business of the Satyr; and not, that any such
Accident had happened to one of the Friends of Persius. But, however, this is
the most Poetical Description of any in our Author: And since he and Lucan were
so great Friends, I know not but Lucan might help him, in two or three of these
Verses, which seem to be written in his style; certain it is, that besides this
Description of a Shipwreck, and two Lines more, which are at the End of the
Second Satyr, our Poet has written nothing Elegantly. I will therefore
Transcribe both the passages, to justify my Opinion. The following are the
last Verses saving one of the Second Satyr. The others are those in this
present Satyr, which are subjoined. -- trabe rupta. Bruttia Saxa
Prendit Amicus inops: Remque omnem, surdaque vota
Co^didit Ionio: Iacet ipse in Littore; and ^na
Ingentes de puppe Dei: Iamque obvia Mergis
Costa ratis lacerae. --


From thy new hope, etc. The Latin is, Nunc and de Cespite vivo, frange
aliquid. Casaubon only opposes the Cespes vivus, which word for word, is the
living Turf, to the Harvest or Annual Income: I suppose the Poet rather means,
sell a piece of Land already Sown; and give the Money of it to my Friend who
has lo^t all by Shipwreck: That is, do not stay till thou have Reaped: but help
him immediately, as his Wants require.

Not Beg with a Blue Table, etc. Holiday Translates it a Green Table: The sense
is the same; for the Table was painted of the Sea Color; which the Shipwrecked
Person carried on his back^ expressing his Losses thereby, to excite the
Charity of the Spectators.

Or without Spices, etc. The Bodies of the Rich before they were burnt, were
Imbalm'd with Spices; or rather Spices were put into the Urn, with the Relics
of the Ashes. Our Author here Names Cinnamun^ and Cassia, which Cassia, was
sophisticated with Cherry Gum: And probably enough by the Jews; who Adulterate
all things which they sell. But whether the Ancients were acquainted with the
Spices of the Molucca Islands, Ceylon, and other parts of the Indies; or
whether their Pepper and Cinnamon, etc. were the same with ours, is another
Question. As for Nutmegs, and Mace, it is plain, that the Latin Names of them
are Modern.

Caesar Salutes, etc. The Caesar here mentioned is Caius Caligula; who affected
to Triumph over the Germans, whom he never Conquered; as he did over the
Britains. And accordingly sent Letters wrapped about with Laurels, to the Senate,
and the Empress Caesonia, whom I here cal^ Queen; though I know that name was
not used amongst the Romans: But the word Empress would not stand in that
Verse: For which Reason I Adjourned it to another. The Dust which was to be
swept away from the Altars, was either the A^hes which were left there; after
the last Sacrifice for Victory; or might perhaps mean the Dust or Ashes, which
were left on the Altars, si^ce some former Defeat of the Romans, by the
Germans: After which overthrow, the Altars had been neglected.

Caesonia Wife to Caius Caligula, who afterward, in the Reign of Claudius, was
proposed, but ineffectually, to be Married to him; after he had Executed
Messallina, for Adultery.

The Captive Germans, etc. He means only such, as were to pass for Germans, in
the Triumph:^ Large Body'd Men, as they are still; whom the Empress Clothed
New, with Course Garments; for the greater Ostentation of the Victory.

Know, I have vowed Two Hundred Gladiators. A hundred pair of Gladiators, were
beyond the Purse of a private Man to give: Therefore this is only a threatening
to his Heir, that he could do what he pleased with his Estate.

Shou'd'st thou demand of me, my Torch, etc. Why shou'd'st thou, who art an Old
Fellow, hope to outlive me, and be my Heir, who am much Younger? He who was
first, in the Course, or Race, delivered the Torch, which he carried, to him
who was Second.

Well Fed, and Fat as Cappadocian Slaves. Who were Famous, for their Lustiness;
and being, as we call it, in good likeing. They were set on a Stall when they
were exposed to Sale; to show the good Habit of their Body; and made to play
Tricks before the Buyers, to show their Activity and Strength.

Then say, Chrysippus, etc. Chrysippus the Stoic, invented a kind of Argument,
consisting of more than three Propositions; which is called Sorites; or a heap.
But as Chrysippus could never bring his Propositions to a certain stint: So
neither can a Covetous Man, bring his Craving Desires to any certain Measure of
Riches, beyond which, he could not wish for any more.


