J2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King,
A DECLARATION.
JAMES R.

AS We cannot Consider this Invasion of Our Kingdoms by the Prince of Orange
without Horror, for so Unchristian and Unnatural an Undertaking in a Person so
nearly Related to Us; So it is a Matter of the greatest Trouble and Concern to
Us, to reflect upon the many Mischiefs and Calamities which an Army of
Foreigners and Rebels must unavoidably bring upon Our People. It is but too
evident by a late Declaration Published by him, That notwithstanding the many
specious and plansible Pretenses it carries, his Designs in the bottom do tend
to nothing less than an Absolute Usurping of Our Crown and Royal Authority, as
may fully appear by his assumming to himself in the said Declaration the Reg^^
Style, requiring the Peers of the Realm, both Spiritual and Temporal, and all
other Persons of all Degrees, to obey and assist him in the Execution of his
Designs; a Prerogative Inseparable from the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And
for a more Undeniable Proof of his Immoderate Ambition, and which nothing can
satisfy but the Immediate Possession of the Crown it self, he calls in
Question the Legitimacy of the Prince of Wales Our Son, and Heir Apparent,
though by the Providence of God, there were present at his Birth so many
Witnesses of Unquestionable Credit, as if it seemed to have been the particular
Care of Heaven, on purpose to disappoint so Wicked and Unparalleled an Attempt.

And in Order to the effecting of his Ambitious Designs, he seems desirous in
the Close of his Declaration, to submit all to the Determination of a Free
Parliament, hoping thereby to Ingratiate himself with Our People, though
nothing is more Evident, than that a Parliament cannot be Free, so long as
there is an Army of Foreigners in the Heart of Our Kingdoms; So that in truth
he himself is the sole Obstructor of such a Free Parliament: We being fully
Resolved, as We have already Declared, so soon as by the Blessing of God, Our
Kingdoms shall be delivered from this Invasion, to call a Parliament, which can
no longer be liable to the least Objection of not being freely Chosen, since We
have actually Restored all the Buroughs and Corporations of this Our Kingdom,
to their Ancient Rights and Privileges, and in which We shall be ready not
only to Receive and Redress all the Just Complaints and Grievances of Our Good
Subjects, but also to Repeat and Confirm the Assurances We have already given
to them, in Our several Declarations of Our Resolution, by Gods Blessing, to
Maintain them in their Religion, their Liberties and Properties, and all other
their Just Rights and Privileges whatsoever. Upon these Considerations, and
the Obligations of their Duty and Natural Allegiance, We can no ways doubt, but
that all Our Faithful and Loving Subjects, will readily and heartily concur and
join with Us, in the Entire Suppression and Repelling of those Our Enemies and
Rebellious Subjects, who have so Injuriously and Disloyally Invaded and
Disturbed the Peace and Tranquillity of these Our Kingdoms.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 6th day of November, 1688. In the Fourth
Year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1688.


