A JUSTIFICATION OF THE DIRECTORS OF THE Netherlands East India Company.

As it was delivered over unto the High and Mighty Lords the States General of
the United Provinces, the 22d. of July, 1686.

Upon the Subject and Complaint of Mr. Skeleton, Envoy Extraordinary from the
King of Great Britain, touching the Affair of Bantam, and other Controversies
at Macassar, and on the Coast of Mallabar and at Gamron, in the Gulf of Persia.

Likewise a JUSTIFICATION in Answer to the several Memorials lately given unto
the States General by the Marquess of Albeville, touching Meslepatam and other
Places in the Indies.

Translated out of Dutch by a good Friend, for the Satisfaction of all such as
are Impartial Judges of the Matters now in dispute between the two Companies.

Printed at LONDON, in the Year 1687.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Tidmarsh, near the Royal Exchange, 1688.

TO THE HIGH and MIGHTY LORDS THE STATES GENERAL OF THE UNITED NETHERLANDS.
High and Mighty Lords,
IN obedience to your Highnesses Letter addressed the 30th. May, 1686. unto the
Praesidial Chamber of the East India Company at Amsterdam, being pleased to
command the said Company in Relation to your Highnesses Resolution of the same
Date, to transmit with the very first an Information unto a certain Memorial
presented by Mr. Skeleton, Envoy Extraordinary of his Royal Majesty of Great
Britain, unto your Highnesses the second of the said Month, touching the
Business of Bantam; and moreover containing Complaints of what passed in the
East Indies at Gamron, Mallabar, and Macassar, with demand of Reparation.
Hereupon the Regents (or Directors) of the said Compan^ of this Nation, have,
with all due Respect, this to say: First, Concerning the first Point,
specifying the Business of Bantam, That although your Puissant Highnesses may
very well remember all what has happened and passed since the Month of May 1683,
when first those Clamours and heavy Complaints were made by Mr. C^udlie,
Extraordinary Envoy, in the Assembly o^ your Puissant Highnesses, and thereupon
soon after more fully dilated and deduced by Sir John Chardin, both viv^^voce
and in Writing. Nevertheless, assuring our selves that it will not be
unacceptable to your Puissant Highnesses, that the said Memorial be again
somewhat afresh reiterated, the aforesaid Regents of the East India Netherlands
Company will, with Permission of your Puissant Highnesses, make a short
Recital; First, of what in the beginning was done here in Holland by Conference
and Treaties, and also afterward continued, and further Progress thereof made
in England by the Lord Ambassador Citters, according to the Order given him by
your Puissant Highnesses; and consequently of the Proceedings held in England
by Committees on both sides, and what further was acted in the same; and so
come to the Principal Matter, to demonstrate as briefly as possibly may be, how
unreasonable, and wholly ungrounded those Complaints are, which in the
beginning were so clamorous: and then will fully justify the Government of
Batavia in their Managements and Proceedings in those Affairs.

What concerns the first, Mr. Chudlie, Extraordinary Envoy, by his Memorial of
the 25th. of May of the aforesaid Year 1683, complained to your Puissant
Highnesses, that the Government of Batavia had in a manner altogether
extraordinary outragiously dealt^ with the English East India Company, and by
main force driven them out of their ancient Place of Residence at Bantam; and
that in so strange a manner, that not any one Example (a thing rather to be
buried in silence, than related) of the like nature can be produced: And
therefore requiring that the said Netherlandish Company should be obliged to
draw back their Troops out of Bantam, re-establishing the English there again,
and to make Reparation of the Losses by them sustained. But Sir John Chardin
beforementioned, who by the foresaid English East India Company was s^nt hither
in Commission, did somewhat mitigate these Complaints, apparently, because they
were so horrible Extravagant: And instead of accusing the Government of
Batavia, as if they had driven the English out of Bantam, did content himself
to say, that it happened through the Suggestion and Counsel of Major St.
Martin, who commanded the Netherlandish Troops at Bantam in Chief, and that it
was he that d^sposed the King to put forth the English out of Ban^^^: And
although all he affirmed was without any Proof, but only grounded on a
Conjecture; yet that which is to be wondered at, is, that he would form a
Public Memorial on so slight and weak Grounds.

And although the Bewinthebbers were at that time infurnished with such
Elucidation of Matters as is requisite, not yet having then any of their Ships
re^^^ed out of India, and what they knew in the Business, was by Letters only
sent in English Ships from England, where the said Letters were held up some
(...), the Seals broken and opened, and then afterward ^^^nded to the
Correspondent of the Netherlandish Company at London; notwithstanding they
omitted not, according to the knowledge they had attained, to give your
Highnesses Informations and Answers to their Complaints. Whereupon your
Puissant Highnesses having given an Answer to the said Chudlie and Chardin
(unto which the English Company in some passages of their Writing do appeal)
soon after with the good liking of your Puissant Highnesses, a Treaty began
with the forenamed Chardin and the Netherlandish Company; and the Business was
so far advanced, that on both sides a final Agreement was assuredly expected,
whereas on a sudden Mr. Chudlie and Sir John Chardin pretending to have Command
and Order from their King, to put a stop to the Business, the aforesaid
Treaties here was unexpectedly broken off* however was with Consent of your
Puissant Highnesses, who desired nothing more than to compose and conclude, if
possible, this matter in a Friendly way, continued in England; whereunto the
Lord Ambassador Citters was furnished with full Order and Power both from your
Puissant Highnesses, as also from the Company here: But hereupon the English
hightning their Demands, and as appeared afterward even in their Reply, of
which shall be spoken hereafter, they avowed to have other Designs, intending
to re-establish themselves at Bantam; unto which end in the latter part of the
Year 1683, they prepared a great Fleet well manned, to effect the same; but
this their Design, as themselves affirm, and complain that they might not put
it in Execution, as being hindered by the now deceased King, of happy Memory;
Hereupon this Treaty was stopped, and no further Progress made therein, until at
length it pleased his said Majesty to make way for the prosecuting of the
Agreement prescribed Anno 1674, between his Majesty and this State; to wit,
That the Differences should be determined and composed by Committees on both
sides, who to that end, according to the aforesaid Convention, were to assemble
together at London: The which being also approved by your Puissant Highnesses,
there was erected a Tribunal Court, consisting of Eight Committees, Four on
each part; before whom, after that the Parties on both sides had diverse times
appeared about the Praeliminaries and Cases incident, it was thought meet, that
all things should be handled in Writing, and the State of the Case so written,
to be made by Demand, Answer, Reply, and Duplick (or double Reply) even to a
Triplick and Quadruplick: And besides all this, there were delivered up such
pieces Probatory, as might serve to fortify and maintain the Case on the one
hand, with the Confutation of the same on the other hand; they of the
Netherlandish Company also making their Demand against the Demand of the
English; and delivering the same over by way of Reconvention or contrary
Demand, for the fraighting of four Ships, wherewith the Netherlandish Company,
upon the earnest Request of the English Company, had accommodated them,
amounting to thirteen thousand nine hundred pounds Sterling: Insomuch that the
aforesaid Pieces being delivered to the said Committees to do Right therein,
the English Commissaries in their Vote declared, that it was their Opinion and
Sentence, that instead of all what was demanded by the English East-Indie
Company (to wit, not only the recalling of the Netherlandish Troops out of
Bantam, and the Territories thereof, but moreover and above, to deliver up the
Castle and City of Bantam.) The Netherlandish Company was only bound to
re-establish the said English Company in Bantam, so, and in such wise, as was
demanded by Monsieur Chardin in the Hague, and to settle all things in state as
it was before the War; and the Damages and Reconvention (or contrary Demands)
should be reserved.

But the Committees of this State delivering in their Advice, every one of them
in order did understand* and declare, that forasmuch as the decision of the
Case, which must be judicially determined, did depend upon the Verity of Fact,
which the English Company had charged the Netherlandish Company with, and in
special that the said English Company were by them driven out of Bantam, of
which they could not produce the least Proof; that therefore the said English
Company ought to have their Demand and Conclusion made, and taken up against
the Netherlandish Company; denied them; and the said English Company to be
condemned to satisfy the Netherlandish Company for the Fraighting of the four
Ships which they demand by reconvention: By which, because of the cessation of
Voices, the Case being fallen into the Terms which they were in according to
the convention of Agreement of the Year 1673-74, must come into the hands of an
Arbitrator or Compromissarius, to the choosing of whom by the aforesaid
Agreement, the time of a Mouth was prescribed. But the said Committees for the
Decision on both sides, not agreeing; for although the English Company were
Plantiff in Convention, yet the English Commissaries did not propose a
Super-Arbitrator: so hereby the whole Case, according to an Act passed and
subscribed on both sides, was left in the Hands of his said Majesty and your
Highnesses, to be determined by you, according to the Contents of the aforesaid
Agreement. And this is the Reason why the said Mr. Skeleton, Envoy
Extraordinary, made the aforesaid Memorial and Address to your Puissant
Highnesses, to do Justice in the Case to the Subjects of England. Whereupon it
must needs fall under Examination, whether the Complaints which the English
Company have, and still do make, of the Business happened at Bantam, be
grounded on such solid Reasons, as to oblige the Netherlandish Company so to
Re-settle them at Bantam, as they were before the War; (for more than this was
before denied to be due to them, by the English Commissaries themselves) and
that with reparation of Damages and Interests, which they pretend to have
sustained by the Netherlands Company. Now to make this Case to appear more
^early, forasmuch as since it was first presented to your Puissant Highnesses
by Mr. Chudlie Extraordinary Envoy, and afterward more amply pressed by Sir
John C^ardin, is now wholly altered, and quite of another Face: As also that
the Netherlandish Company has recovered further Proofs for the confutation of
what the English Company did bring in, and maintain; therefore it will be
necessary to dive somewhat deeper into the matter.

The Case is this, Sultan Agon, formerly King of ^^tam, and Father of the
present King now reigning, having Resolutions, both in respect of his Age; and
other Considerations, to disinvest himself of the Government, and lead a still
and private Life, he made over his Kingdom to his Eldest Son, retiring himself
to T^^rtiassa, a place of Pleasure, about six Miles from Ba^tam, and seated a
Mile from the Sea, there to spend the Residue of his Days, free from Public
Affairs. His Son seated on the Throne, and having the Government of the Kingdom
in his hands, forthwith s^nt Ambassadors to Batavia (accompanied for the
further Splendour, with a Train of about 300 persons) to give notice to the
Government there, of his Access to the Crown; and also to Renew their Ancient
Alliance: Sending also Ambassadors to England, where they were in such manner
received, as that those of the East India Company, by their Letters to the said
King of Bantam in July 1682, written about two Years after the Young King was
come unto the Crown, say, That such Honor was given to his Ambassadors, as if
they had been sent from the Greatest King or Potentate of the World: Adding in
the said Letter, that they did with Joy understand, that God Almighty had
brought, and invested him on the Throne of his Kingdom of Sourosoan, that is,
the Kingdom of Bantam, with the good Will of his Father.

And furthermore, His Majesty of Great Britain sent away the said Ambassadors
with Presents to the Young King their Master, accompanied with an Honorable
Letter to him; all which in the Process is produced, and in which he is styled
the Famous and Illustrious Sultan Abdul Cahar Aba Nasar, King and Lord of the
said Kingdom of Sourosoan, that is, of Bantam: Adding moreover, That his
Majesty received the aforesaid Ambassadors with all due Respect, according to
their Character, and with entire Affection, as coming from a Prince, whose
Person and Amity his Majesty declared to have in very high Esteem, and unto
whom he judged it necessary to send over his Agent or Envoy, furnished with
power from his Majesty, and order from the English Company, for to make a
stricter League with the King of Bantam; which Testimony and Proffer of
Alliance was yet further reiterated in another Letter, writ by the aforesaid
English Company from London the 17th. July 1682, also produced in the Process.
By all which then it appears undeniably unto all that are Impartial, that the
present King now ruling, was acknowledged both by the King of Great Britain,
and by the English Company, as well in England, as in India, for the Lawful
Lord and King of the whole Kingdom of Bantam, and as the Successor of his
Father.

But forasmuch as the present King, in the direction of the Affairs of the
Kingdom, did not, as it seems, answer the Expectation of his Father, nor
satisfy the Humor of many of his Subjects, there arose a heavy Civil War in
the Kingdom, in which the Malcontended intended to cast off the Yoke from their
Neck, as they termed it, after they had also drawn the Old King to their Party:
who thereupon strengthened himself in Turtiassa (as also the King now reigning
did at Bantam.) At length by force of Arms they made themselves Masters of
Bantam, and besieged the Young King in his Castle into which he was retired;
intending to bereave him both of his Throne and Life, and to set up a Younger
Brother in his Place: Whereupon ^^is King, apprehending no other way of
Deliverance, is having most of the Great Ones of his Kingdom ^^^ated against
him, and the Commonalty also his Enemies, thought it Expedient for him to make
known to the General of the Council of the Netherlandish Company at Batavia,
his Miserable State, and that he not only was to expect the loss of the Crown,
but also a most Cruel Death: The which he signified in most lamentable wise,
imploring their Assistance: But they not judging it convenient in a case of
such Importance to intrude themselves too unadvisedly, did, before they
determined any thing in the least about it, conclude to interpose their
Mediation betwixt Father and Son, and to that end to send Ambassadors with
Letters tending to that Purpose: But the Father in a most disdainful manner
rejecting the same, without vouchsafing to return any Answer at all to the
Government of Batavia, or their Committees, the said Government did at last
resolve, seeing the Condition of the Son tending to Ruin, as being forsaken
almost by all, to assist him against the Rebels, and if possible, to deliver
him out of the miserable State into which he was brought; which also they did
with such Success, that notwithstanding the strong Opposition of the Enemy, we
landed our Forces, raised the Siege of the Castle in which the King was, and
set him again upon his Throne; who thereupon, both to demonstrate how greatly
he was offended with the English, who had assisted his Enemies, as also to
provide for his own Security for the Future, did, without any Instigation of
the Netherlandish Company, command them to leave his Country, and to depart
elsewhere with their Goods. This then being a True Narration of what passed in
these Affairs, these Considerable Things do present themselves to Consideration.

First, That the Old King having made over his Kingdom to his Eldest Son, he
thereby became Lawful King by his Father's Transport, and was acknowledged so
to be by the King of Great Britain, and by them of the English East-Indie
Company.

Secondly, That he thereby being Lawful King, his Subjects in taking up Arms
against him, were Rebels.

Thirdly, That according to the Law of Nature and of Nations, it is not only
permitted, to be Assistant unto a King that is oppressed by his Subjects, but
that such Assistance is approveable, and a Work of Charity and Love.

Fourthly, That it is contrary to the Rule of Justice, to ascribe the evil
Consequences of a Lawful and Worthy Act, unto him that is the Author of the
said Act, and no^ of the Consequences.

Fifthly, That it is altogether against Reason, to impute the Chasing of the
English out of Bantam, unto them of the Government of Batavia, and to their
Auxiliary Forces; because it is manifest, that the Departure of the English out
of Bantam was not a Necessary, but an Accidental Consequence; the King not
causing them to depart because he was Victorious (for he had suffered them to
live there from the time he came to the Crown until the War, to wit, during the
two years of his Reign) but only because he was certain they had assisted his
Rebels, besides many other Suspicions he might justly have taken up against
them.

But against this, they of the English Company do allege, and depose for a
real Truth, That they of Batavia had raised and fomented the Quarrels between
the Old and the Young King of Bantam.

That two years before the War began, they had had secret Negotiation with
Pangeran Diepa Panerat, one of the Principal Ministers of the Young King, to
bring about this their Design.

That they afterward, having got this King into their Snares, and most
perfidiously brought him under their Yoke, forthwith forced him to drive out
the English.

And to make the Ministers of the Netherlandish Company yet the more suspected
and stinking to all the World, they undertook in the beginning of the Year
1683, to represent unto the King of Great Britain that the foresaid Major St.
Martin, who commanded over the Forces of the Netherlandish Company at Bant^^ in
chief, had committed very many Enormities against the Factors, People, and the
Effects of the English Company at Bantam; so far, that they dispossessed, and
drove them out of their place of Residence: But instead that the English
Company ought to have proved the Facts which are Essential to the Thing, in
case they herein aimed to Triumph, they do not in the whole product which they
made in the Process thereof, so much as allege the least appearance, either
directly or indirectly, no, not so much as consequentially might serve for the
verifying of the Enormities of such Facts.

And although the Netherlandish Company might stand upon the Negative, which is
not necessary, nay, many times possible to be proved, save only indirectly (for
no man can in a direct manner prove that which is not) nevertheless to manifest
clearly that they of the Government of Batavia are altogether blameless, let us
only consider the moral Impossibility of the aforesaid Fact, viz. That the
Governors of Batavia should have raised and fomented the Questions and
Differences between the Father and the Son; as also the notorious Falsehood of
the second Fact, namely, That the said Government should have forced the King
to cause the English to depart out of Bantam.

What concerns the first, It Is known to the World, that for a long time there
had been no good Intelligence between the Old King, and the Government of
Batavia; no, not so much as to the least Correspondence: For the latter finding
themselves much affronted and injured, insomuch that at last they took up Arms
against each other, the War not ending, until the Son came to the Crown: so
that they could not stir up the Son against the Father, much less foment their
Quarrel.

And what Folly would it have been for them of Batavia, to animate the Father
to War against the Son, forasmuch as they lived with the Son in Amity, and as
Good Neighbors, not having any Reason in the least to complain of his
Government and Conduct toward them; whereas on the contrary, if the Father had
got the upper hand, they should have been in a far worse Condition, and
attracted a new Enemy against themselves.

And that they should have stirred up the Son against the Father, and
encouraged him to War, cannot be imagined by any that are in their right
Senses; partly because thereby they could not expect any Profit or Advantage;
or if they had, it would have been mixed ^ith an uncertainty as to the Event.
And again, the Son would then have endeavored to have been afore^^d, and the
first Aggressor; whereas on the con^^^y, it was the Father, who thereby got so
great Advantage over the Son, burning and ruinating the City, and keeping his
said Son besieged in his own (...): So that, had it not been for the
Intervention ^^d Succors of them of Batavia, the Father certain^^ would have
triumphed over the Son. And put (...) case the War had ended according to the
intention ^^d advantage of the Son, what more could he have expected thereby,
who already sat on the Throne, ^^d could be no greater than he was? Would the
Son (...) listened to such Counsel, and engaged in a War ^^^inst his Father,
whose Interest consisted in Govern^^g his Kingdom in Peace? And does it not
hence ^^llow, that all these Troubles did arise from them (...) breathed after
nothing more than Change? who (...) being able or willing to submit to the
Government of the Young King, revolted against him, with ^^^ention to thrust
him from his Throne, and to set (...) another more suitable to their liking and
humor? Which their Design also so far succeeded, that the Young King was
brought to the point of losing his Crown and Life.

Could the Government of Bantam, at the begin^ng have with any reason imagined,
that the Young ^ing should finally have got the upper hand over his Enemies and
Rebels? Or that the English should have ^^termedled with that War, and would
have assisted the Rebels against their own Prince, whom themselves owned as
Lawful King (of which hereafter shall be more largely spoken) and he thereupon
should have thrust the English out of his Kingdom?

Would they have stirred up the Son against the Father, after that the Son by
so many lamentable Letters had implored their Assistance, and let it come to
that Extremity, that in case they had delayed but one day longer, he must have
given himself over t^ his Rebels, and undergone a cruel Death?

In case the Rebels (before it was delivered by the Netherlandish Forces) had
taken the Castle, and murdered the King, could they have hindered, that either
the Old King, or one of his Younger Sons should have obtained the Crown, and so
managed the Affair^ of his Kingdom, as to take Vengeance of them, tha^ had
opposed themselves against his Designs?

And if so be that in cases of such nature, place may be given to Conjectures
and Presumptions, is it no^^ most probable, that the English themselves have
done that very thing, which they falsely impute to the Netherlandish Company?

They publish for a certain Truth, That the Young King, while the Father as yet
governed the Kingdom assassinated their Agent and Commises; and that h^ always
carried himself as an Enemy to them, wherea^ on the contrary, the Government of
the Father wa^ most Grateful unto them.

Does it then seem to be such an ungrounded Presumption, that they (partly to
revenge themselves o^ that Massacre, of which the King of Great Britain i^ his
Letter to the now King of Bantam, declares him^ self so sensible) and partly
that it was much for their Interest, that the Son might be pulled down from the
Throne, and put to death, and that the Father o^ another Brother were set up;
they should labor to kindle the Fire and foment this War? Especially hereunto
concurring, that they were so soon ready to join their Forces to the Assistance
of the Father, without which the Father could not have obtained those
Advantages, nor the Son be brought to such a Labyrinth.

Also it will clearly appear, that all the Mischief which is come to the
English Company in this business is wholly from the bad Management of Affairs
by their own Men and Ministers in Bantam.

For the King of Great Britain, and the English Company, acknowledge the Young
King for the alone King and Sovereign.

But their Ministers declare him to be an Usurper, and a Rebel of the Father.

Their Masters endeavor to establish a settled Peace with him.

They set themselves formally against him as their Enemy.

Their Masters endeavor to Oblige the Son by all means possible, and send
great quantity of all manner of Ammunition of War to him.

They do not only disoblige him in all things, but even assist his Enemies with
the Provision sent to his Assistance.

Their Masters in their forementioned Letter, pray that God the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, would bless and prosper him.

They endeavor to bereave him of his Throne, and make him the most miserable
of men.

So that having by these Unrighteous Courses brought upon themselves to be
driven out of Bantam, they now know not how to excuse the Matter.

And being disappointed in their Design, as fallen into the Pit they dug for
others, they are at their Wits End, and know not what to do; some body must be
found out upon whom to lay the Blame, and the next that comes to hand is the
Netherlandish Company, Hic mihi turbat aquas.

But had they sat still, or had (as they would make the World believe) kept
themselves Neutral, according to the Will and Footsteps of their Masters; or
had they instead of helping the Old, assisted the Young King, these
difficulties nor questions had never happened.

And how can the English, with any show of reason, dispute or call in question
the Sovereignty of the Young King; seeing it is a known case, that the sending
and admitting of Ambassadors and Agents, together with the making of Treaties
and Alliances, are true Tokens of a Sovereign Power; and therefore all such as
admit and receive Ambassies, do thereby acknowledge the Sovereignty of them that
send the same: which is also further owned by proffers of Alliances and
Leagues, which cannot be erected but between Sovereigns.

Now as to the Second Fact: to wit, That after the Netherlandish Company had
got the Young King into their Snares, and perfidiously brought him under their
Yoke, they then should have forced him to the Expulsion of the English: This we
have before manifested to be a false Fiction; For first, They ought not in a
case of so great weight and tendency, to make such odious and malicious
Positions, except they had clear and convincing Proofs at hand. There is not
any one of the Witnesses, which the English Company have produced, that
mentions a Word thereof, or that speaks of Snares into which they of Batavia
caused the Young King to fall, or of any Yoke under which, against all
fidelity, they had brought him.

It is true, they produce in the Process one Mr. Wait, speaking of the
departure of the English by Order of the King; who relates only of an hard
Contest between the said King and Major Sir Martin, before that Order of
causing them to depart, could be obtained from him: But being, says he,
altogether under the Power of the Hollanders, he was necessitated thereunto.
But besides what might be alleged to weaken this Assertion, he confesses,
That what he witnesses thereof, is not of his own Knowledge, but that he
believes it to be True upon the Credit of Persons of Worth; which of it self
is enough to reject the same: As also it is very observable what on this
Subject the foresaid Sir Martin, and others with him, do declare; to wit, That
the Contest was not to dispose the King to the Ejection of the English, but to
turn away the Wrath and Indignation of the King (which because of their
Assistance of his Father and the Rebels, he had taken up against them) and
thereby to deliver them from the loss of all their Goods, yea Life it self, as
out of Revenge he had determined against them: Which also was so taken and
acknowledged by the English Company at Bantam, when by their Agent they
returned thanks unto the Ministers of the Netherlandish Company for their
Protection. But suppose the King had not been so incensed against them, as has
been said; and that he had not had design at all to be avenged on them, yet the
mere consideration of his Security might have moved him to their Ejection, as
being assured they assisted his Rebels; and in apprehension, that they, as well
versed in Warlike Affairs, might from England, or elsewhere, re-enforce
themselves with Ships and Soldiers; besides the perilous Neighborhood of
their Warehouse to his Castle, his Father lying round about Bantam with his
Army, and keeping it yet for some Months besieged; and he as yet by his
Auxiliary Forces having only the Sea open, might, if he were not very
circumspect, be again suddenly assaulted; or at least, the English remaining in
Bantam, by spying all opportunities, make Discoveries to the Enemies; so as in
the way of Providence, it was requisite for him to do what he did.

If the Letters (brought in the Process) be reviewed, it will appear, whether
it be true, as is imputed to them; that they of their own motion did send
Succors to the said King; yea so, as thereby (if their most injurious
Aspersion were true) to get him into their Clutches: or on the contrary, that
it was done at the Great, and Instant Entreaties of the Young King, after that
all ways of Reconciliation had in vain been attempted.

But forasmuch as this Assistance and Succor is thus aversly, and after so
odious a manner declaimed, it will be necessary to relate the same somewhat
more fully, and more clearly to discover the occasion and progress thereof.

After the Rulers of Batavia had ripely consulted about the constitution of the
Affairs of the Young King, they thought meet, as also has before been
specified, to proffer their Service of Mediation between the Father and the
Son: To which end they wrote two Letters in civil and obliging Terms,
testifying their Purpose and Affection in a way of Friendship to accommodate,
and lay by their questions and differences; and with that Intention sent their
Plenipotentiaries with Letters, the one to the Father, and the other to the
Son, in a Ship prepared to that End; after that some days before, by way of
advance, they had also sent three other Ships: But considering those
Plenipotentiaries went unto a place where the Parties on both sides were in
Arms, and not being certain whether they might meet with Friends or Enemies;
they therefore judged themselves obliged to put them into a posture of Defense,
furnishing them with Weapons, in case of necessity, to make Resistance to such,
as forgetting the Right of Nations (especially in that confused State of
things) and the respect that ought to be given to Public Persons, might
possibly attempt to lay hold on, and injure them. And this is that Fleet of
Ships and Barks, which in these and other of their Writings, they so much
enhaunce and make a stir about, as sent to Bantam, to land our Troops there.

Our foresaid Plenipotentiaries having waited some time for an Answer from the
Old King, received none: And not knowing what properly the Intention of these
men might be as to them, sent a good Troop of men, to inform themselves more
exactly of the State of things: But being a little advanced, they met some
Europeans, who by an English Man enquired of them, wherefore they came to
intermeddle with the differences of the two Kings? Whereupon being answered,
That they came as Friends to procure a Peace between the Father and the Son;
they soon perceived the Design they had formed against them: For forthwith they
saw a Great Troop of Men gathered together, making ready some Fireships, and
other Vessels fitted for War; making a show, as if they would fall foul with
us, who verily were too few in Number, to have thoughts to attempt any thing
against so powerful an Enemy, who seemed to come against them: which also they
did, and came to the Deed it self, shooting at us: and with their Canons, which
were managed by the English, they much endamaged our Ships; whereby they
perceived that they not only did not accept of our Mediation, but also that
they treated us as Enemies. Upon which they of Batavia soon resolved, by force
of Arms, to deliver the young King out of this Misery and the brink of Death;
and to this end to send a sufficient power of Ships and Men to his Assistance,
which also had that Success, as before is mentioned.

The Assistance which the English gave to the Old King, whereby the Displeasure
and Wrath of the Young King was so kindled against them, even to their Ejection
out of his Country, is so notoriously known to the World, that besides the
Proofs which the Netherlandish Company have already alleged, they yet further
could bring hundreds of convincing Testimonies; but let only the Letters of the
Young King, which he sent from his besieged Castle to them of Batavia, be
produced, and you shall hear him complaining in these formal Words.

What Reason has the English Captain to help to shoot at me, without once
laying to heart that he is Resident in my Land and Sea? This is yet worse, that
Mr. Bowyer (one of the English Merchants at Bantam) causes my House to be shot
at; not once thinking, that I desired the King of England that he might be
Captain in the English Lodge. I request of Capitain Moor Speelman, that he will
warn the English not to come on Shore, to shoot at my House, and assist mine
Enemy also with Powder; forasmuch as he has his Residence in my Land, but not
in the Land of Sultan Agon (the Old King) As also to persuade them not to
follow mine Enemy, seeing they drink my Water, and dwell in my Land; and that
they close no more with Sultan Agon: if Captain Moor have Love for me, let him
be pleased forcibly to insinuate this unto the English, that above all things
they shoot not at my House, nor betake themselves to Land.

The which also in a following Letter to the Major St. Martin, he further
confirmed.

Beside, the said King did afterward make often Complaints to the whole World,
that the English had given all assistance to his Enemies: Yea one of the
English themselves, relates in a certain Book printed at London, in which he
gives an Account of what passed at Bantam during the War, and of which he was
an Eyewitness, viz. That they of the English Nation had furnished the Old King
with most of all the Ammunition he had; and withal, that they used all means
possible, to encourage and incense the Javans against the Dutch: And thereupon
he concludes, that they (to wit, the English) had no Ground much to rely upon
the Friendship of the Netherlanders, in case they once came to set foot on
Land: Notwithstanding they are not ashamed to deny all this. Yea, in the
Memorial delivered by Mr. Chardin (while he was here) and seconded, and further
confirmed by a certain Memorial, which the English Company together with their
Demands, delivered over to the Commissaries, who were to decide on both sides:
Namely, that the English in all this while, had kept themselves altogether
Neutral between the said opposing Parties; and conclude from thence, that the
King had not out of his Motion caused them to depart, but through the
Instigation of the Major Sir Martin (a thing most notoriously false) as at the
beginning they clamoured, and published to the whole World; namely, That we
drove them out with Force, after a most barbarous and unheard of manner.

So then it appears on both sides, that their Departure was caused by the Kings
Order, who only has power of Command in his Country, and whose Command they
were bound to obey: But it is denied, and there is Reason to protest against
Injury done us, as if we had been the Effecters of the same. Ought not then the
English to prove that Fact? Undoubtedly yea. But have they any Proof thereof?
Certainly none at all. Can the English satisfy with this, that instead of
Proof, they only produce obscure, suspicious Discourses, to which no Credit
will be given, save only by such as are pre-occupied, and ready to take
whatever may serve to feed and strengthen an anticipated Humor.

They remonstrate, That in a certain Hearing, which the King of Bantam granted
them soon after the obtained Victory, they could not perceive the least
Distemper or Indignation; but that indeed there were some hot Words passed
between the King, and Sir Martin. But, I pray, is this a Proof to convince as
to a Crime, especially of such nature as this? We neither may, nor can rely
upon the Gesture and Countenance of any, much less of a King; especially of an
Indian Prince, who seeks to keep in his Wrath and Indignation, and to take his
best Opportunity to Avenge himself. Is there any one that ever heard that Major
Sir Martin instigated the King to chase the English? Is there any thing
produced in the least rending thereto? Certainly nothing. On the contrary, the
said Sir Martin, as a Man of Honor, a Gentleman of Quality, and surpassing
Modesty, Wisdom and Learning, wholly takes off all sinister suspicion, in
protesting that the Intercourse with the King was intended to no other end,
than to divert and take off the King from the Design he had to destroy all the
English: and should he not to do so, have had much more reason, then, as the
English Company in their Demand given in against the Netherlandish Company, and
more amply in their Reply, do assert; that he some years before had caused the
Agent of the English Company to be murdered, together with their Comises; of
which they afterward made such heavy Complaints, yet nothing followed
thereupon. Is it then to be wondered at, that he was so greatly incensed because
of this their Action, that except he had forcibly been dissuaded by Sir Martin,
he had caused them all to be slain? They endeavor also to make the
Netherlandish Company, or their Ministers, suspected to have an hand likewise
in this Action; but they are necessitated to protest against this outrageous
Injury and Calumny. They who at the same time were so highly out of Favor with
the Old King, then reigning, would certainly be far from having an hand in so
horrible a Murder, by which they could not in any respect be advantaged. If
that William Kaef, the Netherlandish Resident at Bantam, when the Old King
overthrew and sacked the City, was fain for to escape Massacring, to retire to
Batavia, leaving all the Goods and Effects of the Netherlandish Company in
their Lodge; which undoubtedly was by some English, though perhaps without the
knowledge of their Masters, in part stolen. Should not then the English, had
they not in that Fury been protected by the Netherlandish Forces, have been in
far greater danger? Would there have been any appearance for any of them, to
have escaped with their Lives? And nevertheless according to their Saying, It
is the Dutch that caused all these Troubles and Mischiefs to befall them. But
the English were not then of that Opinion, nor used such kind of Language, when
they came so solemnly to declare their Thankfulness to the Dutch, for their
good will and protection they had showed to them.

But how little the English Company does agree with it self, and how often they
are out and in, in their Writings, does hereby appear; That in what they have
deposed by form of Demand, themselves say, That their Agent and the Council,
the day after the raising of the Siege, were with the King in his Castle, to
take off, and appease, if possible, the Chagrin and Wrath of the King, so hot
against them: and that they then found him by far less incensed, than the
Hollanders said he was. Furthermore, in their said Memorial, which they
delivered over, together with the foresaid Pretenses, and to which by the
foresaid Demand they adhere; they say, That the same day they were introduced
to the King, who laid before them many Accusations, not so much as permitting
them to speak a word for their Defense.

It follows then, that whereas they said, when they were brought in before
him, they could not in the least perceive in his Posture or Visage any token of
Indignation, is a pure Untruth.

But yet further, to convince the English Company of the Falsehood of what they
impute to the Netherlandish Company, and that after so Odious a manner; it is
only needful to look over the Answer of the Netherlandish Company, to the
Complaints brought in by Mr. Chudley and Sir John Chardin, in May 1683; whereby
the same does testify a superabounding Affection, and perfect Readiness to
contribute to all means and ways of Re-establishing of the English Company
there, by employing their Credit and Authority with the present King; as also
to reconcile the two contending Parties, according to a Medium therein
proposed, and so consequently to recall our Troops out of the Kingdom of Bantam.

Now it can easily be conceived, they would not have done all this, in case
that by their means that war had been raised, or that they had had an hand in
the chasing of the English, or had caused the same; much less, if it had been
true, as is maliciously imputed to them, that for many years since, they had
plotted for to draw, and by that means, to engross the whole Pepper-Trade unto
themselves; and that, as they affirm, to the inestimable Damage of the English
Company, of which shall be further spoken hereafter. And seeing then it is a
false Fiction, that the Dutch Company should have driven the English out of
Bantam, although perhaps it might have been (which nevertheless was never
directly nor indirectly attempted) that by suggestion they might have somewhat
contributed thereunto: yet hereby also their pretended Action of Damage and
Reparation does fall of it self.

But that of which also they have made an hideous Cry and Tintamar, by an
express Complaint in their foresaid Memorial, which in May 1683 they presented
to your Puissant Highnesses, and which they more fully dilated afterward; is,
first, That the day after the deliverance of the King, one James de Roy,
Lieutenant to the Company of Major Sir Martin, should have taken down the Flag
named the Banner of St. George, planted upon the House of one Captain John
Fisher: that the said Fisher thereupon making haste to his House, found the
said de Roy with a part of the Flag in his Hand, having torn the rest, and
given it to the Soldiers to make Scarfs of.

Again, the said Soldiers had drunk out part of the Drinking-Wares, and taken
away the Remainder, together with his House-hold-Stuff; and withal evilly
entreated him, and placed some Black-Moores in his House.

Thirdly, that five days after the departure of the English from Bantam, our
Soldiers came into the House of the English Company, and had sent some Moors
(of their Servants) to fetch off the Pavillion that was displaid on their Lodge.

Now suppose all this to be a true Story, and might thereupon give credit at
the Deposition of one Man only, to wit, the foresaid Capt. Fisher, and that
also in his own Case; for further Witnesses are not brought for Proof of this
Fact: Yet it is considerable, the Actor hereof was in Service of the King, and
not, as is very abusively said, the Lieutenant of Major Sir Martin, and
consequently the Soldiers were Bantamers. And it is worthy of Observation,
forasmuch as this Jaques de Roy is so often brought upon the Stage, that he is
a Person, who somewhile before the War, was retired from Batavia to Bantam, for
to shun his Creditors, whom the young King took into his Service; who had in,
and during the War, signalized himself by special Services; wherefore also he
was highly esteemed by the said King, though himself were a Man of litttle
worth.

Again, although the foresaid first Flag (for there is mention made of two)
might have been the Banner of St. George, yet could it not bring any respect to
a private House, and thereby to be freed from the Disorders that in time of War
are incident, more than to any other House. And what concerns the Banner, and
use made thereof, is that a thing to make so much Disturbance, that a Captain
of the King should with his Soldiers take down from a private House the English
Flag, after that the King and the whole Nation looked on him as an Enemy of his
Person and of the State?

What concerns the Second part, although the Relation thereof might perhaps be
according to Truth, which nevertheless is doubted of, and cannot be proved, it
does not touch the Dutch Company, yea tho it had been done by their Men, but
must be imputed to the Disorders in War.

As to the third point, if the recital thereof be according to Truth, and that
they sent some of their Black Servants to take down the Banner, which
notwithstanding is nothing but a Report and Recital of some Chinese; this does
nothing to the Charging of the Netherlandish Company: the said Chinese might
be demanded, how they came to know those Moors were Servants of the Dutch
Soldiers, and not of the King, as is much more probable; seeing it should be an
unusual thing, at least unheard of among us, that simple Soldiers should have
Moors to their Servants. But, posito, that the Dutch Soldiers might have been
Executors of the Kings Order therein; the Kings Right is incontestable, and he
might take away the Pavillion of the English, after that he had banished them
out of his Country: Yea, tho the Soldiers had done it without the Order of the
King, which is not likely, yet had it been nothing else than a Military
Insolence, which also must be ascribed to the Disorders of War, where the Laws
of Modesty and Decency are seldom regarded; and therefore, without Injustice,
cannot be imputed to them, who in the time of the War at Bantam, did represent
the Government of Batavia, who never were behind-hand in that respect which
they owe to Crowned Heads. But what need is it to have recourse to Conjectures,
whereas by a certain produced Deposition it is apparent, that it was the King
himself who commanded the Flag to be taken down from the English Lodge. And
what is said of the Dutch Flags, which after the Victory were planted upon the
Castle, and in other parts of the City, deserves no Answer; since it is a known
thing, that we never pretended any territorial Right in Bantam, much less put
the same in execution; but however the said Flags served to no other purpose,
than to make it known to the Dutch Troops, who after the raising of the Siege,
were posted in the principal places of the City, according to the usual
practice every where on like occasions. The Flag upon the Castle was set up by
order of the King, to show honor to the Dutch, however placed under the Flag
of the King.

Besides they of the English Company complain, That the day after the raising
of the Siege, the Dutch Resident Kaeff, with a Troop of Soldiers, and some
Masons, came into the English Lodge, and ordered the English Agent forthwith to
take away the Galleries, and to nail up the Window: And that thereupon a Dutch
Renegate, who was in his Company, began presently to threaten him, That if the
English did not, he himself would do it: which also, as they say, he really did.

This seems to be an outrageous act done to the English; but if we look into
the nature of the thing, it will be found to be a mere trifle, which they ought
to be ashamed to urge in this manner.

The History is this: Because the Dutch Company would not be troublesome to any,
they chose their own Lodge at Bantam for their Magazine of Arms, and other
provisions. Now the Wall of their said Lodge touching part of the English
Companies dwelling house, and in that same Wall they formerly had had no other
opening beside a Casement; somewhile after, the English, by permission of the
Old King, who let slip no opportunity to affront and molest them, made great
wide windows to open and shut, and besides that, a Gallery also, which hanging
four or five foot over the ground of the Hollanders Lodge, gave the English
opportunity to hear and see all whatever the Dutch did. The young King
considering that our said Lodge, in time of War, was like to be the great
Magazine, thought it requisite to prevent such dangerous consequences as might
be occasioned by overtures, being over a place of the House, where the Powder
and other Ammunitions of War did lie, and out or through which Windows or
overtures in the Wall, the English at all times might come upon that place at
their pleasure; and knowing the English would not seal up those Windows, nor
suffer the Galleries to be taken away, he thereupon sent his servants with a
Dutch Renegado, to cause it to be done; and it may perhaps be true, That the
Resident Kaeff was at that time present, forasmnch as it was done in the said
lodge of the Dutch Company, where, according to his Office, he was to take care
of the Magazine.

What evil can herein be imputed to the Company? and what accusation can the
English frame from this? A thing, which way soever they take it, was carried on
by the Authority of the King, and according to their saying, executed by a
Renegado; the very naming of whom, shows, that he was not in Service nor under
the Oath of the Netherlandish Company.

And what besides this they lay to the charge of the Dutch Company is, first,
that they should have taken from the English their Horses, and some other
things, and have constrained them to take out the Powder that was in their
Ships and to bring it ashore.

Secondly, That what they, at the command of the King to depart, in all haste
had laden in their boats to bring aboard their Ships, in which neither the
people of the Country, nor the Soldiers did any ways hinder them; but passing
by the English Chaloups which kept the watch at Sea, they were by them
arrested, under pretense, they had order to suffer nothing to be carried aboard
the English Ships, and in case they persisted to do it, they should be shot at,
by which they should have been necessitated to return to Land with their Boats.

Thirdly, That they complaining of such violence to Major Sir Martin, he in a
jesting way should answer, that all was done by order from the King, whereas no
Man on Land, Soldier, or others, had a hand in those Violences, but all was
done by our Soldiers only.

Fourthly, That the chief of the French requiting of the King restitution of
four Chests with Silver which was taken from him, the King should answer in the
presence of the Dutch Commissary, that he knew nothing thereof; and that he
would do no injury neither to them, nor to the English, Danes, or other
Strangers trafficking in his Country; and in case any wrong had been done unto
him, since the Hollanders had set foot on Land, that he must require reparation
from the Dutch Commissary, or the General at Batavia.

Fifthly, That at the last instance made, to cause the English to quit Bantam,
being, as they say, the day before their departure, our Soldiers came into the
English Lodge, robbed the Chambers, and took away all they found there;
whereupon the people of the Country (so far were they from doing them the least
wrong) permitted them to Seal up their Magazine, and undertook to keep it safe
for them.

What concerns the first point, forasmuch as they do not only not say, much
less prove, that our men should have taken the Horses and other goods from the
English, nor that they should have constrained them to fetch their Powder out
of their Ships, therefore the Netherlandish Company will pass that by as a
thing which does not concern them, and of which they are wholly discharged by
the often forementioned Memorial annexed to the demand or pretense which the
English Company deposed and delivered in, and to which they do refer
themselves; in which is expressly said, that Pagoran Diepa Panerat, one of the
principal Ministers of the young King, or rather the first Minister of State,
had done the same, although they put it in such general and Ambiguous
expressions, in all appearance, as if they would lay it to the charge of our
Men: Only what concerns the Powder, the Dutch Company does say, that in case it
were true, that the English were fain, by the order of the King, to unlade the
same, and bring it to Land; that it was done, not because the King stood in
need of it, for he was abundantly furnished by them of Batavia; but only to
prevent that they might not deliver the same to his Enemies; and besides, it
cannot be ill taken, that the King in that confused state of things, would
oppose and hinder the English from going so often to and fro to their Ships.

Concerning the second point, namely, that we should have hindered the English
from departing out of Bantam, and also to have stopped their Boats, has not
the least appearance of truth in it; forasmuch as themselves confess, that we
assisted them with our Boats and Chaloups to carry their Goods and Wares aboard
their Ships, when none of the people of the Country, or their Boats could be
obtained to be serviceable to them therein; so little acceptance they had with
that Nation: And how can this hang together, That we should have procured their
departure from the King, and then when they were ready to depart, to hinder it?
Yea, the English disagree in the very Position laid down about it; for their
foresaid Memorial, to which by their demand they refer themselves, dictates not
that their men were stopped at Sea by our Barks that kept watch, but that it was
done by the watch of the Netherlandish Company on Land, at the mouth of the
Haven; to wit, as having order to suffer nothing to be carried from Land to the
English Ships.

The complaints which thereupon they should have made to Major Sir Martin,
comprehended in the third point, as if he had in a kind of mockage answered
them, That all was done by order of the King; What does this make to the thing?
For put the case the said Major (which notwithstanding is not granted) might
say, not in way of mockage, but in earnest, that it was to be imputed to the
order of the King, which goes farther, if those orders had been executed by our
Soldiers; although that also is denied, and of which the English do produce no
proofs; yet could it not any ways prejudice the Dutch Company, as not being
bound to be responsible for the Orders of the King.

Touching the King's Answer to the Chief of the French his complaint, and that
the King remitted him as to that matter to Batavia, of which is spoken in the
fourth point, although it should be all true, which notwithstanding is not
proved, it might be that the King did it in such a manner to free himself from
the trouble of those complaints, as well knowing that one of his Ministers had
seized on the said Chests with Silver, which however it be, neither concerns
the English, nor obliges the Dutch Company to be answerable for the same.

But to demonstrate yet more fully how far the English Company, in all their
pretenses, do err from the truth, they say, as may be se^n, in the proposal of
the first point, That the people of the Country, to wit, of Bantam, the day
before they, viz. the English were caused to remove, did indeed come into their
Lodge, but without doing of them the least Injury; and yet they say in their
foresaid Memorial annexed to their Demand, that at the same time they took away
all their Provision (driving the English out of the Chambers (except one named
Wait) and took possession thereof; but a little after the Dutch Soldiers came,
who further made spoil, and carried away all they found there: But this cannot
be; because the English had, a day before their departure, carried away for
Batavia, in the Ships of the Dutch Company, all their movables, to the very
least thing of any worth (their departure, as themselves say, being the 12th of
April) and so nothing could be found: And besides, all the time of their
inhabiting of Batavia, which d^red more than a year, they never brought in any
complaints, by a List or other way, showing what the Dutch Soldiers had robbed
them of; but on the contrary, they came and rendered their thanks to the
Government there, for all the assistance had been done unto them, without the
least mention of wrong received; which had they done, the Government there
might forthwith have caused enquiry to be made, and if it had been true,
procured satisfaction; but letting that occasion slip, and being negligent
therein, and then to bring in their Complaints here, and that without any
proof, the Dutch say is a thing altogether unreasonable.

As has before been alleged, the English Company from the beginning has
pretended re-establishment at Bantam from the Dutch Company, and to which in
their Demand, or Memorial of their Pretenses, delivered over to the
Commissaries of both sides, they remain persisting, with request, that the same
may in the first place, before all other things, be debated and determined,
taking for their foundation, that that reestablishment had already been
accorded and agreed to by your Puissant Hignesses, and by the Netherlandish
Company.

But now not yet content with that, they pretend by their foresaid Demand,
besides the recalling of the Dutch Troops, the delivering over the Castle of
Bantam in its entire, for to put into it a strong Garrison, pretending, that
otherwise they would not be willing to settle themselves again there; yea, they
require that the whole City be delivered up, and put into the hands of His
Majesty of Great Britain.

What concerns the first, It is true indeed that the English Company did
pretend all this; but it is evident, that the Dutch Company has as little
right to this, as to give over the whole City with the Castle, according to
their further pretense: We who have only a simple residence, without
participation of any Authority, which does wholly reside in the person of the
King, it is for us a moral impossibility to dispose of that which Privative
does belong to the King, and so to reestablish the English there against his
will, without intrusion into his Right, and violating his Authority: For
although the Dutch Company have their Troops in Bantam, which serve the King
for a Garrison to defend his City, yet that affords them no Territorial Right,
nor the least power to bring in again those whom he has banished from thence.

And as they cannot by force of Arms oblige the King to take in again the
English, and re-settle them in Bantam without usurping upon the Right of
Nations, and deservedly to incur the Disaffection and Hatred of all the Princes
and Potentates of Indie; so can they with as little ground do it by
Threatenings, without Injury to their Fidelity; which must be the stay of the
Credit of the said Company among the Indian People; who otherwise would not
rely upon their Word, nor enter into Alliances and Combinations with them.

But they of the English Company aver, that herein not only consists their
Interest, but they have also the Promise of your Puissant Highnesses; they only
requiring the Execution of the same.

As to their Interest, the Dutch Company will easily grant, that the foresaid
Re-establishment might be for their Advantage, (although they, as has before
been said, declare, that except they have a Garrison and the Castle for their
Security, they would not reside there) so also undoubtedly it would be for
their Interest, if the Dutch Company did admit them into those Countries, where
we have our Spices, and which we possess by Propriety, with Seclusion of all
others: And so also it would be for the Interest of this State, and the
Inhabitants thereof, that the English would permit them the Navigation and
Trade in the Barbados, Caribes, New England, the Virginies, and many other
Countries they possess in America; where they will not suffer us, nor other
Nations of Europe so much as to pass their Seas. But the Question in this case
is not the Convenience or the Interest, but the Right. If that the English
Company could groundedly maintain, that the Dutch Company is bound to re-settle
them there, and prove it by clear and convincing Reasons that they had driven
them out of Bantam, the business were at an End.

But to come to their Second ground, viz. The Promise of your Puissant
Highnesses, and of the Dutch Company, which was made to them Anno 1683, that
they should be resettled there. To this we have before said, and do now again
answer, that those Proffers do serve for an undeniable Proof, that the Dutch
Company sought nothing more than to continue with the English Company in an
intimate Friendship and Confidence, which by that Accident at Bantam did seem
in some measure to be interrupted; and that they would rather decline the
Advantages which by such excessive Expenses they had acquired there, than to
remain continually in Contention and Quarrel with the English Company: And
hereby the Dutch Company obliterate those Aspersions and Calumnies imputed to
them; as if in all appearance they for their own Interest, and wilfully, had
incited and fomented the Differences, and War that followed thereupon between
the Father and the Son; and had two years before formed that Design by
corresponding with Pang^ran Dupa Nag^ra; and so contrived the Banishing of the
English out of Bantam. For if all this had been true, they should very badly
have managed their Business, after that all was thus succeeded, and they with
such excessive Charges attained what they aimed at, they should then without
any pressing necessity, have made so little account of it; and that for the
mere Pleasure of them, who for all the Pretenses, and justification of their
Complaints made, had nothing to show in way of Proof. Indeed had the English
Company at that time rested satisfied, the Dutch Company should have been
obliged to perform the same, how prejudicial soever it might afterward have
been to them. But forasmuch as the English Company was then pleased wholly to
reject and break off those Transactions, whereas we so desirously longed that
they might be brought to a good End in England; and for which, it is said, the
Lord Ambassador Citters was fully authorized, all the time that Business of
Bantam was in the Terms, as they were, during the Negotiations and Treaty with
Mr. Chudlie and Sir John Chardin in the Hague, and which the English Company
also caused to be broken off. Whereupon it falls now to be enquired into,
Whether the Dutch Company, since the case of things be wholly changed and of
another nature, be still obliged to the same?

It is evident, that at that time the State of the Affairs of Bantam was not
known, namely, Whether the War between the Father and the Son were yet
remaining, or ended: If it were determined, whether by an Accommodation, or by
the Sword: If by the Sword, who of the two, the Father, or Son, remained
Conqueror, and thereby became Master of the Kingdom. During which uncertainty,
it cannot be judged Imprudency, that the Netherlandish Fast-Indie Company (by
whose Forces the Son was delivered from his inevitable Ruin, and by whom he
further was to be assisted, so as not to fall under the oppression of his
Rebellious Subjects) should interpose their Credit and Authority by the said
King, for the settling of the English in Bantam, if he were Conqueror, and with
condition the English should yield no further Assistance to the Father: and in
case the Father were Victor, that then the English should employ all their
Credit by the Father, that the Dutch Company might enjoy a good Neighborhood
with them: And these Proffers of the Dutch Company, while things stood thus at
an uncertainty, were the m^re excusable by the King of Bantam, because they
endeavored thereby to prevent the Succors which the English Company pretended
to send the Father; and also because at that time it was not yet known, how far
the English had made themselves irreconcilable to him.

During this uncertainty of things, the Dutch Company made these Proffers; yea
Sir John Chardin himself projected an Accommodation between both the Companies,
in which mention was made of the withdrawing of the Dutch Troops out of Bantam,
and what each Company should be obliged unto in those occasional Accidents, as
are thereby specified. But as it pleased the said Mr. Chudlie and Sir John
Chardin very unexpectedly to break off those Treaties, which already were so
far advanced, and they also of the English Company on their part did reject the
Proffers, which not only your Puissant Highnesses in their foresaid Answer to
the Memorial of Sir John Chardin, had made; but those also which the Ambassador
Citters afterward did make, in the name, and upon the account of the
Netherlandish Company, after that the foresaid Sir John Chardin was returned
into England, and the English began again to bring in new Demands, after they
had very disdainfully rejected the former; hereupon the Netherlandish Company
judged, that they stood no longer bound to theirs, especially, when as some
while after, by tidings on both sides in Letters from the Indies, it was
signified, that the War at Bantam was ended to the advantage of the young King,
who reobtained the Kingdom as possessor, had taken the Father Prisoner, and
subdued his Rebels; so that consequently the Netherlandish Company had now no
longer any ground nor pretext, either to treat with the English about their
resetling in Bantam, as being Territorium plane alienum, much less to promise
the same, and the rather, because the now reigning King having considered the
Conspiracies of the English with his Father and rebellious Subjects, has
declared them his pernicious Enemies.

Seeing then, from all what has been said, it clearly appears, that the
English Company did rather choose to expect the uncertain Lot of War, than to
agree with the Dutch Company, while it was time, about their Settlement; it is
therefore reasonable that they now acquiesce, and leave the Netherlandish
Company unmolested, as to their re-establishment.

It follows therefore, that it is wholly besides the purpose, at present, to
make use, or apply to their advantage the foresaid answer of your Puissant
Highnesses to the foresaid Memorial, after they had rejected the foresaid
Proffer, and had determined not only to re-establish themselves by force of
Arms, but wholly to become the Masters of Bantam, and to that end to set out a
formidable Power of Ships and Men at Sea, though their Enterprise, as they
themselves depose in their foresaid reply, was stopped by his Majesty of happy
Memory, and not suffered to put forth to Sea: now this was the reason that they
having formed and being busy about this design, that the Charges thereof might
not be fruitless, did not only reject the Proffers aforesaid of the Dutch
Company, but made such Excessive Extravagant Demands, as the delivering up of
the whole City of Bantam with the Castle, although they well knew that it
neither would nor could be accepted of us; or in case they were accepted, that
then they had attained to what they aimed.

So long then as the state of things was at an uncertainty, and it might be in
doubt who of the twain, Father or Son, should have the upper-hand, though the
Son seemed by far more likely to prevail; nevertheless the Netherlands Company
judged, that in such a Constitution of things, it could not be ill taken, that
they entered with the English Company into a Treaty, how they might after the
best way procure a Peace between the two Kings, by interposing their Credit and
Service of Love, and obtain the re-establishment of the English Company: but
all this being rejected by the English with disdain; and that Uncertainty which
then was, being brought to a Certainty, so as the whole business is become of
quite another nature; that the Netherlandish Company should yet be bound to
perform, what they in the uncertain state of things did show themselves willing
unto, the Netherlandish Company apprehends, that it in justice cannot be
required. For first, thereby, besides other considerations, they should
certainly be made losers of the Sum of Six times hundred thousand Ryxdollers,
which the King of Bantam by evening Accounts is found indebted to the Dutch
Company, and of which a Contract is made with him in particular, in which he
grants to their Company the Traffic in his Kingdom, so long and until he shall
come to be in a condition to repay the same to the Dutch Company: But that
which besides this, deserves to be reflected upon* is, That the King of Bantam
hearing a rumor that the English Company persisted in their pretense of
resettlement in Bantam, with the calling back of our Troops thence, wrote to
the Government of Batavia (even after he had surmounted all difficulties) that
in case they should consent therein, and withdraw our Militia from thence, he
should not be able to continue master in the work, but be necessitated to
retire to B^tavia, in hope protection should not there be refused him; and
thereupon besought in all humility, that they would at no hand forsake, and
reduce him to such extremities, but perform their word given him by solemn
Contract. And how should the Netherland^^sh Company be officious to their
readmission, seeing the English Company in their writings do so scandalously
decipher him, as namely, that he has with the approbation of all the world,
acted against the English Na^^^n as an Enemy so unthankful, so barbarous, with
such an^ipathy from their Blood, without any the least reason or ^^^vocation:
that his Majesty of Great Britain without (...)ry to his honor, may not rest
till he have secured himself (...) that City and whole Kingdom, until he have
got reparati(...); and that the sooner, because he is, according to their
^^ying, however he bear the title of King, nothing else but a ^^^fect Slave of
Batavia, and a Servant to their will and (...)sure. High words indeed: also it
is a wonderful Dilemma of the English Company, to wit, if the Old King of
Bantam have any right to Bantam, and the dependencies thereof, then the
conclusion is most so(...), that the same is devolved upon the deceased King
(...) Great Britain, of happy Memory: And if the right (...)pertains to the
young King, as the Hollanders affirm, ^^en he has acted, by the approbation of
the whole World, against the Subjects of his said Majesty as an Enemy, and
according to what they have deciphered ^im.

Concerning the first member of this Dilemma, being it is evident, that the Old
King of Bantam ha^ing given over his Kingdom to his Eldest Son the pre^ent
inheritor thereof, he now cannot afterward give (...) to another: the
conclusion that follows hence is directly against the English Company. What
concerns the second part of the Dilemma, if it be the young King to whom this
right does belong, and that it be true, that he had acted against the English
as an Enemy ungrateful, barbarous, and with antipathy to their blood, without
the least provocation, as indeed may be drawn, but nevertheless not to justify
the Demand of the English Compny against them of Holland; neither can any thing
therefrom be concluded against the present King of Bantam, in case he has
justly, as he affirms, testified his displeasure against the English: but in
the mean while we cannot let pass, without taking notice, that while they are
pleased to heap up reproaches upon the young King, then they say, he had acted
against the Subjects of his Majesty as an enemy, ungrateful, barbarous, with an
Antipathy of their Blood, without the least provocation; further, that he is
unworthy of alliance with them; but when the business is to load the Dutch, and
make them the Authors of their expulsion out of Bantam, then they alter their
strain, and say, that they could not so much as observe neither in the words or
gesture of the King, the least thing manifesting any displeasure against the
English, or that he had a design to make them depart out of his Country.

Here they name the present King a Slave of the Netherlandish Company; and in
their Reply they say, That the Old King, when he sat on his Throne, would
willingly have been a Slave of the King of England, and thereof would have made
his triumph.

In their Reply they give the mentioned King the name of a pauvre Idiot, a vile
person, une Chetive Creature, etc. And in their Letter they wrote to him in
March, 1683. they style him a wise King, to whom they say, they will send a
person with the Title of Envoy or Extraordinary Ambassador, with full power to
conclude an ever-during League and Alliance with him.

The same Title the King of Great Britain gives him in his forementioned
Letter, stiling him a Wise and Righteous Prince.

On the contrary, the English Company in their ^^iplick, call him a Murderer,
and Contemner of the ^ublick Faith.

And how odiously the English Company in their aforesaid Letter (annexing also,
what they wrote to ^angoran Diepa Penerat, Chief Minister of State) have
^eciphered the Netherlandish Company, and in what ^^eem we were already with
them, even before the ^ar of Bantam was kindled, the Dutch Company will (...)
to the judgment of the Reader.

It has already been mentioned, that the English Company in their foresaid
Demand did pretend, be^^des the calling back of the Dutch Troops, the de^^very
also of the whole City and Castle of Bantam, or (...), as they said, they would
not make their residence (...) again.

But besides that, the English Commissaries, who (...) to decide the
differences, did, as has been said, ^^dge, that this their demand, as
altogether un^^unded and unreasonable, ought to be denied: So (...) is a thing
that does sufficiently refute it self.

For before the War of Bantam, the English Company had nothing there but a
Lodge and simple Resi^ence, without the least Territorial Right: The King (...)
he had triumphed over his Enemies, knowing ^that they had afforded all manner
of assistance to ^^em, and not being at rest, as fearing their future
miscarriage, and especially in this juncture of time, while he was yet
surrounded of Enemies, causes ^^em to dislodge: Hereupon now the English
Company comes and demands the delivery of the whole City and Castle, having had
nothing there, but as has been said, a Lodge for Commerce; and this they will
have from the Netherlandish Company, who have no ^ight at all to dispose
thereof, except they chase away the King that now is, out of Bantam, for to put
it into the hands of the English; and except they could make it out, and to be
agreeable to justice, that the Dutch Company should threaten the present King
to abandon and deliver him over to the Will and Mercy of his Enemies, by
removing of their Troops out of his City, whereas we are bound by Contract to
maintain and protect him, should now falter in our word, and falsify our trust,
a thing which may nor ought to be required of us.

But it is said, that the Dutch Companies intent in this, is to monopolize all
the Trade of Pepper, and get it to themselves wholly; and to this they add*
That seeing the Netherlandish Company having besides the Trade of Cloves,
Nutmegs, Mace and Cinnamon, all this would make them able to maintain a Fleet
to withstand the mightiest King in Europe.

But besides that, there are so many other great Countries in the Indies, where
Pepper may be had, and to which the English Company have access as well as the
Dutch, and that it is impossible the Netherlandish Company should get them all
under their power and command; It ought to be called to mind, that when we were
in treaty here with Sir John Chardin, that we proffered the Pepper-trade in
Common to the English Company, and that by the Contract which should be made
with the King, the half should be allotted them; of which an Article was at
that time made, and presented in Writing, but by the said Sir John Chardin
rejected: So far was it from the Dutch Companies intention to design the same,
as it is maliciously laid to their charge; and not only as to the Pepper-trade,
but they add also in their Triplick* That the aim of the Dutch Company by this
their Residence at Bantam, was, besides the Pepper, to engross to their
inestimable profit, the Linnen-Trade also: Whereas on the contrary, the Dutch
Company in their foresaid Proposals to Sir John Chardin, beside the Pepper, did
admit them to the half of all other Wares, including the Linen, which they
also refused; and notwithstanding in their said Reply they further say, That
all the endeavor of the Dutch Company was, whether by right or wrong, to keep
things in the state to which they had brought them.

The English Company had first set in their Demand they gave in, That by our
residence at Bantam we had made the Pepper-Trade more difficult to them; but in
their forenamed Reply they say, that we made way to Monopolize the whole: so
far may men be blinded by passion.

To what the English Company do further depose in their foresaid Demand, viz.
That those in pay, of the Dutch Company, had upon the Coast of Mallabar
assaulted their Men, given fire on them, and this also to deprive them of the
remainder of the Trade in Pepper they as yet had there. The Dutch could have
wished, they had more clearly declared themselves as to the place where, the
aforesaid Coast lying along the Sea the space of an Hundred Miles; as also to
the year and time when, together to what Ship or Bark, and upon what occasion:
As on their part the Netherlandish Company is ready to show after what manner
they dealt with our men upon the West Coast of Sumatra, to wit, the English
Frigate.... in September 1683. being upon the Coast before Air Bangi, and
sending out his Chaloup with about Forty Armed Soldiers, against our men
sitting in a Boat, shooting once and again with Bullets: As the Ships, the
Society, the President, the Eagle, and Berckly-Castle, who at their return
homeward from Bantam, Cormandel and Bengale, in July and the following months
of the year 1681. overwintering at the Island Mauritius, committed no small
insolences and mischiefs, especially they of the President, and Eagle, robbing
and carrying away all what they found, notwithstanding all the complaints and
protestations made by the people of the Dutch Company, of which we have
authentic evidences in hand to show.

We pass by, That the English for so many years have made it their constant
work to debauch our men at Bengale, on the Coast of Cormandel, at Bantam, and
elsewhere, to draw them out of our Service, to serve them on their Ships
homeward (being weakly manned) against the protestations made from time to
time, as is to be shown by evidences in hands of the Netherlandish Company.
That the English Company is intended, as themselves have divulged, to set down
and build a Fortress on Priamang, seated on the West Coast of Sumatra, (a
Country under the Command of the Dutch Company, and where they have a Fort
lying) which by the first Letters that come, we expect to hear that it is
already effected, they having sent to that end, diverse Ships, with Men,
Materials, and Warlike furniture: The mischief that hence will ensue, may
easily be guessed at.

It is a thing inconceivable, how they dare publish to the World, that the
Dutch Company by a contract made with them of Macassar, November Anno 1667, and
as they say, Printed at Batavia, by which the English Nation was secluded from
Commerce in that Country; and of which, after the expiration of Eighteen years,
they make complaints in their Writings: Whereas since that time, two solemn
Treaties have been made betwixt England and this State, beside the forenamed
agreement of the year 1674-75, by which all pretenses and actions whatsoever,
which might have been against each other, were nullified as if they never had
been; and although this should not be urged, the Dutch Company is ready to
justify what they did, by holding forth to the World their right in making such
kind of Contracts. But what in this case falls into special consideration, is,
that the aforesaid Contracts, made by the Netherlandish Company, was during the
War with England, or before the peace concluded, Anno 1667. was, or could be
known in the Indies, or at Macasser.

So then although all were true what is published in a certain Writing, and by
Mr. Skeleton Envoy Extraordinary, annexed to the foresaid Memorial, presented to
your Puissant Highnesses, That we had violently seized on the Factors of the
English Company, carried them away Prisoners to Batavia, and then spoiled their
Houses (although the Company, upon their Faith and Credit, are ignorant hereof)
what could this any way help the English? or why should they thus exclaim about
it? Has not England about this very time taken by Force New-Netherland from
our W^st-Indie Company? and can the Dutch West-Indie Company frame an Action or
Pretense hereon? Without doubt, No.

The English Company finding themselves destitute of necessary Proofs to make
good the Matter of Fact they charge the Dutch Company with, which nevertheless
can only serve as the Foundation of what they urge: as also being convinced of
the unanswerable Confutation made by the Dutch Company, with most evident
demonstration of the ungroundedness of the Assertions of the English Company;
they betake themselves in their Reply to Reproaches, calumniating the Dutch
Company in the conduct of their Affairs, after so odious a manner, and in such
extravagant terms, as must needs make all men astonished, how people of Honor
and Understanding should so forget themselves; yea, so far, as that the English
Commissaries themselves, in the Conference with the Commissaries who on our
side were to decide the business, were constrained to abhor and manifest their
discontent thereof. And although the Dutch wanted no matter to convince the
English Company of their intolerable Injury, and to disabuse the World of so
many untruths falsly^imputed to them; yet they judged it better to abstain, and
with a modest silence to pass it by, than enter into further Contest, and make
the Rupture of the Friendship (which is so necessary between both the
Companies) yet greater, and the Wound incurable.

The Demand the Dutch Company made by reconvention, consisted herein, That they
at the earnest request of the English Company had lent or accommodated them
with four Vessels, for the transport of their Persons, Merchandises and Effects
from Bantam to Batavia, under promise by Writing, to pay the Dutch Company for
the Freight: These Ships they kept some Months, making use of them instead of
Magazines, and for preservation of their Wares and Effects, to the great
Prejudice of the Dutch Company, who stood in very great need of them, in
respect of their Traffic; but could not get them again what Means and
Insinuations soever they used, till some Months after.

The foresaid Ships were, Europa, big 600 Last. New Middleborow, big 500 Last.
Delf^haven, 450 Last. ^TWout, 100 Last.


The Freight of which amounted to the Sum of 13900 l. Sterling.

It remains that we speak a word or two of what happened before Gamron in the
Gulf of Persia, over which also the English Company make their Complaints:
First, In a certain Article in their Triplick, and afterward by that Writing
which the foresaid Mr. Skeleton Extraordinary Envoy, annexed to the foresaid
Memorial by him presented the... of May last to your Puissant Highnesses, of
which mention was made in the beginning. This Article contains, first,
Complaints against the Conduct of the Fleet which lately the Dutch Company had
in the Gulf of Persia, with which they intended, as they say, to shut, or lock
up all the Havens of that great Kingdom.

And the said Memorial did further make like Complaints, That the foresaid
Fleet conducted by Reynier Kasembroot, with violence should have hindered John
Goldsborough, Master of an English Companies Ship called the Merchant of
Bengale, from unlading the said Ship with Boats, thereby detaining and
disturbing him in all their Traffic and Business: But after Examination, this
Complaint will be found as groundless as any of the other.

The case is this, That the Netherlandish Company time out of mind, having a
Comptoir or Lodge, together with their Traffic at Gamron, and other places in
the Kingdom of Persia, by virtue of an Agreement made with the King, and of
Privileges granted unto them; the Persians in many points set themselves in
opposition against them, offering them many outrageous and unjust dealings: and
forasmuch as no Reparation or Redress in the least could be obtained by any
Requests made, although accompanied with extraordinary and costly Presents, at
last it burst forth into Deeds, for to repair the Injury done. And this is the
Fleet of Ships which the Dutch Company for this End had in the foresaid Gulf,
with which they took from the Persians the Island Kismus, with the Castle in
the said Gulf, not far distant from Ormus or Gamron, not for to keep, for it
could not have been serviceable to us, but with intolerable Charge; only it
was done to induce and necessitate the Persians to condescend to Reason, which
it also effected; whereupon the Netherlandish Company restored the Island and
the Castle to the Persians again.

What then concerns the first Complaint, That with that Fleet the Netherlandish
Company sought to shut up all the Havens in Persia, the Netherlandish Company
is necessitated to say, that it is very strange to them, that they should so
wrongfully and maliciously misconstrue the good Intention of the Netherlandish
Company.

Has the Dutch Company with that Fleet of Ships done them the least wrong or
hinderance, as to what concerns their coming or departing in or from the said
Havens? Yea, even during the time that the Netherlandish Company lay with the
whole Fleet before Gamron, Have not the English sailed in and out as they
pleased? They cannot but say, Yea.

What Reason had they then to judge so maliciously of their Design?

But in the foresaid Triplick it is said, That the Netherlandish Company
intended indeed to set on foot and effect it, in case the English had not by
hap appeared there with a greater Number of Ships, not to be hindered or forced
by the Netherlanders.

But before they were arrived there with any number of Ships together, did not
the foresaid Fleet, and the said Kasembroot let their single Ships go in and
out freely and unmolested, yea even their Boats and Chalops; and with them also
their Ship Williamson laden with Goods fraighted for and belonging to the
Persians? Surely they cannot deny it.

And what concerns this great number of Ships, which they say they afterward
had there, if compared with the number, especially the greatness of the
Netherlandish Ships, all mounted, manned, and in gallant Equipage for War, they
were strong enough, had they had order, to have kept them out of Gamron.

The Netherlandish Fleet lay a Year and some Months before Gamron, and the
English were but a small time with their foresaid number of Ships there;
whereas before and after there came other, yea single Ships, to and fro, and
yet according to their own confession no stop or hinderance was done to any of
them, save only to the Ship called the Merchant of Bengale before mentioned,
and of which shall be further spoken by and by.

From whence then is it evinced, that the Dutch Company had such a design, or
what proofs do they bring to justify what they depose in their foresaid Reply?
Not one only word.

But to say how the case stands, the Netherlandish Company undertakes to show,
that the said Kasembroo^, commanding the said Fleet in Chief in the Gulf of
Persia, did all the time of his abode there, by express order and command,
forbid, that no let or hinderance should in the least be offered to the English
Ships in their Navigation and Traffic in that Kingdom.

And that the Dutch Companies management might be rendered the more suspected
and odious, they conclude thus in their Triplick, These are the means which the
Dutch Company uses, for to get great advantages upon the Indian Princes, yea
have thereby constrained that great and mighty King of Persia himself to
subscribe such Articles as they would, that he might have his Havens again open
and free.

But besides, that the Netherlandish Company has not by all those excessive
charges, Covenanted or acquired any greater privileges or advantages than they
always formerly have had in the Kingdom, except only a discharge from taking
yearly a quantity of Silk at a certain price, (at least so far as concerns the
last) according to the advice which the Dutch Company lately received
concerning the same.

And in case the great Princes of the Indies, and the King of Persia himself
were so easily to be forced by such a Fleet as the Dutch Company had there, we
have reason to demand why the English Company did not make use of that
occasion, namely when they had present such a Fleet as they boast of before
Gamron, for to recover of the Persians payment of the Toll or Cu^^om of Ormus
or Gamron, which they say was so truly due unto them, but unjustly detained by
the Persians, at least as to the greater part thereof, and which in the year
1654. they demanded, as to the half thereof, amounting to many hundred thousand
(...) of the Netherlandish Company, to wit, of the Goods which the said Dutch
Company until that time had brought and Negotiated there, but was then by
Committees on both parts denied to be due to them, and they remitted to the
Persians themselves, where they so often importuned them by their Complaints;
yea, even to the threatening of them; but nevertheless could never obtain any
satisfaction: Would they not in all that time wherein these pretenses have
since increased to such vast Sums, if it had been to be acquired with such
facility, have used these ways and (...)? Undoubtedly yea.

And thereby we may well judge, what was the Constitution of that Fleet they had
there, and of which they made such high boasts.

But in case they should yet attempt the same, could the Netherlandish Company,
although much prejudiced thereby in their Traffic, as undoubted would so be,
could they thereupon lay any action to the charge of the English Company, and
make pretenses upon them?

Surely the Dutch Company would wish, yea, entreat in a friendly way, that if
such a thing should be, our Ships might have the like usage, as the Dutch
Company did show to the English.

As to the second Complaint, namely the hinderance occasioned to the Ship the
Merchant of Bengale in her Unlading, by detaining and disturbing them in their
Traffic and Undertakings.

Thus stands the case: The Dutch Company, as has been said, having War with
the Persians, or being as they say, In Statu Belli, and lying with their Fleet
before Gamron, there came tidings from Land, that there was an intent to Board
our Fleet by Fireships, and so cause us to leave the Road; whereupon we
resolved to seize on all the Persian Boats we could get, and make them fast
behind our Ships: the foresaid English Ship lying in the midst of our Fleet,
and making preparation to unlade in Persian Boats, the said Kasembroot desired
them to be pleased to desist, and not to make use of Persian Boats, especially
they being accustomed to take in their Loding in the night time to be very
early at Land to unlade, we offering them all the Boats of our Ships to assist
them, that we might be certain, that they under the cloak of coming to the
foresaid Ship, with their Fireships, and ^assing by our Watch, might not
before we were aware, fall upon us; but they of the foresaid Ship rejecting ou^
proffer, there came among our Fleet a Persian Boat, manned with ten or twelve
Persian Rowers, and one English Mariner, having by him two Cases with
Rose Water, which the said Kasembroot caused to be brought into his Ship; the
English Interpreter presently thereupon making his Complaint, the former
proffer of our Boats was renewed, and at his going away, bid to take with him
the two Cases of Rose Water, which he refusing, they were put into his Boat,
and so he departed.

This being the true History, we demand, What herein was done amiss by the
Dutch Company, to cause the English to make such clamorous complaints about it?
Or whether if any hinderance came thereby to the English (for damage they had
none) they brought it not upon their own heads?

The Goods they accuse us to have taken out of the Persian Boat (which
nevertheless they themselves confess were again restored, and put into the Boat
where the English Interpreter was) they aggravate, for to make them, in all
appearance, to seem of great importance, were only the foresaid two Cases of
Rose Water.

In the contra-Protest, the aforesaid Kasembroot has made against the Protest
of the English (and to which they appeal) the whole carriage of the business is
nakedly and clearly made to appear, for which reason they also thought good, as
the said Extraordinary Envoy annexed the said Protest of the English to his
foresaid Memorial, here withal also to deliver over this contra-Protest.

Thereby more plainly to show, first, the Proffer we made of our Boats for
their service to unlode their said Ship, partly to take away the hinderance
they complained of, and on the other hand to prevent the mischief, which by the
going to and fro of the Enemies Boats, (which they might have pretended to be
done only in the Name, and by the Order of the English) could have befallen our
Fleet.

Again, That the Goods taken out of the Persian Boat, but again restored, were
nothing but the said Cases of Rose Water.

And thirdly, That the English, during our dissension with the Persians, did
all what they could to incense them against us by Calumnies and Falsehoods;
which also did remarkably retard and set back our Business at Court, to the
great loss and detriment of the Dutch Company.

Especially by the Promises they made the Persians with six Ships to chase us
from the Road of Gamron, and out of the Fort of Kismus, whenas nevertheless our
said Fleet consisted of nine Ships, and of which the Dutch Company expects due
Information at the return of our Fleet.

And hereby the Directors of the Netherlandish Company hope they have satisfied
the desire of your Puissant Highnesses, having manifested on the one hand the
Notorious Ungroundedness of all the Complaints brought in by the English; and
on the other hand, the Integrity of the Netherlandish Company in these Matters:
And that thereby your Puissant Highnesses will the more be incited to appear
for the Dutch Company in so Righteous a Cause; and to protect them against all,
and every one, that shall endeavor for this any ways to molest or injure them,
which by these Presents we most humbly request: Having judged that the
Importance of the Cause, and the multiplicity of Enormous Acts wherewith the
Netherlandish Company is laden; and that we might refute all these things in a
due manner, as also give your Puissant Highnesses a Grounded Information, did
require this our large Exhibition of things, and which in all Humility we beg,
may not be unacceptable to your Puissant Highnesses.

Was subscribed, P. VANDAM.

Contra Protest to the ungrounded Aggrievances of the English Residents DANIEL
EDWARDS and FRANCIS SNAPE, both in Service of the Honorable English Company
here in Persia.
Gentlemen;
WE received Yesternight the Protest you sent, and greatly wonder at the
Aggrievances you make about (...) Persian Bark passing throngh our Fleet, and
for some time detained by us; which you affirm to have hired for to unlade the
Merchandises of the Ship called the Merchant of Bengale: To which we answer,
That it cannot be unknown to you, that we have more than a Year secured this
Rode and Gulf with eight or nine Ships; and notwithstanding that our
Commissioners for the compounding of the Differences, are at present at the
Court of Persia, yet our men some few days ago have in a most Hostile manner
been driven from Land, our Flag taken down, and we, as is noised by them of
Gamron, threatened to be ass^ulted here in the Road by a Number of Barks, manned
with Persian Militia; so that Nature teaches us to be upon our watch: And we
thereupon thought it necessary to seize all the Persian Boats, yet without the
least thought of doing any Let or Hinderance to you; as your selves know, that
in the unlading of the Ship Williamson was not done; although the said Ship,
both going and coming, was fraighted with Persian Goods: But on the contrary,
the Day before Yesterday, when we stopped the Persian Bark, which would have
passed our Fleet, we proffered your Truchman David all our own Boats for to
help the said Ship to unlade, both because we would not hinder them in their
Affairs, as also to secure our own Ships from the threatened Mischiefs, (which
by the swerving of the Enemies Boats, pretending to come in the Name, and by
the Order of the English) might have befallen us. But it seems, you were
rather prone thus unjustly to accuse us, that we should have detained your
Goods (which were only the two Cases of Rose Water) than to embrace the kind
Proffer of our Boats. The said David your Truchman took the two Cases into the
Scute wherein he came from Land, at the same time the Bark came on Board of us,
and himself carried them away with him. And forasmuch as it seems to be your
wonted manner, by intricate and practiced Insertions to render things obscure;
this your ungrounded Accusations are not strange unto us, as having since this
Expedition, with much Patience born all the Calumnious Reproaches wherewith you
have a long time sought to make us odious to the Persian Nation, to retard our
Agreement with them: Especially promising them, to make us, with six of your
Ships, to retire out of this Road, and out of Kismus: Of all which we have
sufficient Proofs to show, and withal to make it appear, we had not given you
the least Reason or Provocation thereto. All which has been to the apparent
Damage of our Company: And besides this, ye seek also to constrain us, to let
our Enemies Barks to pass and repass our Fleet. Wherefore in the Name of the
Netherlandish East-Indie Company, we do Protest we are Innocent of all the
Blood, Slaughter, Losses and Inconveniences which shall result from thence, on
the one or other Hand. Given in our Ship the Blaw-Hulck, laying in the Road
before Gamron.

Was Signed, R. Kasembroot. W. Licochton. J. V. Ackersdijk, and W. van
Bullestraten.


Contra Protest against John Goldsborough, Master of the Ship called the
Bengale Merchant.
THE first of June Old Style was delivered unto us by them hereunto appointed,
your Protest; which having considered, we do find in it many things are
mistaken, and by you pressed contrary to Truth; and therefore judge it
unnecessary, to give any Answer thereunto, than what was done by our
Insinuation and Protest delivered over the thirteenth and fourteenth of May N.
S. to the English Residents Daniel Edwards and Francis Snape, of which herewith
a Copy is inserted, and wherein the True State of things is fully contained,
and to which therefore we refer our selves. However we profess to be blameless,
that you by mis-sailing to Shore, came to touch ground once and again with your
Ship, as not being to be imputed to us, but your own unadvisedness. Besides, we
did never forbid or withstand, that any Barks should come to you to fetch
Ballast; and is therefore the fault of the P^rsians, to whom the loss of time,
you say, to have been hindered by it, is also to be imputed, and not to us: And
withal would let you know, we are not such unqualified Persons, as you are
pleased to term us, which rather may be imputed to you, as sufficiently appears
by your unreasonable Protest; and therefore are not any whit troubled, in case
any Dispute do arise thereabout between you and our Company, to be able, as
having Justice and Truth ^n our side, to Answer what has been done. Wherefore
we Protest in the Name and on behalf of the Netherlandish East-Indie Company,
against you John Goldsborough, Master of the Ship called the Bengale Merchant,
and against all other, whoever they be, ^r whom it may concern, that we are
blameless, and not b^und to make satisfaction of your ungrounded Pretenses, or
that any one may unjustly lay to our Charge.

Given in our Ship the Blaw-Hulck, lying in the Road before Gamron, the 19th.
June 1685. S. N. There stood underneath, and was Signed, Reinier Kasembroot,
and Wouter van Bullestraten.

In the Margin, Delivered by us underwritten, And was Signed, Andries van der
Linden, and Jacob Stuyt.


EXTRACT out of the Register of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty Lords
the States General of the United Provinces. Thursday the 18 July, 1686.
IT being deliberated by Resumption upon the Memorial delivered up by the
Directors of the East-Indie Company of these Countries the 22. of June past,
unto their Puissant Highnesses, containing the consequents, and for
satisfaction to their Puissant Highnesses Resolution of the 31. May, past their
Information, upon the Memorial of Mr. Skeleton Envoy Extraordinary of his Royal
Majesty of Great Britain, to this State, delivered up the second of the said
Month to their Puissant Highnesses, touching the affairs of Bantam, it is
understood and found meet by these, to request and give Commission to the Lords
van Else and the other Deputies of their Puissant Highnesses for Outlandish
Affairs, to signify to Mr. Skeleton Envoy Extraordinary, that the differences
concerning what has past at Bantam in the year 1682, being arisen to the state
they are now fallen to his said Majesty and their Puissant Highnesses, they are
prepared and ready to tread into a Conference and Treaty thereof, with the said
Mr. Skeleton, so he be authorized thereto in behalf of his Majesty; or else with
them whom his said Majesty shall be pleased to authorize thereto; and in that
Conference and Treaty to show, that their Puissant Highnesses have no other
meaning and intention, than to preserve and cultivate with his said Majesty and
Subjects, an entire Amity, and that they pretend not to do any wrong unto his
Majesty's Subjects.

Hereunder stood, Agrees with the foresaid Register, Was subscribed H. FAGEL.

EXTRACT out of the Register of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty Lords
the States General of the United Provinces. Tuesday 1. July, 1687.
Was read at the Assembly the Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville,
Extraordinary Envoy of his Majesty of Great Britain, requiring reparation for
what passed at Bantam, according to what is here inserted word for word.

High and Mighty Lords,
AS there is nothing which may contribute more efficaciously to the maintenance
and establishment of Leagues and Alliances made between Kings and States, than
a just and prompt reparation of the Wrong, Injuries and Loss^s, which the
Subjects of one receive from the other.

Therefore the Marquis of Albiville, Envoy Extraordinary of the King of Great
Britain, finds himself commanded by the Order of the King his Master to put
your Highnesses in remembrance of the most considerable losses, enormous
Injuries, and the Honor of his Subjects most sensibly wounded by the
surreptitious, ungodly, and insupportable proceedings of the East Indie Company
of this State at Bantam, and to require without further delay an entire
Satisfaction proportionable to the Enormity of the attempt, and to the Losses
which the Subjects of his said Majesty have suffered.

Given at the Hague the 30. June, in the year 1687. Signed, The Marquess of
Albiville.

Which being deliberated upon, it is found good, and understood, That a Copy of
the foresaid Memorial shall be put into the hands of the Lords Everwyn and
other their Puissant Highnesses Deputies for the affairs of the East Indie
Comprny, to visit and examine the Commissioners of the Directors of the said
Company thereof to hear, as also to take the Considerations and most wise
Advice of his Highness the Prince of Orange, and to make report of the whole to
the Assembly here, and that forthwith an Extract of this their Puissant
Highnesses Resolution, and a Copy of the foresaid Memorial shall be sent to the
Directors of the said East Indie Company of the Praesidial Chamber at
Amsterdam, and therewith written to them, that against this day fortnight,
which shall be the 15, of the present Month, they send hither some
Commissioners well instructed upon the foresaid subject, that so the next day
early in the morning the said business may be taken in hand.

Was Paragraphed B. van Scheltinga.
Lower stood, Agrees with the foresaid Register. Was signed, H. Fagel.

EXTRACT out of the Register of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty Lords
the States General of the United Netherlands. Wednesday 23 July, 1687.
WAS heard the report of the Lords Verbolt and other their Puissant Highnesses
Deputies for Outlandish affairs, having in order, and to satisfying of their
Resolution, as commissionated the 1. of this present, visited and examined the
Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville, Envoy Extraordinary of his Majesty of
Great Britain to this State, by which he requires reparation for what is
passed at Bantam, more largely mentioned in the said Memorial, and in the brief
notes of this present: upon which having deliberated, is found good and
understood, that to the said Marquis of Albiville for answer to the said
Memorial shall be insinuated, that their Puissant Highnesses by their
Resolution 18. July of the year past 1686. have declared to Mr. Skeleton, as
then his Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to this State, that the differences
about what passed at Bantam in June 1682. being arisen to the State that they
were devolved to his said Majesty and their puissant Highnesses, they are
prepared and ready to enter into a Conference and Treaty thereabout with the
forementioned Mr. Skeleton, if that he on the part of his Majesty be authorized
thereunto, or otherwise with such as his said Majesty should be pleased to
authorize; and in that Conference and Treaty, to show, That their Puissant
Highnesses have no other meaning nor intention, than to maintain and cultivate
with the said Majesty and his Subjects an entire Amity, and that they do not
pretend to do any wrong to his Majesty's Subjects; and that therefore their
Puissant Highnesses could not have expected otherwise, from the justice of His
Majesty, but that the said Conference should have been set on foot, and some
person thereunto authorized: and now as yet they adhere to renew the foresaid
declaration, and say, that they still are ready to enter into Conference and
Treaty about the foresaid Differences with the said Marquis of Albiville, in
case he on the part of his Majesty be authorized thereto, or otherwise with
such as his Majesty shall be pleased to authorize, and in those Conferences and
Treaties to show, that they have no other meaning nor intention, than to
preserve and cultivate with his Majesty and Subjects an entire Friendship, and
pretend not to do, or suffer any wrong be done unto His Majesty's Subjects, and
therefore they cannot conceive or apprehend what the foresaid Memorial, and the
terms in which it is couched, would have, or signify; And an Extract of this
their Puissant Highnesses Resolution shall by the Agent Sproussen be delivered
into the hands of the Marquis of Albeville, to serve for his Information,
thereof to make use, so and where it shall be thought fit; and also an Extract
of this their Puissant Highnesses Resolution shall be sent to the Lord Citters,
their Puissant Highnesses Ambassador at the Court of His Majesty the King of
Great Britain, to be subservient unto his Information.

Was paragraphed, Underneath stood, Accords with the aforesaid Register,
Sighned, Francis Verbolt* H. FAGEL.


EXTRACT out of the Register of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty Lords,
the States General of the United Netherlands. Friday the 1. Augusti, 1687.
WAS read at the Assembly the Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville, Envoy
Extraordinary of His Majesty of Great Britain to this State, together with an
Appendix containing Complaints against the East-Indie Company, of these
Countries, as to what should have been attempted at Metocapatans and at
Baktancapas, according to the said Memorial, and the Appendix inserted hereby,
from word to word,

Fiat insertio:

Whereupon being deliberated was found good, and understood that a Copy of the
aforesaid Memorial and Appendix shall be sent to the Directors of the
East-Indie Gompany of the Praesidial Chamber of Amsterdam, for to address an
information thereupon to their Puissant Highnesses, and nevertheless also a
Copy and Appendix thereof shall be delivered into the hands of the Lords
Verbolt, and other their Puissant Highnesses Deputies for outlandish affairs,
to revise, examine and make report of the whole here at the Assembly:

Was Paragraphed, John Vander Bergh, ut, Underneath stood, Agrees with the
aforesaid Register, Was signed H. FAGEL.

Memorial of the Marquis of Albiville Exhibited the 1st. of August, 1687.
High and Mighty Lords,
THE Marquis of Albiville, Envoy Extraordinary of the King of Great Britain,
has received new orders from the King his Master, to signify to your Lordships
the continuance of new injustices and violences offered by your Company of the
East Indies at Mechapatans and Batancapas, as they shall see by the adjoined
writing containing the Particulars thereof.

And as his Majesty finds himself informed of the Answer of your Highnesses
the 23d of the Month past, unto the preceding Memorial of his abovesaid Envoy,
is willing to believe that these things have been committed without your
knowledge; so likewise he does not doubt but they are of ill savor, and
disapproved by your Highnesses, and that he cannot but expect from your justice
and friendship the r^p^ration of these infractions, and the damages which the
Subjects of His Majesty have suffered in these quarters; His Majesty will
willingly also be persuaded by the assurances which the said Memorial gives
him, that your Highnesses will not neglect to send precise and effectual
Orders, to the end, (...) for the future the like attempt be no more used:
(...) means to maintain a good intelligence betwixt (...) Majesty and this
Commonwealth; to which, His Majesty (...) part shall not fail to contribute
always, what in reason may be desired of him.

Given at the Hague this (...) August, 1687. Signed, Marquis of ALBIVILLE.

APPENDIX.
THE English East-Indie Company in a Request they presented to His Majesty of
Great Britain, June 29. 1687. say, they have had advice by diverse Ships newly
arrived, of the injuries and violences the Hollanders have exercised against
the English on the Coast of Cormandel, under pretext of having war with the
King of Golcondach.

That they made themselves Master of Metchalapatam, after the same manner they
seized Bantam.

That they had prohibited the English eight weeks ago to Traffic there any
more, although they have had their residence and Magazine there Eighty or
Ninety years together, and that the Magazine was built by the Company, and that
they bought the very ground upon which it was erected, as may be seen in the
writing of the Governor and the Dutch Council at Pollicats.

That the Hollanders in time of peace did by main force Assault the Fort the
English had built at Batancapas, seated on the West-Coast of Sumatra, to secure
themselves the better of the Traffic in Pepper; that in contempt they brake
and tore in pieces the Pavillion of his Brit^^sh Majesty where it was set up.

That they there pillaged the English.

And because it is apparent, the design of the Hollanders is to appropriate to
themselves by violence, injustice, and oppression, the whole Trade of the
East Indies, The sa^^l Company hops that His Majesty, with the first, will
apply such remedies, as may prevent the continual invasions of the Hollanders.

A Letter of the Holland Company from Pollicat, written August 13. 1686. S. N.
to Mr. William Gifford, President. of the English Company, and to his Council
at the Fort St. George.

It contains in substance, That the said Hollandish Company has been evil
treated some Years since, beyond the Coast of Cormandel; as also the North
Coast from Onixa unto Metchopotam, by the Ministers of State, and the Governors
of the King of Gulcondach.

That they often required Justice, but to no purpose: And for to revenge
themselves of these Injuries, they had seized Metchopotam the 16th. of July.
That for a Mark of the Friendship they desire to maintain with the English
Company, they permit them to embark in their own Ships, out of their Magazines
at Metchepotam the Effects the English had there; ^s also to take out in Barks
all the Provisions, and all the Merchandises which shall come in their Ships to
Metchopotam, for to put them into their Magazines; yet upon condition, that
they shall carry none out of the City of Metchopotam, to sell them to
Merchants, or to the Subjects of the King of Gulcondach, until the said Company
shall have Satisfaction.

The sooner to obtain this Satisfaction, they had resolved not only to hold the
mean while the said City in possession, but also to prevent that the English
should not suffer any Damage during these Troubles; they thought it fit to
advertise them, to bring into their Magazines the Effects they had in the
Country; and that within the space of six or eight Weeks, reckoning from the
time the Company had seized the said City.

That they will also have that the English Company advertise Theirs, of all
what they shall cause to be brought in; to the end, that by the good Order they
shall hold, the Inconveniences may be prevented, which otherwise might befall
the English.

Answer of Mr. William Gifford President, and of the Council of the English
Company, dated..... 1686. written to the Hollands Company at Pollicat. It being
in substance, That the English Company are not Ignorant of the Design the Dutch
Company now has in making themselves Masters in Metchapotam.

That they could wish that the ruinating of the English Commerce, were not the
main End, the Hollanders now a long time had practiced these Tricks:
Particularly at Bantam, and since at Chimatra; but that the Hollanders were as
yet to be responsible unto them.

That they have remarked that the Hollanders in all their Treaties they make
with the Indian Kings and Princes, have endeavored to exclude their Company
from Traffic in their Countries and Ports.

That this Design is now discovered and resented in Europe; that their
Presumption is too great to impose Laws to the English in such a manner; that
now, since they are Possessors of Metchapotam, they will have the English to
comport themselves, as to their Commerce there, according to their Pleasure:
But the English are not obliged to follow their Order: That the House and the
Ground upon which their Magazine is built, is an Heritage acquired by their own
Money.

That upon these Grounds they counsel them to act with Discretion, and agreeing
to Justice.

That they in the mean while will continue to traffic as formerly, and counsel
the Hollanders not to interrupt them, left they should attract sad Consequences
contrary to their Interest.

A Letter of Mr. Samuel Pots, written to Mr. Clement du Chardin, and to the
Council. Indrapanno, the 23d. Sept. 1686.
It contains, First, A Relation of the state of some of the Affairs of the
English Company.

Mr. Pots remits them to a certain Paper of the 26th. of July. to be informed
of the Cause of his Voyage to Batacapas; and why he took with him so much of
the Companies Effects.

He gives Reasons why he did not wait for Orders or Command, before he
undertook the Voyage: That it was, because the two Sons of the Emperor, and the
Mandarins, had extremely pressed him to hast^n the Voyage as much as could be,
lest the Hollanders being advertised of the Design of the English, should
settle themselves there before, and so the English be frustrated of their
Enterprise.

He departed, as he says, from Indraponna the 16th. of July; taking with him
forty men, Domestics and Soldiers, going with them to Pagason, to meet there
the two Sons of the Emperor Manuncabbo, who waited them to go together to
Batancapas, being in all 2000, there to settle the English. That after five
days Voyage they arrived wi^h the Emperor and the two Princes; and that the
Emperor had bid the English to settle themselves there.

That three days before they arrived, the Hollanders had settled and fortified
themselves there upon a Rock on the other side of the River, notwithstanding
that the Emperor and the Mandarins had commanded them to retire; telling them,
That he had given the Country to the King of Great Britain, to settle the
English Company there; and that he had never given Permission to the Dutch to
Reside there.

That the same day of his arriving at Batancapas, the H^llanders had sent him a
Protest; counselling him to take good heed of the Malayans, because they
complained that the English had wronged them by settling at Bancola and at
Indraponna; places which, they said, had formerly been given unto them.

That at the end of two days, he sent them another Protest.

That the day after his arriving, the Emperor and his two Sons arrived; and
themselves planted the Pavillion of the King of England.

That the Hollanders had fortified themselves as much as they could.

That during the three first weeks there was no opposition on the one or other
part, although the English did often press the Mallayans to fall upon the
English.

That the Hollanders, seeing that after all their Persuasions, the Mallayans
would do nothing; forced them to retire further up into the Country, about
three Miles toward the North; with design (as the Emperor and his men
believed) to waste the Country, the Houses, and especially the City of
Batancapas.

That to prevent this Desolation, the Emperor and his two Sons had drawn back
their Forces, except 60 or 70 Mallayans, whom they left there for to cover
their Works.

That after the Retreat of these Troops, the Hollanders in Batancapas, the day
after, being the 23d. of August, on a Friday, and on the Sunday, had shot with
their greatest Cannons at the People as they came to the Market, in hope to
make them afraid, and no more to supply the English, or to bring them any more
Provisions.

That a Cannon-bullet with two Points, striking a Tree near the Palisado of the
English Fort, burst asunder in two Pieces.

That the day after they had dispatched Mr. Samuel Worly to the Hollanders, to
know of them the Reason wherefore they had shot at the Magazine of the English,
and their Men; and to tell their Commander they would send a piece of the
Bullet to the King of England, and inform him of the Affront they had done to
his Subjects: But the Commander not being then present, Mr. Worly had done the
Message to another Gentleman that had the Command in the ab^^nce of the other;
the said Officer should have anvered, That he much wondered they should make
(...) a work of one or two Cannon-shot; and point^^g with his Finger to diverse
Pieces not far off from him, should have said, Behold there a great many core,
which shall be shot off: And not failing of his Word, the same afternoon 21
August, he made two not more, after the same manner as before.

That the Mallayans being affrighted, the greater part which remained with the
English deserted them.

That the Hollanders being advertised hereof, em^arked in their Chalops the
Mallayans, with a number of Dutch Soldiers.

That they fired continually their Great Guns while they were in their Barks;
and at length having set ^oot on Land, they with Fury assaulted the small
number of Mallayans, which were for the English; set on ^re their Pallisado;
and having put to flight the said Mallayans, they fell upon the English which
were at the Entrance of the Pallisado.

That a certain man named Mackolon, an Officer of the Hollanders, told him,
That except he sought to escape, the Mallayans would kill him.

That not fearing their Threats, the Hollanders had commanded the Mallayans to
assault the English; but the Mallayans testifying their dislike by refusing to
do it, the Ensign-bearer set himself in the Front, forced an entrance into the
Fort; being followed of some Mallayans, and about forty Hollanders.

That these Troops were no sooner past the Pallisado, but they said to them and
the other English, That if ever they entered more into the Fort, they might
expect nothing else but to be fallen upon.

That at the very same instant the Dutch Soldiers and the Mallayans began to
plunder, carrying away all they thought was of any worth, and gave it into the
Hands of their Commanders: And while they were thus pillaging, the Dutch
Soldiers in contempt, brake and tore in pieces the Flag of the King of England,
which was set up there.

That after all these Violences, the foresaid Officer, by Order of the
Commander, prayed him to retire on the side of the Hollanders; promising in the
name of the Commander, they would restore the Merchandise, Effects,
Silver-work, Cannon, and all what might appertain to the English, and what
should be found in the Hands of the M^llayans.

That he thereupon going to the Commander named M^ckabon, he instead of
performing what was promised, answered him, He could do nothing in it; and that
what the Mallayans had taken, was justly acquired, and they could not be
constrained to render the same: However, as for the Cannon, he would endeavor
they might be restored.

But coming again to him, after he had ordered men and a Boat to take in the
Cannon, there came some of his men and said, That in case we would have the
Cannon, the Mallyans pretended to have 500 Dollars for them.

Seeing then too apparently, that in this and in all other things the English
were merely deluded, he embarked his Soldiers and Men that were left, and
returned to Indrapanna the 25. of August.


High and Mighty Lords,
WE have received your Puissant Highnesses Letter, and therewith your
Resolution of the first of this present, with an insertion of the Memorial
presented to your Puissant Highnesses, with an Annex by the Marquis of
Albiville, Envoy Extraordinary of his Royal Majesty of Great Britain; which
said Memorial contains Complaints against the transactions and doings of the
Ministers of the Netherlandish Company at Maslapatam upon the Coast of
Cormandel, and at Batancapas upon the West Coast of Sumatra, with their Request
of Reparation; concerning which, your Puissant Highnesses require information
by us. We may not omit, High and Mighty Lords, to propose, with all dutiful
respect to your Puissant Highnesses, That forasmuch as the said Appendix is in
effect the Contents of such Letters which the English Company, as they pretend,
have lately received out of the Indies, diverse particulars are rehearsed in
what manner the things they complain of were there transacted, of which we, by
reason our Ships are not yet arrived, tho expected every hour, cannot have
perfect knowledge: May it therefore please your Puissant Highnesses not to
construe it amiss, that we defer the same a while; however we say aforehand,
that the said Complaints, as they are proposed in the said Memorial, are of two
parts.

First, Against the conduct of our people, in their actings at Maslapatnam: And
secondly, upon the WestCoast of Sumatra, with the wrong done to the English at
both places.

As to the first, we apprehend, that by the information we had the last yeart
out of India, and by another hand, (setting aside what we are yet expecting) we
want no matter fully to justify the transactions of our people there, and to
demonstrate the ungroundedness of the foresaid Complaints.

And what concerns the second, namely, That by force we should have hindered
them, that they could, nor might settle themselves in the Country of the Prince
of Indrapanna, nor build Forts where they pleased; whereas that Prince,
according to what they affirm, had made over that Country to them, although we
cannot directly discover the perfect state and constitution of that business,
until the Ships, which we daily expect be arrived; nevertheless, we are able,
by the information we had the last year concerning it, to affirm from the
contents of those Letters, That the English, by reason of the unhealthfulness
of that Country, and the mortality it brought upon their men, with other
difficulties, were intended, yea, did actually prepare to depart thence, so
that we thought to have mentioned nothing more, nor troubled your Puissant
Highnesses with that business, but have past it by in silence; but seeing out
the foregoing Appendix we find it otherwise, we shall nor may not neglect to
produce with the first opportunity unto your Puissant Highnesses our just
complaints, and withal to show the injuries, losses and intrusions of the
English upon the propriety and right, which we (as to the Westcoast) for a very
long time have had and acquired, and which we yet have the actual possession
and enjoyment of, and can prove, that they continually have sought to debauch,
and draw from us these Princes, who, in acknowledgment of the benefits and
services they received from us, and amongst many other, that we had delivered
them, at our exceeding Charge and Expenses, out of the hands of their Enemies
under whose yoke they were brought; and moreover, at whose Request we have by
solemn Contracts taken upon us, and promised to defend them against all and
every one who should offer to do any injury or violence unto them; and for
which they have declared us for their Sovereigns, and in especial also that
forementioned Prince of Indraponna, in whose Country they have built a Fort,
endeavoring forcibly to thrust us out of our possession, by depriving us of
the enjoyment we had: And yet they themselves confess that our people on the
West-Coast have protested against the injuries they did to them, while they
sought to settle themselves at Boucoulo and Indraponna, Countries and places,
as the real truth is, belonging to us, of which the Contracts are in our hands
time out of mind; and yet they cannot deny, that their people have set
themselves against us by building of Forts to keep us out; yea, they complain,
that we, by raising a Fort, have injured and prevented them, and yet this is
all the damage and wrong, according to their own saying, we have done them. If,
indeed, the English could make it out, and maintain that they have a right to
come into a Country, of which the Sovereignty is made over to us, beside other
engagements we have there, tho as they say, by consent of the said Prince
(although that is not by us owned as true) to build Forts thereby to draw the
Commerce into their hands, with the secluding of us, to whom the right is only
belonging, and yet we not have just cause, by raising a Fort to prevent them;
or that hereby they should have a main Action against us: Certainly this must
needs come from another Law than hitherto has been known to the World. They
accuse us, that we, by privative Contracts, have sought every where to keep
them from Trading, and yet they make their Appeal to such like Contracts which
themselves have made there. The English Company shows, that they wilfully
continue in their custom, to make always complaints, how impertinent or
ungrounded soever, thereby to preoccupy the World, yea, to make an impression
even in the Inhabitants of this State it self, as if we sought nothing else,
but made it our whole business to oppose and be thwarting of the English, as
amongst other their complaints, this also may apparently be seen in the
business of Bantam, which occasioned such commotion and clatter almost in all
places, and concerning which, the Information stated by this Chamber above a
year ago, and presented to your Puissant Highnesses, has clearly mani^ested
what is to be judged of the carriage and conduct of the Netherlandish Company
in that matter, which in the first was so odiously set forth. But forasmuch as
it is our intention, after the arrival of our Ships, whose return from the
Indies we daily expect, more amply, by the permission of your Puissant
Highnesses, to treat of these and other things, when we shall have further
light by the evidences we expect in those Ships, and to show the injuries
offered us; we will herewith conclude, praying, etc.

Beneath stood, High and Mighty Lords, Your most humble Servants, The Directors
of the East-Indie Company of the Chamber of Amsterdam, and from thence,
In the Margin, In Amsterdam, 7. Aug. 1687.

FINIS.

