His MAJESTY'S LATE LETTER IN Vindication of Himself; Dated at St. Germans en
Lay, the Fourteenth of this Instant January, 1688/9.
JAMES R.

MY LORDS; When We saw that it was no longer safe for Us to remain within Our
Kingdom of England, and that thereupon We had taken Our resolutions to withdraw
for some time; We left to be communicated to you and to all Our Subjects, the
Reasons of Our withdrawing: a And were likewise resolved at the same time to
leave such Orders behind Us to you of Our Privy-Councel, as might best suit
with the present state of Affairs: But that being altogether unsafe for Us at
that time; b We now think fit to let you know, that though it has been Our
constant care since Our first Accession to the Crown, to Govern Our People with
that Justice and Moderation, as to give, if possible, c no occasion of
Complaint; yet more particularly upon the late Invasion, d seeing how the
Design was laid; and fearing that Our People, who could not be destroyed but by
themselves might by little imaginary Grievances, b^ cheated into a certain
ruin: To preven^ so great Mischief, and to take away not only all just Causes,
but even Pretencey (...) Discontent; We freely, and of Our own accord redressed
all those Things that were set forth as the Causes of that Invasion: And that
We might be informed by the Council and Advice of Our Subjects themselves,
which way We might give them a further and a full satisfaction; e We resolved
to meet them in a Free Parliament; And in order to it, We first laid the
foundation of such a Free Parliament, in restoring the City of Lond^n and the
rest of the Corporations to their ancient Charters and Privileges; and
afterward actually appointed the Writs to be Issued out for the Parliaments
Meeting on the 15th. of January; f But the Prince of Orange seeing all the Ends
of his Declaration answered, the People beginning to be undeceived, and
returning a-pace to their ancient Duty and Allegiance; and well foreseeing
that if the Parliament should meet at the time appointed, such a Settlement in
all probabil^ty would be made, both in Church and State, as would totally
defeat his ambitious and unjust Designs, resolved by all means possible to
prevent the Meeting of the Parliament: g And to do this the most effectual way,
he thought fit to lay a restraint on Our Royal Person; for as it were absurd to
call that a Free Parliament, where there is any Force on either of the Houses,
so much less can that Parliament be said to act Freely where the Sovereign, by
whose Authority they Meet and Sir, and from whose Royal Assent all their Acts
receive their Life and Sanction, is under actual Confinement. The hurrying of
Us under a Guard from Our City of London, h whose returning Loyalty We could no
longer Trust, and the other Indignities We suffered in the Person of the Earl
of Feversham when sent to him by Us; and in that barbarous Confinement of Our
own Person, We shall not here repeat, because they are, We doubt not by this
time, very well known; and may, We hope, if enough considered and reflected
upon; together with his other Violations and Breaches of the Laws and Liberties
of England, which by this Invasion he pretended to restore, be sufficient to
open the Eyes of all Our Subjects, and let them plainly see what every one of
them may expect, and what Treatment they shall find from him, if at any time it
may serve his purpose, from whose hands a Sovereign Prince, an Uncle, and a
Father could meet with no better Entertainment. i However the sense of these
Indignities, and the just apprehension of further Attempts against Our Person
by them who already endeavored to murder Our Reputation by Infamous Calumnies
(as if We had been capable of a supposed Prince of Wales) which was
incomparably more Injurious, then the Destroying of Our Person it Self;
together with a serious reflection on a Saying of Our Royal Father of Blessed
Memory, when He was in the like Circumstances, That there is little distance
between the Prisons and the Graves of Princes (which afterward proved too true
in His Case) could not but persuade Us to make use of that which the Law of
Nature gives to the meanest of Our Subjects, of freeing Our selves by all means
possible from that unjust Confinement and Restraint. k And this We did not more
for the Security of Our own Person, than that thereby We might be in a better
Capacity of transacting and providing for every thing that may Contribute to
the Peace and Settlement of Our Kingdoms: For as on the one hand, no change of
Fortune shall ever make Us forget Our selves, so far as to Condescend to any
thing, unbecoming that High and Royal Station, in which God Almighty by Right
of Succession has placed Us: l So on the other hand, neither the Provocation or
Ingratitude of Our own Subjects, nor any other Consideration whatsoever, shall
ever prevail with Us to make the least step contrary to the True Interest of
the English Nation; which We ever did, and ever must look upon as Our own. OUR
WILL and Pleasure therefore is, That you of Our Privy-Councel, take the most
effectual Care to make these Our Gracious Intentions known to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in and about Our Cities of London and Westminster, to
the Lord Mayor and Commons of Our City of London, and to all Our Subjects in
general; m And to assure them, that We desire nothing more, than to return and
hold a Free Parliament, wherein We may have the best opportunity of Undeceiving
Our People, and showing the Sincerity of those Protestations We have often made
of the preserving the Liberties and Properties of Our Subjects and the
Protestant Religion; more especially the Church of England as by Law
Established, with such Indulgence for those that Dissent from Her, as We have
always thought Our selves in Justice and Care of the general Welfare of Our
People, bound to procure for them. And in the mean time You of Our
Privy-Councel (who can judge better by being upon the place) are to send Us
your Advice, what is fit to be done by Us toward Our Returning and the
Accomplishing those Good Ends. And We do require you in Our Name, and by Our
Authority, to Endeavor to Suppress all Tumults and Disorders, that the Nation
in general, and every one of Our Subjects in particular, may not receive the
least prejudice from the present Distractions that is possible. So not doubting
of your Dutiful Obedience to these Our Royal Commands, We bid you Heartily
Farewell. Given at St. Germans en Lay the (...) of January 1688/9. And of Our
Reign the Fourth Year.

By His Majesty's Command. MELFORT.
Directed thus to the Lords, and Others of Our Privy-Councel of Our Kingdom of
England.
Remarques,
THis Paper has been industriously and privately dispersed about the City,
bearing the Title of his Majesty's Letter, being the Second (said to be by the
Romanists) writ since his Desertion, to the Lords of the Privy Council; and
because we have yet a veneration left for the Father of our Royal Princesses,
we will forbear any severity in our Remarques, as may seem designedly to
aggravate those misfortunes his Majesty may lie under, though we cannot
altogether be silent in a matter that leaves us all under the heavy imputation
of the worst of Criminals: a His Mjesty is pleased in the beginning of his
Letter to repeat the Reasons he gave in his first departure from Rochester,
which because they are fully answered in another Paper, I shall here pass over,
for being indeed writ in a hurry, and under apprehensions of danger, it is
possible his more material and pertinent objections and reasons might have been
slipped over; b but being now more at leisure, he has been pleased to let us know
what we have been hitherto unfortunately ignorant of, and which our hardened
infidelity, till we have more material demonstration than Words, will not
readily let us assent to; how nice and cautious his Majesty has been of giving
his People any just cause of complaint, may be guessed from this, that he has
been pleased to trample upon, and in effect annul more Law* and Privileges in
the four years of his Reign, than his Predecessors for fourscore years has made
for our preservation: c Indeed as he is willing to suggest he made an offer of
restoration and redress, but we way presume to believe he mistrusted his Game
when saw the Trump turned up, and so like a wary Gamster was willing to change
his Cards, or else refer himself to the good hap of another Deal: d His Majesty
is pleased to tell us he had a desire to have all grievances redressed by a
free Parliament, which he resolved speedily to call, but as this could not suit
with the safety and wishes of some corrupt Ministers about him, so he was
readily persuaded to quit those intentions; and though some of the Writs were
issued out for their Sitting, yet he showed us the sincerity of his meaning by
his sudden withdrawing: e That the Prince meant nothing else by his coming,
than the re-settling the shaken Foundations of our Laws and Religion, by an
open and free Convention of the States, is plain, from his great moderation
since their Sitting, and we may justly say, he has been far more modest in all
his demands, than we have been grateful in the readiness of our Grants. f I
know not how we can believe his Majesty was ever under restraint since his so
easy Desertion seems to contradict the Assertion: g That the City or Country
had changed their resolution, we cannot apprehend, and their constant adhereing
to their first Addresses to the Prince, shows his Majesty has been deceived in
his News: h How instrumental the Prince has been in defaming his Majesty,
especially in the matter of the P. of Wales, all the Kingdom can judge, and we
all could wish his Majesty's Reputation may be proved innocent and clear from
so black a Design: However we wish that his Majesty had been pleased to have
left the Infant among us, which after the proof of his Birth of the Queen had
been a great Security of his Title to the Crown. i As his Majesty has received
many signal proofs of our love and duty, so in this Retirement of his, he has
been pleased to show us the first instance of his care of our Safty, k and as
his Majesty never gave us reason to suspect the intention of his promises,
never to molest or injure the peace and interest of his Kingdom of England, so
we cannot but in gratitude wish his Majesty all the Peace and Quiet that his
pious Zeal inclines him to. l His Majesty in his gracious Condescensions is
pleased again to promise us the preservation of our Laws and Liberties, and
especially the security of the Protestant Religion, but because we cannot
invent other means to assure us of the performance of this than his Word, the
repeated breach of which he has not as yet vouchsafed to acknowledge, we can
hardly be sure of his Majesty's meaning, and may instead of finding redress of
our grievances, be apprehended as Slanderers, and punished as Criminals.

FINIS.
Printed for John Flemming, 1688/9.


