AN EXCELLENT SPEECH Spoken by His Highness JAMES DUKE OF YORK TO ENGLANDS
renowned General, His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, at the Kings Majesty's
Royal Court at Causam.

TOGETHER, With His Excellencies Answer to the said Speech, concerning the
Kings Majesty, and His Royal Posterity.

Also the chief Heads of the Armies new Declaration concerning the King^
Parliament, and Kingdom. With a Message from the General to the Citizens of
LONDON.

Printed at Oxford for Edward Benington, for the public use of Great Britain,
Anno 1647.

THE COPY OF LETTER FROM The Generals Headquarters at Redding, to the Citizens
of London.
Gentlemen,
THe particulars which I have to represent unto you at this present, are things
very remarkable and of great consequence, being of ripeness and maturity, both
for the view of your Metropolis, and the whole Kingdom also: Therefore, for
satisfaction of your selves, and the rest of your Fellow Commoners, I shall
here communicate unto you, a Copy of the Generals Declaration to the Lord
Mayor and Citizens of London; together with another Paper of great consequence,
agreed upon by his Excellency, and the Council of War, concerning the
Freeborn Subjeands of this Nation; both which, I shall here infer verbatim.

A Copy (...) the Declaration sent from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to
the Lord Mayor and Citizens of London.
Whereas in the carrying on of the great businesses of the Kingdom toward a
general and happy settlement, it has been a sixed principle with us to make
it our first endeavor with the Parliament, that all things which threaten an
Engagement of the Kingdom in a second war, might be removed before we could
have a confident expectation of a good issue; upon a Treaty with their
Commissioners, which course of ours, although it might have some appearance of
delay: yet, by men that are zealous of the Kingdoms good (we hope) no
endeavor will be judged unnecessary, that may secure the Kingdom from the
danger of any new imbroylments.

We are now come thus far, that the most material particulars which we have in
preparation to propose, for the general settlement of the affaries of the
Kingdom, have bin communicated to the Parliaments Commissioners; and we hope
they are satisfied that they contain in them things tending to a general
good, and to lay an hopeful Foundation for common Right, and Freedom, to the
people of this Land for future; and for a lasting peace amongst us. But before
we can securely intend and without interruption apply our selves, unto the
proceedings and dispatch of the Treaty, there upon we have delivered into the
hands of their Comissioners, the paper which consists of three particulars, in
the last whereof (which is the Militia of the City) you being most immediately
concerned, to the end you may see we would ask nothing which relates to you,
without giving you a just account thereof, and all possible satisfaction
therein; we have also given a Copy thereof to your Commissioners, to be here
with sent unto you. We should not desire this or and thing else of that nature
were we persuaded, that what we desire is seasonable, and for yours and the
Kingdoms good and quiet. And we should willingly have been silent (as to
this:) but considering the just jealousies which lie against some persons, now
authorized in the exercise of that powea amongst you, and those attempts which
have him made by some, who would have engaged your city, to a war, had not
your Lordships and the court of Aldermen and Commen-Councell by your wisdom
prevented it, by getting those votes which were passed by the Militia, made
null.

We cannot in a case of this importance but deal freely with you, in desiring
your concurrence with ours to the Parliament; that the Militia may be changed
into those hands, out of which it was taken, of whose care and fidelity to the
Public, there has been so long and large experience, as few ages have
paralleld. And if the intere^t we have so long fought for be still the same,
let it not seem strange that we desire both of the parliament and City, that
those may be in places of such a trust, who have given the best proof of their
courage and constancy in prosecution of the same. Having thus far declared our
selves with all freedom and clearness to you, as we do not doubt of your good
acceptance of our intention therein, so we desire your forwardness in a work
so much tending to mutual confidence: and to prevent the designs of any who
would be glad to put obstructions in the way to a happy conclusion, and envy
nothing more then the continuance of a aight understanding between you and us.

Redding July 18. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and his Council of War. Signed, John Rushworth, Secre.

A Copy of another Paper from the Army, concerning the Freeborn People of
England.
HIs Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax has writ to the parliament in t^e^e words,
That all persons imprisoned in England, or Dominion of Wales (not for
Delinquenc^e in relation to the late war) may be brought to a speedy trial, and
if they appear wrong fully, or unduly impris^ned, they may have reputation
according to their sufferings. And in particular, it is desired that this may
be done in behalf of Lieutenant Col. Lilburn, M. Musgrave, M. Overton, and
others (in their condition) imprisoned about London.

SIR,
Upon the close of this Letter, a Gentleman residing near the Court, intimated
unto me, that when His Majesty's Children were at Causam, his Excellency Sir T.
Fairfax came also ^hither, and presenled himself before the two Dukes, and the
Princess; to whom the Duke of York made this ensuing Speech.

Renowned General,
We heartily thank you for the great happiness we now enjoy by the sight of
Our dear Father, the effecting whereof, we cannot but attribute wholly to your
industry and engagement; and as it is a great favor to Us, so shall it be no
prejudice to you: Pray accept of this Our acknowledgment, as the first part of
requital, being all we are able to do at present; but if ever it lies in our
power, it shall (...) ^etter requited.

To which his Excellency replied, That it was the least of those duties wherein
he was obliged to serve his Ma^^^^, and his Royal Posterity.

But by reason of our motion Northward, I dare not detract too much time, but
must of necessity draw to a period; only (in brief) I shall give you some of
the chief Heads concerning the Armies grand Declaration, now speedil^ (...) be
presented to both Houses of Parliament, VIZ. 1. That a Council of State
consisting of 21. may have the ordering of the Militia, and power to treat with
foreign States. 2. That a period be set to this Parliament. 3. That some penal
Statutes be repealed. 4. An Act of Oblivion past, and the future Parliaments
biennuall. 5. Something concerning the King, touching Parliaments. 6.
Concerning liberty of Conscience.


Thus having given you a brief account, I remain

Yours to serve you, William S^n^ers.
Redding 22 of July 1947.


