A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN IN THE COUNTRY TO HIS Friend in the City: TOUCHING
Sir WILLIAM PETTY's Posthumous Treatise; ENTITLED, Verbum Sapienti: Or, The
Method of Raising Taxes in the most equal Manner, etc.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed by G. C. for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, where Gentlemen and others may be furnished with School-Books, and
most sorts of Acts of Parliament, Kings, Lord Chancellors, Lord Keepers and
Speakers Speeches; and other sorts of Discourses, and State-Matters; as also
Books of Divinity, Church Government, Humanity, Sermons on most Occasions,
Blank Funeral-Tickets, etc. 1691.

A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in the Country TO HIS Friend in the City, etc.
SIR,
IN Obedience to your Command, I have diligently perused Sir William Petty's
ingenious Treatise, Entitled Verbum Sapienti, etc. And shall offer you my
Sense of it with the utmost Brevity, which the real weight and mavelous
variety of Matter admits.

I cannot enough commend the Learned Author's Scope and Design to give us a
perfect State of our chiefest Public Concernments, and that at a time, when we
seemed so much to need it: Or, (as in another Case he is pleased himself to
term it) Our Political Anatomy: Wherein, if any Mistakes or Omissions there
seem to be, without doubt the Merit of so noble an Enterprise makes more than
double Amends. In magnis voluisse sat est.

I may likewise without Complement to him affirm, it is the first considerable
Essay of this nature, which I have seen or heard of; and therefore treading in
an unbeaten Path, he cannot Err, but very pardonably, so as to challenge our
Thanks, rather than incur our Censure. Nor will it, I hope, be any blemish or
derogation to so great a Master of Political Measures, as Sir William Petty is
reputed: If one, who, it is like, would never himself have thought of a
Performance so useful to the Public, nor could, to be sure, had he luckily
stumbled on it, have acquitted himself therein half so well, yet standing, as
it were, upon his Shoulders, should pretend in some things to see farther now,
than he at the time he wrote could do. For indeed we rightly say, Bernardus non
videt omnia. And a known Maxim tells us, Facile est nonnihil inventis addere.

This Apology premised, I shall, with your Patience, take the Treatise it self
in pieces, and cursorily examine it, Chapter by Chapter, both to give his
important Discoveries their due Commendation, and note his seeming defects.

In his short, but Solid Introduction, he gives us a general, yet excellent
View of our dangerous (not to say monstrous) Disproportions, in point of
Taxing: Wisely withal insinuating, how light and even infensible our Burdens
equally charged would be, which yet, by many long continued Inequalities, have
oft-times proved so heavy, sometimes insupportable. Whereof I shall only say,
if herein at all he Err, it is sufficiently on the modester and safer side, in
rather palliating, than aggravating our Misconduct on that behalf.

In his First Chapter, he presents us a kind of Particular or Rentall of our
Estate: Examining, as it were, with Boccaline, our real Weight. Therein
yielding us a fair Occasion of Enquiry, how the Parts agree with the Total; and
whether he has left out nothing, or nothing very material.

It is not my business here to contest with him the just Values of the several
Branches specified in his Catalogue. Rather I shall take his Account thereof de
been esse, as equally probable with others, which I have met with of the same
kind, though different enough, and some of them much greater than his: Such
Measures being at best Conjectural, and therefore so various, as hardly two of
ten exactly, or to any purpose agree. But I doubt, it will appear, he has
unhappily overseen diverse personal Profits and Revenues, in themselves as
considerable, as most of those he has inserted, perhaps more easy, clear, and
certain, viz. Professions, Offices; Above all, Interest of Money. Which, though
they do not, I grant, improve, or enlarge our Fund, (indeed I could wish they
did not, at least some of them much impair it,) yet where the principal Aim is
professed to be an equal Apportionment of our Public Contributions, ought to
have been placed in the first Rank, and surely should be charged to the full:
The rather in my Judgment, for the very doubtful Advantage, if not indeed the
manifest Prejudice and Encumbrance, which some of them are but too apt to bring
us.

The discursive part of his Second Chapter is very useful, and indeed curious;
In showing us, how Industry Co-operates wlth Nature, for our comfortable
Subsistence, and in what Proportions to each other. Our Earnings he seems to
rate with his wonted Modesty: However, the mean Estimate he gives them cannot,
I think, but imply, they are capable of a large and easy Advancement.

In the Third Chapter he computes and compares the yearly Charges of the
Kingdom with its Revenues, as succinctly, yet fairly and probaly, as ever yet I
heard them stated.

In his Fourth, he teaches us, how a Million per Annum, (at which he seems
considerately enough to reckon our whole ordinary Expenses,) may be raised with
the least Oppression or Burden. Wherein, no doubt, he were happy even to some
Exactness, could we but admit the Groundwork, which he laid in his First
Chapter to be free from all Exceptions.

The Argument of his Fifth Chapter, although it may seem notional, and at the
first sight, abrupt, is very Pertinent and Substantial. Supposing Six Millions
only to be the ready Coin, or running Cash of England, he enquires, Whether it
suffice for the Circulations or Revolutions of a thriving Trade, and easily
resolves it in the Affirmative. Thereby acquainting us, That it is not the
Species or Quantity, but the due Circulation of Money, which ought to be
considered. Since, although we had much less, yet fairly Circulating, we should
find no lack of it; or had we much more, it would but stagnate, without a
Regular Distribution: In which respect, by the way, methinks, it rather
resembles our Blood than our Fat. Now this will lead us to a farther necessary
Search, what it is which thus obstructs this due Circulation: Wherein 'twill, I
think, appear, that the annual Profits or Rents of Land, being the Source, as
it were, of all our Payments, or current Dealings in Trade, if instead of the
nimble Returns, by our Author supposed, the most, and even the best of our
Country Tenants be above a Year behind with their Rents, others at least twice
or thrice as long. Too many totally insolvent; Abundance of our greatest Farms,
at the same time, either lying waste, or being in the Tenure of hinderly, idle,
or ignorant Owners, to little or no Account: whereby probably Land-Rents are
now one with another in most Countries two or three Years in Arrear, and a
great part of them in a manner Desperate. If all this, I say, appear, as surely
it does, and that to the full; we need not, I trust, resort to a Conjurer, to
learn, where the stoppage lies, nor will it require much Skill or Study to
find, how only some good Provision for the due Payment of our Land-Rents can
now relieve us: And how that is to be Effected, seems also no Enigma. Sure I
am, not by the sole-Taxing of Land.

Were the Species or Quantity of Bullion a real Cause of Current Payment, or of
a Sound Trade, Spain, without dispute, would then have the greatest, whereas,
God knows, she has the least Share of it. Which shows us, how fondly some have
doated on the Abundance of Coin; whilst others as weakly have suffered
themselves to be imposed on with a silly Sophism, viz. the Confounding of those
widely different Notions of Money; As of old it ever was a happy harmless
Expedient of Commerce, and as it is unhappily now become a mighty Revenue, or
Money Current with Money Lent. The former, I verily believe, in respect of the
latter, being not One to Thirty, perhaps much more: And by our Judicious
Author's Estimate, compared with our whole Effects, less than One to a Hundred.

In his Sixth Chapter, he undertakes to show us the Causes of our Irregular
Taxing; whereof he there alleges diverse specious ones, and aptly enough
enforces them; which, I grant, may all of them more or less have contributed,
or at least given color to it. Though truly, were my late worthy Friend, Sir
William Petty, living, I could not choose but take him aside, whisper softly in
his Ear, and only ask him, If in good earnest he thought, That at the time when
he wrote, there might have been no other Causes assigned, viz. no dark
Interests, or rather rank Combinations, of some, point blank to favor
themselves in their immediate Payments; of others, to keep the Land at an
under-rate, till they had made their intended Purchases of it: And perhaps of
others yet, to close, or at least comply, with the Court-Intrigues, or on other
by-respects.

His Seventh tells us of many notable Uses, or collateral Advantages, to be
made of the several Methods of Taxing, viz. by Customs, by Poll, as well
Compound as Simple, by Chimnies, by Excise, by Land Tax, and by Assessment on
the concealed Estates, viz. Interest-Monies; which I could heartily wish, he
would have taught us his Art, how to render visible, and thereby liable to
Taxing, if not with the Custom-house Law, in obliging them, under their utmost
Peril of Forfeiture, to unmask and Rate themselves. Most of these Uses indeed
are worthy of Consideration, though surely in no degree comparable to the
matchless Benefit of a mixed general and comprehensive Rate, (had we once the
Blessing to light upon it,) which should bring almost every individual
Shoulder, or at least every Rank, to bear its equal Share of all our Burdens.
A State, having once got this great Receipt, has, as it were, found its
Elixir. And yet the Learning of it, I must tell you, seems to require, rather a
towardly Disposition, than a large Capacity, there being so fair a Pattern of
it at hand, in our Neighborhood. If by our Author's Measures, we could well
bear the yearly Charge of four Millions: By this, I dare say, we might, with
less Hardship, at least Ten or Twelve.

In his Eighth, he gives a full Account, what great things are to be done at
the Expense of 3300000 l. And so by moderate Calculation, without any extreme
Pressure or Grievance of the People: To all which, for ought I see, no
Exception can be justly taken.

In his Ninth he produces five effectual Motives, for the persuading of us to
bear even our highest Taxes, (he means, I suppose, should they be never so
unequally laid,) with discreet Submission. Of which, no doubt, all true
Englishmen would in this Juncture cheerfully secure him, if any could warrant
them, no public Calamity, or horrible Inconvenience, viz. by Famine, or at
least general Impoverishment and Insolvency, shall in a short time ensue from
such insupportable Burdens.

His last Chapter has many considerable Hints: And had he but done us the
Favor to set us in a right way, how we shall augment, indeed multiply the
Product of our Lands, (as by many modern Improvements even at the time he
wrote, we had fairly begun, and daily further proceed to do beyond our
Neighbors, as well as Ancestors,) without the rendering of it Dog-cheap, to
the Ruin of Farming, and with it, in time, all honest Endeavor; he would
therein, not only have consummated our worldly Felicity, but crowned his whole
Work.

As for the mighty Success he promises, with the prudent Direction he gives us,
for Employing all our Hands, I can only say, Till the Monstrous Block of
Fomenting Sloth it self, with the noblest of Privileges, an absolute Exemption
from Taxes, and feeding it with the Spoil of Industry, be removed, it is
altogether hopeless, but will be then as needless: Wise Nature requiring of us
only her Freedom from all Constraint or Restraint, and almost as ill brooking
to be Prompted, as Forced or Checked.

But upon the whole Matter he has given us, though not a perfect, at least the
usefullest Map of our Country, that in my Judgment has been hitherto made. He
has fairly set before us both our Strength and Weakness, our Advantages,
together with our Defects. He has taught us a sort of Learning we mainly
wanted, viz. the Skill of Taxing, and withal Living, I hope, by Measure, in
relation to what we are really worth. In sum, He has laid us the Groundwork
of a noble Fabric; and if those, who shall hereafter attempt to build
thereupon, (as I doubt not many good Wits, as well as public Spirits, will
endeavor,) acquit but themselves half like Sir William Petty, we may soon
expect to see a Mausoleum. Yet as excellent Pictures have always at first their
rough or dead Draughts, and no work of the greatest Moment was ever at once, or
perhaps at twice or thrice consummated; He has withal made some Blots or
Oversights, such as, in good troth, I scarce expected from so rare an Artist.

1. He should, I humbly conceive, have taken his Flight or Rise from a Previous
Discourse on the vast Consequences of equal or unequal Taxing. It may perhaps
here be said, The very Title of his Treatise imports no less: And besides, he
has therein scattered diverse pertinent Reflections of that Tenor. Yet the
Matter, I take it, would well have borne, indeed deserved his express and
accurate handling of it. Wherein most aptly, as well as evidently, he might
have shown, how all Nations have from time to time declined or flourished, in
proportion to their due or undue Methods of Contribution: How to the latter of
these may be fairly imputed most of the famous Revolts of Provinces,
Enthralments of Free Countries, violent Changes of Government, with other
Calamities, and even Depopulations, which we meet with in our Chronicles. How
from the same Root have likewise sprung the foulest Corruptions of Manners,
with the most Notorious Scandals: It manifestly disposing, if not rather
exposing, one part of any People to all the Enormities attending vast
Superfluity; the other to the dishonest Shifts and Practices of an indigent
Fortune. Whereby, betwixt the vain Pomp, with the Luxury and Arrogance of such,
as swimming in Wealth, yet contribute little or nothing to the Public; and the
lamentable Distresses, irreconcilable Grudges, indeed deadly Feuds of those,
who under their straight Circumstances, bearing in effect the whole Burden,
find themselves thereby suddenly supplanted, and many of them reduced from a
Plentiful Estate to Beggary with Contempt; All Virtue must needs expire, all
Vices enter with a Torrent: And there is neither Mischief nor Crime, to which
this Oppression, where it is extreme, or of long Continuance, may not with
color enough be entitled. If I be not much deceived, our present Rates further
pursued, will in a short time leave us as little Goodness, or real Worth, as
Wealth.

I look it should here be objected, That the very Language of Equal Taxing, is
merely Platonic and Utopian; That there never was, will, or can be, any such
thing reduced to Practice, no not of old in the purest state of Rome, or now in
Holland, or Swisserland. That it sounds Seditious, and is only fit for
Demagogues, therewith to incense the Mobile. To which give me leave to answer
with this sincere Protestation, that I never once so much as dreamed of any
perfect Equality, well knowing, that in all such Cases there would be fair
Grains of Allowance for Practical Miscarriages. But still, in Gods name, let
them be only Grains, not Ounces, and much less Pounds. To this our ingenious
Author, no doubt, would readily have subscribed. And surely were our
Disproportions but double, (however inconsistent even that must be with a
thriving Commonwealth,) yet few, I dare say, would now even murmur. I freely
answer for One.

2. I could not easily, without seeing, have believed; That in such an Enquiry,
one of our Author's Nostrils should hardly mention Interest Money, save in some
sort to excuse or extenuate its Oppression, as also that he should write with
so little concernment of our sole Land-Taxes. But am thoroughly scandalized, he
should so forget his own dear Art of Arithmetic, in his wrong Measures of
them. He tells us, forsooth, In a Monthly Land Tax of seventy thousand Pounds,
Landlords pay two Shillings in the Pound: which is sure a strange Misreckoning
in all but Ground-Rents; seemingly founded on the Erroneous Supposal, that all
our Land-Rents are such. Whereas one would think, it should now require small
Skill in Accounts, as well as little Experience, to know, That allowing for
heavy Repairs, with other endless Charges, incident to all Estates in the
Country, there must needs be paid to such a Land Tax at least four Shillings in
the Pound, not perhaps of Rents reserved, yet doubtless of such as are received
de claro. For I dare affirm, take our Landlords round, they pay thereunto much
more than double, considering, how many of the prime Nobility and Gentry, owing
great Sums, pay their Creditors Taxes, as well as their own; How many again
having Estates far remote from their Dwellings, through their Farms lying
Vacant, or Tenants failing, in many Years see little of Rent, yet hardly avoid
the Payment of all Sesses, as well Parochial as Public. Not to mention the
mavelous Variety of our Marsh or Fenny Grounds, our mean Candle-Rents, our
Wind-mills and Water-mills, with abundance of others, obnoxious either to
deadly Casualties or heavy Charges, and oft-times to both. So that, by as
current Estimates, as most of these our Author offers, it seems highly
probable, the Monthly Assessment even of seventy thousand Pounds, to speak
modestly, in most places is not discharged with a full Noble in the Pound of
the Liquid Rents of Land.

He admits indeed, a Fourth part of the People bears our whole Burden, which,
to do him right, is much more than hitherto has been allowed, and would
heretofore have passed for a monstrous Paradox. Yet if it be made appear, that
it is not bearly a Fourth, but a Ninth, or Tenth, indeed I dare hardly guess,
how small a part of the Nation bears our whole Charge; Though we still must own
his Ingenuity, both in discovering and granting to us so much, yet I cannot
choose but reflect on his Oversight, either in observing or yielding no more.

His Estimate of a Fourth he seems fairly enough to ground upon the Exemption
in effect of the whole Commonalty, and of mighty Stocks in Trade. But he
strangly passes by both Offices and Professions, which may well be computed
near equal to our Land-Rents, as now they are charged: Above all, little notice
he takes of Estates concealed at Interest, which in all likelihood, are still,
as they long have been, the greater half of our real Fund.

I must needs confess, on my first general View hereof, I thought it next to
impossible, that all of these together much less any one of them singly should
for Revenue balance our Land-Rents. But discoursing since thereof with Persons
of approved Insight and Experience; Besides on a fair Review considering, how
on the one side, not only the chief Estates of the Nobility and Gentry have
long been, and are still grievously encumbered with Debts, or at least with
Portions, but the greatest part of our petty Traders, as well as Farmers, now
pay one with another, to speak Modestly, more than Six per cent, for the better
half of their Wares and Stocks, though few of them, in their several ways of
Dealing, can raise near so much: On the other side weighing, how Moneys at Use
are notoriously the Provision in effect of all younger Children, the Estate of
most Men of Profession or Office, the surest Income of our Ablest, whether
Wholesale or Retail Traders, the general Livelihood of our old Men, retired
from Affairs, I am now fully convinced, that coming so clear, and being so
amply secured, either by Mortgages or Sureties, our Interest of Money must far
exceed our*Land Revenues, encumbered as now they are, and attended with their
unsteady Payments, wretched Securities, and heavy constant Charges, besides all
extraordinary Burdens. Whereby, as was said before, it plainly appears to be
much more than Equivalent, if not to Land-Rents reserved, yet at least to those
received.

That Professions and Offices are also betwixt them near equal to the
Land-Rents, seems as reasonable a Measure, as the most of those our ingenious
Author has offered us: That to at least forty or fifty Capital Aids within
memory, they have not paid above twice or thrice, is matter of Fact, and that
no yearly Profits ought to be more strictly charged than they, methinks speaks
it self; By reason of their clear and even daily Income, the constant gradual
Increase of their Customary Fees, with their immediate dependence upon the
State, for Privilege and Favor. In which respects, I suppose, among our
Adversaries of France, they with the Clergy, it is said, now bear the main
Expense of this heavy War.

Our Prudent Author himself computes our People, with their Labor and
Sustenance, to hold much the like Proportion with all our other Effects, as
five and twenty does to fifteen, but treble at least to our Land-Rents: And
thence judiciously infers, that they, as well as any, may bear their Quota of
all public Burdens, answerable to the Substance of so great an aggregate
Body, which, as he likewise aptly shows us, would probably amount to our Wish,
in an easy Poll, often repeated, or gentle Excise well placed, or both. A
Proposal now seemingly much enforced by the daily dangerous Growth of Wages,
concurrent with the Fall of Provisions and Rents. Were this Nail driven home,
it would alone much alleviate the Charge of our Lands: Though still I conceive,
only the mixed comprehensive Rate, equally reaching and affecting at least all
Ranks, can upon great and instant Occasions render our Burdens easy, or
indeed tolerable.

Our Trade is either Foreign or Domestic: The former of these, I would
willingly believe, our Author sets at too low a Rate, viz. an Eight part only
of our Effects* Sure I am, it should, and easily might be more, or we have too
much doated on it, as if it had been our main Support. This in Prudent
Governments has ever been lightly charged for the benefit of Navigation.
Indeed it feels even the smallest Imposts, its Hazards being great and many;
And if it cannot ply the Market with the Cheapest, 'twere better for it to stay
at home; A Grain or Scruple oft-times turning that Scale as well as an Ounce.
With Submission therefore, I wish it in great measure discharged, and the
Duties elsewhere laid, as with ease enough, for ought I see, they might. But
then it would be likewise well balanced, especially with the necessary and
obvious Arts of curbing our Sloth and Luxury. For the latter, viz. Domestic,
and chiefly Retail Trade, why should it not bear its full share of all our
Burdens? Though none, I confess, like Interest of Money, with some other
Liquid Revenues, which, I dare aver, now to rate them equally, deserve at the
least a double Charge. The vast Stocks herein employed would without much
hardship yield us a fair Supply, to the ease and benefit both of Land and
Foreign Trade. Without much hardship indeed: For the Charge, which through the
present Mischief of sole Taxing, now crushes the Land, and by Consequence will
ere long crush all, were it tollerably divided, would be no more than a
Flea-bit to any. Rather on the contrary, there is hardly one well-meaning
Person here among us, but would quickly feel the benign Influence of that
honest and wise Maxim, Live and let live. So as it may well be said, whosoever
opposes, grudges, or industriously avoids equality of Taxing, upon the matter
aloud declares, he would fire his Neighbor's House, or rather, as far as in him
lies, set his Country it self on a Flame, merely to Roast his own Eggs. And to
Argue, as still our Sophisters do, that Taxes should not, indeed cannot be
equally laid, as it is only Gratis dictum, and most abominably selfish, so in
this Juncture, I doubt, it Tolls our Passing bell.

Thus betwixt the Swarms of our People, with the vast Stocks of our Trade, by
our ingenious Author specified, Interest of Money, Offices, Professions, etc.
now be superadded, all which in our Land-Taxes are not only at present excused,
but have, for at least forty Years past, seldom and lamely, God knows,
contributed to our almost innumerable heavy Burdens; To me it seems
undeniable, that a very small part of the Nation, (how small indeed, is scarce
credible) has all along borne the Charges of the whole. With this severe
Aggravation, that the Parties hereby grieved have in effect only been our
Industry and our Quality, which should, if any, have been favored, those
excused the Sloathful with the Vulgar. So as we are rather to marvel, we are
not already swallowed up, as it were, in a Gulf or Quicksand, or how we still
subsist as a Nation, under so long a Progress of such Hardships than, that at
the length, after Civil War, attended with such Rigors, beside much
Unsettlement, it has brought Land-Rents to so low an Ebb, and so sad an
After-game; not to be retrieved, I am confident, without the speedy Expedient
of a just and general Rate, wherein all our Revenues shall keep even pace with
Land. And we may farther fairly conclude, that had it not been for these
lurching, indeed Muthering Taxes, our Estates in the main had been long since
free from Encumbrance, our Farms well letten, our Rents duly paid, on yearly
Advance, and few or no Complaints in our Streets. In Sum, we had doubtless
been ere this, with Gods usual blessing on honest and prudent Means, the Envy
of all Mankind, and a sort of earthly Paradise: No People under Heaven, all
things considered, having naer the like Ingredients of Safety, Plenty and
Power, as we.

'Twas in a dark Age, we gave our Monasteries, with other Superstitious
Endowments, the odious Nickname or Brand of Mortmains; Though they generally
paid their full Quotas in War, and in Peace upon the matter eased us of the
vast Charge of our Poor, besides other public Works. Alas, here are Protestant
Mortmains indeed of a larger Size, enough to sink us to the Center, and
suddenly turn even this happy Arabia into a Desert.

Our want of Public Spirits is now the common Complaint: But where or how
should we look for them? I cannot Divine, what famous Exploits for the
Commonwealth, in extraordinary Exigences, we are to promise our selves from
such as have all along declined to afford it their ordinary Support or Aid:
They should, methinks, scarce pretend to be Cato's or Regulus's. And for those,
who deserving from their Country, perhaps of any the best, are by it treated
like Aliens, or rather like Enemies, it is fair, I hope, if they be not
Catilines. Without some Justice on the one side, there is seldom much kindness
on the other: We are not over-apt to mourn, at least sincerely, for Stepmothers.

Now though my late worthy Friend, Sir William Petty, did not himself fully
befriend us with these so important Truths, yet has he left us a most useful
Platform or Scheme of future Taxing: And from his Torch I fairly own to have
lighted mine.

3. I could not but hope, The Measures of Domestic Excise would on this
Account naturally have occurred to our Author's Enquiry, That he would have
dived into the Nature of it, as an Argument most worthy his Scrutiny: So to
have taught us, what Commodities may best bear it, and in what Proportions, as
also with what Returns. Which for that he has but lightly touched, waving all
such particular Examens, as wholly out of my Sphere, I shall only in general
offer you my present Thoughts, what are the seeming Advantages or
Inconveniences, attending this sort of Tax; which being fairly represented, it
will be the easier for you to frame a Judgment of it.

Excise, you know, has obtained a current Repute of perfect Equality: Now
though I may by no means admit of that; not only Niggards, but all those, whose
Condition obliges them not to live Honorably upon their Demeans, at pleasure
avoiding it; yet I must allow, it is, singly considered, perhaps the most equal,
and Innocent of any particular way of Taxing, commonly proposed or discoursed
of; excepting Imposts on some Foreign hurtful Superfluities, for the due
regulating of Trade. It has at first sight a notable Air and Aspect of
Freedom, every one being indeed his own Assessor: It rises almost insensibly,
bringing the Multitude, (who are more apt to murmur at integral Taxes,) without
much Grudging, to pay their Quota's in this. It affects not immediately the
Fund of Land, as our sole Land-Taxes mischievously do: And so powerfully does
it recommend, indeed preach Frugality, that, to say the truth, It in a manner
condemns all Unthrifts, as mere Idiots or Lunaticks.

But withal it is a Mineral, which ought to be corrected, or else with us will
turn rank Poison, and may prove only in some respects a little better than our
present sole Land-Taxes; which if they have not already, must soon bring our
Noble to Nine-pence: Besides that generally speaking, it is a known high Road to
Slavery, Gabelles and Sabots being almost inseparable. The Land would
concurrently be otherwise relieved, and in some measure set upon even ground
with Trades, Professions and Offices, above all with Usemoney, by the most
moderate Rate of Interest: Without which, the greatest part of those, who sell
either Land or its Product, being still necessitous and under Hatches, will be
but too much at the Mercy of their Chapmen, especially of our Interloping
Traders, viz. Meal-men, Maltsters, etc. to work upon their Exigencies, and not
deal with them, unless on Ruinous Terms, at least with full Allowance for the
Duty they must pay. Indeed, however expedient or harmless Excise of it self, or
in our abstracted Notion of it, may be or seem, it cannot, I fear, without a
powerful Allay, be seasonable in a Juncture, when our principal Native
Commodities are already so Dog-cheap: Neither were it, I presume, undeserving
our serious Thought, How a general Thrift in Houshold-Expence, (the Famous
Consequence of Excise) will comply, or even consist with our Improvements, the
doubling of our Product, and its daily growing under-value. Whether at this
rate we do not toss and tumble, like a Sick Man, who seeks, as the Saying is,
for his Pillow, but cannot find it; or as a squeafie Stomach is apt to change
old Aquavitae for new Brandy.

I do not so much insist on the general Objection of former times, viz. the
Multiplying of Officers, whereby, besides other dangerous Inconveniences, half
the Water is apt to run from the Mill: In hope Expedients may be found for
cheap and easy Collection, the only Convenience of Land-Taxes. But in truth
the Difficulties of adapting an Excise to mighty urgent Occasions, seem as it
were insuperable. For in such case it would prove too Penal, if it should fall
very short, and surely no way expedient, should it much exceed. Now who can any
thing near compute, how Imposts, when newly laid, or without trial of them,
will rise? However they ought, I conceive, to be light: For if heavy, they
crush like Millstones, wherever they fall. Upon which account, they surely
seem most applicable to a standing Revenue, The mixed and comprehensive Quota,
or Tax upon all Abilities, in nature of the Dutch two or three hundredth Penny
for all extraordinary Purposes, having, I think, no Fellow.

If it be alleged, That our Landlords, who so long have been oppressed, will
hereby at least take Breath, indeed be much eased in their Payments: So, say I,
to appearance, is the Tenant in our present Taxes; who yet tells us another
Story, by daily woeful Experience sinking under them, and fully Sympathizing
with the Landlord in all these Hardships. So, I doubt, shall we with our
Tenants, in a large Impost on their Commodities. Whereof the Gentry in France,
who so vainly boast of their Privileges herein, will give us a fair, or rather
a foul Account.

But 4. It were to be wished, our Author had discovered to us (as indeed who
better could?) the Causes of our wretched Cheapness, although our Crops be
never so mean, and our notorious prodigal Expense, even in times of soarest
Complaint, for the loss of Rents, Deadness of Trade, and Scarcity of Current
Money, together with the necessary Consequences thereof. Which, how Foreign
soever at the first sight it may seem to his Arithmetic, yet in treating of
Political Measures, would no doubt have been as pertinent, at least as useful,
as any thing he has, or could have handled. Now for the fatal Cheapness
oppressing us, as well now, as when he wrote, there is, methinks, no great
Mystery in it. Five times, I think, within Memory, has the like Scandalous
want of Vent for all the Product of Land signally afflicted us; yet never,
unless in times of sole Land-Taxes; which plainly points out to us, as with a
Finger, whence it proceeds, viz. from the over-taxing of Landlords, and so
disabling them liberally to take off the Farmers Commodities toward their
Rent, to spend them, as their worthy Ancestors did, in generous Housekeeping
upon the Place, much in the nature of still laying the Compost upon the Farm:
For want whereof Poor Tenants are now generally forced to ply remote Markets,
and chiefly that of our great Metropolis; which being thus cloid, they must, as
before was said, sell at the Discretion of Crafty Interlopers. That this is
singly the case, The universal Complaint, as well in all those Junctures, as at
present, of too many Gentlemen's abandoning the Country, or living but obscurely
in it, I hope, enough evinces.

Indeed how should it be otherwise? For admitting, all things computed, viz.
Want or Insolvency of Tenants, Charges of Managery, Vast and Cumbersome
Repairs, with the many other Defalcations now incident to Estates, that they
one with another receive hardly half their Revenues, (and well I may say, would
to God they could promise themselves so much, even those few that are out of
Debt,) How should any of them with long Trains subsist, much more provide for
Posterity, except they contract their Household Expenses, even to the undoing of
their Tenants, as well as their own Eclipse.

If an inconvenient Rate of Interest, though it seemed immediately to concern
only the Parties in Debt, who before the Civil War were few in Comparison,
could yet so miserably embase our Native Commodities, as, that then it did, at
large appears by the Famous Preamble of the Statute made for Reducement
thereof, 21 Jacobi, Reciting, That it then caused a very great Abatement in the
value of Land, and all the Merchandises, Wares and Commodities of this Kingdom,
that it disabled Men to pay their Debts, and continue the Maintenance of Trade,
that it enforced them to sell their Lands and Stocks at very low Rates, to
forsake the use of Merchandise and Trade, and to give over their Farms, and so
become unprofitable Members of the Commonwealth, etc. How much more such a
horrid Rate of Taxes, universally charged on the Land, as on that behalf must
needs amount to much more than the doubling of our Interest? Sure I am, heavy
Imposts on Native Commodities have by long Experience ever brought them to be
mere Nutshe's; even as in Foreign Trade, they likewise are reputed little less
than Counterbands.

For our Luxury, both then and now, to be sure, alike unseasonable, it were not
hard to show, that all such Excess proceeds from Causes almost as natural, as
Snow, Rain, or any Meteor, The Ringleaders thereof being apparently those, who
with their concealed Estates have all along gone Scot-free, and chiefly the
Female Sex. Indeed cheap living sufficiently prompts the Poor, Wanton Emulation
the Richer sort; Disproportion of public Rates enables and disposes many to
lead, but in pure Self-defence obliges, and even provokes far more to follow
all Extravagant Modes. Sic vivimus ambitiosa paupertate omnes.

They have a common Saying in France, that how grievous soever the Taxes, or
hard the Times be, there is still Money stirring enough to be Drunk and Fine.
Now Gallantry and Debauch are known to consist in mere Superfluities, and those
chiefly, or rather only, Foreign. Nothing of our own, whether Growth or
Manufacture, is in those cases at all esteemed: Nor does any of our Fair Ladies
take her self to be well dressed in Woollen, or our Sparks well treated with
Homespun Liquors. How many, through the deadly Cheapness of all our Native
Commodities, can now afford to drink Wine, wear Velvet, and eat Anchovies, who,
did but Household Provisions bear a due Rate, would be, as their Predecessors
were, proud of honest Stuffs, glad of good Small Beer, with Ale or Strong Drink
on Holidays, and content with Sprats? So clearly does our Riot and Cheapness
Feed and Foment each other; which might, one would think, naturally guide us to
the ready Cure of both, only by not oppressing the Land.

What are the direct Consequences of them, can hardly need either Proof or
Illustration. I am but too sensible, How the Vulgar ever doated on Cheapness,
as the very Fuel of their Sloth. They call it Plenty, nay Mannah it self; and
wonder any should construe it otherwise than they do, viz. for a Sovereign
Blessing. Whereas all that either think or read must know, Dog-cheapness, and
the general low Values of the Product in any Country, are, and have ever been
reputed a kind of Plague-Tokens, and Epitome of Miseries, above all Peremptory
to public Freedom, indeed an immediate Inlet to Despotick Empire. That the
very sound of them is the same with Beggary; they plucking up Industry all at
once by the Root, especially that of the Plow. For instance whereof, we need
not go so far as the East or West Indies: Not only France, but Ireland
affording us notable Patterns of it at our very Doors. That to consummate our
sad Prospect of them, They manifestly tend to, and generally end in utter
Famine: Witness that ever Memorable Egyptian Plenty, the clear result whereof
was, That they, who one Year sold their Corn for a Song, the next, or at least
soon after, sold themselves for Corn.

The dismal Effects of Luxury are a common place, wherewith all Classick
Authors superabound; Saevior Armis Luxuria; Plus Gula quam Gladius, etc. Yet
how Fatal and Enormous soever, It is and has always been a Plausible, nay a
very Popular Evil. To say all herein at once, It commonly fares with Nations
alike as with Families; whilst fair Estates are in the spending, there is ever
wonderful Plenty; nothing to be seen or heard, but Merriment. The Master of the
House, (or as some love to call him, Founder of the Feast,) is celebrated for
his generous Hospitality, nay even worshipped, at least whilst it lasts, as a
general Benefactor: The Mistress, with all her Children, are in perfect good
Humor, indeed in Fools Paradise: The Steward, to be sure, well licks his
Fingers, probably makes his Fortune: All the Domestics live for the time at
their perfect ease, in a kind of Golden Age. But alas a long and severe Lent is
in both respects still at the heels of this short lived Carnaval.

Many like happy Discoveries or Enquiries of equal Moment, I not only wished,
but hoped from Sir William Petty's approved Ingenuity: Of all which, I may
hereafter Discourse with you, at your good leisure and mine. Wherefore, not now
to load you with a Volumn, instead of an Epistle, I beg your Pardon for my
present Trespass, and in great Friendship always remain, Sir,

Your most Affectionate Humble Servant H. J.

Books Printed for and Sold by William Miller at the Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, where Gentlemen, and others, may be furnished with most sorts of
Acts of Parliament, Kings, Lord Chancellors, Lord Keepers, and Speakers
Speeches, and other sorts of Speeches, and Statematters; As also Books of
Divinity, Church Government, Humanity, Sermons on most Occasions, etc. 1690.
Books in Folio.
1. ASsemblies Annotations in two Volumes 2. Ainsworth's Annotations. 3. Book
of Martyrs in Three Volumes. 4. Cassandra, a Romance. 5. Burton's Anatomy of
Melancholy. 6. Jones's Reports. 7. Perkins's Works, Three Volumes. 8. Prinne's
History of King John, etc. 9. Bishop Wilkins's Essay toward a real Character.
10. Ward on Matthew. 11. Burgess on Corinthians. 12. Baines on Ephesians. 13.
Cradock's Harmony of the Four Evangelists. 14. Curia Politiae. 15. Elton on the
Collossians. 16. Love and Revenge, a Romance. 17. Extravagant Shepherd, the
Anti-Romance. 18. Gauden of the Church. 19. Heywood's Hierarchy of Angels 20.
Hakewell's Apology. 21. Hart's Diet for the Diseased. 22. Jones on the Hebrews.
23. Johnson's Three Plays. 24. Kellet on the Sacrament. 25. Lloyd's Memoirs.
26. Leggon's History of the Barbados. 27. Leigh's Critical Sacra. 28.
Matchiave^'s Works. 29. Monk's Military and Politic Observations. 30. Orlando
furioso. 31. Philip *de Comine's History. 32. Pharomon, a Romance. 33.
Pembles's Works. 34. Pareus on the Revelations. 35. Ramsey's Astrology. 36.
Rouse's Works. 37. Royal Chemistry. 38. Spanish Bawd. 39. Bishop Smith's Sermon.

In Quarto.
1 Barclay's Argines, in English with Cuts* 2 Ball against Can of Separation.
3 Holy History. 4 Jackson's Concordance to the Bible. 5 Sir Henry Vane's
retired Man's Meditations. 6 Weeme's Works in three Volumes. 7 Adventures in
Love. 8 Arreignment of the whole Creature. 9 Allain's Chain of Scripture
Chronology. 10 Behmon's Pieces* 11 Bolton's Works in two Volumes. 12 Baxter's
Works. 13 Cooper's Heaven Opened. 14 -- His Life and Death. 15 Clark's Life of
William the Conqueror. 16 Cradock's Knowledge and practice. 17 Carpenter's
pragmatical Jesuit, a Comedy. 18 Dod on the Commandments. 19 -- On the Lord's
prayer. 20 Digges's Tectonicon. 21 Extravagant Shepherd, a Comedy. 22 Ghost, or
the Woman wears the Breeches. 23 Heywood's Life of Edward VI. 24 -- Life of
Henry IV. 25* Hooker's Soul's preparation for Christ. 26 -- Soul's Humiliation.
27 -- His Exaltation. 28 History of King Authur. 29 History of precious Stones.
30 Killigrew's Conspiracy, a Tragedy. 31 Leigh's Saints Rest. 32 Norwood of
Fortification. 33 Squier on the Thessalonians. 34 Struther's King David's
Choice. 35 Sir Henry Vane's Meditations. 36 Voyage of the wandering Knight. 37
Medice cura teipsum, or the Apothecaries plea against Doctor Christopher
Merret. 38 Bagshaw's Doctrine of Free Grace. 39 -- His Discourse about Christ
and Antichrist. 40 -- His great Question concerning Things indifferent in
Religious Worship. 41 -- Of God's Decrees against Pierce. 42 A Letter of Advice
concerning Marriage. By A. B.

In Octavo.
1 Lately published some Instructions in the Art of Grammar, writ to Assist a
young Gentleman in the speedy Understanding of the Latin Tongue.

2 There is now in the Press, and will be speedily published, the Greek and
Roman History, Illustrated by Coins and Medals, representing their Religions,
Rites* Manners, Customs, Games, and Feasts; Together with a Succinct Account of
their Emperors and Families, in two Parts, necessary for the Introduction of
Youth into the Knowledge of Antiquity, by O. W.

3 Vinnes's Twenty Sermons on the Sacrament. 4 Arcanum of Astrology. 5
Botelar's Art of War* 6 Bagshaw's Rights of the Crown. 7 Bunworth of the French
Disease. 8 Continuation of Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia. * Dent on the
Revelation. 9 -- Sermon of Repentance. 10 Downame's Abstract. 11 Enchirion of
Fortification. 12 Epicurus's Morals. 13 Howe's Marks of Salvation.

14 Wall's Baptism Anatomized, being propounded in Five Queries? 1. What Water
Baptism is? 2. What is the end for which it was Instituted? 3. What gives
right to it? 4. Who are the true Administraters of it? 5. Whether is be Lawful
for a Man to Baptize himself, wherein the right that the Infants of Believers
have to Water Baptism is vindicated; The duty of Believing Parents in that
matter asserted, and that by the contrary Tenet and Practice they ought
themselves to be excluded from the Lords Supper, is plainly and fully proved.

15 The Christians daily Walk, in holy Security and Peace. Being an Answer to
these Questions; 1. How a Man may do each pre ent days work with Christian
Cheerfulness? 2. How to bear each present days Cross with Christian Patience?
Containing familiar Directions: 1. How to walk with God in the Course of a
Man's Life: 2. How to be Upright in the said walking: 3. How to Live without
taking Care or Thought in any thing: 4. How to get and keep true peace with
God; wherein manifold Helps to prevent and remove damnable Presumption; also to
quiet and ease distressed Consciences. By Hen. Scudder.

16 Hume's steadfast Christian. 17 Juan de Luar, Spanish and English Grammar.
18 Gouge's Word to Saints, and Word to Sinners. 19 -- Catechism. 20 Garland of
Good Will. 21 Government of the Tongue. 22 Knolly's Rudiments of the Hebrew
Grammar. 23 Latine's Apprentice made Freeman. 24 Love's Dominion. 25 Lucius
Florus in English. 26 Merry Drollery. 27 Natural and artificial Conclusions. 28
Nomenclatura, Greek, Latin, and English. 29* Shakespeer's Rape of Lucreece. 30
Shepheard's Office of Constables. 31 Sharp's Midvvisry. 32 Ward, of Wit,
Wisdom, and Folly, describing the Nature* Use, and Abuse of the Tongue and
Speech. 33 Templum Musicum: Or, the Musical Synopsis. 34 Skelton's
Tachugraphia, in Latin. 35 Emblems Divine, Moral* Natural and Historical,
expressed in Sculptures, and applied to the several Ages, Occasions, and
Conditions of Men. By a Person of Quality.

In Twelves.
1 Aristotle's Art of Rhetoric. 2 Abernetskie's Duty of a Christian. 3
Courtior's Art. 4 Abbot's young Man's Warning piece. 5 Andrew's pattern of
Catechitical Doctrine. 6 A, B, C. in Welsh. 7 Usher's Catechisms in Welsh. 8
Despane on the Lord's Prayer, in Welsh. 9 Sincere Convert, in Welsh. 10
Bellerminus Ennervatus. 11 Boulton's Helps to Humiliation. 12 -- His devout
Prayers. 13 St. Barnard's Meditations. 14 Bradshaw and Hildersham on the
Sacrament. 15 Old Bacon of Life and Death. 16 Cotton's none but Christ. 17
Capell of Temptation. 18 Coral and Steel their Virtue. 19 Doctrine of the
Bible. 20 Dent's Pathway to Heaven. 21 David's Blessed Man. 22 -- Sing. 23 --
Repentance. 24 Duty of every one that intends to be saved. 25 Complete English
and French Cook. 26 Fettiplace's Christ Monitor. 27 -- His holy Exercises of
heavenly Graces. 28 -- Sinners Tears. 29 Granada of Prayer and Meditation. 30
Garden of Spiritual Flowers. 31 Golden Mean. 32 Garbut on the Resurrection. 33
Henshaw's Meditations. 34 Holy Sinner. 35 Joseph and his Mistress, by Smith. 36
Mothers Legacy to her Child. 37 Moral practice of the Jesuits. 38 Norden's poor
Man's Rest. 39 -- Pensive Man's practice. 40 Oxford Jests. 41 Practice of the
Faithful. 42 Preston on the Sacrament. 43 -- Doctrine of Saints Informity. 44
Sibbe's Saints Conflict. 45 -- Fountain Sealed. 46 -- Spiritual Man's Aim. 47
Saltemarsh of Free Grace. 48 Smith's practice of Physic. 49 Spurstow's
Meditations. 50 The Third part of the Bible. 51 Understanding Christians Duty.
52 Jeffery's New Year's Gift.

FINIS.

