J2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King,
A DECLARATION.
JAMES R.

WHereas We find it requisite for Our Service, That the Forces, which We are
obliged to Maintain for the Preservation of the Peace of this Our Kingdom, be
kept in good Order and Discipline, and that Our Subjects may not suffer by any
Disorders or Misbehaviour of any Officers or Soldiers within Our Pay and
Entertainment; We have thought fit hereby to Declare Our Royal Will and
Pleasure, That in what Place soever any of Our Forces shall pass or remain,
they shall duly pay their Quarters at the Rates and Allowances formerly paid by
Our Forces, and shall not, upon any pretense whatsoever, refuse or avoid the
same. And We do likewise strictly forbid all Our Officers and Soldiers to use
any Violence or Threatening Words to any Person whatsoever, or to give any other
Offense, or just cause of Complaint. And in case any of Our said Officers or
Soldiers shall presume to commit any Spoil or Disorder, or use any Violence, or
threatening Words, or otherwise misbehave themselves, We do hereby Require all
Our Loving Subjects forthwith to make known the same to their Superior
Officers, who are to cause Satisfaction immediately to be made to the Persons
Injured. And if such Officer, to whom Complaint is made, shall forbear or delay
the causing due Satisfaction to be given as aforesaid, the Persons to whom the
wrong is done, are then to present their Complaint to Us, that We may Order
speedy Justice to be done them, by Reparation of the Injury, and by causing the
Officers and Soldiers so offending, to be forthwith Cashiered, and such further
Punishments to be inflicted on them as the nature and quality of their Offenses
shall deserve. And We do further Declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, That no
Officer or Soldier in their March or Quarters shall be Lodged in any Private
House whatsoever, without the Free and Voluntary Consent of the Owner; And that
in case any Officers or Soldiers shall for any Reward or Consideration, leave
or change the Quarters appointed them, or shall demand or exact Money for
Quarters, or to exempt any persons from the same, they shall be Punished by
Cashiering and loss of their Pay. And We do likewise strictly Prohibit and
Forbid all Officers and Soldiers to Destroy or Disturb the Game in any manner
whatsoever, without Leave from Us, the Lords of the respective Manors, or
others to whom it may belong to Grant the same: It being Our Royal Intention
and Command, That all Officers and Soldiers in Our Service, behave themselves
Orderly in all things, upon Pain of the Severest Consequences of Our High
Displeasure.

Given at Our Court at Windsor the Twenty fifth day of August 1685. In the
First Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1685.


