His Majesty's most Gracious and General PARDON.
JAMES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come
Greeting. It has always been Our earnest Desire since Our Accession to the
Crown, that all Our People should live at Ease, and in full Enjoyment of Peace
and Happiness under Our Government; and nothing can be more agreeable unto Us,
then that Offenders should be Reformed by Acts of Mercy extended toward them,
rather then Punishment, Our open Enemies upon Repentance have found Our Favor.
And although besides Our particular Pardons which have been Granted to many
Persons, it be not long since We issued forth Our Royal Proclamation of General
Pardon to all Our People; yet inasmuch as even they who live most peaceably, do
often fall within the reach of some of Our Laws, and may be liable in their
Persons or Estates (should We be severe) to Prosecutions in Our Courts
Ecclesiastical or Temporal; We therefore, out of Our special Grace and
Tenderness to Our People (from whom We expect a suitable return of Duty and
Obedience) do hereby Grant, Publish and Declare this Our Royal and Gracious
Pardon; And We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Pardon, Acquit,
Release and Discharge all and every Our Subjects (except such Persons who shall
be herein or hereby excepted) of this Our Realm of England, Dominion of Wales,
and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
them and every of them, and all and all manner of Bodies Politic or Corporate
within Our said Realm, or Dominions aforesaid, and the Successor and Successors
of of them and every of them, against Us, Our Heirs and Successors, of and from
all and all manner of Treasons, Felonies, Misprisions of Treason, or Felony,
Treasonable or Seditious Words or Libels, Seditious and unlawful Meetings and
Conventicles, all Offenses whereby any Person may be charged with the Penalty
and danger of Praemunire, all Riots, Routs, Offenses, Contempts, Trespasses and
Misdemeanors, and all Judgments and Convictions for not coming to Church, and
of and from the Forfeitures and Penalties for the same, or any of them
heretofore had, committed or done (except as herein or hereby after is
excepted.) And Our Will and Pleasure is, that neither Our said Subjects nor any
of them, nor the Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Successors of any of them,
be or shall be Sued, Vexed, or Disquieted in their Bodies, Goods or Chattels,
Lands or Tenements, for any manner of Matter, Cause, Contempt, Misdemeanor,
Forfeiture, Offense, or any other thing heretofore suffered, done or committed,
or omitted, against Us, Our Crown, Dignity, Prerogative, Laws or Statutes, and
not herein or hereby after excepted; And that this Our Grant of General Pardon,
by the general Words, Clauses and Sentences before rehearsed, shall be reputed,
deemed, adjudged, expounded, allowed and taken in all manner of our Courts and
elsewhere, most beneficially and liberally for Our said Subjects thereby
Pardoned, in all things not hereafter excepted, as if their particular Persons
and Crimes had herein been at large and fully expressed. Excepted, and always
Foreprized out of this Our Pardon, all Treasons committed or done in the Parts
beyond the Seas, or in any other Place out of this Our Realm; And also excepted
all Offenses in Forging or false Counterfeiting the Great or Privy Seal, Sign
Manual or Privy Signet, or any of Our Moneys current within this Our Realm, or
of unlawful Diminution of any of the said Moneys by any ways or means
whatsoever, and all Abetting, Aiding, Comforting or Procuring the said Offenses
or any of them, and also all voluntary Murders, Petty Treasons, Wilful
Poysonings, and all Offenses of being accessory to the same, or any of them
before the Fact committed, and also all Piracies and Robberies committed upon
the Sea, Robberies upon the Highways, Burglaries in Houses, and all Offenses of
being accessory to the said Offenses or any of them; And also Excepted the
detestable and abominable Vice of Buggery committed with Man or Beast, all Rape
and Carnal Ravishments of Women, all Ravishments and wilful taking away or
Marrying of any Maid, Widow or Damsel against her will, or without the Consent
or Agreement of her Parents, or of such as then had her in Custody, and all
Offenses of Aiding, Comforting, Abetting, or Procuring the said Offenses or any
of them; And also excepted all Offenses of Perjury, Subbornation of Witnesses,
Razing, Forging or Counterfeiting any Deeds, Escripts, Inquisitions, Indentures
of Appraisment, or other Writings, or Publishing the same, Forging or
Counterfeiting any Examinations or Testimonies of any Witness or Witnesses
tending to bring any person or persons into danger of his Life, and all
procuring and Counselling of any of the said Offenses; And also except all
Informations, and all Proceedings concerning High ways and Bridges, and common
Nusances, or Reparing County Goals, and all Fines and Issues set and Returned
thereupon since the Year One thousand six hundred seventynine. And also Except
all Offenses in taking away, Imbezeling, or Purloyning any Goods, Moneys,
Chattels, Jewels, Armor, Munition, Stores, Naval Provisions, Shipping,
Ordnance, or other Habillments of War, belonging to Us or Our late Brother; And
all Offenses committed or done within the space of one year last, within Our
Forest of Windsor; And also Except all Offenses of Incest, Dilapidations, or
Simony, and also Except all Contempts and Process thereupon Issuing in or out
of any Court of Equity; And also Except all Recognizances, Conditions and
Covenants, and all Penalties, Cities, and Forfeitures of Offices, Conditions or
Covenants forfeited, accrued or grown to Us or to Our late Brother by reason of
the Breach, or not performing of any Office, Covenant or Condition whatsoever;
Also Excepted all Concealments, Frauds, Corruptions, Misdemeanors and
Offenses, whereby We or Our late Brother have been deceived in the Collection,
Payments or Answering of Our Revenues, or any part thereof, or any other Money
due, or to be due to Us, or received for Us or him; And all Forfeitures,
Penalties and Nomine Paene's thereupon arising; And all Indictments,
Informations, or other Process or Proceedings now depending, or to be depending
thereupon.

Provided always that nothing in this Our Pardon contained shall extend or be
construed to discharge any Fines, Sums of Money recovered by Judgment, Fines,
pro licentia Concordandi, Post-Fines, Issues or Amerciaments, lost, imposed,
assessed, set or entered in any Court of Record whatsoever; And also Except all
Persons who are as to any pains, penalties or disabilities whatsoever excepted
out of the several Acts of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion made
in the Reign of Our late Royal Brother, Excepted also all Persons who after
Conviction or Attainder of or for any manner of Treason or Misprisions of
Treasons have been Transported, and such Attainted of other notorious Crimes or
Felonies as have been ordered or directed to be Transported into any of Our
Foreign Plantations; Except also all Fugitives and Persons fled from Our
Justice into Parts beyond the Seas, or out of this Realm, who shall not return
and render themselves to Our Chief Justice, or some Justice of the Peace before
the First day of January next ensuing; And also Excepted out of this Our Pardon
the Persons hereafter particularly mentioned, Viz. Robert Parsons, Edward
Matthews, Samuel Venner, Andrew Fletcher, Colonel John Rumsey, Major John
Manley, Isaac Manley, Francis Charleton, Esquire; John Wildman, Esquire; Titus Oats,
Robert Ferguson, Gilbert Burnet, Sir Robert Peyton, Laurence Braddon, Samuel
Johnson Clerk, Thomas Tipping Esquire; and Sir Rowland Gwynne. Provided that no
Process of Outlawry at the Suit of any Person Plaintiff shall be by virtue of
this Our Pardon stayed or avoided, unless the Defendant appear and put in Bail
where by Law Bail is necessary, and take forth a Writ of Scire Facias against
the Party at whose Suit he was Outlawed; and that this Our Pardon be not
allowed to Discharge any Outlawry after Judgment till Satisfaction or Agreement
be made to or with the Party at whose Suit the Outlawry was obtained: And Our
Will and Pleasure is, That this present Pardon shall be of as good force and
effect to Pardon and Discharge all and singular the Premises abovementioned,
and intended to be Pardoned and Discharged, as if We should by Letters Patents
under the Great Seal have granted particular Pardons to every one of Our
Subjects: And for the better manifestation of Our Gracious Intentions and
Desire herein, We do give leave that any of Our Subjects not herein excepted
may Sue and take out Our particular Pardon pursuant to the Tenor hereof, and
for that purpose We shall direct Our Secretaries of State to present Warrants
to Us for Our Signature, and give order to Our Attorney General or Solicitor to
prepare Bills for passing Pardons for such as shall desire the same. In Witness
whereof We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents, Witness Our self
at Westminster the Second day of October, in the Fourth Year of Our Reign.

Clerk.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1688.


