THE HISTORY OF IVSTINE, Taken out of the four and forty BOOKS OF TROGUS
POMPEIUS:

CONTANING The Affairs of all Ages, and Countries, both in Peace and War, from
the beginning of the World until the Time of the Roman EMPERORS.

Together, With the Epitomie of the Lives and Manners of the Roman Emperors,
from Octavius Augustus Caesar, to the Emperor Theodosius.

Translated into English by Robert Codrington, Master of ARTS.

LONDON, Printed for William Gilbertson, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Bible in Gilt-Spur. Street without Newgate, 1654.

To the most Illustrious OLIVER, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of the
three Nations of England, Ireland, and Scotland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging.
My Lord,
SO great is the happiness that we already do enjoy under Your Highness
Protection, that we have neither hearts nor hopes, but what are armed with a
Confidence, that from the tempests and the discords of War we shall gradually
return to the harmony of the Arts, nor act any more Wars in our Fields, but
content ourselves with the reading of them in our Histories at home; being
crowned with a Safety, as accomplished as Peace and Plenty, and as Piety her
self can make it.

Neither is this (My Lord) the Expectation only of the three Nations united in
this Commonwealth, but of Fo^raign States and Princes, who as much dread as
gratulate your Greatness, to which the differing Counsels of the State, and the
loud necessities of the moving times, and no desires of your own did call you.

This is that (My Lord) which will yet raise you higher, and which will
establish you in that height. He stands fast who is advanced, and upheld by the
hand of Providence, which even by the mightiest of your Enemies will be
acknowledged; who surprised as. much with envy as admiration, shall find the
Presence and the Power of GOD in the wonder of your Victories; And from the
observation and the Course of your Actions, they may beforehand pass a
judgment on themselves, either of their Happiness or their Dangers.

In this History, your Highness may observe by what Arts Empires and Kingdoms
have been Erected, and how justly they have suffered when the corruptions of
Peace did deliver them to the Examination of the Sword, to be either reformed
or destroyed; You may observe how the World has been Inhabited by several
Plantations, which though many of them may seem near unto a Fable, yet
doubtless there is something of Truth in them, as may appear by what is
rehearsed of the Jews; whose Ancestry, and whose Religion being precisely
concealed from the observation of the Gentiles, it is to be wondered how Trogus
Pompeius knew so much; and that Tacitus, who lived many years after him, and
when the Jews had a Synagogue in Rome, should know so little, and in that
little, should fall so short of the Truth.

My Lord, This History in the Original was dedicated to Antoninus Pius, an
Emperor so admirable for his Government, that the striving gratulations of
those officious times wherein he lived, when they could find no parallel for
him, they had recourse unto Antiquity, and compared him unto Numa. I have
presumed (My Lord) to prefer the Translation of it to your Highness Protection,
whose Courage, and whose candor is beyond Example, and whose Piety is greater
then both. The Idolatry of the Romans decreed divine Honors to Antoninus, and
employed all their Eloquence to extol him, being dead. It shall be the
Business of our zeal to wait upon your Laurels, and with the eloquence of a
bended knee to implore the Almighty to continue you long amongst us the
Protector of true Religion, and the Delight and Defender of the Arts; and that
when by a late Death you shall be taken from us, our suffrages may be so happy
as to find a Successor like unto you: So prays

My Lord, Your Highness most humble and most devoted Servant Robert Codrington.

The History of Iustine,
THE INTRODVCTION OF IVSTINE, The most famous Historian, to the Histories of
Trogus Pompeius, Dedicated to the Emperor ANTONIUS.
WHereas many of the Romans, and men of Consulary dignity, have committed to
History the Roman Affairs both in Greek and other tongues; Trogus Pompeius, a
man of ancient eloquence, being delighted either with the desire of glory, or
with the variety and novelty of the enterprise, did compose in Latin not only
the History of Greece, but the History also of the whole world, that as the
Roman affairs are read in Greek, so now the affairs of Greece may be read in
the Roman tongue: and if the works of other Authors, discoursing on the acts of
several Kings and Nations do seem to them to be a task of arduous difficul^y,
ought not Pompeius seem unto us with Herculean boldness to adventure through
the whole world, in whose books the acts of all Ages, Kings, Nations and People
are contained? And what the Greek Historians have confusedly thrust together as
every one thought best unto himself, srogus Pompeius (some things being omitted
which were judged to be superfluous) has digested the rest into order, the
whole work being distinguished by time, and by the course and Series of the
affairs. In the leisures which in this City I enjoyed, I have carefully
collected out of his four and forty books (for so many he did publish) all
things which did proffer themselves to observation: and I have composed as it
were one Posie of flowers of them, those things being left out which were
neither delightful for the pleasure of knowledge, nor profitable for example:
to the end that both those who understand the Greek tongue might have wherewith
to be remembered, and those who understand it not may have wherewith to be
informed. This I have transmitted unto you Emperor Antoninus, not to improve
your knowledge, but to correct the defects thereof: as also that I may give you
an account even of my leisures, of which Cato records, that an account is to
be rendered. Your approbation even in this time will be sufficient for me, by
which, when envy and detraction shall be gone, Posterity shall receive a
testimony of my industry.

The First Book OF JUSTINE THE HISTORIAN, Taken out of the Histories of Trogus
Pompeius.
IN the beginning of Affairs, the command of People and Nations was in the
power of Kings, whom no popular ambition, but an approved moderation amongst
good men did advance unto the height of Majesty. The people were restrained by
no Laws, the arbitrations of the Princes being in the place of Laws: It was
their custom rather to defend then to enlarge the bounds of their Empires:
Their own Countries were to every one the limits of their Kingdoms: Ninus King
of the Assyrians was the first of all, who by an immoderate desire of reign,
did change the ancient, and (as it were) the hereditary custom of the Nations.
He first made war upon his Neighbors, and subdued the people (as yet
unexperienced to resist) even to the bounds of Africa. There were indeed more
ancient in time, as Vexores King of Egypt, and Tanais King of Scythia, one of
whom advanced into Pontus, and the other as far as Egypt; but their wars were
remote, and not on their neighboring Countries: neither sought they domination
for themselves, but glory for their people: and being contented with victory,
they abstained from the tyranny of command. Ninus with continued happiness
confirmed the greatness of his acquired power; therefore the next Nations unto
him being subdued, he by the access of new powers, did always march more strong
against the others; and every last victory being the promoting of the
following, he overcame all the Nations of the East. His last war was with
Zoroastres King of the Bactrians, who is said first of all to have found out
the art of Magic, and most diligently to have observed the beginnings of the
world, and the motions of the stars. He being slain, Ninus deccased himself,
his son Ninus whom he had by Semiramis being not yet of age: she not daring to
deliver up the Empire to a boy, nor openly to exercise the command of it her
self, so many and so great Nations being scarcely to be obedient to a man, much
less unto a woman, did counterfeit her self to be the son instead of the wise
of Ninus, and a boy instead of a woman. They were both of a middle stature,
their voice but soft; their complexion and features of face, and the lineaments
of their bodies were alike both in the mother and the son: she therefore with
raiment covered her arms and thighs, and put a tire on her head; and that she
might not seem to conceal any thing by her new habit, she commanded the people
to be clothed in the same attire, which that whole Nation have ever since
observed: Having thus counterfeiced her Sex, she was believed to be a boy.
After this she made her self famous by great achievements, by the magnificence
whereof when she thought she had overcome all envy, she c^nfes^ed who she was,
and whom she had counterfeited; neither did this take away from her the dignity
of her Government, but increased her admiration, that a woman not only
surpassed her sex, but even men in virtue. She builded Babylon, and encompassed
it with a wall of Brick, being interlined with Rozen, Sand, Pitch, which in
those places the earth does everywhere cast up: There were many other famous
acts of this Queen; for not content to defend the Boundaries of the Empire
obtained by her husband, she not only added Aethiopia to it, but she carried
the war into India, which besides her and Alexander the Great never any in
vaded. At last when she desired to lie with her son, she was killed by him,
having reigned two and forty years after Ninus. Her son Ninns being contented
with the Empire purchased by his Parents, did abandon the study of war, and as
if he had changed his sex with his mother, he grew old in the company of
Ladies, being seldom at any time seen by men; his Successors also following
his example, gave answers to the Nations by their Agents. The Assyrians, who
afterward were called Syrians, did possess the Empire for the space of one
thousand and three hundred years. The last that reigned was Sardanapalus, a man
more dissolute then a woman. When his Lieutenant over the Medes, Arbactus by
name, after great solicitation could hardly be admitted into his presence,
which was vouchsafed unto none before him, he found him amongst a throng of
Concubines spinning Purple on a distaff, and distributing their tasks unto
them, and exceeding them all both in the effeminacy of his habit, the softness
of his body, and the wanton glances of his eye: Which things observed, Arbactus
being possessed with indignation, that so many men should be subjet to such a
woman, and that those who did bear arms should obey a Spinster, repairing to
his companions, he did communicate to them what he beheld; he denied that he
could pay Homage unto him who had rather be a woman then a man. A conspiracy
therefore was plotted, and war was made on Sardanapalus, which he
understanding, (not as a man who would defend his Kingdom, but as women at the
fear of death) he looked first about where to hide him; then with a few, and
those out of all military order, he advanced to the battle; being overcome, he
retired himself into his Court, where a pile of wood being prepared and
burning, he threw himself and his riches into the fire, in this only having
imitated a man: After this Arbactus the Governor of the Medes, and the killer
of the King, was made King himself; he translated the Empire from the Assyrians
to the Medes: After many Kings the Kingdom did descend to Astyages by the order
of Succession. He in a dream beheld a Vine to spring from the womb of his only
daughter, by the branches whereof all Asia was shadowed: The Magicians being
asked their counsel, they made answer, that from the same daughter he should
have a Grandchild whose greatness was presaged, and that he himself should lose
the Kingdom: Being amazed at this answer, he gave his daughter in marriage
neither to a Gentleman nor to a Citizen, lest the nobility of the Father and
Mother should elevate the mind of his Grandchild, but to Cambyses a mean man,
and one at that time of the obscure Nation of the Persians: And the fear of his
dream being not thus taken off, he sent for his daughter being great with
child, that the child should especially be killed in the sight of the
Grandfather. The Infant being born, was delivered to Harpagus (a partaker with
the King in all his counsels) to be killed. He fearing that if the King being
dead, and the Empire divolved to his daughter, because that Astyages had no
male-child, she would take that revenge from the servant which she could not
from the father for the murder of her son, did deliver the Babe to the Kings
Shepherd to be exposed in the woods to the mercy of wild beasts. It so fell
out, that at the same time the Shepherd had a son born; his wife, hearing of
the exposition of this royal Infant, did earnestly entreat her husband that
the child might be brought home and showed her: Returning to the wood he found
a bitch close unto the Infant giving suck unto him, and defending him from the
birds and beasts: and being himself moved to compassion, with which he saw the
bitch to be touched, he brought the Infant to his cottage, the bitch all the
way sollicitously following him; as soon as the woman took him into her arms,
the boy danced as to a note of music; and there appeared in him such a vigor,
and such sweet smiles of flattering innocence, that the wife of her own accord
did desire the Shepherd to expose her own child for him, and to give her leave
to bring up that boy either for his hopefulness, or for his fortune; and thus
the condition of the little ones being changed, the one was brought up for the
Shepherd, and the other exposed for the Grand child of the King. The name of
the Nurse was afterward called Spacon, for so the Persians do call a bitch.
The boy being brought up amongst the Shepherds, received the name of Cyrus.
Not long after being by lot chosen King amongst his Playfellows, when by
wantonness he punished those who appeared to be stubborn with stripes, a
complaint was brought from the fathers of the boys to the King, disdaining that
the sons of ingenuous men should be whipped like slaves by a servant of the
Kings. The boy being sent for, and the reason of it demanded, when with a
countenance nothing changed, he made answer, that he did as a King; the King
admiring his constancy, did call to mind his dream, and the answer of the
Magitians into his memory; and when his Physiognomy and likeness, and the time
of his being exposed, and the confession of the Shepherd did all agree, he
acknowledged him to be his Grandchild; and because he thought he was clear of
his dream, the domination of Cyrus being exercised amongst the Shepherds, he
only dismissed him with a check: but being angry with Harpagus in revenge of
his preserved Grandchild, he slew his own son, and delivered him to his father
to feast on; Harpagus for the present having dissembled his grief, deferred his
hatred of the act to an occasion of revenge.

Some years after this, when Cyrus grew into years, Harpagus being admonished
with his grief that he was childless, did write unto Cyrus how he was made over
by his Grandfather to the Persians, how he commanded him to be slain being a
little one, how he was preserved by his benefit, how he had offended the King
by it, and lost his own son: He exhorted him to prepare an Army and advance the
ready way into the Kingdom, promising that the Medes should turn unto him; the
Letter because it could not be carried openly, (the Kings Garrisons guarding
all the avenues) was put into the belly of a disentrail'd Hare, and he Hare was
delivered to a faithful servant to be carried to Cyrus into Persia; Nets were
also given to him, that under the pretense of hunting the deceit might be more
concealed. The Letters being read, he was commanded in a dream to take the same
course, and was forewarned that whom he first should meet with on the next
morning, he should take him as a Companion in his enterprises. Beginning his
journey about the break of day, he met with the servant of a Median, Sybaris by
name, who lately had escaped out of prison; his pedigree being demanded, he no
sooner understood that he was a Persian, but his chains being knocked off, he
took him as his companion, and returned to the City of Persopolis. The people
being there called together, he commanded all of them to be ready with their
hatchets to cut down the wood that shut up the way; which when they had
cheerfully performed, he invited them on the next day to a dinner, and when he
observed them made more cheerful, he demanded of them, that if a condition were
propounded to them, which course of life they would make choice of, whether of
yesterdays labor, or of this days dinner; as they all cried out, Of this days
dinner; you shall live all your lives, said he, like to yesterdays labor, as
long as you obey the Medes; but if you will follow me, you shall lead a life
like to your present feasting. All of them rejoicing thereat, he made war upon
the Medians. Astyages forgetting what Harpagus had deserved of him, did commit
the chief command of the war unto him; he no sooner received the Army, but
presently did betray it unto Cyrus, revenging the cruelty of the King with the
perfidiousness of revolt; which when Astyages understood, having from all
places drawo together new forces, he advanced in person against the Persians,
and the fight being begun again with great resolution, whiles his men were in
the height of the conflict, he placed a part of his Army on their Rear, and
commanded them to fall on the flying soldiers with their swords as on enemies,
and proclaimed to those in the Van with him, that unless they overcame, they
should find no less resolute men on their Rear then in their Front; therefore
he advised them to look to it, whether this Army was to be broken by them
flying, or that by them fighting. Admonished by this necessity, his Army did
fight with great resolution; therefore when the Army of the Persians (being
forced) began to give ground a little, their mothers and their wives did meet
them, and desired them to return into the battle; the soldiers delaying to
rally and to charge again, the women pulling up their clothes did show them the
nakedness of their bodies, and asked them if they would fly back into the wombs
of their mothers or their wives; being restrained with this check, they
returned into the battle, and having made a violent impression upon their
enemies, they enforce those of fly from whom before they fled.

In this fight Astyages was taken, from whom Cyrus took nothing but his
Kingdom, and deported himself to him rather like a Grandchild then a Conqueror;
and because he would not return again unto the Medians, he made him Governor of
the populous Nation of the Hyrcanians. This was the end of the Empire of the
Medes, which continued three hundred and fifty years. Cyrus in the beginning of
his Reign made Cybaris Governor of Persia, and gave him his sister to marriage,
having according to his vision in the night delivered him from his chains, and
made him his companion in all his enterprises. But the Cities of the Medians
which were tributary, thinking their condition changed with their Empire, did
revolt from Cyrus, which was the cause and original of many wars unto him; but
the greatest part of them being at last subdued, when he made war against the
Babylonians, Croesus the King of the Lydians who in those days was famous for
his treasure and rich movables, did march to their assistance; but being
overcome, and solicitous for his own safety, he fled into his back Kingdom.
Cyrus after this victory having settled the affairs in Babylon, did carry the
war into Lydia, where he easily overcame the Army of Croesus; they being
discouraged at the fortune of the former fight, Craesus himself was taken; but
by how much the war was of the less danger, by so much the milder was the
victory. Croesus had his life, and some parts of his Patrimony, and the City
Borce granted to him, in which although he lived not a Kingly life, yet it was
next to Kingly Majesty. This clemency was no less profitable to the Conqueror
then the Conquered; for it being known that war was made against him,
Auxiliaries came in such great numbers to him out of all Greece, as to
extinguish a common fire; so great was the love which the Cities in general did
profess to Croesus, that Cyrus would have pulled a heavy war from all Greece
upon himself, if he had determined any thing too cruelly against Croesus.

In the process of time Cyrus being employed in other wars, the Lydians again
rebelled, who being again overcome, their horses and arms were taken from them,
and they were commanded to exercise voluptuous and effeminate arts and
employments, by which means that industrious and heretofore powerful and
warlike Nation being weakened by sloth and riot, did lose their ancient virtue,
and whom before Cyrus no wars could master, being fallen into luxury, ease and
excess did overcome. The Lydians had many Kings before Croesus famous for many
adventures; but the fortune of Candaules is to be compared unto none, who, when
he made his wife the subject of all his discourse, whom he too much loved for
the excellence of her beauty; and as if silence were the enemy of beauty, being
not content with the tacit conscience of his pleasures, unless he revealed the
secrets of wedlock, to add at last a proof to his asseveration, showed her
naked to his companion Gyges, by which fact he made both his friend his enemy,
being allured to commit adultery with his wife, and her love being thus
betrayed to another, he estranged his wife from himself; for not long after the
murder of Candaules, was the reward of the marriage. The wife being ^ndowred
with the blood of her husband, delivered both her self and the Kingdom of her
Husband to her adulterer: Cyrus, Asia being overcome, and all the East brought
into his power, did make war upon the Scythians. In that time Thomyris was
Queen of the Scythians, who being not (like a woman) affrighted at the approach
of her enemies, she suffered them to pass over the river of Araxes when she
might have hindered them, conceiving that the event of the battle would prove
more successful to her within the bounds of her own Kingdom, and that the
flight would be more difficult to her enemies by reason of the interposition of
the river; Cyrus therefore when he had passed over his forces, having advanced
a little further into Scythia, did there pitch his tents; on the next day
dissembling a fear, as if he flying back had forsaken his Camp, he left behind
him great store of wine, and of those things which were necessary for a
Banquet, which when it was declared to the Queen, she sent her young son to
pursue him with the third part of the Army. When he came to Cyrus Camp, the
young man being unexperienced in the affairs of war, forgetting his enemies,
and as if he came to feast and not to fight, did permit the Barbarians,
unaccustomed to wine, to overburthen themselves with it, and the Scythians were
overcome with wine before they were overcome in war; for this being discovered,
Cyrus returning by night did oppress them, not thinking of him, and put all the
Scythians to the sword, and the son of their Queen. Thomyris (so great an Army
being lost, and which is more to be lamented, her only son) did not pour forth
her grief into tears that she was childless, but did reserve it into the
comfort of revenge, and with the like policy of deceit circumvented her enemies
insulting at their late victory; for counterfeiting a distrust of her strength,
and retiring in some disorder, by reason of the loss received, she brought
Cyrus into a straight betwixt two hills, where her Ambuscado being lodged, she
killed two hundred thousand of the Persians, with the King himself. In which
victory this also was memorable, That there remained not a messenger of so
great an overthrow. The head of Cyrus being cut off, the Queen commanded it to
be cast into a tub filled with the blood of men, with this exprobration of his
cruelty, Satisfy thy self, she said, with blood which thou thirstedst after,
and of which thou have always been insatiable. Cyrus did reign thirty years,
being admirably remarkable not only in the beginning of h^s reign, but by a
continual success through all his life. His son Cambyses did succeed him, who
add^d Egypt to his Fathers Empire; but being offended with the superstitions
of the Egyptians, he commanded the Temples of Apis, and of others of their
Gods to be demolished; He sent also his Army to destroy the most famous Temple
of Ammon, which Army was lost, being overwhelmed with tempests, and with hills
of sands. After this he saw in his sleep that his brother Mergides should
reign; being affrighted at which vision, he delayed not to commit parricide
after sacrilege; for it was not easy for him to spare his own, who had
committed violence against the Gods. To this so cruel an execution he selected
one of his friends, a Magician called Comaris. In the mean time, he himself
being grievously wounded in the thigh with his own sword dropping by chance out
of his scabberd, died of that wound, and endured the punishment either of
parricide commanded, or of sacrilege committed. This being made known by a
Mesenger, Magus committed the villainy before the death of the King was
reported, and Mergides being killed, to whom the Kingdom was due, he
sub^litu^ed his own brother Oropastes in his room; for he was like unto him in
the favor of face, and in the lineaments of body, and no man suspecting the
deceit, Oropastes was made King in the stead of Mergides; which was reserved
the more private, because amongst the Persians the person of the King under the
awful pretext of Majes^ie is always concealed: Therefore the Magi to win unto
them the favor of the people, did forbear the Tributes, and granted a vacation
from wars for three years, that they might confirm the Government to them by
favors and largesses which they had obtained by deceit, which was first
suspected by Orthanes, one of the Nobility, a man of a most sharp apprehension;
therefore by his Agents he enquires of his daughter, who was one of the Kings
Concubines, whether the Son of Cyrus were King or no; who returned answer, that
she did not know it her self, nor could learn it of another, because every one
of them were shut up by themselves. He then commanded her to feel his head
being asleep, for Cambyses had cut off both the ears of Magus. Being then
assured by his daughter that the King was without ears, he decla^ed it to the
Nobility, and by the Religion of an Oath, did oblige them to the slaughter of
this counterfeit King. There were only seven that were conscious of this
confederacy, who immediately, that they might not have the leisure to repent
and disclose the plot, with swords under their garments did repair to the
Court. There those being killed whom they met with in the way, they came unto
the Magi, who wanted not courage to defend themselves; for with drawn swords
they killed two of the Conspirators; howsoever they were apprehended by the
greater number, one of whom being fast in the arms of Gobrias, his companions
doubting lest they should kill him in the stead of Magus, because it was acted
in a dark place, he commanded them to make sure work of it, though the sword
should pass even thorough his own body; but fortune so disposing, he was
preserved, and Magus slain. The Magi being destroyed, great was the glory which
these Princes did obtain for the Kingdom restored; but greater far was their
glory in this, that when they were in debate on a Successor, they did so well
agree upon it; for they were so equal in virtue and nobility, that the equality
could hardly give an advantage to the people in the Election: They therefore of
themselves found out a way by which they might commit a trial of themselves
both to Religion and to Fortune. They did all agree, that on an appointed
morning they should on the break of day come every one on horseback before the
Court, and he whose horse was first heard to neigh before the rising of the
Sun, he should be King. For the Persians do believe the Sun to be the only God,
and that horses are consecrated to him. Darius the son of Hystaspes was one of
their Associates, who being desirous of the Kingdom, the master of his horse
assured him, that if that were all which made the victory doubtful, he should
take no more care for it; therefore on the night before the appointed day he
brought a Mare to the same place, and did let loose the horse unto her,
conceiving by eagerness to the Venereal pleasure that it would so fall out, as
indeed it did. On the next day when they all met on the prefixed hour, the
horse of Darius, the place being known unto him, did presently neigh aloud, out
of his desire to the Mare, and the other horses being dull and heavy, did give
a happy auspication to his Master. So great was the moderation of the rest of
the Nobility, that this auspication being heard, they rather leaped then
alighted from their horses, and saluted Darius King. The people also following
the approbation of the Princes, did constitute him King. Thus the Kingdom of
the Persians being recovered by the virtue of seven of the most noble of the
Princes, in so short a space, was conferred into the power of one. It is
altogether incredible to consider with what a pious gallantry this was done,
insomuch that they refused not to dye themselves to pluck the Kingdom from the
Magi; howsoever Darius besides his personableness and his virtue, worthy of the
Empire, was of near relation in blood to the ancient Kings; therefore in the
beginning of his Reign, to confirm it with royal Nuptials, he took to wife the
daughter of Cyrus, that so the Kingdom might not seem to be translated to a
stranger, but to be returned into the Family of Cyrus. In process of time, when
the Assyrians revolced, and had possessed themselves of Babylon, and the King
being in a passion by reason of the difficulty of the Siege, Zopyrus one of the
seven Confederates, gave command that his body at his own house should be torn
all over with rods, and that his nose, lips, and ears should be cut off, and in
this posture he unexpectedly presented himself to the King. Darius being
amazed, and demanding the cause of so foul and deformed a violence, he softly
informed him to what purpose it was done; and prepared with counsel for the
design, he made haste to Babylon under the Title of a Renegado. There he showed
unto the people his dismembered body; He complained of the cruelty of the King,
by whom he was over-reached in his share of the Kingdom, not* by virtue, but by
auspice; not by the judgment of men, but by the neighing of a horse; he
advises them to take an example from his friends what his enemies must expect;
he exhorts them not to trust unto their walls more then to their arms, and that
they would suffer themselves to manage the common war with fresh and doubled
resolutions. The nobility and virtue of the man was known to them all, neither
did they doubt of his fidelity, having the wounds on his body, and those marks
of injury as the pledges of it. He was therefore made Captain by the consent of
all, and once and again the Persians on purpose giving back, he made with a
small party successful encounters. At last, when the whole Army was committed
to his charge, he betrayed it to the King, and reduced the whole City into his
power. After this, Darius made war against the Scythians, which shall be
declared in the following volume.

The Second Book OF IVSTINE.
IN this relation of the achievements of the Scythians which were of large
extent and magnificence, we must derive their Pedigree from their first
original; for they had beginnings as illustrious as was their Empire, and were
no less famous under the government of women then of men; for the men did found
the Kingdom of the Parthians and the Bactrians, and the women did erect the
kingdom of the Amazons; if you consider the deeds done both by the men and
women, it will be uncertain to determine which of their Sexes were most famous.
The Nation of the Scythians was always esteemed to be of all most ancient;
although for a long time there was a contention betwixt the Scythians and
Egyptians, concerning the Antiquity of their Nations. The Egyptians alleging
that in the beginning of all things, when other Lands did burn with the
immoderate heat of the Sun, or were frozen with the extremity of the cold; so
that they were not only incapable to produce men, but could neither receive or
entertain any adventitious, before habiliments for their bodies were found out,
to defend them from the violence of the heat or cold; or the intractableness of
the places were made more tolerable by remedies procured by Art; Egypt was
always so temperate, that neither the heat of the Summer, nor the cold of the
Winter, did oppress her inhabitants. The soil was also so fruitful, that no
place did more abound with nourishment for the use of mankind; therefore it in
reason may appear that men were first born there, where they could most easily
be brought up. On the other side, the Scythians conceived the temper of the
Heavens to be an Argument of no force to prove Antiquity; for when Nature did
first distribute the beginings either of heat or cold unto Countries, she
straight way, not only produced creatures to endure the constitution of that
Clime, but diverse kinds of Fruits and Trees, aptly qualified and suitable to
the condition of the Countries. And by how much the Climate of the Scythians is
more sharp then the Egyptians, by so much their bodies and their understandings
are more solid. But if the world was ever entire in one piece, as it is now
divided into many; or if in the beginning of things the deluge of waters did
overwhelm the earth, or if the fire which begot the world did possess all
things; the Scythians in every respect were most ancient in their original: for
if the fire first possessed all things, which by degrees being extinguished,
gave place unto the earth; there was no place that was sooner severed from the
fire then the North, by reason of the cold; as to this day it is to be seen,
that no Clime is more stiff with Winter; but Egypt and all the East received
long afterward their temper, seeing it does still burn with the violent heat
of the Sun. On the other side, if all Lands were heretofore drowned in the
Deeps, no doubt but every highest part (the waters flowing down) was first
uncovered, and that the water stayed for a long time in the lower Countries;
and the sooner that any part of the earth became dry before the other, the
sooner it began to bring forth creatures. But Scythia is so high in her
situation above all other Lands, that all Rivers which have their beginnings
there, do flow down first unto the Maeotick, then into the Pontick, and
afterward into the Egyptian Sea, but Egypt (whose fences have been made at the
care and charges of such great Kings, and so many ages, and provided with so
many Banks against the force of the falling Rivers, and cut into so many
Ditches, that when the waters are drayned from one place they are received into
another; and yet for all this cannot be inhabited, unless Nilus too be
excluded) cannot appear to pretend to any antiquity, which both by the
exaggeration either of her Kings, and of Nilus drawing so much mud after it,
does seem of all Lands to be the last inhabited. The Egyptians being overcome
with these Arguments, the Scythians were always esteemed the more Ancient.
Scythia being stretched forwards toward the East, is enclosed on one side with
Pontus, and on the other with the Riphaean mountains, on the back of us with
Asia, and the River Phaesis. The men have no limits to their possessions, they
Till not the ground, nor have any house or shelter, or place of residence being
accustomed to wander through waste and unfrequented places, as they drive and
feed their Cattle: they carry their wives and children with them in Wagons:
Which (being covered with the Hides of Beasts to defend them from the showers
and tempests) they do use in the stead of houses. The Justice of the Nation is
more beautified by the simplicity of their conversation, then by their Laws.
There is no crime amongst them more capital then theft; for having flocks and
droves without any house or fence, what would be safe amongst them if it were
lawful for them to steal? they despise gold and silver as much as other men do
covet it. They feed on milk and honey. The use of Wool and of Apparel is
unknown unto them; and because they are pinched with continual cold, they are
clothed with the skins of wild beasts, great and small.

This their continence has endued them with such a righteousness of
conversation, that they covet not any thing which is their neighbors; for
there is the desire of riches where is the use of it; and it were to be wished
that in other men there were the like moderation and abstinence; surely not so
many wars should be continued through all Ages, almost over all Lands, neither
should the sword devour more men then the natural condition of Fate. It is
wonderful indeed, that Nature has granted that to these, which the Grecians
could not attain unto by the repeated Instructions of their wise men, and the
Precepts of their Philosophers, and that their refined Manners should stoop in
the comparison to unrefined Barbarism; so much the ignorance of vices has
profited more in them, then does in others the knowledge of virtue. The
Scythians thrice attempted the chief command of Asia, they themselves did
always remain either untouched or unconquered by the forces of others; by a
shameful flight they removed from Scythia Darius King of the Persians. They
destroyed Cyrus with all his Army, and in the same manner they overthrew
Zopyron one of the Commanders of Alexander the Great, with all his power: They
heard of, but not felt the arms of the Romans. They erected the Parthian and
Bactrian Kingdoms, a Nation proud of war and labor. The strength of their
bodies is great, they lay up nothing which they are afraid to lose, and where
they are Conquerors, they desire nothing but glory. Vexores King of Egypt was
the first that made war upon the Scythians, having first by Ambassadors sent a
Summons to them to obey him; But the Scythians being before advertised by their
Neighbors of the coming of the King, made answer, We wonder that the Commander
of so rich a People should so foolishly make war against poor men, having more
reason to look to his affairs at home; for here the event of the war is
uncertain, the rewards of the Conquest are none, and the losses are apparent;
therefore they would not attend till he should come to them, when in so great
and rich an enemy there was more by them to be expected, and therefore of their
own accord they were resolved to meet him. Their deeds did jump and overtake
their words; and the King understanding that they marched toward him with so
much speed, he turned his back upon them, and his Army with all the Bag and
Baggage being left behind, he timorously escaped into his Kingdom. The Marshes
did hinder the Scythians from the pursuit. Being returned from thence they
subdued Asia, and made it tributary, a small tribute being imposed rather to
show their titular Command, then for any reward of their victory. Having stayed
fifteen years in establishing the affairs of Asia, they were called back by the
importunity of their wives, it being assured them by their Ambassadors, that
unless they did return with more speed, they would seek for issue from their
Neighbors, nor ever suffer through their default, that the Nations of the
Scythians should have no name in posterity. Asia was tributary to the Scythians
for the space of one thousand and five hundred years; Ninus King of the
Assyrians did put a period to the tribute: But in this interval of time, two
young men of royal blood amongst the Scythians, Plinos and Scolopythus being
driven from their own Country by the faction of the Nobility, did draw with
them a gallant and numerous train of young men, and sitting down in the coast
of Cappadocia, near unto the River of Thermodoon, they did inhabit the
Themiscyrian Plains which they had conquered to obedience: Being unaccustomed
there for the space of many years to plunder their Neighbors, they were at
last slain through treachery by the conspiracy of the people. Their wives when
they observed their punishment to be without children, to be added to their
banishment, did put on arms, and first by removing, and afterward by
commencing wars, they did defend their own Territories. They also did forbear
the desire of marriage with their Neighbors, calling i^ slavery, not
Matrimony; a singular example to Posterity. They did increase their
Commonwealth without men, at the same time when they did desend themselves with
the contempt of them; And lest some women should seem more happy then others,
they killed those men who did remain alive amongst them, and afterward
prosecuted the revenge of their slaughtered husbands on the destruction of
their Neighbors. Peace then being obtained by war, lest their Nation should
fail, they mingled in copulation with their Neighbors; If any male-children
were born, they were killed; They exercised their Virgins in the same way of
education as they were bred up themselves, not in sloth, or the manufactures of
wool, but in arms, horses and hunting, the right breasts of every Infant Virgin
being bu^ned off, that afterward by not drawing of it home, it should not
hinder the force of the arrow from the Bow; from them they are called Amazons.
They had two Queens, Marthesia and Lampedo, who, their forces being divided
into two parts, being now renowned for their wealth, did make war by turns,
carefully defending their Territories; and because authority should not be
wanting to their successes, they declared that they were begotten of Mars. The
greatest part of Europe being conquered, they seized on several Cities in Asia
also, and having there builded Ephesus and many oher Towns, they sent home one
part of their Army laden with a migh^y booty: The rest who stayed behind to
desend what they had got in Asia, were overcome by the concourse of the
Barbarians, and were killed with their Queen Marthesia; in whose place her
daughter Orithya succeeded in the Kingdom, who besides her singular industry in
the war, has been admirable through all Ages for the preservation of her
Virginity. By her prowess so much same and glory was derived to the Amazons,
that the King who imposed the twelve labors upon Hercules, did command him as
a task impossible to bring him the Arms of the Queen of the Amazons; therefore
he sailing thither with nine long ships did unexpectedly assault them, the
youth of the Princes of Greece accompanying him. Two* sisters of the four did
then govern the Kingdom of the Amazons, Antiopa, and Orithya; Orithya was then
employed in the wars abroad; When Hercules did steer toward the Amazonian
shore, there were but a small and unusual number with Antiopa the Queen,
fearing no invasion of an enemy; wherefore it came to pass, that a few being
awakened by the sudden Alarm had recourse to Arms, and became an easy victory
to their Enemies; many were slain and taken prisoners, amongst whom were the
two sisters of Antiopa; Menalippe who was taken by Hercules, and Hippolite by
Theseus, who having mnde his prisoner his reward, did afterward take her into
marriage, by whom he begat Hippolitus; Hercules after the victory restored
Menalippe to her sister, and took for his reward the Armor of the Queen: and
having performed what he was commanded, he returned to the King. But Orithya
returning, when she found that a war was made upon her sisters, and that the
Prince of the Athenians was the chief actor, she persuaded her companions to
revenge, alleging that Pontus and Asia were subdued in vain, if they still lay
open not only to the wars, but to the rapines of the Grecians. She desired aid
of S^g^llus King of the Scythians, representing that she was of the same
generation with him; she made apparan^ to him the destruction long ago of all
the husbands of the Amazous, the necessity that first made the women to take
Arms, and the causes of the war, and that they had purchased by their virtue
that the Scythians should not be found to have women less industrious then were
the men. He being moved by the temptation of domestic glory, did send his son
Penaxagoras to her aid with a very great body of horse. But some difference
being occasioned before the Battle, she being abandoned of her Auxiliaries was
overcome by the Athenians. Nevertheless she had the Tents of the Scythians for
her receptacle, by whose assistance being untouched by other Nations she
returned into her Kingdom. After her Pensithelea enjoyed the Kingdom, who
bringing aid against the Greeks, and fighting in the Trojan war amongst the
most valiant men, did give many demonstrations of her singular valor; but she
being killed at last, and her Army consumed, those few that were left being
nardly able to defend themselves against their Neighbors, did continue unto
the time of Alexander the Great. Their Queen Minothaea or Thalestris having
obtained of Alexander for thi^teen days together to enjoy his company to have
issue by him, being returned to her Kingdom, not long after was extinguished,
and with her the whole name of the Amazons. But the Scythians in their third
Asian expedition, when they were seven years absent from their wives and
children, were received on their return by a war from their own slaves; for
their wives being wearied with the long expectation of their husbands, and
believing that they were not detained by the war, but destroyed, did marry
their servants left behind to have a care of their cat^el, who being now armed
did prohibit their Masters like strangers from their own Territories, being
returned with victory. The fight being doubtful, the Scythians did admonish one
another to change the manner of the war, and to remember that they did not
encounter with enemies but with servants, and that they must not overcome now
by the Law of Arms, but by Authority of Masters, and not use weapons but
scourges; and the sword being laid by, rods and whips, and such other
instruments of servile fear were to be provided; The Council being approved,
and all well appointed as it was prescribed, as they made their approach unto
their enemies, they held out the lash unto them not thinking of it, which
struck so sudden and deep impression into them, that they overcame them with
the fear of stripes, whom they could not with the sword, and they fled away not
like to conquered enemies, but a pack of fugi^ive slaves; whosoever of them
were taken were fastened to the Cross. The women also being conscious to
themselves, what they had done, did end their own lives with their own hands,
some with knives, and some with halters. After this the Scythians ^ad peace
until the time of King Lanthin, against whom Darius King of the Persians, when
he could not obtain his daughter in marriage, did commence a war, and invaded
Scythia with seven hundred thousand armed men; but his enemies declining the
fight, he fearing that the bridge of Ister being broken down, he should be
stopped in his return, did timorously fly back, having lost ninety thousand men
in the expedition, which brush in so vast a multitude of men was hardly reputed
as any loss at all. After that, he subdued Asia and Macedonia, and overcame the
Ionians in a fight at Sea; and it being known that the Athenians did bring aid
to the Ionians against him, he turned all the force and fury of the war against
them.

And now because we are come to the wars of the Athenians, which were managed
not only beyond hope, but above belief; and because the acts of the Athenians
were greater in effect then their wishes, I will in a few words give you the
original of them; and the rather because they rose not as other Nations from
small beginnings to their heigh of glory; for they besides those additions
which by degrees they purchased by their valor, did also much boast of their
original; for they were not Aliens, neither did a collected Refuse of people
give an original to this City, but they were born in the same Soil which they
did inhabit, and where was their seat there was also their original. They first
taught the Manufacture of Wool, and the use of Oil and Wine, and showed to
those who fed on Aco^ns, how to plough and sow; without all doubt good letters
and eloquence and the order of civil Discipline have Athens as their Temple.
Before the days of Deucalion they had Cecrops for their King, whom Antiquity
did feign to be of two forms, he being the first who in marriage joined the
male unto the female. Cranaus succeeded him, whose daughter Attis did give a
name to the whole Country. After him Amphitrion reigned, who first of all did
consecrate the City to Minerva, and called it by the name of Athens. In his
time a Deluge of water overwhelmed the greatest part of Greece; those only were
preserved alive whom the tops of the mountains received into protection, or who
were transported in ships to Deucalion King of Thessaly, for which cause he is
said to restore mankind. By order of Succession the Kingdom descended to
Erictheus, in whose Reign the sowing of Corn was found out by Triptolemus at
Eleusinum, for the honor of which gift were the mighty devotions celebrated by
women, called Eleusina sacra. Aegeus, the father of Theseus, possessed also the
Kingdom of Athens, from whom Medea departing being divorced from him, by reason
of the full age of her Step-son, did repair to Colchos with her son Meaus,
begotten by Aegeus. After Aegeus, Theseus; and after Theseus, Demophoon (who
assisted the Greeks against the Trojans) did possess the Kingdom of Athens.
There were some old grudges betwixt the Athenians and the Dorians, which the
Dorians intending to revenge, asked counsel of the Oracle concerning the event
of the war; it was answered, that the Dorians should have the better if they
killed not the King of the Athenians: When the Armies therefore were to join in
Battle, the Dorian Soldiers received Orders above all things to be careful of
the person of the Athenian King; Codrus at that time was King of the Athenians,
who (the answer of God, and instructions of the enemies being understood)
having put off his royal habiliments came all in rags (carrying on his neck a
bundle of vines) into the Camp of the Dorians, where in the throng of those
that did oppose him he was slain by a soldier whom he cunningly wounded with
his hook. The body of the King being known, the Dorians marched back without
any engagement at all: By this means the Athenians were delivered from the war
by the virtue of their King, who for the safety of his Country, did devote
himself to destruction. After Codrus there was no King of Athens, which is
added to the memory of Codrus his name. The administration of the Commonwealth
was transmitted to yearly Magistrates; but the City had then no Laws at all,
because the will of the Rulers did pass for Laws. Solon therefore was chosen, a
man famous for Justice, who with his Laws did as it were erect a new City, and
did deport himself with so great a temper between the Senate and the People,
that when he propounded something for one order, which might seem to displease
the other, he received equal thanks from both. Amongst many excellent things
of this man, this does most prefer it self to observation. The Athenians and
the Megarans did contend with arms for the propriety of the Isle of Megara,
almost to the utter destruction of both parties. After many overthrows, it
began to be a capital offense amongst the Athenians, if any one had but
propounded the vindication of their right to the Island; Solon being therefore
perplexed, left by his silence he should be unprofitable to the Commonwealth,
or by his speech he should endanger his life, he disguised himself into a
madness, by the liberty whereof he could not only speak, but do things that
were prohibited. In a torn unfashioned habit, just like a mad man, he came
into the public, where a great assembly being drawn together, that the better
he might dissemble his counsel, he began to persuade the people in verses
unaccustomed to him, to that which was forbidden, and so possessed the minds of
them all, that immediately war was decreed against the Megarans. In the mean
time the Megarans being mindful of the war which was made against them by the
Athenians; and fearing lest they should seem in vain to have attempted war
against them, did repair to their ships, having a design to oppress by night
the Athenian Matrons at their Eleusin devotions. Which being understood,
Pisistratus Captain General of the Athenians, did lay an Ambush for them, the
Mat^ons being commanded to celebrate their Devotions with their accustomed
noise and clamor on the very approach of their enemies, that they might not
perceive they were discovered; and Pisistratus having unexpectedly set upon
them, as they came down from their ships he easily overcame them; their Fleet
being taken, he immediately did set sails for Megara, the women above the Decks
being mixed with the men, that they might pretend a show of the captive Matrons.
The Megarans when they observed the form and building of the ships, and the
booty that was purchased, ran down to the shore to meet them, where being all
slain, Pisistratus became almost Master of the City it self. Thus the Megarans
by their own deceit did give a victory to their enemies; but Pisistratus as if
he overcame for himself, and not for his Country, did by subtility invade the
sovereign Authority; for having afflicted himself at home with voluntary
stripes, his body being torn, he came forth into the Marketplace, and an
Assembly being called, he showed his wounds unto the people; be complained of
the cruelty of the Rulers, by whom he dissembled that he suffered this
opprobrious injury; tears were added to his complaints, and by his envious
words the credulous people were incensed; he affirmed that he was hated by the
Senate for his love unto the people; and obtained a Guard for the preservation
of his person; by the power of whom being established in his tyranny he reigned
three and thirty years. After his death, Diocles one of his sons, having
ravished a Virgin, was killed by the brother of the Maid. His other brother
Hippias being settled in his fathers Government, did command the killer of his
Brother to be apprehended, who when by torments he was enforced to name those
who were guilty with him of the murder, he named all the friends of the Tyrant,
who being put to death, the Tyrant demanded if there were any yet remaining of
them; he answered, there are no more whom I now desire to have dead, but the
Tyrant himself; by which words, after the revenge of his Sisters chastity, he
showed himself to be a Conqueror of the Tyrant himself. By his virtue the City
being admonished of her liberty, Hippias at last was driven from his Kingdom
into banishment, who repairing to the Persians, did offer himself as a Guide
unto Darius in his war against his Country. Therefore the Athenians (the
approach of Darius being understood) desiring aid of the Lacedaemonians, a City
then in friendship with them, and finding that by reason of some Religion they
demanded the respite of four days, their assistance being not regarded, with
ten thousand of their own Citizens, and a thousand Auxiliaries of the
Platensians, they advanced into the fields of Marathon, against six hundred
thousand of their Enemies; Miltiades was Captain Gene^al of the war, and the
Author, not expecting the Lacedemonian aid; who was armed with so great a
confidence, that he believed there was more advantage in the swiftness of the
march, then in the assistance of his friends. Great therefore was the
cheerfulness and courage of their minds, which they showed in their eager
running to the battle, insomuch that when there was the space of a mile betwixt
both Armies, in full speed, and before the flight of their arrows, they came up
unto the faces of their enemies; neither was success wanting to their boldness;
for they fought with so much courage, that you would take these to be men, and
the other sheep.

The Persians being overcome, did fly into their ships, many of which were
sunk, and many taken.

In this fight so great was the prowess of every one, that it is hard to judge
whose praise was the greatest: But the glory of young Themistocles did
apparently shine forth amongst the rest, in whom his Imperatorious Honors to
come were easily to be seen. The glory also of Cynegirus an Athenian Soldier,
is celebrated by the praises of many Writers, who after innumerable slaughters
in the fight, when he had driven the flying enemies to their ships, he took
hold of a ship laden with men with his right hand, nor did he let loose his
hold till he lost that hand: His right hand being cut off, he fastened upon the
ship with his left hand; and having lost that also, he took hold of the ship
with his mouth; so great was his courage, that being not wearied with so many
slaughters, nor (both his hands being lost) being yet overcome, at the last
thus dismembered as he was, and like an enraged wild beast, he fought even with
his teeth. In that battle the Persians lost two hundred thousand men, besides
those who perished at Sea. Hippias the Athenian Tyrant was also slain, the
Author and Promoter of the war, the Gods the revengers of his Country, taking
punishment of his treachery. In the mean time Darius when he would renew the
war, died in the very preparation of it, many children being left begotten both
before and after his reign. Artobazanes being eldest by the privilege of his
age did challenge the Kingdom, which the right and order of birth and nature
her self does allow to the Nations: But Xerxes did make his plea not in
relation to order, but to the happiness of his birth; It was true indeed, he
said, that Artobazanes was the firstborn, but when Darius was a private man;
but he was born when Darius was a King; therefore his brothers who were born to
Darius being but a private man, could not challenge to themselves the Kingdom,
but only that private Fortune which Darius had before he was a King; He
alleging that he was the first whom his Father being a King, did beget to
inherit the Kingdom. To this it was added that Artobazanes was born when not
only his father but his mother also were of a private Fortune: but he was born
his mother being a Queen, and that he never saw his father but when a King;
moreover that King Cyrus on his mothers side was his Grandfather, not only the
heir but the erector of so great an Empire: Therefore if the Father had left
both Brothers endued with equal right, yet he should carry it, both by the
right of his Mother, and his Grandfather. This strife, with concording
affections, they did refer to their Uncle Artaphernes, as to a Domestic Judge,
who, the cause being examined, made Xerxes King; and so brotherly was the
contention, that neither the Conqueror did insult, nor the conquered repine;
and in the very height of the contestation they sent presents to one another,
and had not only undistrustful but delightful feastings together. The Judgment
it self was also given without arbitrators, and without reproaches; so much
more moderately did brothers then decide great Kingdoms amongst themselves,
then they do now share but small Patrimonies. Xerxes made preparations five
years together for the Grecians; which when Demaratus King of the
Lacedaemonians, who lived as a banished man in the Court of Xexes, understood,
being more friendly to his Country after his flight, then to the King after
his benefits, lest they should be oppressed by an unexpected war, he did
certify the particulars to the Magistrates in Tables of wood, and covered the
Letters with wax spread over them, that neither the Characters might be read,
which would have bin if they had nothing to cover them, nor the fresh wax
betray the deceit; he then gave them to a faithful servant to be carried, and
did command him to deliver them to the Magistrates of Sparta, which being
brought unto them, it held them long in suspense at Lacedemon; for they saw
nothing written, and yet believed that they were not sent in vain, and that the
business was so much the greater, by how much it was the more concealed. The
men not knowing what to conjecture, the sister of King Leonides found out the
design of the writer; the wax therefore being taken off, the advertisements of
the war were discovered. Xerxes had by this time armed seven hundred thousand
men out of his own Dominions, and had three hundred thousand sent to his
assistance, that it is not unworthily recorded that Rivers were drank up, and
that all Greece was hardly able to contain his Army; he was also said to have
one hundred thousand Ships. To this so great an Army a General was wanting; for
if you look upon the King, you will rather extol his wealth then his conduct,
of which there was such abundance in his Kingdom, that when Rivers were
consumed with his multitudes, yet his Exchequer was still full. He was always
seen the last in the fight, and the first in the flight; humble in dangers, and
when the occasion of fear was over, one high-minded. Before the trial of the
War, as if he was Lord of Nature her self, by the confidence o^ his numbers he
levelled mountains and raised the valleys all to one height; some Seas he
covered with Bridges, and contracted others, for the advantage of the Saylors.
His entrance into Greece as it was terrible, so was his departing foul and
shameful; for when Leonides King of the Lacedaemonians had secured the
Straights of Thermopylae with four thousand men, Xerxes in contempt of their
powers, commanded those of his soldiers to encounter them, whose kinsmen were
slain in the Marathonian Plains, who whiles they began to revenge their
friends, were the beginning of the overthrow; and these being followed by an
unprofitable multitude, a greater slaughter was occasioned. Three days
together there they fought, to the grief and indignation of the Persians; on
the fourth, when it was reported to Leonides, that the tops of the Straights
were possessed by twenty thousand of the enemy, he exhorted his associates to
drawback, and to reserve themselves for some better service for their Country:
He would try his own fortune, he said, with the Lacedaemonians, being more
indebted to his Country then to his life; the residue were to be preserved for
the general defense of Greece. The command of the King being heard, the rest
were dismissed, and the Lacedaemonians only remained. In the beginning of the
war, counsel being asked of the Oracle of Delphos, it was answered, that
either the King of the Lacedaemonians, or the City must fall; therefore when
King Leonides did set forth to the War, he so confirmed the resolution of his
own soldiers, that they all knew he advanced with a mind resolved to dye. He
therefore did possess himself of the Straights, that he might overcome with a
few with greater glory, or fall with less damage to the Commonwealth. His
Companions therefore being dismissed, he exhorted the Spartans to remember that
howsoever did they fight, they must fall, and that they should take heed lest
they might seem to have more courageously stood still, then to have fought;
therefore he said they were not to attend to be environed by their enemies, but
as soon as night should administer the opportunity to fall unexpectedly upon
them secure, and hugging an abusing joy: The Conquerors, he said, could never
dye more honorably then in the Tents of their enemies. It was no hard task to
persuade those who were resolved to dye: they presently buckled on their Arms,
and six hundred men did beat up the Quarters of five hundred thousand;
immediately they advanced to the Pavilion of the King to dye with him, or if
they were over-povvered to dye especially in his tent and sight. The Alarm
was heard over all the Camp. The Lacedaemonians after they could not find cut
the King, did fly up and down as Conquerors over all the Camp, and killed or
overthrew whatsoever did oppose them, as knowing that they did not fight in
hope of victory, but to revenge their own deaths. The fight was continued from
the beginning of night unto the greatest part of the next day; at the last not
overcome, but being weary with overcoming, they fell upon the great heaps of
the carka^es of their enemies. Xerxes having received two overthrows by land,
was determined to try his fortune on the Sea. But Themistocles the General of
the Athenians, when he understood that the Ionians, against whom the King of
the Persians had undertaken this war, had set forth to Sea with a Navy to his
assistance, he resolved to solicit them to take part with him; and because he
could not have the opportunity to confer with them, he provided that Symbols
should be provided and left written on the stones, by which they were to sail,
in these words: What madness has possessed you, O Ionians? What crime is this
which you undert^ke? Did you before make war upon us your Founders, and do you
now intend it again upon us your Defenders? Did we therefore build your Walls,
that they should be those who must overthrow our own? What, was not this the
cause that at first made Darius, and now Xerxes to make war against us, because
we would not forsake you rebelling? Come away from that Siege into our Tents,
or if you think this Counsel not safe, the battles being joined, withdraw your
selves by degrees, keep back your Oars, and depart from the War. Before the
Battle at Sea was fought, Xerxes had sent four thousand men to plunder the
Temple of Apollo at Delphos, as if he would wage war not with men only,
but also with the Immortal Gods: who were all destroyed with tempests and
thunders that he might understand that the greater the anger of the Gods is, by
so much there is no power of men that is able to stand against them. After
this he set on fire Thespiae and Placeae, and Athens, destitute of inhabitants;
and because with his svvord he could not destroy the men, he did devour their
houses with fire; for the Athenians after the battle of Marathon (Themistocles
forevvarning them that the victory over the Persians would not be the end, but
the cause of a greater war) did build two hundred ships, and having asked
Counsel of the Oracle on the approach of Xerxes, the answer was, that they
should defend themselves with walls of wood. Themistocles conceiving that by
the Oracle, a defense of shipping was ^mplicitely understood, did persuade them
all, that their Country was their confines, and not their walls, and that the
City did consist not in the houses but the Citizens; therefore they should
better commit their safety to their ships, then to their City, and that God was
the Author of this counsel. This counsel being approved of, and the City being
abandoned, they lodged their wives and children with their most precious
movables in the close Islands; they themselves being armed, did repair unto
their ships. There were other Cities also that followed the example of the
Athenians. When all their Fleet was united and resolved for a Sea Fight, and
had possessed themselves of the Straights of Salamis, that they might not be
circumvented by the multitude of Xerxes Fleet, there did arise a dissension
amongst the Princes, who when they would forsake the war to defend their own
possessions, Themistocles fearing that by the departure of his confederate^ his
strength should be diminished, did acquaint Xerxes by a faithful servant, that
he might now with ease take all Greece, being drawn up into one place. But if
the strength of the Cities, which we^e now marching homeward should be
scattered he must pursue after then one by one with greater labor.

By this artifice, he prevailed upon the King to give a sign and sound to the
battle: The Greeks also being busied at the advance of their enemies, did
prepare for the fight with their ^nited powers. The King in the mean time (one
part of his ships not far from him) did stand upon the shore as spectator of
the fight but Artemisia Queen of Halicarnassus, who came to the aid of Xerxes
in her own person, did fight most gallantly amongst the foremost of the
Commanders; for as you might here behold a womanish fear in a man, so in a
woman you might see a manly courage. When the fight was doubtful, the Ionians
according to the Instructions of Themistocles, did by degrees withdraw
themselves from the fight, whose revolt did alter the resolution of their
companions; therefore looking round about them where to fly, they were at a
stand, and presently after being overcome, they were all put to slight. In the
violence of this fear, many ships were drowned, and many sunk, and many
dreading as much the anger of their King as the fury of their enemies, did
steal away into Persia. Xerxes being amazed at this overthrow, and uncertain
what to resolve upon, Mardonius came unto him, and did exhort him that he would
return into his own Kingdom, lest the report of the unprosperous war might
occasion some sedition at home; and as the custom is, making the best of all
things, he desired that he would leave to him the command of three hundred
thousand of selected men, with which he would eithet to his glory overcome all
Greece, or if the event fell otherwise, he should fall before the enemies
without the infamy of his Master. The counsel being applauded, the Army was
delivered to Mardonius, and the King himself intended to lead back the
remainder of them into his own Kingdom. But the Grecians having notice ot the
Kings retreat, did take counsel to break down the bridge, which Xerxes as if
he had been Conqueror of the Sea, had made at Abydos, that his passage being
hindered, he should either be destroyed with his Army, or through desperation of
success, be enforced to sue for peace. But Themistocles fearing lest the
enemies being shut up in Greece, it might raise their desperation into
resolution, and enforce them with their swords to open that way which was
obstructed to them; he declared that there already were too many Enemies left
in Greece behind, and that their numbers ought not to be increased by
obstructing them in their return. When he could not prevail by his counsel, he
sent the same servant to Xerxes, and did thoroughly inform him of it, and
persuaded him by a swift flight to make sure his passage. He being amazed at
the information of the Messenger, left all his sould^ers to be commanded by his
Captains, and himself with a small retinue did make all haste unto Abydos:
Where when he found the bridge to be loose and broken by the winters stroms, in
a great fear he passed over in a Fishers Sceph. It was a sight worthy the
observation, and in the estimation of things to be admired for the variousness
of human condition, to behold him hiding himself in a small vessel, whom not
long before scarce all the Sea could contain: and that he should be without the
attendance of servants, whose armies by reason of their multitude were a burden
grievous to the earth to bear them. Neither had his Armies by Land which he
assigned to his Captains, a more happy expedition; for to their daily travel
(there being no rest to the fearful) famine was joined, and the want
continuing many days did bring the Plague upon them; and so great was the
noysomness of the dying, that the Highways were filled with Carkases; and
Beasts, and Birds of Prey did follow the Army, being tempted by the multitude
of the Carkases. In the mean time Mardonius did sack Olynthus in Greece, and
did solicit the Athenians to the hope of peace, and to the friendship of the
King, promising them to build again their City that was burned, and to make it
greater then before; when he found that they would sell their liberty at no
price, having burned what he began to rebuild, he marched with his Army into
Baeotia; thither the forces of the Greeks did follow him, which consisted of
one hundred thousand men.

The battle there being fought, the fortune of the King was not changed with
the General Mardonius being overcome, did fly as out of a wrack at Sea, with a
few men; his tents full of Princely wealth were taken, and the Persian gold
being divided amongst them, the luxury of riches did there first seize upon the
Grecians. On that day in which the forces of Mardonius were overthrown, there
was a fight also at Sea against the Persians under the Mountain of Mycale in
Asia. There before the engagement, when the two Fleets stood opposite to one
another, it was with confidence reported to both Armies that the Grecians had
obtained the Victory, and that the Army of Mardonius was utterly overthrown; so
great in this was the celerity of Fame, that when in the morning the Battle
was fought in Baeotia, in a few hours through so many Seas, and so many hills
and valleys, it was brought by neon into Asia.

The war being ended, there was a counsel called concerning the rewards of the
Cities; and by the judgment of all, the virtue and the prowess of the
Athenians was preferred above the rest, and by the attestation of all the
Cities, Themistocles being judged to be the most meritorious amongst the
Commanders, did increase the glory of his Country.

The Athenians therefore being enlarged both by the rewards of the War, and by
the glory of it, did begin again to build their City; and because their walls
were stronger, and of a greater compass then they were before, they began to be
suspected to the Lacedaemonians, wisely foreseeing that if the Ruins of their
City could give them so great additions, what would they now purchase, the
City being enlarged and walled about? They therefore did send Ambassadors to
admonish them, not to build again Fortifications for their Enemies, and the
Receptacles of a War to come. Themistocles observing that they envyed the
increasing glory of their City, yet determining not to deal abruptly with them,
did answer the Ambassadors that they would send messengers of their own to
Lacedemon, who should debate with them concerning the same subject. The
Spartans being dismissed, he exhorted the Athenians to make haste of the work,
and not long after he did go himself as an Ambassador to Lacedemon; and
sometimes in his journey counterfeiting an indisposition in his body, sometime
accusing the sloth of his fellow-Ambassadors, without whom nothing could be
concluded, he from day to day so long delayed the time, that he gave them at
Athens the leisure to accomplish the work.

In the mean time it was told the Spartans that the buildings at Athens were
almost finished, whereupon they sent Ambassadors again to look upon the work.
Themistocles hearing of it, did write unto the Magistrates at Athens to keep
the Ambassadors of Lacedemon in safe custody, and to detain them as a pledge,
lest any thing should be determined too cruelly against himself. He then
addressed himself to the Senate of the Lacedaemonians, where he declared that
Athens was fenced round about, and that they were able now to sustain a War,
not only by their Walls, but by their Armies: And if for that they would make
him suffer, he told them that their Ambassadors were detained at Athens as a
pledge of his safety. He then did sharply reprehend them, for that they sought
to increase their own power not by the strength but by the weakening of their
Associates. Being dismissed to Athens, he was received by the Citizens as if
Sparta had been triumphed over. After this, the Spartans (that their Army might
not be corrupted with sloth, and to revenge the War which the Persians had made
on their City and on Greece) did of their own accord make incursions into, and
plundered the Confines of Persia. They chose Pausanias to be General both for
their own Army, and the Army of their Associates, who for his Conduct affected
the whole Kingdom of Greece, and contracted with Xerxes for the marriage of his
daughter, (a reward of his treachery;) to which purpose he restored the
prisoners, that by some benefit he might oblige to him the belief of the King.
He also wrote to Xerxes, that whatsoever Messengers he sent unto him, he should
put them to death, lest the negotiation betwixt them should be betrayed by
their tongues; but Aristides the Captain of the Athenians, being chosen his
Companion in the War, by crossing the designs of his Colleague, and wisely
providing for the imminent danger, did find out the Treason, and not long after
Pausanias being accused was condemned.

Xerxes when he found the plot discovered, made War again upon the Grecians,
who elected for their Captain Cimon the Athenian, the Son of Miltiades a young
Gentleman, the example of whose piety did declare his greatness to come; for to
give him Funeral Rites, he redeemed the body of his Father out of prison,
where he dyed, being accused to have purloined from the public Treasury, and
took the Bonds upon himself; neither did he deceive in war the expectation of
his Friends; for being not inferior to the valor of his Father, he enforced
Xerxes to fly back with fear into his Kingdom, being overcome both by Sea and
Land.

THE THIRD BOOK OF IVSTINE.
XErxes the King of the Persians, the terror before of the Nations, the wars
being unfortunately managed abroad, began at last to be despised at home; for
the Majesty of the King daily diminishing, his Lieutenant Artabanus having
flattered himself with the hope of the Kingdom, did come in an evening with
seven sons he had into the Court, which by the interest of friendship lay
always open to him, where having slain the King, he by policy did attempt to
take away his sons, who opposed his desire; and not mistrusting Artaxerxes
being very young, he reported that the King was slain by his own Son Darius,
that he might the sooner enjoy the Kingdom: He persuaded Artaxerxes by
Parricide to revenge Parricide, and coming to the house of Darius being asleep
they killed him, as if being guilty he had coun^er^e^ted sleep on purpose.

After this, when Artabanus saw that one of the Royal Issue was yet remaining,
and did outlive his villainy, and withal feared the contention of the Nobility
concerning the possession of the Kingdom, he assumed Baccabassus to be a
partner of his co^nsells, who being contented with his present condition, did
reveal to Artaxerxes how his Father was slain, and his Brother murdered upon a
false suspicion of Parricide, and that Treason was plotted against himself.

This being understood, Artaxerxes fearring the number of the sons of
Artabanus, did command that his Army should be mustered on the next day, that
he might take into his observation the number of his soldiers, and their
particular industry and experience in their exercise of Arms: Therefore when
amongst the rest Artabanus was present and in Arms, the King dissembled that
his Coat of Mayl was not fit for him, and desired Artabanus to make an
exchange, who being busy to disarm himself, and unprepared for defense, the
King did run him through with his sword.

After this, he commanded the sons of Artabanus to be apprehended; and at once
this excellent young man did revenge the slaughter of his Father, the death of
his Brother, and delivered himself from treachery. Whiles these things were
thus carried in Persia, all Greece being divided into two parts by the
Lacedaemonians and Athenians, they from Foreign Wars did convert their Swords
into their own bowels: Therefore of one people there were constituted two
bodies, and men heretofore of one and the same Camp, were now divided into two
hostile Armies. The Lacedaemonians did draw to their party the common
Auxiliaries heretofore of both Cities; but the Athenians being as renowned for
their Antiquity as their Acts, did trust in their own strength; and so these
two most powerful people of Greece, equal by the Institutions of Solon, and the
Laws of Lycurgus, did throw themselves into a War through the emulation of
greatness. Lycurgus when he succeeded his brother Polybites King of Sparta, and
could challenge the Kingdom for himself, did with great fidelity restore it to
his son Charilaus (born after his Fathers death) when he came unto age, to give
an example to Posterity how much the Rights of Piety amongst all good men
should prevail above the temptation of riches; therefore in the Parenthesis of
time whiles the Infant grew up, he being his protector, made Laws for the
Spartans; Laws not more famous for their justice, then for the example of the
Lawgiver; for he ordained nothing in any Law for others, of which he first of
all had not made a rule of it in himself. He confirmed the people in their
obedience to their Governors, and the Governors to Justice in the execution of
their places of Command. He persuaded parsimony to all, believing that the
labors of the war would be more easy by the daily exercise of frugality; he
commanded all things to be bought not with money but with exchange of wares; he
took away the use of Gold and Silver as the occasion of all wickedness; he
divided the administration of the Commonwealth by orders; he gave to their
Kings the power of the Wars; to the Magistrates the Seats of Judgment and
annual Successions; to the Senate the Custody of the Laws; to the People the
substituting of the Senate, and the power of creating such Magistrates whom
they pleased; he made an equal division of Land to all, that their Patrimonies
being alike, no man might be made more powerful then his Neighbor; he
commanded all men to keep their feasts in public, that no man's riches or his
luxury should be concealed. It was permitted to young men to wear but one suit
of Apparel during the space of one whole year, and that no man should be
clothed better then another, nor feast more voluptuously, lest the imitation
should be turned into luxury. He instituted that the boys at fourteen years of
age should not be brought up in the City, but in the field, that they might lay
forth their first years not in riot, but in labor: They were permitted neither
bed nor pillows to lie upon, nor to eat any warm things, nor to return into the
City until they were at man's estate. He ordained that the Virgins should be
married without portions. He commanded that wives should not be chosen for
their money; for he said that husbands would more severely observe the Laws of
Matrimony when they were obliged by no respects of Dowry. He ordained that the
greatest reverence should not be given to men rich or powerful, but to those
who were of the greatest age; and to speak the truth, age had nowhere in the
world a more venerable respect; and because their manners before being
dissolute, these Laws at first might appear to be harsh and hard, he dissembled
that Apollo of Delphos was the Author of them, and that he received them from
his Instructions, that so the fear of Religion might take away all tediousness
from the obedience of them. Lastly, that he might give eternity to his Laws, he
did oblige the City by oath that they should change nothing in their Laws till
he returned, and counterfeited that he would go to the Oracle at Delphos to
consult what should be taken away or added to them. But he traveled not to
Delphos, but to Creet, and lived there in perpetual banishment, and dying he
commanded that his bones should be cast into the Sea, left being brought to
Lacedemon they should think themselves discharged of the Religion of their
Oath, and dissolve their Laws. With these Laws the City 4o flourished in a
little time, that when they made war with the Messenians for defiling their
Virgins in a solemn sacrifice of the Messenians, they bound themselves by a
great Oath that they would never return until they had levelled Messenia to
the ground; so much did they promise to themselves either by their strength, or
by their fortune; therefore when contrary to their confidence they were
detained ten years in the siege of the City, and after so long a widdowhood
were called back by the complaints of their wives, they fearing that this
continuation of the war they should endammage themselves more then the
Messenians; for what young men the Messeninas lost in the War, could be supplied
again by the fruitfulness of the women; but unto them their losses in the War
were daily, and the Husbands being absent, there could not be any fruitfulness
of their Wives; therefore they did choose young men out of that number of the
Soldiers, who after the administration of the Oath, did come as Recruits unto
the Army; who being sent back to Sparta, a promiscuous copulation with all
women was permitted, thinking that the conception would be more mature, if the
women did deserve for it by the 4ryal and use of several men. The Children born
from these were called Parthenians, in reflection on their mothers chastity;
who when they arrived to Thirty years of Age, for the fear of Penury (for they
having no Father into whose Patrimony a Succession might be hoped) did choose
for their Captain Phalantus the Son of Aratus, who was the Author to the
Spar^ans of sending home the young men for the pro^agation of Children: that as
they had his Father the Author of their Original, so they might 4ave his Son
the Original of their hope and dig^ity. Not taking leave of their Mothers by
4hose looseness they thought they had contracted 44famy, they traveled to seek
out new Habitati^ns, and through many Adventures having been tossed long upon
the Seas, they arrived at last in Italy, and the Tower of Tarentum being taken,
and the ancient Inhabitants forced from it, they there made a Plantation for
themselves. But after many years their Captain Phalantus being by sedition
driven into banishment, did repair unto Brundusium, to which place the ancient
Tarentines, retired, being (as I have said) forced from their own Habitations.
He dying, did persuade them that they should beat his bones and last Relicts
into dust, and privately strew them on the public place of meeting of the
Tarentines; for Apollo at Delphos did by this means promise that they should
recover their City and Country again: they conceiving that to fulfill his
revenge, he had betrayed the fate of the Citizens, did obey his Instructions.
But the sense of the Oracle was contrary, for it promised by this deed, a
perpetuity to them, and not an amissi^n of their City. Thus by the counsel of
their banished Captain, and the officiousness of the Enemies, the City of
Tarentum was through all Ages possessed by the Parthenians; In the memory of
which benefit, divine honors were decreed to Phalantus. In the mean time, the
Messenians when they could not be overcome by prowess, were circumvented by
deceit, and having for fourscore years endured the grievous scourges, and for
the most part the bonds, and the other calamities of a conquered City; after a
long patience of punishments they renewed the War, and the Lacedaemonians did so
much the more eagerly combine themselves unto Arms, because they were to fight
against their own Captains; therefore when injury on this side, and indignity
on the other side did exasperate their swords, the Oracle at Delphos being
consulted, the Lacedaemonians were commanded to fetch a Captain for their War
from Athens.

The Athenians when they understood the Answer of the Oracle, in the disgrace
of the Lacedaemonians, did send Tyrtaeus the Poet, a man lame in feet, who being
overthrown in three battles, did bring down the Spartans to so much
desperation, that they set free their servants for recruits of their Army; and
the Widows of the slain were promised to them in marriage, that they might
succed not only in the number, but also in the dignity of the Citizens that
were lost. But the Kings of the Lacedaemonians, least by fighting against
Fortune, they should heap more calamity upon their City, would have marched
back with their Army, had not Tyrtaeus intervened, who at a full Assembly
recited to the Army some Verses he had made, by which he shot so great a heat
of courage into the breasts of the Soldiers, that more mindful of their burial
then of their safety, they fastened Medals on their right Arms, in which their
own and their Fathers Names were engraven, that if the fury of the battle
should have deveured them all, and by the space of time the lineaments of their
bodies should lie confused together, yet by the observation of their Titles
they might be discovered and delivered unto burial.

When the Kings perceived the Army to be thus encouraged, they sent a
Messenger to e^form the Enemy with their Resolutions, which possessed the
Messenians not with any fear, but a mutual emulation; they fought therefore
with such height of Courage, that there was scarce ever seen a more bloody
battle; the Lacedaemonians at last did obtain the victory.

In the process of time, the Messenians commenced the third War, at which time
the Lacedaemonians amongst their other Associates did call the Athenians to
their aid; but suspecting their fidelity, and pretending them to be
supervacaneous, they dismissed them from the service, which left so deep an
impression in the hearts of the Athenians, that they translated the money
(which was collected over all Greece for the Persian War) from Delos unto
Athens, least it should be a prey to the Lacedaemonians: But the Lacedaemonians
were not contented with it; for being engaged themselves in the Messenian War,
they sent to the Pelopen^iensians to invade the Athenians, whose Forces at that
present were but small, their Fleet being commanded into Egypt; therefore
fighting at Sea they were easily overcome, but by the return of their
Associates, being increased both in ships and men, they renewed the War; and
now the Lacedaemonians giving some respite to the Messenians, did turn
themselves and their arms against the Athenians; the Victory was a long time
doubtful; at last they left off with equal loss; and the Lacedaemonians being
called back to the war again of the Messenians, least in the mean time they
should leave the Athenians idle, they bargained with the Thebans to restore
unto them the Government of Boeotia which they lost in the times of their
troubles with the Persians, if they would undertake the War against the
Athenians; so great was the fury of the Spartans, that being envolved in two
Wars, they refused not to undertake the third if they could get any to assist
them who was an enemy to their Enemies; Therefore the Athenians against so
great tempest of the War did choose two Captains, Pericles a man of approved
virtue, and Sophocles the writer of Tragedies, who having divided their Army,
did waste the Fields of the Lacedaemonians, and added many Cities of Achaia to
their Government, with which misfortunes the Lacedaemonians being disco^raged,
did make peace with the Athenians for thirty years, but their enmities could
not endure so tedious a truce; therefore in the space of less then fi^teen
years they invaded the borders of Athens, and plundered the Country in the
despite of God and man; and that they might not seem to desire a prey rather
then an encounter, they challenged the Athenians to battle; but by the counsel
of Pericl^s, the Athenians deferred the injury of the loss sustained to an apt
time of revenge, thinking it not good discretion to join in battle with the
Enemies, when without danger they could be revenged of them. Certain days
being passed, they went aboard their Ships, and the Lacedaemonians not thinking
of it, they plundered all Sparta, and brought away far more then before they
lost, and in reference to this booty taken, the revenge was above the anger.
This Expedition of Pericles was famous, but much more famous was his contempt
of his private Patrimony: for the Enemies when they made havoc of the rest,
did leave his Fields untouched, hoping by that means to pluck upon him either
danger by the envy, or the infamy of treachery by suspicion; which Pericles
foreseeing, did both declare it unto the people, and to decline the assault of
envy, did give away those Fields to the Commonwealth, and so where his danger
was most sought after, he found his greatest safety. Not long after, there was
another battle at Sea, in which the Lacedaemonians being overcome, were put to
flight, neither did they cease afterward, but by various fortune of the War,
either by Sea or by land they destroyed one another. At the last, being wearyed
by so many calamities, they made a peace for fifty years, which they observed
but six; for the Articles which they signed in their own names, they did break
in the persons of their Associates, as if they were guilty of less perjurie by
bringing aid to their Confederates, then if they had proclaimed open War
themselves. The War was hence translated into Sicily, which before I shall
declare, some few things are to be first spoken concerning the situation of the
Island.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF IVSTINE.
IT is reported that Sicily by some narrow necks of Land was heretofore joined
to Italy, and that it was torn from it as from the greater body by the
impetuousness of the upper Sea, which is carried that way with all the weight
of its Waves. The Earth itself is light and brittle, and so full of holes and
flaws, that it lies almost all open to the gusts of the winds; and there is a
natural virtue and faculty in it, both for the begetting and the nourishing of
fire; for it is reported that within, it is full of the veins of Pitch and
Rozen, which is the cause that the wind in the bowels of the Earth wrestling
with the fire, it often and in several places does belch forth sometimes fire,
sometimes vapors, and sometimes smoke; and from hence through so many Ages,
the fire of Aetna does continue; and where the winds do work more strong
through the spiraments of the Caves, heaps of Sands are cast forth. The
Promontory next to Italy is called Rhegium, which according to the Greek does
signify abrupt: Neither is it a wonder, that the Antiquity of this place
should be so fabulous, in which so many wonderful things do meet together.
First, there is nowhere a more violent Sea, and not only with a rapid but a
cruel force, and terrible not only to the Saylors but Spectators afar off: so
great also is the combat of the Waves tilting one against another, that you
may behold some of them as it were turning their backs to dive into the bottom
of the Gulf, and others in foaming triumph to ride aloft as Conquerours over
them; you may hear the roar of their rage in the height, and the groans again
of their fall into the Deeps. The perpetual fires of the Hill of Aetna and of
the Aeolian Islands do come so near, that you would think the very fire is
nourished by the water; for otherwise in so narrow a compass, so great a fire
could never continue so many Ages, if it were not fed by the nutriture of the
moisture: From hence the Fables did produce Scylla and Charibdis; from hence
those barkings were heard, from hence were those strange shapes of the Monster
believed, when the Sailors by, affrighted with the great noise and swallows of
the whirl-Pools, did conceive those Waves did bark, which the voraginousness of
the devouring Sea did commit and clash together. The same cause makes the fire
of the Monntain Aetna to be perpetual; for this concurse and wrestling of the
water does take down with it into the bottom of the deeps the enforced spirit,
and there suffocates and keeps it down so long, until diffused through the
pores of the Earth, it kindles the nutriment of the fire. The neerness of Italy
and of Sicily, and the height of their Promontories is so equal, that it gives
no less admiration to us, then it did terror to Antiquity, who did believe (the
Promontories meeting both, and uniting themselves into one, and by and by again
dividing) that Ships oftentimes were by them intercepted and comsumed. Neither
was this invented by the Ancients for the delightfulness of the Story, but by
the fear and wonder of the Sailors; for such is the condition of the place to
those who at distance do observe it, that you would believe it rather to be a
Harbor then a Passage, to which when you are arrived, you will think that the
Promontories did cleave asunder and were divided, which before were joined into
one. Sicily was first called Trinacria, and afterward Sicania: At the
beginning it was the Country of the Cyclops, who being extinguished, Aeolus
possessed himself of the command of the Island, after whom every one did stoop
to the Government of Tyrants, there being never any Land more fruitful of them.
In the number of whom when Anaxilaus with justice and mercy contended with the
cruelty of others, his moderation gained him no little profit; for when dying
he left many little children, and committed the Tutelage of them to Micythus a
servant of his of approved fidelity, so great was the love which they did all
bear unto his Memory, that they chose rather to obey a servant, then to abandon
the children of the King; and the Governors of the Ci^ie forgetting their
dignity, did permit that the Majesty of the Kingdom should be administered by a
servant.

The Government of Sicily was heretofore attempted by the Carthaginians, and
with various success they for a long time did fight with the Tyrants; but their
General Hamilcar being lost at last with his whole Army, the conquered were
quiet for a season: In the mean time, when the Inhabitants of Regium did labor
with discord, and the City was divided into two parts, the old Soldiers who
combined altogether being called by the Inhabitants of the City of Imera to
their aid, having relieved the City, did fall upon their friends whom they came
to assist, and not only seized upon their City, but took their Wives and
Children captive, their Fathers and Husbands being slain who did oppose them; a
villainy by no Tyrants to be paralleld. How much more honorable were it for
the Rhegians in this cause to be conquered then to conquer? for although by the
Laws of War they had served the Authors of their Captivity, or, their Country
being lost, they were necessitated to be banished, yet they should never have
left their City nor their Wives and Children as a prey to the most barbarous of
Tyrants, nor be sacrificed themselves almost on their own Altars, and in the
presence of the gods of their Country.

The Catanians also, when they found the Syracusians too heavily to oppress
them, distrusting their own strength, desired aid of the Athenians, who whether
out of the desire to increase their Dominions, being masters already of Greece
and Asia, or whether for fear that the Lacedaemonians Forces should be added to
the Syracusian Navy, sent Lamponius their Captain with a Fleet into Sicily,
that under pretense of assisting the Catanians, they should endeavor to
possess themselves of the whole Island. And because their first beginnings were
prosperous enough, their Enemies being often slain or routed, with a great
Navy and a stronger Army they came again to Sicily, under the command of
Lachetes and Chariades; But the Catanians either through fear of the Athenians,
or the tediousness of the War, made peace with the Syracusians, the Auxiliaries
of the Athenians being dismissed: Not long after, when this Covenant of Peace
was ill observed by the Saracusians, they sent their Ambassadors again to
Athens, who in old and ragged habiliments, their hair both of head and beard
being of an unsightly length, and in a most slovenly and deformed posture, to
move compassion, did address themselves to the Assembly. Tears were added to
their prayers, and their supplications so prevailed upon the people inclined to
pity, that they condemned their Captains who brought back their Auxiliaries
from them. Hereupon a great Navy was prepared; Nicias, and Alcibiades, and
Lamachus were made Captains, and so formidable an Army was sent into Sicily,
that they became even a terror to those unto whose aid they marched. Not long
after Alcibiades being called back to answer to the Charge that was brought
against him, Nicias and Lamachus did obtain two Victories by Land, and with a
close siege having begirt their Enemies, they blocked up the passage, which
brought them their relief from Sea. The Syracusians laboring under the burden
of these necessities, desired aid of the Lacedaemonians, which was dispatched to
them but with one Captain, Gylippus by name, but such a one that no assistance
could be comparable to his. He (the nature and course of the War being
understood, and yet almost in a lost condition, they had drawn together some
few inconsiderable Forces our of Greece and Sicily) did in the first place
possess himself of some places of reserve fit for the carrying on of the War:
After this being twice routed; in the third encounter, he slew Lamachus one of
their Commanders of the Athenians, and having put his Enemies to flight, he
relieved his besieged friends. On this the Athenians transferred the War from
Land to Sea, which being suddenly known, Gylippus sent to Lacedemon for the
Fleet to his assistance, and for some recruits if need were for the service of
the Land. The Athenians also sent Demosthenes and Eurymedon in the place of
their Captain that was killed, with supplies both of men and money. And by the
common decree of Cities, the Pelopennesians sent Auxiliaries in great numbers
to the Syracusians; and as if that the War of Greece was translated into
Sicily, they did fight on both sides in the height of resolution with all the
powers they could make. In the first encounter at Sea the Athenians were
overcome, who lost all, and all their moneys both public and private: This
distress at Sea was seconded by a distress at Land, and being routed there
also, it was the counsel of Demosthenes, that they should remove themselves,
and the War from Sicily, whiles their affairs, though shaken and ruinous, were
not quite lost, and that they ought not to persevere any longer in a War
unluckily begun; he alleged that there may be more grievous and more
unfortunate Wars at home, for which they ought to reserve the Forces of their
City. But Nicias, whether through shame of the ill success, or through f^ar to
leave destitute the hopes by abandoning the cause of his Associates, or fate so
ordaining it, was resolved not to stir. Therefore the fight again at Sea was
renewed, and they were called back from the storm of their former misfortune,
to some hope of Victory; But by the unexperience of their Captains who
assaulted the Syracusians, defending themselves in the streights of the Sea,
they were easily overcome. Eurymedon their Captain fighting most bravely
amongst the foremost, was the first that was slain: The thirty ships which he
commanded were all immediately devoured by the fire. Demosthenes and Nicias
being themselves all overcome, did convey their Army to the shore, thinking
that their flight would be more safe by Land, whereupon Gylippus seized upon
one hundred and thirty of their ships which they had abandoned, and pursuing
the Athenians in their flight, he took many Prisoners, and put many to the
sword. Demosthenes (the Army being lost) did with his sword by a voluntary
death redeem himself from Captivity: But Nicias, who would not be admonished by
the counsel of Demosthenes to provide for himself, did increase his overthrow
with the dishonor of Captivity.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF IVSTINE.
WHiles the Athenians for two years together did make war in Sicily more
eagerly then happily; one of their Generals, and a contriver of that War,
Alcibiades by name, being absent, was accused at Athens for having divulged the
mysteries of Ceres, which were solemnized by nothing more then silence; and
being called back from the war to his trial, either not enduring the
consciousness, or the indignity of the Charge, conveyed himself privately away
into banishment at Elis; where he persuaded the King of the Lacedaemonians (the
State of the Athenians being sorely shaken) by the adverse war in Sicily, to
invade their Territories at home; whereupon all the Cities of Greece did come
of their own accord to his assistance, as to put out a common fire; so general
a hatred the Athenians had contracted by their cruelty, through the immoderate
desire of Sovereignty. Darius also King of the Persians, being not unmindful of
the ancient enmity of this City to them, (a league being made with the
Lacedaemonians by Tissafernes Governor of Lydia) did promise to assist the
Grecians in all the charges of the war. This was his pretense to comply with
the Grecians; but he feared in earnest, lest the Athenians being overthrown,
the Lacedaemonians should transfer the war on him. Who would therefore wonder
that so flourishing an Estate as was this of Athens, should fall to the ground,
when to oppose it alone, all the Powers of the East did unite themselves
together? but they fell not in a sluggish or an unbloody war, but fought to the
last man; and being sometimes Conquerors, they were not overcome but rather
worn out by the variety of their fortune. In the beginning of the war, all
their Consederates revolted from them, as commonly it is seen, that where
fortune, thither also the favor of men does incline; Alcibiades also did help
on the war made against his Country, not with the industry of a common
Soldier, but with the power of a Commander: For having received a squadron of
five ships, he sailed into Asia; and by the authority of his name, compelled
the Cities which paid tribute there to Athens, to rebel against them; For they
knew that he was famous at home, and saw him not made less by banishment; and
he being a Captain not so much taken from the Athenians, as offered to the
Lacedaemonians, they weighed the Government he had go^ten with that which he had
lost: But his virtue contracted amongst the Lacedaemonians more env^e then
favor; Therefore when the Rulers had commanded that by treachery he should be
slain, being one tha^ did emulate their glory, it being made known to
Alcibiades by the wife of King Agis, with whom he was too familiar, he sled to
Tissafernes the Lieutenant of King Darius, into whom he quickly did insinua e
himself by the officiousness of his Courtship and his eloquence; For he was in
the flower of his youth and beauty, and famous also amongst the Athenians for
his Oratory, more happy in procuring friendships then in preserving them; for
the vices of his manners did lie hid under the shadow of his Eloquence; he
persuaded Tissafernes that he should not contribute so much in money to the
Fleet of the Lacedaemonians, alleging that the Ionians were to pay part of it,
for whose liberty being tributary to Athens, the war was undertaken; neither
were the Lacedaemonians (he said) too prodigally to be seconded with
Auxiliaries; for he ought to consider that he provided a Victory for another,
not for himself; and so far only, the war was to be relieved, that it might
not for want be abandoned. For in this discord of the Greeks, the King of
Persia might stand as an Arbitrator b^th of Peace and War, and overcome them by
their mutual Arms whom he could not by his own. And the war being ended, it may
come to his turn afterward to fight with the Conquerors; Greece therefore he
said, was to be overrun with Domestic wars, that they might not have the
leisure to look abroad; and the powers of the Parties were to kept equal, and
the weaker to be relieved with aid; for he may be sure, that the Lacedaemonians
who profess themselves to be the Defenders of the liberty of Greece, will not
be quiet after this Victory. This Speech was agreeable to Tissafernes;
therefore the prom^sed provisions for the war were (...) but slowly in; he sent
also but part of the R^yal Navy, lest he should complete the Victory, and lay a
necessity on the other side to lay down their Arms. Alcibiades in the mean
time, did make this known to the Citizens of Athens, unto whom when their
Ambassadors did arrive, he promised them the friendship of the King, if the
command of the Commonwealth were translated from the people to the Senate;
hoping that either by the agreement of the City he should be chosen General by
all, or a difference being made betwixt the people and Senate, he should be
called by one of the parties to their assistance; But by reason of the imminent
danger of the war, the Athenians had a greater care of their safety then their
dignity. Therefore the people giving way unto it, the Government was transla ed
to the Senate; whom when they managed themselves with great cruelty to the
people, according to the pride inherent to that Nation, every one by himself
exercising the power of a Tyrant, Alcibiades was called from his banishment by
the Army, and cho en Admiral of the Navy: He immediately sent to Athens that
he would make haste unto them with an Army, and if they would not restore it,
he would by force take from the f ur hundred, the priv^ledges of the people.
The Peers affright^d with this Rem^nstrance, did attempt in the first place to
betray the City to the La^ed^monians, which when by the vigilance of the Army,
it could not be effected, they undertook a wilful banishment. In the mean time,
Alcibiades, his Country being delivered from the intestine trouble, with great
care and industry equipped his Fleet, and lanched forth against the
Lacedaemonians, and being expected by Mindarus and Pharnabasus, the two Admirals
of the Lacedaemonians, the battle being begun, the Athenians had the Victory: In
this battle, the greatest part of the Army, and almost all the Commanders and
Officers of the Lacedaemonians were slain; Not long after, when they brought the
War from Sea to Land, they were overcome again; being discouraged with those
losses, they desired a peace; which that it might not be obtained, was procured
by their policy who knew which way to make a mercenary advantage of it. In the
mean time, the Carthaginians having made war in Sicily, the Auxiliaries sent to
the Lacedaemonians from the Syracusians were called back; and the Lacedaemonians
being left destitute, Alcibiades with his conquering Navy did make spoil in
Asia, and fought many battles in many places, and being everywhere a Conqueror,
he reduced the Cities which revolted, he subdued some others, and added them to
the Commonwealth of Athens. And thus having vindicated the ancient glory of the
Athenians by Sea, and made himself mo^e famous by some Conquests by Land, being
much desired by the Citizens, he returned to Athens; In these encounters he
took two hundred ships from the Enemy and a great booty: The Army rerurning in
triumph, the people in throngs came forth to meet them, and with wonder they
gaze upon all the Soldiers in general, but on Alcibiades in particular: The
whole City did fasten on him their eyes; they extolled him as sent from Heaven,
and beheld him as Victory her self: They repeated what he achieved for his
Country, and what being a banished man, he had acted against it, excusing him
that he was incensed and provoked to it; So much of high concernment there was
in this one man that he was both the Author of their large Dominions subverted,
and again restored. They did prosecute his merits not only with all humane,
but with divine honors, and contended with themselves whither they more
contumeliously expelled him, or more honorably received him; they brought
those gods to gratulate him to whose execrations they had before devoted him,
and they would now place him in Heaven, to whom they had denied the society of
men. They made satisfaction for disgrace with honors, for losses with rewards,
and for execrations with prayers. They discoursed no^ of the adverse fight in
Sicily, but of the Victory of Greece, not of the Fleets he lost, but of those
he won, not of Syracuse, but of Ionia and Hellespont. This was the fortune of
Alcibiades who never knew a mean either in the favors or the displeasure of
his Citizens. Whiles this was done at Athens, the Lacedaemonians made Lysander
General both by Sea and Land; and Darius King of the Persians had made his Son
Cyrus Governor of Lydia, and Ionia in the place of Tissafernes, who with men
and money did raise up the Lacedaemonians to the hope of their former fortune.
Being increased in their strength with the suddenness of their approach, they
suppressed Alcibiades sent into Asia with one hundred ships, and spoiling the
Country made rich with long peace, his Soldiers in the desire of the booty
being dispersed, and not suspecting the coming of an Enemy; so great therefore
was the slaughter which the Lacedaemonians made, that in this fight the
Athenians received a greater wound then they did give in the former; and so
great was their desperation, that immediately they changed their General
Alcibiades for Conon, believing, they were overcome, not by the fortune of the
war, but by the deceit of Alcibiades, on whom the former injuries more
prevailed then the latter benefits; they alleged that in the former war, he
over-came only to show the Enemies what a General they had despised, and yet
he might fell the Victory more deer unto them; for the vigor of his wit, his
love to vices, and the luxury of his manners, made all things credible in
Alcibiades: Fearing therefore the violence of the people, he betook himself to
a willing banishment. Conow succeeding Alcibiades in the Government of the
Army, having before his eyes, how great a Captain he was that was before him,
did make the Navy readic with the greatest industry; but men were wanting to
the ships, the most valiant being slain in taking the spoils of Asia; Boys
therefore and old men were armed, and great was the number of the Soldiers,
but weak was the strength of the Army. The Lacedaemonians made no long work of
them; for being unable to resist, they were everywhere either killed or taken
prisoners; and so great was the overthrow, that not only the Commonwealth, but
even the name of the Athenians did seem to be extinguished; so lost and
desperate was their condition, and so great an exigence were they brought unto,
that for want of Soldiers, they gave the privileges of the freedom of the
City to strangers, liberty to slaves, and impunity to the condemned; and with
this c^nscribed Army composed of the outcasts of men, the late Lords of Greece
did defend their Liberties. They had once more a mind to try their fortune at
Sea, and they were possessed with such a sudden height of courage, that when
they before despaired of their lives, they were now even confident of Victory.
But these were not the Soldiers who should uphold the name of the Athenians,
nor these the Forces with which they were accustomed to overcome; neither could
any military abilities be expected from these men, who were inured to bonds,
and not unto Tents: They were all therefore either killed or taken; Conon their
General only remained alive, who fearing the cruelty of the Citizens, with
eight ships did repair unto Evagoras the King of Cyprus. But the General of the
Lacedaemonians, the war happily being managed, did insult over the fortune of
his Enemies: He sent the ships he took, the booty being laid forth upon the
Decks, in the way of triumph to Lacedemon, and received the Cities into his
protection which paid tribute to Athens: the fear of the doubtful fortune of
the war, detaining them till then in their fidelity; the Athenians had now
nothing left them but the City it self; when this was reported at Athens, they
all abandoning their honors, did traverse the streets of the City in great
fear; they demanded the news of one another, and examined the authority of the
Messengers; imprudency kept not at home the young, nor delibity the old, nor
the weakness of their Sex the women: So much the sense of the calamity had
possessed every Age. Late in the night they assembled in the Marketplace, and
began to lament the public misfortune; some bewailed their brothers, some
their sons, some their parents, some their kindred, some their friends deerer
then their kindred, and with private mischances mingled the public losses;
sometimes thinking of the ruin of themselves, sometimes of the ruin of their
Country, sometimes conceiving the fortune of the living to be more miserable
then the fortune of the dead; they did every one propound unto themselves,
siege and famine, and the proud conquering Enemy. The destruction and firing of
the City, the general captivity, and most miserable slavery did still present
it self before their eyes, believing that the ruins of the former City were
far more happy, when their sons and fathers being alive, they were only
punished with the destruction of their walls and honors: They had now no Fleet
to which as before they might repair, nor had they any Army by whose valor
being preserved, they might build greater walls. In this manner lamenting the
condition of their City, their Enemies came upon them, and at once did inviron
them with an Army, and besieged them with hunger: They knew that not many of
their forces remained; and they provided that no man should be brought in; with
which growing miseries the Athenians being discouraged, after a long famine
attended with a great mortality, they desired peace: And a long debate there
was amongst the Lacedaemonians and their Associates, Whether it were expedient
that it should be vouchsafed them or not: when many were of judgment that the
very name of the Athenians was to be extinguished, and the City utterly to be
destroyed with fire. The Lacedaemonians denying that of the two eyes of Greece,
one of them was to be plucked out, did promise peace unto them, if they would
pull down their walls toward Pyreum, and surrender the ships unto them, which
were left, and withal receive thirty of their Delegats to govern their
Commonwealth. The City being delivered upon these conditions: the Lacedaemonians
did commit unto Lysander the charge of it.

This year was remarkable for the besieging and taking of Athens, and for the
death of Darius King of the Persians, and for the banishment of Dionysius the
great Tyrant in Sicily. The State of Athens being altered, the condition of the
Citizens was changed with it: Thirty Rulers were set over the Commonwealth who
became all Tyrants; for at their entrance into their government, they did take
unto themselves a Guard of three hundred men, there scarce remaining so many
Citizens by reason of so many overthrows; and as if this number were too little
to secure the City, it received a Garrison of seven hundred Soldiers of the
Lacedaemonians; after this they began the slaughter of the Citizens with a
design upon Alcibiades, left he should invade the Commonwealth again with an
intent to deliver it. When they found that he was fled to Artaxerxes the King
of the Persians* they sent in full speed to intercept him in the way, and
having found where he was, when they could not openly put him to death, they
burned him alive in the chamber where he slept. The Tyrants being delivered
from this fear of their Revenger, did fill the wretched Relics of the City
with slaughters and rapine* which cruelty when they found it, did displease
Theramenes, who was one of their numbers, they did put him to death to be a
terror to the rest; whereupon they fled all out of the City, and Greece was
filled with the Athenian exiles, which being all the security they had, that
also was taken from these miserable men; for by an Edict of the Lacedaemonians,
the Cities were prohibited to receive the banished; on this, they all conveyed
themselves to Argos and Thebes; where they not only lived in banishment, but
entertained the grateful hopes to be restored to their Country. Amongst the
number of the banished, there was one Thrasibulus, a man of great vigor both
in body and in mind, and of noble Parentage, who propounding to himself, that
something although with danger ought to be undertaken for the public safety,
having drawn the banished men together, he seized upon Phyle a Castle on the
Borders of Athens; neither was the favor and assistance of some other of the
Cities wanting, who had in compassion the extremity of their sad condition:
Therefore Hismenias the Prince of the Thebans did assist them with private,
although he could not with public helps: And Lysias the Syracusian Orator,
being also a banished man, did send at his own charge five hundred Soldiers to
assist them in this recovery of the Country of the common Eloquence. The
encounter was sharp, the Athenians exercising all their courage for the
recovery of their own Country, and the Lacedaemonians fighting more securely
for the possessions which belonged to others; the Tyrants at last were
overcome, who flying into the City, having in revenge filled it with slaughter,
they did also dispoil it of Arms; and suspecting all the Athenians to be guilty
of treachery, they commanded them to depart out of the City, and to live in the
ruins of the Suburbs which were pulled down, and in the mean time they
defended themselves with foreign Soldiers. After this, they attempted to
corrupt Thrasibulus, and to promise him a share in the Government, which he
refusing to accept, they desired aid of the Lacedaemonians which being sent unto
them, they renewed the encounter, in which Critius and Hippomachus two of the
most cruel of all the Tyrants were killed; the others being overcome, when
their Army (which for the greatest part consisted of the Athenians) did fly
away, Thrasibulus with a loud voice did cry out unto them, and demanded, What
made them to fly from the Conqueror, whom they ought rather to assist as the
Desendor of their common liberty? He told them that his Army was composed of
their own Citizens and not of Enemies; neither did he take up Arms to force any
thing from them, but to restore unto them what they had lost; he made war, he
said, on the thirty Tyrants, and not on the City of Athens; he did admonish
them that they were all of one blood, of one Law, of one Religion, and of one
Militia through the course of so many wars: He did implore them to have
compassion on their banished Citizens; and though they themselves would be
patient slaves, yet they should restore their Country unto them, that they
might receive their liberty. With these words he so prevailed upon them, that
the Army being returned into the City, they commanded the Tyrants to remove to
Eleusina, ten being substituted who should govern the Commonwealth, who being
nothing terrified with the example of the former Tyrants, did tread in the same
paths of cruelty.

Whiles these things were thus managed at Athens, it was informed at
Lacedemon, that the Athenians had taken Arms again; whereupon Pausanias their
King was sent to suppress them, who being touched with compassion, did restore
the banished Citizens to their City, and commanded the ten Tyrants to abandon
the City, and to go to their companions to Eleusina. Peace being made, not many
days after, the Tyrants on a sudden, resenting with indignation, that the
banished were restored, and that they were condemned to banishment, as if the
liberty of the Citizens were their slavery, they did make a new war upon the
Athenians: But a Treaty being had, as if they were to receive again their
Domination (being in the way by policy intercepted) they were all put to death,
and made the sacrifices of the public peace. The people whom before they
commanded to live about the ruins of the remotest walls, were called back into
the City; and the City dispersed into many members, was reduced again into one
body; and that no dissension should arise concerning any thing committed in the
time of war, they all did oblige themselves by oath, that there should be an
oblivion of all dissentions. In the mean time, the Thebans and Corinthians did
send Ambassadors to Sparta, to demand their proportion in the spoils of the
common war and danger, which being denied, they did not openly declare a war
against the Lacedaemonians, but with silence did conceive so great an
indignation, that all might understand that a war was designed. Much about that
time, Darius the King of the Persians dyed, leaving behind him two sons,
Artaxerxes and Cyrus. His Kingdom he bequeathed to Artaxerxes, and to Cyrus the
Cities of which he was before Lieutenant: This Legacy of the Father, did seem
to Cyrus to be unequal; he therefore privily prepared war against his brother,
which when it was told to Artaxerxes, he sent for his brother, who pretending
innocence, did come unto him, and was by him bound with chains of gold, and had
been put to death, if his mother had not commanded him to the contrary* Cyrus
being dismissed, did now begin to make war against his brother, not covertly,
but openly; not dissembl^ngly, but professedly, and from all places did draw
Auxiliaries to him. The Lacedaemonians being mindful of the assistance he sent
them in their war against the Athenians, did decree to send help upon him, but
in such a way as if they did not take notice against whom the war was made,
that if the occasion so required, they might procure unto themselves the favor
of Cyrus: and if Artaxerxes had overcome, they might hope for his Patronage and
his pardon, because they determined nothing openly against him. But in the
encounter, the chance of the fight having brought both brothers directly
opposite one against another, Artaxerxes was first wounded by his brother, but
was delivered from further danger by the swiftness of his horse; Cyrus being
overpowred by the King's Life*guard was slain outright. Artaxerxes being
Conqueror, enjoyed the Army and the spoils of his brothers war. In that battle
Cyrus had ten thousand Greeks that came to his assistance, who in that part of
the field where they stood did overcome, and after the death of Cyrus, could
neither be conquered by the power of so great an Army, nor yet taken by
treachery, but returning in so great a march through so many unconquered
Nations and barbarous people, they with their valor did secure themselves,
even unto the confines of their own Country.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF IVSTINE.
THe Lacedaemonians after the common condition of men, who the more they have,
the more they do desire, being not content that their strength was doubled by
the access of the Athenian power, did begin to affect the Government of all
Asia; The greatest part whereof being under the command of the King of the
Persians, Dercillides who was chosen general for that war, when he found that
he was to fight against two of the Lieutenants of Artaxerxes, Pharnabasus and
Tissafernes, who were attended with the powers of formidable Nations, he
resolved to make a peace with one of them. Tissafernes seemed most fit for his
design, being more remarkable for his industry, and more powerful by the
Soldiers of the late King Cyrus, who being treated with, and conditions being
agreed upon betwixt them, he was dismissed; whereupon he was accused by
Pharnabasus before the King, that he repulsed not the Lacedaemonians who had
invaded Asia, but maintained them at the King's charge, and contracted with
them to delay the wars, as if all the loss of the Empire should not be put upon
one score. He alleged it to be an unworthy thing, that the war should be
bought, and not carried on with resolution, and that the Enemy should be
removed with money and not with Arms: Tissafernes being estranged from the King
by these complaints: Pharnabasus did persuade him, for the mannaging of the
wars at Sea, to make Conon the Athenian Admiral in his place, who, his Country
being lost by war, did led a banished life in Cyprus; for the Athenians,
although they were broken in their fortunes, had yet some strength at Sea; and
if one were to be chosen, he alleged that they could not find amongst them an
abler man. Having received five hundred talents, he was commanded to make Conon
Admiral of the Fleet: This being known at Lacedemon, they by their Ambassadors
did desire aid of Hercimon King of Egypt for the carrying on of the war at
Sea, who sent them one hundred ships, and six hundred thousand measures of
corn; and very great aid was also sent unto them from the rest of their
Associates: But a worthy Commander was wanting to so great an Army, and against
so great a Captain; Therefore their Associates desiring Agesilaus King of the
Lacedaemonians to lead forth their Armies, it was a long time debated whether
they should make him their General or no, by reason of the answer of the Oracle
of Delphos, which denounced a period to their Government when the royal Command
halted; for Agesilaus was lame of his feet; but at last, resolving that it were
safer that the King* then Kingdom should halt, they sent Agesilaus with a
form^dable Army into Asia: Two such Captains as these to command in this war
could not easily be matched again; for they were equal in age, valor, counsel,
providence, and in the glory of their achievements: and when fortune gave them
a parity in all things, yet she preserved them unconquered by one another.
Great was the preparation of both for the war, great were the acts which they
performed: But a sedition of the Soldiers (whom the former Lieutenants of the
King had defrauded of their pay) disturbed Conon; the Soldiers demanding their
Arrears the more roundly, because knowing their duties in the war should be the
harder under so great a Captain, Conon having a long time wearyed the King in
vain with Letters, did at the last repair in his own person to him; but being
denied either to see him or to speak with him, because he would not prostrate
himself unto him after the custom of the Persians, he treated with him by
Messengers, and complained that the wars of the most mighty King did suffer
through indigence, and having an Army equal to the Enemies, he was overcome by
the want of money, in which he did exceed them, and was found inferior in that
part of strength in which he was far superior. He desired that the moneys for
the war might be trusted into his hand, it being dangerous that it should be
committed unto many: The moneys being received, he returned to the Navy, and
made no delay in the prosecution of the war. He acted many things valiantly,
and many things happily; he plundered the Fields, he sacked the Cities of his
Enemies, and as a Tempest, did beat down all before him. With which
proceedings, the Lacedaemonians being affrighted, did determine to call back
Agesilaus out of Asia for the defense of his own Country. In the mean time,
Lysander being left by Agesilaus to command the Forces at home in his absence,
being resolved to try the fortune of the war by battle, did with great care and
industry provide a mighty Navy, and Conon being ready to join in battle with
the Enemy, did with great judgment assign unto every ship its station, and the
emulation of the Soldiers was no less then of the Captains; for Conon the
Admiral did not so much labor for the Persians as for his Country, and in
their afflicted estate, as he was heretofore the Author of their loss, so he
would now be the author of their power restored, and receive that Country by
conquering, which he had lost by being conquered, which would be so much the
more glorious, that he fought not with the forces of the Athenians, but of
another Nation, and fighting at the charge and danger of the King of Persia* he
should overcome for the advantage of his own Country, and gain true renown by
other arts then the former Generals of Athens had purchased; for they defended
their Country by overcoming the Persians, he by making the Persians
Conquerors, should restore his Country being lost. On the other side, Lysander
besides his conjunction with Agesilaus, was also an emulator of his virtues,
and did contend that he might not fall shore of him in his acchievements and
the splendour of his glory, and not in the moment of an hour by his oversight
subvert the State, gained by so many battles, and continued for so many Ages.
The same was the care of the Soldiers, and of all the Commanders, whom a
deeper impression did possess, not so much that they should only lose the
great riches they had obtained, as that the Athenians should again recover it
of them: But by how much the fight was the more perilous, the Victory of Conon
was by so much more glorious. The Lacedaemonians being overcome; The Garrisons
of the Enemies were drawn away from Athens, and the people restored to their
ancient dignity, were delivered from their bondage, and many Cities were
reduced: This was the beginning to the Athenians of reassuming their power, and
to the Lacedaemonians of ending theirs, who as o^ they had lost their valor
with their Dominions, did begin to be despised by their next neighbors: First
of all the Thebans, the Athenians helping them, did make war upon them, which
City out of the infinite advantages by the virtue of their General Epaminondas,
was raised up to be the Commandress of all Greece: The fight was by Land in
which the fortune of the Lacedaemonians was the same, as it was against Conon at
Sea: In that battle Lysander was slain, who was General before against the
Athenians when they were overcome by the Lacedaemonians: Pausanias also, another
Captain of the Lacedaemonians, being accused of treachery, did betake himself to
banishment. The Thebans having obtained the Victory, did advance with all their
Army to the City of the Lacedaemonians, thinking suddenly to become masters of
it, because they were abandoned of all their Associates: Which the
Lacedaemonians fearing, they sent for Agesilaus their King out of Asia, who did
there gallant service for the defense of his own Country; for Lysander being
slain, they had confidence in no other Commander; and because it was long
before he came, with an Army suddenly mustred, they adventred of themselves to
fight with their Enemies; but being conquered not long before, they had neither
strength nor courage to oppose their Conquerors; therefore at their first
encoun^er they were overthrown* but Agesilaus came opportunely to their rescue;
and the fight being renewed, he with his fresh Soldiers being all hardened to
the services of the war, did with an easy violence pluck the Victory from his
Enemies; but he received a dangerous wound himself; which being understood, the
Athenians fearing least the Lacedaemonians being Conquerors, they should be
reduced into their ancient condition of servitude, did leavie a new Army, and
sent it to the aid of the Boeotians under the command of Iphicrates, a
gentleman of not above twenty years of age, but of a vast expectation: The
virtue of this young man was admirable, for amongst so many, and so great
Captains, the Athenians had never any General before, of greater hope or
forwardness, in whom there were not only all the Arts belonging to a
Commander, but to an Orator also. Conon having understood of the return of
Agesilaus, did draw back out of Asia to spoil the C^untrey of the
Lacedaemonians, who, the fear of the war growing round about them, were brought
almost to the bottom of despair, having plundered the Country of his Enemies,
he marched to Athens, where he was entertained with great joy of all the
Citizens, but he himself was more possessed with grief to behold the City
burned and pulled down by the Lacedaemonians, then he was with joy to see it
restored to its freedom: Therefore what places were burned he repaired, and
what places were pulled down he re-edified out of the profit of the booty, and
of the Army of the Persians: This was the fate of Athens, that being before
burned by the Persians, it was builded up again with their spoils, and being
now destroyed by the Lacedaemonians, it was ^estored again with the treasure
that was taken from them, and the condition of the war being changed, they had
now those for their Associates, who were then their Enemies; and they were now
their Enemies to whom they were then united in the nearest bonds of society.
Whiles these things were thus managed, Artaxerxes King of the Persians sent
Ambassadors into Greece, by whom he commanded all to lay down their Arms, and
whosoever should refuse so to do, he would esteem him for an Enemy. He restored
liberty and all that belonged to them to the Cities, which he did not thereby
to give redress to the labors and the wars of Greece, occasioned by the
growing hatred of the Citizens, but that he himself being wholly employed in
the Egyptian war, by reason of the aid which they sent the Lacedaemonians
against his Lieutenants, his Armies should not be detained in Greece: The
Grecians being wearyed with many wars, did e^dily obey him.

This year was remarkable, not only that a sudden Peace was made over all
Greece, but that at the same time also the City of Rome was taken by the Galls.
But the Lacedaemonians being secure, and having treacherously observed the
absence of the Arcadians, did lay a vigorous siege unto their Castle, and
having taken it, they did put a Garrison into it. The Arcadians therefore with
a prepared Army, taking the Thebans unto their aid, were resolved to regain
what they lost by war: In the fight, Archidamus the General of the
Lacedaemonians was wounded, who when he beheld the destruction of his men,
demanded by a Herald the bodies of the dead to give them burial: For amongst
the Grecians, this was a sign of a victory acknowledged; with which confession
the Thebans being contented, they sounded a retreat. Some few days after,
neither of them exercising hostility against each other, when as it were by a
silent consent, there was a truce, the Lacedaemonians being engaged in another
war, the Thebans under the command of Epaminondis, entertained a sudden hope to
become masters of their City; therefore in the beginning of the night, in a
silent match, they did advance to Lacedemon; but they could not take the
Citizens unprepared; for the old men and the weaker youth, the approach of
their Enemies being discovered, did meet them in Arms at their very entrance
into their Gates, and not above one hundred men, and disabled too by their age,
did enter into a fight against fifteen thousand Soldiers; so much strength and
courage the sight of their City, and of their household gods did administer, who
infused into them greater spirits, as much by their presence as by the
remembrance of them; for when they saw for whom, and amongst whom they stood,
they were all of a resolution either to overcome or die; a few old men
undertook the whole brunt of the battle, unto whom (before that day appeared)
not all the youth and Army of their Enemies could be equal: In this fight, two
Captains of the Enemies were slain. In the mean time, when the coming of
Agesilaus was reported, the Thebans retreated, and some few hours after the
battle again began; for the youth of the Lacedaemonians being inflamed with the
courage and glory of their old men, could not be kept back, but would throw
themselves upon their Enemies; howsoever the Thebans had the Victory, and
Epaminondas performing the duty not only of a General, but of a resolute and
courageous Soldier, was grievously wounded, which being understood, the
Thebans through the excess of grief were possessed with fear; and the
Lacedaemonians through the excess of joy with a kind of amazement, and as it
were with a consent on both sides, they departed from the bat^el. Some few
days afterward, Epaminondas deceased, with whom the whole strength of that
Commonwealth dyed also; for as if you break or blunt the edge of any weapon,
you take from the residue of the steel the power to hurt; so this Captain who
was the edge of their courage being taken away, the whole strength and vigor of
that Theban Commonwealth was immediately rebated; insomuch that they did not
seem only to lose him, but to have all perished with him; for before this
Captain, they did never manage any memorable war, and were famous afterward,
not for their virtues, but their overthrows; so apparent it was that the glory
of his Country was born and dyed with him. It is hard to say, whether he was a
better man or a better Captain; for he sought the Government not for himself,
but for his Country, and was so careless of money, that he had not wherewith
to defray the charges of his own Funeral; moreover, he was no more covetous of
glory then of money; for the Commands were all thrown upon him, refusing and
drawing back from them; and he so deported himself in his places of honor,
that he seemed not to receive, but to give an ornament to the dignity it self;
So great was his knowledge in Letters and Philosophy, that it may be wonderful
how that excellent experience in the affairs of war should arrive unto a man
born amongst the Arts; neither did the manner of his death differ from the
institutions of his life; for being brought half dead into his Tent, he
collecting his voice and spirits, demanded only if his Enemy had taken his
Buckler from him when he fell, which when he understood was preserved, he
desired to see it, and it being brought unto him, he kissed it as the companion
of his labors and his glory. He again demanded, Who had obtained the Victory?
when it was answered, The Thebans; he replied, It was well; and so gratulating
his Country, he did give up his last breath. In his grave the virtues not
only of the Thebans, but of the Athenians also was buried; for he being taken
away, whom they were accustomed to emulate, they did degenerate into sloth, and
laid forth the public Revenues, not as before, on Fleets and Armies, but on
festival days, and on the setting forth of Plays, and visiting the Scene
oftener then the Camp; they only celebrated the Theators, famous with Poets and
Actors, praising their Poets and their Orators more then their Captans; by
which means it came to pass that in these leisures of the Grecians, the name of
the Macedons, but ignoble and obscure before, should rise into glory; and that
Philip bred up in the virtues and institutions of Epaminondas and Pelopidas
(being three years as an Hostage at Thebes) should put the Kingdom of Macedonia
on the necks of Greece and of Asia as the yoke of their servitude.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF IVSTINE.
MAcedonia was heretofore called Aemathia, after the name of their King
Emathion, the first experiments of whose virtue were extant in those places.
Their beginnings were but small, and their b^unds but narrow; the people were
called Pelasgi, and the Country Boeotia; But afterward by the prowess of their
Kings, and the industry of their Nation, having first subdued their borderers,
and after them, other People and Nations, they extended their Empire to the
furthest bounds of the Orient. Telegonus the father of Astriopaeus whose name
we have received amongst the most famous Commanders in the Tro^on war, was said
to reign in the Country of Poeonia, which now is a part of Macedonia; On the
other side in Europa, there ra^gned Europus by name; But Caranus with a vast
multitude of the Grecians, being commanded by the Oracle to lo^k out a seat for
h^m^n Macedonia, when he came into Emathia, he unexpectedly possessed himself
of the City of Ediss^, he Inhabitants not perceiving it by reason of a tempest,
and a great mist that did attend it. In this expedition, he followed the
conduct of a slock of G^^ts, who ^led toward the Town from the violence of the
tempest, and calling the Oracle into his memory, by which he was commanded to
seek out a place to rule in, the Goats being his leaders, he made that City the
^eat of his Kingdom, and whithersoever afterward ^e advanced, he religiously
observed to have the same Goats before his Ensigns to be the Leaders on in his
enterprise, who were the authors of his Kingdom; for the memory of this event,
he called the City Edissa, Aegaea; and the people Aegae^des.

After this, Midas being forced away (for he also possessed a part of
Macedonia) and some other Kings with him, he alone succeeded into the place of
them all, and having united the Nations into one, he brought the several people
of Macedonia into one body, and the Kingdom increasing, he made the founda^ion
strong with an intent to raise it higher. After him Perdicas reigned, whose
life was famous, and his last words at his death were as memorable as the
precepts of the Delphian Oracle; for full of age and dying, he showed to his
Son Argaeus, the place where he would be buried, and commanded that not only
his own but the bodies of all who succeeded him in his Kingdom should be
interred the same place, presaging that if the Relics of his Successors should
be buried there, the Kingdom should perpetually continue in that Family; And it
is superstitiously believed that the issue failed in Alexander, because he
changed that place of Sepulcher.

Argaeus having governed the Kingdom moderately, and with the love of the
people did leave Philip his Successor, who being taken away by an untimely
death, did make Europus a little child his Heir.

At this time the Macedonians had daily wars with the Thracians and Illyrians,
by whose Arms being hardened as with a daily exercise, they became a terror to
their neighbors by the glory of their achievements. The Illyrians contemning
the Infancy of their King did make war upon the Macedons, who being overcome in
the battle, the little Infant their King was brought forth in his Cradle, and
placed in the front of their Army, whereupon they renewed the encounter with
greater violence; for they were beaten they conceived before, because in the
fight they had not with them the auspicious presence of their King, and should
now overcome, because out of a superstition, they were possessed with a
confidence that they should be Conquerors; the compassion also on their Infant
Prince did leave an impression on them, whom if they were overcome, they should
make him of a King a Captive. The battles therefore being joined, with a great
slaughter they overthrew the Illyrians, and made it apparent to their Enemies,
that in the former encounter the Macedons wanted not courage but a King.
Amyntas succeeded him famous by his own virtue, but more renowned by the
excellent endowments of Alexander his Son, in whose nature the ornaments of all
virtues were so extant, that in the various exercis^ of sports, he contended at
the Olympian Games. In the mean time Darius King of the Persians being routed,
and making haste out of Scythia in a dishonorable flight, least he should grow
everywhere contemptible by his loss, he sent Megabazus with a part of his Army
to subdue Thrace and the other Kingdoms adjacent to it, in which number was
Macedonia, a place then accounted so poor, that it was hardly worth looking
after.

In obedience to the Kings command, Megabazus not long after sent Ambassadors
to Amyntas King of the Macedons, demanding that pledges might be given to him
as an earnest of the peace to come: The Ambassadors being bountifully
entertained, in the height of the banquet and of wine, required of Amyntas that
to the magnificence of the Feast, they would add the privileges of
Familiarity, and send for their sons, their wives, and daughters, which amongst
the Persians is the pledge and assurance of entertainment: Who when they came,
the Persians handling the Ladies with too petulant a wantonness, Alexander the
son of Amyntas desired his Father in respect of his age and gravity, that he
would be pleased to depart from the Feast, promising that he would try the
jests and frolicks of his Guests. His father being gone, he not long after,
called all the women from the Banquet, in a pretense to dress them finer, and
to return them more acceptable to them: In their places he brings in young men
disguised in the apparel of Matrons, and commands them to chastise the
wantonness of the Ambassadors with the swords which they carried under their
garments. And thus all of them being slain, Megabazus being ignorant of the
event, and seeing they returned not, did command Bubaris thither with a part of
his Army only, as into a poor and easy war, scorning to go himself least he
should be dishonored to make war in his own person with so contemptible a
Nation. But Bubaris before the war, being inflamed with the love of the
daughter of Amyntas, instead of making wars, did make a marriage; and all
hostility being laid aside, he entered into the obligations of affinity. After
the departure of Bubaris from Macedonia, Amyntas the King deceased, to whose
son and Successor Alexander, the consanguinity with Bubaris not only procured
peace in the time of Darius, but confirmed Xerxes to him, insomuch that he
endued him with the command of the whole Country, between the Hills of Olympus
and Haemus, when like a Tempest he invaded Greece. But Amyntas increased his
Kingdom as well by his own valor as by the liberality of the Persians. By
order of succession, the Kingdom of Macedonia came afterward to Amyntas the
son of his brother Menelaus; he also was famous for his industry, and
accomplished with all royal virtues: He begat three sons of his first wife,
Eurydice; Alexander, Perdicas, and Philip the Father of Alexander the Great,
and a daughter called Euryone; and on his second wife Cygaea, Archelaus,
Aridaeus, and Menelaus: He made great war, first with the Olynthians, and
afterward with the Illyrians, and had lost his life by the treason of his wife
Eurydice who contracting a marriage with her son in-law, had undertaken to kill
her husband, and to deliver the Kingdom unto her adulteror, which had taken
effect if her daughter had not betrayed the looseness of the Mother, and the
counsels of her wickedness. The old man deliverd from so many dangers,
deceased, the Kingdom being left to Alexander the eldest of his Sons.

Alexander in the beginning of his reign bought his peace of the Illyrians, a
sum of moneys being agreed upon, and his Brother Philip being given them as a
pledge; in the process of time he made peace with the Thebans, having given the
same pledge unto them, which conduced much to the growing fortunes of Philip by
the advantage of his education; for being three years a pledge at Thebes, he
received the first rudiments of his youth in a City of ancient severity, and in
the house of Epaminondas who was as great a Philosopher as a General. Not long
after Alexander being assaulted by the treason of his Mother Euridice, was
slain; his Father had pardoned her before, being guilty of contriving his
death, in relation to the children he had by her, not thinking she would prove
so pernicious unto them. His brother Perdicas did also lose his life, being
killed by the treasonable plotting of his mother: A most unworthy thing it was
that the children should be deprived of their lives by their mother for her
lust, the consideration of whom had before protected her from the punishment
due unto her for her wickedness. This murder of Perdicas seemed the more
grievous, because the little son whom he left could not prevail upon her
cruelty to take compassion of him. Philip a long time did deport himself not as
a King, but as a Guardian to the Infant. But when great wars did threaten the
Kingdom, and that the help would be too late in the expectation of the Infant,
he took upon him the Government of the Kingdom, being compelled unto it by the
people. In the beginning of his reign, the hopes were great that were conceived
of him both for his wit, which promised him to prove a great man, and for the
ancient fates of Macedon, which sang that one of the sons of Amyntas being
King, the state of that Kingdom should be most flourishing; And this was the
man who was preserved from the wickedness of his mother, to make good the hopes
of the people and to justify the Oracle. When on one side, the most unworthy
murder of his brothers, on the other side the multitude of his Enemies, the
fear of new treacheries, the want occasioned by the continual wars, and the
Kingdom exhausted of Soldiers, did much distract him and the wars of many
Nations from several places did at one time conspire to oppress Macedonia,
because he could not answer them all at once, he thought it expedient to
dispense with some for a while; he therefore upon an agreement did compound for
a peace with some; others he overcame with easy assaults, by the conquest of
whom he confirmed the doubtful minds of his Soldiers, and took from himself
the contempt of his Enemies. His first war was with the Athenians, who being
overcome by an Ambu^cado, he without money (for fear of a greater war) did
permit them all to go safe away, when it lay in his power to have put them all
to the sword: The war being afterward carried against the Illyrians, he slew
many thousands of his Enemies: Afterward he took the famous City of Larissaea,
from whence he unexpectedly advanced against the Thessalians, not for the
desire of prey, but that he might add to his Army the strength of the
Thessalian Cavalry, by which means (the body of their horse being joined to his
foot) he made his Army invincible. The event of these things answering his
expectation with success, he took to wife Olympias the daughter of Neoptolemus
King of the Molossians; her brothers son Arymbas, who was her overseer, and was
then King of the Molossians did make the marriage, having himself married Troas
the sister of Olympias, which was the cause of his destruction, and the
manifold calamities which afterward fell upon him; for whiles he hoped to make
some additions to his Kingdom by the affinity of Philip, being deprived by him
of his own Kingdom, he grew old in banishment. These things being thus passed,
Philip being now not contented only to remove wars, did now provoke and
challenge others Nations of his own accord. As he was besieging Methona, an
arrow from the walls as he was passing by, did put out his right eye; for all
which wound he became not the flower in the prosecution of the war, nor was he
made more angry by it against his Enemies, who some days afterward having
supplicated for peace, he did grant it to them, and was not only moderate, but
also merciful against the conquered.

THE EIGTH BOOK OF IVSTINE.
WHiles the Cities of Greece sought every one to enjoy, they all lost the
Sovereignty of Greece; for restlessly running into mutual destruction they
perished, being overcome of all: and not unless oppressed, they found what
every one did loose; For Philip lying in wait in Macedonia (as in a
Watchtower) for the liberties of them all, whiles he did foment their
divisions by sending aid to the weaker parties, he made both the Conquerors and
Conquered to undergo the yoke of servitude. The Thebans were the cause and the
beginning of this calamity, who when they were masters of all, and carrying
their good fortune with too impotent a mind, did publicly before a general
Council at Greece accuse the Lacedaemonians and Phocensians, as if before they
had endured but small punishments for the slaughters and the rapines which they
committed: it was laid to the charge of the Lacedaemonians, that they had seized
upon the Tower of Thebes in the time of truce, and to the Phocensians that they
had plundered Baeotia, as if after Arms and War there were a place left for the
Laws: When the judgment was carried according to the pleasure of the
Conquerors, they were condemned in a greater sum of money then they were able
to pay. Therefore the Phocensians when they were deprived of their wives and
children, and possessions, in a desperate condition, Philomelus being their
Captain, they seized upon the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, and being angry with
men, they would be revenged of God; being made rich with the gold and silver
which there they found, they made war upon the Thebans with a mercenary Army;
and though all abhorred this act of the Phocensians, by reason of the
sacrilege, yet the Thebans contracted more envy by it, by whom they were
enforced to this necessity, and both the Lacedaemonians, and Athenians sent aid
unto them. In the first encounter Philomelus became master of the Camp and
Tents of the Thebans; but in the second battle he fell first of all, fighting
amongst the thickest of his Enemies, and with the forfeit of his impious blood
did answer for the crime of his sacrilege. Onomerchus was made Captain in his
place, against whom the Thebans and Thessalians chose not a Captain of their
own Citizens for fear of his domineering if he should prove Conqueror, but
Philip King of the Macedonians to be their General; and of their own accord
they did fall into that power and domination in another Commander which they
feared in their own. Philip therefore, as if he was rather a revenger of the
Sacrilege, then of the Thebans, commanded all his soldiers to wear wreaths
of bays on their brows; and thus as if god was his conduct, he advanced to the
battle.

The Phocensians seeing the Ensigns of the God, being affrighted with the
consciousness of their offense, throwing down their Arms, did fly away, and
with great slaughter and bloodshed did expiate the violation of Religion. It is
incredible, what glory this achievement brought to Philip amongst all Nations;
Him they extolled as the vindicator of sacrilege, the Revenger of Religion,
which the world with all its power was obliged to keep undefiled; the only man
who was thought worthy to exact a Piacle for the sin committed to plunder God.
He next unto the gods was esteemed, by whom the majesty of the gods was
vindicated: But the Athenians, the event of the war being understood, did seize
upon the streits at Thermophyle to keep Philip from Greece, as they did
heretofore the Persians, but not with the same courage nor the same cause; for
then they fought for the liberty of Greece, now for public sacrilege; then to
vindicate the Temples from the violent profanation of the Enemies, now to
defend the violent Prophaners against the Vindicators of them, and they
deported themselves as defenders of that wickedness in which it was a shame to
be Connivers, being altogether unmindful that in the uncertainty of their
affairs they had heretofore repaired to that god as to the Author of their
Counsels: and he being their conduct, they had undertook so many wars, and
formerly erected so many Cities, and obtained so great a Sovereignty both by
Sea and Land, and managed nothing either public or private without the
majesty of his divinity. Who would imagine that wits adorned with all variety
of learning, and brought up under such excellent Laws and Institutions, should
commit so horrible an impiety, that they had nothing left, of which after it
they might justly accuse the Barbarians? But Philip observed no more faith
himself toward his Associates; for fearing least he should be overcome himself
of his Enemies in the impiety of sacrilege, in a hostile manner he seized upon
those Cities, of which but immediately before he was Protector; those Cities
which sought under his conduct, those Cities which gratulated both him and
themselves for the victory they had obtained, he in a scornful manner sold not
long afterward both the wives and children of them all; he spared not the
Temples, nor the consecrated houses, nor the public, nor the private gods whom
not long before he adored: Insomuch that he seemed not to be the Revenger of
sacrilege, but to grant a liberty for sacriledges; After this, as if he had
done admirably well, he marched into Cappadocia, where having managed the war
with the like perfidiousness and the neighboring Kings being taken and slain
by treachery, he joined the whole Country of Cappadocia to the Kingdom of the
Macedons: After this to take away the infamy of envy, with which at that
present he labored above other men, he sent several persons through several
Kingdoms and most flourishing Cities, to plant a belief that King Philip had
laid up a great bank of money for the erecting of new walls through the Cities,
and for the building of Fanes and Temples, and made Proclamations by Heralds,
to the end that workmen might come in to undertake the building, who when they
came to Macedonia, being frustrated by long delays, they departed home in
silence, fearing the anger of the King. After this he invaded the Olynthians,
who after his slaughter of one of his brothers, did in compassion entertain the
two other, whom Philip resolved to put to death, pretending they desired to
partake with him in the Kingdom, being the children of his mother-in-law; for
this only cause he utterly destroyed this ancient and noble City, and his
brothers being delivered to their destined destruction, he enjoyed a great
booty together with the desires of his paricide. After this, as if all things
were lawful which he had a mind to do, he seized upon the golden Mines in
Thessaly, and on the silver Mines in Thrace, and that he might leave nothing
inviolated, he at last resolved to exercise Pyracies on the Seas: These things
in this manner managed* it came to pass that the two brothers of the King of
Thrace did make choice of him as an Arbitrator of their differences, not out of
any contemplation of his justice, but both of them fearing least by his
assistance he should add more strength and quite overbalance the cause and
power of the other. But Philip, (according to the versatilness of his wit) did
come with a gallant Army, the two brothers unsuspecting it, not as an
Arbitrator but a General, and deprived them both of the Kingdom by force, not
like a Judge, but as a Theif and a plunderer. While those thing were in
agitation, the Athenians sent Ambassadors to him to desire a peace, who having
had audience, he sent himself Ambassadors to Athens with the condition of it,
and a peace was concluded for the advantage of them both. There came also
Ambassadors from the other Cities of Greece, not so much for the love of peace,
as for the sears of war; for the fire of their rage being not to be
extinguished but by blood, the Thebans and Boetians did desire that he would
vouchsafe to profess himself to be the General of Greece against the
Phocensians, being possessed with so great a hatred against the Phocensians,
that forgetful of their own ruin, they desired rather to perish themselves
then not to destroy them, and to endure the known cruelty of Philip then to
pardon their Enemies. The Ambassadors of the Phocensians on the other side, the
Lacedaemonians and Athenians being joined with them, did crave that the war
might not proceed, this being the third time that they bought with moneys a
forbearance of it.

A vile thing it was, and shameful to behold, that Greece being at that time
the mistress of the world, both in strength and dignity, and always the
Conqueress of Kings and Nations, and at that time the Commandress of so many
Cities, should humble her self at the doors of a stranger, and either craving
or deprecating war, should put all her hope in the assistance of another. The
Revengers of the world were brought so low by their own discords and by civil
wars, that of their own accord they flattered a sordid part not long before of
their own clientry; and this especially was done by the Thebans and the
Lacedaemonians before emulous which of them both should enjoy the absolute
command of Greece, as Greece at this present would have the command of them.
Philip in these dissentions, for the ostentation of his glory, did ride as it
were in triumph over the tops of so great Cities, and did deliberate with
himself which part was most worthy of him. Having given audience in private to
the Ambassadors on both sides, to the one side he did promise the forbearance
of the war, having obliged them by an Oath not to divulge his answer; unto the
others he gave assurance, that he suddenly and powerfully would assist them; he
commanded both either to prepare for war or to fear it; and thus with a double
answer both sides being secure, he seized upon the straights of Thermophylae.
Then the Phocensians finding themselves circumvented by the treachery of Philip
had their recourse to Arms, but they had not the leisure to prepare an Army,
nor to draw unto them any Auxiliaries: and Philip threatened utterly to destroy
them, if they would not surrender themselves unto him. But there was no more
trust in his composition, then there was in his promise that the war should be
forborne; They were therefore everywhere put to slaughter, and violated; the
Children were plucked from their Parents, the Wives from their Husbands, and
the Images of the gods were not safe, nor left in their own Temples. This was
all the miserable comfort that they enjoyed, that when Philip had defrauded his
Associates in the distribution of the booty, and engrossed it all to himself,
they could find nothing of their own goods amongst their Enemies. Being
returned into his Kingdom, he drove Cities and People as Shepherds do their
Flocks, sometimes into their Summer, and sometimes into their Winter Pastures:
He translated every place according to his own pleasure, as he would have them
peopled or left desolate; lamentable was the face of all things, and like unto
an utter ruin. There was no fear of any invasion of the Enemy, no running
about of the Soldiers in the streets, no tumult of Arms, no plundering of
goods, nor forcing men into Captivity, but a silent grief and sadness did
possess them, and a fear that even the very tears in their eyes should be
censured for delinquency: Their griefs did increase in their counterfeiting,
and in their concealing of them, sinking so much the deeper, by how much they
were the less seen to express them: Sometimes they revolved in their minds the
Sepulchers of their Ance^^^rs, sometimes their old household gods, sometimes
their own houses in which they begot their children, and in which they were
begot themselves: Sometimes they lamented their own misfortune that they lived
to see that day, sometimes the misfortune of their children that they were not
born after it. Philip in the mean time did remove some of them into the
frontier Garrisons, and set them before the faces of their Enemies; others he
did dispose of into the farthest bounds of his Kingdom: Some whom he had taken
Prisoners in the war he reserved at home to supply his Cities, and so out of
many Countries and Nations he constituted one Kingdom and People. The affairs
of Macedonia being set in order, he became master of the Dardanians, and other
neighboring places taken by deceit; neither did he abstain from those who were
most near unto him; for he determined to drive Arymbas out of his Kingdom who
was King of Epirus, and in the nearest consanguinity obliged to his wife
Olympias; and for this purpose he sent for Alexander the brother of his wife
Olympias, a boy of a sweet and lovely countenance to come in his sisters name
to Macedonia, and with all his art having solicited him into the hope of his
Fathers Kingdom, dissembling his lust, he enforced him to grant him the
unlawful use of his body, thinking that he would be more obsequious to him
either through this familiarity of unlawful love, or through the benefit of the
Kingdom; therefore when he arrived to the age of twenty years, he took the
Kingdom from Arymbas and gave it unto him, being unrighteous in both, for that
he observed not the rights of consanguinity in him f om whom he took the
Kingdom, and that he made him his prostitute before he made him a King unto
whom he gave it.

THE NINTH BOOK OF IVSTINE.
WHen Philip had advanced into Greece, solicited by the plundering of a few
Cities, and finding by their riches how great was the wealth of them all, he
intended to make war upon all Greece; and thinking that if he could be master
of Bizantium a famous Sea-Town, i^ would much conduce to his affairs, it being
a gallant reserve both by Sea and Land, he laid a fiege unto it shutting her
Gates against him* This City was first builded by Pausanias King of the
Sparians, and possessed by him for the space of seven years. Afterward by the
several inclinations of Victory, it was sometimes in the power of the
Lacedaemonians, and sometimes of the Athenians, which uncertain possession was
the cause that neither of them either helping it or owning it as their own, she
did more constantly maintain her liberty. Philip therefore being weary, and his
stock exhausted with the long delay of the siege, made use of Piracy for the
purchase of moneys, and having taken one hundred and seventy ships, he
refreshed his Army distracted and languishing through want; And that so great a
power might not be held in a League^ before one Town, taking with him the most
valiant of them, he besie^ed many Cities of the Ch^^sonesians, and sent for his
son Alexander, being then eighteen years of age to come unto him, that he might
learn under him the first rudiments of the War.

He marched also into Scythia to see what plunder he could get there, and like
a Merchant he maintained one war by the profits of another. At that time
Matthaeas was King of the Scythians, who being oppressed by the war of the I
strians did desire the assistance of Philip by the Apollonians, promising to
adopt him into the succession of the Kingdom of Scythia. In the mean time, the
King of the I strians dying, delivered the Scythians both from the fear of the
war, and the need of assistance. Therefore Matthaeas having dismissed the
Macedonians, commanded them to acquaint Philip that he neither desired his aid,
nor did intend his adoption; for the Scythians, he said, did not need the
revenge of the Macedonians, being better men then themselves, neither his Son
being alive did he want an (...) This being understood, Philip sent Ambassadors
to Matthaeas, desiring of him to lend him some moneys toward the charge of the
fiege, least through want he should be enforced to forsake the war, which the
more re^dily he said he ought to do because he paid not the soldiers whom he
sent unto his aid, who received nothing for their service nor for the charges
of their march in the way. Matthaeas excusing himself by reason of the
unkindness of the heaven, and the barrenness of the earth, that neither
enriched the Scythians with Patrimonies, nor allowed them sustenance, made
answer that he had no wealth wherewith to satisfy so great a King, and
therefore it were more honorable for him to deny him altogether then to
contribute but a little to him; the Scythians he said, were esteemed not by
their wealth, but by the virtues of their mind, and by the strength and
hardness of their bodies. Philip finding himself de^ided, having raised the
fiege before Byzantium, did advance against the Scythians, who to make them the
more secure did send Ambassadors to enform Matthaeas, that when he besieged
Byzantium, he had vowed a Statue to Hercules, and that he now came to erect it
at the mouth of the River of Ister; he therefore desired that coming as a
friend to the Scythians, he might be allowed a peaceable entrance to perform
his religion to his god: Matthaeas made answer, that if he would perform his
vows, he should send the Effigies unto him, and promised that it should not
only be erected accordingly as he desired, but that it should stand
inviolated. He sent him word that he could not give way that his Army should
enter into his Dominions, and if he should erect any Statue, the Scythians
being unwilling, he would pull it down again, when he was departed, and convert
the brass of the Statue into heads for arrows. With these passages the minds of
both being much exasperated, the battle was begun.

The Scythians excelled in virtue and valor; howsoever they were overcome by
the policy of Philip. There were taken twenty thousand women and children, and
a vast booty of Cattle, but of gold and silver nothing at all: And although it
were before reported, it was at this time first of all believed how poor the
Scythians were. Twenty thousand of their Mares of a brave race were sent into
Macedonia for breed. But the Triballians did meet with Philip on his return
from Scythia; they denied to give him passage, unless they received part of the
prey; From hence began the quarrel, and by and by the fight, in which Philip
was so sorely wounded in his thigh, that through his body his horse was killed;
when all conceived him to be slain, the booty was all lost; therefore the
devoted spoils of the Sythians were to be lamented rather than enjoyed by the
Macedons; as soon as he began to recover of his wound, he brought upon the
Athenians his long dissembled war, to whose cause the Thebans did join
themselves, fearing least the Athenians being overcome, the flames of the
neighboring war should whirle upon them.

A league being therefore made betwixt the two Cities that not long before were
at the greatest enmity, they wearved Greece with their Ambassadors, alleging
that the common Enemy was to be repelled by the common strength; for they said
that Philip would not leave off, if the affairs at first succeeded according to
his mind, until he had subdued all Greece unto him. Some Cities being
persuaded by the Athenians did unite themselves unto them, but the fear of the
war did draw many unto Philip: the battle being begun when the Athenians did
much exceed in the number of the Soldiers, they were overcome by the valor of
the Macedons inured to daily wars; howsoever they fell not unmindful of their
ancient glory; for with honorable wounds they dying, did all cover that place
of the field with their bodies which their Captains did assign them to fight in.

This day did set a period to all Greece, in the respect of their ancient
liberty, and the glory of the Sovereignty of their command. The joy of this
Victory was craftily dissembled by Philip, for he did not observe it as a day
consecrated to Triumphs; he was not seen to laugh at the banquet; he neither
crowned his head, nor anointed his body, and as much as in him was, he so
overcame that no man could perceive him to be a Conqueror: He commanded that he
should not be called the King, but the Captain of Greece; and he so tempered
himself betwixt a silent joy, and the public grief of his Enemies, that his
own Soldiers could not observe him to rejoice, nor his Enemies to insult. And
though the Athenians were always most pernicious to him, yet he sent home
their prisoners without ransom, and restored the carcasses of the dead to
burial, and of his own accord gave order that they should be carried to the
Sepulchers of their Fathers: Moreover, he sent his Son Alexander and his friend
Antipater to Athens, to establish a firm friendship and a peace betwixt them.
But he was not so indulgent to the Thebans; for he not only sold their
Captives but also the carcasses of their slain. Some of the Rulers of that City
he beheaded, some he forced into banishment, and seized on all their goods, and
restored those into their Country who had been banished from it, out of which
number he appointed three hundred to be the Judges and Rulers of the City, by
whom when some of the most powerful of the Citizens were accused, that unjustly
they had driven them into banishment, they were of that constancy, they all in
general confessed that they were all the Authors of it, and with confidence
affirmed that it was better with the Commonwealth by far when they were
condemned persons, then it could be now when they were restored.

A wonderful confidence it was; they passed a sentence as well as then they
could, on the Judges of their life's and deaths, and did contemn that absolution
which their Enemies could give them, and because they could not revenge by
deeds, they assumed to themselves a liberty by words.

The affairs being thus composed in Greece, Philip commanded that Ambassadors
out of all the Cities should be called to Corinth, to consider on the present
occasions, and to provide for the future: He there appointed to all Greece a
condition of Peace, according to the merits of every City, and chose to himself
a Counsel, and as it were a Parliament out of all. The Lacedaemonians only did
despise both the Law and the Lawgiver, affirming that it was a slavery and not
a peace which was imposed upon them by the Conqueror, and did not proceed from
the Cities. After this the Auxiliaries of every City were listed, by whom the
King was to be assisted against any invasion, or he being their General, was to
make war himself with them, and to lead them forth against any Nation; for it
was not doubtful that the Empire of the Persians was the design of these great
preparations. The number of his Auxiliaries of foot were two hundred thousand,
and fifteen thousand horse: Besides these, there was the Army of Macedonia, and
an Army of the barbarous Nations who were contiguous to them. In the beginning
of the Spring, he sent three of his chief Commanders into that part of Asia
which was under the power of the Persians, Parmenio, Amyntas, and Attalus,
whose sister he had lately married; Olympias the Mother of Alexander being
repudiated upon the suspicion of incontinence. In the mean time until the
Auxiliaries of Greece might be drawn into one body, he did celebrate the
Nuptials of his daughter Cleopatra, and of Alexander whom he had made King of
Epirus. The day was remarkable for the magnificence of the two Kings, the one
marrying, the other giving his daughter in marriage: Neither was there wanting
the delightfulness of Enterludes, to the beholding whereof when Philip passed
without a guard between the two Alexanders, his Son-in-law, and his own Son,
Pausanias one of the Nobility, being suspected by no man, did kill King Philip
as he was passing through the crowd, and made the day destined to mirth and
marriage black with the lamentation of a Funeral: This Pausanias about the
fourteenth year of his age, was enforced to be a prostitute to Attalus, to
which indignity this ignominy was added, that Attalus having afterward brought
him into the Banquet, and made him drunk with wine, did not only expose him to
his own lust, but to the lust of all his guests, and rendered him a common
laughing stock amongst them all: Which Pausanias with great indignation
resenting, did oftentimes complain of it to Philip; And finding that he was
both deluded and delayed in his just complaints, and that his Adversary
moreover was honored with a new addition of power and greatness, he converted
his anger against Philip himself, and that revenge which he could not have on
his Adversary, he took on his unrighteous Judge, It is also believed that he
was encouraged to it by Olympias the Mother of Alexander, and that Alexander
himself was not ignorant of the murder of his Father; for Olympias was no less
troubled at her divorce, and that Cleopatra was perferr'd above her, then
Pausanias was at the violation of his honor. It was conceived also that
Alexander suspected that his brother begot of his Stepmother, did aspire unto
the Kingdom; and so far the jealousy did advance it self, that at a former
Banquet he first quarrelled with Attalus, and afterward with his Father,
insomuch that Philips did follow him from the Table with a drawn Sword, and was
hardly detained by the entreaties of his friends from the slaughter of his son.
Wherefore Alexander did first convey himself with his Mother to his Uncle in
Epirus, and from thence to the Kings of the Illyrians, and was hardly
afterward reconciled to his Father, and with much difficulty was persuaded by
his kinsmen to return unto him. Olympias also did solicit her brother
Alexander the King of Epirus to undertake the war, and had overcome him to it,
if the Father had not prevented his Son-in-law by the collocation of his
daughter to him: With these provocations of jealousy and anger, it is believed
that both of them did incite Pausanias to the commission of so desperare an
Act. Sure it is, that Olympias had horses ready for Pausanias, if it had been
his fortune to have escaped; and she her self, the death of the King being
understood, when under the pretense of the duty, she came in great haste that
night to attend his Hearse, she did impose on the very same night a Crown of
Gold on the head of Pausanias then hanging on the Cross, which none but she
would have been so bold to have adventured, the Son of Philip being alive. Some
few days after, she caused his body to be taken off from the Cross and burned,
and in the same place she did erect him a Monument, and struck such a
superstition into the people, that she provided that for the honor of his
memory, here should be yearly made a parentation to him: After this, she caused
Cleopatra (for whose sake she was divorced from Philip, having first in her own
lap killed her daughter) to end her life by hanging, and satisfied her revenge
by beholding her in that lamentable posture swinging on the Tree. Last of all,
she consecrated that sword with which the King was slain to Apollo, under the
name of Myrtalis; for so Olympias was called when she was a little one. All
which was done so opnely, that it may be seared least the fact committed by her
were not approved by others: Philip deceased about the seven and fourtieth year
of his age, after he had reigned five and twenty years. He begat on Larissaea
the Danceress Aridaeus, who reigned after Alexander: He had also many other
Sons from diverse other marriages, it being the custom of Kings to take them
into Marriage as many as they pleased; but they all dyed, some by natural
deaths, and some by the sword. He was a King more studious of the preparations
of Arms then Feasts; his greatest riches were the utensils of war, and yet he
was more cunning to get riches then to perserve them, which made them always
poor, though he was always plundering: Mercy and Treachery were in him equally
beloved: No way whatsoever to overcome his Enemies did appear sordid to him; In
his discourse he was both pleasing and deceitful, and one who would always
promise more then he would perform; he was master of his Arts both in jest and
in earnest: He observed his friendships not by faithfulness but by profit: To
dissemble love in hatred, to plant sedition amongst friends, and to insinuate
himself both with friends and foes was his daily Custom: Excellent he was in
Eloquence and in the acuteness of a fine flourish in his words, full of
delicate composures, that neither facility was wanting to the ornament* nor the
ornament of invention to the facility. Alexander did succeed him greater then
his Father both in virtues and in vices. Their way was different in the
Conquests they obtained: The Son managed his wars by apparent valor, the
Father by deceits: The Father joined his Enemies being surprised; the Son being
openly overcome; The Father more subtle in Counsel; the Son more magnificent in
mind; The Father would commonly dissemble his passions, and overcome them; The
Son inflamed with rage knew neither how to delay, not moderate his revenge;
Both of them were too greedy of wine, but their vices in the excess were
different. It was the custom of the Father from the Banquet to advance against
the Enemy, to encounter him, and unadvisedly to expose himself unto all
dangers; Alexander was more furious against his own friends then against his
Enemies; wherefore the battles have oftentimes sent back Philip wounded, and
his Son has often come from the Banquet the killer of his Friends; This would
not reign over his friends, the other would usurp and grow upon them; Tbe
Father did choose rather to be beloved, the Son to be feared; The love to
Learning was equal to them both* The Father was more full of Policy, the Son of
Fidelity; The Father more moderate in his speech, the Son in his actions, for
he had always a more ready and a more honest mind to be merciful to those
whom he overcame; The Father was addicted to thrift, but the Son to excess: By
these Arts the Father laid the foundation for the Conquest of the World, and
the Son accomplished the glory of the work.

THE TENTH BOOK OF IVSTINE.
ARtaxerxes King of the Persians had fifteen Sons by a hundred Concubines, but
he had only three begotten in lawful marriage; Darius, Ariarctos, and Occhus.
Of these against the Laws of the Persians, amongst whom the Kingdom suffered
no change but by death, Artaxerxes being alive, did out of his Fatherly
indulgence make Darius King, thinking that there was nothing taken from the
Father which was conferred upon the Son, and that he should take a sincerer joy
in his paternal Interest, if he alive did behold the Ensign of his Majesty in
his Son. But Darius after these unaccustomed examples of indulgence, took
counsel to kill his Father: He had been wicked enough, if he only had
conceived the parricide in his mind; but so much the more wicked, that into
the society of the villainy he took his fifty brothers to be partakers of it;
Prodigious it was, that in so great a number, the parricide could not only be
contracted but concealed, and that amongst fifty of his children there was not
one found whom neither the Majesty of the King, nor the reverence of an ancient
man, nor the indulgence of a Father, could recall from so horrible an act. What
was the name of a Father so vile amongst so great a number of his Sons, that he
who should be safe even against his Enemies by their defense, being
circumvented by their Treason, should now be safer amongst his Enemies then
amongst his own children? The cause of the Parricide was far more wicked then
the Parricide it self; for Cyrus being slain in the brothers war, as mention
above is made, Artaxerxes the King took his Concubine Aspasia into marriage;
Darius did demand that his Father should give her unto him, as he had delivered
up his Kingdom, who being too indulgent to his children, did promise at first
that he would do it, and not long after repenting hims^l^, and honestly denying
what rashly he had promised, he made her a Prioress in the Temple of the Sun,
whereby a perpetual abstinence from all men was religiously imposed on her. The
young man being much incensed at it, did first quarrel with his Father; and not
long after having made a conspiracy with his brothers, whiles he sought to
betray his Father, being discovered and apprehended with his Associates, they
expiated with their blood the designed Parricide, and did punishment to the
Gods the Revengers of paternal Majesty. The Wives also of them all with all
their children were put to death, that there should not be so much as a shadow
to be seen of so great a villainy. After this Artaxerxes having contracted a
disease by the excess of grief deceased himself a happier King then a Father.

The Inheritance of the Kingdom by order of succession was devolved on Occhus,
who fearing the like conspiracy, did fill the Court with the slaughter of his
kinsmen, and the ruins of the Princes, being touched with no compassion in the
respect either of blood, or sex, or age; belike that he might not be more
innocent then the Parricides his brothers.

And having as it were thus purified his Kingdom, he made war upon the
Armenians; in which one of the Enemies having sent a challenge to try his force
in Arms with any in a single fight, Codoman with the good opinion of all,
advanced to encounter him, who the Enemy being slain, did restore both victory
to the Persians and almost their lost glory. For this achievement so gallantly
performed, he was made Governor of the Armenians, and in the process of time,
after the death of Occhus in the memory of his ancient valor, he was chosen
King by the people, and being honored with the name of Darius, that nothing
might be wanting to the regal Majesty, he a long time managed the war with
great courage; but uncertain fortune against Alexander the Great; at the last,
being overcome by him, and slain by his own kinsmen, he ended his life with the
Empire of the Persians.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF IVSTINE.
AS there were diverse Nations in the Army of Philip, so he being slain, there
were diverse agitations of minds in his Army: Some being oppressed with the
injury of servitude did advance themselves to some hope of liberty; others not
pleased with the tediousness of so remote a war, did rejoice that the
expedition would be remitted: Some there were who lamented that the torch
lighted for the marriage of the daughter should be now employed to be put under
the pile of the Father. And no small fear it was that possessed his friends at
so sudden a Change of the affairs, revolving in their minds how much Asia was
provoked before Europe was subdued, and how unfaithful and uncertain were the
Illyrians, the Thracians and Dardaneans and others of the barbarous Nations
that were adjacent to them, which people if they should all revolt together, it
was impossible to redress it.

In these destractions the coming of Alexander was as a Sovereign remedy, who
in a set speech did for the present so persuade and comfort the Soldiers, that
he took off all fear from the timorous, and did raise the opinion of all into a
great hope of him: He was then but twenty years of age, in which he so
moderately promised so much that it might appear to all that he reserved more
for the proof. He gave to the Macedonians the immunity of all things, unless a
discharge from the wats, by which he so much attracted their love, that they
said they had changed only the body, but not the virtue nor the valor of the
King. The first care he had was for his Fathers obsequies at which he gave a
charge above all things that all who were guilty of his Fathers death should be
slain before the Tomb of his Father; he only reprieved Alexander the brother
of the Lyncestae, preserving in him the inaguration into his dignity; for he
was the first that did salute him King. He also took care that his brother
Caraunus born of his Stepmother, who aspired to the Kingdom, should be put to
death.

In the first beginning of his Reign he awed many Nations that were about to
rebel, and appeased diverse seditions in the East, and joyful at the success of
his proceedings he marched privately into Greece, where having called all the
Cities to Corinth after the example of his Father, he was made General in his
place. After this, he did go on with the preparations for the Persian war,
which was begun by his Father; and being altogether employed to make provision
for it, he was informed that the Athenians, Thebans, and Lacedaemonians had
revolted from him to the Persians, and that the Author of that treachery was
Demosthenes the Orator, who was corrupted by the Persians with a great sum of
gold: He alleged that all the Forces of the Macedonians were overthrown by the
Triballians with their King, and in his speech composed for that purpose, he
produced his Author before the people, who affirmed that he was wounded in the
same battle wherein the King was slain: By which report the resolutions of
almost all the Citizens being startled, they resolved to shake off the
Garrisons of the Macedons; to meet with and to prevent these difficulties, he
marched into Greece with so much speed, and with so gallant and so prepared an
Army, that whom they knew not of to come, they could hardly believe they saw.
In his way he exhorted the Thessalians, and did put them in mind of the
benefits of Philip his Father to them, and of the near relations of his Mother
descended from the generation of the Aeacidans. His exhortation was agreeable
to the Thessalians; they created him General of Greece after the example of his
Father, and delivered to him all their tributes and revenews. But the Athenians
as they were the first in the revolt, so they began to be the first in
repentance, and turning the contempt of their Enemy into their admiration of
him, they extolled the youth of Alexander despised before above the virtue of
the ancient Captains; Ambassadors therefore being sent, they besought a
forbearance of the war; Alexander having heard them and severely reprehended
them, did remit the war. After this he advanced against the Thebans, and would
have exercised the same indulgence toward them, if he had found the same
repentance; but the Thebans were resolved to make use of their Arms, and not of
entreaties or deprecations. Being overcome, they endured the heaviest
punishments of the most miserable captivity: When a Council was called to
debate on the utter destruction of the City, the Phocensian^ and Plataeans, the
Thespians and Orchomaenians the Associates of the Macedonians, and the
partakers with Alexander in this victory, did demonstrate to him the ruins of
their own Cities, and the cruelty of the Thebans, charging them with their
inclinations toward the Persians against the liberty of Greece, not only for
the present, but for the continuance of many Ages, for which cause the hatred
of all people was upon them to be manifested, by this that they have all bound
themselves by an oath, the Persians being overcome, to pull down Thebes. To
this they added the fables of their former abominations, with which they have
filled all Scenes, insomuch that they are to be abhorred, not only for their
present treachery, but for their ancient infamy. Eleadas one of the Captives
having obtained liberty to speak, did allege that they did not revolt from the
King whom they heard to be slain, but from the heirs of the King; and what by
them was committed, was not so much by the guilt of treachery as by the
provocation of cruelty, for which already they had endured grievous
punishments; their youth being overthrown, there remained only he said, a
company of old men and women, who were as weak as they were harmless, and were
so vexed with adulteries and reproaches, that they never endured any thing more
grievous; he entreated not he said for the Citizens who were so few, but for
the innocent ground of his Country, and for the City which had not only
brought forth men but gods: He supestitiously conjured the King by the
remembrance of Hercules, who was born amongst them, and from whom the Nation of
the Aeacidans did derive their Original, that he would forbear all further
execution: He besought, his father Philip having had his education in that
City, that he would vouchsafe to spare it, it being the City which adored some
of his Ancestors being born gods amongst them, and which saw others who being
there brought up were Kings of the supreamest dignity. But anger was more
powerful then prayer; the City therefore was levelled to the ground: the Fields
were divided amongst the Conquerors; the Captives were sold, whose prizes were
set not for the profit of the Buyers, but at the rate of the hatred of the
Enemy. Their sad condition was lamented by the Athenians, who opened their
Gates to receive them against the mandate of the King: which Alexander took so
grievously, that the Athenians by a second Ambassy beseeching him to forbear
the war; he did remit it on that condition, that their Orators and Captains by
whose confidence they so often had rebelled, might be delivered to him; into so
great a strait the Athenians were brought, that rather then undergo the war,
their Orators being retained, their Captains were sent into banishment, who
immediately going to Darius, were of no small moment in the Army of the
Persians; Alexander being now wholly designed *on the Persian war did put to
death those kindred of his step-mothers, whom Philip advancing to the places of
highest dignity had set over the Kingdom; neither was he more indulgent to
those who were more near unto him, if they nourished aspiring thoughts and were
fit for Government, that no occasion of sedition might call him back being
employed in his war in Asia; and he took into the war those Pensioners of the
King with him, the abilities of whose understandings were more eminent then
their fellows, leaving those who were of any age and gravity behind him for the
defense of his Kingdom. After this, having drawn his Army all into one Body, he
speedily embarked them, and being come into the sight of Asia, being inflamed
with an incredible ardor of spirit, he erected twelve Altars, where he made his
vows to the gods of war: He divided all the Patrimony which he had in
Macedonia and in Europe amongst his friends, alleging that Asia was sufficient
for himself; And before that any of his ships put forth to Sea, he offered
sacrifices, desiring Victory in this war, in which he was to be the Revenger of
Greece so often invaded by the Persians; whose Empire was great, old, and
over-ripe, it being now high time that it should receive others by turns, who
could do better: Neither were the presageful resolutions of his Army less then
his own; for all of them forgetting their wives and children, and the war that
was to be managed so far from their own Country, did propound unto themselves
the Persian Gold, and the Riches of all the East as already their own booty:
when they drew near unto the Continent, Alexander first of all did throw a dart
as into the hostile La^d, and in his Armor leaping on the shore and valting
aloft, did cut a fine caper or two; he there offered sacrifices, praying that
those Countries would not unwillingly receive him their King: In Ilium also he
did parentate to the Tombs of those who fell in the Trojan war; advancing
afterward toward the Enemy, he caused a Proclamation to be published,
forbidding his Soldiers to plunder, alleging that they must spare their own
goods, nor destroy those things which they came to possess.

In his Army there were two and thirty thousand foot, and four thousand and
five hundred horse, and a Fleet consisting of one hundred and fourscore and two
ships. With this so inconsiderable an Army, it is hard to say whether he more
wonderfully overcame all the World, or that he durst undertake to do it,
especially when to so dangerous a war he chose not an Army of robustious men,
or in the first flower of their youth, but old Soldiers, and some who by the
Laws of war were to be dismissed by reason of their Age, and who had served in
the wars of his Father and his Grandfather, that you would have taken them to
be selected masters of the war rather then Soldiers; neither in the first
files or ranks was any a leading man who was not threescore years of age,
insomuch that had you beheld the order of their Camp, you would have said that
you had seen a Senate of some ancient Commonwealth. Therefore in the battle no
man thought of flight but of Victory, neither did they put any hope in the
nimbleness of their feet, but in the strength of their Arms.

On the other side, Darius King of the Persians in the confidence of his
strength, affirmed that nothing was to be done by circumvention, and that the
close counsel of a stolen Victory was not suitable to his greatness: He
thought it more honorable to drive back the war then not to admit it, and not
to prohibit the Enemy into his Confines, but to receive him into his Kingdom.
The first battle was in the Plain of Adrastum, where there being six hundred
thousand in the Army of the Persians, they were put to flight, being overcome
as much by the policy of Alexander as by the courage of the Macedons; great was
the slaughter of the Persians; in the Army of Alexander there were slain but
nine footmen, and one hundred and twenty horse, whom for the encouragement of
their fellows, the King caused to be honorably enterred, and commanded Statues
to be cut for them, as for some memorable Commanders, and gave privileges of
immunity to all their kindred. After this victory, the greater part of Asia did
submit unto him; He also made many wars with the Lieutenants of Darius whom he
overcame not so much by arms as by the terror of his Name. Whiles those things
were thus managed, he understood by one of his Captives, that a treason was
plotted against him by Alexander of Lynceste, the Son-in-law of Antipater, who
was the Kings Lieutenant in Macedonia, and fearing that if he should put him to
death, it might occasion some tumult in Macedonia, he only confined him to
Imprisonment and Bonds; After this, he advanced to the City of Gordium, which
is situated between both the Phrygias, which City he desired to be master of,
not so much for the booty, as for that he understood that in that City in the
Temple of Jupiter, there was consecrated the plough of Gordius, the knots of
whose cord if any could unlose, the Oracle did persage of old that he should
reign over all Asia. The cause and original was from this; When Gardius was
ploughing in this Country with his Oxen, great flights of birds of all sorts
did fly round about him, and repairing to the Augurs of the next City to know
the reason of it, he met in the Gate of the City a Virgin of an excellent
beauty, and having demanded of her to what Augur he should more particularly
address himself, she having understood the occasion, and having some knowledge
herself in the Art, by the instructions of her Parents, did make answer that
the Kingdom was presaged to him, and did offer her self the companion of his
hope, and to be his companion in marriage. So ^air a condition did seem to be
the first felicity of the Kingdom. After the marriage, there did arise a
sedition amongst the Phrygians; and counsel being asked, what a period should
be put unto the differences: and when the Oracles did answer, That to end the
discord there was need of a King; and it being demanded again, who should be
the King: They were commanded to make him King whom they should find with a
Plough entering into the Temple of Jupiter. Gordius was the man whom presently
they saluted as their King. He consecrated to Regal Majesty in the Temple of
Jupiter the Plough by which the Kingdom was conferred on him. After him there
reigned his Son Midas, who being instructed by Orpheus with the solemnities
belonging to the worship of their gods, did fill all Phrygia with Religion and
Ceremonies, by which during the whole course of his life, he was safer then by
his Arms.

Alexander therefore, the City being taken, when he came into the Temple of
Jupiter, he demanded where the Plough was, which being showed unto him, when he
could not discover the ends of the cord lying hid among the multiplicity of the
foldings, he gave a violent interpretation to the sense of the Oracle, and
cutting the cords asunder with his sword, he found the ends lying undiscovered
in the mystery of the twists. Whiles he was doing this, he was informed that
Darius was approaching to give him battle with a formidable Army. Therefore
fearing the danger of the streights, he in a swift march did lead his Army over
the Mountain of Taurus; in which expedition, his foot without any respite did
run five hundred furlongs: When he came unto Tarsus, being taken with
pleasantness of the River Cydnus running through the midst of the City, having
unbuckled his Armor, and being covered with sweat and dust, he threw himself
into the River which, was extremely cold. On an sudden; so great and so
chilling a benumnedness did posses every joint, that being speechless, the
danger could be neither deferred, nor any hope o^ remedy admitted. There was
one of his Physicians Philip by Name who promised to give a redress unto his
evil, but some letters sent the day before by Parmenio from Cappodocia did
render him suspected to the King, who not knowing of Alexander's sickness did
write unto him to have a careful eye on Philip his Physician, because he was
corrupted by Darius with a great sum of money; howsoever thinking it safer to
doubt the trust of his Physician, then his undoubted disease, having received
the Cup, he delivered the letters to him, and sted fastly did behold him as he
drank the physic: Having observed him to be not moved at the sense of the
letter, he became more cheerful, and on the fourth day afterward was
recovered. In the mean time, Darius advanced toward him with an Army of three
hundred thousand foot, and one hundred thousand horse: The multitude of his
numbers did trouble Alexander in the respect of the fewness of his Soldiers,
but computing with himself what great achievements he had performed by that
paucity, and how many Nations he had overthrown, his hope did overcome his
fear, and thinking it dangerous to delay the Battle least some desperation
should grow upon the minds of his Soldiers, being mounted on horseback he did
ride about his Army, and by several exhortations did inflame the courage of the
several Nations; he stirred up the Illyrians and the Thracians with the
ostentation of the wealth of the Persians, the Grecians with the memory of
their former wars, and with their perpetual hatred against the Persians: He put
the Macedonians in mind of Europe overcome, and of Asia desired by them; and
that the world had not any Soldiers that were comparable unto them: This
battle he said would put an end to their labors, but no end unto their glory:
As he delivered these words, he did once and again command his Army to stand,
that by that delay they might the better observe and sustain the unwe^ldy
numbers of their Enemies; neither was Darius less industrious in the
marshalling of his Army; for omitting no office of a General, he in his own
person did ride about the Army, and did exhort every one, and admonish them of
the ancient glory of the Persian Empire, and of their everlasting possession
which was given of it by the immortal Gods. After this the battle was fought
with great resolution, in which both Kings were wounded, and the fight was
doubtful until Darius fled, whereupon there followed a great slaughter of the
Persians; there were slain of their foot threescore and ten thousand, and ten
thousand of their horse, and forty thousand were taken Prisoners. Of the
Macedons there were slain one hundred and thirty foot, and one hundred and
fifty horse: In the Camp of the Persians, there was found much gold, and other
rich movables. Amongst the Captives, there were the Mother, and the Wife, who
was also the sister of Darius, and his two daughters, to visit and to comfort:
who when Alexander came in person with some men in Arms, they embracing one
another as if immediately they were to die, did make a skrieking lamentation*
then humbling themselves to the knees of Alexander, they desired not life, but
only a respite from death so long until they had buried the body of Darius.
Alexander beimg moved at their so great a piety, did both give them an
assurance of the life of Darius, and withal took from them the fear of death,
and did command that they should be esteemed and saluted as Queens, and
commanded the daughters of Darius to look for husbands suitable to the dignity
of their Father. After this taking into his observation, the riches and
precious Furniture of Darius, he was possessed with admiration at it; he then
first began to delight himself with luxurious Banquets, and the magnificence of
Feasts, and to be tempted by the beauties of Barsine his Capive, on whom having
afterward begot a Son, he did call him Hercules. But remembr^ing that Darius
was yet alive, he commanded Parmenio to seize upon the Persian Fleet, and sent
some others of his friends to take possession of some Cities in Asia, which the
fame of his Victory being understood, came presently into the hands of the
Conquerors, the Lieutenants of Darius delivering themselves with vast sums of
gold unto them. After this he advanced into Syria, where many Kings of the East
with Fillets and Miters did meet him; of whom some he received into the society
of his friendship according to their merits, and from others he took their
Kingdom, new Kings being chosen in their places. Amongst others, A'bdolominus
chosen King of Sidonia by Alexander was remarkable, who living but miserably
before (all his employment being either to scour ditches, or to water gardens)
was ordained King by him, the Nobility of that Kingdom being rejected, least
they should impute their royalty to their birth, and not to the benefit of the
giver; When the City of Tire had sent to Alexander by their Ambassadors a Crown
of gold of great weight in the pretense of gratulation, the gift being
gratefully accepted, Alexander did declare unto them that he would repair
himself unto Tire to pay his vows to Hercules; the Ambassadors replying that he
should perform that better in the old Town of Tire, and in the more ancient
Church, and desiring withal that he would forbear to enter into their new City;
Alexander was so incensed at it, that he threatened utterly to destroy their
City: and immediately drawing his Army to the Island, he was not less resolutely
received by the Tyrians through the confidence they had of being assisted by
the Carthaginians. The example also of Dido did confirm them in their
resolution, who, Carthage being builded, were masters of the third part of the
World, thinking it dishonorable, if their women had more resolution to subdue
foreign Kingdoms, then they had to defend their own liberty: Those therefore
who were unfit for the service of the war being removed to Carthage, and the
aid of that City desired to be hastened, they were not long after taken by
treachery: After this he took Rhodes, Egypt, and Cilicia upon composition, and
was resolved to go to Jupiter-Hammon to ask counsel of him concerning the event
of things to come, and concerning his own Original; for his mother Olympias had
confessed to his Father Philip, that Alexander was not begotten by him, but by
a serpent of a vast extent and bulk. And Philip not long before his death, did
openly confess that Alexander was not his Son, and caused Olympias to be
divorced from him as being guilty of incontinence; Alexander therefore desiring
to know the divinity of his Original, and to deliver his Mother from Infamy,
did send some before him to suborn the Priests what answers they should give
unto him. Entering into the Temple, the Priests immediately did salure him as
the Son of Ammon; He being joyful of this his adoption by the God, did command
that he should be esteemed as his Father. After this he demanded, whether he
had taken full revenge on all the Murderers of his Father: It was answered,
That his Father could neither be killed nor die, but the revenge for King
Philip was fully performed. After this having propounded a third demand unto
them: It was answered, That both Victory in all wars, and the possession of all
Lands was granted to him. His Companions also were enjoined by the Priests to
worship him as a God, and not as a King. From hence he was possessed with a
strange insolence, and a wonderful pride of mind, being altogether estranged
from that familiarity which he had learned by the letters of the Grecians, and
the Institutions of the Macedons: being returned from Hammon, he builded
Alexandria, and commanded that a Col^ny of the Macedons should be the chief
Seat of Egypt.

Darius flying to Babylon, desired Alexander by letters, that he might have the
liberty to redeem the Captive Ladies, and promised him a vaste sum of money.
But Alexander returned answer, That to redeem those Captives, he must not only
have his money, but all his Empire. Not long after Darius did write again to
Alexander, and in his letter he offered him the marriage of his Daughter, and a
great part of the Empire; but Alexander did write back unto him, that he gave
him but that which was his own before, and commanded him to come as a Suppliant
to him, and to permit the Conqueror to dispose of the Kingdom at his own
pleasure. Wherefore having abandoned all hope of peace, Darius did prepare
again for the war, and advanced against Alexander with four hundred thousand
foot, and one hundred thousand horse. In his march he was informed that his
Wife was dead in her extremity of pain by an abortive birth, and that Alexander
did lament her death, and assisted at her burial, which civilities he used
toward her, not out of the heat of vain love, but the obligations of humanity;
for he was assured that Alexander did never see her but once, when he
oftentimes repaired to comfort his Mother and his Daughters; Darius then
confessing that he was truly conquered, when after so many battles his Enemy in
courtesies did overcome him, and that it should not be altogether unpleasing to
him if he could not be victorious, especially when he was conquered by such an
Enemy, did write the third time unto Alexander, and gave him thanks for his
civil respects unto his Family, and offered him his other Daughter to Wife, and
the greater part of his Kingdom, even to the River of Euphrates, and thirty
thousand talents for the other Captives. Alexander returned answer, That the
giving thanks of an Enemy was superflucus, neither had he done any thing in
flatto^y of him, or in the distrust of the event of the war, or to complement
for conditions of peace, but out of the greatness of his mind by which he had
learned to contend against the Forces, but not the calamities of his Enemies:
He promised that he would allow the same Grants to Darius, if he would be his
Second and not his Equal: But as the World could not be governed by two Suns,
no more could it endure the Government of two such great Empires in a safe
condition: Therefore he should come, he said, and make a surrender of himself
on that present day, or prepare for the battle on the next* nor promise to
himself any other fortune then of what before he had the experience.

On the next day, their Armies stood both in battel-array; Immediately before
the fight began, a deep sleep invaded Alexander, possessed with too much care,
who being only wanting in the battle, he was with much ado awakned by
Parmenio: All men demanding the cause of so sound asleep in such apparent
danger, when in his greatest leisures he was always moderate of it; He made
answer, that being delivered from a great sear, the suddenness of his security
was the occasion of it, for he might now fight at once with all the Forces of
Darius, being afraid before that the wars would be delayed if the Persians
should have divided their Army. Before the battle did begin both the Armies
made a stand, and did look on one another. The Macedons did wonder at the
multitudes of their Enemies, at the greatness of their bodies, and the beauty
of their Armor: The Persians were amazed that so many thousand of their
Soldiers had so often by so few been overcome. The two Kings did ride round
ab^ut their Armies; Darius assured his, that if the division were made
throughout his Army, he had ten men in arms to fight against but one of his
Enemies. Alexander admonished the Macedonians not to be troubled with the
multitudes of their Enemies, nor with the greatness of their bodies, or the
novelty of the complexion of their Arms: he commanded them only to remember
that this is the third time they fought with them, and so consider that they
were become never the better men by their so often flying away, but carried
always with them the sad remembrance of their former overthrows, and of so
much blood they had lost before in the two other battles; He assured them that
as Darius did exceed in men, so did he in strength: He persuaded them to
despise that Army shining with gold and silver, in which there was more booty
then danger; the Victory being not to be purchased by the glittering of
ornaments, but by the edge of the sword.

After this both Armies were joined in battle; The Macedons in contempt of the
Enemy so often overcome, did throw themselves upon the swords of the Persians.
And the Persians desired rather manfully to die then to be overcome* seldom
more blood in any fight was shed. Darius when he saw his Army overthrown, would
willingly have dyed himself: But those who stood next unto him did compel him
to fly: Some persuading him to break down the Bridge of the River of Cydnus to
stop the passage of his Enemies; he made answer, That he would not so
dishonourably provide for his own safety by exposing so many thousands of his
Soldiers to the fury of their Enemies, and that the same way of flight was to
he open to others, which lay open to himself. Alexander in his own person was
always present in the greatest difficulties, and where he saw his Enemies on
their thickest squadrons to fight most bravely, he clapped in upon them, and
would have all the dangers to be wholly his own and not his Soldiers. In this
battle h^ gained unto himself the whole Empire of Asia in the fifth year of his
reign, and so great was his felicity, that after this no man durst to rebel;
and the Persians after the Empire which continued so many years did patiently
endure the yoke of servitude. His Soldiers being rewarded and refreshed, so
great was the booty, that it took up forty days to receive the full account of
it; he found hid in the City eleven thousand Talents: After this, he took
Persepolis the chief Seat of the Persian Empire, a City renowned for many
years, and full of the spoils of the World, which first appeared at the
destruction of it.

As those things thus passed, eight hundred Greeks did come unto him, who with
dismembered bod^es did endure the punishment of their Captivity, beseeching him
that as he had delivered Greece, so he would deliver them also from the cruelty
of their Enemies. The King having granted them leave to return to their own
Country, they made choice to be seated rather in a plantation abroad, least in
the stead of joy, they should present unto their Parents the lamentable and
loathed spectacle of themselves. In the mean time, Darius to purchase favor of
the Conqueror, was bound by his knismen in golden chains in a Town of the
Parthians called Tancas. I believe the immortal gods, so ordained it, that the
Empire of the Persians should have its end in their Land who were afterward to
succeed in the Government. Alexander pursuing the chase in a full gallop came
to the same Town on the next day. He there understood that Darius in a close
wagon was carried away by night; his Army therefore being commanded to follow,
he pursued him with only seven thousand horse, and in the way had many and
dangerous encounters; And having in the chase numbered many miles, when he could
not receive the least notice of Darius, he respited a little to breathe and
bait his horses. As one of his Souldies did go unto the next spring, he found
Darius bleeding through many wounds, but yet alive; whereupon he made use of
his Captive to be his Interpreter, whom when Darius found by his voice to be a
Persian, he said that this brought some comfort to him in his present
misfortunes, that he should speak to one who understood him, and should not in
vain breathe forth his last words. He desired that it might be represented to
Alexander that he dyed much in his debt; being obliged to him for many favors,
having never the happiness to return any; he was much to thank him that he
deported himself toward his Mother and his children, not like an Enemy, but a
King; and was more happy in his Adversary, then in his own kindred; for the
lives of his Mother and his children were given to them (he said) by his
Ennemy, but his life was taken away by his kinsmen to whom he had given both
life and Kingdoms, for which he should receive that recompense, which he being
a Conqueror should be pleased himself to take; All the thankfulness which he
being a dying man could return unto him, was to beseech the powers above, and
the powers below, and the gods that dispose of Scepters, that they would grant
him the Empire of all the World; For himself he desired to have rather a solemn
then a sumptuous Funeral. As for what pertained to the Revenger of his death,
it ought he said to be made Exemplar, it being not only Alexanders but the
common cause of all Kings, which to neglect, would be as dishonorable as it
were dangerous; for as in one, the Example of his justice, so in the other, the
cause of his futu^e safety would be declared; for the performance of which he
gave his right hand, the only pledge of the Faith of a King.

Having spoken these word^ and stretched forth his hands he dyed; which when it
was reported unto Alexander, having beheld him, he with tears prosecuted his
death so unworthy of that height wherein he lived; and commanded that his body
should be buried after the manner of their Kings, and be carried to the Tombs
of his Predecessors.

THE TWELFTH BOOK OF IVSTINE.
ALexander after this with great Funeral expenses did honor those Soldiers
whom he lost in the pursuit of Darius, and divided fifteen thousand Talents
amongst their fellows who did accompany him in that Expedition. The greatest
part of their horses were lost by the excessive heat, and those which remained
alive made unserviceable. The treasure consisting of one hundred and three and
fifty thousand Talents, was brought all into one Exchequer, and Parmenio was
made Chancellor of it. In the mean time Letters were received from Antipater in
Macedonia, in which the war of Agis King of the Lacedaemonians in Greece, the
war of Alexander (King of Epirus) in Italy, and the war of Zopyron his
Lieutenant in Scythia were contained, with which news he was diversely affected,
but received more joy by the death of the two Kings that did emulate his glory,
then he expressed grief for the loss of Zopyron with his Army: For after the
departure of Alexander, almost all Greece, taking advantage of his absence, did
combine to take Arms for the recovery of their liberty; In which they followed
the authority of the Lacedaemonians, who alone despised the peace with Philip
and Alexander, and refused the conditions of it. The General of this war was
Agis King of the Lacedaemonians; which insurrection Antipater, having drawn his
forces together, did suppress in the very beginning of it. The slaughter
howsoever was great on both sides: Agis when he beheld his Soldiers to turn
their backs, having cleared himself of his Guard, that he might be equal to
Alexander, though not in fortune, yet in courage, did make so great a slaughter
of his Enemies, that sometimes he drove whole Troops of them before him: At the
last, though he was overborn by the multitude, yet he overcame them all in
glory. And Alexander King of Epirus being called into Italy by the Tarentines,
desiring aid against the Brutians, did march with so much resolution, that if
in the division of the world, the West by lot had fallen to him, and the East
to Alexander the Son of Olympias his sister, he might have found no less a
subject of glory, in Italy, Africa, and in Sicily, then the other in Asia, and
amongst the Persians. To this may be added, that as the Oracles at Delphos did
fore-warn Alexander the Great of treachery in Macedonia; so he was advised by
Jupiter of Dodona to take heed of the City of Pandosia and of the Acherusian
River, which being both in Epirus, he being ignorant that they were both in
Italy also, did more readily undertake a foreign war to decline the danger
which was threatened by the destinies as he conceived at Rome.

Being advanced in Italy, he first of all made war with the Apulians; the fate
of whose City being understood, he not long after made peace and friendship
with their King. At that time Brundusium was the City of the Apulians, which
the Aetolians (following the Conduct of their Captain Dio medes, renowned for
his achievements at the siege of Troy) did build. But being forced away by the
Apulians, it was told them by the Oracle, that perpetually they should possess
the place which they first found out, wherefore by their Ambassadors they
demanded of the Apulians, that their City should be restored to them* and
threatened to bring a war upon them, if they should detain it. But the Apulians
having notice of the Oracle, did put the Ambassadors to death, and did bury
them in their City, to have there their perpetual residence. And being thus
discharged of the Oracle, they for a long time did possess the City, which when
Alexander of Epirus understood, in reverence to the Antiquity of the place, he
did abstain from making war upon the Apulians: But he made war against the
Brutians and Lucanians, and took many of their Cities; afterward he made peace
with the Metapontinians, the Rutilians, and the Romans. But the Brutians and
Lucanians having the assistance of their Neighbors, did renew the war with
greater courage, in which the King near unto the City of Pandosia and the River
Acheron was killed, the name of the fatal place being not known until he fell;
and dying* he understood that the danger of death was not in his own Country,
for the fear of which he did ^^e his Country. The Tyrians having at the
public charge redeemed his Body, did commit it unto Burial. Whiles those
things were done in Italy, Zopyron, who was made Lieutenant of Pontus by
Alexander the Great, conceiving himself to be but as an idle person, if he
should do nothing memorable himself, having drawn together an Army of thirty
thousand men, did make war upon the Soythians: being slain with all his Army,
he suffered for the rashness of making wars on that innocent Nation: When these
things were brought to Alexander in Parthia, having dissembled a sorrow for the
death of Alexander his kinsman King of Epirus, he commanded his Army to
quarters for the space of three days; And all men suggesting to themselves,
that in Darius death the war was ended, and expecting now a speedy return into
their own Country, and in their imagination already embracing their wives and
children, Alexander did call them forth to a general convention, and declared
unto them, that nothing was as yet achieved by so many famous battles, if the
more Eastern Enemies should remain untouched; neither did he make war for the
body, but the Empire of Darius; those he said were to be pursued who fled away
and revolted from him. Having with his speech given new heat to the courage of
his Soldiers, he subdued the Mardians and Hercanians. In that place Thalestris
or Minothaeae Queen of the Amazons did address her self unto him with three
hundred thousand women, having traveled* five and twenty days through most
hostile Nations, to have Issue by him; her countenance and the cause of her
coming was the subject of much wonder, both for the strangeness of her habit,
and the strangeness of her desire; To satisfy which, the King took the leisure
of thirty days, and when she thought that her womb was pregnant, she departed.
After this Alexander assumed the habit and the diadem of the Kings of Persia,
before unused by the Kings of Macedon, as if he had translated himself into the
customs and fashions of those whom he had overcome; which, that it might not
more enviously be beheld in him alone, he commanded his friends also to take
unto them the long robe of gold and purple. And that he might imitate as well
their riot as their habit, he divided the nights by turns amongst the flocks of
his Concubines, as remarkable for their birth as for their beauty, to which he
added, the magnificence of banquets, least his luxury should not seem complete.
And according to the vanity of royal pomp, he made his Feasts more delightful
with Enterludes, being altogether unmindful that so great wealth with such
profuseness is accustomed to be consumed and not enlarged. Amongst these things
great was the Indignation of all, over all the Camp, that he so degenerated
from his Father Philip, that he cared not for the name of his own Country, and
followed the dissoluteness of the Persians* whom for such dissoluteness he
overcame; and that he might not only seem to addict himself to the vices of
those whom with arms he had subdued, he permitted his Soldiers to marry those
female Captives, to whom they had indeared themselves: politickly conceiving
that having in their Tents a representation of their houses and Families at
home, the labor of the war would be both more pleasant by the company of their
wives; and their desires to return into their Countries, would be more
moderate: And that Macedonia also should be less exhausted with recruits, if
young Soldiers should succeed in their old Fathers places, and fight in the
same works in which they were born, being likely to be more constant upon duty,
exercising not only their youth and childhood, but having their cradles also
rocked in the Camp. This Custom remained afterward amongst the Successors of
Alexander, and maintenance was provided for the Infants, and Instruments for
the making of Arms, and the furniture for horse were given them to practice on,
when they were but young; and their Fathers had allowances appointed them
according to the number of their children, and if their Fathers dyed,
nevertheless the children had the pensions of their Father, their Infancy
amongst so many Expeditions being as a continual war-fare. Therefore from their
minority being enured to labor and to dangers, their Armies were
unconquerable; for they thought no otherwise of their Tents then of their
Country, and that an encounter was always nothing else but Victory.

This is that offspring which were called Epigoni: The Parthians being
overcome, Andragoras one of the most noble of the Persians was made Governor of
them, from whom the Kings of Parthia did afterward derive their Original. In
the mean time, Alexander did begin to exercise his rage on his own men, not
like a King, but like an Enemy: Nothing more incensed him then that he was
upbraided by them, that he had subverted the Customs of his Father Philip, and
of his own Country, for which offense old Parmenio next unto the King in
Dignity, and his Son Philotas (being questioned for other pretenses) were both
put to death. On this there did arise a murmur over all the Camp, in compassion
of the condition of the innocent old man and of his Son, and sometimes they
were heard to speak, that they could not hope for any better themselves; which
when it was reported unto Alexander, fearing least the same reproach should be
divulged in Macedonia, and that the glory of his Victories should be eclipsed
by the ignomy of his cruelty, he dissembled that he would send some of his
friends into his own Country* who should be the Messengers of his Conquests. He
desired the Soldiers to write freely unto their friends, being but seldom to
enjoy such an apportunity again, by reason of the more distant remoteness of
the war. This being done, he commanded the packet to be brought privately unto
him, by which having discovered what every* one thought of him, he reduced them
who had written to their friends more hardly of him into one Company, either
with an intent to destroy them, or to distribute them into Colonies in the
furthest parts of the world. After this he subdued the Dracans, Evergetans,
Parimans, Paropamissidans, Hydaspians, and the other Nations which live at the
foot of Caucasus. In the mean time Bessus, one of the friends of Darius was
brought bound in chains, who had not only betrayed, but also killed the King,
whom Alexander delivered to the brother of Darius to be tormented, in revenge
of his treason, thinking Darius was not so much his Enemy as he had been a
friend to him by whom he was slain: And that he might give a name to those
Lands, he builded the City of Alexandria on the River of Tanaia, within
seventeen days having made a Wall about it six miles in compass, and
translated thither the people of three Cities which Cyrus had erected. He
builded also twelve Cities amongst the Bactrians and the Sogdians, having
distributed amongst them whomsoever he found to be seditious in his Army. After
this, upon a holy day, he called his friends together to a banquet, where
mention being made by them in their wine, of the deeds performed by Philip,
Alexander preferred himself above his Father, and extolled unto the Skies the
greatness of his own achievements, the greatest parts of his Guests assenting
to him: Therefore when Clytus one of the old men tempted by the confidence of
his friendship with the King, did advance the memory of Philip and the battles
which he fought, he so inflamed Alexander, that a spear being snatched from one
of the Guard, he killed him at the banquet, and insulting over him, he objected
to him, being dead, how bravely he defended his Father Philip, and how highly
he praised his wars. After his passion was blown over, and he was satisfied
with his blood, and the consideration of his reputation succeeded into the room
of his anger, pondering with himself sometimes the person of him who was slain,
and sometimes the cause of his being slain, he began to repent of what he had
done, and that he gave so discontented an ear to the praises of his Father,
which he ought not to have given to his reproaches, and lamented that his old
friend, and his innocent one was slain by him, being full of wine and supper,
and by the same fury being hurryed into repentance, as he was into passion, he
would have killed himself: Melting into tears, he did embrace the body of the
dead, he did handle his wounds, and did confess his madness to him, as if he
had heard him, and taking the spear again into his hand, he turned the point of
it to himself, and had done a thorough execution with it, if his friends had
not prevented him; this resolution to die continued with him certain days
afterward. The remembrance of his Nurse, sister unto Clytus, was an addition
to his repentance, for whom being absent, he was greatly ashamed that he
returned her so foul a recompense for the nourishments she had given him, and
that being a young man and a Conqueror, he should with Funerals requite her in
whose arms he was bred up. He then considered what reports, what disgrace he
had by this violent act pulled upon himself, not only in his Army, but amongst
the conquered Nations, how much fear and hatred he had cotracted amongst his
friends, how sad he had made his Feast, sitting more terrible at his banquet
with his friends, then armed in face of his Enemies. Then Parmenio and
Philotas, then Amyntas his kinsman, then his Stepmother and his Bothers being
killed, then Attalus, Eurilochus and Pausanias, and others of the slaughtered
Princes of Macedonia, did present themselves unto his memory. For this he four
days persevered in an abstinence from all meat, until at last he was entreated
by the prayers of all the Army, desiring that he would not lament so much the
death of one, as to destroy them all, nor forsake them whom he had brought into
the furthest part of the East amongst barbarous and cruel Nations, and provoked
by the war. The persuasions of Calisthenes, the Philosopher, did prevail much
upon him, who was his familiar acquaintance, and bred up with him in the School
of Aristotle, and was at that time sent for by him to commit his Deeds to
History.

Having therefore called back his mind to the war, he took into his protection
the Dracons and Chorasmians, who did submit unto him; Not long after, to make
himself yet more hateful, he commanded that he should not only be worshipped,
but adored, which was the only thing he had forborne in the proud imitation of
the Persian Kings. Calisthenes was the most sharp and resolute of all that did
contradict it, which brought a destruction both on him and many others of the
Princes of the Macedons, for they were all put to death under the pretense of
treason. Netheless the Macedons would not admit of adoration, but only
retained the Custom of saluting their King: After this he marched into India to
bound his Empire with the Ocean and the farthest East, to which glory, that the
ornaments of his Army might be agreeable, he covered with silver the trappings
of their horses, and the arms of his Soldiers, and from their silver bucklers
he called his Army Argyraspidae. When he came unto the City of Nysa, the
Inhabitants not resisting him by reason of their religious confidence in the
assistance of their god Bacchus, by whom that City was builded, he commanded
that it should be spared, being glad that he followed not only the Militia,
but the foot*steps of the god.

After this he did lead his Army to the sight of the holy Hill, which was
clothed with Vines and lvie, the goods of Nature, and that so elegantly, as if
it had been adorned by the art and industry of the hand of the Planter. But his
Army was no sooner marched to the Hill, but transported with a sudden rapture,
they did by instinct break forth into the sacred ululations of the God, and to
the amazement of the King, did run up and down without any prejudice, that he
might understand that by sparing the Inhabitants, he provided as well for his
Army as for them.

From thence he marched to the Hills of Dodalus, and to the Kingdom of Queen
Cleophis, who having yielded her self unto him, she received back her Kingdom,
having redeemed it by granting him the use of her body; obtaining that by
wantonness which she could never have purchased by the force of arms; She
called her son Alexander, who was begotten by him, who afterward enjoyed the
Kingdom of the Indians. Queen Cleophis by reason of this violation of her
chastity was afterward called by the Indians, The royal Whore. Having marched
almost through India, when he came to a Rock as wonderful in its bigness, as in
the difficulty of its ascent, into which many Nations fled, he understood that
Hercules was by an Earthquak prohibited from the taking of it. Being therefore
transported with a desire to overcome the Acts and Labors of Hercules, with
infinite difficulty and danger, he became master of it, and took into his
protection all the Nations in that place. One of the Kings of the Indians was
called Porus, as admirable by the strength of his body, as by the greatness of
his mind, who having understood before of the advance of Alexander, had
prepared an Army to entertain him. The battles being joined, he commanded his
Army to invade the Macedons, and demanded for their King, being resolved as a
private Enemy to fight with him hand to hand; Alexander made no delay to answer
him, and in the first encounter having fallen headlong to the ground, his
horse being killed under him, he was preserved by the concourse of his Guard.
Porus being almost covered with blood from many wounds which he received, was
taken Prisoner, and with such indignation grieved that he was overcome, that
after his Enemy had given him quarter, he would neither take any sustenance,
nor suffer his wounds to be dressed, and with much difficulty was persuaded to
be contented to live.

Alexander in the honor of his valor, did send him back safe into his own
Kingdom: He erected there two Cities, one called Nicaea, the other Bucephale,
after the name of his horse: After that having overthrown their Armies, he took
the Adrestrians, Strathenians, Passidams, and Gangaritans; when he came to the
Euphites where they attended his coming with an Army of two hundred thousand
horse, all his Army being tired as well by the numbers of their Victories as by
their labors did beseech him with tears, that he would put at last a period to
the war, and once think upon a return into his Country; they besought him to
look upon the years of his Soldiers whose age would scarce suffice to their
return; some showed him their gray hairs, some their wounds, some their bodies
consumed with sickness, and some their bodies with the loss of blood. They
only (they said) were the men who enduced the continual war-fare of two Kings,
Philip and Alexander: They did entreat him that he would restore their Relicts
and what was left of them to the graves of their Fathers, there being no defect
in their zeal, but in their age: Howsoever, if he would not spare his
Soldiers, that he would spare himself, and not weary his good Fortune by too
much oppressing it; Being moved with these so just entreaties he commanded his
Camp (as to give an end to his Victories) to be made more magnificent then was
usual, that by the large extents thereof, both the Enemy should be terrified,
and an admiration of him should be left unto posterity. His Soldiers did never
undertake any work more readily; and their adjacent Enemies being slain with a
great joy they returned unto them.

From thence he marched to the River Acesines on which he sailed to the Ocean;
The Gesonae there and the Asybians (two Nations of whom Hercules was the
Founder) did submit unto him; from thence he sailed to the Ambrians and
Sycambrians, which Nations with fourscore thousand armed foot, and threescore
thousand horse were ready to receive him; Having overthrown them in battle he
did lead his Army to their City, and being himself the first man that scaled
the Walls, when he found the City to be abandoned by its Defendants, he leaped
down without any Guard into it; The Enemy when they did behold him alone, with
a great shout from every place ran toward him, to try if in one man they could
end the wars of the World, and give a revenge to so many Nations. Alexander did
as resolutely resist them, and did fight alone against so many thousands: It is
incredible to be spoken, that not the multitude of his Enemies, nor the pointed
force of their weapons, nor the cries and shouts they made provoking one
another could any ways affright him; he alone did kill and put to flight so
many thousands of them; but when he perceived that he began to be over-powred
by their numbers, he applied himself to the body of a Tree that stood close
unto the Wall, by which defense he along time did sustain their multitudes: His
friends at length (the danger being understood) did leap down unto him, of
which many were slain, and the battles continued doubtful until all his Army
(the Walls being thrown down) did come to his assistance: In this fight being
shot with an arrow under the breast, he fainted* through the loss of blood, yet
he fought so long with one knee on the ground until he had killed him who
wounded him. The cure of the wound was more grievous then the wound it self;
but being at last restored from almost a desperation of recovery, he sent
Polipercon with his Army unto Babylon. He himself with a selected number of
Soldiers did go aboard his Fleet to make some discovery on the Ocean. When he
landed at the City of King Ambigerus, the Inhabitants understanding that he was
not to be overcome by the sword, did arm their Darts with poison, and with a
double wound of death, forcing their Enemies to retreat from their Walls, they
killed many of them. When amongst others, Ptolomy was deadly wounded, and was
even ready to expire, an herb was shown to the King in his sleep as a remedy
for the poison; which being found out and steeped in Ptolomys drinck, he was
suddenly delivered from the danger, and by this remedy the greater part of the
Army was preserved. The City being taken, he returned to his ships and
sacrificed to the Ocean, imploring a happy return into his Country; And (as a
Chariot driven about the gole) having put bounds unto his Empire, where the
creeks, or the solitudes of the Land did suffer him to pass, or the Sea was
navigable, he was at last brought by a favorable tide into the mouth of the
River of Indus. There as a Monument of what he had done, he builded the City of
Barce, and erected Altars, having left one of his friends as his Lieutenant
over the Maritine Indians: Being afterward to march altogether by Land, having
understood that the places were dry, about the middle of his way he caused
Wells to be dug, and great store of fresh water being found he came to
Babylon. Many of the conquered Nations did there by their Ambassadors accuse
his Lieutenants, whom Alexander without any respect of friendship did cause to
be put to death in the sight of the Ambassadors. After this he took to marriage
Statyra the daughter of King Darius, and gave in marriage to the Princes of the
Macedons the most noble of the Virgins chosen cut of all Nations, that by the
community of the fact, the fault of the King might appear the less. He then
called his Army together, and promised at his own charges to pay all their
debts, that entirely they might carry home with them both their booty and their
pay. This munificence was remarkable, not only for the sum but for the ground
of the Gift, nor was it more grateful to the Debtors then to the Credit^rs,
because the exaction as well as the solution was of equal difficulty to them
both: Three and twenty thousand Talents were laid forth in this largess. The
old Soldiers being dismissed, he supplied his Army with those of younger age,
who being retained did murmur at the departure of the old Soldiers, and
demanded to be discharged themselves; they required that Alexander would not
number their years but their pay unto them; and being chosen into the same war
with old Soldiers, they thought it just they should be disobliged of their
oath with them; at last they turned their entreaties to reproaches, and told
him since he had so great a mind to it, he should end the wars alone with his
Father Hammon. Alexander on the other side, sometimes did chastise his
Soldiers, sometimes he did persuade them that they would not with seditions
clow'd the glory of their warfare. At the last, when he found that he prevailed
nothing by words, he leaped unarmed from the tribunal amongst the armed
multitude, to apprehend the authors of the sedition, and no man opposing him,
he with his own hand took twelve of them and hurried them to punishment; either
the fear of the King did give them so great a patience to die, or the
Discipline of the war did give the King so great a constancy to exact
punishment of them. After this, having called the Auxiliaries of the Persians
to convention by themselves, he extolled their perpetual fidelity, both toward
himself and toward their former Kings: He made mention of his benefits to
them, and that he never did deport himself toward them as being conquered, but
rather as the Companions of his Conquests; lastly, that he transposed himself
into their manners and fashions, and not they into the manners of his Country,
and that the Conquerors did mingle in marriage and affinity with the conquered;
He declared that he was now resolved to commit the Custody of his Body not to
the Macedons only but to them; And accordingly he chose out of their young men
one thousand of them to be in the number of his Guard; he mingled also a party
of the Persian Auxiliaries with his own Army to inure themselves to the
Discipline of the Macedons, which the Macedons took much to heart, alleging
that the Enemies of the King were overcome by him for their own advantage. Then
they all weeping did repair unto him, and besought him that he would rather
satisfy himself with their punishments then with their ignominy. By which
modesty they prevailed so much upon him, that he dis-authorized eleven thousand
of the ancient Soldiers. Of his old friends there were dismissed Polypercon,
and Clytus, Gorgias, Polydamas, and Antigonus. In their return, Craterus was
appointed to be their chief, who was also to be the Kings Lieutenant in
Macedonia in the place of Antipater, who was called out of Macedonia to bring
some Recruits unto the Army and to be in the place of Craterus: Their pay was
given to them in their return, as if they had continned still in the Army.

Whiles these things were thus managed, Ephestion dyed, one of the Kings
friends, and most deer unto him both by the endowments of his beauty, and by
the obsequiousness of his youth, whom Alexander contrary to the dignity of a
King, did a long time lament, and erected him a Tomb on which he laid forth
twelve thousand Talents, and commanded after he was dead, that he should be
worshipped as a god.

Returning to Babylon from the furthest shores of the Ocean, he was informed
that Ambassadors from Carthage and other Cities of Africa, as also from Spain,
Sicily, France and Sardinia, and from diverse Cities of Italy, did attend his
arrival. The terror of his name had so possessed the whole World, that all
Nations submitted to him as to their destined King: For this cause approaching
to Babylon to keep as it were a Parliament of the World, some of the Magicians
did advise him not to enter into the City, affirming that it would be fatal to
him: wherefore Babylon being omited, he turned aside to Byrsia an unpeopled
City, on the other side of Euphrates; He was there importuned by Anaxarchus the
Philosopher to despise again the presages of the Magicians as things false and
uncertain, and unknown to men if proceeding from the Fates, or if from Nature,
not to be prevented. Being returned therefore to Babylon, after the leisures of
many days, he again prepared a solemn Feast, which sometimes before he had
intermitted, where having devoted himself altogether to mirth, in the excess of
drinking he added night unto the day: Thessalius Medius afterward to a new
Bower did invite both him and his Companions; having taken the Cup into his
hand, in the middle of his draught he groaned as if he had been struck through
with a sword, and being carried half dead from the Banquet, he was tormented
with so great a pain, that to free himself of it, he demanded for a sword, and
his body became so extremely tender, that he complained at the touches of his
friends, as if he had received so many wounds. His friends divulged the cause
of his disease to be a distemper by the excess of wine, when indeed it was
treason, the infamy whereof the powerfulness of his Successors did suppress.
The Author of the Treason was Antipater, who when he beheld the dearest of his
friends commanded to death, his Son-in-law Alexander Lycestos slain, and
himself having done considerable service in Greece, not respected only, but
also made distastful to the King, and morever accused by his Mother Olympias
for diverse insolences: when he considered also some few days before, what
were the punishments which the Lieutenants of the conquered Nations too cruelly
endured, and conjectured that he himself was called out of Macedonia, not to
the society of the war but to be a partaker of their punishment; therefore to
make sure work with the King, he with poison suborned his Son Cassander, who
with his brother Philip and Jolla were accustomed to minister unto him; So
great was the strength of this poison, that it could not be contained either in
Iron or in Brass, or in any shell, and could no way be carried, but in the hoof
of an horse. Cassander was instructed that he should not commit the trust of it
unto any but to Thessalus and his brothers. For this cause therefore the Feast
was prepared and renewed in the house of Thessalus. Philip and Jollas, who were
accustomed to take an assay of the Kings Cup, had the poison ready in cold
water, and having tasted of the wine they put the poison afterward into it.
Four days afterward, Alexander finding that death undoubtedly was approaching,
he said, that he acknowledged the fate of the Family of his Ancestors (most of
the Aeacidans dying about the thirtieth year of their age:) After this he
pacified the Soldiers growing into tumults, and suspecting that he perished by
treason, and being brought into the highest and the most conspicuous place of
the City, he did admit them all into his presence, and gave them his right hand
to kiss. When they all wept, he was seen to be not only without tears himself,
but without the least show of a troubled mind, and comforted some who
impatiently did lament; he gave to others his instructions to deliver from him
to their Parents; so invincible was his courage now against death, as it was
before against his Enemies. The Soldiers being dismissed, he demanded of his
friends who stood round about him, if they thought they should find another
King that was like unto him? they all holding their peace, he said, that as he
himself was ignorant of that, so he was confident of this, and did presage it,
and did almost with his eyes behold how much blood Macedonia should lose in
this contention, and with how many slaughters she would parentate to him being
dead: At the last, he commanded his body to be burryed in the Temple of Hammon.
When his friends beheld him to faint away, they demanded whom he would make
heir of his Empire? he made answer, The most worthy. So great was the magnitude
of his mind, that when he had left behind him his Son Hercules, his brother
Aridaeus, and his wife Roxane great with child, forgetting those obligations,
he did nominate the most worthy to be his heir; as if it were a sin, that any
but a valiant man should succeed a valiant man, or the wealth of so great an
Empire should be left to any but to approved resolutions: With these words as
if he had sounded into his friends ears a charge unto the battle, or had sent
the evil spirit of discord amongst them, they all grew immediately jealous of
one another, and in a popular ambition, did all tacitly seek the favor of the
Soldiers. On the sixth day, being speechless, having taken his Ring from his
finger he delivered it to Perdicas, which for the present did pacify a little
the growing dissension of his friends; for although he was not named Heir by
voice, yet by choice he seemed to be elected. Alexander deceased being three
and thirty years of age and one month, a man endued with a mightiness of spirit
above the capacity of men. On that night when his Mother Olympias did conceive
him, she seemed in her sleep to have commerce with a great Serpent, neither was
she deceived in her dream, which by God was presented to her; for undoubtedly
she had in her womb a burden above the condition of mortality; and although the
generation of the Aeacidans from the first memory of Ages, and the Kingdoms of
her Father, brother, and husband, and of her Ancestors before them, did render
his mother most illustrious, yet she was not more famous by any Title, then by
the name of her Son. There appeared also many presages of his greatness on the
day of his birth; for two Eagles flying all that day round about the place, did
perch at last upon the Battlements of his Fathers Court, prognosticating unto
him, the two Empires of Europe and Asia, and on the same day his Father
received the glad tidings of two Victories, the one in Illyria, and the other
in the Olympic race, to which places he sent some Chariots drawn all with four
horses, which portented to the Infant the victory of the whole World. He was of
an admirable apprehension in the study of letters, and having passed his
minority, he for the space of five years had his education under Aristotle, the
most excellent of all the Philosophers. Being invested in his Fathers Kingdom,
he commanded that in his Title he should be called King of all Lands and Lord
of the World. So great a confidence had his Soldiers in him that he being
present they feared not, though unarmed, the arms of any Enemy. He therefore
never encountered any Enemy whom he did not overcome, nor besieged any City
which he did not take, nor invaded any Nation over whom he did not triumph. At
the last, he was overcome not by any prowess of the Enemy but by Treason and
the Civil fraud of his own Subjects.

THE Thirteenth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
ALexander the Great being deceased in the flower of his Age and the height of
his Victories, a sad silence there was over all Babylon and over all men. The
conquered and barbarous Nations would not believe the report, who believed him
to be as immortal as he was invincible; They called to mind how often he had
been plucked from sudden death, how often his sword being broke, and his buckler
slipped from his hand, he on a sudden presented himself to his Soldiers not
only safe but a Conqueror. But as soon as it was believed that he was dead,
all the barbarous Nations, whom not long before he overcame, did leave him not
as an Enemy but a Father. The mother also of Darius (who her son being lost,
yet repented not by the indulgence of the Conqueror that she lived that day,
although reduced from the height of Majesty into Captivity) having heard of the
death of Alexander, she wilfully ended her own life, not that she preferred an
Enemy above her Son, but because she found the piety of a Son in him whom she
had feared as an Enemy. On the other side the Macedons did rejoice as if they
had lost rather an Enemy then a Citizen and a King of so great a Majesty,
condemning his great severity, and the daily dangers of the war. To this you
may add that the Princes looked after the Sovereignty of command, the common
Soldiers after the treasure and the heavy and great weight of gold as an
unexpected booty, those bending their thoughts to the succession of his
Kingdom, and these to the inheritance of his riches; for you are to understand
that there was in the treasury one hundred thousand, and in the office of the
yearly revenews by tributes three hundred thousand Talents; But the friends of
Alexander did not undeservedly expect the Kingdom; for they were of that virtue
and veneration that you would have believed every one of them to be a King,
such a graceful beauty of countenance, such a tall streightness of body, such a
greatness and vigor of strength and wisdom were in them all, that they who did
not know them, would have judged them not to be selected out of one people, but
out of all the Nations in the Earth. For never Macedonia before, nor any other
Nation did flourish in the production of such famous men, whom Philip first of
all, and after him Alexander did select with so much care, that they seemed not
so much to be chosen into the society of the war, as into the succession of the
Kingdom. Who would therefore wonder that the world should be conquered by such
ministrators, when the Army of the Macedons was governed rather by so many
Kings then Captains, who never had found any equal to them, if they had not
fallen out amongst themselves; and Macedonia in the room of one should have
had many Alexanders, if Fortune had not armed them by the emulation of their
virtue into their mutual destruction.

But Alexander being deceased, they were neither secure nor joyful, drawing
both their persons and competitions into one place, neither were the common
Soldiers less sollicitous, whose liberty was more dissolute, and whose favor
more uncertain: Their equality did increase their discord, not one of them all
so excelling another* that any one of them should submit unto him. Therefore
putting on their Arms, they came all unto the Court to form a new State
according to the emergency of the present affairs. Perdiccas was of judgment,
that they should attend the Issue of Roxanes womb, who being eight Months with
child, was almost ready to be delivered, and if she brought forth a Boy, that
he should be his Successor in the Kingdom. Meleager denied that the Counsels
ought to be delayed to the doubtful events of the birth of the child, neither
ought they to attend when Kings should be born unto them, when they might make
choice of those who were born already; for if they would have a child, there
was at Pergamus the Son of Alexander, begotten on Arsine; or if they would
rather have a young man, there was in the Camp Aridaeus the brother and
companion of Alexander, and most acceptable to all, though not in his own, yet
in the name and notion of Philip his Father. He alleged that Roxane received
her original from the Persians, neither was it lawful that Kings should be
derived to the Macedons from those whose Kingdoms they destroyed, and that
Alexander himself was against it, who dying made no mention of him. Ptolomy
refused Aridaeus to be King, not only by reason of his Mothers infamy, being
begot on Larissaea the Danceress, but also by reason of his own incapacity,
least he having the Title only, another should govern the Empire; it was
therefore better he said to make choice of those who in regard of their virtue
were next unto the King, who might govern the Provinces, and might command war
or peace, then to subject themselves to the command of unworthy men under the
pretense of a King.

The opinion of Perdiccas was approved by the consent of all: It was therefore
agreed upon, that they should attend until Roxane was delivered of her child,
and if it were a Male, that Leonatus, Perdiccas, Craterus and Antipater should
be his Guardians, and immediately they every one did take their oaths to
perform the office of a Guardian. When all the horsemen did the like, the foot
being offended, that they were not assumed into the participation of their
Counsels, did choose Aridaeus the brother of Alexander to be their King, and
did provide him with a Guard out of their own Companies, and commanded that he
should be called Philip after the name of his Father, which when it was
reporred unto the Horsemen, they sent two of the Nobility, Attalus and Meleager
to pacify their minds, who seeking a new power to themselves by a compliance
with the people, omitting their legation, did accord with them. On this the
sedition did increase, and it began now to have both head and Counsel. The foot
being all in arms did break into the Court to destroy their Cavalry, which
being understood, the Horse surprised with fear, did abandon the City, and
having encamped not far from it, the Foot themselves were startled at it. But
the contestation of the Nobility ceased not: Attalus did send to kill Perdiccas
who was Captain of the other party, to whom, being armed and out-daring them,
when the Executioner durst not approach, Perdiccas was of so great a
resolution, that of his own accord he came unto them, and admonished them to
look back upon the crime which they were about to commit, and consider against
whom they had taken arms, not Persians, but Macedons, not enemies, but
Citizens, and most of them their nearest kinsmen, certainly their fellow
Soldiers, and companions in the same Tents and dangers; it would be a gallant
spectacle he said unto their Enemies, who would rejoice in their mutual
slaughter, by whose arms they were overcome, and to see them with their own
blood to parentate to the ghosts of their Enemies whom they had slain. When
Perdiccas had spoken this according to that excellent eloquence which was
natural in him, he so prevailed upon the Footmen, that his Counsels being
approved, he was chosen General by them all. The Horse at the same time being
reduced into concord with the Footmen, did chose Aridaeus for their King* But a
portion of the Empire was reserved for the Son of Alexander, if a Son were born
unto him: When this was done, the dead body of Alexander was placed in the
midst of them, that the Majesty of it should be a witness to their Decrees:
These things being composed, Antipater was made Governor of Macedonia and of
Greece. The custody of the Treasure was committed to Craterus: The care of the
Army and of all Military affairs was assigned to Meleager and Perdiccas; And
Aridaeus was commanded to convey the body of Alexander unto the Temple of
Ammon. Perdiccas being incensed against the Authors of the sedition, did on a
sudden (his Colleague being ignorant of it) command that there should be a
lustrati^n of the Army for the death of the King; and having brought the Army
into the Field, all men agreeing to it, he privately commanded that the
seditious persons should be called out of every Band, and delivered to
punishment. Being returned, the Provinces were by him divided amongst the
Princes, that at once he might remove the Emulators, and make the allotments in
the Empire the benefit of his bounty. Egypt in the first place and a part of
Africa and Arabia did come by lot to Ptolomy, whom Alexander from an ordinary
Soldier had advanced for his Chivalry, Cleomenes, who builded Alexandria, was
commanded to deliver that Province to him: Laomedon the Mitylaenean received
Syria which bounded on it; Philotas with his Son received Cilicia and Illyria;
Acropatus was Governor of Media the greater, and Alcetes the brother of
Perdiccas was set over Media the less: Susia and the Not on thereabouts was
assigned to Synus; and Phrygia the greater was assigned to Antigonus the Son of
Philip: Learchus obtained Lycia and Pamphilia; Cassander was to command Caria,
and Menander Lydia; Thracia and the Countries n^er to the Pontick Sea were
given to Lysimachus, and Cappadocia and Paphlagonia to Eumenes.

The chief Tribunalship of the Camp was given to Seleuchus the Son of
Antiochus; Cassander the Son of Antipater was set over the Lifeguard of the
King: The former Lieutenants were retained in the further Bactria, and the
Kingdoms of India; but Taxiles commanded all betwixt the two Rivers Hydaspes
and Indus; Phiton the Son of Ag^nor was sent into the Colonies planted amongst
the Indians; Axiarches was to command the Parapomeni, and bounds of the
Moun^a^n Caucasus; Statanor was set over the Dracans and Argaeans, and Amyntas
the Bractrians; Sythaeus obtained the Sogdians, Nicanor the Parthians, Philip
the Hyrcanians, Phratafarnes the Armenians, Neoptolemus the Persians, Peucestes
the Babylonians, Arthous the Pelasgians, and Arche^ilaus the Mesopotamians.

This division of the Empire, which was as a fatal gift to every one, did prove
unto many a subject of great additions; for not long after as if they had
divided Kingdoms, and not Lieutenantships, being made Kings of Lieutenants,
they purchased great wealth for themselves, and dying, left it to their
posterity. When this was done in the East, the Athenians and Aetolians with all
their power did proceed in the war which they undertook Alexander being alive.
The occasion of the war was, That Alexander returning out of India did send
letters into Greece, by which the banished of all Cities were restored, those
only excepted who were guilty of murder. These Letters being read all Greece
being present at the Olympic Fair, a great combustion did arise, because many
of the banished men were driven from their Country, not by the Laws, but by the
faction of the Princes, who feared that being called back, they might grow more
powerful then themselves in the Commonwealth. Many Cities d^d therefore openly
murmur, and declared that their liberty was to be vindicated by war. The
Athenians and Aetolians were the chief sticklers in it: Which when it was
reported to Alexander, he commanded that a Fleet of one thousand ships should
be in readiness, with which he would prosecute war in the West, resolving with
a strong power to level Athens to the ground.

The Athenians therefore having drawn an Army together of thirty thousand
Soldiers, and two hundred ships, did make war against Antipater, who by lot
was Governor of Greece, and delaying the battle, and protecting himself within
the Walls of Heraclea, the Athenians did close besiege him. At the same time
Demosthenes the Athenian Orator, who was driven from his Country, being
condemned for bribery, having received a sum of gold from Harpalus, and who
fled from the cruelty of Alexander, having persuaded the City to war against
him, did lead a banished life at Megarae, who when he understood that the
Athenians had sent Hyperides their Ambassador to solicit the Pelopennensians
to join in war with them, having followed him to Syceon, he by his Eloquence
joined Arges, and Corinth, and other Cities to the Athenians: For which he was
called back from banishment, the Athenians having sent a ship to meet him in
the way. In the mean time, Antipater being besieged in Heraclea, Leosthenes the
Captain of the Athenians was slain with a dart from the Wall as he came to give
some directions in the Leaguer, which so encouraged Antipater, that he sallyed
forth and possessed himself of some of the works of the Enemies. After that, he
by his Ambassadors desired help of Leonatus, who when he marched to his
assistance, the Athenians meeting* him with a gallant Army, and having given
him battle on horseback, he received a grievous wound, of which he dyed:
Antipater, although he beheld his Auxiliaries were overcome, yet he in wardly
rejoiced at the death of Leonatus; for he gratulated himself that his emulator
was taken from him, and that the remainder of his fortes was come unto him:
Therefore with this addition to his Army, when he appeared to be equal to his
Enemy in strength, having raised the siege, he marched into Macedonia*
Whereupon the Forces of the Grecians, the Enemy being driven from their
Confines, did steal away into their own Cities: In the mean time, Perdiccas
having made an unjust war on Ariarathes the King of the Cappadocians, and being
Conqueror in the battle, did bring nothing from him but wounds and danger; for
the Cappadocians flying from the fight into the City, having slain their own
wives and children, did set their own houses on fire with all the Forces which
they had; and having brought thither all their wealth, they threw both it and
themselves into the flame, so that their Enemies, the Conquerors of them and
their Possessions, did enjoy nothing but only the spectacle of the fire. After
this, that by his power he might arrive to royal Authority, he pretended to the
marriage of Cleopatra sister to Alexander the Great, and Wife to Alexander late
King of Epirus, Olympias her Mother seeming inclined to it. But he resolved
first to overreach Antipater under this pretense of affinity; he therefore
dissembled to desire his daughter in marriage, to the end that he might the
sooner obtain of him a recruit of young men out of Macedonia, which deceit
Antipater foresaw, and whiles Perdiccas courted two Ladies at the same time,
he obtained neither.

After this, there did arise a war betwixt him and Antigonus: Craterus and
Antipater assisted Antigonus in their own persons, and having made a Peace with
the Athenians, did substitute Polypercon in the Government of Greece and
Macedonia. The affairs of Perdiccas being in some difficulty, he came into
Cappadocia, and he took into Counsel with him Aridaeus, and the Son of
Alexander the Great, the charge of whom was committed to him to debate there
concerning the carrying on of the war.

It was the opinion of some that the war should be translated into Macedonia,
the head and original of the Kingdom, and where Olympias the Mother of
Alexander lived, who would bring no small moment to their party, besides the
favor of the Inhabitants in their respect to the names of Alexander and Philip.

Others differed in judgment from it, and it was concluded that it was better
for the present to begin with Egypt, least whiles they were withdrawn into
Macedonia, Asia might be seized on by Ptolomy. In the mean time, Paphlagonia,
Caria, Lycia and Phrygia were added to the Provinces of which Eumenes was
Governor: It was appointed that they should there attend the coming of
Antipater and Craterus: Alcetas the brother of Perdiccas and Neoptolemus, did
join themselves with their Armies to the Armies of Perdiccas: The charge of the
Navy was committed to Clytus; Cilicia was taken from Philotas, and given to
Philoxenus: Perdiccas himself with a formidable Army did march into Egypt; And
thus the Macedons, their Captains being divided into two parties, were armed
against their own bowels, and turning their swords from an hostile war, they
covered themselves with civil blood, after the example of mad men who
themselves do tear their own hands and members. Ptolomy in Egypt with wise
industry did lay up great riches; for with singular moderation of government he
attracted the Egyptians to him, and obliged the neighboring Kings with
benefits and all civil respects: He also enlarged the bounds of his Empire,
having possessed himself of the City Cyrene, and was now so great, that he
feared not so much his Enemies as he himself was become terrible to them. The
City of Cyrene was builded by Aristaeus, who being tonguetyed, was called
Battus. Cyrenus his Father King of the Island of Thera, when he came to the
Oracle of Delphos to implore the god to take away the disgrace from his Son who
could not speak, he received an answer by which his Son Battus was commanded to
go to Africa, and to build there the City Cyrene, which being done, he should
enjoy the use of his tongue: When the answer seemed like a jeer, by reason of
the similitude of the Island Theramenis, from which they were commanded to
travel so great a journey to build a City in Africa, the Oracle was was not
obeyed: Not long after, having their contumaciousness punished with a
Pestilence, they were enforced to be obedient to the Oracle, their number being
so few, that all of them could scarce fill one ship; when they came into
Africa, having driven away the Inhabitants, they seated themselves on the Hill
Cyra, delighted both with the pleasantness of the place, and the abundance of
the water. There Battus their Captain, the knots of his tongue being un^yed,
did begin to speak, which encouraged them (the promises of the god being in
some part fulfilled) to proceed in the building of the City; Having there
pitched their Tents, they received the opinion of the ancient Fable, that
Cyrene, a Virgin of an excellent beauty, being forced from the Hill Pelion to
Thessaly by Apollo, and brought to the cliffs of the same Hill which they did
inhabit, being bid by the god, did bring forth four Children, Nomius,
Aristaeus, Eurocus and Agaeus; those who were sent by their Father Hypsaeus
King of Thessaly to seek out the Virgin, did reside in the same place with her,
being taken with the pleasure of the place. Three of the Boys being grown unto
age, did return afterward into Thessaly, where they enjoyed their Fathers
Kingdom; Aristaeus did reign in Arcadia, and first delivered unto men the use
of Bees, and Honey, and Milk, and Curds, and the knowledge of the Solstices,
and the motion of the Stars: Which being understood, Battus (the name of the
Virgin being known by the Oracle) did build the City Cyrene.

Ptolomy being increased with the strength of this City, did make ready for war
against the coming of Perdiccas: But the hatred contracted by his arrogance,
did more hurt Perdiccas then all the Forces of his Enemies, insomuch that his
Companions not enduring him, did fly away in Troops unto Antipater. Neoptolemus
being left for the assistance of Eumenes, would not only fly away, but also
attempted to betray the Army, which when Eumenes perceived, he held it
necessary to fight with the Traitor, and Neoptolemus being overcome did fly
unto Antipater, and Polypercon did persuade them by continual marches to
advance against Eumenes, and to fall upon him, being proud of the Victory, and
grown secure by reason of his flight; But Eumenes had notice of it, and the
treacheries were turned against the Traitors, who thinking to have assaulted
him, unsuspecting their advance, and unprepared to receive them, they were
assaulted themselves, not thinking of his approach, and wearyed withal by
their watching and their travels in the night. In that fight Polypercon was
slain and Neoptolemus fighting hand to hand a long time with Eumenes (both of
them being wounded) was at the last overcome and killed by him. Eumenes being
Conqueror in two battles, did a little support the afflicted parties of his
Companions. And Perdiccas at last being slain, he was saluted as King by the
Army of the Enemy with Phython, and Illyrius, and Alcetas the brother of
Perdiccas, and war was decreed against them by Antigonus.

THE Fourteenth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
EVmenes having understood that Perdiccas was slain, and himself adjudged as an
Enemy by the Macedoniaens, and that war was denounced against him by Antigonus,
did of his own accord declare it to his Soldiers, lest fame should make it
greater then it was, or affright the minds of the Soldiers with the novelty of
the danger, and withal that he might take new counsels from their motions, if
he found that they were animated against him; He therefore constantly
professed, that if these things were a terror unto any of them, he would
willingly grant him leave to depart: By which words he so enflamed the minds of
all to adhere unto him, that of their own accord they did exhort him to the
war, affirming that with their swords they would cut in pieces the Decrees of
the Macedons. Being advanced with his Army into Aetolia, he commanded the
Cities to pay him contribution, and violently forced it from those who refused
it. Afterward he marched unto Sardis, to Cleopatra the sister of Alexander the
Great, that by her voice the chief Officers and Centurions might be confirmed,
concieving that regal Majesty would turn all to that side for which she stood.

Such was the veneration of the greatness of Alexander, that even by the
addresses of women, the favor of his sacred name was implored. On his return,
Letters were found dispersed over all the Camp, in which great rewards were
promised to those who should bring the Head of Eumenes to Antigonus; Eumenes
having understood it, and called the Soldiers to an Assembly, did in the first
place give thanks that there was not any found amongst them who preferred the
hope of a bloody reward above the Oath of his fidelity, and craftily concluded
that these Letters were contrived and scattered by his directions, thereby to
make a trial of their resolutions: He declared that his safety consisted in the
power of them all, and that none of the Generals would so overcome, as to
decree that such a most wicked act should be determined against him. By this
means he confirmed the staggering resolutions of his Soldiers for the present,
and provided for the future, that if any such thing should happen again, his
Soldiers might believe that it was no corruption of their Enemy, but the
temptation of their General: They therefore all by throngs did offer themselves
and their endeavors for the preservation of his person.

In the mean time Antigonus came upon them with his Army, and having encamped
close unto him, did on the next day set his Army in Array to give him battle.
Eumenes also with great care marshalled the Field, and made no delay of the
encounter; but being overcome, he fled into a Castle that was fortified, where
when he saw that he must undergo the fortune of a siege, he disbanded the
greater part of his Army, lest he should be delivered to the enemy by the
consent of the multitude, or the siege should be oppressed by their numbers.
After this, in a most humble manner he sent Ambassadors to Antipater, who only
was equal in power to Antigonus, who when he found that considerable ayds were
sent unto him by Antipater, he raised the siege. Eumenes was now delivered from
the fear of death, but not from the fear of danger, having before disbanded a
great part of his Army. Therefore looking round about him to provide for his
safety, it seemed most expedient to him to have recourse to the Argyraspides of
Alexander the Great, an invincible Army, and shining with the glory of so great
and so many Victories.

But Alexander being deceased, the Argyraspides disdained to be commanded by
any, conceiving that the Militia under others would be but disgraceful after
the memory of so great a King. Eumenes therefore did court them with alluring
words, and full of submissive respects, did complement with every one of them,
sometimes calling them his Fellow Soldiers, sometimes his Patrons, sometimes
the Companions of his dangers in the great labors of the East, sometimes his
Supporters, and the only Refuges of his safety; they (he said) were the only
men by whose valor the East was overcome, the only men who exceeded the wars
of Bacchus, and the Monuments of Hercules, by whom Alexander was made great, by
whom he obtained divine honors and immortal glory; He besought them to receive
him, not as their General, but as their fellow-Souldier, and to be admitted as
a member of their body. Being on this condition entertained, he not long after
by admonishing all of them, and by gently correcting what was done amiss
amongst them, did by degrees usurp the Sovereignty of Command; nothing was done
in the Camp without him, nothing could be contrived or determined without his
Policy. At the last, when it was declared that Antigonus came against him with
an Army, he enforced them to come down and to give him battle, where when they
despised the Commands of their General, they were overcome by the valor of
their Enemies. In that battle, they did not only lose their glory gained in so
many wars, but their booty also, with their wives and children. But Eumenes,
who was the Author of their overthrow, and had no other hope of safty, did
encourage the conquered, affirming that they were superior to their Enemies in
courage; for they slew five thousand of them, and if they would but continue
the war, he assured them that the Enemy of their own accord would desire peace
of them. He informed them that their losses (by which they thought themselves
overcome) were but two thousand women, and a few children and slaves, which
were but the luggage, and the lumber of the war, and to be repaired by fighting
and prosecuting, and not by forsaking the Victory. But the Argyraspides made
answer that they would neither fly, after the damages of Matrimony, and the
losses of their wives, nor would they make war against their own children.
Moreover, they did torment him with reproaches, that in their returning home
after so many years of their pay dearly earned with the rewards of so many
Victories, he recalled them (being discharged) into new wars and battles as
lasting as they were dangerous, and had with vain promises deceived them, being
almost at their journeys end in the very entrance of their Country, and the
sight of their household gods, and now having lost all the booty which they
gained in their happy warfare, he would not permit them in the penury of their
old age to rest, being overcome: Immediately upon this, their Captains not
knowing of it, they sent Ambassadors to Antigonus, demanding that what they had
lost, might be restored to them: He promised that all things should be
returned, if they would deliver up Eumenes unto him; which being understood,
Eumenes with a few men did attempt to fl^e, but being brought back, and his
affairs altogether desperate, there being a great concourse of the multitude,
he desired to have the liberty to speak unto the Army, which being readily
granted by them all, silence being made, and his handcuffs of steel taken off,
he stretched forth his hand unto the people, having yet some other chains upon
him, and said: Soldiers, Behold here, the habits and the ornaments of your
General, which none of the Enemies have imposed upon me, for that would be my
comfort: I^ is you, who of a Conqueror have made me conquered, and of a
General a Captive; four times within this one year have you obliged your selves
unto me in an Oath of fidelity, but that I do omit, for it becomes nor the
miserable to be reproachful: One thing I entreat of you, that if Antigonus be
resolved to take away my life, that you will give me the leave to die amongst
you. For it concerns not him at all, where or in what manner I shall fall; and
I shall by this means be delivered from the ignominy of death. This, if I shall
obtain, I will disoblige you all of the Oath, by which you have so often
devoted your selves unto me; or if you are ashamed to lay violent hands upon
me, desiring it, give me a sword, and permit your General to do that for you
without any Oath, which you have so often sworn, that you would act for your
General. When he could not obtain it of them, he turned his entreaties into
curses, and in a great passion: But you (he said) O devoted Heads, may the
gods, the Revengers of perjury, look down in judgments on you, and give unto
you such ends as you have given to your Generals* It is you who have imbrued
your guilty hands in the blood of Perdiccas; It is you who attempted the murder
of Antipater; It is you (which is the worst of all) who would have killed
Alexander himself, if it were possible for him to have fallen by a mortal hand,
having so often tormented him with your seditions; I now the last sacrifice of
such perfidious wretches, do fix these curses and imprecations on you: May you
live all your lives Vagabonds and desolate in Tents and in banishment: May your
own Arms devour you, by which you have destroyed more Captains of your own then
of your enemies. Being full of passion, he commanded his keepers to go before
to the Camp of Antigonus: The Army followed, having betrayed their General, and
he himself a Captive, did bring the triumph of himself to the Tents of his
Conqueror: They delivered all the Trophies, all the Palms and Laurels of King
Alexander, together with themselves unto the Conqueror; and that nothing of the
pomp might be wanting, their Elephants, and the Auxiliaries of the East did
follow. Much more honorable was this for Antigonus, then so many Victories
were for Alexander; for though Alexander conquered the East, Antigonus
conquered those by whom the East was overcome. Antigonus therefore divided
amongst his Army these Conquerors of the World, having restored all things to
them which he took from them in the former victory. After this, he did set a
Guard upon Eumenes, being not admitted to come into his presence, in respect of
the familiarity of their former friendship* In the mean time, Eurydice the wife
of Aridaeus, the King of the Macedons, as soon as she heard that Polypercon was
returned out of Greece into Macedonia, and that Olympias was sens for by him,
being possessed with a female emulation, and abusing the weakness of her
Husband, whose Offices she challenged to her self, she did write to Polypercon
in the name of the King to deliver the Arms to Cassander to whom the King had
transferred the administration of the Kingdom; she sent also Letters to
Antigonus to the same effect in Asia, by which benefit Cassander being obliged,
did perform all things which the boldness of the Queen did prompt him to;
Having marched into Greece, he made war there on many Cities, by the
destruction whereof the Spartans being affrighted, as by a fire in a neighbors
house, distrusting to their arms, they did enclose their City with a Wall,
contrary to the answer of the Oracles, and the ancient glory of their
Predecessors, whose honorable custom always it was to defend it with their
arms and not with their Walls; So much they degenerated from their Ancestors,
that when for many years, the wall of their City was the virtue and the valor
of their Citizens, they now conceived they could not be safe unless they lay
h^d under the protection of a Wall. Whiles these things were thus managed, the
troubled Estate of Macedonia did call back Cassander out of Greece; for
Olympias the Mother of Alexander the Great, being come from Epirus toward
Macedonia, Aeacidas the King of the Molossi following her, she was forbidden by
Eurydice and King Aridaeus to enter into the Confines of that Kingdom, which so
incensed the Macedons, both in the regard of the memory of her Husband, the
greatness of her Son, and the indignity of the act, that they all sided with
Olympias, by whose command both Eurydice and King Aridaeus were both slain,
having reigned six years after the decease of Alexander. But Olympias enjoyed
not the Kingdom long afterward; for having committed many great slaughters of
the Princes after a womanish, rather then a manly way, she turned the love of
her Subjects into hatred. Therefore having heard of the approach of Cassander,
distrusting to the Macedons, she fled with Roxane her daughter-in-law, and
Hercules her grandchild, into the City of Pictua. In her journey Dardamia the
daughter of King Aeacidas, and Thessalonice her kinswoman (being also famous
her self by the name of Philip her Father) and many other Ladies of royal
blood, a gallant rather then a profitable company, did attend her.

When Cassander was informed of it, in a swift match he came to Pictua, and
laid a close siege unto the City; Which when it was oppressed with the sword
and famine, Olympias being no longer able to endure the tediousness of the
siege, having Articles for her life, did deliver her self to the Conqueror. But
Cassander having called the people to an Assembly to understand what they would
have done in relation to Olympias, he suborned the Parents and kindred of the
noble men whom she had put to death, who having put on mourning habits, did
accuse the cruelty of the woman, by whom the Macedons were so much instigated,
that without any respect to her former Majesty, they did decree that she should
be put to death, being altogether unmindful that by her Son and Husband, they
not only enjoyed their lives with safety amongst their neighbors, but also
became masters of such great wealth, as also of the Empire of the world. But
Olympias, when she beheld the armed men to come resolutely toward her, being
clothed in royal habiliaments, and leaning on her two Maids, she did go to
meet them: The Executioners beholding her, were amazed, and stood still,
startled at the Majesty of her presence, and the names of so many of their
Kings which came at once into their memory: At the last, they were commanded by
Cassander to run her through with a sword; she drew not back from the sword,
nor at the thrust that was made, nor gave any shrike like a woman, but
submitted unto death after the manner of valiant men, and for the glory of her
ancient family; insomuch that you might have seen Alexander again in his dying
mother; Moreover, she covered her face with her hair, and the neither parts of
her body with her garments, that nothing unseemly might be discovered.

After this Cassender did take to wife Thessalonice the daughter of King
Aridaeus, and sent the Son of Alexander with the Mother to be kept prisoners in
the Tower of Amphipolis.

THE Fifteenth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
PErdiccas and his brother Alcetas, Eumenes and Polypercon, and diverse Captains
of the other party being slain, the contention betwixt the Successors of
Alexander the Great did seem to be at an end, when on the sudden a new discord
did arise betwixt the Conquerors themselves: For Ptolomy, Cassander and
Lysimachus, requiring that the Provinces and the booty of the money that was
taken should be divided; Antigonus denied to admit any Companions in the booty,
having undertaken all the danger himself; And that he might seem to make an
honest war against his Companions, he declared that he would revenge the death
of Olympias, slain by Cassander, and deliver the Son of Alexander with his
Mother from their imprisonment at Amphipolis.

This understood, Ptolomy and Cassander having entered into a league with
Lysimachus and Seleucus, did with great industry provide for the war both by
Sea and Land; Ptolomy had in his possession Egypt with a greater part of
Africa, and Cyprus, and Ph^nicia. Macedonia and Greece obeyed Cassander;
Antigonus had all Asia and a part of the East, whose Son Demetrius in the first
encounter of the battle was overcome by Ptolomy at Calama: In which fight, the
glory of the moderation of Ptolomy was greater then his victory; for he
dismissed the friends of Demetrius, not only with their own goods, but also
honored them with the additions of great presents, and restored to Demetrius
all his private treasure and family* and dismissed him with an honorable
complement, that he undertook the war not for booty, but for dignity, being
displeased that Antigonus, having overcome the Captains of the other party,
would reserve entirely to himself the rewards of the common victory. Whiles
these things were in agitation, Cassander returning from Apollonia, did fall
upon the Abderitae, who having left their Country by reason of the abundance of
Frogs and Mice, did seek out new places of habitation; wherefore fearing lest
they should come into Macedonia, he made peace with them and received them into
the society of his friendship, having assigned lands unto them in the furthest
borders of Macedonia: After this, fearing least Hercules the Son of Alexander,
who was now fourteen years of age, in the favor of his Fathers name should be
called into the Kingdom of Macedonia, he commanded him privately to be killed
with his mother Arsine, and that their bodies should be covered with Earth,
least the murder of them should be betrayed by their Sepulture; and as if he
had committed but a small crime, first in the poisoning of the King, afterward
in the murder of his mother Olympias, and then in the murder of his wife
Arsine and her Son, he killed also by the same deceit the other Son of
Alexander with Roxane her mother, as if he could not otherwise then by villainy
obtain the Kingdom of Macedonia, which he so inordinately affected. In the mean
time Ptolomy did fight again with Demetrius at Sea; and having lost his Navy,
and yielded the victory to his Enemy, he fled into Egypt. Demetrius sent back
Leuticus the Son of Ptolomy, and his brother Menalaus and their friends, with
all that did belong unto them, being provoked before to the same remuneration
by Ptolomy: And that it might appear that they were not inflamed with hatred,
but the glory of Dignity and Domination, they did contend who should exceed
each other in gifts and presents in the heat of the wars; so much more
honorably were wars managed then, then friendships are professed now:
Antigonus being puffed up with the victory, commanded that the people should give
him, and his Son Demetrius, the Title of a King; And Ptolomy, that he might be
of no less Authority amongst his Soldiers, was also saluted as King by the
Army, which being understood, Cassander and Lysimachus did challenge to
themselves the regal Majesty: They abstained from the Ornaments of this honor
as long as the Sons of their King were al^ve; and so great was their modesty,
that when they had the Estates of Kings, they were well contented to abstain
from the Titles of a King, as long as Alexander had any Heir remaining: But
Ptolomy and Cassander, and the Captains of the other faction, when they
perceived they were all reproached by Antigonus* whiles they made a private war
of every one, and not a common war of all, and were unwilling to assist one
another, as if the victory were only for one, and not for all; confirming
themselves jointly by Letters, they did appoint a time and place to meet
together, and provide for the war with united Forces. At which, when Cassander
could not be present by reason of the war with his Neighbors, he sent
Lysimachus to his aid with a formidable power: This Lysimachus was famous in
Macedonia by the Nobility of his descent, but more famous by his virtue then
his Nobility, which was so eminent in him, that in the greatness of his mind,
in the knowledge of Philosophy, and in the glory of strength he excelled all by
whom the East was overcome; For when Alexander the Great did falsely accuse
Calisthenes the Philosopher of the Treason that was contrived against him,
being indeed angry because he did forbear to worship him according to the
custom of Persia, and had rendered him a lamentable and deformed spectacle by
cruelty, dismembring his body, and cutting off his nose and lips, and carrying
him shut up in a kennel with a Dog to be a terror to the rest; Lysimachus would
then repair unto him, and hear and take instructions from him, and in
compassion of so great a man, suffering forhis liberty, and not for any crime,
he gave him poison to put a period to his miseries, to which Alexander did give
so heinous an Interpretation, that he commanded him to be objected to a hungry
and an enraged Lion, who when at the first sight with a swift and eager
violence he did run upon him to devour him, Lysimachus having wrapped his hand in
a cloth, did thrust it into the mouth of the beast, and plucked out at once
both the tongue and the life of the Lion, which when it was reported to
Alexander, the admiration was turned into satisfaction, and always afterward
he had him in an higher respect for the constancy of so great a virtue; and
Lysimachus with great patience indu^ed the contumely of the King, as the
contumely of his Father; And at last, the memory of this act being banished
from his mind, the King in India being in the pursuit of some routed Enemies,
and his Guard not able to overtake him by reason of the swiftness of his horse,
he only was his Companion through the vast Deserts of the Sands, which when
his brother Philip did before endeavor to perform, he expired in the Arms of
the King; but Alexander alighting from his horse, did wound Lysimachus in the
forehead so deeply with the point of his Spear, that his blood could not be
stanched, before the King having taken the Diadem from his own head, did impose
it on his to bind the wound, which was an earnest to Lysimachus of the royal
Majesty to come; And after the death of Alexander, when the Provinces were
divided amongst his Successors, the most fierce of all the* Nations were
assigned to him as the most valiant of them all, so much he did exceed the rest
by the approbation of them all. But before the war was carried on betwixt
Ptolomy and his Associates against Antigonus, Seleucus marched down from Asia
the greater, being a new Enemy unto him; famous also was the virtue of
Seleucus, and his Original admirable; for his mother Laodice being married to
Antiochus a great Commander in the Army of Philip, did seem in her sleep to
have conceived with child by Apollo, and to have received a Ring from him, the
reward for the use of her body; In this Ring, there was a Gem, and an Anchor
engraven on it; which she dreamed she was commanded at her delivery to give to
her Son for a gift. This apparition was truly wonderful; for on the next day,
the Ring with the Anchor engraven on it was found in the bed, and the figure of
an Anchor was apparently to be seen on the thigh of Seleucus when he was born.
Seleucus going afterward into the Persian war with Alexander the Great,
Laodice did give that Ring unto him, having first taught him the original of
his pedigree. After the death of Alexander, having possessed himself of the
Kingdom of the East, he did build a City, and consecrated it to the memory of
the Gem of his original; for he called the City Antiochia after the memory of
Antiochus his Father, and consecrated to Apollo the Fields adjoining to it. The
argument of his original did remain to his posterity; for his Sons and
Grandson^ had all of them the impression of an Anchor on their thighs as a
natural mark o^ their Family. He made many wars in the East, after the division
of the Macedonian Empire betwixt him and his Companions.

In the first place he surprised Babylon, an^ having increased his strength by
the victory he overcame the Bactrians, and marched into India, which after the
death of Alexander, ha^ killed his Lieutenants, and shaken off from their necks
the yoke of servitude. Sandrocottu^ was the Author of this liberty, which
afterward he turned into slavery; for having possessed himself of the Kingdom,
he by tyranny oppressed the people whom he ha^ delivered from sorraign
domination: He was born of ignoble parentage, but enforced to take upon him the
Government of thi^ Kingdom by the Majesty and providence of God. For having
offended Alexander by his petulance, and being commanded to be killed, he
purchased his safety by the swiftness of his feet; And being drousie and weary
by the length of his travel, a Lion of a great bigness did approach unto him in
his sleep, and with his tongue wiped away the sweat which did run down his
face, and did gently leave him, being awakned. Being by this prodigy advanced
to the hope of the Kingdom, he solicited the Indians to rebellion, having
drawn a company of Thieves to his assistance.

In the beginning of the war against the Lieutenants of Alexander, an Elephant
of an infinite bulk, did of his own accord draw near unto him, and as if he had
been tame by discipline, did receive him on his back; Sandrocottus became
afterward a great Leader, and a famous master of the war; and having thus
gained the Kingdom, he had possessed himself of all India at that time when
Seleucus did lay the foundations of his future greatness, who having made peace
with Sandrocottus, and settled his affairs in the East, did march down to the
war against Antigonus; And the Armies of all the Associates being united, the
battle was fought, in which Antigonus was slain, and Demetrius his Son put to
flight. But the Associates, the war with Antigonus being ended, did again turn
their arms upon themselves, and not agreeing upon the booty, were divided again
into Factions. Seleucus was joined with Demetrius, and Ptolomy with Lysimachus,
and Cassander being dead, his Son Philip did succeed him, and thus new wars did
arise in Macedonia.

THE Sixteenth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
AFfter the death of King Cassander and his Son Philip, Queen Thessalonica the
wife of Cassander was slain not long afterward by her Son Antipater, she
having besought and conjured him by her breasts that gave him suck to spare her
life. The cause of the Parricide, was, that after the death of her Husband, she
seemed to be more inclined to Alexander in the division of the Kingdom amongst
the brothers. This wicked act appeared to all men to be so much the more
grievous, there being not the lest evidence of any deceit in the Mother,
although in parricide no cause can be pretended to be just enough to defend the
wickedness. Alexander resolving to make war with his brother in the revenge of
his Mothers death, desired aid of Demetrius; and Demetrius in hope to obtain
the Kingdom, made n^ delay to advance to his assistance; and Lysimachus fearing
his coming, did persuade his Son-in-law Antipater to be reconciled to his
brother* and not permit the Enemy of his Father to enter into Macedonia; when
Demetrius had understood that there was an agreement made betwixt the brothers,
he killed Alexander by treacheries, and having possessed himself of the Kingdom
of Macedonia, he called the Army to an Assembly to excuse the murder. He
alleged that Alexander had first of all a design upon him, and that for his
own part, he rather prevented then committed treachery. As for the Kingdom of
Macedonia, he said, it was more due to him, both for the experience of his age,
and for other considerations; for his Father was Companion to King Philip, and
to Alexander the Great in all their wars, and he was afterward Governor of the
children of Alexander, and a General in their wars to prosecute those who
revolted from them. On the other side, Antipater the Grandfather of these young
men was always a more inexorable minister of the Kingdom then the Kings
themselves; and Cassander their Father was the destroyer of the Royal Family,
who put to death both the wives and children of Alexander, and ceased not till
he had utterly destroyed the whole Progeny of him: and because he could not
light upon Cassander, the revenge of these horrid murders was translated to his
Sons, for which cause Philip and Alexander (if the spirits of the departed have
any sense) had rather that their Revengers, then the Murderers of them and
their Posterity should enjoy the Kingdom of Macedonia.

The people being pacified with these words, he was saluted King of Macedonia.
But Lysimachus when he was oppressed with the war of Dromiches King of the
Thracians, least at the same* time also he might be enforced to fight with
Demetrius, he made a peace with him, having delivered to him the other part of
Macedonia which belonged to his Son-in-law Antipater. Therefore Demetrius being
possessed with all the strength of the Kingdom of Macedonia, did resolve to
seize upon Asia, when Ptolomy, Seleucus, and Lysimachus having made a proof
before of what force was Concord, did enter into a League together, and having
amassed their Forces into one body, they (...) the war against Demetrius into
Europe. Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, did join himself unto them as their Companion
in the war, hoping that Demetrius could lose Macedonia as easily and as
suddenly as he obtained it; neither was he deceived in his expectation. For his
Army being corrupted, and himself put to flight, he left his Kingdom to the
Conquerors. In the mean time, Lysimachus killed his Son-in-law Antipater,
complaining that the Kingdom was taken from him by his deceit, and committed
into Custody his own Daughter Euridice, the companion of his complaints; And
thus all the Family of Antipater, partly by slaughter, partly by punishment,
became so many sacrifices to satisfy the revenge of the Ghost of Alexander,
both for his own death, and for the destruction of all his offspring.
Demetrius also being surrounded by so many Armies, when it was in his power to
die honorably, chose shamefully rather to deliver himself to Seleucus.

The war being ended, Ptolomy dyed full of the glory of his achievements: He
against the law of Nations delivered the Kingdom to his youngest Son, not long
before the last infirmity of his Age, and afterward did give a reason of it to
the people; the favor which the young man gained, was no less in receiving,
then was his Fathers in delivering the Scepter; Amongst other Examples of
mutual piety betwixt the Father and the Son, it procured the young man many
respects of love amongst the people, that his Father having publicly delivered
his Kingdom to him, did privately attend upon him amongst the Guard, affirming
that to be the Father of a King, was more honorable then to enjoy any Kingdom
whatsoever. But discord, an assiduous evil amongst equals, had moved a new war
betwixt Lysimachus and King Pyrrhus, Associates* not long before against
Demetrius. Lysimachus being the Conqueror, having routed Pyrrhus, did possess
himself of Macedonia: He afterward did make war against the Thracians, and not
long after against the Heraclians, the beginning and the ending of whose City
was admirable; For the pestilence raging in Boeotia, the Oracle at Delphos
answered that they should plant a Colony in the Country of Pontus, which they
should dedicate to Hercules. When it was omitted by reason of the fear of the
long and dangerous voyage by Sea, every man desiring rather to die in his own
Country, the Phocensians made war against them, and being after vanquished by
them, they again had recourse to the Oracle, which answered, That the remedy
was the same both for the war and the pestilence. Therefore a considerable
Colony being drawn together, and brought to Metapontus, they builded the City
of Heraclea, and because they were brought thither by the Ordinance of the
Destinies in a short time, they obtained great possessions.

This City afterward maintained many wars against their Neighbors, and much
they suffered by dissentions at home: Amongst other passages of magnificence,
this one is memorable. When the Athenians were masters of all, and the Persians
were overcome, it was ordered by the Athenians that the tribute of Asia and of
Greece should be for the maintenance of their Navy; all other Cities readily
submitting for their own safety, the Heraclians only refused by reason of
their ancient friendship with the Kings of Persia. Mala^tus therefore being
sent with an Army to force them to Contribution which they were resolved not to
pay, whiles he was plundering their Country, having left his ships in their
Harbor, there did arise on a sudden so great a tempest that he lost all his
Fleet with the greatest part of his Army; therefore when they could not return
by Sea, having lost all their ships, nor durst adventure to return by Land with
so small an Army amongst so many warlike Nations, the Heraclians thinking it
more honorable to confer a benefit then to revenge a discourtesie, did send
them home furnished both with Seamen and Provisions, believing that herein they
had provided well for themselves, and for their Fields, having by this act
confirmd those to be their friends who were before their Enemies. Amongst many
other calamities they also endured the heavy burden of Tyranny; for when the
common people did too impotently demand new tables and a levelling proportion
to be shared amongst them in the Fields of those who were rich, the business
being often debated in the Senate, when it could not be determined, the Senate
desired aid of Timotheus General of the Athenians, and not long after of
Epaminondas General of the Thebans: but both of them refusing it, they had
recourse to Clearchus whom they themselves had forced into banishment: So great
was the necessity of their calamities, that they called him back to the defense
of their Country, whom they had commanded never to return unto it. But
Clearchus returning more wicked from his banishment, conceiving this dissension
of the people to be a prompt occasion offered to him to exercise his tyranny,
he had first a conference with Mithridates the Enemy of his Citizens, and
having entered into a League, he compounded with him to be made his Lieutenant,
and to betray the City to him as soon as he was called back into his Country.
Afterward he turned the treachery which he had prepared for the Citizens
against Mithridates himself: For being returned from banishment, as the
Arbitrator of the civil discord, the time being appointed in which he should
deliver the City to Mithridates, he took him Prisoner with his friends, and
having received a vast sum of money for his ransom, he delivered him being
taken. And as to Mithrdates he suddenly made himself an Enemy of a friend, so
being called back to defend the cause of the Senate, he immediately became the
Patron of the people, and not only incensed the people against the Authors of
the power, by whom he was called back into his Country, and by whom he was
placed at the helm of Government, but exercised his usurped power in the
highest demonstrations of Cruelty and Tyranny. The people therefore being
called to an Assembly, he declared that he would be no longer present nor
assist the Senate in their rage against the people, but would take their parts
if they persevered in their former cruelty; and if they conceived themselves to
be equal in strength to deal with them, he would depart with his Soldiers, nor
have any hand in their civil discords; but if they distrusted in their own
strengths, he would not be wanting to be a Protector to in them. He desired
them therefore to ask counsel of themselves, whether they would command him to
be gone or to remain their Companion in the common cause. The people being
excited with these words did transfer into his power the chief Government of
all, and whiles they were incensed at the power of the Senate, they delivered
themselves, their wives, and children, unto the domination of a Tyrant.
Clearchus having seized upon threescore of the Senators (for the rest were fled
away) did throw them into prison, being laden with Irons. The people rejoiced
especially that the Senate were overthrown by the Captain General of the
Senators, and that their aid was converted into their destruction; and
Clearchus threatened sudden death to every one of them on purpose to raise the
market of them to a higher rate. For under the pretense of withdrawing them
from the fury of the people, having received from them great sums of money, and
despoyled them of their fortunes, he not long after did despoyl them of their
lives; And having understood that war was made against him by those Senators
who fled away, the Cities prompted to compassion being come to their
assistance, he did set free their Servants: and that no affliction should be
wanting in these potent Familes, he enforced their wives and their daughters to
marry their own Servants, death being proposed to every one that should refuse
it; by this means he thought to render the Servants more faithful to him, and
more unreconcileable to their masters. But these sad Nuptials were made more
grievous by the sudden Funerals of the Matrons; for many of them before their
Nuptials, and some on the very day in which they were married, having first
killed their husbands, did afterward kill themselves, and delivered themselves
from their increasing calamities by the virtue of an ingenious shame.

Not long after this, the battle was fought, in which the Tyrant being
Conqueror, he in the way of triumph did drag the conquered Senators before the
faces of Citizens, and being returned into the City, he bound some of them, he
racked others, and slew many; there was no place free from his cruelty;
insolence was added to his savageness, and arrogance to his fury. And now by
the success of his continual felicity he did forget himself to be a man, and
did call himself the Son of Jupiter. When he would be seen in public, a golden
Eagle was born before him in the honor of his descent: His body was clothed
with a garment of Purple; he did wear buskins on his feet after the custom of
Tragic Kings, and a Crown of Gold upon his Head: He also called his Son
Ceraunus, that he might delude the gods not only with lies, but also with
names. Two of the most noble of the young men, Chion and Leonides, complaining
at these things with indignation, and resolved to deliver their Country, did
conspire the death of the Tyrant. These two were the Scholars of Plato the
Philosopher, who desiring to exhibit that virtue to their Country to which
they daily were instructed by the precepts of their Master, they did prepare an
Ambush of fifty of their kindred, as if they were all their Clients, and
repairing themselves to the Tower to the Kings, as two in great contestation,
being admitted by the right of Familiarity, whiles the Tyrant intentively heard
the former of them pleading his cause, he was killed by the other; but their
friends coming in not timely enough to their assistance, they were both cut in
pieces by the Guard, by which it came to pass that the Tyrant indeed was
killed, but their Country was not delivered; For Satyrus the brother of
Clearchus did the same way invade the Tyranny, and Heraclia for many years by
degrees of succession was possessed by Tyrants.

THE Seventeenth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
MUch about the same time there was a terrible Earthquake in the Countries of
Hellespont and Chersonesus, in which though they trembled all over, yet the
City only of Lysimachia erected by Lysimachus two and twenty years before, was
utterly overthrown, which portended dismal things to come both to Lysimachus
and to his Generation, and the ruin of the Kingdom with the desolation of the
afflicted Countries round about him. Neither was belief wanting to the prodigy;
for not long after, he killed his Son Agathocles by poison, having used therein
the assistance of his Stepmother Arsyrice, it being the more horribly
remarkable; for (having ordained him into the succession of the Kingdom, and
made many prosperous wars under his Conduct) he now hated him not only beyond
the obligation of a Father, but beyond the Example of Humanity. This was his
first stain and the beginning of his growing ruin; For this parricide was
attended with the slaughter of the Princes, who were punished to death because
they lamented the death of the young man. Therefore those who were Commanders
in his Army, did in great numbers fall away from him to Seleucus, and enforced
him (being prone enough before out of the emulation of glory) to make war
against Lysimachus.

This was the last contestation betwixt the fellow - Soldiers of Alexander,
and (as it were) reserved by Fortune to make the example of their parallel the
more admirable. Lysimachus was seventy and four years of age, and Seleucus
seventy and seven: But in this old age, they had both of them the resolutions
of youth, and an insatiable desire to increase Sovereignty of Command; for when
but these two did seem as it were to be masters of the whole world, they were
shut up into too narrow bounds, and measured the end of their lives, not by the
space of years but by this limits of their Empire. In that war Lysimachus
having lost* before in diverse charges fifteen sons, dying not uncouragiously,
did descend into the Grave himself being the last Hearse of all his Family:
Seleucus rejoicing in so great a victory, and which he conceived to be greater
then the victory, that he was the last that lived of the cohort of Alexander,
and a Conqueror of the Conquerors, did vaunt of his fortune, as if it had been
a work of Divinity, and above the condition of man, being altogether ignorant,
that not long afterward he was to be an Example himself of the frailty of the
condition of man; for at the end of seven Months he was slain, being
circumvented by the treachery of Ptolomy, whose sister Lysimachus had married,
and lost the Kingdom of Macedonia (which he took away from Lysimachus) together
with his life. Therefore Ptolomy being ambitious to please the people, for the
honor of the memory of Ptolomy the Great, and in the favor of the revenge of
Lysimachus, did first resolve to reconcile unto him the children of Lysimachus,
and desired the marriage of Arsinoe his own sister who was their Mother; having
promised to adopt them his own Sons, thinking thereby that they would attempt
nothing against him, being restrained by their duty to their mother, and by
their calling of him Father. He desired also by letters the friendship of his
brother the King of Egypt, professing that he would forget the offense of his
succeeding in his Fathers Kingdom, and would demand no more of him being his
brother, the injury being received from his Father: With all his Art he
flattered Eumenes and Antigonus the Sons of Demetrius, and Antiochus the Son of
Seleucus, against whom he was to make war, for fear a third Enemy should arise
unto him. Neither was Pyrrhus the King of Epirus omitted, it being of great
concernment to what party he became a friend, who desiring himself to master
them all, did labor to have an interest in every party. Therefore having
promised to assist the Tarentines against the Romans, he desired ships of
Antigonus to transport his Army; he desired moneys of Antiochus who was more
considerable both in men and money; he desired of Ptolomy the aid of the
Macedonian Soldiers; Ptolomy who made no delay to gratify him, having a
numerous Army, did lend unto him for the space of two years, and no longer,
five thousand foot, four thousand horse, and fifty Elephants, for which Pyrrhus
having taken to marriage the daughter of Ptolomy, did leave him invested in the
Kingdom.

But because we are come to the mention of Epirus, we must deliver a few things
concerning the Original of that Kingdom. In that Country was first of all the
Kingdom of the Molossians: Afterward, Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles having lost
his Fathers Kingdom by his long absence in the Trojan wars, did plant himself
in this Country, the people being first called Pyrrhide, afterward Epirotae:
But Pyrrhus when he came to ask counsel in the Temple of Jupiter of Dodona, he
there saw and by force took unto him Anassa the Niece of Hercules, by whom he
had eight children: He married those who were Maids to the neighboring Kings,
and purchased to himself great Possessions by the aid of affinity: and gave
unto Helenus the Son of King Priamus for his singular knowledge in Prophecy the
Kingdom of Chaonia, and Andromache the relict of Hector to wife, whom in the
division of the Trojan booty he took unto his own bed. Not long after he was
slain at Delphos between the Altars of the god by the teachery of Orestes the
Son of Agamemnon. Piales his Son succeeded him and by order of succession the
Kingdom was devolved to Arymbas, who being of a tenderage, and the only child
that remained of that Regal Family, had Guardians assigned him with great care,
both for his preservation and his education: And being sent to Athens to be
instructed there, he was so much the more acceptable to the people, as he was
more learned then all his Predecessors* He first made Laws, and ordained a
Senate and yearly Magistrates, and the form of a Commonwealth; and as the
Country became more famous by Pyrrhus, so it was reduced to more humanity under
the Government of Arymbas. His Son was named Neoptolomus, from whom Olympias
was immediately descended, who was the Mother of Alexander the Great, and
Alexander who after him enjoyed the Kingdom of Epirus, and having made war in
Italy, he was slain amongst the Brutians. After his death, his brother Aeacides
succeeded in the Kingdom, who by his daily wars against the Macedonians having
too much wearyed and exhausted the people, did contract the hatred of the
Citizens, and being forced into banishment by them, he left his Son Pyrrhus a
young child of two years of age to succeed him in the Kingdom, who when he was
fought for by the people to be put to death by reason of the hatred which they
did bear unto Father, he was privately conveyed to the Illyrians, and delivered
to Beroe the daughter of King Glaucias to be nursed by her, who was himself of
the Family of the Aeacidans; The King either in the compassion of his fortune,
or delighted with his sportfulness, did not only protect him a long time
against Cassander King of Macedonia, although he threatened to make war against
him for detaining of him, but also did adopt him into the succession of the
Kingdom, with which the Epirots were so overcome, that turning their Hatred
into Pity, they called him back at eleven years of age, having set Guardians
over him, who were to govern the Kingdom until he arrived to maturity of age.
Being a young man, he made many wats, and began to be so great in the success
thereof, that he seemed alone to be able to defend the Tarentines against the
Romans*

THE Eighteenth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
PYrrhus therefore King of Epirus, being again wearyed by a new Embassy of the
Tarentines, and by the Petitions of the Lucanians and Samnites who also needed
aid against the Romans, was not much induced by the Petitions of the
Suppliants, as by the hope of invading the Empire of Italy, and did promise
that he would assist them with his Army. The E^*amples of his Ancestors did
carry him on med violently to it, being well inclined to it of himself, that he
might not seem to be inferior to his Uncle Alexander, whom the same Tarantines
used as their Protector against the Brutians, or to have less resolution then
Alexander the Great, who in a war so remote from his own Country had subdued
the East: Therefore having left his Son Ptolomy about the fifteenth year of his
age to be the Keeper of his Kingdom, he landed his Army in the Haven of
Tarentum, having taken with him his two young Sons Alexander and Helenus, to be
some solace to him in so remote an Expedition.

Valerius Levinus the Roman Consul, having heard of his arrival, did march
toward him with all speed, with a resolution to give him battle before his
Auxiliaries could be drawn together; And having put his Army in array, the King
though inferior in the number of Soldiers, made no delay to encounter him:
The Romans being Conquerors, at first were amazed, and enforced to forsake the
battle at the unusal sight and charge of the Elephants; these strange monsters
of the Macedonians did on a sudden conquer the Conquerors, neither had their
Enemies an unbloody victory: For Pyrrhus himself was grievously wounded, and
(...) great part of his Soldiers being slain, he (...) a greater glory then a
joy of the Victory. Many of the Cities of Italy following the event of this
battle, did deliver themselves to Pyrrhus; Amongst the rest, the Locri having
betrayed the Roman Garrison did submit to Pyrrhus: Pyrrhus out of the booty
which he took, sent back to Rome two hundred Soldiers whom he had taken
Prisoners without any ransom, that the Romans might take notice as well of his
liberality as of his valor: Some time being passed, when the Army of the
Associates were drawn altogether, he joined in battle again with the Romans, in
which his fortune was the same as in the former.

In the mean time, Mago the General of the Carthaginians, being sent with one
hundred and twenty ships to bring Auxiliaries to the Romans, did address
himself to the Senate, affirming that the Carthaginians did deeply resent that
in Italy they should suffer the calamity of war from a foreign King: For which
cause he was sent, that the Romans being enfested by a foreign Enemy, they
should also be relieved by a foreign Enemy.

The Senate having returned their hearty thanks to the Carthaginians, did send
back their Auxiliaries. But Mago after the fine subtilty of the Punick wit,
after a few days did repair privately to Pyrrhus as a peacemaker from the
Carthaginians, to dive into his Counsels concerning Sicily, to which place Fame
reported that he was designed. And indeed, that was the cause why the Romans
sent back the Carthaginians aid, lest Pyrrhus in the war with Rome, being
detained in Italy, should not have the liberty to transport his Army and the
war into Sicily.

Whiles these things were in agitation, Fabricius Lucinus being sent Ambassador
from the Senate of Rome, did conclude a peace with Pyrrhus; to confirm which,
Cyneas being sent to Rome with great presents from Pyrrhus, found not any whose
hand was open to entertain them: There was almost at the same time, another
Example of the same continuance of the Romans; for an Ambassie being sent from
the Senate into Egypt, when they had refused great gifts offered to them by
King Ptolomy, some few days after being invited to a supper, they had Crowns of
Gold sent to them, which having received in a complement of an honor, the next
day they imposed them on the Statues of the King. Cyneas when he brought back
word that the Peace with the Romans was disturbed by Appius Claudius, Pyrrhus
demanded of him what manner of City Rome was; He made answer, That it seemed to
him to be a City all of Kings.

After this, the Ambassadors of Sicily came to Pyrrhus, delivering to him the
command of the whole Island, which was extremely harrassed with the daily wars
of the Carthaginians. Therefore having left his Son Alexander at Locri, and put
strong Garrisons into the Cities, he passed over with his Army into Sicily.

And because mention has been made of the Carthaginians, we will speak
something of their original, the Genealogy of the Tyrians being to be extracted
from many generations, whose conditions also were much to be lamented. The
Nation of the Tyrians descended from the Phoenicians; who being shaken with an
Earthquake, having abandoned their Country, did first inhabit the Assyrian
marsh, and not long afterward the shore next unto the Sea where they builded a
City and called it Sidon, from the abundance that was there of fishes; for the
Phoenicians call a fish Sidon; After the process of many years, being overcome
by King Ascalon, they took shipping again, and did build the City of Tire in
the year before the destruction of Troy; and being long and variously wearied
with the wars of the Persians, they were Conqueros at the last; but their
Forces being exhausted, they endured unworthy punishments by their own Servants
at that time abounding in their multitudes, who having made a conspiracy, did
kill all the free people and their masters with them; and possessing themselves
of the City, they enjoyed the Houses of their Masters, they invaded the
Commonwealth, they married wives and begat children.

One amongst so many thousands of the slaves, being of a better disposition,
and prompted to take compassion on the old man his Master and his little Son,
did not kill them with cruelty, but looked upon them with pious pity and
humanity; therefore when he had removed them out of the way, as if they had
been slain, the slaves taking into consideration the present condition of their
Republic, they thought it expedient to have a King created out of their own
Corporation, and to make choice of him as most acceptable to the gods, who
first could discover the rising Sun. This design he acquainted Strato with, for
so his Masters name was called whom he had privately conceald: and being by him
instructed of the place of the Randezvous, when at midnight they came all forth
into one Field, the others looking toward the East, he alone did turn himself
toward the West; It appeared unto them a madness to look for the rising of the
Sun in the Hemiphere of the West: But when the day brake forth, and the Sun
began to shine on the highest tops of all their Cities; others expecting that
they should in the East behold the rising of the Sun, he showed them in the
West the fulgor of it, where it did gild the Pinnacles of their Temples. The
device appeared to exceed the apprehension of a slave; and Strato being
examined, he confessed that he had been one of their Masters: Then they
understood how much ingenious understandings were superior to the servile, and
that slaves may overcome in numbers and malice, but not in wisdom; pardon
therefore was granted to the old man and his Son; and as if they had been
preserved by Providence, they immediately created Strato their King; after
whose death the Kingdom passed to his Son, and afterward to his Grandsons.
This outrageous villainy of the slaves, was everywhere reported as an Example to
be feared over all the World: Therefore in the process of time, when Alexander
the Great made war in the East, having sacked the City of the Tyrians, he
lastned all to the Cross who remained alive, as the Revenger of the public
security in the remembrance of this their ancient slaughter; But he preserved
the Family of Strato inviolate, and restored the Kingdom to his posterity;
ingenuous and innocent Inhabitants being commanded to inhabit that City, and so
the servile race being utterly extirpated, a new generation of Citizens was
erected. The Tyrians being thus founded by the auspication of Alexander, did
soon grow rich by thrift and industry: But before the murders committed on
their Masters, when they abounded both in wealth and numbers, having sent a
Colony into Africa, they builded the City of Vtica: In the mean time, the King
of Tyrus deceased, having left Heirs Pygmalion his Son, and Eliza his daughter,
a Virgin of an excellent beauty; The people delivered the Kingdom to Pygmalion
a boy of a very tender age. Eliza married her Uncle Sichaeus the Priest of
Hercules, which was an honor next unto the King. He had great but concealed
treasures, and for fear of the King he did hide his gold, not in Houses or
Coffers, but in the Earth, which though it was unknown to men, yet Fame
revealed it to Pygmalion, who being transported with an insatiable desire of
it, and forgetting all respects of nature and humanity, did impiously kill his
Uncle, who was also his brother-in-law. Eliza for a long time could not endure
the presence of Pygmalion by reason of the horrid murder he had committed; at
the last, having dissembled her hatred, and made more smooth her brow, she
privately attempted to fly away, and having taken into her society some of the
Princes who were equally exasperated against the King, she truly conceived that
they had the same desire to make an escape with her. After this she made her
deceitful addresses to her brother, and represented to him that she had a
desire to live in his Court, that the house of her Husband might no longer
renew any subject of grief unto her, she being desirous to forget him, and that
no longer the imagination of him might reflect so sad upon her. Pygmalion did
give no unwilling ear to these words of his sister, thinking that with her the
gold of Sychaeus would come along unto him. But Eliza in the dusk of the
evening, did put into the ships not only the goods but the servants of the
King, who were sent by him to attend her in his removal to the Court: and being
carried into the main, she commanded them to throw into the Sea some great bags
and sacks of sand, which she said were all bags of gold, and so made up and
corded, that by their handling they could not discover what the heavy burden
was. Then she melting into tears, did implore Sichaeus with a mournful voice,
that favorably he would receive his own wealth which he left, and take those
as sacrifices to his grave which were the cause of his death: After this, she
sent for the servants of the King, and declared to them, that for her part, she
wished for death many years ago, but grievous and dismal torments did hang over
their own heads, who had taken to satisfy the avarice of the Tyrant, the
wealth of Sychaeus, for the hope of which the King had murdered him. These
words having shot a general fear into them, she took them along with her as the
companions of her flight, and on that night also a prepared company of Senators
did unite themselves unto her, and under pretense of renewing the Sacrifices in
the honor of Hercules, whose Priest Sichaeus was, they sought new habitations
by a wilful banishment. Sailing along the Coast, they were first driven into
the I Will of Cyprus, where the Priest of Jupiter by the admonition of the god,
did offer himself a companion to Eliza, with his wife and children, to be a
partaker of her fortune, having agreed with her to have for himself and his
posterity the perpetual honor of the Priesthood. The condition was taken for a
manifest token of a good fortune to come. It was the custom of the Cyprians to
send their Virgins on set days before their marriage to the Seashore, to
provide themselves a Dowry by the use of their bodies, and to offer sacrifice
afterward to Venus for the rest of their chastity: Eliza commanded that
fourscore of the youngest of them should be taken away and carried to her
ships, that so both the young men she took with her might enjoy wives, and her
City grew numerous by Posterity.

In the mean time, Pygmalion having understood the flight of her sister, and
resolving to prosecute her with an impious war, he was with much difficulty
restrained by the entreaties of his Mother, and by the threatenings of the gods,
the Prophets by inspirations presaging to him, that he should not go
unpunished, if he hindered the beginnings of a City, which promised to be the
most flourishing one in the World; by this means Eliza and those who fled with
her, had leave to breathe; therefore being brought into the Coasts of Africa,
she solicited the Inhabitants, rejoicing at the arrival of Strangers* and the
Commerce of Traffic with them, to make friendship with her: Having then bought
a place no larger then what might be encompassed with the Hide of an Ox, in
which she might refresh her Associates, weary with their long travel, until she
advanced further; she divided and did cut the Hide into long and thin thongs,
by which artifice she gained a far larger extent of ground then she seemed to
desire, by reason whereof the place was afterward called, The Burss. The
Neighbors out of every Country in a short time, did in great numbers resort
thither, and in hope of gain brought many things to be bought by their new
Guests, and making Booths to vent their Commodities, it appeared by the
frequency of the people, like a new City. The Ambassadors also of the
Vticensians did bring presents to them as to their kindred, and did exhort them
to build a City where they had made their mansion.

The Africans also had a great desire to entertain these new Inhabitants;
therefore Carthage was builded by the general consent of all the Tyrians,
paying a yearly Tribute for the ground on which the City was builded: In the
first foundations of the City, there was found the head of a Bullock, which was
the token indeed of a fruitful Earth, but of a labourious and a servile City;
wherefore they translated the City into another place; There the head of an
horse, (portending that they should be a wa^like and powerful people) did give
a happy auspication to the original of their City. The Nations coming in
throngs to give their judgment on this new City, in a short time, both the
people and the City were greatly enlarged. The affairs of the Carthaginians
flourishing thus in continual success, Hiarbas King of the Mauritanians having
sent ten of his Princes to them, he demanded Eliza for wife, and threatened to
make war upon them if they should deny him: The Ambassadors fearing to declare
their Message to the Queen, they dealed with her according to the
capritiousness of the Punick apprehension, and expressed to her that the King
desired to have one who should teach the Africans more refined Arts and
manners; but none of their own consanguinity could be found who would come unto
them living like Barbarians, and not to be distinguished from the manners of
beasts* Being then reproved by the Queen if they themselves would refuse any
difficulty or travel for the improvement of their Country, to which if
necessity did require, they did owe their lives, they delivered to the Queen
the mandats of the King, alleging that if she intended well to her own City,
she must do that her self which she prescribed unto others. Being circumvented
by this deceit, having with many tears and great lamentation invoked the name
of Sichaeus, she at last made answer, That she would go whether her own
stubborn fortunes and the destinies of her City did call her. For which having
taken the space of three Months, she at the end thereof, erected a huge pile
of wood in the Suburbs of her City, and as she would appease the ghost of her
Husband, she slew many sacrifices; and having a drawn sword in her had, she did
ascend the funeral pile, and looking back on her people, she told them that she
would go to her Husband accordingly as he had enjoined her, and ended her life
with the sword: As long as Carthage was unconquered, she was afterward
honored for a Goddess. This City was builded before Rome threescore and twelve
years, and as it was famous for war, so the state thereof at home was troubled
with much contention. When amongst many other calamities, they were afflicted
also with the plague, they used the Religion of a most bloody devotion, and an
abomination for their remedy, for they offered men in Sacrifice, and laid
their children on their bloody Altars, whose Infancy would have provoked their
Enemies to compassion, and with their blood they desired peace of the gods, for
whose life the gods were accustomed by other Nations to be devoutly importuned.
The gods therefore being averse to so horrid an impiety, when a long time they
had fought unfortunately in Sicily, the war being translated into Sardina, they
were overthrown in a great battle, having lost the best part of their Army, for
which they commanded Macheus (under whose conduct they had subdued a part of
Sicily, and performed great achievements against the Africans) to be banished
with the part of the Army which remained: Which the Soldiers took so heavily,
that they sent Ambassadors to Carthage, who in the first place were to desire
the liberty to return into their Country, and a pardon for their unhappy
warfare, and if not, to declare unto them, That if they could not obtain it by
entreaties, they would command it by arms. When the threatenings as well as the
Petitions of the Ambassadors were despised, they not long after having embarked
themselves* did advance in arms unto the City. There having called both the
gods and men to witness, that they came not to ruin, but to be restored to
their Country, and to manifest to the Citizens, that in the managing of the
former war, they wanted not valor, but fortune, having besieged the City, and
cut off all provisions from coming to it, they brought the Carthaginians to the
lowest desperation. In the mean time, Cartalo the Son of the banished Machaeus,
when he was sent for by his Father, as he passed by the Leaguer in his return
from Tire (to which place he was sent by the Carthaginians to carry the Tenths
to Hercules out of the Sicilian prey, which his Father took) he returned
answer, That he would first discharge the obligations of public Religion
before the duties of private piety; This answer, although it much troubled his
Father, yet he durst not offer any violence to Religion; Not long after, the
people having made Cartalo their Agent, to desire that Machaeus would suffer
provisions to be brought with safety to the City, when he came unto his Father,
being clothed in purple and the fillets of the Priesthood hanging down from
his Miter, his Father calling him aside did speak unto him; And how dare
thou, wretch as thou art, to approach into the presence of so many miserable
Citizens clothed in that purple and glistering with gold! How dare thou, as
it were in triumph to enter into our sad mournful Tents, in such a slowing
habit and ornaments of quiet felicity! Could thou find none else to whom to
vaunt thy self? was there no place so fit for thee as this Camp, where is
nothing to be represented, but the sordid condition of thy Father, and the
reproaches of his unhappy banishment? Not many days since being sent for by
me, thou did not only proudly despise (I will not say) thy Father, but I am
confident, the General of thy own Citizens; And what show thou more in that
purple, and those Crowns, then the titles of my Victories? Since therefore,
thou will acknowledge nothing of a Father, but the title only of a banished
man, I am resolved to show my self not like a Father but a Soldier, and I will
make thee an Example that none hereafter shall be so bold as to scorn the
unhappy miseries of his Father; having said this, he commanded him to be
fastened to a most high Cross, in his gorgeous habiliments in the sight of the
whole City. Some few days afterward he surprised Carthage, and having called
forth the people to an Assembly, he complained of the injury of his banishment,
he excused the necessity of the war, he forgave the contempt of his former
Victories, and having punished the chief Authors of the injurious banishment of
the miserable Citizens, he pardoned all the rest; And having put to death ten
of the Senators, he restored the City to her former Laws. And not long after
being accused to have affected the Kingdom, he suffered double punishment, both
for the murder of his Son, and for the violation of the liberties of his
Country. In his place Mago was chosen General, by whose industry and courage
the wealth of the Carthaginians, and the limits of their Empire, and their
glory in the affairs of war increased.

THE Nineteenth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
MAgo the General of the Carthaginians, having established their government by
an orderly course of military Discipline, and confirmed the strength of that
City, as well by the art of war as by his policy, deceased, having left behind
him two Sons, Asdrubal and Amilcar, who treading in the paths of their Fathers
virtue, did succeed as well in the greatness, as in the genealogy of their
Father. Under their conduct war made against the Illyrians: They fought also
against the Africans, demanding the Tribute for the ground of their City, the
payment whereof for many years was neglected: But as the cause of the Africans
was more just, so their fortune was better; And the war was concluded with them
not by Arms, but with the payment of the moneys: And Asdrubal being grievously
wounded, dyed in Sardinia, having delivered up the Government to his brother
Amilcar: The general lamentation in the City, and his eleven Dictatorships, and
four Triumphs, did make his death the more remarkable. The courage also of the
Enemy did increase, as if the Carthaginians had lost their Army with their
Captain; The people therefore of Sicilia having addressed themselves to
Leonidas brother of the King of the Spartans (by reason of the daily injuries
committed by the Carthanigians) the war between them continued long with
various success. Whiles these things were in action, Ambassadors came to
Carthage from Darius King of the Persians, bringing an Edict with them, in
which the Carthaginians were forbidden to sacrifice men upon their Altars, as
also to eat the flesh of dogs, they were also commanded to burn, and not to
bury in the ground the bodies of the dead; they desired also aid of the
Carthaginians against the Grecians, on whom Darius was resolved to make war.
But the Carthaginians refusing to send Auxiliaries by reason of the daily wars
with their Neighbors, did readily obey him in the rest, lest that they might
seem to be obstinate altogether. Amilcar in the mean time was killed in the
Sicilian war, having left behind him three Sons, Hamilco, Hanno, and Gisco.
Asdrubal also had the same number of Sons, Annibal, Asdrubal, and Sapho, by
whom the affairs of the Carthaginians were governed in those times; they
invaded the Mauritanians, and fought against the Numidians; and the Africans
were compelled to remit the Tribute which was demanded for their City:
Afterward when so a great a Family of the chief Commanders began to be heavy
to the City, because they did act and determine all things of themselves, the
City made choice of one hundred of the Senators, unto whom the Generals
(returning from the war) were to give an account of what they had done for the
public service, that being under the power of this supreme Court, they might
so in war dispose of their Commands, that they might have a regard to Justice
and to the Laws at home. Amilco succeeded General in Sicily in the place of
Amilcar, who when he made many successful encounters, both by Sea and Land, did
at last on a sudden, lose all his Army by the rage of a pestilential Planet.
Which when it was reported at Carthage, the City was so full of sorrow and
lamentation, as if it had been taken it self: The shops and houses were shut
up; so were the Temples of the gods; no public duties of religion were
performed, and all Offices intermitted which belonged to the administration of
justice. They all slocked in throngs to the Haven, and asked those few who came
out of the ships (who escaped the fury of the mortality) how their Sons and
kinsmen did; and when they were assured of their deaths, of which before they
were uncertain, and were in some hopes that the Reports were false, they filled
all the shore with their lamentations; nothing was heard but sighs and throbs,
and the sad complaints of the unhappy Parents. In the mean time, the distressed
General Amilco came down out of his own ship, raggedly clothed, and in the
habit of a servant; the multitudes of the mourners pressed round about him to
behold him; And he amongst the rest lifting up his hands to Heaven, sometimes
bewailed his own, and sometimes the public fortune; sometime he accused the
gods who took from them so many Ornaments and Trophies of the war, and of the
victories which they had given them, and had destroyed the victorious Army, not
by war but pestilence, so many Cities being taken, and the Enemies so often
overcome in the battles both by Sea and Land; Howsoever, he said, he brought
some comfort to the Citizens, that the Enemies though they might rejoice, yet
they could not glory in their calamity, for they could neither say, that those
who were dead were killed, or that those who returned, were routed by them. The
booty he said, which the Enemy found in their abandoned Tents, was not such as
they could boast to be the spoils of a conquered Enemy, but such as by the
casual deaths of their Masters, they had seized upon, being poor and transitory
things, which no body was left to own; and that in relation to their enemies,
they departed Conquerors, but in the relation to the plagues, they departed
conquered: Howsoever, he affirmed that he took nothing more near unto his
heart, then that he could not die himself amongst so many most valiant men, and
was preserved not for any delight which he took in life, but only to be the
sport of calamity; yet nevertheless, having brought the miserable relics of
his Army to Carthage, he would follow also himself his deceased Soldiers, and
would make it apparent to his Country, that he did not continue to that day,
because he had a mind to live, but that he would not by his death, betray
these whom the direful pestilence had spared, by leaving them amongst the
Armies of their Enemies. With this Resolution and complaint, having entered the
City, as he came to the threshold of his own door, he dismissed the multitude
that followed him with his last Farewell unto them, and having locked the door,
with his sword he put a period to his own life, not admitting any, not so much
as his own Sons to come unto him.

THE Twentieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
THe Carthaginians being driven out of Sicily, Dionysius seized upon the
command of the whole Island, and thinking so great an Army without action would
be prejudicial to his Kingdom, he transported his forces into Italy, that the
Soldiers should be both exercised with continual labor, and the bounds of his
Kingdom enlarged; His first war there was amongst the Grecians who enhabited
the next Coasts of the Italian Sea, who beings overcome, he assaulted all their
Neighbors, and destined to himself all the Grecians that possessed Italy, who
at that time enjoyed not only a part but almost all Italy; for many Cities
after so great a Tract of Antiquity, do to this day demonstrate that they
received their original from the Grecians. For the people of Tuscany, who
inhabit the Coast of the lower Sea, did come from Lydia; And Troy being taken
and sacked, did send forth the Venetians, who are the Inhabitants on the Coasts
of the upper Sea under Antenor their Commander; Adria also which is washed by
the Illyrian Sea, is a Greek City which gives a name to the Adriatic, and so
is Arpos which (Troy being overthrown) Diomedes builded, being brought by
shipwreck into that place; Pisca also amongst the Ligurians, is beholding to
the Graecians for her original. And amongst the Tuscans, Tarquinia derives her
beginning from the Thessalians, and the Spinambrians and Perusians from the
Achaians; What shall I speak of the City Cere, and the Latin people who seem
to be planted by Aeneas? And are not the Falicians, Japigians, Nolans, Abelans,
Plantations from Calcedo in Greece? What shall I speak of all the Provinces of
Campania? What shall I speak of the Brutians, Sabinians, and the Samnits? what
of the Tarentins which we have read did come from Lacedaemon, and were called
Spurii. It is recorded that Philoctetes did build the City of the Thurins,
whose Monument is yet to be seen in that place; As also the Arrows of Hercules
which were the first ruin of Troy, are to be seen in the Temple of Apollo. The
Metapontins also do show in the Temple of Minerva those Tools of Iron with
which Epeus, from whom they are derived, did build the Trojan horse; by reason
of these Inhabitants, all that part of Italy is called Graecia major.

But in the beginning of these Originals, the Metapontins with the Sybarits and
Crotonians, did resolve to drive all the other Grecians out of Italy; and
having first of all taken by force the City of Syris, they killed fifty young
men, embracing the Image of Minerva, and the Priestess her self amongst the
Altars of the Goddess, having on her the Sacerdotial ornaments. Wherefore when
they were punished with pestilence and sedition; the Crotonians first of all
repaired to the Oracle at Delphos for a remedy, to whom it was answered, That
an end to their calamity would ensue, if they would pacify the violated power
of Minerva, and the ghosts of the slaughtered young men: Therefore when they
began in the first place to erect the Statue of Minerva; and afterward of the
young men according to the just proportion of their bodies, the Metapontins
having understood the Oracle of the gods, did resolve to be as forward in the
Religion as they, and erected small Images of stone to the young men, and
pacified the goddess with Manufactures of Wool. And thus the Plague was ceased
in both places, the one striving who should exceed in magnificence, and the
other in swiftness: The Crotonians being recovered to their health, were not
long quiet. But being discontented, that in the taking of the City of Syris,
the Locrensians did send Auxiliaries against them, they made war upon them,
which so troubled the Locrensians, that they besought aid of the Lacedaemonians;
The Lacedaemonians being unwilling to employ their forces into so remote a war,
did advise them to crave aid of Castor and Pollux; Neither did the Ambassadors
despise the counsel of their friends; And departing to the next Temple, having
offered sacrifice, they implored the assistance of the gods, and having
obtained as they thought what they desired, and being as joyful as if they
should carry the gods themselves with them, they placed Cussions for them in
the ship, and by a fortunate adventure they brought home comfort to their
distressed Army in the stead of help. This being known, the Crotonians
themselves did send Ambassadors to the Oracle at Delphos, imploring the grant
of victory, and prosperous events in the wars to come. It was answered, that
the Enemies were first to be overcome by Votes, and afterward by Arms.

Hereupon the Locrensians devoted to Apollo the Tithes or Tenths of their
booty, having understood that the Crotonians had devoted but the ninth part,
which they reserved with great privacy, lest the answer of the god being known,
they should be overcome in their Votes. Therefore when both Armies were drawn
into battel-Array, and there were marshalled in the Field one hundred and
twenty thousand armed men of the Crotonians, the Locrensians looking upon their
own Musters, which could not at the most amount to above fifteen thousand men,
having abandoned all hope of Victory, they did destinate themselves to a
certain death; and so honorable an heat did grow upon them all out of this
desperation, that in the battle they thought themselves to be Conquerors, if
they dyed not unrevenged. Thus whiles they desired to die honorably, they
overcame happily; and their despair was the original of their Victory. In the
heat and height of the labor of their sword, an Eagle constantly appeared to
fly in the front of the Locrensian Army, and sometimes wheeling about the wings
of the Army, she would immediately return and be seen again to hover over them,
until they were become Masters of the Field. In the wings of their battle there
were also seen two young men to fight in Armor far different from others, and
remarkable by the height and greatness of their bodies, and by their white
horses, and co^cineous paludaments; neither did they appear any longer then
whiles the battles were fighting.

The incredible swiftness of the report of the victory did increase the wonder
of it: For on the same day on which the Battle was fought in Italy, the Victory
of the Locrensians was reported at Corinth and Athens, and at Lacedaemon. After
this, the Crotonians delighted themselves, neither in the exercises of honor,
nor in the use of Arms, for they hated what so unhappily they undertook, and
had changed their lives into luxury, had it not been for the documents of
Pythagoras the Philosopher, who being born at Samos, was the Son of Demaratus a
rich Merchant; he was endued with excellent gifts of wisdom and understanding,
and traveled first into Egypt, and afterward to Babylon to learn the motion
of the Stars, and to understand the beginning of the World; And having therein
attained to the perfection of knowledge, he returned to Creet and Lacedaemon,
to instruct himself in the Laws of Minos and Ly^urgus, with which (their Laws
being the most famous of all in those days) he reduced the people of Crotona
from the abuse of riot by his example, to the use of temperance and frugality.
He daily extolled virtue, and cried down the vices of luxury, and did number to
them how many Cities were destroyed by this devouring sin; and at last he was
so much followed by the multitude, that what was thought almost incredible,
even some of the most riotous of those people were converted into the manners
and principles of the most thrifty of men. He had several Schools and several
Auditories, and distinctly taught the Matrons from the men, and the children
from their Parents: He taught the Matrons chastity, and obsequiousness toward
theit husbands; and he taught their husbands temperance, and to be lovers of
Learning. He always prompted both unto frugality, as if it were the mother of
all virtues, and by his daily disputation he so prevailed that the Matrons did
leave off their Garments of gold, and other ornaments of their dignity, as the
instruments of luxury; and these ornaments being brought them into the Temple
of Juno, they were by these Matrons consecrated to the goddess her self,
professing that the best ornaments of Matrons was chastity and not gorgeous
apparel: How much also he prevailed by conquest on the young men, the
conquered spirits of the contumacious women ^id declare. But when three hundred
of the young men having obliged themselves by oath, through the Interest of
their society, did like Separatists segregate themselves from the rest of their
Citizens, being suspected to hold a clandestine Conspirary, they exasperated
the Citizens against them, who would have burned them altogether being convened
in one house. In this tumult there perished about threescore of them; the rest
were condemned to banishment. Pythagoras having lived twenty years at Crotona,
did remove himself to Metapontum, in which City he dyed; they had there so
great an admiration of him, that they made of his house a Temple, and did
worship him as a god.

Dionysius the Tyrant having (as before we mentioned) transported his Army out
of Sicily into Italy, and made war upon the Grecians who there inhabited, he
overcame the Locrians, and did assault the Crotonians through a long respite
scarce resuming new strength, so great was their overthrow of their former war;
they now more valiantly resisted with a few men the powerful Army of Dionysius,
then heretofore with many thousands they resisted the inconsiderable number of
the Locrensians: So much virtue has poverty against insolent riches, and
sometimes so much more certain is a dispaired then a presumed Victory.

In the mean time, the Ambassadors of the Gauls, who not many Months before
had burned Rome, did address themselves to Dionysius making wars in Italy, and
desired a league and friendship of him, they affirmed that their Nation was now
seated between his Enemies, and would be of great concernment to him, both to
attend him in the Van* or to defend him if his Enemies should take the
advantage to press upon him in the Rear.

This Embassy was acceptable to Dionysius; wherefore having entered into a
league with them, and reinforced his Army with Auxiliaries from them, he did
begin the war again. The cause which brought these Gauls to seek new
habitations in Italy, was civil discord and daily dissentions at home, being
weary with the tediousness whereof, when they came in multitudes into Italy,
they did drive the Tuscans from their possessions, and builded Millain, Comum,
Brixia, Verona, Bergomum, Tridentum, and Vincentia. The Tuscans at the same
time under the command of Rhetus, having lost their ancient habitations, did
possess themselves of the Alps, and called the Country which they commanded
Rhetia, after the name of their Commander.

Not long afterward, Dionysius was called back into Sicily by the
Carthaginians, who having recovered themselves by the aggregation of new
Forces, did begin the war again which they had abandoned by reason of the
Pestilence. Hanno was chosen General of the war, whose Enemy Suniator the most
powerful at that time of all the Carthaginians, when in hatred to him he had
frequently in the Greek Tongue acquainted Dionysius of the approach of the Army,
and of the temper and sloth of the General, the letters being intercepted, he
was accused of Treason, and condemned for it, and an Act was passed by the
Senate, that no Carthaginian should afterward either speak or write in the
Greek Tongue, that they might hold no discourse, nor write unto the Enemy
without an Interpreter: Not long after Dionysius, whom neither Sicily nor Italy
could contain, being overcome and wearyed out with the daily encounters in the
war, was slain by the treachery of his own Soldiers.

THE One and twentieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
Dionysius the Tyrant being slain in Sicily, the Soldiers did substitute in
his place his eldest Son, who was called after his Fathers Name, both for the
maturity of his Age, and that the Kingdom might be more firmly united, if it
continued in the power of one man, then if it should be by parts divided
amongst many of his children. But Dionysius in the beginning of his reign had a
desire to take away his Uncles as those who would be partakers with him in his
Kingdom, and be the perswaders of his brothers to have it divided amongst them.
And the better to dissemble his design, he thought it requisite in the first
place to assure himself of the good opinion of the people, being more excusedly
to perform what he had determined, if he stood fast in the approbation of them
all. He delivered therefore out of prison three thousand that lay there in
chains together, and for three years dismissed the payment of all tributes, and
by all Artifices solicited the affections of all men to him.

Then resolving to put in practice his contrived villainy, he put to the sword
not only the kinsmen of his brothers, but even his brothers themselves,
beginning his tyranny first in his own Family before he exercised it in others,
and left not so much as the spirit of fraternal consortment to those to whom he
owed a consortment in his Kingdom. His emulators being thus taken away, and
falling into sloth, he became unweildy in his body by too much riot, and
contracted so great a weakeness in his eyes, that he could not endure the Sun
or Dust, or any splendour of light: By reason of which, believing that he began
to become despicable, he committed outrageous cruelties, and filled not as his
Father the prisons with enchained Citizens, but filled the City with the
murders of them, by which he grew both contemptible and hateful unto all.
Therefore when the Syracusians had determined war against him, he was in a
great suspense whether he should lay down his royal Authority, or make
resistance in war against them; but his Soldiers propounding to themselves a
great booty, and the plundering of the City, he was enforced by them to try it
out in battle with them. Being overcome, when not long after he had the same
ill fortune in the fight again, he sent Ambassadors to Syracusae, promising to
lay down his tyranny, if they would send some to him to agree upon Articles for
a peace.

The Syracusians sending some of the most eminent in their City to him, he
commanded them to prison, and brought his Army to overthrow their City, which
at that present feared no assault, nor the approach of any Enemy at all: The
fight was a long time doubtful in the City, but the Citizens overcoming with
their multitudes, Dionysius was routed and beaten out of it. And fearing to be
besieged in the Tower, he fled privately into Italy with all his Princely
furniture: Being there as a banished man, he was received by the Locrensians,
who were in friendship with him, and he possessed himself of their Tower, where
he exercised his accustomed cruelties: He commanded the wives of the chiefest
of the City to be defloured; He took away the Virgins by force, and having
ravished them, he returned them to those who were to espouse them: The most
wealthy of all the City he commanded to be expelled, or to be slain, and did
confiscate their goods; And when there was not the lest occasion for any
further rapine, he circumvented the whole City by this studied project. When
the Locrensians were oppressed by the war of Leophron Tyrant of Rhegium, they
vowed if they were Conquerors, they would prostitute their Virgins on a day
dedicated to Venus. This vow being unperformed, when they made unfortunate wars
against the Lucanians, Dionysius called them to a public Assembly, and did
exhort them to send their wives and daughters into the Temple of Venus, dressed
in the richest clothes they could put on, and that one hundred of them, chosen
by lot, might perform the public vow, and that for Religions sake, they might
stand one whole Month in the open Stews, all men having before taken an Oath
not to defile any of them* And that the Virgins might not be deceived,
performing the Vows of the City, he ordained that not a Maid should be married
until husbands were first provided for them: This counsel being approved, in
which provision was made both for the superstition and the chastity of the
Virgins, the women adorned in the most sumptuous manner did come in throngs to
the Temple of Venus, every one of whom Dionysius despoyled, having sent in
Soldiers to the Temple, and converted the Ornaments of the Matrons into his
own Wardrope. He killed also some of the Husbands of the richest of them: and
some women he tormented to betray their Husbands wealth; when by these arts he
reigned six years, being driven from the City by the Confederacy of the
Citizens, he returned into Sicily, and after a long peace, all men being
secure, he became Master of Syracusae by treachery.

Whiles these things were thus managed in Sicily, Hanno the General of the
Carthaginians in Africa employed his own treasure, in which he exceeded the
bank of the Commonwealth, to become absolute Sovereign of all, and attempted
having first killed the Senate, to usurp the Kingdom. For the acting of this
wickedness, he set apart a solemn day for the marriage of his Daughter, that by
the religion of his Vows, he might both the better commit and conceal his
abominable design. He prepared a Feast for the people in the public places,
and for the Senate in his own house, that with Cups infected with poison, he
might more secretly and without any witnesses destroy them, and the more easily
invade the Commonwealth deprived of her Magistrates. This being betrayed to the
Senators by his servants, the wicked plot was declined but not revenged, least
in a man so powerful the plot should prove more prejudicial being known then
concealed. Being therefore contended by a decree to put a measure to the
charges of marriages, they commanded it not to be observed by one or some few,
bur by all in general, that the person might not seem to be pointed at, but the
vice corrected. Being prevented by this Counsel, he again incited the slaves to
a Rebellion; and having appointed another day for the slaughter of the
Senators, when he found that he was the second time prevented, fearing to be
called into judgment, he possessed himself of a fortified Castle having armed
twenty thousand slaves.

There whiles he incited the Africans and the King of Mauritania to make war on
the Carthaginians, he was taken, and being scourged with rods, his eyes pulled
out, and his hands and legs broken, that a due punishment might be exacted of
every one of his members, he was put to death in the sight of the people, and
his body torn with rods, was fastened on a Cross. His Sons also, and all his
kindred though innocent were delivered to the Executioner, that not ^one of so
nefarious a Family should remain either to imitate his wickedness, or to
revenge his death.

In the mean time, Dionysius being received by the Syracusians, when he grew
every day more grievous and cruel to the City, was besieged by a new
conspiracy, and having at last laid down both his Tyranny and his Army, he
delivered the Tower to the Syracusians, and taking with him some necessaries
for a private fortune, he betook himself to a banished life in Carinth, and
there conceiving things most humble to be most safe, he descended into a most
sordid condition of life, for being not contented to foot it up and down in
public, but to drink also, and not only to be seen in Taverns and Houses of
wantonness, but to continue in them many days together, he would quarrel with
the vilest scum upon the basest subject, and be seen all in rags and squallid,
and rather give an occasion of laughter to others then receive it from them; he
would stand in the Shambles and devour with his eyes what he was not able to
buy; he would complain of the Bawds and Whores before the Aedils, and do all
things in such an importunate rudeness, that he seemed rather to be despised
then to be feared. At last, he professed himself to be a Schoolmaster, and
taught children in open places, that he might either be seen always in public
by those that feared him, or more readily be despised by those that feared him
not. And although he abounded with the vices of a Tyrant, yet this dissembling
of his vices was not by nature, but by art he counterfeited to have lost all
royal shame, being not ignorant how hateful was the very name of Tyrants
without their revenews. He endeavored also to take away the envy of things
past by the contempt of things present, and made use not of honest, but of safe
counsel. Nevertheless, amongst those arts of his dissimulation, he was thrice
accused to affect the Tyranny again, and his best protection was the
despicableness of his person and his fortunes.

In the mean time the Carthaginians being amazed at the great success of
Alexander the Great, fearing that he would add Africa to the Empire of Asia,
sent Amilcar, surnamed Rhodanus (a man famous above the rest for eloquence and
policy) to discover his intents: Their fear was increased by the taking of the
City of Tire, the mother to their City, and by the building of Alexandria, a
City emulous of Carthage on the bounds of Africa and Egypt, and by the
perpetual felicity of the King, whose desires and whose fortune could not any
ways be bounded: Amilcar having obtained access to the King by the means of
Parmenio, he dissembled to the King that he fled unto him, being banished from
his own Country, and offered himself to serve him in his expedition against it.
And having dived into his Counsels, he wrote all things to the Carthaginians in
wooden Tables, the Letters being covered with wax. Howsoever, after the death
of Alexander, the Carthaginians did put him to death, being returned into his
own Country, not only by an ungrateful but with a cruel sentence* alleging
that he would have betrayed their City unto Alexander the Great.

THE Two and twentieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
AGathocles the Tyrant of Sicily, who arose to the height and greatness of the
former Dionysius, from a base and sordid pedigree did advance himself unto
royal Majesty. He was born in Sicily, his Father was a Potter; nor had he a
more honest childhood then he had Original; for being admirable in beauty, and
the lineaments of his body, he a long time lived by the passive prostitution of
his body: And being come to sixteen years of age, he transferred his lust from
men to women. Afterward being infamous with both Sexes, he changed his course
of life, and committed Robberies. In process of time he traveled to Syracusae,
and was sent for into the City by the Inhabitants, where he lived a long time
without reputation; for he had nothing more in fortune to lose, nor in chastity
to defile. Being at last an ordinary Soldier, he was as prone to any villainy
by a seditious, as he was before by a dissolute life. He was resolute and
active, and very eloquent in discourse. In a short time he was made a Centurion
and not long afterward Tribune of the Soldiers. In the first war against the
Aetnaeans, he showed the Syracusians excellent demonstrations of his Chivalty.
In the following war against the Campanions, the opinion which all had of him
was so great, that he was chosen General in the place of Damascen deceased,
whose wife (having known her first by adultery) he did take unto him in
marriage after the death of her husband. And being not contented that of a poor
man he suddenly grew rich, he at last turned Pyrat against his own Country: It
was his safety, that his Companions being taken, and tormented, denied that he
had any any interest amongst them. Twice he endeavored to possess himself of
Syracusae, and twice he was driven into banishment for it. In the hatred to the
Syracusians he was made first Praetor, and afterward General by the
Murgantins, amongst whom he did lead a banished life: In that war he took the
City of the Leontins, and began to besiege the City of Syracusae, to the
defense whereof when Amilcar General of the Carthaginians was desired to march,
having laid aside all hostile hatred, he sent considerable Forces to relieve
it. In one and the same time, the City of Syracusae was defended by her Enemies
in a civil love, and was besieged by her Citizens in a civil hatred; But
Agathocles when he perceived that the City was more gallantly defended then
beleagured, did by his Messengers Petition to Amilcar, that he would undertake
the arbitration for a peace betwixt him and the Syracusians, promising on his
part the assured peculiar return of all good Offices that he could expect.
Amilcar being possessed with this hope, did enter into a league with him, being
induced to it by the fear of his power, considering that what strength by this
confederacy he gave to Agathocles against the Syracusians, he added as much to
himself for the enlargement of his private fortunes. Therefore Peace was not
only made with Agathocles, but he was also made Praetor of Syracusae: After
this tapers of wax, being brought forth and lighted, he did swear to Amilcar to
be careful upon all occasions to advance the Interests of Carthage. Having then
received of him a Garrison of five thousand Africans, he killed all those of
greatest power in the City; and intending as it were to form a new Government
in the Commonwealth, he commanded the people to be called forth into the
Theater, the Senate being disposed of into another place, as if he would
consult with them concerning something before hand; and thus having ordered his
affairs, and brought in the Soldiers, he besieged the people, and put the
Senators to the sword; and having finished the slaughter of them, he killed
those that were most rich, and most forward of the people. This being done, he
leavied more men, and formed an Army, with which he assaulted the neighboring
Cities, fearing no Enemy at all. He also perfidiously provoked with injuries
the Associates of the Carthaginians, Amilcar permitting it. Of which the
Confederate Cities did complain at Carthage, not only of Agathocles but of
Hamilcar: of the one as a domineering Tyrant, and of the other as a Traitor, by
whom the fortunes of the Confederates were given to a most deadly Enemy, by the
making of a peace with him, and by delivering Syracusae to him as the pledge of
their Society, (a City always at enmity with the Carthaginians, and the Rival
of Carthage for the command of Sicily) and now at last by delivering up the
Cities of their Confederates to the same Agothocles under the title of a
friendship, they did declare that those things would suddenly redound to the
Carthaginians themselves, and they should suddenly perceive how much evil they
brought not only to Sicily but to Africa also. With those complaints the
Senate was incensed against Amilcar: But because he had the Command of the
Army, they passed silent suffrages on him, and commanded that before they were
reported, they should be cast into an urne and sealed up, until another
Amilcar, the Son of Gisco, should return from Sicily: But the death of Amilcar
prevented these close contrivances, and the dumb suffrages of the
Carthaginians, who being injuriously condemned by his own Citizens, his cause
unheard, was delivered from them by the friendship of death. This administered a
subject to Agathocles to make war against the Carthaginians.

The first encounter of the war was with Amilcar the Son of Gisco, by whom
being overcome, he retreated to Syracusae to renew the war with greater Force;
But the fortune of the second battle was the same as of the former; wherefore,
when the conquering Carthaginians had laid a close siege to Syracusae,
Agathocles finding himself neither equal to them in strength, nor any ways
prepared to endure the fury of the siege, and withal (by reason of his cruelty
and other offenses) that he was forsaken of his Confederates, he resolved to
carry the war into Africa. A wonderful boldness it was, that he who was
inferior to his Enemy in his own Land and Cities, should translate the war into
their Country, and advance to encounter with them abroad, being not able at
home to desend himself, and that being overcome he should insult over the
Conquerors. The silence of this counsel was no less admirable then was the
design he undertook* professing only to the people that he had found them out
a way to victory: He desired them that they would arm themselves with a
resolution patiently for a while to endure the difficulties of the siege; or if
the condition of their present fortune was grievous to any of them, he gave
them free leave to depart where they pleased; when one thousand and six hundred
of them did go away, he provided the rest with corn and money for the necessity
of the siege; he only took with him fifty Talents for his present use, being
to provide himself with other things rather from his Enemy then his Companions;
Having then granted freedom to all the servants that were of age to bear arms,
he did oblige them by Oath to be faithful to him, and afterward shipped them
and the greatest part of his Army; and having made equal the condition both of
bond and free, he conceived that there would be betwixt them a mutual emulation
of virtue. All the rest were left for the defense of his Country.

In the seventh year of his reign (none of his Soldiers knowing whether they
were to be transported) he directed his course to Africa, taking with him his
two Sons, who were then of age, Archagathus and Heraclidas; when they all
believed that they were imbraked either to plunder Italy or Sardinia, having
landed them on the shore of Africa, he declared his design unto them, and
informed them in what condition Syracusae was, to whom there was no other help
remaining then to do unto their Enemies what they suffered themselves. The war,
he said, was managed otherwise at home then it was abroad; Those were only the
ayds at home, which the strength and Forces of the Country did administer: but
abroad the Enemy was often overcome with his own strength, their associates
revolting from them, and in the hatred of continued Sovereignty looking after
innovation and foreign ayds. To this he added that the Cities and Castles of
Africa were not encompassed with Walls not builded on the tops of Hills, but
lay open in the Champain without any defense, and these might easily be brought
to join in society with him to prevent their utter ruin. The war, he said,
would be more grievous to the Carthaginians in Africa it self then in Sicily,
where they would all join their Forces together against one City more famous by
her name then her by strength; and what strength he brought not with him, he
would take it there. Neither would the sudden fear of the Carthaginians be of a
small moment to the victory, who undoubtedly would tremble, amazed at the
gallant confidence of their Enemies; And this terror of theirs would be
increased by the firing of their Towns, and the plundering of their Castles and
contumacious Cities, and by the spoils of Carthage it self: By all which they
should perceive, that war not only lay open to them against others, but to
others also against them; and by this means that the Carthaginians might not
only be overcome, but Sicily be delivered from the burden of their Forces; for
the Enemies would never continue in the besieging of Syracusae, when they were
put so hard to it at home. The war he alleged, could never be carried on more
easily, nor the booty be more abundant; for Carthage being taken, all Africa
and Sicily would be the reward of the Conquerors; Moreover, the glory of this
honorable warfare was so great, that it would continue through all Ages, and
be determined by no measure of time, it being recorded that they were the only
men in the world, who translated to their Enemies the wars which they could not
themselves sustain at home, and of their own accord followed the Conquerors,
and besieged the besiegers of their own City: He concluded that the war
therefore was to be carried on by them all with a gallant and joyful
resolution, there being no reward more abundant for the Conquerors, nor any
monument more honorable for the conquered. By these exhortations the courages
of the Soldiers were erected; but they were amazed again at the portent they
beheld, which was that being under Sail the Sun was ecclipsed; of which the
King gave an account with no less care then was his preparation for the war, he
affirmed that if it had happened before they had set forth, it might be believed
that it persaged loss unto them, but it coming to pass after they had lanched
forth, it did portend ill to those against whom they did advance. Moreover,
that the natural defect of the Stars did always persage some present change of
State, and it was most certain that the condition of Carthage being then in
their height of flourish, there was a change persaged by it, and calamity to
come.

The Soldiers being thus comforted, he commanded all the ships to be burned,
that they might all understand that the means of their flight being taken away,
they must either overcome or fall by the sword. Afterward having born down all
before them wheresoever they did march, and set on fire the Towns and Castles,
Hanno General of the Carthaginians did advance to give them battle with an Army
of thirty thousand men: The battle being fought, two thousand of the Sicilians,
and three thousand of the Carthaginians were slain with the General himself;
with this Victory the courages of the Sicilians were erected, and the spirits
of the Carthaginians fainted.

Agathocles, his Enemies being overcome, did sack and raze their Towns and
Castles, driving away great booties, and killing many thousands of his Enemies.
He afterward pitched his Tents within five miles of Carthage, that they
themselves from the Walls of their Cities might behold the loss of those things
which were most precious to them, together with the wasting of their Fields,
and the burning of their Towns. In the mean time the great Fame over all Africa
of the Army of the Carthaginians being overthrown, and of the taking of their
Cities being divulged, a sudden wonder and amazement did invade them from
whence should arise so great an overthrow in so potent an Estate, especially
ftom an Enemy overcome: And not long after, not only all Africa, but the most
noble of the Cities having followed the novelty, did revolt to Agathocles, and
assisted the Conqueror both with corn and money.

To this calamity of the Carthaginians the news of their Army in Sicily
overthrown with their General, did arrive to make up the height of their
affliction: For after the deparure of Agathocles out of Sicily, the
Carthaginians, being become the more secure in their Leagure before Syracusae
were utterly routed, and cut in pieces by Antander the brother of Agathocles:
Therefore when the fortune of the Carthaginians was the same both at home and
abroad, not only their tributary Cities, but the Kings who were their
Confederates revolted from them, weighing the interests of friendship not by
fidelity but success: Amongst others, Offellas King of the Cyrene, who
entertained a vain hope to be master of all Africa did by his Ambassadors enter
into a League with Agathocles, and accorded with him, that the Carthaginians
being overcome, the one should obtain the command of Sicily, and the other of
Africa: Therefore Offellas came with a formidable Army into the society of the
war; having often dined together, Agathocles who always entertained him with
humble submissions and flattering complements, because Offella had adopted his
eldest Son to succeed him in the Kingdom, did at the last kill him, and having
possessed himself of his Army, the Carthaginians renewing the war with all
their might, were overcome again in a great battle, not without much effusion
of blood on both sides. By this overthrow the Carthaginians were brought to so
great a desperation, that (if there had not been an insurrection in the Army of
Agathocles) Bomilcar who was General of the Carthaginians, had revolted to him
with the remainder of his Army: For which offense he was fastened to a Cross in
the middle of the Marketplace, to make the same place the monument of his
punishment which before was famous for the Installation of his honors. But
Bomilcar with so great resolution endured this cruelty of the Citizens, that he
declaimed against the wickedness of the Carthaginians from the height of the
Cross, as from the height of a judgment seat: Sometimes he objected how Hanno
was circumvented by them with false accusation that he aspired to the Kingdom;
sometimes he did call into their memory the banishment of innocent Gisco;
sometimes the silent suffrages against his Uncle Amilcar; sometimes he alleged
the nature of his own offense, which was that he had rather make Agathocles a
friend unto them then an Enemy: After he had roared out this in a great
Assembly of the people, he expired. In the mean time, Agathocles having
overcome all in Africa, did deliver his Army to his eldest Son Archagathus, and
returned into Sicily, conceiving that nothing had been performed in Africa, if
Syracusae in Sicily was any longer besieged: For after the slaughter of Amilcar
the Son of Gisco, the Carthaginians had sent a new Army thither: Therefore on
his first approach, all the Cities of Sicily, having heard of his achievements
in Africa, did strive (as if in emulation) which first should surrender it self
unto him; and by this means the Carthaginians being driven out of Sicily, he
became the a^^olute Master of the whole Island; And returning afterward to
Africa, he was received by an insurrection of his Soldiers; for his Son had
deferred the payment of the Army until his Father returned. Having therefore
called them to an Assembly, he stroaked them with fair words, and told them
that their Pay was not to be demanded of him, but to be sought for from their
Enemy, and that a common victory would produce a common booty: He desired them
to be patient but a little until the relicts of the war were ended, and when
Carthage was taken, he would satisfy all their hopes. The military tumult
being thus pacified, some few days afterward, he did bring his Army to the
Camp of his Enemies, and inconsiderately engaging with them, he lost the
greatest part of his Army. Therefore when he was fled into his Tents, and saw
the envy and blame of the ill managed war turned upon himself, and feared
withal the former offense of having not paid his Army, he fled away about
midnight, having not any with him but his Son Archagathus, which when his
Soldiers understood, they were struck with so great a fear, as if they had
been all taken by their Enemies. They declared that they were twice abandoned
by their King in the midst of all their Enemies, and that their safety was
forsaken by him who ought by the Law of Arms to take care of their burial. When
they would have purchased their King who was received by the Numidians, they
were enforced to fly back unto their Tents; but Archagathus was taken by them,
who had lost his Father in the error of the night. In the mean time, Agathocles
had embarked himself for Syracusae in the same ships which brought him from
Sicily. He was a singular Example; a King, and yet the forsaker of his Army;
and a Father, and yet the betrayer of his children: But his Soldiers having
articled for an agreement in Africa, after the flight of the King, did deliver
themselves to the Carthaginians, having first killed the Sons of Agathocles.
Archagathus being commanded to be slain by Archesilaus his Fathers old friend,
demanded of him, what he thought that Agothocles would do by his children by
whom he was made childless: To whom he answered, That it was enough for him to
understand that they outlived the children of Agathocles. After this the
Carthaginians sent Commanders into Sicily^, to prosecute the relicts of the
war, with whom on equal conditions Agathocles did conclude a peace.

THE Three and twentieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
AGathocles King of Sicily, having made peace with the Carthaginians, subdued
part of the Cities dissenting from him through confidence of their own
strength. Afterward, as if he had been confined too closely in the bounds of
one Island, a part whereof in his first beginnings he could not presume so much
as to hope for, he transported his Army into Italy, following the example of
Dionysius who subdued many Cities in that Nation. His first Enemies were the
Brutii, who appeared to him to be the most valiant and the most rich, and by
their situation most prompt to be injured by their neighbors; for they had
driven from Italy the Inhabitants of many Cities, who had been Grecians, and in
war had overcome the Lucanians from whom they had derived their Original, and
had afterward made peace with them on equal terms: So great was the wildness
of their nature, that they would not spare their own Original. For the
Lucanians were accustomed to institute their children in the same Laws as the
Lacedaemonians did: For in their beginning to be striplings, they were bred up
in the Woods amongst the Shepherds without any to attend them, and without any
garment to put on, or to lie down in, that so in their first years they might
inure themselves to hardness and frugality without any accommodation of the
City: Their food was what they got by Hunting; their drink, honey and milk, and
the chry^^al of the Fountain; And thus they by degrees were hardened to the
labors of the war. Fifty of their number were first accustome^ to plunder the
Fields of their neighbors, their multitude increasing, and solicited by the
prey, they troubled all the Countries round about them.

Therefore Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily, being wearyed with the complaints of
his Confederates, did send six hundred Africans to suppress them, whose Castle
(it being betrayed to them by a woman called Brutia they surprised and planted
there a City; the Shepherds flocking thither to behold and inhabit the new
City, called themselves Bruti^, after the name of the woman. Their first war
was with the Lucanians, the au horse of their original; and being elevated with
the victory over them, when they had made a peace on equal terms, they subdued
the rest of their Neighbors, and in a short time purchased so much wealth,
that they seemed formidable even unto Kings. At last, Alexander King of Epirus,
when he came with a great Army to the assi^^ance of the Grecian Cities, was
destroyed by them with all his Forces; whereupon, the resolutions of them being
inflamed by the success of their felicity, they became terrible to their own
Neighbors. At last, Agathocles being implored to invade them, in the h pe of
enlarg ng his Territories, he passed from Sicily into I aly. The Brutians being
startled at the noise (...) his approach, did send Ambassadors into Sicily to
him, desiring his society and right ^and of friendship, whom Agothocles
deluded; for having invited them to supper, he promised them audience the next
day, and on the morning following he embarked his Army for Italy, the
Ambassadors suspecting no such thing: But the event of the deceit was not
fortunate; for not long after the violence of his disease did enforce him to
return into Sicily, and being taken over all his body (the pestiferous humor
raging in all his nerves and every joint) he was assaulted as it were with an
inward war of every member. By this desperation of his Recovery, a war began
betwixt his Son and his Nephew, both challenging the Kingdom, as if he had been
dead; in this war his Son being slain, his Nephew possessed himself of the
Kingdom. Agathocles, when the painfulness of his disease, and the difficulty of
the cure and the anguish of his mind did daily increase, and one malady did
grow upon and strive to overtake and exceed the former, dispairing of his life,
did by Sea send back his wife Theogena to Egypt from whence he fetched her,
and two small children which he begot of her, with all his money, family, and
Princely movables, in which none of the Kings then living did exceed him;
fearing lest the fury of his Enemy, who usurped and plundered his Kingdom,
should se^^e on them also. Nevertheless his wife would not be a^ long (...)me
plucked from the embraces of her sick husband, and did beseech him, That her
departure might not be added to the cruelty of his Nephew, and she might seem
as unconscionably to forsake her husband, as he to have made war against his
Uncle; she affirmed that when she married him, she not only undertook to be a
partaker in his prosperities, but in all fortunes whatsoever, and would
willingly purchase with the danger of her own life the sad happiness to receive
the last breath of her husband, and perform his funeral Rights, in which (she
being gone) there was none left to succeed her with that obsequiousness of
piety which was due unto him. His little children departing, did hang upon
their father, and embraced him with many doleful complaints. On the other part,
his wife who should see her husband no more, did weary him with her kisses; and
no less miserable were the tears of the old man: The Mother and Children
bewailed the dying Father, the Father bewailed his banished wife and children.
They at their departure lamented the melancholy estate of the old and sick man
their Father: he lamented the condition of his children, and that they should
be left in misery whom he had brought up unto the hope of a Kingdom. Amongst
these complaints all the Court resounded with the lamentations of the Standers,
to behold this so sad a departure; at length the necessity of their Journey,
did impose an end to their tears; and the death of the King did follow his
traveling Family.

Whiles these things were in agitation, the Carthaginians understanding how the
affairs were carried in Sicily, conceiving that an occasion was offered to them
to become Masters of the whole Island, they passed thither with a great Army,
and subdued many Cities. At the same time, Pyrrhus made war against the Romans,
and being desired by the Sicilians to assist them (as has been mentioned
heretofore) when he came to Syracusae, and had there conquered many places, he
was called as well King of Sicily as of Epirus. In which felicity rejoicing, he
bestowed on his Son Helenus, whom he begat on the daughter of Agathocles, the
Kingdom of Sicily, as discending to him by the privilege of Inheritance, and
gave to his Son Alexander the Kingdom of Italy: After this he made many
prosperous battles with the Carthaginians. In the process of time, there came
Ambassadors from his Confederates in Italy, reporting that they could not
resist the Romans, and that they must surrender all unto them unless they were
relieved with sudden supplies. Being perplexed with this doubtful danger, and
uncertain what to determine, or whom first to assist, he providently consulted
for the safefy of both. For the Carthaginians pressing him on this side, and
the Romans on the other, it appeared dangerous unto him not to transport his
Army into Italy, but far more dangerous to abandon Sicily, least that the one
should not appear forsaken, nor the other lost for the want of Recruits. In
this tempest of growing dangers, the safest haven of Counsels did appear to
fight it out in Sicily with all the powers he could make; and the Carthaginians
being beaten, to carry his conquering Army into Italy. The battles therefore
being joined, although he overcame his Enemies, yet because he withdrew his
Army from Sicily, he was interpreted to be overcome, and his Confederates
revolting from him, he lost speedily the Kingdom of Sicily, as he easily did
obtain it. But having found no better fortune in Italy, he returned into
Epirus: His fortune in both these places was as admirable as exemplar; For as
before in his prosperity, the happiness of his affairs flowing above and beyond
his desires, he added the command of Italy to Sicily, and grew glorious by many
victories against the Romans: ^so now in his adversity, his Fortune having
destroyed what she had builded, and made him an example of humane frailty, she
added to the loss of Sicily the ruin of his Navy at Sea; and the disgraceful
battle against the Romans, and his dishonorable departure from Italy.

After his departure from Sicily also, Hiero was made chief Magistrate, whose
moderation was so great, that with the approbation of all the Citizens, he was
created General against the Carthaginians, and not long afterward King. His
infant Education was a Prophetess of his future Majesty; for he was the Son of
Hieroclytus a noble man, who derived his original from Gelus an ancient Tyrant
of Sicily, but his birth on the Mothers side was sordidly ignominious: For he
was begotten on a Mayd-servant, who was his mother; and therefore it was
commanded by his Father, that he should be exposed as the disgrace and
dishonor of his Family. But the Bees having laid honey round about him where
he was left, did nourish him, being very young, and wanting all humane comfort
for many days; by reason of which his Father being admonished by the
South*sayers, who persaged in their songs that the Kingdom was portended to
him, did cause him to be brought home, and with all his care and endeavor, did
instruct and bring up to that hope of Majesty which was promised; being but a
boy at Shool amongst his companions, a Wolf suddenly appearing, took his book
from him; and being a young man, and learning his first rudiments in the art of
war, an Eagle pearched on his buckler, and on Owl on his Spear; which did
presage, that he should be wary in Counsel, high in courage, and be crowned a
King at last. He often fought with those that challenged him, and always
returned a Conqueror; he was rewarded by King Pyrrhus with many Military gifts;
he was as admirable for his strength as for the beauty of his body; pleasing in
discourse, just in employment, moderate in command, and nothing could be seen
that was wanting in him of a King, but the Kingdom only.

THE Four and twentieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
WHile these things were thus managed in Sicily, King Ptolomy surnamed
Ceraunicus, and Antiochus and Antigonus dissenting in Greece and making war
amongst themselves, almost all the Cities of Greece being encouraged by it, as
if an occasion were offered them to recover their liberty, did send to one
another; and by their Ambassadors having obliged themselves into a league of
friendship, they did break forth into an apparent war; and that they might not
seem to make war with Antigonus, they assaulted the Aetolians his Confederates,
pretending that the cause of the war was because they had by force possessed
themselves of the Cyrean Fields, which by the consent of all Greece, were
dedicated to Apollo.

To this war, they made choice of Aras for their General, who with a prepared
Army* did spoil both the Cities and wrecks of Corn which was laid up in those
Fields, and what they could not take, they did set on fire: Which when the
Aetolian Shepherds beheld from the tops of the Mountains, having drawn
themselves together into a body of five hundred, they pursued their scattered
Enemies, not knowing how numerous they were, because the amazement of the
sudden assault, and the smoke of the fire had taken from them the full
discovery of their Enemies, and having killed nine thousand of them, they put
the residue to fight.

After this the Spartans beginning the war again, many of the Cities denied
them aid, conceiving that they sought not after liberty, but the sovereign
command of Greece. In the mean time, the wars amongst the Kings were ended; for
Ptolomy having beaten away Antigonus, and possessed himself of the Kingdom of
all Macedonia, did make peace with Antiochus, and joined in affinity with
Pyrrhus, his daughter being given to him in marriage; and being safe from all
fear of a foreign Enemy, he turned his unrighteous mind to commit domestic
wickedness, and by treachery prepared the destruction of Arsinoe his sister,
that he might both deprive her Sons of life, and her self of the possession of
the City of Cassandria. His first artifice was by dissembling his love to
convert his sister in the way of marriage; for he could not otherwise then by
the pretense of love find access to the Sons of his sister whose Kingdom he
would enjoy. But this wicked design of Ptolomy was made known unto her; but he
did send her word (not giving any belief unto him) that he would come and join
with her Sons in the fellowship of the Kingdom, with whom he would not contend
in arms to force the Kingdom from them, but because he would more confirm it on
them by his presence and assistance. To this effect, he desired that she would
send one to be the Attestator of his oath, before whom he would oblige himself
with what obsecrations she would desire in the presence of the gods of his
Country. Arsinoe was uncertain what to resolve upon, fearing, if she should
send, she should be deceived by perjury: and if she should not send, she should
pull upon her the fury of her brothers cruelty. But more careful for her
children then for her self, whom she thought she should be the better able to
protect by her marriage with her brother, she sent Dione one of her friends,
who being brought into the most holy Temple of Jupiter (a Temple of the ancient
Religion of the Macedons) Ptolomy having laid his hands on the Altars and
touching the Images and Cushions of the gods, did swear by unheard of and
devoted imprecations, that he most sincerely did desire the marriage of his
sister, and that he would call her his Queen, neither would he ever in the
disgrace of her take any other wife, or own any other children but her Sons.
Arsinoe after she was delivered from fear, and became pregnant with hope, and
had conference with her brother, whose countenance and flattering eyes promised
no less belief then did his Oaths, although Ptolomy his Son did apparently
dissuade her, and informed her of the deceit, yet she consented to marry with
her Brother. The Nuptials were celebrated with great solemnity, and with the
public joy of the people. And Ptolomy having that day called forth the Army to
an Assembly, he there imposed a Diadem on the head of his sister, and called
her his Queen; with which title Arsinoe being transported with joy (because she
had now regained that which she had lo^t before by the death of her former
husband Lysimachus) did of her own accord invite her husband to her City of
Cassandria, for the desire of which the deceit was contrived: And going before
to complete the preparations, she commanded that a holy day should be observed
in the City for the approach of her Husband, and that the Houses, Temples and
the streets should be adorned, and that Altars should be erected everywhere,
and that sacrifices should be in a readiness. She also commanded her two Sons,
Lysimachus of sixteen years of Age, and Philip three years younger, being both
of an excellent feature and complexion, to meet him with Crowns on their heads.
Ptolomy the better to conceal his deceit, having greedily embraced them both
(and beyond the measure of true affection) did a long time even smother them
with his kisses. When he approached to the Gate of the City, he commanded the
Citadel to be seized on, and the two boys to be slain, who when they fled to
their Mother, they were killed in her very lap as she was kissing them; Arsinoe
exclaiming that Ptolomy had committed so abominable a crime under the pretense
of marriage, and offered herself to the Executioners for her children, and
oftentimes with her own body she protected the embraced bodies of her children,
and would willingly receive the wounds which were intended to them: At the last
being denied to be present at the funerals of her children, she was brought out
of the City with two handmaids only, her garments torn, and her hair
dishevelled, to lead a banished life in Samothracia, being so much the more
miserable, that it could not be permitted to her to die with her own children.

But this wickedness of Ptolomy was not unrevenged; for the immortal gods
revenging so many perjures and cruel Parricides, he was not long after
dispoyled of his Kingdom by the Gauls, and being taken, he lost his life by the
sword as he deserved. For the Gauls (their multitudes abounding, when the Land
^n which they were born could not contain them) did send as it were like
vagabond sojourners three hundred thousand men to look out new habitations:
Part of them sat down in Italy, who took and set on fire the City of Rome;
part of them (through the Armies of the Barbarians who opposed them) did out
their way into the Coasts of Illyria, and inhabited Pannonia, following the
auspication of the birds, in which Art the Gauls excel above all others; a
hardy, bold, and warlike Nation, who first after Hercules (to whom this attempt
gave an admiration for his virtue, and a belief of immortality) did pass over
the unconquered H lls of the Alps, and places intractible by the extremity of
cold, where having overcome the Pannonians, they for many years made sundry
wars with their Neighbors. Afterward by the temptations of success, having
divided their strength, some of them advanced as far as Greece, some as far as
Macedonia, laying all things waste before them. So great was the terror of
their Name, that Kings not provoked by them would of their own accords buy
their p ace with vast sums of money: Only Ptolomy King of Macedonia d^^
without ^e^r at end the arrival of the Gauls, and with a few S^u^d^ers, and
those disordered (s if wars were managed with no less d fficulty then
parricides were committed) e did advance to meet them being tormented with the
furies of his bloody Acts. He despised also the Embassage of the Dardanians,
offering him twenty thousand armed men to aid him, adding this to their
contumely, that Macedonia was in a sad condition, if when they alone overcame
all the East, they should now stand in need of the Dardanian Citizens to be
revenged of their Enemies: He boasted that he had the Sons of those in his
Army, who being Conquerors under Alexander the Great, made all the World
tributary to him.

Which when it was reported to King Dardanus, he said that the renowned Kingdom
of Macedonia would shortly fall by the rashness of one heady young man. But the
Gauls under the commannd of Belgius, did send Ambassadors to Ptolomy, to try
the Resolutions of the Macedons, offering him peace if he would purchase it
with money; But Ptolomy vaunted to his Subjects, that the Gauls did supplicate
to him to have peace for fear of the war, and did speak as insolently to the
Ambassadors as to his Subjects; He assured them that he would grant them no
peace, unless they should give him their Princes for Hostages, and deliver up
their Arms; for he would not believe them unless they were disarmed.

This answer being returned, The Gauls laughed outright, crying out on every
side that he should shortly perceive whether they offered peace unto him for
his advantage or their own. Some few days after, the battle was fought; and
the Macedons being overcome, were beaten down: Ptolomy having received many
wounds was taken, his head was cut off, and being fixed on the point of a
Lance, it was carried all about the Army to the terror of the Macedons: So
fatal was this overthrow, and so great the rout, that few of them were
preserved by flight, the rest were either all slain or taken Prisoners. When
this was reported throughout all Macedonia, the Gates of the Cities were shut,
all places were filled with mourning; sometimes they lamented the loss of their
children, sometimes they feared the destruction of their Cities, they called
upon the names of Alexander and Philip, as if their Kings had been their gods,
and emplored their assistance under whom they were safe, not only against
their Enemies, but also Conquerors of the World; they emplored them that they
would defend their Country, which by the glory of their achievements, they had
made second unto Heaven, and to relieve those now in their distress, whom the
fury and rashness of King Ptolomy had destroyed. All men despairing, Sosthenes
one of the Princes of the Macedons, thinking that in this extremity they must
use deeds as well as prayers, having drawn the youth of the Macedons into a
body, he both restrained the Gauls growing insolent with their Victory, and
defended the Macedons from the plunderings of their Enemies; for which benefit
of his conduct and valor (many of the Noble men of Macedonia affecting the
Kingdom) he by his birth although ignoble, was advanced above them all* and
being saluted King by the Army, he compelled the Soldiers to take the Oath of
Allegiance, not in name of the King, but of the General.

In the mean time, Brennus under whose command one part of the Gauls had poured
themselves into Greece, having understood of the victory of his Associates, who
under Belgiu had overcome the Macedons, disdaining that so rich a booty and
laden with the spoils of the East, should so easily be abandoned, having
amassed a body of one hundred and fifty thousand foot, and fifteen thousand
horse, did break into Macedonia: and having plundered the Towns, and preyed the
Fields, Sosthenes did advance against him with a gallant Army of the Macedons,
but being not so numerous, they were overcome by the multitude, and the weaker
by the stronger. The Macedonians being overcome, did hide themselves within the
Walls of their Cities, and Brennus being Conqueror, did plunder up and down the
Country of all Macedonia no man opposing him; And as if those spoils were too
unworthy of his avarice, he turned his mind to the Temples of the immortal
gods, profanely asserting that the gods being rich, ought out of their
abundance to contribute unto the poverty of men. He presently therefore marched
to Delphos, preferring gold, the temptation of Religion, above the violation of
the immortal gods, who he affirmed did stand in no need of riches, it being
their custom to bestow them upon men.

The Temple of Apollo is placed at Delphos on the Hill of Parnassus, a rock
everywhere hanging over it, in which place the frequent confluence of men did
erect a City, who coming thither in great numbers, to the confirmation of the
Majesty of the god did inhabit on that Rock. The Temple and City is not
defended by Walls, but by precipices not made by hands, but made strong and
guarded by Nature; so that it is hard to say, whether the strength of the
place, or the majesty of the god be more to be admired: The middle of the Rock
does open it self into the form of a Theater, by reason whereof, the clamor of
men, and the clangor of the Trumpets when they are sounded (the hollowness of
the Rocks returning and banding the sound from one to another and playing with
it amongst themselves) the sound is heard more multiplied by the reboation, and
appears greater far then when at first it was delivered. This is that which
strikes a greater terror of Majesty into those who are ignorant of the cause,
and adds a reverent amazement to the admiration; much about this hollow of the
Rock on the middle of the height of the Hill, there is a little plain, and in
it a deep hole, out of which the Oracle proceeds, which being a cold breath
driven up as it were by a wind, does possess the minds of the Priests with a
madness, who being filled with god, he does enforce them to give answers to
those who do demand them: By reason of this, there were to be seen many and
very rich gifts, both of Kings and others, who do manifest by their
magnificence both the gratititudes of the Givers, and the Answers of the gods.

Brennus when he beheld the Temple, did make a halt with his Army, debating
whither he should presently assault it, or give his weary Soldiers the respite
of one night, to refresh themselves. Euridanus and Tessalonus two Commanders,
who joined themselves unto him in hope of the booty, did counsel him to cut off
all delays, whiles the Enemies were unprepared, and his new approach had
struck a terror into them; but they affirmed that if they should give them the
deliberation of one night, the Enemies might put on new resolutions by the
access of new supplies, and the ways which now lay open might be obstructed.
But the common Soldiers of the Gauls out of their long want, when they found
the Country to abound with wines, and all manner of provision, did disperse
themselves about the Fields, being no less joyful with the abundance they
found, then with their victory; and forsaking their Ensigns, they did range up
and down as Conquerors to seize on all things; which gave some respite to the
Delphians; for on the first report of the coming of the Gauls, the Country
people were prohibited by the Oracle to bring their Vintage and Harvest into
their Towns: which saving counsel was not understood until the abundance of
wine and other provisions being left as a temptation and delay to the Gauls,
the Auxiliaries of the neighboring Countries had the leisure to draw together;
and the Delphians being increased by the access of their Forces, did fortify
their City, before the Gauls falling to their swill of Wine as to their prey,
could be called to their Standards.

Brennus out of all his Army made choice for this service of threescore and
five thousand foot. The Army of the Delphians and their Associates did not
amount to above fourteen thousand, in contempt of whom, Brennus the more to
encourage his men, did show them the greatness of the booty, and the Statues
drawn with four horse (of which a vast number were seen afar off) all with
solid gold; moreover he affirmed to them that the booty was far more
considerable in the weight then in the show. With this information the Gauls
being as much inflamed as with their last nights Wine, did fall upon the onset
without respect of danger. The Delphians on the other side, putting their
confidence in their god, and not in their own strength, did with contempt
oppose their Enemies, and from the top of the Hill, some of them with Arms, and
some with stones did overwhelm and repel the Gauls in their Scalado. In the
heat of this encounter, on a sudden the Priests of all the Temples, and the
Prophets themselves with their hair dishevelled in their most solemn habits and
fillets did tremble all with indignation, and did run forth mad into the Front
of the Army: where the fight most violently was maintained, They cried out that
their god was come down, and that they beheld him leaping into the Temple,
laughing from the opened Roofs thereof; for whiles they most humbly emplored
his help, a young man as admirable in his beauty as the tall proportion of his
body, with two armed Virgins who were his Companions did appear, and did meet
them out of the two adjoining Temples of Diana and Minerva; neither did they
only behold them with their eyes, but they heard also the twang of his Bow,
and the clashing of his Armor; they therefore conjured them by the utmost
Imprecations, that they would not delay to make a thorow-dispatch upon their
Enemies, the gods being their Leaders, and to join themselves Companions with
them in the Victory; with these words being enflamed, they did all throw
themselves upon the points of their Enemies swords, and immediately they
perceived the presence of their god; For part of the Hill (being torn off by an
Earthquake) did overwhelm the Army of the Gauls, and the most thick and pointed
wedges did fall to the ground not without some wounds to the Delphians.
Immediately there followed a great Tempest of hayl, lightning, and thunder
which devoured those who fainted by reason of their wounds. Brennus their
General, when he could not endure the anguish of his wounds, did end his life
with his Poynedo. Belgius the other of their Generals, the Authors of this war
being punished, departed in a flying march out of Greece with ten thousand of
his Associates: But Fortune was not more propitious to them flying; for fearful
as they were, there was no night without rain or cold, nor day without labor
and danger, but daily storms and snow concrete with Ice, and hunger, and
weariness, and above all the great evil of too much watching did consume the
miserable Relics of the unhappy war. The people also and Nations through which
they marched, did pursue them flying before them as a prey; By which means it
came to pass, that not one of so great an Army, who not long before being too
confident in their strength and numbers presumed to plunder the gods, did now
remain to witness the remembrance of so great an overthrow.

THE Five and twentieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
PEace being concluded betwixt the two Kings, Antigonus and Antiochus; when
Antigonus returned into Macedonia, a new Enemy did on a sudden arise unto him;
for the Gauls who were left by Brennus to defend the bounds of the Nation, when
he advanced into Greece (that they alone might not seem idle) having armed
fifteen thousand foot, and three thousand horse, did invade the Getes and
Tribals, and having overcome them, they did hang like a dark cloud over
Macedonia, and sent their Ambassadors to King Antigonus to offer him a
mercenary Peace, and to discover his strength. Antigonus with royal
magnificence did invite them to a stately Banquet, set forth in the highest
manner that could be devised. The Gauls admiring the vast weights of gold and
silver, which on purpose were laid open to their observations, and being
provoked by the abundance and variety of the booty, returned more greedy of
war, then when they came forth. The King also commanded that the Elephants
should be showed unto them for a terror, it being a sight unaccustomed to them,
and that they should see the ships laden with Soldiers, and gallantly
equipped, being ignorant that he did hereby tempt them by the rlchness of the
booty, whom he thought to have affrighted by the greatness of his power.

The Ambassadors being returned, made all things greater then they were, and
declared both the wealth and the security of the King; his Tents, they said,
were covered with gold and silver, and defended neither by works nor ditches:
and as if their riches were defense enough, they neglected all Military duties,
thinking (belike) that they needed not the defense of Iron, because they
abounded with gold: By this relation the desires of the greedy Nation were the
more provoked to the prey. The Example of Belgius did the more excite them, who
not long before had overthrown the Army of the Macedons, and killed the King
himself. With the general consent of all, they in the night did invade the
Tents of the King, who foreseeing this tempest, did give order the day before
to take away all the precious movables, and privately to hide themselves in
the adjoining woods; neither was the Camp otherwise preserved, then that it was
thus abandoned; For the Gauls when they saw all things forsaken and not only
without Defenders, but also without a Guard, conceiving it to be rather an
Ambush then a flight, they did forbear for a while, to enter into the Ports
thereof. At last, they possessed themselves of them, rather examining and
searching then plundering them, and not long afterward, taking away what they
found, they did carry it to the shore; There when too rashly they thought to
seize upon the ships, they were killed by the Seamen, and by a part of the
Land Army, who fled thither with their Wives and children suspecting no such
danger: And so great was the slaughter of the Gauls, that the report and
opinion of this Victory procured peace to Antigonus, not from the Gauls, but
some other stubborn Enemies who were his Neghbors.

The young men of the Gauls at that time were so numerous that they swarmed all
over Asia, neither did the Kings of the East manage any wars without the
mercenary Army of the Gauls; neither did those who were banished or beaten from
their Kingdoms, address themselves unto any but to the Gauls only. So great
was the terror of their name, or the invincible happiness of their Arms, that
the King believed their Majesty was not safe, nor could they recover it being
lost, unless they were assisted by the valor of the Gauls: Being therefore
called by the King of Bithynia to his help, and the Victory obtained, they
divided the Kingdom with him, and called that Country Gallograecia; Whiles
these things were performed in Asia, Phyrrus being overcome by the
Carthaginians in a battle at Sea, desired aid of Antigonus King of Macedonia,
declaring that if he assisted him not, he must be enforced to return into his
Kingdom, and seek the advancement of his Fortunes from the Romans. Which when
his Ambassadors brought him word was denied, (having dissembled the reason) he
pretended a sudden departure.

In the mean time, he commanded hls Confederates to provide for the war, and
delivered the Government of the Tower of Tarentum to Helenus his Son and Milo
his friend. Being returned into Epirus, he immediately invaded the bounds of
Macedonia, where Antigonus did meet him with an Army, and being overcome by
him, was put to flight; Pyrrhus hereupon did take Macedonia into his power, and
as if he had balanced the loss of Italy and Sicily with the regaining of the
Kingdom of Macedonia, he did send both for his Son and for his friend, which he
did leave at Tarentum. Antigonus with a few horsemen the Companions of his
flight, being on a sudden forsaken of all the ornaments of his dignity, did
repair to Thessalonica, to behold the events of his lost Kingdom, hiring a
mercenary Army of the Gauls to renew the war; And being again utterly
overthrown by Ptolomy the Son of Pyrrhus, and in his flight attended but with
seven men, he not only lost all hope of the recovery of his Kingdom, but fled
into solitary places and made them the best procurers of his safety.

Pyrrhus being now advanced to so great a height of sovereignty, was not
content with that which with modesty he durst not aspire unto in his hopes, but
propounded unto himself the Empire both of Greece and Asia; he took a felicity
and pride in his wars as in his Sovereignty; for no man could resist him
whithersoever he turned his power; but as he was esteemed invincible in adding
Kingdom unto Kingdom, so having overcome them and obtained them, he quickly
lost them, being more fortunate to obtain then to preserve; having afterward
transported his forces on the other side of Chersonesus, he was received by the
Embassies of the Athenians, Achaians, and Messenians; And all Greece amazed at
the glory of his name, and at the wonders of his Achievements against the
Romans and Carthaginians, did with a laboring expectation attend his arrival.

His first war in Greece was against the Lacedaemonians, where he was opposed
more by the valor of the women then the men: There he lost his Son Ptolomy,
and the ablest and the choycest men in his Army: For so great a multitude of
women did press in throngs upon him for the defense of their Country, as he was
besieging Sparta, that he was enforced to retreat from them, being not more
valiantly then modesty overcome. Moreover, it is affirmed that his Son Ptolomy
was so able a man of his hands, that he took the City of Corcyra being followed
only with threescore men. In a battle at Sea, there being but seven men with
him, he leaped out of his boat into the ship of his Enemies, and did enforce it
to obedience. And at the assault of the City of Sparta he gallopped into the
middle of the City, and was there killed by the concurse of the multitude,
whose body, when it was brought unto his Father, it is reported that Pyrrhus
said thar he was slain a great while later then he feared or then his rashness
did deserve. Pyrrhus being beaten back by the Spartans, did march to Argos,
where when he endeavored to besiege Antigonus shut up in that City, he
(fighting most violently amongst the thickest and the foremost) was slain with a
stone thrown from the Walls; his head was brought unto Antigonus, who using the
victory with gentleness, did dismiss his Son Helenus delivered to him with
Epirus, and gave him leave to depart to his own Kingdom, and delivered him the
body of his unburyed Father to be interred in his own Country. Amongst all
Authors the Fame is constant and clear enough, that no King either of that or
the former Age, was to be compared to Pyrrhus; and that not only amongst
Kings, but other personages, there was seldom any to be found of a more just or
a more Religious life. So great was his knowledge in Military affairs, that
although he made war with so great Kings, as Lysimachus, Demetrius, and
Antigonus, yet he always remained unconquered. In the war also of the
Illyrians and Sicilians, and of the Romans, and Carthaginians, he was never
inferior to them, and oftentimes a Conqueror, who though his Country was but
narrow, and before ignoble, by the Fame of his achievements and the
uprightness of his conversation he did renown it over all the World.

THE Six and twentieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
AFter the death of Pyrrhus there were great motions and tumults of war, not
only in Macedonia but in Asia also and in Greece, for the Pelopennesians were
by treachery betrayed to Antigonus, and according to the several inclinations
of the Inhabitants, partaking either of joy or grief, as the several Cities
either hoped for aid from Pyrrhus, or were afraid of his power; so now they
either entered into league with Antigonus, or flung themselves upon a war by the
mutual hatred amongst themselves.

In this commotion of the troubled Provinces, the City also of Epirus was by
tyranny invaded by Aristotimus the Prince; by whom when many of the Rulers of
the City were slain, and more of them driven into banishment, the Aetolians
desiring of him by their Ambassadors, that the Exuls might be permitted to have
their wives and children come unto them, he at the first denied it, and
afterward as if he had repented of what he had denied, he gave all the Matrons
leave to repair unto their banished husbands, and appointed a day for their
departure. They as if they should for ever suffer banishment with their
husbands, taking with them their richest movables, when they had met at the
gate of the City to travel all in one troup, they were apprehended and
committed to prison, and plundered of all their goods, the little children being
slain in the laps of their Mothers, and the Virgins their daughters ravished.
All men being amazed at this domineering cruelty, one of their Rulers Helemat
by name, an old man, and destitute of children, and one that feared not the
respect of age, being not obliged to the respect of pledges, having called to
his house the most faithul of his friends did exhort them to the revenge of
their Country.

They all debating on a way to conclude the public with their private danger,
and desiring a time for deliberation, he sending for his servants, did command
them to lock the doors, withal to go unto the Tyrant, and desire him to send
some of his Guard to apprehend the Conspirators assembled in his house,
objecting to every one of them, that because he could not be the Author of
delivering his Country, he would be the revenger of it being forsaken by them.
Hereupon they being surprised with a doubtful danger, choosing the more
honorable way of the two, they conspired to kill the Tyrant, and Aristotimus
by this means was slain in the fifth Month af er he had usurped the Tyranny.

In the mean time, Antigonus being oppressed with several wars, which he made
against King Ptolomy and the Lacedaemonians, and a new Army of Enemies from
Gallograecia, having left in his Camp some few Companies to defend it against
the other Enemies, he marched with his chief power against the Gauls: Which
being understood, the better to prepare themselves to the fight, they did offer
sacrifices for the good event of the battle; And a great slaughter and utter
destruction, being persaged to them by the entrails of the beasts, they
desperately turning their fear into a fury, hoping that the threatenings and the
anger of the gods could be expiated by the slaughter of their Families, they
killed their wives and children, beginning the auspications of the war with
such a detestable Parricide: So great was the barbarousness of their savage
minds, that they did not forbear their Infants and the tenderness of that age
which even their Enemies would have spared, but made a na^alitious and an
intrinsic war with their own bowels their children, and with the mothers of
their children, for whom others are accustomed to undertake wars: Therefore as
if they had redeemed the Victory and their lives by the barbarous cruelty,
(bloody as they were from the streaming murders of their wives and children)
they joined in battle with their Enemies with no better event then the
auspication promised; for fighting, the furies of their own consciences did
surround them before their Enemies, and the Ghosts of those whom they had
murdered, ptesenting themselves always before their eyes, they fell upon a
final desolation. So great was the slaughter, that the gods did seem to have
combined with men for their utter destruction.

After the event of this battle, Ptolomy and the Lacedaemonians declining the
conquering Army of Antigonus, did retreat into more safe places: Antigonus when
he perceived that they were departed, the courage of his Soldiers being
flushed with the former Victory, did make war upon the Athenians: In which,
when he was engaged, Alexander King of Epirus desiring to revenge his Fathers
death, did plunder the borders of Macedonia; against whom when Antigonus
marched, being returned out of Greece, he was forsaken by his Soldiers who
revolted from him, and did lose with his Army the Kingdom of Macedonia. His Son
Demetrius being in his minority having leavied a new Army in his Fathers
absence, did not only recover Macedonia that was lost, but dis-invested
Alexander of his Kingdom of Epirus. So great was the inconstancy of the
Soldiers, or the variety of Fortune, that Kings were even now but banished
men, and by and by they were Kings again. Alexander when he fled as a banished
man into Arcadia, was not long after restored into his Kingdoms with as great
an applause of the Epirots as with the help of their Confederats.

At that time Agas King of the Cyrenians dyed who before his sickness (to
compose all strifes with his brother Ptolomy) had espoused his only daughter
Beronioe to his Son. But after the death of King Antigonus, Arsinoe the Mother
of the young Lady, that she might dissolve the marriage contracted without her
consent, did send for Demetrius the brother of King Antigonus from Macedonia,
not only to the marriage of Beronice, but to the Kingdom of Cyrene; Demetrius
being born himself of the daughter of Ptolomy, made not the least delay; but
having a forewind to his own desires, arrived suddenly at Cyrene, and by the
confidence of the comeliness of his personage, endeavoring to endeer himself to
his Mother-in-law Arsinoe, he began to deport himself very proudly to the royal
Family, and to domineer over the Soldiery, and to translate his affections and
his Courtship from the daughter to the mother, which was first discovered by
the daughter, and afterward abominated both by the people and the Soldiers:
Therefore all of them having changed their affections, a plot was laid for
Demetrius, to whom Executioners were sent being in bed with his Mother-in-law:
But Arsinoe having heard the voice of her daughter standing at the door, and
giving order to spare her Mother, did for a while with her own body protect the
adulterer, who being slain, Beronice with the preservation of her piety,
revenged the incontinency of her Mother; and in the choice of her husband did
follow the judgment of her Father.

THE Seven and twentieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
ANtiochus King of Syria being dead, when Seleucus his Son succeeded in his
place, he began his reign with Parricide, his mother persuading him to it, who
ought to have deterred him from it; for he killed his Stepmother Beronice with
his little brother begotten on her: Which horrible crime being committed, he
was not only tainted with Infamy, but withal he involved himself in a war
with Ptolomy. Moreover, Beronice when she understood that Executioners were
sent to take away her life, she shut up her self in her Fathers Daphne, where
when it was reported to the Cities of Asia, that she was besieged with her
little child, they calling to their minds the dignity of her Father, and of her
Ancestors, and prompted to compassion at the indignity of her Fortune, they all
sent aid unto her: Her brother Ptolomy being also startled at the danger of his
sister, having left his own Kingdom, did advance to her relief with all the
speed that could be. But before the arrival of any aid, Beronice when she could
not be taken by force, was killed by treachery: It was conceived by all to be a
subject most worthy of lamentation. Therefore when all the Cities who had
revolted from her, had provided a very great Fleet, being amazed at this
example of horrid cruelty, they did offer themselves and their ships to
Ptolomy, who if he had not been called back into Egypt by some intestine
sedition, had possessed himself of all the Kingdom of Seleucus; This
parricidial guilt had brought upon him so much hatred; or the unworthy death of
his sister had purchased to Ptolomyes much affection. After the death of
Ptolomy, when Seleucus had set forth a great Navy against the Cities which
revolted, immediately a great tempest arising, as if the gods themselves would
revenge this par^icide, he lost them all by Tempest, neither had he any thing
left of so great a preparation, but his naked body, and some few Companions of
his shipwreck whom Fortune had preserved alive; A lamentable thing it was, and
yet acceptable to him; for the Cities, which in hatred of him had revolted to
Seleucus (as if the gods were satisfied in his punishment, themselves being the
Arbitrators) by a sudden change of their mind, being touched with compassion
for his shipwreck, they did restore themselves unto the Authority of his
command: Rejoicing therefore in his calamity, and made more rich by loss, he
made war upon Ptolomy, conceiving himself now equal in strength unto him: But
as if he was born to be the sport of fortune, and had only received his
Kingdom again but to lose it again, being various in battle, and not much more
accompanied then after his shipwrark, he sled in great fear to Antiochia: from
whence he sent Letters to his Brother Antiochus, in which he did implore his
aid, and in recompense thereof did offer to him all that part of Asia which
lies on the bounds of the Hill Taurus.

Antiochus being but fourteen years of age, and greedy of Sovereignty above his
years, took hold of the occasion, but not with that pious mind as it was
offered; but desiring like an Oppressor, to force all from his brother, he
armed himself being but a boy with a wicked but a manly boldness; from his
ravenous disposition he was called Hierax, because in snatching away the goods
from other men he followed not the life of a man, but of a Bird of prey.

In the mean time, Ptolomy, when he understood that King Antiochus did advance
to the aid and help of Selencus, made peace with Seleucus for ten years, that
he might not fight at once against two: But peace being granted by the Enemy,
it was reversed by the Brother, who having drawn unto him a mercenary Army of
the Gauls, in the stead of a Brother did render himself an Enemy. In that war
by the prowess of the Gauls, Antiochus was Conqueror; but the Gauls believing
that Seleucus was slain in the battle, did turn their swords against Antiochus
himself, believing they should plunder Asia with more freedom, if they had
destroyed all the Royal Progeny. Which when Antiochus perceived, he ransomed
himself from them as from highway men with gold, and not long after entered
into a league with his own mercenaries.

In the mean time, Eumenes King of Bythinia, his Brothers being dispersed and
consumed with civil discords (being as it were to invade the uncertain
possession of Asia) assaulted the Gauls, and the Conqueror Antiochus at once,
who being weary, etc. many of them wounded in the former encounter, it was not
difficult for him to overcome them. In that time, all the wars were designed
for the destruction of Asia, and as one was more powerful then another, he
always seized upon Asia as a prey. The two Brothers, Seleucus and Antiochus did
wage war for Asia; Ptolomy King of Egypt in pretense to revenge his sister,
did also greedily covet the Empire of Asia; on this side Eumenes of Bythinia,
on the other side the Gauls being always a mercenary Army, did make a prey of
Asia; and amongst so manythere was no man found to be a Defender of it.
Antiochus being overcome, when Eumenes had possessed the greatest part thereof,
the two Brothers, (the booty being lost for which they made war) could not yet
agree amongst themselves, but, the foreign Enemy being neglected, they did
drive on a war for the mutual destruction of themselves: In which Antiochus
being overcome the second time, and wearyed with flying, which continued many
days, he at last directed his course to Artamenes his Father-in-law, who was
King of Cappodocia: He having nobly entertained him at first, did not long
after contrive to take away his life by treachery, which Antiochus having
understood, did provide for his safety by flight. And when wandering up and
down, he could find no place in which he might reside with safety, he repaired
to Ptolomy his Enemy, conceiving his assurance to be more safe then his
Brothers, being either conscious what he intended to him, or what he had
deserved of him; But Ptolomy being not to be reconciled to him, did command him
to be kept in close imprisonment, from whence by the endeavors of a woman whom
familiarly he knew, he made an escape, having deceived his Keepers, and flying
away, he was seized upon and killed by Thieves. Much at the same time, Seleucus
having lost his Kingdom (being thrown from his horse) did lose his life; and
thus these two brothers, being Brothers also in banishment, after the loss of
their Kingdoms, did suffer the punishment of their transgressions.

THE Eight and twentieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
OLympias the Daughter of Pyrrhus King of Epirus, having lost Alexander her
husband, who was also her Brother when she took upon her self the guardianship
of her two Sons Pyrrhus and Ptolomy begotten by him, and the Government also of
the Kingdom; the Aetolians attempting to force from her part of Acarnania which
her husband had purchased with his sword, she addressed her self to Demetrius
King of Macedonia, who having before espoused the sister of Antiochus King of
Syria, she delivered him her own Daughter Phytia in marriage also, that so by
the right of consanguinity she might obtain that assistance which she could not
procure by Compassion: The Nuptials therefore were solemnized by which the
favor of the new marriage was confirmed, and the offense for giving distaste to
the old was contracted: But the first wife (as if she had been divorced) did of
her own accord depart to her Brother Antiochus, and did by importunity enforce
him to make war upon her husband. The Arcanians also distrusting the Epirots,
did implore aid of the Romans against the Aetolians, and obtained of the Senate
of Rome that Ambassadors should be sent who should command the Aetolians to
withdraw their Garrisons from the Cities of Arcania, and permit those to be
free who only heretofore refused to aid the Grecians against the Trojans the
Authors of their Original. But the Aetolians returned a proud answer to the
Ambassadors of Rome, upbraiding them with the Carthaginians and the Gauls, by
whom they were oppressed with so many wars, and so often absolutely overcome;
they told them that they must first open their Gates to fight against the
Carthaginians, which the fear of the Punick war had shut, before they could
translate their Army into Greece: They desired them also to call to mind who
they were whom they threatened; the Romans (they said) could not defend their
own City against the Gauls; and it being taken, they did not rescue it by the
sword, but redeemed it with Gold; which Nation having invaded Greece with a far
greater number, they without any Auxiliaries received from strangers or from
their own Countrymen did totally overthrow, and gave them that seat for their
Sepulchers which they propounded to themselves for their Armies and their
Empire: On the other side, the Romans trembling at the burning of their City,
did give the leisure to the Gauls to possess themselves of almost all Italy.
They declared that the Gauls were first to be beaten out of Italy, before they
should impose any command upon the Aetolians, and that they should first defend
their own, before they should undertake to protect the interests of others;
proceeded further in disdainful Interrogatories; and what men are these Romans?
Shepherds who by robbery detained the Lands from their right Master; who
through the infamy of their descent, could not provide themselves with Wives,
unless they took them by violence; who erected their City by parricide, and
mingled the matter of the foundation with brothers blood. They declared, that
the Aetolians were always Princes of Greece, and exceeded others as much in
dignity as in valor; They were the only men who always despised the
Macedonians flourishing with the command and Sovereignty of the World, who
feared not King Philip, who contemned the Edicts of Alexander the Great, after
his conquest of the Persians and the Indians, when the world trembled under his
Laws. They therefore admonished the Romans to be contented with their present
fortune, nor provoke those Armies by whom they saw the Gauls were overthrown,
and the Macedons made contemptible; And having thus dismissed the Roman
Ambassadors, that they might not appear to have spoken more courageously then
they resolved to have performed, they plundered that part of Acarnania which
bordered on Epirus.

Olympias had now delivered her Kingdoms to her sons, and Ptolomy succeeded in
the place of Pyrrhus his deceased brother, who when he advanced against his
Enemies with a gallant Army, being surprised by sickness, dyed in the way: And
Olympias her self, her heart being pierced through and through for the loss of
both her children, and her soul sick within her, did not long outlive them;
and when of all the Royal Family there not any remained alive but only the
young Lady Nereis with her sister Laodamia, Nereis married Gelon the Son of the
King of Sicily; and Laodamia flying to the Altar of Diana, did there lose her
life by the violence of the people; which facinorous act the Immortal Gods
revenged with the continued slaughters, and almost the total destruction of all
the people. For being punished with barrenness and hunger, and vexed with civil
discords, they were at last almost utterly consumed by Foreign Wars. And Milo
the executioner of Laodamia being possessed with a fury, attempting sometimes
to kill himself with a sword, sometimes to beat out his brains with stones, at
the last tearing out his bowels with his teeth died the twelfth day afterward.

These things being thus managed in Epirus, King Demetrius in the mean time
deceased in Macedonia, leaving his Son Philip in his minority, to whom
Antigonus being Tutor, having married his mother, did intend to possess himself
of the Kingdom. In the process of time, when he was kept a prisoner in his own
Court by the threats and sedition of the Macedons, he broke forth at last and
adventured into the public without a Guard; and having thrown his Diadem and
purple robe amongst the people, he commanded that they should be given to some
other man who knew better to govern them, or they to obey him. For his part, he
understood well enough the ringols in that envyed Crown, and the weight of it*
not by his pleasures, but by his labors and his dangers. He did put them in
mind of what he had done for them; how he revenged the revolt of their
associates; how he suppressed the Dardanians and Thessalians, insulting at the
death of King Demetrius; and at last, how he not only defended, but increased
the dignity of the Lacedaemonians, of which since they did repent, he d^d lay
down his command, and did return them their own gift, because they demanded a
King over whom they might command.

The people hearing this, were rebuked by their own shame, and commanded him to
receive again the sovereignty of Command, which he refused until the Authors
of the sedition were delivered to him to be punished.

After this he made war upon the Lacedaemonians, who alone in the Wars of Philip
and Alexander, despised the command of the Macedons, and the Arms which were
feared by all the world. Betwixt these two renowned Nations the War was carried
on on both sides with the greatest resolutions: Those fighting for the ancient
glory of the Macedons, and the others not only for their unstained liberty, but
for their certain safety.

The Lacedaemonians being overcome, not themselves only, but their wives and
children sustained their misfortune with them, with an invincible courage. In
the Battle not any one of the men was indulgent to his own safety, nor any one
of the women did afterward bewail her lost husband: The old men extolled the
honorable death of their sons, and the daughters did gratulate their Fathers
slain in the field. They all lamented their own condition, that they died not
themselves for the liberty of their Country. The Parents did receive into their
houses all that were wounded, they comforted the sick, and refreshed all the
weak and the weary. In so great an overthrow there was no complaint in the
City, no sign of fear at all; they all lamented rather their public then their
private fortunes: presently upon this Cleomenes their King (after a great
slaughter of his enemies) being covered with his own blood, and with the blood
of his Enemies, retreated to the City, and having entered into it, he fate not
down to demand either meat or drink, nor eased himself by putting off the
burden of his Armor, but leaning against the wall, when he beheld that there
were but four thousand left of all his Army, he exhorted them to reserve
themselves to a better opportunity to do their Country service; and taking his
wife and children with him, he departed to Ptolomy in Egypt, by whom he was for
a long time honorably entertained, and lived in the height of regal Majesty:
And at last after the death of Ptolomy, he and all his Family were slain by his
son. But Antigonus (the Lacedaemonians being utterly overthrown) did lament the
fortune of so great a City, and strictly did inhibit his Soldiers to plunder;
and moreover gave a free pardon to those who remained alive, alleging that he
made War not with the Lacedaemonians, but with Cleomenes in whose flight all his
anger was appeased; and it was more for his own glory that Lacedemon was
preserved by himself, then if it were taken and plundered by his forces. He
therefore spared the City and the foundation of the walls because there were no
men left to whom he might show indulgence. Not long after he died himself, and
left his Kingdom to his Son Philip, being above fourteen years of Age.

THE Nine and twentieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
MUch about the same time, the sovereign Commands of the whole world did suffer
a change by the succession of new Kings; for Antigonus, the Tutor of Philip
being dead, Philip reigned afterward fourteen years in Macedonia, and Seleucus
being in Asia, Antiochus was made King both of it and Syria before he was
fifteen years of age: The Kingdom of Cappadocia was delivered by his Father to
the child Ariathres. Ptolomy possessed himself of Egypt having slain his father
and mother, and for this parricidial guilt was surnamed The Lover of his Father
the clean contrary way. The Lacedaemonians constituted Lycurgus to be their King
in the place of Cleomenes. And that in no place there should a change be
wanting, Hannibal, being not yet of Age, was chosen General of the
Carthaginians; not for the want of Commanders, but for his hatred to the
Romans, which arose up from his childhood with him: A fatal disease he was not
only to the Romans, but to Africa it self. These boys being kings, although
there were no Governors of a greater age, yet every one of them being intent
to follow the traces of their Predecessors, there shined forth a growing light
of honor in them all. Only Ptolomy as he was nefarious in gaining the Kingdom,
so he was slothful in the administration of the government of it. The
Dardanians, and other neighboring Nations, who carried an inveterate and a
deadly hatred to the Kings of Macedonia, in the contempt of this young man's
age, did daily provoke him. On the other side, his enemies being round, and he
not contented only to defend his own Dominions, desired to make War against the
Aetolians; and being full of the design, Demetrius King of the Illyrians being
lately overcome by Paul the Roman Consul, did with an humble Petition address
himself unto him, complaining of the injury of the Romans, who were not
contented with the bounds of Italy, but in an aspiring hope, promising to
themselves the Empire of all the World, did make War upon all Nations. Thus
they affected the sovereignty of Sicily, Sardinia and Spain, and greedy after
Africa made War with the Carthaginians, and with Hannibal himself. They also
he said brought a war upon himself for no other cause, but that he was a
neighbor unto Italy; as if it were a trespass for any King to Reign near the
bounds of their Empire; but above all things he was to be an example of
Admonition, whose Kingdom by how much it was more noble and more near unto
them, by so much the Romans would be his more eager Enemies.

He alleged that he would give a place to him in that Kingdom which the Romans
had possessed, it being more graceful to him to see a friend and not an enemy
to strive with him in the possession of the Sovereignty.

With this speech he enforced Philip to forbear the Aetolians, and to make
War upon the Romans, conceiving the business of the War to be the less,
because he understood that they had been already beaten by Hannibal at the lake
of Thrasimen. Therefore at the same time that he might not be infested with
mutual War, he made peace with the Aetolians, not that he desired to translate
the War into another place, but that he would take care for the safety of
Greece, which he affirmed was never in a greater danger. For the Empires of the
Carthaginians and of the Romans growing up to a great height in the West, to
whom the Kingdom of Macedonia was only a delay from being Masters of Greece and
Asia (they having tried amongst themselves for the superiority) the Conqueror
would suddenly invade the East.

He said, he beheld the cloud of that fierce and cruel War arising in Italy,
and the storms already thundering and lightning from the West, which into
whatsoever parts of the world the Tempest of the Victory should drive, it would
pollute all things with a crimson shower of blood.

Greece indeed he said had oftentimes endured vast motions of the Persians,
sometimes of the Gauls, sometimes of the Macedons, but all this would appear no
more then a sport, if that Army of the Romans which was now in Italy should
pour it self into another Land.

He beheld what cruel and bloody Wars both the Nations of the Romans and
Carthaginians amongst themselves did make, being equal in the strength of their
forces, and in the conduct of their Generals, which enmity could never be
concluded with the destruction of one of the parties only, without the ruin of
their neighbors.

It was true indeed, that the fierce minds of the Conquerours were less to be
feared by the Macedonians then by the Grecians; for they were more remote in
their situation, and more strong in their power to exercise their revenge
howsoever; he was confident moreover that those who now fought in Italy with so
much might, would not content themselves with that victory, and they ought even
in Macedonia to fear the approach of the Conquerors.

With this pretense the War being ended with the Aetolians, Philip minding
nothing more then the Wars against the Romans and Carthaginians, did weigh with
himself the strength of both Armies. And the Romans themselves who were deeply
engaged in the War with Hannibal, were not free from the fear of the Macedons,
by reason of the ancient valor of the Macedons, and the glory of the conquered
East; and young Philip being industrious and prompt to the War, and withal
inflamed with an emulation to tread in the victorious steps of Alexander, did
strike a new terror into them.

Therefore Philip when he found that the Romans were overcome again by the
Carthaginians in a second Battle, professing himself to be an Enemy openly to
the Romans, he did begin to build ships to transport his Army into Italy. He
sent afterward an Ambassador to Hannibal with Letters, to enter into a League
with him who being apprehended by the Romans, and brought unto the Senate, was
dismissed without any prejudice, not in honor to the King, but that being yet
but doubtful they might not make him an undoubted Enemy. When it was
afterward declared to the Romans, that Philip would pass his forces into
Italy, they sent Levinus the Praetor with a Fleet well equipaged to hinder him
in his passage, who when he arrived in Greece, he enforced the Aetolians with
many promises to undertake a War against Philip.

At the same time also Philip did solicit the Aetolians to make War against
the Romans. In the mean time the Dardinians began to make spoil on the borders
of Macedonia, and having taken thence twenty thousand Captives, they called
back Philip from the Roman War to defend his own Kingdom. Whiles these things
were thus in action, the Praetor Levinus having entered into a League with King
Attalus did plunder Greece, with which the Cities being dismayed they wearied
Philip with their Embasseys desiring aid of him; and the Kings of Illyria also
with their daily supplications did importune him to perform his promise: but
aboveall, the plundered Macedons desired revenge. He being besieged with so
great and so many difficulties did deliberate with himself what War he should
first undertake, and promised unto all, that he suddenly would send aid unto
them, not that he was able to perform what he promised, but that having filled
them with hope, he might still keep them obliged in the Indentures of their
association. His first expedition was against the Dardanians, who attending to
make an advantage of his absence did threaten to fall upon Macedonia with a
greater weight of War. He made Peace also with the Romans, being content that
they had deferred the Macedonian War. He had a design upon Philopemenes General
of the Achaeans, who (as he had heard) did privately solicit the Romans, and
the tempers of their associates, which being known and avoided, he by his
authority commanded the Achaeans to depart from his service.

THE Thirtyeth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
PHilip being intent on great atchivements in Macedonia, the manners of Ptolomy
in Egypt were far different from him; for the Kingdom being obtained with the
Parricide both of Father and Mother, and the slaughter of his Brother being
added to the murder of his Parents, as if he had done very bravely in it, he
afterward delivered up himself to luxury, and the whole Country followed the
dissolute manners of the King: Therefore not only his friends and Lieutenants,
but all the Army having left off the Arts of War, were corrupted with the
looseness of the Court, and became unarmed by sloth and riot. Which being
understood, Antiochus the King of Syria (the ancient hatred betwixt both
Kingdoms exciting him) in a sudden War did possess himself of many of his
Cities, and did invade Egypt it self. On this, Ptolomy was surprised with fear,
and by his Ambassadors desired Antiochus to forbear, until he could get his
Army in a readiness. And having drawn very considerable Forces from Greece, he
overcame Antiochus, and had dispoyled him of his Kingdom if he had but a little
helped Fortune and improved the advantage by his valor. But contented with the
restoration of the Cities which he had lost, and having made a Peace, he
greedily embraced a Subject for sloth, and being fallen into luxury, having
slain his wife Eurydice, who was his own sister, he was overcome by the
allurements of Agathocle^ the Harlot, and forgetting the greatness of his Name
and Majesty, he wasted the nights in wantonness, and the days in riot. Timbrels
and Dances were added (the Instruments of Luxury) and he was not now looked
upon as a King, but as a professed Master of looseness; he delighted himself
with Minstrels and all the provocations of lust. This was the hidden disease,
and the sad symptoms of the falling Court. Licentiousness afterward
increasing, the impudence of the incontinent woman could not be contained
within the walls of the Palace, whom the daily and intermingled pollutons of the
King with her Brother Agathocles, (a prostitute of an aspiring come^ness) did
make more insolent. No little aggravation to this was the Mother Euanthe, who
held more fast the King inthralled with the allurements of both her children:
Therefore being not contented to possess the King, they did now also possess
the Kingdom: Now they were seen in public, and saluted and attended.
Agathocles the Prostitute being joined to the side of the King, did govern the
City, and the women did dispose of the S^a^s of Judicature, of
Lieutenant-ships, and places of Command; neither was there any man of less
power in the Kingdom then the King himself. In the mean time, having left five
sons by his sister Eurydice, he died. Thus whiles the women seized upon his
Exchequer, and endeavored to govern the Kingdom, by making a League with the
deboystest and most dissolute persons, the business was a long time concealed;
but it being discovered at last, Agathocles was killed in the first place by
the concourse of the multitude, and the women (to revenge the death of
Eurydice) were fastened upon crosses.

The King being dead, and the infamy of the Kingdom being as it were expiated
by the punishment of the Harlots, the Alexandrians did send their Ambassadors
to Rome entreating them that they would undertake the Guardianship of the young
Prince, and protect the Kingdom of Egypt which (they said) Philip and Antiochus
having made a League together, had divided amongst themselves. The Embassy was
grateful to the Romans at that time seeking an occasion to make War against
Philip, who lay in wait to entrap them in the time of the Carthaginian War. To
this may be added, that the Carthaginians and Hannibal being overcome, the
Romans feared the Arms of no man more; Considering with themselves, how great a
commotion Pyrrhus with a few Bands of the Macedonians had made in Italy, and
what great achievements they had performed in the East; Ambassadors were
therefore sent to require Philip and Antiochus to refrain from the Kingdoms of
Egypt. Marcus Lepidus was also sent into Egypt to be protector of the Kingdom
in the behalf of the young Prince. Whiles these things were in action, the
Ambassadors of Attalus King of Pergamus and of Rhodes did address themselves to
Rome, complaining of the injuries of King Philip, which complaint took away all
the delay of the War against Macedonia. Immediately in pretense of bringing aid
to their associates, War was denounced against Philip, and many Legions were
sent with the Consul into Macedonia: And not long afterward all Greece in
confidence of the Romans success against Philip (being erected into a hope of
their former liberty) did make War upon him; so that the King being urged on
every side was compelled to desire peace, the conditions whereof when they were
expounded by the Romans, King Attalus began to redemand his privileges, the
Rhodians demanded theirs, the Achaeans and Aetolians theirs.

On the other side Philip did grant that he could be induced to obey the
Romans, but it would be an unworthy part of him if he should condescend that
the Grecians being overcome by Philip and Alexander his Predecessors, and
brought under the yoke of the Macedonian Empire, should like Conquerors impose
Laws of peace on him, who ought rather to give an account of their subje^^ion
then lay a claim to liberty.

At the last Philip being importunate, a Truce was made for two months, and
the peace which could not be concluded in Macedonia, was to be concluded on by
the Senate at Rome.

In the same year between the two Islands of Theramenes and Therasia in the
midst betwixt both banks and the Sea, there was a great Earthquake. In which to
the wonder of those who sailed by, the waters growing suddenly hot, there arose
an Island out of the Deeps: And on the same day an Earthquake in Asia did shake
Rhodes and many other Cities, and bringing a great ruin with in, did wholly
devour others. All men being affrighted at the prodigy, the prophets presaged
that the rising Empire of the Romans should devour the ancient one of the
Greeks and Macedons. The Senate in the mean time having refused to make any
Peace with Philip, he solicited the Tyrant Nabis into the society of the War;
and having brought his Army into the field, and marshalled them to encounter
their enemies who were prepared to receive them, he did exhort them by
declaring to them that the Persians, Bactrians, and the Indians, and all Asia,
even to the end of the East was overcome by the Macedons, and that this war
ought so much the more courageously to be sustained by them, as Liberty is more
noble then subjection.

But Flaminius the Roman Consul did excite his Soldiers unto Battle by the
Commemoration of their late Achievements, demonstrating that Carthage and
Sicily on this side, and that Italy and Spain on the other side were conquered
by the Roman valor; and that Hannibal was not to be ranked below Alexander the
great, who being beaten out of Italy, they had subdued Africa it self, the
third part of the world. Moreover the Macedons were not to be esteemed
according to their ancient fame, but by their present strength; for now they
waged not war with Alexander the great, whom perchance they heard to be
invincible, neirher with his Army who subdued the East, but with Philip a boy
not yet grown up to maturity of Age, who hardly was able to maintain the bounds
of his own Kingdom; and with those Macedons who not long ago became a prey to
the Dardanians. They did only boast of the honors of their Ancestors, but the
Romans were renowned for the present courage of their Soldiers; for Hannibal,
and the Carthaginians, and almost all the West were not overcome by any other
Army but by those Soldiers who were then in the field with him. The Soldiers
on both sides being stirred up with those exhortations, they joined in Battle;
the one glorying in the conquest of the East, the other of the West; these
carrying into the fight the ancient and obsolete Honors of their Ancestors,
and the others the flower of their Chivalry, flourishing in the height of the
present examples. But the Roman fortune overcame the Macedonians: And Philip
having lost the battle, desired Peace of the Consul Flaminius; which being
obtained, he preserved still the name of a King, and all the Cities of Thrace
being lost (as Members that had no interest in the ancient possession of the
Kingdom) he only reserved the title of King of Macedonia; but the Aetolians
being offended, because Macedonia was not taken from the King, and given to
them for a reward of their service, did send Ambassadors to Antiochus, who by
flattering him with his greatness, did persuade him to make War with Rome,
promising him that all Greece would be ready to assist him.

THE One and Thirtieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
PTolomy surnamed Philopater, King of Egypt, being dead, the tender age of his
Son, who was left to inherit the Kingdom, being despised, he became a prey to
his own Subjects; moreover, Antiochus King of Syria had a design to dispossess
him of Egypt; Therefore when he had invaded Phaenicia, and other Cities of
Syria, which belonged to the principality of Egypt, the Senate of Rome did send
Ambassadors to him to declare unto him that he should abstain from the Kingdom
of the young Prince, which was bequeathed to their trust by the last Will of his
Father. But these Ambassadors being neglected by Antiochus, not long after
there was sent from Rome another Ambassy, who making no mention of their Ward
at all, commanded that the Cities (which by the right of War were under the
People of Rome) should wholly be restored to them. Antiochus refusing it, War
was denounced against him, which he as hastily did undertake as unfortunately
he did manage. At the same time Nabis the Tyrant did seize upon many Cities of
Greece. Whereupon the Senate (that the Roman forces should not at the same time
be detained in a double War) did write unto Flaminius, that if he thought good,
he should first free Greece from Nabis as he had delivered Macedonia from
Philip. For this cause his Commission was prolonged. The name of Hannibal did
also make the war of Antiochus more terrible, against whom his adversaries (who
envyed his name in Arms) did in private accusations complain unto the Romans
that he had entered into a League with Antiochus, alleging that he being
accustomed to military Commands and the arbitrary power of the sword, would
never be content to live under Laws, and that he being weary of the peace of
the City, would be always looking after new causes of War, which accusations,
although they were falsely reported, yet amongst the fearful they passed for
truth. The Senate being surprised with the fear of him, did send Servilius
Ambassador into Africa to discover his Designs, and gave him private
Instructions, that if possibly he could, he might kill him by his emulators,
and free the Roman people from the fear of so hated a Name. But Hannibal was
not long ignorant of the design, being a man experienced both to foresee and to
prevent dangers, and preparing for adverse fortune in prosperity, as thinking
of prosperous fortune in adversity. Therefore after he had the whole day
presented himself in public before the face of the Senate of Carthage, and of
the Roman Ambassador, the evening approaching, he took horse and repaired to
his Country House, which he had near to the Seacoast, his servants not knowing
of it; and being commanded to attend him at the gate of the City. He had there
ships with Mariners in a readiness, which lay hid in a Creek, and vast sums of
money, that when occasion required, neither want nor inconveniency should delay
him. With the choicest youth of his Servants, whose number the prisoners which
he had taken in Italy did increase, he embarked himself, and directed his
course to Antiochus. On the next morning the City expected their Commander in
chief, and at that time Consul, in the place of public Assembly, whom when
they found to be departed, they were possessed with as great a fear, as if the
City it self had bin taken. And the Roman Ambassador, as if a new War already
was brought by Hannibal upon Italy, returned in a private silence unto Rome,
and brought along with him the melancholy tidings. In the mean time Flaminius
(having with him some of the associated Cities of Greece) did in two battles
overcome Nabys the tyrant, and left him, as it were, unnerv'd and fainting in
his Kingdom: But liberty being restored to Greece, and the Garrisons drawn off
from the Cities, when the Roman Army was commanded back into Italy, Nabys being
incensed at the nothingness of his empty fortunes, did in a sudden War invade
again many of the Cities, with which the Achaians being affrighted (that the
neighboring Evil might not creep unto them) they constituted their Praetor
Philopemenes to be their General, a man of admirable industry, whose courage,
and whose conduct in that War was so apparent, that in the Judgment of all he
might be compared to Flaminius the Roman General.

At the same time Hannibal came to Antiochus, and was received as a gift from
the gods, and by his arrival the King was possessed with so great a heat of
resolution, that he thought not so much on the war it self as on the rewards of
the victory. But Hannibal who had experience of the Roman valor, affirmed that
the Romans could not be suppressed but in Italy it self. For the performance of
which service he desired one hundred ships, ten thousand foot, and one thousand
horse, promising with those unconsiderable forces to make as great a War in
Italy as he did ever heretofore, and bring unto the King sitting in his throne
in Asia, either a victory over the Romans, or the equal conditions of a peace;
for he said, that there was wanting only a General to the Spaniards inflamed
with a desire to commence the War against the Romans; and Italy moreover was
now more known unto him then heretofore; neither would Carthage be quiet, but
without delay would send Auxiliaries to him. These counsels being acceptable to
the King, one of the Confidents of Hannibal was sent to Carthage to exhort them
to the War, being too covetous of it, before he represented to them that
Hannibal would immediately be present with his forces, and did not communicate
to either of the Factions any thing at all, but only that nothing was wanting
to carry on this War but the resolutions of the Carthaginians; for Asia would
defray the charges, and lend them men enough for the War. When these things
were reported to the Carthaginians, the Messenger himself was apprehendrd by
the Enemies of Hannibal, and being brought into the Sentate (according to the
subtilty of the Carthaginian wit) he made answer, that he was sent to the whole
Senate; for his business did not belong to this man or that man in particular,
but did concern them altogether. Whiles they debated many days in the Senate to
send him to Rome to purge the public conscience, he privately took shipping
and returned to Hannibal; which was no sooner discovered, but the Carthaginians
sent presently an Ambassador to Rome. The Romans also sent Ambassadors to
Antiochus, who under that pretense might discover the preparations of the King,
and either reconcile Hannibal to the Romans, or by their daily conversation
with him might render him suspected and hated by the King. The Ambassadors
therefore when they came unto Antiochus at Ephesus, they delivered to him the
desires of the Senate; and whiles they attended for an answer from him, they
missed not a day to give a visitation unto Hannibal, and informed him that
unadvisedly he departed from his Country when the Romans with great fidelity
did observe the peace, not made so much with the Commonwealth of Carthage; as
with himself; for they found that he made War not so much out of any hatred
that he did bear unto the Romans, as for the love to his own Country, to which
the best of men do owe their lives. These they said were the public causes of
War amongst the People, but not of private ones amongst Commanders. They
afterward began to extol his achievements, by the discourse whereof he being
delighted, did more often and more greedily converse with the Ambassadors,
being ignorant that he should procure hatred with the King by his familiarity
with the Romans: For Antiochus suspecting that he had reconciled himself to the
Romans by his often discourse with them, did refer nothing to him as heretofore
he was accustomed, nor made him partaker of any of his Councels, but did begin
to hate him as his Enemy and Betrayer: Thus suspicion did corrupt all the
preparations for the War, there appearing no General in the field, either to
take the Musters, or to exercise the Soldiers. The substance of the Roman
Embassy to Antiochus was, that he should be contented with the Borders and
Frontiers of Asia, and not impose upon the Romans a necessity to enter into
Asia with an Army: which Message being despised by Antiochus, he made answer
that it became his Royalty and resolution not to attend a War, but to give it.
The Council of War being often called afterward, and Hannibal never sitting
amongst them, Antiochus at last commanded that he should be summoned, not that
he should act any thing which he propounded, but that he might not appear to
have neglected him altogether; and the Council of every one being asked, at the
last he demanded his advice, which being observed by Hannibal, he professed
that he sufficiently understood that he was called by him to the Council of
War, not that he wanted advice, but to fill up the number of the Sentences;
howsoever out of his inveterate hatred to the Romans, and his love unto the
King, with whom alone he enjoyed a safe banishment, he was resolved, he said,
to declare unto him the best way of making War against the Romans. Desiring
then to be excused for his boldness, he professed that he approved not of any
thing of the present Councels or Enterprises, neither did it seem good in his
Judgment that Greece should be the seat of the War, when Italy afforded a far
more plentiful subject for it. For the Romans, he said, could not be overcome
but by their own Arms, nor Italy be subdued but by the Italian Forces: for in
them both the manner of the War and the People did differ much from other sorts
of men. It was of great importance in other Wars to take the first advantages
of place and time, to lay waste the fields, and to plunder the Cities of the
Enemies; but with a Roman, if you first either plunder them of their goods, or
overcome them in Battle, you must also wrestle and tug with them when they are
subdued and lying on the ground. Wherefore if any shall provoke them in their
own Country, they may be overcome by their own wealth, by their own strength,
and by their own Arms, as he himself had done: But if any shall draw them out
of Italy* which is the fountain of their strength, he shall be as much
deceived, as he who would dry up the Rivers, should attempt it not at the head
of the Fountain, but further off by some new works and dams which he should
make.

This he said was his Judgment, which he had a long time reserved in private
to himself, and freely before did offer it unto them, and did now again repeat
it, that they might all understand the way of making War with the Romans, and
that although invincible abroad, they are easy to be conquered at home: For
you may sooner, said he, deprive them of their City then their Empire, and
sooner dispoyl them of Italy then of the Provinces: they were taken by the
Gauls, and almost utterly overthrown by my self; neither was I or my Army ever
overcome until we departed from them. But when we returned to Carthage, the
fortune of the War was suddenly changed with the place. The Friends of the King
were the Contradictors of this Counsel, not reflecting on the profit of it, but
fearing least his advice being approved, he should have the first place of
respect with the King. But Antiochus was not so much displeased with the
Council as with the Author, and feared lest the glory of the Victory should be
Hannibals and not his own; all things therefore were corrupted with the various
informations of the flatterers; nothing was undertaken either according to
Judgment or to Reason. The King himself being fallen into Luxury, was given
all the VVinter to new Marriages.

On the other side, Attilius the Roman Consul, who was sent into this War, did
with elaborate ca^e and industry, muster his Armies, and provide Arms and other
necessaries for the war; he confirmed the associated Cities, he allured the
doubtful ones, the event of the war consisting in the preparations of either
side. The King therefore beholding his men to give back at the first charge, he
brought no succor to them in distress, but was the foremost in the flight, and
left his Tents full of Riches for the Conquerors; and the Romans being intent
on the plundring of them, he fled into Asia, where he began to repent of the
Council he neglected, and having called back Hannibal, he promised to act all
things according to his counsel.

In the mean time it was reported to him that Livius Menemus, the Roman
Admiral, did approach, being sent by the Senate with fourscore Brazen-beaked
ships to make a war by Sea. Therefore, before that his associated Cities should
revolt to the Enemies, he resolved to encounter with the Enemy by Sea, hoping
by a new Victory to abolish the Infamy of the overthrow lately received in
Greece. The Navy being committed to the charge of Hannibal, the Battle was
fought. But neither were the Asian Soldiers comparable to the Romans, nor
their Ships to theirs, which were armed with brass on their sterns; howsoever
the overthrow was the less by the policy of the General.

The report of the Victory had not as yet arrived at Rome, and the City was
therefore in suspense concerning the creating of Consuls. But who could be a
better Commander against Hannibal* then the brother of Africanus, it being the
business of the Scipio's to overcome the Carthaginians? Lucius Scipio therefore
was created Consul, and his brother Africanus was given as Legate to him, that
Antiochus might understand that he placed not a greater confidence in conquered
Hannibal, then they did in the conquering Scipio's. The Scipio's being busy in
the transporting of their Army into Asia, it was reported to them that the War
was everywhere already brought to a period, and accordingly they found
Antiochus overcome in a fight by Land, and Hannibal in a fight by Sea.
Therefore at their first arrival, Antiochus sent Ambassadors to them to desire
peace, and as a peculiar gift to Africanus, they brought him his Son, whom
Antiochus had taken, as he was transporting himself in a small Bark into Asia.
But Africanus returned answer, that private benefit ought to be distinguished
from public, and that the offices due unto him as a Father were of one Nature,
and the Offices due unto his Country were of another, which ought to be
preferred not only above children, but also above life it self. Howsoever he
declared, that he very thankfully accepted the gift, and out of his own
Fortunes would answer the munificence of the King. As for that which belonged
either to Peace or War; he made answer, that he could contribute nothing by way
of thankfulness, neither could he fall in any punctilio from the rights of his
Country; for his son being taken, he never treated with the King concerning
his ransom, nor suffered the Senate to make mention of it, but as it was worthy
of the Majesty of his resolution, he professed that he would recover him by
arms. After this the Articles of the Agreement were drawn up, That Asia should
be surrendered to the Romans, and Antiochus be contented only with the Kingdom
of Syria; that he should deliver to the Romans all his Ships, Prisoners and
Renegadoes, and give full satisfaction to the Romans for their Charges in the
War. Which when it was reported to Antiochus, he made answer, that he was not
so overcome as to be content to be dispoyled of his Kingdom; and alleged, that
what the Romans had propounded to him, were rather provocations to war then any
inducements unto peace. Great preparations therefore were made for war on both
sides; the Romans having invaded Asia, and entered into Ilium, there was a
mutual gratulation between the Inhabitants of Ilium and them; the inhabitants
of Ilium declared that Aeneas and other of their Captains proceeded from them;
and the Romans acknowledged that they received their Original of them.
Suchand^o general was the joy, as after a long absence is accustomed to be seen
betwixt Fathers and Children. It delighted the Inhabitants of Ilium* that their
Nephews having overcome Africa and the West, did challenge Asia as their
Hereditary Kingdom, and they said the ruin of Troy was not to be lamented,
which was revived again in a happy race of such Noble successors. On the other
side, the Romans with an unsatisfied desire did behold the Household Gods, and
the Cradles of their Ancestors, and the Temples and Images of the Gods. The
Romans being departed from Ilium, King Eumenes did march with Auxiliaries to
them; And not long after the Battle was fought with Antiochus, when in the
right wing a Roman Legion being beaten, did fly back to the Camp with more
disgrace then danger; one of the Tribunes of the Soldiers, Marcus Aemilius by
name, being left for the defense of the Camp, commanded his Soldiers
immediately to buckle on their Arms, which being done, he did lead them out of
the works, and with drawn swords did threaten those that fled back, and
declared that there should not a man of them be left alive, unless they
returned to the Battle, and that their own Tents should be more fatal to them
then their Enemies swords. The Legion being amazed at so great a danger, the
Soldiers Armed by the Tribune, accompanying them, they returned into the
Battle, and having made a great slaughter of their Enemies, it was the
beginning of the Victory. There were fifty thousand of the Enemies slain, and
eleven thousand taken. Antiochus again desiring peace, there was nothing added
to the former conditions. Africanus declared that the Romans did neither abate
their courage being overcome, neither grew they insolent with the success of
Victory. They divided the Cities they had taken amongst their Associates,
judging glory more proper for the Romans then possessions; For the glory of the
Victory was to be owned by the Roman Name, and the luxury of wealth was left to
their Associates.

THE Two and thirtieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
ANtiochus being overcome, the Aetolians who enforced him to make wars against
the Romans, remained alone being unequal to them in strength, and destitute of
all help. And not long after being overcome, they lost their liberty which they
alone amongst so many Cities of Greece had preserved unviolate, against the
Dominations of the Lacedaemonians and Athenians; which condition was so much the
more afflicting as it arrived the more late unto them: They computing with
themselves those times, in which with their own strength they resisted such
numerous Forces of the Persians, and those when in the Delphian war they brake
the violence of the Gauls, terrible both to Asia and Italy; which glorious
commemoration did the more increase the desire of their liberty. As these
things were in action, in the mean time there arose first a contention, and
afterward a war betwixt the Messenians, and Achaians, concerning the honor of
pre-eminence, in which Philopemenes the Noble General of the Achaians was
taken, not that in the fight he spared his life, but that as he called back his
Soldiers to the Battle, being thrown from his horse as he leaped a ditch, he
was invironned and oppressed by the multitude of his Enemies. As he lay on the
ground, the Messenians durst not kill him, either through the fear of his
courage, or the consciousness of his dignity. Therefore as they had dispatched
all the war in him alone, they did lead him Captive round about Greece in the
way of Triumph, the People thronging in multitudes to behold him, as if he was
their own, and not the General of their Enemies approached. Neither did ever
the Achaians with a more greedy eye behold him being a Conqueror, then the
Messenians did now being conquered. Therefore they commanded him to be brought
into the Theater, that they might all have a full view of him, whom every one
conceived to be impossible to be taken. Being brought afterward unto the
Dungeon, in the respect to his greatness, they gave him poison: which he took
as cheerfully as if he had conquered death, as he had heretofore his Enemies;
He demanded afterward if his Lieutenant General Lycortal, whom he knew to be
second to him in the affairs of war, had escaped, and having understood that he
was alive, and in safety, he said, Then it goes not altogether so ill with the
Achaians; and speaking those words he died. Not long after the war being
renewed, the Messenians were overcome, and they endured the punishment for the
death of Philopemenes. In the mean time Antiochus King of Syria, when he was
oppressed by the Romans with too great a Tribute, and groaned under the burden
of it (either enforced by the want of money, or solicited by avarice, by which
under the pretense of a necessitated Tribute, he hoped that he more excusedly
should commit Sacrilege) having drawn an Army together, did by night assault
the Temple of Dindymaean Jove. Which being discovered, he was slain with all
his Army by a concourse of the Inhabitants. When many Cities of Greece ^ame to
Rome to complain of the Injuries of Philip King of the Macedons; And there was
a great dispute in the Senate between Demetrius the Son of Philip, whom his
father had sent to satisfy the Senate, and the Ambassadors of the Cities; the
young man being confused with the multitude of complaints made against his
Father, did on a sudden hold his peace; The Senate being moved with his
shamefastness (by which in a private condition he before endeered himself to
all when he was an Hostage at Rome) did give him the cause: and thus Demetrius
by his modesty obtained pardon for his Father, not by the right or plea of
defense, but by the patronage of his modesty, which was signified by the Decree
of the Senate, that it might appear that the King was not absolved, but the
Father rather was given to the Son; Which procured to Demetrius not the grace
of an Ambassador, but the hatred of obtrectation. It pulled upon him the
emulation and envy of his brother Philip, and the cause of the pardon being
known to his Father who was pardoned, it became an offense, Philip disdayning
that the person of his Son was of more moment with the Senate then the
Authority of the Father, or the dignity of regal Majesty. Perseus therefore
having observed the sickness of his Father, did bring daily complaint unto him
against Demetrius being absent; and at first did cause him to be hated, and
afterward to be suspected by him; sometimes he did object against him the
freindship of the Romans, and sometimes treason against his Father. At the last
he counterfeited that treacheries were prepared by him against his person to be
put suddenly in Execution, to the trial and proof whereof the Judges were sent
for, the suborned witnesses examined, and the Charge was proved which was
objected against him. By those unjust proceedings the Father being compelled to
parricide, did make sad all the Court with the execution of his Son. Demetrius
being slain, Perseus grew not more dutiful but more contumatious against his
Father, and carried himself not as an heir of the Kingdom, but as the King
himself, with which Philip being offended, did daily more impatiently lament
the death of Demetrius: and suspecting that he was circumvented by the
Treachery of Perseus, he caused the witnesses and the Judges to be tormented;
And having by this means discovered the deceit, he was no less afflicted with
the wickedness of Perseus, then with the innocent death of Demetrius; which he
was resolved to have revenged if he had not been prevented by death; For not
long after his disease increasing by the Melancholy and perplexedness of his
spirit, he deceased, having left great preparations of war against the Romans,
which Perseus afterward employed; For he enforced the Gauls, called
Scordisci, to join in league with him, and he had made a great war against the
Romans if he had not died. For the Gauls, the war against the Delphians being
unfortunately managed, in which they found the power of God to be more great
and present then the power of their Enemies, having lost Brennus their
General, some part of them did fly into Asia, and some part did wander up and
down in Thracia; From whence in the same path in which they marched forth, they
returned to their ancient Country. Of these a considerable number did sit down
in the Confluent of the River Danubius, and called themselves by the name of
Scordisci. But the Tectosagi when they arrived at their ancient Country of
Toulouse, were there visited by the Pestilence, and recovered not their health
until being admonished by the answers of the Diviners, they had drowned all
their Gold and Silver which they had got by Sacrilege in the Lake of Toulouse,
all which Coepio the Roman Consul did a long time afterward take away. There
was in all one hundred and twenty thousand weight of Gold, and five millions of
Silver, which Sacrilege was the cause afterward of the destruction of Coepio
and all his Army.

The tumult also of the Cambrian war did follow the Romans, as the revenge of
the violation of the consecrated money. Not a small number of the Nation of the
Tectosagi did seat themselves in Illyricum, being delighted with the sweetness
of the Air and the Prey, and having spoiled the Istrians, they did inhabit
Pannonia. Fame reports that the Nation of the Istrians do derive their
Original from Colchos, being sent by King Aetus to the Argonauts to pursue the
ravisher of his daughter, who as soon as they entered into Ister out of Pontus,
having sailed far into the Channel of the River Sais, following the steps of
the Argonauts, they carried their ships on their shoulders over the cliffes of
the hills, until they came to the shore of the Adriatic Sea; having
understood that the Argonauts by reason of the length of their Ship had done
the same before them, whom when the Colchians did not receive, they either
through fear of their King, or the tediousness of their long Navigation, did
sit down at last near to Aquileia, and were called Istrians, after the Name of
the River, into the which from the Sea they sailed.

The Dacians also are a Generation of the Getes, who when they fought
unfortunately under Olor their King against the Bastarnians, were commanded,
that when they were in bed, they should, to expiate their sloth, lay their feet
where they should rest their heads, and perform those household offices and
services to their wives, which their wives before were accustomed to do to
them. Neither was this custom changed, until by their courage they had wiped
away the old Ignominy which they had received in the war. Perseus when he
succeeded in the Kingdom of Philip his Father, did excite all these Nations to
join in assistance with him against the Romans. In the mean time there did
arise a war betwixt King Prusias, to whom Annibal fled after the peace granted
to Antiochus by the Romans, and Eumenes; Which war Prusias first began having
broken the League through the confidence he had in Annibal; For Annibal (when
amongst other of the Articles of the Treaty, the Romans did demand of Antiochus
that he should deliver him up unto them) being advertised by Antiochus of it,
did fly to Crete; Where having lived for many years a quiet life, and found
himself envied by reason of his excessive wealth, he deposed in the Temple of
Diana pitchers filled with Lead, as the safeguard of his fortune; and the City
being no ways jealous of him, because they had his fortunes with them as his,
he repaired to King Prusias, his Gold which he carried with him being melted
and poured into hollow Statues, least his riches being discovered should be a
hinderance to his life. Prusias being overcome by King Eumenes by land, and
intending to try the fortune of a Battle by Sea, Annibal by a new invention was
the Author of the Victory; For he commanded that all kinds of Serpents stored
into earthen Vessels in the middle of the Battle should be thrown into the
Ships of their Enemies. It seemed ridiculous to the Enemies at first, that they
should Arm themselves and fight with earthen Pots, who could not encounter
their Enemies with swords; But when their Ships began to be filled with the
Serpents, they were circumvented with a doubtful and double danger, and
yielded the Victory to their Enemies. When these things were declared at Rome,
Ambassadors were sent by the Senate to make a reconciliation betwixt both
Kings, and to demand the person of Annibal; but Annibal having notice of it,
did take poison and prevented the Embassy by death. This year was remarkable by
the death of three of the most famous Generals in the world; Annibal,
Philopemenes, and Scipio Africanus; Most certain it is that Annibal when Italy
trembled at the thunder of his Arms, did never sit down when he did eat, nor
did ever drink more at once then one pint of wine; and so great was his
chastity amongst so many Captives, that who would deny that he was born in
Africa? It was undoubtedly a great Argument of his moderation, that when he
commanded an Army of diverse Nations, he was never set upon by any treachery of
his own men, nor betrayed by the deceit of others, when his Enemies had
oftentimes attempted both against him.

THE Three and Thirtieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
THe Romans managed the Macedonian war with less noise and trouble then they
did the Carhaginian; But with so much the more honor, as the Macedons in fame
did exceed the Carthaginians; For the Macedonians were not only encouraged
with the glory of the conquered East, but assisted with the Auxiliaries of all
Kings. Therefore the Romans sent more Embassies to their Associates, and
received Auxiliaries from Messanissa King of the Numidians, and from others of
their Confederates; And amessage was sent to Eumenes King of the Bithynians to
contribute to the war with all his powers. And (besides the opinion that the
Army of the Macedons was invincible) Perseus had provision for ten years war
laid up byhis Father, both in his Exchequer, and his Granaries, with which
being growng insolent, and forgetful of his Fathers fortune, he commanded his
Soldiers to call to mind the Ancient glory of Alexander. The first encounter
was of the horse only, in which Perseus being Conqueror made all men begin to
doubt, and to incline to his side. Howsoever he sent Ambassadors to the Consul
to desire that peace which the Romans had given to his Father being overcome,
offering to defray the charges of the war as if he had been overcome himself.
But Sulpitius the Consul did give him no other conditions then what the
conquered were accustomed to receive. In the mean time, through the fear of so
dangerous a war, the Romans made Aemylius Paulus Consul, and decreed unto him
contrary to custom, the Macedonian war; who when he came unto the Army, did
make no long delay of the battle. On the night before there was an Eclipse of
the Moon. All men judged that it was a sad portent for Perseus, and that the
end of the Macedonian Empire was thereby presaged. In that Battle Marcus Cato
the Son of Cato the Orator, when amongst the thickest of his Enemies he gave
admirable Demonstrations of his valor, having fallen from his horse did fight
on foot; For a band of the Enemies with a horrid cry did stand round about him,
falling on him as if they would have killed him lying on the ground. Bur he
having suddenly recollected himself, did get upon his feet, and made a great
slaughter of his Enemies, the Macedons did surround him on every side, and did
throw themselves upon him to take away his life, but he striking at one of the
Commanders, his sword flying from his hand did fall into the midst of a cohort
of his Enemies, to recover which (protecting himself with his Buckler, both
Armies looking on) he was covered with the swords of his Enemies, and having
gained his sword, and received many wounds, he returned with a general
acclamation to the Army; his fellows imitating his valor obtained the Victory.
Perseus the King fled to Samothracia carrying with him ten thousand talents;
And Cneus Octavius being sent by the Consul to pursue him, did take him
prisoner with his two Sons Alexander and Philip, and brought them to the
Consul. Macedonia had from her first King Caranus to Perseus, thirty Kings; But
she was not famous for Sovereignty above one hundred and ninty three years;
when she came into the power of the Romans she was made free, Magistrates being
constituted through the several Cities, and she received those Laws from
Aemylius Paulus which to this day she does observe. The Senates of all the
Cities of the Aetolians (because they were uncertain in their fidelity) were
sent with their wives and children unto Rome, and were a long time detained
there, that they might make no innovation in their Countries; but the City
being wearyed with the importunities of many Ambassadors, they were hardly,
after many years, suffered to return into their Countries.

THE Four and thirtyeth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
THe Carthaginians and Macedonians being subdued, and the strength of the
Aetolians being weakened by the Captivity of their Princes; the Achaians only
of all Greece did seem at that time most powerful to the Romans, not by the
excessive wealth of every one of their particular Cities, but by the
combination of them all; for although the Achaians be divided by their Cities
as by so many members, yet they have one Body and one Command; they beat off
the dangers which threaten particular Cities, with their mutual strength. The
Romans therefore seeking out an occasion of the war, fortune did luckily
present them with the complaints of the Lacedaemonians, whose Fields in mutual
hatred the Achaians had laid wast.

The Senare answered the Lacedaemonians, that they would send Ambassadors into
Greece, to look upon the affairs of their Associates, and to take away the
suspicions of all injury; but instructions were privily given to the
Ambassadors that they should dissolve this entire Body of the Achaians, and
make every City to subsist by her own privileges, that so they might more
easily be enforced to obedience; and if any appeared to be stubborn, that they
should be broken: The Princes therefore of all the Cities being called to
Corinth, the Ambassadors did recite the Decree of the Senate* and declared what
was the Counsel which was given to them: They declared, that it was expedient
for all, that every City should have her own Laws, and her own privileges;
which the Achaians no sooner understood, but in a fury they presently killed
all that were strangers; and had violated the Roman Ambassadors themselves, if
upon notice of the tumult, they had not fled away in a great fear. When this
was declared at Rome, the Senate did immediately Decree that the Achaian war
should be undertaken by Mummius the Consul; who not long after, having
transported his Army into Greece, and all things with great care being provided
for, did provoke his Enemies to battle. But the Achaians (as if it had been no
trouble at all to conquer the Romans) had nothing in a readiness for War, but
thinking more of the booty then the fight, they brought their Carriages into
the Field to draw from thence the spoils of their Enemies, and placed their
Wives and Children on the adjacent Hills to behold the pleasure of the Battle,
which was no sooner begun, but being slain before the eyes of their Wives and
Children, they became a sad spectacle to them for the present, and left them a
grievous remembrance of it for the future; and their Wives and Children being
made Captives of Spectators, were an easy prey unto their Enemies: The City of
Corinth it self was pulled down, and all the people sold in the most
ignominious manner that in those times was practiced, that this Example might
strike a fear into the other Cities to take ^eed of Innovations for the time to
come.

Whiles these things were in action, Antiochus King of Syria made War upon
Ptolomy King of Egypt, the Son of his elder Sister, but ^ slow man, and so
consumed with daily luxury, that he not only neglected the Offices of Regal
Majesty, but was deprived also of the sense of an ordinary man: Being therefore
beaten out of his Kingdom, he fled to Alexandria to his younger brother
Ptolomy, and having made him a partaker in his Kingdom, they jointly sent
Ambassadors to the Senate at Rome, by whom they desired their help and implored
the Faith of their Society; The supplications of the Brothers did move the
Senate: Therefore Publius Popilius was sent Ambassador to Antiochus to command
him not to invade Egypt; or if he was already in it, to withdraw from it. The
Ambassador having found him in Egypt, the King kissed him; for Antiochus above
the rest did respect Popilius when he was a Hostage at Rome; Popilius desired
him to forbear all private friendship, when the Mandates and the Interests of
his Country intervened; and having produced the Decree of the Senate, he
delivered it to the King; when he found the King to demur upon it, and to say
that he would refer it to the Consultation of his friends; Popilius with a rod
which he had in his hand, having enclosed him in a spacious Circle, that it
might contain his friends with him, did require him to counsel with them in the
Precinct of that Round, and not to move out of it before he had given an Answer
to the Senate, Whether he would have peace or War with the Romans. This sharp
proposition did so blunt the mind of the King, that he answered that he would
obey the Senate. After this, Antiochus returning to his Kingdom, dyed, having
left behind him a son very young, to whom when Guardians were assigned by the
people, his Uncle Demetrius (who was then a Hostage at Rome) having understood
of the death of his brother Antiochus, addressed himself unto the Senate, and
alleged that his brother being alive, he came to Rome as a Hostage for him:
but being dead, he did not now know whose Hostage he might be; therefore he
pleaded that it was just he should be dismissed from Rome to be invested in his
Kingdom, which as it was due by the law of Nations to his elder brother, so it
was now due unto himself who must have the precedence of the Pupil by the
privilege of Age; When he observed that the Senate (silently presuming that
the Kingdom would be more safe unto them under the Pupil, then under him) were
un willing to grant him leave to depart. Having secretly departed to Hostia,
under the pretense of hunting, he there took shipping with the Companions of
his flight; and being brought into Syria, he was received with the applause of
all men; and the young Prince being put to death, the Kingdom by his Guardians
was delivered unto him.

Much about the same time, Prusias King of Bithinia contrived how to put to
death his son Nicomedes, endeavoring to provide for his younger sons whom he
had by Nicomede's Stepmother, and who were then at Rome: But the plot was
betrayed by those who undertook to perform it; they exhorted the young man
(being provoked by the cruelty of his Father) to prevent the deceit, and return
the wicked act upon the Author of it; nor was it hard to persuade him to it,
therefore (being sent for) when he came into the Kingdom of his Father, he was
saluted as King, and Prusias his Father being dis-invested of his Kingdom,
became as a private man, and was forsaken of his own servants. When he
concealed himself in corners, he was discovered and commanded to be killed by
his son, with no less wickedness then he commanded his son to be killed.

THE Five and thirtyeth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
Demetrius having possessed himself of the Kingdom of Syria, conceiving that
the common hatred by this Innovation would prove ruinous to himself, he
determined to enlarge the bounds of his Sovereignty, and to increase his
Revenues by making War upon his Neighbors. Therefore being become an Enemy to
Ariathes King of Cappadocia, because he refused to marry his Sister, he
received his suppliant Brother Holofernes injustly driven from the Kingdom; and
rejoicing that he had offered to him an honest Title of the War, he determined
to restore to him his Kingdom: But Holofernes having ungratefully made a League
with the Antiochians, and growing into enmity with Demetrius, he took counsel
to expel him from the Kingdom, by whom he was restored to it; which although
Demetrius understood, yet he spared his life, that Ariathes might not be freed
from the War which his brother Demetrius threatened to bring upon him; howsoever
having apprehended him, he commanded him to be kept bound at Seleucia;
nevertheless the Antiochians being no ways terrified at it, did continue in
their rebellion against him. Therefore Ptolomy King of Egypt, Attalus King of
Asia, and Ariathes King of Cappadocia being all provoked by him to war, they
suborned one Prompalus a young man, but of a most sordid birth and condition to
challenge the Kingdom of Syria, as if derived to him from his Father; and if
denied, to recover it by force of Arms; And that nothing should be wanting to
the pretense, he was called by the name of Alexander, and reported to be the
Son of Antiochus. So general a hatred they did bear to Demetrius, that not
only Kingly powers, but the Nobility of birth also by the consent of all was
bestowed on this counterfeit: Alexander therefore forgetting the baseness of
his former condition through the wonderful variety of events being attended
with the Forces of all the East, did make war upon Demetrius: and having
overcome him, did deprive him at once both of his life and Kingdom: Howsoever
Demetrius wanted neither care nor courage to provide for the War; for in the
first encounter he routed his Adversary, and the King again renewing the War,
he killed afterward in battle many thousands of his Enemies; At last, with an
invincible courage, he fell fighting most gallantly amongst the thickest of his
Enemies. In the beginning of the War, Demetrius commended both his Sons with a
vast sum of Gold to his Guest Gnidius, both that they should be exempted from
the dangers of the War; and if fortune so ordained it, that they should be
preserved to revenge their Fathers death. The eldest of these, Demetrius by
name, being about the sixteenth year of his age (having heard of the luxury of
Alexander, whom such unlooked for possessions, and the royal ornaments
belonging to another did keep a Prisoner in his own Court, amongst throngs of
Concubines) the Cretians helping him, did set upon him secure, and fearing no
Enemy at all: The Antiochians also recompencing their old offense committed
against his Father with new deservings, did surrender themselves unto him; and
his Fathers old Soldiers in favor of the young man (preferring the Religion of
their old oath of fidelity above the pride of this new King) did translate both
themselves and their Ensigns to Demetrius; And thus Alexander being forsaken by
no less impetuousness of fortune then he was advanced, was overcome and killed
in the first encounter, and by his punishment satisfied the Ghost both of
Demetrius whom he killed, and of Antiochus whose original he did counterfeit.

THE Six and thirtyeth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
Demetrius having recovered his Fathers Kingdom, and (by the success of
affairs) being corrupted himself, did fall through the vice of his youth into
sloth and riot, and contracted as much contempt by his sloth, as his Father had
hatred by his pride. Therefore when the Cities did everywhere revolt from his
Command, to wipe away the blemish of his idleness, he made War upon the
Parthians. The Eastern Nations did not unwillingly behold his approach both for
the cruelty of Arsacidas King of the Parthians, and for that being accustomed
to the ancient Command of the Macedonians, they did with indignation endure the
arrogance of this new people: Therefore being assisted with the Auxiliaries of
the Persians, Elamites, and the Brastrians, he overthrew the Parthians in many
battles. At last, being circumvented by the pretense of a peace, he was taken;
and being led in triumph through the Cities, he was showed (as a mock of their
favor) to the people that revolted; and being afterward sent into Hyrcania,
he was honorably entreated according to the dignity of his former Fortune.
Whiles those things thus passed, Trifo who labored in Syria to be constituted
by the people to be the Guardian of Antiochus, the privign of Demetrius, having
slain the young Prince, did invade the Kingdom of Syria, which having a long
time enjoyed, the favor of his new Command growing out of date, at last he was
overcome by Antiochus the Brother of Demetrius, a very young man who was bred
up in the Wars of Asia; and thus the Kingdom of Syria was again devolved to the
Issue of Demetrius.

This Antiochus being mindful that both his Father was hated for his pride, and
his Brother made contemptible by his sloth, that he might not fall into the
same vices, having first married Cleopatra his Brothers wife, he followed the
War with great resolution against the Cities which revolted in the beginning of
his Brothers reign, which being subdued, he added them to the bounds of his
Empire. He also overcame the Jews, who under his Father Demetrius in the
Macedonian Empire had by their arms redeemed themselves into liberty: So great
was their power, that after him, they would not endure any King of the
Macedons, and using their own Governors, they infested Syria with great Wars.

The Jews derive their Original from Damascus, which is the most noble of the
Cities of Syria; and the Syrian Kings do boast their descent in a direct line
from Queen Semiramis: The name of Damascus was given to the City by Damascus
who was King of it, in the honor of whom the Syrians have worshipped the
Sepulcher of his wife Arathes as a Temple, and esteemed her a Goddess in the
height of their most Religious devotions; After Damascus, Abraham, Moses and
Israel were Kings: But the happy Issue of ten children made Israel more famous
then the rest of his Ancestors; he delivered to his Sons the people divided
into ten Tribes or Kingdoms, and commanded* that they should be all called
Jews, after the name Judah who dyed not long after the division of the
Kingdoms, whose memory he commanded should be reverenced by them. His portion
was distributed amongst them all, and Joseph was the youngest of the brethren,
who fearing his excellent wit, having privately intercepted him, they sold him
to foreign Merchants, by whom being brought into Egypt, when by the sharpness
of his apprehension he had learned there the Magic Arts, he became in a short
time most gracious with the King; for he was most sagacious in the discovery of
wonderful events, and was the first of all who found out the understanding of
dreams; and there seemed nothing unknown unto him which belonged to the Laws
either of God or men, insomuch that (many years before it came to pass) he
foresaw the barrenness of the Fields; and Egypt had been destroyed by Famine,
if the King by his admonition had not given command that the fruits of the
Earth should for many years together be preserved; And so great was his
Experience, that his Answers seemed to be given not from a man, but God. Moses
was his Son, whom besides his hereditary knowledge, the excellency of his
beauty did commend. But when the Egyptians were plagued with itch and scabs,
they were admonished by the Oracle to expel him with the sick from the bounds
of Egypt, least the contagion of the disease should spread over all. Being
therefore made Captain of the banished persons, he took away by stealth the
sacred things of the Egyptians, which they attempting to recover by arms, were
enforced to return back by Tempests. Moses therefore on his return to his
ancient Country of Damascus did possess himself of Mount Sinai, where he and
his people being afflicted with seven days continued fast, in the Deserts of
Arabia, when he arrived to his journeys end, he by a fast consecrated the
seventh day to all Posterity, and according to the language of his Nation did
call it the Sabbath, because that day did put a period both to their fasting
and their travel: And (in remembrance that they were driven from Egypt for fear
of the contagion) least for the same cause they might be hated by the
Inhabitants, they provided by a Law that they should not communicate with
strangers, which beginning first from Policy, was by degrees turned afterward
into Discipline and Religion.

After the death of Moses, his Son Arvas who was a Priest also in the Egyptians
Religion, was created King; and it was always afterward a Custom amongst the
Jews that they had the same men both for Kings and Priests; whose justice being
mixed with Religion, it is incredible how greatly they did prosper. The weath of
the Nation did arise from the profits of the Opobalsamum which does only grow
in those Countries; for it is a Valley like a Garden which is environed with
continual Hills, and a^ it were enclosed with a Wall: The space of the Valley
contains two hundred thousand Acres, and it is called Jericho. In that Valley
there is a Wood as admirable for its fruitfulness as for its delight; for it is
intermingled with Palm Trees and Opobalsamum: The Trees of the Opobalsamum have
a resemblance like to Firr-Trees, but that they are lower, and are planted and
husbanded after the manner of Vines: On a set season of the year they do sweat
Balsom; The darkness of of the place, is besides as wonderful as the
fruitfulness of it: For although the Sun shines nowhere hotter in the World,
there is naturally a moderate and a perpetual darkness of the Air: There is a
Lake also in that Country, which by reason of its greatness and unmoveableness
of the water, is called the dead Sea; fot it is neither stirred with the Winds,
the glutinous substance (with which all the water is covered) resisting their
violence, neither is it patient of Navigation; for all things wanting life, do
presently sink into the bottom, neither does it sustain any matter, unless it
be washed over with Roch-Allum dissolved.

Xerxes King of the Persians did first overcome the Jews, they came afterward
with the Persians themselves into the power of Alexander the great, and a long
time they continued in subjection to the Macedonian Empire; when they revolted
from Demetrius, and desired the friendship of the Romans, they first of all the
East did receive their liberty, the Romans at that time giving freely out of
other men's possessions. In the same time in which the change of Government in
Syria was alternately managed by the new Kings, Attalus King of Asia polluted
that most flourishing Kingdom received from his Uncle Eumenes, with the
slaughters of his friends, and the punishments of his nearest kindred; feigning
sometimes that the old woman his Mother, sometimes that his wife Beronice were
slain by their treasonable practices. After the fury of this most wicked
violence, he did put on ragged clothes, and made short his beard, and the hair
of his head after the manner of the guilty; he would not be seen in public,
nor show himself to the people, he would have no feasts of mirth at home, or
any appearance of a sober man* as if he would altogether by taking punishment
on himself, give satisfaction to the Ghosts of the slain. At the last having
forborne the administration of his Kingdom, he dug in gardens, sowed seeds,
and mingled the good with the hurtful, and having steeped them all in the juice
of poison, he sent them as a peculiar gift unto his friends. From this study,
he gave himself to the Art of making of brass, and in the invention of tools
and things belonging to it, and much delighted himself with the melting and the
minting of pieces in Brass. After this, he bent all his endeavors and design
to make a Tomb for his Mother, at which work being too intent, he contracted a
disease by the immoderate heat of the Sun, and died the seventh day afterward.
By his Testament the People of Rome were made Heirs: But there was one
Aristonicus descended from Eumenes, not by lawful marriage, but born of an
Ephesian Strumpet, the Daughter of a Fiddler, who after the death of Attalus did
invade Asia as his Fathers Kingdom: And having made many happy encounters
against the Cities, which for fear of the Romans would not deliver themselves
unto him, he seemed now to be a King in earnest; wherefore Asia was decreed to
Licinus Crassus the Consul, who being more intent to the Attalick booty then to
the war, when in the end of the year he entered into Battle with the Enemy with
a disordered Army, being overcome, he with his own blood suffered for his
inconsiderate avarice. The Consul Perpenna being sent to supply his place, at
the first encounter did overcome Aristonicus, and brought him under subjection,
and carried with him unto Rome the hereditary treasures of Attalus; which his
successor the Consul Marcus Aquilius repining at, did make all possible haste
to snatch away Aristonicus from Perpenna, to become the gift and honor of his
Triumph. But the death of Perpenna did end the difference of the Consuls; and
thus Asia being made the Romans, she sent also, with her wealth, her vices unto
Rome.

THE Seven and thirtieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
ARistonicus being taken, the Massilians sent Ambassadors to Rome, humbly
entreating for the Phocensians their Founders, whose City, and the memory of
whose Name, because they were always implacable Enemies to the people of Rome,
both at that time, and before, in the war of Antiochus, the Senate commanded
should be utterly extinguished, but a pardon was granted by the importunity of
the Ambassadors. After this, the rewards were given to those Kings who brought
in their Auxiliary forces against Aristonicus Syria the less was bestowed on
Mithridates of Pontus; Lycaonia and Cilicia were given to the sons of
Ariarathes, who fell himself in that war; and the people of Rome were more
faithful to the sons of their Confederate Ariarathes, then the Mother was to
her own children; for they increased the Dominions of his son in his nonage,
and she took away his life from him: For Laodice having in number six sons by
King Ariarathes, fearing that they growing into years, she should no longer
enjoy the administration of the Kingdom, did destroy five of them by poison.
The care of his Kindred did preserve the youngest from the violence of the
Mother, who after the death of Laodice (for the people did cut her off by
reason of her cruelty) did enjoy the Kingdom alone. Mithridates also being
taken away by a sudden death, did leave his Kingdom to his son, who was also
called Mithridates, whose Greatness afterward was such, that he excelled in
Majesty, not only all the Kings of his time, but of the former age, and with
various victory held war with the Romans for the space of six and forty years:
whom the most famous Generals, Sylla, Lucullus and others at the first, and
Cneius Pompeius at the last did so overcome, that he arose always more great
and famous in renewing of the war, and became more terrible by his losses; and
at last being overcome by no hostile force, he died a voluntary death in his
own Kingdom, being a very old man, and leaving a Son to succeed him, many signs
from Heaven did presage his greatness to come; for both on that day in which he
was born, and on that in which he began his Reign, at both times there did
appear a Comet, which for seventie nights did shine so brightly, as all Heaven
did seem to be in a flame; for by the greatness of it, it took up the fourth
part of Heaven, and by its splendour it overcame the light of the Sun; and when
it did either rise or set, it took up the space of four hours.

Being in his minority, he lay open to, and did endure the treachery of his
tutors, for they did put him upon a wild and an unmanaged horse, and did
command him not only to ride him, but to exercise his horsmanship, and to
throw darts from him; but Mithridates deluding their design, by governing the
horse beyond the expectation of his age, they conspired against him by poison,
which he suspecting, did oftentimes drink Antidotes, and with such exquisite
remedies did so prepare his body against it, that being an old man, he could
not die by poison, though attempting it. Fearing afterward, that his enemies
would perform with the sword what they could not dispatch with poison, he
pretended he would solace himself with the recreation of hunting; wherefore for
the space of four years, he neither entered into City, nor came in the Country
within the roof of any house, but wandered in the woods, and took up his lodging
on the tops of several hills, no man knowing in what place he was, being
accustomed by his swiftness of foot, either to pursue wild beasts, or to fly
from them, and sometimes by main force to grapple with them. By which means he
both eschewed all treason that was designed against him, and hardened his body
to all indurance of virtue. When afterward he came to the management of the
Kingdom, he immediately contrived not so much how to rule it, as how to enlarge
it, and by an incomparable felicity overcame the Scythians, who were before
invincible, for they had overthrown Zopyro the Lieutenant of Alexander the
great, with thirty thousand armed men, and killed Cyrus King of the Persians,
with two hundred thousand Soldiers, and routed Philip King of the Macedons.
Being increased in his power, he possessed himself of Pontus, and not long
afterward of Cappadocia; and going privately out of his Kingdom, he sojourned
over all Asia with a few friends, and thereby gained a perfect knowledge of all
the Country, and of the situation of every City. After that, he travailed
higher over all Bithynia, and being already, as it were Lord of Asia, he
contrived where to lay his best opportunities for his following victories.
After this he returned into his Kingdom, where it being generally noysed abroad
that he was dead, he found a young child, which in his absence Laodice, who
was both his sister and his wife, had brought forth. But after his long
travels, amidst the gratulations both of his safe arrival, and of the birth of
his son, he was in danger of being poisoned; for his sister Laod ce believing
he had been dead, did fall into an incontinent life, and attempting to conceal
one sin by committing a greater, did resolve to welcome him with poison; which
when Mithridates understood by her maid, he revenged the treason which was
plotted, on the author of it. And winter drawing on, he spent his time, not at
the banquet, but in the field, not in sloth, but in exercise, not amongst his
companions, but with Kings equal to him, either in the horse-race, or the
foot-race, or by trying the strength of body. He also by daily exercise
hardened his Army to the same patience of labor, and being unconquered
himself, he by these acts made his Army invincible. Having afterward made a
league with Nicomedes, he invaded Paphlagonia, and having overcome it, he did
share it with his companion Nicomedes. The Senate being informed that
Paphlagonia was again in the possession of Kings, they sent Ambassadors to them
both, to command them to restore the Nation to her former condition.
Mithridates when he believed that he was equal to the Roman Greatness, did
return a proud answer, which was, that he received his Kingdom by inheritance,
and did much wonder that they should trouble themselves with a Controversy
which did not belong unto them; and being nothing terrified with their
threatenings, he seized upon Galatia. Nicomedes, because he could not defend
himself by right, made answer* that he would restore his part to a lawful King,
and (having changed his Name) he called his own Son Philomenos, after the name
of the Kings of Paphlagonia, and in a false name and title enjoied the Kingdom,
as if he had restored it to the true Roial Progeny: And thus the Ambassadors
being deluded, did return to Rome.

THE Eight and thirtyeth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
MIthridates having begun his parricides by the murder of his own wife,
determined with himself to put to death the Sons of his other sister Laodice,
whose husband Ariarathes King of Cappadocia he had treacherously murdered by
Gordius, thinking he had done nothing in murdering of the father, if the young
men still enjoyed their fathers Kingdom, with a desire whereof he was violently
transported. Whiles he was busy on his design, Nicomedes King of Bithynia did
invade Cappadocia, destitute of a King; which when Mithridates understood, in a
counterfeit piety he sent assistance to his sister to drive Nicomedes out of
the Kingdom; but in the mean time a contract being made, Laodice had espoused
her self to Nicomedes. At which Mithridates being much troubled, he drove the
Garrison-Souldiers and others of the Army of Nicomedes out of Bithynia, and
restored the Kingdom to his sisters son, which was an honorable act indeed, if
it had not been attended by deceit; for not long after, he pretended that he
would call back Gordius from banishment, whom he used as his minister in the
murder of Ariarathes, and restore him to his Country, hoping if the young man
should not give way to it, there would arise from thence a sufficient cause of
the war, or if he should permit it, that the Son might be destroyed by the same
man who killed his father, which when young Ariarathes did understand to be
attempted by Mithridates, taking it deeply to heart, that the murderer of his
father should be called from banishment by his Uncle, he imbodied a mighty
Army; Mithridates brought into the field four score thousand foot, and ten
thousand horse, and six hundred Chariots armed with hooks of steel, and
Ariarathes was altogether as powerful, the neighboring Kings assisting him.
Mithridates fearing the uncertain chance of the war, did alter his counsels, by
causing them to degenerate into treachery; and having by his Agents courted the
young man into a conference, and hid a naked sword in the plates of his
garment, the Searcher being sent to do his office according to the manner then
of Kings, with great curiosity examined about the bottom of his belly;
whereupon he desired him to take heed, lest he found another weapon then that
he sought for; the treachery being thus protected by the jest, Mithridates
having called him aside from his friends, as if he would confer in private with
him, did kill him, both the armies being the spectators of it. This being done,
he delivered the Kingdom of Cappadocia to Ariarathes his Son, being but eight
years of age, having made Gordius Tutor over him, and calling him by the name
of Ariarathes. But the Cappadocians being incensed at the cruelty and the lust
of Mithridates, his Lieutenants revolted from him, and called back the brother
of the slaughtered King from Asia, where he was bred up, and whose name was
Ariarathes also, with whom Mithridates renewed the war, and having overcome
him, did expel him the Kingdom of Cappadocia; and not long after the young man
(having contracted an infirmity by his melancholy) died; after his death
Nicomedes fearing least by the addition of Cappadocia, Mithridates should also
invade Bithynia that bordered on it, did suborn a boy, as remarkable for his
stature as his countenance, to demand of the Senate of Rome his fathers
Kingdom, as if old Ariarathes had three, and not two Sons born unto him. He
also sent his wife Laodice to Rome to be a witness of the three Sons begotten
by Ariarathes. Which when Mithridates understood, he with the like impudence,
sent Gordius to Rome, to assure unto the Senate, that the Boy to whom he
delivered Cappadocia, was begotten of that Ariarathes who died in the war of
Aristonicus, bringing his Auxiliaries to the Roman Army* But the Senate being
prepossessed with the designs of the Kings, would not give to false Names the
Kingdoms of others, but took Cappadocia from Mithridates, and that he should
not be alone in discontent, they took away also Paphlagonia from Nicomedes. And
that it should not be any contumely to the Kings, that the Kingdoms which were
taken from them should be given unto others, both people received the Donation
of their liberty. But the Cappadocians refused their gift of freedom,
affirming that their Nation could not subsist without a King. Therefore the
Senate did constitute Ariobarzenes to be their King. At that time Tigranes was
King of Armenia, not long before given as a pledge to the Parthians, and now
lately dismissed and sent by them home to his Fathers Kingdom. Mithridates had
a great desire to join him with him in the war against the Romans, which he had
before determined with himself. Tigranes thinking nothing what an offense it
would be against the Romans, was by Gordius excited to make war against
Ariobarzenes, a man of a heavy temper and not able to oppose him; and that
there should be no suspicion of any injury to be contrived by deceit,
Mithridates did give him his Daughter Cleopatra into marriage. Therefore on the
first approach of Tigranes, Ariobarzenes having taken all things with him that
he could call his own, did repair to Rome; and thus by the means of Tigranes,
Cappadocia became again under the power of Mithridates. At the same time
Nicomedes being deceased, his son, who was also called Nicomedes, was by the
force of Arms beaten by Mithridates from his fathers Kingdom; who when he came
a suppliant to Rome, it was decreed in the Senate, that they should both be
restored into their Kingdoms; to the effecting of which, Aquilius Manlius, and
Malthinius were sent Ambassadors. This being made known in Asia, Mithridates
being to make war against the Romans, did enter into a league with Tigranes,
and articled with him, that the Cities and the fields should be the part of
Mithridates, but the Captives and all the movables should be the portion of
Tigranes.

And Mithridates having pondered with himself how great a war he had raised,
sent some Ambassadors to the Cymbrians, and others to the Gallogrecians, to the
Sarmatians and Bastarnians, to desire assistance of them. For heretofore when
he had determined with himself to make war against the Romans, he obliged to
him all these Nations with variety of gifts and benefits. He also sent for an
Army out of Scythia, and armed all the East against the Romans: therefore with
no great difficulty he overthrew Aquilius and Malthinius, who commanded the
Asiatick Army, who being routed and driven out of the field with Nicomedes, he
wasreceived with an extraordinary great applause of the Cities. In those he
found great store both of Gold laid up by the thrifty providence of the former
Kings; he found also great store of Arms and Provision for the war, with which
being furnished, he remitted to the Cities their public and private debts, and
for five years did free them from all Impositions. After this, having called
his soldiers to a general Assembly, with several exhortations he did excite
them to the Roman, or rather the Asiatick Wars. The Copy of his Speech I have
thought worthy to insert into the narrow compass of this work, which Pompeius
Trogus did interpret to be indirect, and reprehended both Livy* and Salust,
that (inserting set speeches into their writings as the orations of the parties
interested) they did exceed the bounds of History. Mithridates said, that it
was to be wished that he might have leave to take Counsel, whether war or peace
were to be had with the Romans; since we are bound to resist those who do
oppose us; and those are not to be in doubt what to determine on, who are
without hope of Victory: For against thieves, though we cannot for our safety,
yet we all do draw our sword for revenge; but because that is not in question
whether we ought to set down, being looked upon not only with hostile minds, but
assaulted also with hostile arms; the present Counsel to be demanded is, upon
what hope and account we may maintain the wars begun? For his own part, he
affirmed he had a confidence of the Victory, if they had a generous Resolution
to fight: and it was known as much to his soldiers as to himself, that the
Romans that were to be overcome, were they who overthrew Aquilius in Bithynia,
and Malthinus in Cappadocia; But if other examples would persuade more then his
own Experience, he had heard that Pyrrhus King of Epirus commanding an Army of
not above five thousand Macedons, did in three battails overthrow the Romans.
He had heard that Annibal had continued a Conqueror in Italy for the space of
sixteen years together, and that he might have taken the City it self, were he
not hindered by a faction of emulating and envious spirits at home, and not by
any power of the Romans. He had heard he said, how the people of Transalpine
Gaul had invaded Italy, and possessed themselves of the most and greatest
Cities therein, and had there larger territories then they enjoyed in Asia,
which was said to be but weak in comparison of Rome, neither was Rome only
overcome by the Gauls, but it was taken also by them, and nothing was left them
but only the top of one hill, from whence they were removed not by war, but by
money. But as for the Gauls (whose Name was so terrible to the Romans) he had a
great part of them amongst his own Auxiliaries; for the Gauls he said, who do
inhabit Asia, do only differ from those in Italy by the distance of place, but
had the same original, the same courage, and the same manner of fight; who had
so much the more clear and apprehensive wits, as they had adventured a more
long and difficult march through Illyricum and Thracia, who have their
residence in other places. As for Italy it self, did they never hear how, and
by whom Rome was builded? which though now at peace with it self, yet some of
them daily for their liberty, and others for the power of Command have
persevered in continual wars; How many Armies of the Romans have been
overthrown by the Cities of Italy, and some of them by a new way of Contumely
thrust under the yoke: And that we may not dwell on old Examples, all Italy is
now in Arms excited by the Marsick war, demanding now not liberty, but to be
partakers in the Empire, and of the freedom of the City of Rome* neither is the
City more oppressed with the neighbou^ing war of Italy, then with the domestic
faction of the Governors, and ^ war even with their own Citizens does grow
upon them far more dangerous then the war with Italy. The Cymbrians also from
Germany like a vast deluge of wild and ungoverned people, do at this present
overwhelm all Italy. And although the Romans peradventure could maintain the
several wars one after another, yet they must needs now suffer, so many wars
coming all at once upon them, insomuch that they cannot be at leisure to follow
this very war that they do make upon us; we make use therefore of this present
occasion, and pluck from them the increase of their strength, and not give them
leave to rest, being so deeply engaged, lest hereat they might find more work,
being quiet at home, and without another enemy; for the question is not to be
put, whether we should take arms or no, but whether of our selves, or provoked
by the Romans.

But the war he said was indeed begun against him by them, when in his nonage
they took the greater Phrygia from him, which they granted should be given to
his father, as a reward for the aid he brought against Aristonicus, it being
the same Country which Seleucus Callimacus gave in Dowry to his Grandfather
Mithridates. And what shall I say to the command laid upon me to depart from
Paphlagonia; was not that another motive of the war? espeeially since
Paphlagonia came not by the power of the sword, but descended to my Father by
inheritance, by adoption in Will, and by the death of successive Kings; and in
giving obedience to their violent Decrees, I have no ways mitigated them, but
they have still deported themselves more violently against me. For he said, what
obsequiousness was not afforded to them by him? was not Phrygia and Paphlagonia
taken from him? was not his Son forced from Cappadocia? which by the Law of
Nations he seized upon being Conqueror; but his victory was ravished from him
by them, who have nothing at all but what they have purchased by the sword. Was
not Crestos the King of Bithynia (against whom the Senate had denounced war)
cut off by him to do them a favor? yet in whatsoever Gordius or Tigranes had
offended, it must be reckoned all on his account. He alleged also that in the
ignominy of him, the Senate of their own accord offered that liberty to
Cappadocia, which they took from other Nations* and that people instead of
their proffered liberty, desiring Gordius to be their king, it could not be
granted because Gordius was his friend. Nicomedes also by their command had
made war upon him, and was assisted by them, because Mithridates did pass
unrevenged; and now they find the same cause of war with Mithridates, because
he would not tamely yield himself to be torn in pieces by Nicomedes the Son of
a vaulting woman; for they did not so much pursue the faults of Kings, as their
Power and their Majesty, neither did they with so much violence exercise his
art on him alone, but on all other Kings also; so his Grandfather Pharnaces
was by their arbitration delivered up to Eumenes King of Pergamus; So Eumenes
again, in whose Ships they were first transported into Asia, by whose Army
rather then by their own, they overcame both Antiochus the great, and the Gauls
in Asia; and not long after King Perseus in Macedonia, was at the last censured
by them as their Enemy, and forbidden to come into Italy; and because they
thought it would render them odious to make war with him in his own person,
they deferred it for a while, to carry it on with more violence against his
Son Aristonicus. They professed that no man deserved better of them, then
Masinissa King of the Numidians; to him they imputed the Conquest of Annibal,
the Captivity of Syphax* and the destruction of Carthage; to him as well as
unto the two Scipios, called Africani, the title was ascribed of Preserver of
the City; and yet the war waged but the other day in Africa with his Son, was
so inexpiable, that having overcome him, they would give no respect in him to
the memory of his Father, but he must endure both imprisonment, and become the
spectacle of the Triumph. This condition and height of hatred was imposed by
them on all Kings, because their own Kings were such, at whose very names they
might blush, being either Stepherds of the Aborigines, or Southsaiers of the
Sabins, or Ex^ls of the Corinthians, or slaves and varlets of the Tuscans, or
(whose name is most honorable amongst them, and as they themselves assert are
their founders) those who were nourished with the Milk of a Shee*Wolf;
accordingly all their people have the minds of Wolves, insatiate of blood, and
greedy and hungry after riches and soveraigntie. But if he would descend to
compare himself in his Nobility with them, he was far more famous he said,
then that litter of mongrels* deriving his Ancestors on his fathers side, from
Cyrus and Darius, the founders of the Persian Empire, and on his mothers side
from Alexander the great, and Nicanor Seleucus, the Erectors of the Macedonian
Empire; or if he should compare his people to theirs, they were of those
Nations who are not only equal to the Roman Empire, but opposed the
Macedonian; no Nation that is subject unto him, did ever stoop to the commands
of a foreign Potentate, and obeyed none but their own Domestic Kings; would
they have him to make mention of Cappadocia or Paphlagonia, of Pontus or
Bithynia, or of Armenia, the greater or the less, none of which Nations,
neither Alexander the great, who subdued all Asia, nor any of his Successors or
Posterity ever touched. As for Scythia, it is true indeed, that two Kings
before him adventured not so much to subdue as to invade it; Darius by name,
and Philip, who had much to do to escape from thence by flight, from whence he
shall receive the greatest part of his strength against the Romans. He affirmed
he undertook the Pontick wars, with far more fear and diffidence then this, he
being then but a young man, and unexperienced in the Discipline of war. The
Scythians* howsoever then his enemies, (besides their Arms, and courage of
their minds) were fortified with the solitude and inhospitable coldness of
their climate, by which, their great labor in war, and their contempt of
dangers was the more declared; amongst which difficulties, there could not be
any hope of reward expected from a wandering enemy, and destitute not only of
money, but of habitations; but he now undertook another way of war; for there
is no climate more temperate then the Air of Asia, nor any place more fruitful
of soil, nor more pleasant in the multitude of Cities; and they should consume
the greatest part of their time, not as it were in war, but in keeping of
holy days; and it is hard to say, in a service more easy or more abundant,
whether they are to march to the neighboring possessions of the Attalick
Kingdoms, or to the ancient Cities of Lydia and Jonia, which they should not go
to overcome, but to possess. And Asia it self, desirous of his approach, does
so much expect him, that she seems even to court his presence, and to call
upon him with her voice; so hateful had the Romans made themselves unto her, by
the ravenous avarice of their Proconsuls, the exactions of their Publicans, and
the calumny of their contentions. Let them therefore (he concluded) follow him
with resolution, and collect to themselves what so great an Army might
atchieve under his command, whom without the aid of any Soldier, they saw
with his own strength to have taken in Cappadocia, and to have slain the King
thereof, who the first of all mankind subdued Pontus and all Scythia, which no
man before him could with safety pass by, much less invade. Nor could his
Soldiers be ignorant, he said, of his Justice and liberality, having those
demonstrations of it, that alone of all Kings he possessed not only his
Fathers Kingdoms, but had added other Kingdoms to them, by reason of his
munificence, as Colchos, Paphlagonia, and Bosp^orus. Having with this Oration
excited his Soldiers, in the three and thirtieth year of his Reign he
descended to the wars with Rome. At the same time King Ptolomy being dead in
Egypt, his Kingdom and his sister Queen Cleopatra, who was his wife also, was
by Ambassadors presented to that Ptolomy, who was King of Cyrene. At which
Ptolomy much rejoiced, but especially that without contestation he should be
possessed in his Brothers Kingdom, to which he knew that the Son of his Brother
was appointed both by his mother Cleopatra, and by the favor of the Princes.
Not long after (all being displeased with him) he no sooner entered into
Alexandria, and commanded all the favorers of the young child to be put to
death; and on that very day in which he married his mother, he killed the young
Prince in the mothers embraces of him, in the midst of the Banquet and the
solemnity of this marriage; and thus he ascended his sisters bed, bloody with
the slaughter of her Son. Afterward, he was not more mild unto the people who
called him unto the succession of the Kingdom; for licentiousness being given
to the foreign Soldiers, all things did daily flow with blood, and at last
(having by force ravished her daughter, and taken her afterward into marriage)
he divorced himself from his sister. With which cruelty the people being
affrighted, they stole away into several places, and having wilfully banished
themselves, they forsook their Country for the fear of death. Ptolomy therefore
with his own servants being left alone in so great a City, when he perceived
himself to be a King not of men, but of empty houses, did publish a
declaration, soliciting all Strangers to inhabit the City, who coming in great
numbers to him, he not long after did go himself to meet Scipio Africanus,
Spurius Mummius, and Lucius Metellus the Ambassadors of the Romans, who made a
visitation into those parts to observe the condition and kingdoms of their
Confederates.

But he appeared as ridiculous to the Romans, as bloody to all the Citizens;
for he was deformed in countenance, and short in stature, and by the obeseness
of his strutting belly, more like unto a Beast then to a man; which filthiness,
his tiffanies and light garments which he had on did increase, as if those
parts offered themselves to be seen as through a vail, which Modesty commands
us with diligence to conceal.

After the departure of the Ambassadors, amongst whom while Africanus walked
forth to behold the City, he became a spectacle of honor himself to the
Alexandrians; Ptolomy (being hated by the Strangers also that were become
Citizens) did silently for fear of treachery, depart into banishment, having
taken with him his son which he had begotten on his sister, and his new wife
whom he had married, having put away her mother, and having with money
contracted a mercenary army, be made war at once on his Sister, and his
Country; After this, having sent for his eldest son from Cyrene, that the
Alexandrians should not make him their King against him, he put him to death;
whereupon the people pulled down his Statues and Images, which he conceiving to
be done in favor of his Sister, he slow that Son also whom he begot on her,
and having divided his Body into several parts, and put it into a Coffin, he
sent it to his Mother on that day whereon she made yearly a great feast for the
solemnity of his Birth; which was a sight not only grievous and much lamented
by the Mother, but by all the City also, and brought so much grief in the
height of all their mirth at the banquet, that all the Court was filled with a
great and a sudden lamentation.

The Inclinations of the Princes being therefore turned from feasting into
mourning, they showed to the people the dismembered body of the young Prince,
and by the murder of his own son did declare what they ought themselves to
expect of their King. Cleopatra having ended the days of her mourning for the
death of her son, when she perceived that she was oppressed by a war also from
her late husband her brother, she by her Ambassadors demanded aid of Demetrius
King of Syria, whose own fortunes were as various as they were memorable; For
when Demetrius made war against the Parthians, as mention has been made
before, and in many encounters overcame them, being on a sudden surrounded by
an Ambuscado, having lost his Army, he was taken himself.

Arsacides King of the Parthians, in the greatness of his royal spirit having
sent him into Hyrcania, did not only honor him with the Respect due unto a
King, but gave him his daughter also in marriage, and promised to restore unto
him the Kingdom of Syria, which in his absence Trypho became Master of. After
his death, Demetrius despayring of return, and not enduring Captivity, and
loathing a private life, although a fatt one and a wealthy, did contrive with
himself how he might escape into his own Kingdom. His friend Calamander was
both his Companion, and his perswader to undertake this journey, who after his
Captivity in Syria, having hired a guide, did bring him disguized in a
Parthians habit through the deserts of Arabia into Babylon; But Phrahartes who
succeeded Arsacides, by the swiftness of his horses did cause him to be brought
back, being overtaken by the compendiousness of their goings; Being brought
unto the King, he not only pardoned Calamander, but gave him a reward for his
fidelity to his friend; but having very roundly checked Demetrius, he sent him
to his wife in Hyrcania, and commanded that he should be observed by a stricter
guard: In process of time, when the children which he had by his wife, did seem
to be a stronger obligation on him for his fidelity, he did endeavor to make
his escape again, having the same friend to be his Companion* but by the same
infelicity he was taken again near unto the bounds of his own Kingdom* and
being the second time brought unto the King, he was looked upon as a hated man,
and not suffered to come into his presence. But being then also dismissed to
his wife and children, he was sent back into Hyrcania and confined to a City,
upon a penalty not to go out of it, and in the reproach of his childish levity,
was laden with golden shackles. But no compassion of the Parthians, nor respect
of any consanguinity was the occasion of this their clemency toward Demetrius,
but because the Parthians affected the Kingdom of Syria, they determined to
make use of Demetrius against his brother Antiochus, as the opportunity of time
or the fortune of the war should require. This being understood, Antiochus
thinking it discretion to take the advantage to begin the war, did conduct his
Army, which he had hardened with many neighboring wars against the Parthians;
But his preparation for luxury, was no less then for the carrying on of the
war, for three thousand of his black guard followed eight thousand of the armed
men; amongst whom also, a great number were Cooks, Bakers and Players* and all
of them so abounding with Gold and Silver, that the common Soldiers had their
shoes enterlaced with Gold, and trod upon that metal; for the love of which
all other Nations do fight with steel. In their Kitchings also their
instruments were of silver, as if they advanced rather to keep some great
feast, then to prosecute a war.

Anticohus approaching, many Kings of the East did meet him, who in detestation
of the Parthian Pride, delivered themselves and their kingdoms to him. Not long
after the battle began, and Antiochus having overthrown his Enemies in three
several fields, and possessed himself of Babylon, he was called Antiochus the
great; And the people in all the neighboring Nations revolting to him, there
was nothing left to the Parthians but their own Country, and the boundaries of
it. At the same time Phrahartes sent Demetrius into Syria with a considerable
Army of the Parthians, to possess himself of his own Kingdom, that upon that
account Antiochus should be called off from Parthia to defend his own
Interests. And because he could not overcome him by strength, he did every
where attempt him by Stratagems. The Army of Antiochus abounding with
multitudes, the winter coming on, he quartered his Army in several Cities,
which was the cause of his destruction; For when the Cities beheld themselves
oppressed with the billeting* and the injuries of the soldiers, they revolted
to their old Masters the Parthians and on a prefixed day, by treacheries they
did all assault the divided Army, that thereby one might be disabled to bring
assistance unto the other. Which when Antiochus understood, being resolved to
relieve those who were next unto him, he advanced with that party which with
him had their winter quarters.

In his way, he encountered with the King of the Parthians, against whom in his
person he fought more couragio^sly then all his Army. At last when he had
overcome his enemies by fine force, being abandoned of his own Soldiers
through the treachery of their fear, he was slain. Phrahartes did bestow upon
him the solemnity of magnificent funerals, after the manner of Kings, and
(being taken with the love of the Virgin) did marry the daughter of Demetrius,
which Antiochus had brought along with him, and began to repent that ever he
suffered Demetrius to go away; and having sent in full speed several troops of
horse to fetch him back, they found him in safety in his own Kingdom, fearing
the same design of Phrahartes, and having in vain attempted all things to
reduce him, they returned to their own King.

THE Nine and thirtyeth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
ANtiochus being overthrown in Parthia with his Army, his Brother Demetrius
being delivered from the Captivity of the Parthians and restored to his own
Kingdom, when all Syria was in lamentation by reason of the loss of the Army,
as if he had happily managed his own and his Brothers wars with Parthia, in
which the one of them was taken, and the other slain, he was resolved to make
another war in Egypt, his mother in law Cleopatra having promised him that
Kingdom as the reward of his assistance against her Brother. But whiles he
affected the possessions of other men (as oftentimes it comes to pass) he lost
his own by the revolt of Syria; for the Antiochians first of all under the
command of their General Trypho, having in detestation the pride of their King
which became intolerable by the exercise of his Parthian cruelty, and after
them the Apamenians and other Cities following their examples, did revolt from
King Demetrius in his absence. But Ptolomy King of Egypt, having his Kingdom
invaded by him, when he understood that his sister Cleopatra having taken with
her the wealth of Egypt, was fled unto her Daughter and to Demetrius her Son in
law, did suborn a young man of Egypt the son of Protarchus a Merchant, who by
arms should demand the Kingdom of Syria; and the plot was laid as if he had
been received into the Royal Family by the adoption of King Antiochus; and the
Syrians despising not any who was imposed upon them to be their King, the name
of this their King that they might no longer endure the arrogance of Demetrius)
was called Alexander, and great aides were sent him out of Egypt* In the mean
time, the body of Antiochus slain by the King of the Parthians, was brought in
a silver Coffin, being sent by him to be buried in Syria, which was received
with infinite solemnity, both from all the Cities and from King Alexander
himself, to leave a fairer gloss upon the fable; and this procured him the
general favor and acclamations of the people, all men believing that his tears
came as much from his heart as from his eyes. But Demetrius being overcome by
Alexander, when he was besieged round with calamities, he was at last forsaken
by his own wife and children. Being therefore le^t with a few poor servants
when he repaired to Tyrus, to defend himself there by the religion of the
Temple, going out of the Ships, he was killed by the commandment of the
Lieutenant. Seleucus, one of his Sons, because he assumed the Diadem without
the Authority of his mother, was slain by her* the other (whose Name* by
reason of the greatness of his Nose was Gryphus) was ordained King as yet by
the mother, that the Name of the King might be with the Son, but all the
command of Soveraigntie with the mother. But Alexander having seized upon the
Kingdom of Syria, being puffed up with the vanity of his present success, did
begin now by a contumelious arrogance to despise Ptolomy himself by whom he was
advanced into the Kngdom. Ptolomy therefore having reconciled himself unto his
sister, did endeavor with all his power to destroy the Kingdom of Alexander,
which in the hatred to Demetrius he had procured to him by his own power; To
which purpose he sent Auxiliaries into Greece to Gryphus, and his daughter
Gryphina to be espoused to him, that he might solicit the people to the aid
of his Nephew, not only by his affinity to him, but by the society of the
war. Neither was it in vain; for when all perceived Gryphus recruited with the
Egyptian forces, they did by degrees begin to revolt from Alexander. Not long
after the battle was ^ought, in which Alexander being conquered, did fly to
Antiochia. Being there destitute of money, and the Soldiers complaining for
want of pay he commanded the Effigies of VICTORY being all of solid Gold, to be
taken away from the Temple of Jupiter, laughing at the Sacrilege with this
scorn of prophan^r wit^ for VICTORY he said was lent him by Jupiter. Not long
after, when he commanded ^^e Effigies of Jupiter himself, being all of beaten
Gold, and of an infin^^e weight to be taken away, he was met with in the
Sacrilege and enforced to fly, by reason of the concourse of the multitude,
and a great Tempest following him, he was taken by Thieves, being forsaken of
his own men, and was by them* brought unto Gryphus, who did put him to death.
Gryphus having recovered his fathers Kingdom, and being delivered from all
foreign dangers, was set upon by the Son of his own Mother, who in her
immoderate desire of Soveraigntie, having betrayed her Husband Demetrius, and
killed one of her Sons, and complaining that her Dignity suffered Diminution
by the greatness and the Victories of her Son, she offered him a Boule of
poison as he came hot from hunting. But Gryphus having notice of this treason,
as if he would contend with his mother in complement, desired her to drink
first her self; but she refusing it, he grew importunate upon her; at the Iast
the witness being produced, did convict her, and affirmed that she had nothing
left to defend her self, but only to drink that which she offered to her Son.
The Queen being thus overcome, her wickedness being turned upon her self, she
died by the same poison which she had prepared for another. Gryphus having
obtained security for his Kingdom, did live for the space of eight years
secure himself. At the last he found a Rival in his Kingdom; it was his Brother
Cyricaenus born of the same mother, but begotten of his Uncle Antiochus, whom
when he endeavored to take away by poison, he exasperated him to contend with
him the sooner in Arms for his establishment in the Kingdom.

Amongst these parricidial discords in the kingdom of Syria, Ptolomy King of
Egypt dyed, the kingdom of Egypt being left to his wife and to one of his Sons,
whom she should make choice of to succeed him; as if the State of Egypt should
be more quiet then the Kingdom of Syria, when the mother having elected one of
her Sons to be her successor, should have the other to be her enemy. Therefore
when she was more inclined to her younger Son, she was compelled by the people
to make choice of the elder, to whom before she would give the Kingdom, she
took away his wife, and enforced him to divorce from his bed his most dear
sister Cleopatra, and to marry his yonnger sister Seleuce, not with the
impartial^tie of a motherly affection to her two daughters, having taken a
husband from one of them and given him unto the other. But Cleopatra being not
so much forsaken by her husband, as dismissed from him by the willfulness of
her mother, was married afterward to Cyricaenus in Syria; and that she should
not bring him the bare and empty name only of a wife, she solicited the
Army of Cyprus, and having engaged them to her* she brought them as a Dowry
to her husband. Cirycaenus being now equal to him in strength, the battle
was fought, and Cyricaenus being overcome was put to flight and came to
Antioch, which was presently besieged by Gryphus, in which City was also
Cleopatra the wife of Cyricaenus; the City being taken, Gryphina the wife of
Gryphus commanded nothing more earnestly then that her sister Cleopatra should
be sought out, not to assist her in her Captivity, but to be sure that she
might not escape the calamity of it, because that in the emulation of her, she
did come into that Kingdom, and by marrying the enemy of her sister, did make
her self an enemy unto her; she accused her for drawing foreign Armies into
the contestation of the Brothers, and that it was not for nothing that she was
divorced from her Brother, and that she married another without the Kingdom of
Egypt, against the will of her mother. On the other side, Gryphus did desire
her that she would not compel him to commit so foul a crime, and that never
any of his Ancestors after so many wars both at home and abroad, having
overcome their enemies, did offer any violence to the women, whom their sex did
exempt from the danger of the war, and from the cruelty of the Conqueror; but
to plead for her, besides the Laws of war, there was also the contiguitie of
blood, she being her own sister, against whom so bloodily she raged, and his
own cosen German, and the mother of children betwixt them; to this near
relation of consanguinitie, he added the superstition of the Temple to which
she fled to protect her self, and that the gods were so much the more
religiously to be worshipped, as they were more propitious and favorable to
him in his conquest; besides, she being slain, nothing was diminished of the
strength and power of Cyricaenus. But by how much Gryphus was the more
unwilling, by so much her sister was inflamed with a female pertinatiousness,
conceiving those words of his proceeded from love and not from pity.
Therefore having called the Soldiers to her, she sent them her self to kill
her sister, who entering into the Temple, when they could not drag her out of
it, they cut off her hands, holding fast on the Image of the goddess, and in
her last words having cursed the Author of the Parricide, the gods besides
being violated, she died but to revenge her self; for not long after, another
battle being fought, and Cyricaenus Conqueror, he took Gryphina the wife of
Gryphus prisoner, who killed her sister, and by her death did parentate to the
Ghosts of his wife. But Cleopatra in Egypt, when she was offended that her Son
Ptolomy was her companion in the Kingdom, she excited the people against him,
and having taken from him his Wife Seleuce, and so much the more unworthily
because he had two children by her, she compelled him to live a banished life,
having sent for her younger Son Alexander, and crowned him King in the place of
his Brother; and being not content to have banished him out of the Kingdom, she
prosecuted a War against him in Cyprus, and having driven him from thence also,
she killed the General of her own Army, because he permitted him to escape
alive out of his hands: although Ptolomy being no ways inferior to him in
strength, did willingly depart out of the Island, that he might not be engaged
in a War against his own Mother.

Alexander being terrified with this cruelty of his Mother, did also himself
forsake her, preferring a safe and quiet life above a dangerous Kingdom.

But Cleopatra fearing that her eldest Son Ptolomy should be assisted by
Cyricaenus to be by him restored into Egypt, did send great Ayds to Gryphus,
and Seleuce to be his wife, who must now be espoused to the Enemy of her former
husband, and by Ambassadors called back Alexander her Son into the Kingdom,
whose life when by treachery she contrived to take away, being prevented by
him, she was killed herself, and yielded up her spirit not by fate but
parricide. Worthy she was of this infamy of death, who drove her own Mother
from the bed of her husband, and possessed her room in it, and successively
made her two Daughters Widows after their alternate marriage with their own
Brothers, who banished one of them, and afterward made war against him, and
having taken the Kingdom also from the other, did endeavor to put him to death
by treachery.

But Alexander had the leisure to repent of this horrible act; for when ever it
was known that the Mother was slain by the violence of the Son, he was forced
into banishment by the people, and Ptolomy being called back, the Kingdom was
restored to him, who would neither make War with his Mother, nor take away by
Arms from his brother what he himself did first possess. Whiles these things
were thus carried, his brother begotten on a Concubine, to whom his Father in
his Will did leave the Kingdom of Cyrene, did decease, having made the people
of Rome his Heir; for now the fortune of Rome being not content with the bounds
of Italy, did begin to extend it self to the Kingdoms of the East. Therefore
that part of Lybia was made a Province, and afterward Crete and Cilicia being
subdued in the Piratick War, were reduced into the form of a Province, by which
means the Kingdoms of Syria and Egypt being straightened by the Roman
neighborhood, and accustomed heretofore to raise advantages to themselves by
Wars, with those who were next unto them, the power of wandering abroad being
taken away, they turned their own strength into their own bowels, insomuch that
consuming themselves with daily encounters, they grew into contempt with their
neighbors, and became a prey to the Nation of the Arabians but weak and
contemptible before; whose King Herotimus in the confidence of six hundred Sons
begotten on diverse Concubines, with divided Armies did sometimes invade and
plunder Egypt, and sometimes Syria, and advanced the name of the Arabians,
making it great by the weakness of the neighboring Princes.

THE Fortyeth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
THe mutual hatreds of the Brothers, and not long afterward the enmity of the
Sons succeeding the hatred of their Parents, when both the Kings and Kingdom of
Syria was consumed by an inexpiable War, the people were enforced to seek
foreign Aid, and began to look upon the Kings that were strangers to them;
Therefore when one part of them were of opinion that Mithridates should be sent
for out of Pontus, and another part thought that Ptolomy should be sent for out
of Egypt, it being advertised that Mithridates was involved in the Roman War,
and that Ptolomy was an Enemy unto Syria, they all agreed upon Tigranes King of
Armenia who was supplied (besides his own strength) with the Society of the
Parthians, and the affinity of Mithridates. Tigranes being therefore sent for
into the Kingdom of Syria, for the space of eighteen years most peaceably
enjoyed the Kingdom, neither did he provoke any by War, neither being provoked
did he conceive it necessary to make war against any other. But as Syria was
safe from the in vasion of Enemies, so it was made desolate by an Earthquake,
in which one hundred and seventy thousand persons, and many Cities were
destroyed: The South-sayers being consulted, did make answer, that this
Prodigy did portend the change of affairs in the Kingdoms of the East.

Tigranes therefore being overcome by Lucullus, Antiochus the Son of Cyricaenus
was made King of Syria by him. But what Lucullus gave, Pompey afterward did
take away; for he demanding the Kingdom of him, he made answer, That he would
not make him King of Syria, either desiring or refusing it, having for the
space of eighteen years, during which Tigranes possessed Syria, dishonourably
concealed himself in a corner of Cilicia; but Tigranes being overcome, he now
desired of the Romans the reward of another man's labor; Therefore as he did
not dispossess him of the Kingdom when he had it; so because he gave way to
Tigranes, he would not grant him that which he could not defend, least he
should render Syria again obnoxious to the robberies of the Arabians and the
Jews: He therefore reduced it into the form of a Province, and thus by the
discord of the consanguineous Kings, the East by degrees became under the power
of the Romans.

THE One and fortyeth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
THe Parthians in whose power (as if they had made a division of the World with
the Romans) the Empire of the East is at this time resident, were the banished
men of Sythia; which by their own language is interpreted; for in the Sythian
tongue, a Parthian does signify a banished man. In the time of the Medes and
Assyrians, they were the most obscure of all the Nations in the East; and
afterward when the Empire of the East was translated from the Medes unto the
Persians, like people without a name they became always he prey of the
Conquerors. At last the Macedons having triumphed over all the East, did make
them their servants: And indeed it may appear wonderful, that by their courage
they were advanced to so great a happiness, as to reign over those Nations
under whose command they were accounted before but as a servile Generation: And
being provoked by the Romans by their greatest Generals in their most
flourishing estate of the Empire, they were of all Nations not only their
equals but their Conquerors: Howsoever, it is more their glory to rise and grow
up amongst hose Empires of Assyria, Media, and Persia, (before remembered) and
the most renowned Bactrian Dominion of one thousand Cities, then to be fam us
in the Conquests of a Nation so remote: Moreover it is remarkable, that when
they were daily vexed with the great Wars against the Sythians and their nearer
Enemies, and were oppressed round with all manner of dangers, they did not
only possess themselves of the solitary and waste places betwixt Hyrcania and
the Dacans, but privily became masters of the Borders of the Areans, Spartans,
and Majans: Afterward their neighbors not permitting but opposing them, they
did so far advance themselves, that they inhabited as well the clifts and tops
of the Rocks and Mountains, as the low and spacious plains: By which means it
comes to pass, that either the excess of cold or heat does give bounds to the
greatest part of Parthia; for the snow does possess the Mountains, and the heat
does afflict the Valleys. The Government of the Nation after their revolt from
the Empire of the Macedons was under Kings. The order or estate of the Commons
is next to the Majesty of Kings; from hence they derive both Generals in War,
and Magistrates in peace: Their speech is mixed betwixt the Sythian language and
the Median; They are clothed after their old Custom; and if their fortunes do
grow high, they are apparalled like the Medes, with a garment translucently
thin and fluent; In their Wars, they use both their own and the Sythian
Discipline; They have not as other Nations, an Army composed of freemen, but
the greatest part of it does consist of servants; the Communalty of whom (they
being never to be made free) does daily increase as more are daily born: They
bring up these with as great care as they do their own children, and teach them
both to ride and shoot with great industry: As every one is more rich, so in
the service of the War he brings in more Horses to the King. When fifty
thousand of their Cavalry did meet Mark Anthony in the Field, making war upon
them, there were not above four hundred and fifty of them that were free born:
They are not used to fight hand to hand, or to maintain a league before a City:
They fight always with their Horses either charging or wheeling about; they
also oftentimes do counterfeit themselves to be routed, that they may return
with the greater advantage, whereby they both find their pursuers to lie open
to their swords, and unprepared to receive the second impression of their
Charge; their sound unto the Battle is not given by a Trumpet, but by a Drum;
neither do they long hold out in fight; for they were not to be endured, if
they had as much perseverance in the fight, as impetuousness in the first shock
of the charge. Oftentimes in the very heat of the first charge they forsake
their battle, and after their fight they will immediately rally and renew the
fight again, and when you think you are most sure of Conquest, the greatest
difficulty and danger of the Battle is to come; Their defense for themselves
and for their Horses, are plumed Coats of Mail, on which are such waving Plumes
^at they do cover all the bodies of both; They have no use either of Gold or
Silver, but only on their Armor; through the delight of various lust, they
have every one several Wives; neither is there any crime amongst them which is
prosecuted with a greater punishment then adultery; Wherefore they forbid their
women not only the company of men at their Banquets, but also the sight of
them; they eat no flesh but what they procure by hunting; they are always
carried on Horses; on those they manage their Wars, on chose they celebrate
their Feasts, and perform all pu^lick and private Offices; on those they ever
move, or stand still, on those they constantly trade and discourse. This is the
greatest difference betwixt their Slaves and their Freeborn, that the Servants
in times of no War do go on foot, the Freemen do always ride on horseback;
their common burial is no other then to be devoured by birds or dogs; their
bones being all that is left, are covered with the Earth; as for their
Religion, they are most devout in the worship of their gods; the d sp^sitions
of the Nation are lofty, seditious, deceitful, petulant; they comman^ boldness
in men, and courtesy in women; they are always apt to rise at any commotion
either Foreign or Domestic, they are more prompt to act then to speak;
therefore they cover all things with silence whether good or bad; they are
prone unto lust, frugal in their diet, and with us faith either in their words
or promises, unless it complies with their advantage; they obey their Princes,
not for reverence, but for fear.

After the death of Alexander the Great, when the Kingdoms of the East were
divided amongst his Successors, none of the Macedons vouchsafing to command
over so poor a Nation as they were, delivered it to Stratagenor, one of their
Associates in their wars. The Parthians therefore, the Macedonians being
divided and exercised in civil Wars, did follow Eumenes with the other Nations
of Upper Asia, who being overcome, they came unto Antigonus: Afterward they
followed the Ensigns of Nicanor Seleucus, and (he being dead) of Antiochus and
his Successors, from whose Nephews Son Seleucus they first of all revolted. In
the first Carthaginian War, Lucius Manlius Piso and Attilius Regulus being
Consuls, the discord of the two Brothers Seleucus and Antiochus did give them
an impunity for this desertion; for the two brothers contending to pluck the
Kingdom from one another, they did forbear to prosecute against the Revolters.
At the same time Theodotus the Lieutenant of the thousand Cities of the
Bactrians revolted also, and commanded himself to be called King, whose Example
all the people of the East following, there was a general revolt from the
Macedons.

There was in those times a man called Arsaces, of an uncertain birth, but of
an undoubted courage, who being accustomed to live by theft, and upon the
spoil, having understood that Seleucus was overcome by the Gauls, being
delivered from the fear and the danger of him, having invaded the Parthians
with a company of Thieves, he suppressed Andragores their Lieutenant, and not
long after having killed him, he usurped the Empire of that Nation: After that
he possessed himself of the Kingdom of the Hyrcanians; and having thus invested
himself with the command of two Cities, he prepared a great Army for the fear
of Seleucus and Theodotus King of the Bactrians; but being quickly delivered
from his fear by the death of Theodotus, he entered into a League and Covenant
with his Son, whose name was Theodotus also; and not long after he encountering
with King Seleucus, who advanced with his Army to make War against the
Revolters, he overcame him; the day of which Conquest the Parthians observe in
their Almanacks as an Holiday, it being the beginning of their liberty.

Seleucus being called back, and some intermission of time being given to the
new troubles in Asia, he founded and formed the Parthian Kingdom, and made
choice of a Militia; he fortified the Castles, and confimed the Cities, and
erected the City Clara on the Mount of Thabor; such is the condition of that
place, that there is nothing more secure or more delightful; for it is so
environed with Rocks and Clifts, that the safety of the place needs no
Defe^ders; and so great is the fruitfulness of the adjacent plains, that it is
almost oppressed with its own abundance: Such a variety there is also both of
Fountains and Forests, that copiously it is wa ered, and attracteth the
neighboring people with the delight of hunting. Arsaces in this manner having
both attempted and obtained a Kingdom, became no less famous amongst the
Parthians, then Cyrus amongst the Persians, or Alexander amongst the Macedons,
or Romulus amongst the Romans, and deceased in a ripe old Age. To whose memory
the Parthians have ascribed this honor, that they have ever since called all
their succeeding Kings by the name of Arsaces. His Son and Successor was also
himself called Arsaces, who commanding an Army of one hundred thousand foot,
and twenty thousand horse, did with admirable prowess fight against Antiochus
the Son of Seleucus, with one hundred thousand foot, and twenty thousand horse,
and at last he entered into a Confederary with him.

Pampatius was the third King of the P rthians, and he also was called Arsaces;
for as I have mentioned heretofore, the Parthians by that name called all their
Kings, as the Romans do call every Emperor Caesar and Augustus. He having
reigned twelve years, deceased, having left behind him two Sons, Mithridates
and Pharnaces; Pharnaces being the elder did inherit the Kingdom after the
Custom of the Nation, and having overcome the valiant Nation of the Mardi, he
not long after dyed, having left behind him many Sons, who being all rejected
by him, he left the Kingdom to his brother Mithridates, a man admirable for his
Virtue, thinking that he owed more to his Kingdom then to the name of a Father,
and was more obliged to provide for his Country then his children.

At the same time almost as Mithridates began his Reign in Parthia, Eucratides
was invested in the Kingdom of Bactria, being both of them men of excellent
Spirits. But the fortune of the Parthians being more happy, that Nation was
advanced under the reign of Mithridates to the height of all their glory; but
the Bactrians being distressed by several Wars, did at the last not only lose
their Kingdom, but their liberty: For being wearyed with the Wars of the
Sogdians, the Dranganits, and the Indians, they were at last as men without
spirit or blood, suppressed by an inconsiderable number of the Parthians.
Howsoever Eucratides managed many Wars with great resolution, being much
wasted, with which when he was at last beleaguered by Demetirus King of the
Indians, he by daily sallies with three thousand men did overcome threescore
thousand of his Enemies: and having raised the siege in the fifth Month after
it was begun, he made India stoop in obedience to him, from whence when he
withdrew his Army, he was killed in the march homewards, by his own Son, whom
he made partner with him in the Kingdom, who not dissembling the murder of his
Father (as if he had killed an Enemy, rather then a Father) caused his Chariot
to be hurried over the place where his blood was spilt, and commanded that his
body should be thrown away, as unworthy to be buried. Whiles these things thus
passed amongst the Bactrians, a new War did arise amongst the Parthians and the
Medes, and the fortune of both Nations being a long time various, the Bactrians
were at last overcome by the Parthians; Mithridates being more formidable by
this access of new power, did make Bacasus his Lieutenant in the Kingdom of
Media, and marched himself into Hyrcania; From whence being returned, he waged
War with the King of the Elamits, who being overcome, he also added that Nation
to his Kingdom; and many Nations being subdued, he extended the Empire of the
Parthians from Mount Caucasus to the River of Euphrates, and being at last
visited with sickness, he dyed in an old age, no less glorious then Arsaces his
Grandfather.

THE Two and fortyeth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
AFter the death of Mithridates King of the Parthians, Phrahartes his Son was
made King, who when he determined to make War on Syria, to be revenged on
Antiochus, who attempted the Parthians Kingdom, he was called back by the
commotion of the Scythians to defend his own possessions; for the Scythians
being solicited with the promise of great rewards to help the Parthians
against King Antiochus, they came with their Auxiliaries just when the War was
ended; when they were denied their pay, to reproach them for their assistance
which came so late, the Scythians grieving that they had made so great a march
to so little purpose, when they desired that either their pay should be given
them for their travel, or an Enemy with whom they might encounter, they had a
proud answer returned them, whereat being incensed, they began to plunder the
Borders of the Parthians. Phrahartes therefore advancing against the Scythians,
did leave one Hymerus for the defense of his Kingdom, having obliged him by his
love from the flower of his youth, who unmindful of the courtesies received,
and whose substitute he was, did afflict the Babylonians and many other Cities
with tyrannical cruelty. Phrahartes himself in this War did proudly and
insolently deport himself toward the Army of the Grecians, whom he had then
with him (having taken them prisoners in the War which he made against
Antiochus) being altogether unmindful that no Captivity could abate their
spirits, and that the indignity of new injuries did more exasperate them.
Therefore in the battle when they perceived the Army of the Parthians deeply
engaged, they revolted to the Enemy, and executed their long desired revenge on
the Parthian Army, by their slaughter of them, and by the death of their King
Phrahartes himself: In his place his Uncle Artabanus was chosen King. The
Scythians being contented with the Victory, having plundered their Country,
return home. But Artabanus having made War upon the Inhabitants of Colchos, and
received a wound in his arm, not long after deceased by the anguish of it.

His Son Mithridates did succeed him, whose Achievements did gain him the same
name of GREAT; for being enflamed with the emulation of the Acts of his
Predecessors, he excelled their glories by the greatness of his virtues; he
made many Wars with his neighbors, where he showed great demonstrations of his
valor, and added many Nations to the Parthian Kingdom, and having made many
prosperous Wars against the Scythians, he revenged the injuries of his
Predecessors, and made War at last upon Artoadistes King of the Armenians.

But because we have here a passage opened to Armenia, we will in the first
place derive its original from the first beginning; neither is it fit that it
should be passed by in silence, it being so great a Kingdom, whose bounds,
Parthia being excepted, does exceed the magnitude of any Kingdom whatsoever;
for Armenia lies open from Cappadocia toward the Caspian Sea eleven hundred
miles in length; the latitude of it contains but seven hundred only: It was
founded by Armenius the Companion of Jason the Thessalian, whom when King
Pelias desired to have destroyed by reason of his excellent valor, thinking
him dangerous to his Kingdom, he was commanded to be one of the adventurers
into Colchos, to bring home the Fleece of the Ram, so famous amongst all
Nations; the King hoping that he would be destroyed either by the length of the
Expedition, or by war amongst the most barbarous of the Nations. Jason
therefore, the report being spread abroad of that glorious expedition, when the
most noble of the youth of the whole world did strive who first should come
into that service, did compose an Army of most excellent men, who were called
Argonautae, whom after great achievements, when he had brought back safe into
Greece, they were with great force beaten from Thessaly by the Sons of Pelias;
Jason therefore with a great multitude (who on the report of his glory, came
daily out of all Nations to him) his Wife Medea being his companion (whom
having repudiated, he again in the commiseration of her banishment did take
into the participation of his Bed) and Medius his Stepson, begotten by Aegeus
King of the Athenians, did return to Colchos, and restored there his
Father-in-law driven from the Kingdom.

After that he made great Wars against the neighbors, and added to the Kingdom
of his Father-in-law, diverse Cities that were taken, to take away the injury of
the former War, in which he both took by force his daughter Medea, and killed
Aeg^alus the Son of Aetas, and part of them he distributed to the people whom
he had brought with him to serve him in his Wars: He was the first of all men
who subdued that part of the world, Hercules and Bacchus excepted, who were
said to be the Conquerors and the Kings of all the East. To some of the people
he assigned Phrygius and Ansistratus to be their Generals, who were the drivers
of the Chariot of Castor and Pollux; he made a league also with the Albanians,
who having followed Hercules out of the Mount Albania in Italy after he had
slain Geryon, did drive his Cattle through Italy, and who being mindful from
whence they derived their Original, did in the War of Mithridates salute the
Army of Cneius Pompeius by the name of brethren. All the East therefore did
erect Temples and constitute Divine Honors to him, which many years
afterward, Parmenio Lieutenant General under Alexander the Great did command
to be pulled down and abolished, that no name in the East should be of more
veneration then the name of Alexander himself.

After the death of Jason, Medus was the emulator of his virtues, who in the
honor of his Mother Medea, did build a City, and called it after her name, and
founded the Kingdom of the Medes after his own name, in the Majesty whereof the
Empire afterward did a long time flourish. The Amazonians are near unto the
Albanians whose Queen Thalestris desired for generation to have the carnal
knowledge of Alexander the Great, as we find it asserted by several Authors.
Armenius also being himself a Thessalian, and one in the number of Jasons
Captains, having recollected a considerable party that wandered up and down
after the death of Jason, did plant Armenia, from whose Hills the River Tygris
does first flow but with small beginnings, and after some space she hides her
self under Earth, through which running undiscovered for the space of five and
twenty miles, she shows again her self, and appears a great and violent River
in the Country of Sophone, from whence falling down, is received into the
waters of Euphrates.

But Mithridates King of the Parthians, after the war of Armenia, was expelled
by the Senate from the Parthian Kingdom, by reason of his cruelty: His brother
Horodes having possessed himself of the vacant Kingdom, did for a long time
besiege Babylonia, whither Mithridates fled, and at last compelled the
Inhabitants, being oppressed by famine, to surrender themselves; and
Mithridates of his own accord in confidence of the contiguity of his blood, did
deliver himself unto the power of Horodes. But Horodes taking him to be rather
an enemy then his brother, did in his own presence command him to be slain.
After this he made War upon the Romans, and overthrew Crassus the Roman
General, with his Son, and all the Roman Army. His Son Pacocus having performed
great achievements in Syria, and being sent to pursue the relicts of the Roman
Army, was called back into Parthia, being suspected by his Father, in whose
absence the Army of the Parthians being left in Syria, were slain by Cassius
the Quaestor of Crassus, with all their Captains.

This being performed, not long after there did arise the Civil Wars of the
Romans betwixt Caesar and Pompey, in which the Parthians took the part of
Pompey, both by reason of their association with him in the war with
Mithridates, and because of the death of Crassus, whose Son they heard did side
with Caesar, and who they doubted not would thoroughly revenge his Fathers
death, if Caesar were the Conqueror; Therefore Pompey and all his party being
overcome, they afterward sent their Auxiliaries to Cassius and Brutus against
Augustus and Antonius; and after the end of that war, having entered into a
league with Labienus, they made desolate with their Armies both Syria and Asia,
and being as high in their resolutions as their numbers, they assaulted the
Camp of Ventidius; who after Cassius, in the absence of Pacorus did overthrow
the Parthian Army; but Ventidius having dissembled a fear, did a long time
contain himself within the Camp, and permitted the Parthians for a while to
insult; who being insolent and secure, he at the last did send forth one part
of the legions against them, who charging upon them with great courage, did
utterly rout them; Pacorus conceiving that his flying men had drawn along after
them the Roman legions to pursue them, did set upon the Camp of Ventidius,
supposing it to be destitute of defenders; whereupon Ventidius sallying forth
with the other part of the legions, did cut off the whole Army of the
Parthians, with the King Pacorus himself; neither did the Parthians in any war
receive a greater wound then in that battle.

When these things were reported in Parthia, Horodes the father of Pacorus, who
not long before had understood that all Syria was plundered, and Asia seized
upon by the Parthians, and who did glory* that his Son Pacorus was a Conqueror
of the Romans, being on a sudden informed both of the death of his Son, and
the total destruction of the Army, his grief was heightened into fury. For the
space of many days he would not speak to any, nor take any sustenance, nor
utter any words at all, insomuch that he seemed to be a dumb man. After many
days, when grief had opened the passage of his voice, he called upon nothing
but Pacorus; he seemed as if he both heard and saw Pacorus, and would stand
still and speak as if he discoursed with him, and sometimes would lamentably
condole him, being slain.

After a long time of sorrow, another affliction did invade the miserable old
man, which was to determine with himself, which of his thirty Sons he should
make King in the place of Pacorus.

He had many Concubines, on whom so great a number of children were begotten,
and every one of them was importunate with him to make choice of her own Son;
but the fate of Parthia did so ordain, (it being there a solemn custom to have
Kings to be parricides) rhat the most wicked of them all, Phrahartes by name,
should be elected King, who no soo^ner was invested in his royalty, but (as if
he would not die a natural death, and when he would have him) did kill his
father, and afterward put to death his thirty Brothers; neither did his guilt
cease here; for perceiving that the Peers of the Kingdom were much incensed
against him for his daily cruelties, he commanded his own Son, being almost of
age, to be killed, that there should not one remain who might bear the name of
a King.

Mark Antony made war upon him with sixteen gallant Legions, because he
brought aid to Pompey and his party, against Caesar and himself; but his
Army being sorely weakened by many encounters, he retreated from Parthia; by
which victory, Phrahartes being grown more insolent, when he determined many
things cruelly against the people, he was driven into banishment by them; and
having with repeated importunities for a long time wearied the neighboring
Cities, and last of all the Scythians, he was by their great assistance
restored unto his Kingdom.

In his absence the Parthians had constituted one Tyridates to be their King,
who understanding of the advance of the Scythians, did fly with a great number
of his friends to Caesar, making war at the same time in Spain, carrying with
him as a pledge to Caesar, the youngest Son of Phrahartes, whom he took away by
force, being too negligently guarded. Which being understood, Phrahartes sent
presently Ambassadors to Caesar, demanding that his servant Tyridates and his
Son should be restored to him.

Caesar having understood the Embassy of Phrahartes, and the desires of
Tyridates, (for he desired also to be restored to the Kingdom) affirming that
the Romans would have a Right to Parthia, if the Kingdom thereof should be at
his disposing, did make answer, That he would neither deliver Tyridates to the
Parthians, neither would he aid Tyridates against them.

And that it might appear that Caesar was not of that sullen temper, that they
could prevail nothing at all upon him, he sent Phrahartes his Son without
ransom, and allowed Tyridates a large exhibition as long as he would continue
with the Romans.

After this, the war in Spain being ended, when he came into Syria to compose
the State of the East, Phrahartes was possessed with a great fear that he would
make war against him.

Therefore the Captains over all Parthia, that were taken Prisoners in the
Armies of Crassus, or of Antony, were recollected, and the Ensigns that were
taken, were also sent back to Augustus; with them the Sons and Nephews also of
Phrahartes were given as pledges to Augustus; and Caesar prevailed more with
the greatness of his Name, then another Emperor could have done by Arms.

THE Three and fortyeth BOOK OF IVSTINE
THe affairs of Parthia, and the East, and almost of all the world, being
described; Trogus, as after a long pilgrimage, does return home, thinking it
the part of an ungrateful Citizen, if having illustrated the actions of all
Nations, he should conceal the affairs only of his own Country. He briefly
therefore touches upon the beginning of the Roman Empire, that he might not
exceed the measure of his propounded work, and not in silence to pass by the
original of that City which is the head of the whole World.

The Inhabitants of Italy were first the Aborigines, whose King Saturn was
reported to be of so great Justice, that no man served under him, neither had
he any thing private to himself, but all things were undivided and common unto
all as one patrimony to them. In the memory of which example, it was provided
that in the Saturnalia, the Interests of every one being made equal, the
servants did everywhere in their banquets, lie down along with their masters.
Therefore Italy was called Saturnia, after the Name of their King; and the
Hill where Saturn did inhabit, being by Jupiter driven from his own Seat, is
called the Capitol.

The third King who Reigned in Italy after him, was Faunus, in whose time
Evander came into Italy from Pallantheum, a City of Arcadia, with a small
Retinue, to whom Faunus did bountifully assign certain fields and a Hill, which
he afterward called the Hill Palatine. At the foot of this Hill he errected a
Temple to Lycaeus, whom the Greeks call Pan, and the Romans Lupercus. The
Effigies of the god is clothed with the skin of a Goat, in which habit they
rnn up and down in Rome at the Lupercals. Faunus had a wife whose name was
Fatua, who being daily filled with a divine Spirit, did as it were in a fury
presage of things to come, from whence those that to this day are inspired,
are said to fatuate, or to foretell the events of Fates to come. Latinus
conceived in whoredom, was the son of the daughter of Faunus, and of Hercules,
who at that time having killed Geryon, did drive his Cattle through Italy, the
rewards of his Victory. In the Reign of Latinus, Aeneas came from Ilium into
Italy, Troy being sacked and destroyed by the Greeks. He was immediately
entertained with war, and drawing forth his Army to battle, Latinus sending a
Trumpet to parley with him, was possessed with such an admiration of him, that
he received him into the society of the Kingdom, and Lavinia being given him
in marriage, he was the son in law to Latinus. After this they had both war
with Turnus King of the Rutilians, because Lavinia who before the arrival of
Aeneas was betrothed to him, was denied him in marriage. In this war both
Turnus and Latinus perished; therefore when Aeneas by the Law of Arms commanded
over both people, he builded a City after the name of his wife Lavinia. He
afterward made war against Mezentius King of the Tuscans, in which dying
himself, his Son Ascanius did succeed him, who having abandoned the City
Lavinium, did build long Alba, which for three hundred years was the Metropolis
of the Kingdom. After the Reign of many Kings of that City, at the last
Numitor and Amulius did enjoy the Kingdom* but when Amulius had disenthroned
Numitor, who was the more respected by reason of his age, he politickly devoted
his Daughter Rhea to a perpetual Virginity, that there should be no more
children out of the race of Numitor, to take revenge on him for the usurpation
of the Kingdom; and the better to conceal his design, a pretense of honor was
added to the injury, and she seemed not so much to be a person condemned, as a
Voteress elected. Therefore being shut up in a Wood sacred to Mars, she brought
forth two children at one birth; it is uncertain whether begotten by Mars or by
incontinence with another. Amulius his fear being multiplied by the birth of
the two boys, did command them to be exposed, and laded Rhea with chains, by
the injury and burden whereof she not long after died. But fortune prospicient
to the Original of Rome, did provide a Woolf to give suck to the children, who
having lost her whelps, and desiring to empty her teats, did offer her self as
a Nurse to the Infants, and returning often to the children, as to her own
young ones; Faustulus the Shepherd observed it, and having taken them from the
Woolf, he brought them up amongst the flocks in a rural life. It is by manifest
arguments believed, that the boys were begotten by Mars, both because they were
born in his Grove, and were nursed also by a Woolf, which is a creature under
the protection of Mars. One of the boys was called Remus* and the other
Romulus; being at man's estate, in their daily exercises amongst the Shepherds,
they did increase their strength and swiftness, and did oftentimes with prompt
industry drive away the Thieves that came to steal the Cattle. It so fell out
that Remus at last was taken by them, and as if he was himself the same which
he did forbid in another, he was brought unto the King, and accused to have
been accustomed to rob the flocks of Numitor; wherefore the King did deliver
him to Numitor to be revenged of him. But Numitor being moved with the flourish
of his youth, and his suspicion calling to his mind his Nephew exposed, when
the similitude of the savor of his daughter, and the time at which he was
exposed, did agree with his age* and held him very doubtful: Behold then
Faustulus came unexpectedly with Romulus, by whom the Original of the ^oys
being understood, the plot immediatey was contrived; the young men were armed
or the revenge of their mothers death, and Numitor for his Kingdom taken from
him. Amulius being slain, the Kingdom was retored to Numitor, and the City of
Rome was ^uilded by the young men; the Senate then was constituted, consisting
of one hundred Seniors, who were called Fathers. The Neighbors also disdaining
that their daughters should be married unto Shepherds, the Sabin Virgins were
taken away by violence, and the Nations about them being overcome by Arms, they
first obtained the Empire of Italy, and afterward of the world.

In those times it was the custom of Kings, instead of Diadems, to use Spears,
which the Greeks call Scepters; for in the beginning of time, the Ancients
worshipped Spears for the immortal Gods; in the memory whereof, Spears at this
day are added to the Images of the gods. In the times of King Tarquin, the
youth of the Phocensians being brought into the mouth of Tyber; did enter into
friendship with the Romans; and sailing from thence into the furthest parts of
France, they builded Massilia betwixt the Ligurians and other fierce Nations of
the Gauls, and performed great achievements, whiles by Arms they either
protected themselves against their barbarous insolence, o^ whiles of their own
accord they did provoke them, of whom they were provoked heretofor^.

For the Phocensians (being compelled by the barrenness of their soil) did live
with more industry and alacrity on the Seas, then on the Land, and did lead
their lives sometimes by fishing, sometimes by trading, but for the most part by
Pyracie, which at that time was accounted honorable. Therefore having sailed
into the farthest Coasts of all the Ocean, they came into a harbor at the mouth
of the River of Rhone, and being delighted with the pleasure of the place, on
their return to their own Country, discovering to others what they had seen
themselves, they stirred up many men to undertake that voyage. Furius and
Peranus were the Admiral and Vice Admiral of their Fleet. They came to the King
of the Segoregians, S^^anus by name, in whose Territories they d^^ired to build
their City, desiring his friendship. It so fell out, that the King on th^^ day
was employed in the preparations for the marriage of his daughter Gyptis; for
whom according to the custom of that Nation, he intended to provide a husband,
who was to be chosen by her self, at a great and solemn feast prepared for that
purpose. Therefore all the Suitors being invited to the ^inner, the Grecian
Guests were also intreatd to be present at it. The Virgin then (acording to the
custom being brought in) and eing commanded by her father to give waer unto him
whom she would make choice of ^o be her husband, she passing by all the Gauls,
did turn toward the Greeks, and gave the water to Peranus, who being made of a
guest a Son in law, had a place assigned to him wherein to build his City.
Mas^ilia therefore was builded near unto the mouth of the River of Rhone on a
remote Bay, as it were an angle of the Sea. But the Ligurians envying the
prosperity and increase of the City, did weary the Grecians with daily wars,
who in beating back the dangers from them, became so glorious, that their
enemies being overthrown, they sent forth many Colonies into the neighboring
Countries; from these the Gauls being instructed, their barbarous manners being
either quite laid aside, or more civilized, they learned the use of a more
refined course of life; as to exercise and mitigate the field s with ploughs,
and to environ and to defend their Cities with Walls. They then began to live
not only by Arms, but Laws; they learned to prune the Vine, and to plant the
Olive. And so great a beauty and order was observed both in disposing of the
things and men; that Greece did not seem to come into Gallia, but Gallia to be
translated into Greece. Senanus King of the Segoregians being dead, from whom
the place was received to build the City, his Son Commanus did succeed him in
the Kingdom, and a certain King affirming that the time would come, when
Massilia should be the destruction of the neighboring people; did argue that it
might be suppressed in the Original, lest growing strong by degrees, it might
at last suppress him, who gave both an Original and an increase unto it; to the
performance whereof he inserted this following Fable.

A Bitch great with whelp, did petition to a Shepherd to give her room in which
to bring forth her young ones; which being obtained, she petitioned to him
again to grant her the same room to bring up her young ones; at the last her
whelps growing into age, and she being supported with her Domestic numbers,
did challenge the propriety of the place unto her self.

So the Massilians who do now appear to be but strangers, may in a short time
become Lords of the Country.

The King being incited by the application of this story, did attempt by
deceits to destroy the Massilians. Therefore on the Holy Day dedicated to
Flora, he sent many lusty and able men into the City, to be entertained as
guests, and gave order that many more should be brought in Carts, in which they
should be covered with green leaves, whiles he himself with his Army lay hid
in the next hills, that they might be present when the opportunity served for
their Ambush, and the Gates in the night being opened to receive their Carts,
they might with armed men invade the City drowned in wine and sleep.

But a woman, who by the contiguitie of blood had near relation to the King,
being accustomed to play the wanton with one of the Grecians, pitying the
loveliness of the young man in her embraces of him, did betray the deceit unto
him, and desired him to decline the danger. He immediately informed the
Magistrates with it; and the prepared treacheries being discovered, the
Ligurians were apprehended, and lying hid were drawn out of the Carts, and
being all put to death, deceits were prepared for the deceitful King, and seven
thousand of the Ligurians were slain with the King himself.

After this, the Massilians did always upon their Holy Days keep their Gates
shut, and observed a strict watch, and had Sentinels to walk their Rounds on
the walls, and to take notice of strangers, and to demand the word; and thus,
as if they were environed with war, they managed their City in the times of
peace; so punctually good Instructions are observed there* not so much by the
necessity of the times, as by the custom of doing well.

After this the Massilians had for many years great wars with the Ligurians and
the Gauls, which both increased the glory of the City, and amongst the
neighboring Countries, made famous the valor of the Greeks by their multiplied
Victories.

And when a new war arose from Carthage, they having surprised the Busses of
their Fishermen* they often overthrew the Army of the Carthaginians, and gave
peace unto them, being conquered. They entered into a league with the Spaniards;
and almost from the first foundation of their City, they observed their
friendship with the Romans with great fidelity, and in all their wars
industriously assisted their associats, which both increased the confidence of
their strength, and purchased them peace from their enemies.

When Massilia flourished therefore with the same of their achievements, the
abundance of their wealth, and the glory of their strength, the neighboring
people in conspiring multitudes did gather themselves together to root out the
name of the Massilians, as to extinguish a common fire. By the consent of all,
Caramandus was chosen General, who when he besieged the City with a powerful
Army of chosen men, being affrighted in his sleep with the vision of a hard
favored woman, who called her self a goddess, he offered peace of his own
accord to the Massilians, and having desired that he might be allowed the
liberty to enter into their City, and to worship their gods, when he came
unto the Temple of Minerva, and beheld in the p^rtalls of it, the image of the
goddess which he beheld before in his sleep, he immediately cried out, that
that was she who did affright him in the night, and commanded him to raise the
siege; and having gratulated the Massilians, that the immortal gods had care of
them, he entered into a perpetual league with them, having recompensed the
goddess with a chain of Gold.

Peace being obtained, and their security established, the Ambassadors of the
Marsilians having returned from Delphos, to which place being sent, they had
brought gifts unto Apollo, did inform them that they heard in the way that the
City of Rome was taken by the Gauls and set on fire; they seemed to be much
afflicted at the loss, and did prosecute it with a public funeral, and sent
their Gold, both what they had in private as well as public, to make up the
sum, having understood that they had redeemed their City and their peace
with money from the Gauls. For which benefit, it was decreed by the Senate,
that they should be made free of Rome, and a place allowed them in the public
Spectacles, and a solemn league was again confirmed perpetually to be observed
with equal Interests on both sides. In his last book Trogus affi^ms that his
Ancestors derived their original from the Volscians, that his Grandfather
Trogus Pompeius was made free of the City, at what time Cneius Pompeius made
war against Sertorius in Spain; he affirms also, that his Uncle under the
same Pompey, was Colonel of a Regiment of horse, in the war against
Mithridates, and that his father served in the wars under Caius Caesar, and
that he was both his Secretary, the master of the Complements, and had the
office of the Seal.

THE Four and Fortieth BOOK OF IVSTINE.
SPain, as it is she does shut up the limits of Europe, so it is the conclusion
of this Work. The Ancients called it first Hyberia, from the River Hyberus, and
after Spain ^om Hispanus. It is situated betwixt Africa nd France, and enclosed
with the main ^cean and the Pyrenaean mountains; and as is less then either
Africa or France, so it more fruitful then either; for it is not scorched with
the violence of the Sun as Africa, neither is it troubled with daily winds as
France, but enjoyes a mean betwixt both, and by its temperate heat, and
seasonable and pregnant showers, it produces all variety of fruits, insomuch
that it suffices not only the Inhabitants, but sends forth abundance of all
things to Italy and the City of Rome; neither is there in it only great store
of Corn, but also of wine, honey* and oil. There is in it also, an abundance of
steel, and of swift horses; and it is not only to be praised for the outward
goods of the earth, and which are on the superfiices of it, but for the many
Mines, and richness of the metals in the bowels of it. There is also abundance
of Flax and Spartus, and no Count^ie in the world undoubtedly, is more full of
minion.

In this Kingdom, the courses of the Rivers are not now so violent as to bring
any hurt by their swiftness, but smooth and gentle, and water both the fields
and Vine-yards, and by the high tides from the Ocean, very full of fish.

Many of their Rivers are rich in Gold, which are celebrated by the praises of
many writers; It only joins to France by one ridge of the Pyrenaean hills; on
all other parts of it, like to a circle, it is surrounded by the Sea. The Form
of the Country is almost four square, unless when it is shut in by the
Pyrenaean Hills, the Sea shores being there more straight and narrow.

The space of the Pyrenaean Hills does contain six hundred miles. The salubrity
of the air and the equal temper of it throughout all Spain is not infected with
any hea^ie mists from the marshes; to this may be added the cool aires from the
Sea, and the gentle and daily whisperings of the winds, which piercing through
all the Country, is an occasion of a great and general health to all.

The bodies of the men are prepared for hunger and labor, and their resolutions
for death. They are all and altogether given to frugalitie, and covet war
rather then sloth; if they want an enemy abroad, they will seek him at home.
They have been oftentimes tormented to death, for the concealing of things
committed to their trust; so much more strong is the care of their taciturnitie
then of their life.

The patience of that servant is made famous in the Carthaginian war, who
having revenged his master, did insult with loud laughter on the rack, and in
an unclouded and pure joy, overcame the horror of death, and the cruelty of
his tormentors.

The Nation are swift of feet, they have for the most part active spirits;
Horses for service in war, and good swords are more dear unto them then their
own blood. They have no feasts there but on holy days.

After the second Carthaginian war, they learned of the Romans to be bathed in
hot water. In a long course of time they had never any famous General besides
Veriatus, who for the space of ten years, wearied the Romans with various
victory, (so much the more near to beasts then unto men are their dispositions)
Neither was he elected by the suffrages of the people, but they followed him as
a wary man, and expert to decline dangers; and so great was his valor, and his
continence, that though oftentimes he overthrew the Armies of the Consuls, and
was renowned for great achievements, yet he never changed his arms nor his
habit, no not so much as his diet, and continued in the same fashion of clothes
and Arms in which at first he began to fight, insomuch that every common
Soldier did seem more gallant then the General himself.

In Portugal, near unto the River of Tagus, it is affirmed by diverse Authors,
that Mares do conceive by the wind, which fables received their original by
the fruitfulness and abundance of them, who are found to be so swift in
Galizia, and in Portugal, that not undeservedly they seem to be conceived by
the wind.

The Galizians do derive their pedigree from the Grecians; for after the end of
the Trojan war, Teucer being hated by his father Telamon, and not received into
the Kingdom by reason of the death of his Brother Ajax, sailed unto Cyprus, and
builded there the City Salamina, after the Name of his ancient Country; to
which place (having understood of the death of his father) he not long
afterward returned; But when Eurix the Son of Ajax would not suffer him to
land; he lanched forth into the Deeps again, and by rough winds was driven to
the Coasts of Spain; where he possessed himself of that place on which new
Carthage now does stand; from thence he sailed to Galizia, and having planted
there a Colony, he gave a name unto that Nation. Howsoever Galizia is said to
be the portion of Amphilochus.

The Country does abound with Lead, and Brass, and with Minion also, which
gives a Name to the neighboring River. And it is so rich in Gold, that
oftentimes in ploughing the ground, they do turn up the Oar of Gold with it.

On the bounds of this Nation, is a consecrated Hill, and which it is accounted
a great sin to violate with Iron, but when the earth is cleaved with thunder*
Bolts, which is usual in those places; it is permitted to any to collect the
detected Oar as the gift of God.

The women do exercise themselves in household affairs, and in manuring of the
ground; the men do live by their swords and by their plunder. Steel with them
is a principal commodity, but their water is more violent then Steel it self,
for the Steel being extinguished in it, is made more sharp and hard; neither do
they approve of any weapon which is not dipped in the River of Bilbo, or in
Chalybs, from whence the Inhabitants who live near unto this River are called
Chalybes, and are said to excel all others in the commodity of Steel. But the
Curetians do inhabit the Forests of the Tertesians, in which it is reported
that the Titanian Giants made war against the gods.

The most ancient of their Kings was Gargoris, who did first find out the use
of honey. He, when a Nephew was born unto him by the incontinence of his own
Daughter, being ashamed at the dishonor of the act, he commanded that the
little one, by several varieties of death should be destroyed; but being
preserved by fortune, through so many chances, he at the last, even by the
compassion of the dangers themselves, did arrive unto the Kingdom. First of
all, when he commanded him to be exposed, he after certain days did send to
enquire after his Body, and found that he was wonderfully preserved, and
nourished by the milk of several wild beasts; Being brought home, he commanded
him to be cast into a narrow path in which the droves and heads of Cattle were
accustomed to pass; too cruel he was in this, to have the young child rather
to be trod upon by the mui^tude of the Beasts, then to perish by a single
death; and remaining untouched by them, and not wanting nourishment, he
commanded that he should be cast to fierce bandogs, impatient by the abstinence
of many days; and they also forbearing him, he not long afterward commanded
that he should be cast unto the hogs, who did not only not hurt him, but some
of the Sows did nourish him, with their milk; whereupon at the last, he
commanded that he should be cast into the Ocean. Then by the present power of
Providence, as if he was carried rather in a Ship then on the waves, by a
gentle tide he was brought to the land safe, betwixt the raging sands and the
reciprocating Billows: And not long after there did appear a Hind, who did
offer her strutting dugs unto the little one, who by his daily conversation
with his nurse, became of a wonderful swiftness of body, and a long time
wandered on the Mountains and the Valleys amongst the herds of the Dear, being
no ways inferior in his swiftness to them: At the last, he was taken in a
snare, and given as a great present to the King, and being discovered to be his
Nephew by the similitude of his lineaments, and by the marks of his body, which
presently after his birth were burned on it; in the admiration of the
deliverances from so many chances and dangers, he was ordained by the King to
be his Successor in the Kingdom; his name was called Habis, and no sooner was
he invested in the Kingdom, but he showed such proofs of nobility and
greatness, that it appeared he was not in vain delivered from so many dangers
by the Majesty of God; for by Laws he did unite the barbarous people, and
taught them how to yoke the Oxen, and to plough and sow the ground, and
enforced them to feed on better nourishment then what the trees or Plants
provided, belike in the hate of those things which he himself had endured. The
education of this Prince would seem fabulous, but that it is recorded, that the
Builders of Rome were nourished by a Woolf, and that a Bitch did give suck unto
Cyrus King of Persia: The people were by him forbidden to exercise any servile
labor, and they were distributed by him into seven Cities.

Habis being dead, the Kingdom for many Generations continued amongst his
Successors. But in another part of Spain which consists most of Islands, the
Kingdom was in the power of Geryon. In this place there is such abundance of
grass, and withal so pleasant, that if by the providence of the herdsmen the
Cattle were not enforced to discontinue feeding, their bodies would break by
the excess. From hence the Droves of Geryon, in those times accounted the only
wealth of the world, were of that fame amongst the Nations, that by the
greatness of the booty, they allured Hercules out of Asia. It is recorded in
Story, that Geryon was not a Giant of three bodies, as the Fables do make
mention, but that there were three brothers of so fast a concord, that all
three seemed to be governed by one mind, and that Hercules did not of his own
accord make War upon them, but having observed that his own droves of Cattle
were forced from him, he regained of them what he had lost by the sword.

After the Succession of many Kings in Spain, the Carthaginians first of all
possessed themselves of it; for when the Inhabitants of the Gades being
obedient to the vision, had translated into Spain the holy things of Hercules
from Tire, from which place the Carthaginians also do derive their Original,
and had builded them there a City, the neighboring people of Spain envying the
growing happiness of the new City, and upon that account provoking them to War,
the Carthaginians being of the same kindred, did send relief unto them, and by
a happy Expedition they both vindicated the Gaditans from injury, and added the
greatest part of Spain to the Empire of their command: And afterward being
incited by the fortune of their first Expedition, they sent Amilcar their
General, with a great Army to make themselves masters of all the Province, who
having performed great achievements, whiles he followed his fortune too
inconsiderately, he was betrayed in an Ambush and slain. Asdrubal his
Son-in-law was sent to supply his plae who was slain himself by the servant of
a Spaniard, in the revenge of the unjust death of his Master.

Annibal the Son of Amilcar did succeed him, and was a greater General then
them both; for having excelled them in his achievements, he subdued all Spain,
and having afterward made war on the Romans, he afflicted Italy with several
losses and overthrows for the space of 16 years. The Romans in the mean time
having sent the Scipioes into Spain, did first of all drive the Carthaginians
out of that Province; afterward they had great Wars with the Spaniards
themselves, neither could they be conquered to an absolute obedience, until
Augustus Caesar, having subdued all the world, did carry thither his conquering
swords, and having by Laws brought the barbarous and rude people into a more
civil course of life, he reduced all Spain into the form of a Province.

The End of the Books of JVSTINE the HISTORIAN.
Collections taken from the Books of Sextus Aurelius Victor, on the lives and
manners of the Roman Emperors, from the time of Caesar Augustus, to the Emperor
Theodosius.
Octavianus Augustus Caesar.
IN the seven hundred and two and twentyeth year after the City of Rome was
built, but in the four hundred and eightieth year after the expulsion of the
Kings, the custom was renewed at Rome to obey only one person, not entitled
a King, but an Emperor, or by a more reverend Name Augustus. Octavianus was the
Son of Octavius a Senator by the Mothers side; he derived his descent from
Aeneas by the Julian Family; and by the adoption of Caius Caesar his great
Uncle, he was called Caius Caesar, and by reason of his victories surnamed
Augustus: Being established in the Empire, he exercised the Tribunitian power
of himself; He reduced the Country of Egypt, being before unpassable by reason
of the Marshes and the inundation of Nilus, into the form of a Province, which
that he might make serviceable to the City by the transportation of Corn, he
caused with the great labor of his Soldiers, all the deep ditches to be
opened, which the negligence of Antiquity had covered with mud. In his time
four hundred Millions of measures of Corn were brought yearly out of Egypt unto
Rome. To the number of the Provinces of the people of Rome he added the
Cantabrians and Aquanians, the Rhoetians, Vindelicans, Vandals, and Dalmatians;
he overthrew the Swedes, and the Cattans, and translated the Sycambrians into
France, and enforced the Pannonians to be tributary to Rome, and compelled the
people of the Goths and Bastarnians to a peace, having first provoked them to
feel his power by War. The Persians presented their Hostages unto him, and
granted him the permission to choose them a King. The Indians moreover and the
Scythians, the Garamants and Ethiopians did send their Ambassadors with
Presents to him: He so much abhorred all Wars, troubles, or division, that he
would never denounce War upon any Nation, unless for great and just causes;
alleging that it showed a vainglorious and most unconstant mind, either in
the immoderate desire of triumph, and for a few unfruitful leaves in a Laurel
Garland, rashly to throw the safety of the Citizens into the danger of doubtful
war. He affirmed that nothing was more incongruous to a good Emperor then
precipitation, and that every thing is done soon enough that is well done; and
that Arms are never to be undertaken unless for some necessary cause, lest the
Victory being obtained by a great loss, and accompanied but with small
advantage, it may resemble those who do fish with a golden hook, the which
being lost or broken off, the loss cannot be recompensed with any gain of fish
that can be taken. In his time, the Roman Army that was beyond the Rhine was
destroyed, and the Tribunes and the Propraetor slain; which he so deeply
resented, that in the height of lamentation, he would beat his head against the
wall, and did put on mourning apparel, and was known by all the Liveries of
sorrow and deformity; he much reproved the practice of his Uncle, who too much
flattering the common Soldiers, and calling them his companions, whiles he
sought to become dearer to them, he lessned the Authority of a Prince; he
deported himself with great clemency toward the Citizens; he was most faithful
to his friends; the chiefest whereof was Mecaenas, whom he loved for his
secrecy, as he did Agrippa for his modesty and patience in enduring of labor;
he also loved Virgil; he was very careful whom he entertained into his
friendship; but having once acknowledged them, he was most constant to preserve
them; he applied himself much to the study of the liberal Arts, but most of all
to Eloquence, so that no day did pass in which he did not write, read and
declaim; he made some new Laws, and others he corrected, and inserted his own
name to them; he increased and adorned Rome with many Structures, glorying with
these words, I found the City made with Brick, but I leave it made of Marble;
he was mild, grateful, of a civil and a pleasant nature, beautiful over all
his body, but most in the luster of his eyes, which did dart forth their beams
after the manner of the brightest Stars, and therefore he gladly did give way,
that those who looked s^ed^as^ly upon him should draw off their eyes, as being
dazzled with the glory of his own. A certain Soldier having turned himself
from beholding his face, and being demanded wherefore he did so; He made
Answer, because I cannot endure the lightning flying from your eyes. Howsoever
so great a man was not without his faults; for he was angry, but not
immoderately, privately envious, and openly ambitious, and beyond all measure
desirous of Sovereignty; a great player at dice, and although much given to
wine and high food, he did sleep but little; he was inclined to lust, even to
the reproach of common Fame; for he was accustomed to lie betwixt twelve
prostitute Boys, and as many maids; being divorced from his wife Scribonia, he
fell in love with Livia the wife of another man, and married her, her husband
giving way unto it; she had at that time two Sons, Tiberius and Drusus;
Augustus although he was a slave unto his lust, yet he was a great punisher of
it in others, after the manner of men, who are severe in chastising those
crimes which they themselves with greediness commit: For he condemned Ovid to
banishment because he composed three Books of the Art of Love; he was much
taken with all manner of spectacles, especially with the strange shapes, and
the numbers of wild beasts; having lived seventy and seven years he dyed of a
sickness at Nola, although some do write that he was poisoned by the treachery
of Livia, who because in a Step-mothers hatred, she had caused Agrippa to be
condemned into an Island, and found he was to be recalled, did fear that when he
was constituted Emperor, he would call her to strict account for it, what she
had made him to endure; but howsoever it was, whether he fell by the treachery
of Livia, or dyed a natural death, the Senate decreed to prosecute him being
dead, with many and new honors: For having before given him the little of the
Father of his Country, they now consecrated semples unto him, not only in Rome,
but in all the most famous Cities of the Empire, all men commonly saying, I
would he had never been born, or had never dyed The Government of the whole
World in the hands of one man being of a dangerous beginning, was of an
excellent ending. For in obtaining the Empire, he was accounted an Oppressor of
the liberty, and yet in the management thereof he so loved the Citizens, that
but three days provision of Corn being found in the Granaries of Rome, he had
resolved to die himself by poison, it in the mean time the Fleet laden with
Corn had not returned from the Provinces; which being arrived, the safety of
his Country was imputed to his Felicity; he reigned six and fifty years, twelve
with Mark Anthony, and four and forty alone; certainly he could never have
contracted to himself the whole power of the Commonwealth, nor so long have
enjoyed it, had he not abounded with most excellent gifts both of Art and
Nature.

Claudius Tiberius.
Claudius Tiberius the Son of Livia, and Step-son to Augustus Caesar, did reign
four and twenty years: He was called Claudius Tiberius Nero, and by the wits of
Rome, by reason of his great love to Wine, Caldiu, Biberius Mero: He was expert
enough in all the Arts of War, and fortunate withal under Augustus, before he
was made Emperor, so that the Government of the Commonwealth did not seem
unworthily to be committed to him: He had the knowledge of good Letters, and
was more excellent in his elocution, then candid in his apprehension; for he
was of a cruel, covetous, and treacherous disposition, pretending to do those
things, to which he had not the least inclination; he seemed to be offended
with those whose counsel he did follow, and to bear good will to those whom he
most hated; he was better in sudden Answers then those that were deliberated;
he fainedly refused the Government of the Empire, which was offered him by the
Senate, and found out thereby what every man did say or think of him, which was
the occasion of the death of many excellent men, who conceiving that according
to the sense of his long Speeches he did decline the burden of the Empire,
whiles they delivered their opinions therein, and as they thought according to
his own desires, they incurred the greatest danger, and met with a certain
ruin. He reduced the Cappadocians into the form of a Province, and deposed
their King Archelaus; he suppressed the great Robberies of the Getulians, and
finely cajoled Marabodunus King of the Switzers; having with incredible fury
lived in the height of cruelty and injustice, punishing both the guiltless and
the guilty, and as well his friends as strangers; all discipline of War being
neglected, Armenia was spoiled by the Parthians, Moesia by the Dacians,
Pannonia by the Sarmatians, and France by the neighboring Nations; having
lived seventy eight years he was destroyed by the treachery of Caligula.

Caius Caesar Caligula.
CAligula reigned four years; he was the Son of Germanicus; and because he was
born in the Army, he took his name according to the shoe the Soldiers do
wear, which the Latins call Caligula. Before he was made Emperor, he was dear
and acceptable to all, but after he was invested with the Empire, he was such a
one that not undeservedly it was said of him, That there was never a more cruel
Lord then himself, He defiled his three sisters, and did wear that manner of
habit in which his gods were clothed; he affirmed himself to be Jupiter for
his incest, and amongst the roaring Boys he called himself Bacchus. I know not
well whether it be expedient to commit his name to memory: but because we
delight to know all things concerning Princes, and that wicked men might
decline such bad Examples for the fear of infamy, I have inserted his name in
this Catalogue; he caused noble Matrons to be prostituted in his Palace unto
public lust, and was the first, who having set the Diadem on his head, did
command himself to be called Lord. In the space of three miles in the Bay of
Puteoli, having cast up the sand, and made the ground firm and passable, being
clothed in habiliaments wrought all over with gold, and having on his head a
Crown of Brass, he did ride as triumphant in a Chariot drawn with two horses
richly entrapped; not long afterward he was killed by his own Soldiers.

Claudius Tiberius.
Claudius Tiberius, the Son of Drusus, the Brother of Tiberius, and Uncle to
Caligula, did Reign fourteen years. He when the Senate had decreed, that the
stock of the Caesar's should be rooted out, being found by the Soldiers where
he lay hid in a blind hole, because he seemed to them to be a modest and a
tame thing, they having no knowledge at all of him, was made Emperor. He was
much addicted unto drunkenness, glutrony, and lust, cowardly, and almost
stupid, slothful and timorous, and a slave to the commands of his servants and
his wife.

In his time Scribonianus Carmillus being made Emperor amongst the Dalmatians,
was immediately put to death. The Moors were expelled from their Provinces,
and the Army of the Masulamians was overthrown, and the water called Aqua
Claudia was brought unto Rome.

His wife Messalina, at the first privately, and afterward openly, and as it
were by Authority, did pollute her self with adulteries; and many for fear
abstaining to join with her, were put to death.

Afterward being inflamed with a more desperate lust, she commanded the most
noble of the Matrons and the Virgins to go along with her and to do as she did;
and men were compelled to be present, and if any one did refuse, he was
immediately accused of one capital crime or other, and he and his whole Family
were condemned to suffer all the tormen's that cruelty could invent, insomuch
that she seemed to command all her self, rather then to be subject to the
Emperor her husband. And her servants made free, being preferred to the places
of the chiefest Authority, they did pollute all things with their whoredoms
and murders, and banishments and proscriptions; amongst whom she made Felix
Governor of the Legions in Iudaea. At the triumph over the Britains, she gave
unto Possidius the Eunuch, a gallant suit of Arms, as a partaker of this
victory amongst the most valiant of the Soldiers; in the mean time Polybus in
gre^ state did walk in the midst of the two Consuls. Narcissus the Secretary
did surpass them all, and seemed to be his masters master. Pallas being honored
with the Robes of a Praetor, was grown so rich, that he being the cause of the
great Dehaust of moneys in the Exchequer, it was wittily divulged in the Libel,
that the Emperor might have supplies of money enough if he might be received by
his two slaves into their society. In this time a Phoenix was seen in Egypt,
which bird they say did fly out of Arabia in the five hundred year of its age,
to some memorable places thereabouts; An Island did suddenly rise up out of the
Aegean Sea. This Claudius married Agrippina the daughter of his own Brother
Germanicus, who procured the Empire for her Son, and first made away her
step-son by manifold treacheries, and afterward her own husband by poison. He
lived threescore and four years, whose Funeral (as sometimes the Funeral of
Tarquinius Priscus) was a long time concealed; whilst the Guard, corrupted by
the craft and largesses of this woman, did dissemble that he was but sick; Nero
his step-son did take upon him the Government of the Empire.

Domitian Nero.
DOmitian Nero, the Son of Domitian Aenobarbus and Agrippina, reigned sixteen
years. He for the space of five years seemed tolerable, whereupon some have
delivered, that the Emperor Trajan was accustomed to say, That all Princes do
differ much from the first five years of Nero. He builded in the City an
Amphitheatre, and places to bathe in. By the permission of Polemon Regulus, he
reduced Pontus into the form of a Province, whereupon it was called Pontus
Polemoniacus; he also reduced the Cottian Alps, Cottius the King thereof being
dead; the rest of his life he did lead with such infamy and dishonor, that any
one might be ashamed but to make mention of it; for he made such a progress in
all wickedness, that he spared not either his own or any others modesty, and
at the last being cloa^hed in the habit of Virgins when they are to be
married, the Senate openly being called, and the Dowry named, the people
flocked round about as to a wedding; and being covered with the skin of a wild
beast, he showed to both sexes many proofs of abhorred lust. He defiled his own
mother, and afterward killed her; he married Octavia, and Sabina, surnamed
Poppea, their husbands being slain. Not long afterward, Galba in Spain, and
Caius Julius did attempt to dispossess him of the Empire; when he understood of
the approach of Galba, and that it was decreed by the Senate, that his neck
being put into a fork, (after the ancient manner) he should be whipped to death
with rods, being forsaken on all sides, he did steal out of the City about
midnight, and none following him but Phaon, Epaphroditus, Nephitus, and the
Eunuch Sporus, whom sometimes Nero had assaied in the spite of nature to turn
into a woman, he did thrust himself through with a sword, the impure Eunuch
Sporus helping his trembling hand, and when he found that there was none of
them that would kill him outright, he cried out; Is it so! have I neither a
friend left me, nor an enemy? I have lived wickedly, and shall die as
wretchedly. He died in the two and thirtieth year of his age; the Persians so
much did love him, that they sent Ambassadors to desire leave that they might
be permitted to build a Monument for him. But all the Provinces and the City
of Rome so much rejoiced at his death, that the people having on their heads
the Caps of manumission, did triumph as if they had been delivered from a cruel
master.

Sergius Galba.
GAlba derived of the noble Family of the Sulpitii, Reigned seven months, and
as many days. He being infamous in his youth, was intemperate in his diet, and
ordered all things according to the counsel of his three friends, Junius,
Cornelius, and Caelius, insomuch that as well amongst the common people as the
Courtiers, they were called his Schoolmasters. Before he did take upon him the
Government of the Empire, he ruled many Provinces excellently well, and was so
severe unto Soldiers, that as soon as he came into the Camp, it was in all the
mouths of the Soldiers, Soldiers stand to your Arms, Galba is here, and not
Getulicus. Being seventie three years of age, whiles in his coislet he
endeavored to appease the Legions stirred up by the sedition of Otho, he was
slain at the Lake of Curtius.

Otho Salvius.
SAlvius Otho, derived of noble parentage, in the City of Terentinum, Reigned
four months; he was dishonest in all his life, but especially in his youth.
Being overcome by Vitellius first at Placontia, and afterward at Bebriacum; he
did run himself through with his own sword, in the seven and thirtieth year of
his age. He was so beloved by his own Soldiers, that many of them having seen
his dead body, did with their own hands become their own Executioners.

Aulus Vitellius.
VItellius was born of a noble Family, and Reigned but eight months, his
father was Lucius Vitellius, who was the third time Consul; he was cruel of
mind, extremely covetous, and extremely prodigal. In his time Vespasian did
possess himself of the Government in the East, by whose Soldiers Vitellius
being overcome in a batta^l under the Walls of the City of Rome, and plucked
out of his Palace where he had hid himself, he was dragged about the City with
his hands bound behind him, as a spectacle for all to look upon. And lest the
impudent man, in the consciousness of the evils he had committed, should for
shame hold down his head, a sword was put under his chin; and being half naked,
many casting dirt, and others more filthy excrements in his face, he was drawn
to the Gemonian Ladders, where he caused Sabinus the Brother of Vespasian to be
slain; and falling by many wounds which he received from several swords, he
there died himself; He lived seven and fifty years. All those of whom I have
here spoken, especially those of the Cesarian race, were of such learning and
eloquence, insomuch that abounding with all manner of vices (Augustus only
excepted) they had nothing else to commend them.

Vespasian.
VEspasian Reigned ten years. Amongst other virtues of this man, this was the
most remarkable, that he would forget all enmities, insomuch that he married to
a most honorable man, the daughter of Vitellius, having a very great dowry. He
patiently endured the insurrections of his friends, answering their reproaches
(as he was the most witty man in the world) with sharp and innocent conceits
of mirth. He so prevailed upon Licinius Mutianus, presuming too much upon his
own merit, because by his assistance he obtained the Empire, that a third
friend being called in, and familliar to them both, he did pacify him with
these few words, You know me to be a man* But what shall we speak of friends,
since he despised also the tauntings of the Lawyers, and the reproaches of the
Philosophers. In a short time he refreshed the world, wearied and exhausted
with war; for he had rather overcome by persuasions then by torment, or to put
to death the ministers of tyranny, unless it were those who had been found to
be too bloody instruments, thinking most wisely, that wicked deeds are in many
restrained only by fear. Moreover, he abolished many vices in admonishing the
offenders by most just Laws, and which is more effectual, by the Example of his
own life. Nevertheless there are some who do accuse him of covetousness, when
it is manifest enough that through the want of money and the re-edification of
so many ruined Cities, he was enforced to impose those Taxes which were not
known before his time, nor after it: He re-edified Rome wasted with former
fires, and gave free leave to any to build the houses again, if the old masters
of them were not to be found; he repaired the Capitol, the House of Peace, and
the Monuments of Claudius, and builded many new Cities in all Lands which were
under the Roman jurisdiction; the Cities were renewed with excellent Art and
Elegance, and the Avenues unto them fortified with great industry. The
Flaminian Mountains were made hollow and cut down on both sides, and a way made
to pass through them, which way is how commonly called The Rock Pertuse; he new
formed and established a thousand Nations who hardly before were reckoned to be
two hundred, the greatest part of them being extinguished by the cruelty of
Tyrants. Vologese King of the Parthians was through fear constrained to seek
peace of him. By his virtue Syria, which is also called Palestine, Curaminia,
Tracheta, and Comagine, which at this day we call Augustophratensis, were
reduced to the Roman Provinces; Judaea also was added to them; his friends
advising him to beware of Mutius Pomposianus who aspired to the Empire, he made
him Consul, with this allusion, That the time might come he would be mindful of
so great a benefit; he governed the Empire with great uniformity; he watched
much in the night, and the great affairs of the Commonwealth being over, he
permitted his friends to come unto him, putting on his Princely habiliments
whiles he was saluted; The first thing that he did, was to exercise his body,
afterward he rested, and having washed, he fell to his meat with a better
stomach; The love unto this good Emperor has caused me to speak so much of
him, whom the Roman Commonwealth for the space of 56 years after the death of
Augustus, being almost breathless and spent by the cruelty of Tyrants, by
Providence enjoyed that it might not altogether fall into decay; he lived
threescore and ten years wanting but one, and dyed; with his most serious
studies, he always mingled jests with which he was much delighted. I find that
a blazing Star appearing formidable by his fiery train, This (says he)
pertains to the King of the Parthians who does wear a long bush of hair. At the
last, being tormented with the repletion of the belly, he rising from his bed,
did say, That it becomes an Emperor standing on his feet to depart out of the
world.

Titus.
TItus called Vespasian after his Fathers name, born of Domicilla a Freewoman,
reigned two years, two months and twenty days. He from a child most
diligently applied himself to the excellent studies of Virtue and Military
Discipline, and above all to learning, which he afterward showed by the gifts
both of his mind and body; taking upon him the Government of the Empire, it is
incredible how much he excelled those who were before him, especially in
clemency, liberality, magnificene, and in the contempt of money; all which
graces were so much the more esteemed in him, because many thought that being
descended of a private man, he would be more cruel to private men himself, and
be given to avarice and to riot; For having gotton the office of the Praetor in
the reign of his Father, he oppressed many of his opposites, having his
Emissaries in the Theaters and in the Army who did cast forth envious and
railing accusations against them, and as if they had been convicted of the
crimes of which they were accused, he did demand them unto punishment, amongst
whom he commanded that Cecinna a Consulary man, whom he had invited to supper,
should be put to death upon suspicion that he had defiled his wife Berenice,
and all men took very grievously the quarrels which he revenged in the time of
his Father, alleging that he was greedy of spoils, and that he would be
another Nero when he had got the Empire into his hands. But these things
falling out better, did procure him such immortal Glory, that he was called The
Delight and the Love of mankind. As soon as he was invested with the
Government of the Empire, he sent Berenice home, and commanded the Companies of
the Eunuchs to depart, which was a good sign that he had changed his
intemperate life; And the succeeding Emperors being accustomed to confirm the
Donations and Grants made by the former Emperors, he as soon as he took upon
him the Government, in the first place, of his own accord did ratify them. One
day calling to mind in the Evening, that he had performed no good office to
any man that day, in a reverend and celestial Speech he thus expressed himself,
O my friends, we have lost a day; of such a magnificent liberality he was. He
so famous made his Clemency, that when two men of great Honor had conspired
against him, and could not deny the intended Treason, he first admonished them,
and afterward having brought them into the public Spectacles, he did place
them on each side of himself, and having sent for a sword from the Fencers
being present, whose exercises were that day to be seen, he did give it first
to the one and afterward to the other, who being amazed at it, and wondering at
his constancy, See you not (said he) that power is given by Providence, and
that it is in vain to attempt a villainy either in hope to commit it, or through
fear to be disappointed of it? He also with tears in his eyes did oftentimes
request his brother Domitian, who solicited the Soldiers against him, that he
would not seek to obtain that by parricide which would come unto him in course
and with his own consent, nay, which he had already, since he was his partner
in the Empire. In his time, the Mountain of Vesuvius in Campania did begin to
burn, and there was a great fire in Rome which burned night and day for three
days together; there was also one of the greatest plagues that was ever known,
with which calamity many being afflicted, with his own money he provided all
kind of remedies, and in his own person would visit and relieve the sick, and
comfort those who mourned for the death of their friends. He lived one and
forty years, and dyed of a fever in the same place amongst the Sabines where
his Father dyed. It can hardly be believed how great a lamentation there was
for his death, both in the City and the Provinces, who calling him Their
public Delight, did so bewail him as if the whole world had been deprived of
a perpetual preserver.

Domitian.
DOmitian the Son of Domicilla a free woman, the Brother of Titus, reigned
fifteen years; he at the first pretended clemency, and seemed to be more
tolerable both at home and abroad, and not to be so cowardly as indeed he was:
He overcame the C^ttuns and the Germans, and administered the Law most justly:
He builded many houses in Rome, either begun before, or also anew from the
foundation: He restored the Library consumed with the fire, Copies everywhere
being sent for, but especially from Alexandria. He was so skilful an Archer,
that standing far off, he would shoot Arrows betwixt the fingers of a man's hand
stretched forth: Afterward growing cruel and out-ragious, he exacted unjust
punishments by the murders of good men, and after the manners of Caligula he
commanded men to call him Lord and God, and sending off his Attendants, he
ridiculously would pursue swarms of flies: He raged with that lust, the filthy
exercise whereof the Greeks call (...); from his pursuing the flies it came to
pass that a certain man asking who was in the Palace, Answer was made, Not so
much as a fly; with those cruelties of his, and especially with the injury of
words (by which an aspersion of lust was laid upon him,) Anthony being incensed
did invade the Empire, having at that time the command of the Upper Germany;
but he being slain in a battle by Normanus Appius, Domitian growing more
furious against all kind of men did prosecute even his own friends with the
utmost cruelty; Therefore many in fear of his unbounded rage did conspire
against him, Parthenius the Groom of his Chamber, and Stephanus inciting them,
to whom was added one Clodian fearing to be punished for the sums of money he
had intercepted, Domitia also the wife of the tyrant fearing to be tormented by
him for the love she did bear to Paris the Stage Player, was one of the
Conspiracy; Domitian by their instigation having his Body printed full of
wounds dyed in the five and fortieth year of his life. The Senate decreed that
there should be no more honor done unto him at his funeral then was allowed to
a common Ruffian, and that his name should be razed out of the Registers of
Honor. In his time the secular Plays were celebrated.

Cocceius Nerva.
HItherto such as were born in Rome or in Italy did govern the Empire;
Strangers afterward were advanced to the Government of it, by whose virtue the
City was much strengthened; For, who was there more wise or more moderate then
Nerva? who more divine then Trajan? who more excellent then Adrian? Cocceius
Nerva was born in the Town of Narnia, he reigned thirteen Months and ten
days; Having taken upon him the Empire, a rumor being raised that Domitian was
still a live and approaching, he was surprised with so great a fear, that his
countenance being changed, and his voice lost, he was hardly able to stand upon
his legs; but being afterward assured to the contrary by Parthenius, he
returned to his former temper: Being joyfully received by the whole Senate,
Arrius Antonius, a Gentlemen of a high spirit, and his greatest friend, wisely
observing the estate of those who did bear rule before him, did embrace him
saying, That he did gratulate the Senate, the People, and the Provinces, but he
could not gratulate him; It having been better for him always to suppress ill
Princes, then taking upon him so great a burden to be subject not only to the
troubles and the dangers, but also to the reports of all as well enemies as
friends, who when they presume that they have deserved all things, if they
cannot extort any thing from him, will be more cruel then the greatest Enemies:
He forgave all the penalties due at that time for not paying the Tributes; he
relieved the afflicted Cities, he commanded that Boys and Girls born of poor
Parents should be brought up throughout all the Towns of Italy at the charge of
the Commonwealth: He (that he might not be terrified by the access of
Malignants) was then advertised by the saying of Mauritius a grave and an
ingenious man, who being his familiar friend and at Supper with him, when he
beheld Veientones, who had been Consul to be present, who had brought many
private informations to Domitian against him: mention being made in the time of
Supper of Catulus, who was the chief informer; What would he have done (said
Nerva) if he had outlived Domitian? Why? he would have supped with us too
(said Mauritius;) He was a most knowing and frequent reconciler of all
differences. He removed Calphurnius Crassus with his Wife to Tarentum for
soliciting the Soldiers with great promises against him, the Senators
reproving him for his too much lenity. When the Murderers of Domitian were
demanded to be put to death, he was so much amazed at it, that he could not
forbear to vomit or defer the forced burden of his belly; howsoever, he did
vehemently oppose the Vote of the Senate, saying, That it were better to die,
then to injure the power of the Empire, and to betray those by whose means he
assumed the Authority which he had. But the Soldiers letting alone their
Prince, did kill Petronius with a sword, but the privy members of Parthenius
were first cut off and thrown in his face: Gusperius redeemed his life with
great sums of money, and grown more insolent, he constrained Nerva to give
thanks to the Soldiers before the people because they had destroyed the worst
and the most wicked of all men: He adopted Trajan into the place of a Son, with
whom he lived three noneths; and one night exclaiming against ^ne Regulus with
a very loud voice, being in a great choler against him, he fell into an extreme
sweat* and dyed not long afterward on the same day wherein there was an
Eclipse of the Sun.

Vlpius Trajanus.
VLpius Trajanus born in the City of Tudertum was called Vlpius of his
Grandfather, and Trajanus of Trajus who was the first of his Fathers stock, or
else he was so called after the name of Trajane his Father; he reigned twenty
years: He did demonstrate himself to be so brave a man, and of such admirable
parts, that the great wits of the most excellent Writers are hardly able to
express them: He took upon him the Empire at Agrippine a noble Colony in
France: In the affairs of War he used industry; in the affairs of peace,
lenity; and in relieving the distressed Cities, liberality. And seeing there
are too things which are expected in great Princes, Religion at home, and
Fortitude in Arms abroad, and Wisdom in both; he was endued with so great a
measure of the noblest gifts, that he seemed to enjoy a transcendent
temperature of all Virtues; only he was a little too much addicted to meat and
wine; he was liberal toward his friends, and did use the society of them as if
he enjoyed with them the same society of life; He builded certain Baths in the
honor of Sura, by whose means he attained to the Empire. It would appear
superfluous to give you an exact account of him in particulars; it is
sufficient that he wss absolute in all things; He was patient of labor,
studious to do the Soldiers good, and all good men; he loved the most candid
wits and the most learned men, although he himself was not much indebted unto
Learning, and but a little Eloquent; He was a great lover of Justice, and as
well a finder out of new Rights both Humane and Divine as an observer of the
Ancient: All which in him seemed so much the greater, because the splendour of
the Roman State being as it were quite destroyed and levelled to the ground by
many cruel Tyrants, he was thought to have been sent by Providence for the
redress of such great calamities, and many wonders did presage his coming to
the Empire: Amongst the rest a Chough from the top of all the Capitol was heard
to speak in the Greek tongue (...), which is by Interpretation, It shall be
well. The Ashes of his Body being burned, were brought to Rome, and buried
under his Pillar in the Marketplace of Trajan. His Image (as those who did
come in triumph were accustomed) was brought into the City, the Senate and the
Army going before it. In his time, the River of Tyber overflowed more
dangerously by far then in the reign of Nerva, and covered very many Houses;
There was also a great Earthquake in many of the Provinces attended with a
devouring Pestilence, and the calamities of consuming fires, all which he much
helped by exquisite remedies, and ordained for the time to come that no House
should be higher then threescore foot, because of the vast ruins and expenses
when such fires did happen, whereupon he was deservedly called A Father of his
Country: He lived six and forty years.

Aelius Adrianus.
AELius Adrianus of Italian Parentage, and cousin-germane to Trajan the
Emperor, was born at Adria, which Town standing in the Country of the Piceni,
did give a name to the Adriatic Sea; He reigned twelve years; he was so
entirely addicted to the Greek Tongue, that by many in derision he was called
Graeculus: He augmented the Attick Studies and manners, not only with Poetry,
but with the faculty o singing, and with the art of healing, and with Music
and Geometry; He was an excellent Painter and Carver, and a rare workman in
Brass or Marble, and next to Polycletus or Euphranor; a man would have thought
that he had been only made for those Arts; for they never received so
exquisite an elegancy as by the work of his hands; He had a memory beyond
belief, and could remember all places, businesses, Soldiers, and call them all
by their own names, although he had been long absent from them; He traveled on
foot over all the Provinces, and in that Expedition was the foremost by far of
all that were with him; in the way he restored many Cities, and established
them by sundry Orders; For after the discipline of the Legions, he had many
Bands by Hundreds together of Smiths, Carpenters, Engineers, and all manner of
workmen either for the building the walls or for the adorning them. In all
causes he was a most absolute Judge, being born as it were to be an Arbitrator
betwixt Vice and Virtue; He governed his affections with great Artifice, and
cunningly covered his insolent, envious, sullen and wanton disposition; In the
ostentation of himself, he counterfeited chastity, clemency, and attraction,
and closely carried his Ambition with which he wholly was enflamed; He was most
ingenious either at Questions or at Answers, whither it were in earnest or in
jest; he would ex tempore give you verse for verse, and sentence for sentence,
insomuch that you would think he used premeditation in whatsoever he did speak.
His wife Sabina being used by him more like a slave then a wife, was compelled
with her own hands to be her own Executioner; she reported what an inhumane
disposition of her husband she endured; and endeavored (she said) that she
might not prove with child by him to the ruin of mankind. Being overcome
with the pain of a dropsy which a long time he patiently endured, he caused
many of the Senators to be slain. Diverse Kings having sent rich presents to him
to purchase their Peace, he boasted openly, That he had gained more by ease,
then others had obtained by Arms. He established the Palatine and public
Offices, and reduced them and the Militia into that form in which it continues
unto this day, some few things since being changed by Constantine; He lived
threescore and two years, and dyed most miserably, being so tormented in all
the members of his body, that he desired the most faithful of his servants to
dispatch him, but was kept by the care of his dearest friends from doing
violence on himself.

Antonius Pius.
ANtonius called Fulvius or Bonnonius, was afterward surnamed Pius; he reigned
three and twenty years; He was adopted by Adrian being his Son-in-Law; he
showed so much goodness in his reign, that he lived above all Example, although
that Age in which he lived did compare him unto Numa; Without making any war at
all, he ruled the World three and twenty years by his own Authority, insomuch
that all Kings, Nations, and people, did stand in awe of him, and loving him
withal, they rather esteemed him to be their Father and Patron, then their
Lord and Emperor, and with one consent they all desired his determination of
all their Controversies, looking on him as if he had slid down from Heaven. The
Indians, Bactrians, and Hyrcanians did send their Ambassadors to him, being
moved with the justice of so great an Emperor, which he adorned with a fair and
pleasant countenance, being tall in stature, and strong of limbs: Before he did
go out of his chamber to salute any man, his manner was to eat a morsel of
bread, least by the cooling of the blood about his heart he might loose his
strength, and be rendered unable in the performance of Public Affairs, which he
executed with incredible diligence (like a good Master of a Family) without any
appearance of vain glory or ostentation: He was so meek, that when the Senators
did earnestly persuade him to punish them with death who had conspired against
him, he made Answer, That it was not necessary too strictly to search them out
who had a hand in it; for if they should be found to be many in number, he well
understood how much hatred he might contract unto himself thereby. Having
reigned three and twenty years, he dyed of a fever, twelve miles from Rome, at
a Town of his own called Lorium. Temples, Priests, and infinite other things
were decreed in the Honor of him. His meekness was such, that when on a time
the people of Rome would have stoned him for want of bread, he did choose rather
to satisfy them by giving them the reason of it, then to revenge the sedition.

Marcus Antonius.
MArcus Antonius reigned eighteen years; he was a man of a Celestial spirit^, a
sincere maintainer of virtue, and a protector of Rome in the public
calamities; and truly, if he had not been born for that time, all the glory of
the Empire had fallen at once. There was no respite at all from Wars, which
most of all raged in the East through Illyria, Italy and France. Many Cities
were buried in the ruins which the Earthquakes made, there were great
inundations of waters and much pestilence, and swarms of Locusts that devoured
the grass of the fields, insomuch that there was almost no judgment by which
men can be said or thought to be afflicted, which in his reign did not exercise
its greatest vengeance. I do believe it was ordained by Providence, that when
Nature produces such evils as are unknown to men, the counsels of such
righteous Princes should be present to assuage and redress the calamity. In a
new way of Benevolence he made Antoninus Verus his kinsman partaker with him in
the Empire, who afterward in the eleventh year of his reign, traveling
betwixt Altinum and Concordia, did die by a percussion of blood in the head,
which Disease the Greeks call the Apoplexy; this Verus was of a sharp but a
wanton wit, a great lover of Verses, especially those which are called Tragical.

Marcus Antoninus.
AFter his decease Marcus Antoninus reigned alone, being from his Infancy a man
of a quiet spirit; It is observable, that neither joy nor sorrow did ever make
any change in his countenance; he was much addicted to the study of Philosophy,
and was exactly learned in the Greek Tongue. He permitted the more apparent of
the Nobility to Feast in the same manner, and to have such Attendants as he
himself was accustomed unto. When his treasury was exhausted, and money was
wanting to give the Soldiers their promised largesses, being unwilling to
impose any Taxes upon the Senate or the Provinces, he in the open Market of
Trajanus for the space of two Months together, did set to sale all the
Princely Furniture, the vessels of Gold, and Cups of Crystal and of Myrrh, his
Wives Wardrob, and his own, in which were many Garments of Silk, of Gold, and
many Ornaments of Pearls and Precious Stones, whereby he gathered together a
great mass of Gold. The War being ended, and the Victory obtained, he restored
the money again to so many of the Merchants as would return their bargains, and
troubled not any of them who refused to part with that which they had bought.
In his reign, Cassius endeavoring to play the Tyrant, was put to death; in the
nine and fiftieth year of his age he dyed of a disease at Bendobona: When the
news thereof was brought to Rome, the City made a great lamentation for him,
and the Senators weeping, and clad all in mourning, did meet in the Senate
House, and what was hardly believed of Romulus, was with one consent
confidently presumed of Marcus Antoninus, that he was received into Heaven, and
in the Honor of him they erected Temples, Columns, and many other Monuments.

Commodus.
AVrelius Commodus, the Son of Antoninus called also Antoninus, reigned
thirteen years: At his first inauguration it was suspected what an Emperor he
would prove; for being counseled by his Father on his death bed, not to suffer
the Barbarians to grow in strength, He made Answer, That men in health and
safety might perform some actions by leisure, but of dead men nothing could be
expected. He was extremely addicted to lust, avarice, and cruelty, and kept
promise with none; he was most cruel to those whom he had before advanced unto
the greatest honors, and enriched with most vast rewards. He was so deboyst
that very often he would challenge the Fencers at their own weapons, and play
with them openly in the Amphitheater. Martia, a woman of a sordid birth, but
excelling in beauty and in light and wanton arts, was altogether the mistress
of his heart, and as he came out of the Bath, she did give him a Cup of
poisoned drink: At the last, in the two and thirtieth year of his age, a most
stout and strong Wrastler being sent unto him, did overthrow him, and held his
Chaps so fast together, that he dyed.

Helvius Pertinax.
HElvius Pertinax reigned but eight and fifty days, and against his will too;
for he was enforced to be Emperor, and for that cause was surnamed Pertinax; he
was but of obscure and sordid Parentage, and from the Praetorship of the City
was advanced to be the Emperor of the World; He sell by the wickedness of
Julian; having received many wounds, in the threescore and seventh year of his
life, his head was cut off and carried all about the City: This end had this
man, the example of humane inconstancy, who having known all fortunes, and
endured all manner of labors, was so bandied from one extreme unto another,
that he was called The Tennis Ball of Fortune; for his Father was at first but
a slave to Lollius Gentianus, who lived in the fenny Country amongst the
Ligurians, and he himself oftentimes did willingly confess himself to be a
Retainer to him, during the time of his residence in that place; He was a
Schoolmaster of the Grammar, and more affable then profitable, for which cause
the Grecians called him (...). An injury being received, he could never be
induced to revenge it; He loved simplicity, and e^ceeded not other men either
at Table, Conference, or in Habit; being dead, it was decreed, That he should
be Deified: The people in the honor of him, with repeated applauses, cried out
until they could speak no more, Pertinax being Emperor, we lived in safety, we
feared no Enemy. A righteous Father he was, The Father of the Senate, the
Father of all good men.

Didius Julianus.
DIdius Julianus being born in Millan, reigned seven Months, he was noble by
his birth, an excellent Lawyer, but factious, heady, and ambitious of
Government; In his reign Niger Piscennius at Antioch, and Septimius Severus in
Pannonia were both created Augusti: By this Severus Julianus was led into the
secret Bathes of the Palace, and his neck being stretched forth, after the
manner of those who were condemned, his Head was struck off, and afterward set
up in the Court where the Causes were pleaded.

Septimius Severus.
SEptimius Severus reigned eighteen years, he put to death that monster of men
Priscennius, and afterward Albinus, who made himself Caesar at Lions in
France. Severus left his two Sons Bassianus and Geta to be his Successors; He
made a wall in England quite cross the Land from Sea to Sea, containing at the
least two and thirty thousand paces in length; He was the most warlike of all
the Emperors that were before him, quick of apprehension, persevering to the
end in all things which he determined, and where he inclined to favor, he was
as admirable as he was constant, diligent in seeking out, and liberal in
giving; he was equally vehement both toward friends and foes, as it appeared
by his enriching of Lateranus, Chilo, Amilius, Bassus, and some others, as also
in those great and memorable Houses of receipt which are called the Parthians
and the Laterans; he permitted no man in his Dominions to sell his Honors; he
was sufficiently instructed in the Latin Tongue, but more prompt and eloquent
in the Africa, being born at Leptis, in the Province of Africa; he was
afflicted with so great a pain in all the members of his body, but especially
in his feet, that being not able to endure the torment, he called for poison,
which being denied, he with great greediness did so glut himself with gross and
heavy meats, that being not able to digest it, he dyed of a surfeit in the
sixtyeth year of his Age.

Antonius Caracalla.
AVrelius Antonius Bassianus Caracalla, the Son of Severus, was born at Lions,
and reigned six years alone; he was called Bassianus, after the name of his
Mothers Grandfather: Having brought with him a full and large Garment out of
France, which was there called Caracalla, hanging down unto the ankle^, the
people that came to salute him, seeing him arrayed in that Garment, did call
him Caracalla, after the name thereof; He caused his brother Geta to be slain,
for which cause vengeance followed him, and being troubled in his Conscience he
did fall mad, of which madness he was afterward recovered. Having seen the
body of Alexander King of the Macedons, he commanded that his followers should
call him Alexander the Great; and by the suggestion of his Flatterers, he was
brought to such a fond conceit, that he would walk like Alexander, with an
awful and threatening countenance, and bend his head to the left shoulder, and
whatsoever he observed in the countenance of Alexander, he would imitate to the
life, and did persuade himself that he had the same lineaments, and
proportions: He was much addicted to lust, which was the cause that he married
his own Mother-in-law. In his jorney to Carrae, not far from Edessa, going out
of the way to ease his body, he was slain by a Soldier, who followed him as a
Guard to his person; He lived almost thirty years, his body afterward was
brought unto Rome.

Oppilius Macrinus and Diadumenus.
MAcrinus with his Son Diadumenus were created Emperors by the Army, and
reigned but fourteen Months, and were killed by the same Army, because
Macrinus did attempt to contract their pay, and suppress their luxury.

Aurelius Heliogabalus.
AVrelius Antonius Varius, who was also called Heliogabalus, was the Son of
Caracalla by his cousin-german Semea; he was privately begotten in adultery,
and reigned two years and eight Months; Bassianus Grandfather to his Mother
Semea, was the Priest of the Sun; When Heliogabalus came to Rome with a great
expectation both of the Senate and the Soldiery, he defiled himself with all
manner of pollutions: So inordinate was his concupiscence, that nature not
permitting him to that which his desires did prompt him unto, turning his lusts
into himself, he did put on the name of a woman* and instead of Bassianus,
commanded himself to be called Bassiana; He married himself to a Vestal Virgin,
and having cut off his privy parts, he consecrated himself to the great Mother
Cybele; He made his cousin-german Marcellus, who afterward was called
Alexander, a Caesar; and he himself was slain in a tumult by the Soldiers; His
body was drawn by a Soldier through all the streets of Rome like the carcass
of a dog, in a military Irony, calling him The Whelp of a ravening and an
untamed lust; At the last* the bulk of his body being so great that it would
not enter into the hollow seat of a Privy, they did drag it unto Tiber, and
fastening a great weight unto it, that it might not rise again, they did cast it
into the River. He lived sixteen years, and for these things which happened to
him, was called Tiberinus and Tractisius.

Severus Alexander.
SEverus Alexander reigned thirteen years, he was destructive to the good of
the Commonwealth: In his time Taurinus was made Augustus, who for fear did
cast himself into the River Euphrates. At that time Mauritius did take upon him
the Empire, having corrupted many of the Soldiers; but when Alexander did
observe himself forsaken of the Soldiers, he cried out upon his Mother,
alleging that she was the occasion of his death; and the Executioner coming to
him, he covering his head, did with great confidence offer his neck unto him to
be struck off. His Mother Mammea did carry so closs a hand over him, that if
any thing at Dinner or at Supper was left, were it never so little, it was
reserved for his next meal.

Julius Maximinus.
IVlius Maximinus a Soldier born in Thrace, governed three years, who while he
prosecuted the rich men, as well innocent as guilty, was torn in pieces at
Aquileia, and his Son with him by the sedition of the Soldiers, the Soldiers
in derision crying out, Of a bad Sire they must not keep a whelp. Under his
Government, Gordianus the Father, and Gordianus the Son, one after another did
take upon them the Government, and one of them after another came to confusion.
In the like manner, Pupianus and Balbinus affecting the Principality, were both
put to death.

Gordianus.
GOrdianus, the Grandchild of Gordianus by his Mother, was born at Rome; he was
the Son of a noble Father, and ruled six years; he was slain at Ctesiphon by
Philip a Praetorian Commander, the Soldiers being stirred up into sedition;
this was done in the twentyeth year of his life: His body being interred in the
Confines of the Roman and Persian Empire, did afterward give a name unto the
place which was called The Sepulcher of Gordian.

Philip.
MArcus Julius Philippus ruled five years; he was slain by the Soldiers at
Verona, his head being cleaved a sunder in the middle a little above the upper
row of his teeth; his Son Gallus Julius Saturninus being about twelve years of
age was slain at Rome, being of so melancholy a disposition, that after he was
five years of age, he could by no sport or invention be moved to laughter, and
in the secular Games seeing his Father to laugh profusely, although he was but
a child (in dislike of it) he turned his face from him. This Philip was born
but of mean Parentage, his Father being a Captain or Leader of Robbers.

Decius.
DEcius born in Pannonia Bubalia, reigned thirty Months, and made his Son a
Caesar; he was a man well learned in all the Arts, addicted entirely unto
virtue, pleasant and familiar at home, and a brave man at Arms. In a great
tumult he was drowned amongst many others, in a place so full of Bogs and Fens
that his body could never afterward be found; His Son also was slain in War;
He lived fifty years; In his time Valens Lucinianus was made Emperor.

Virius Gallus.
VIrius Gallus with his Son Volusio, reigned two years; In their time the
Senate created Hostilianus Perpenna Emperor, who not long afterward dyed of
the Pestilence. In their time also Aemilianus was created Emperor in Maesia,
against whom both the Father and the Son marched with an Army, and were slain
by their own Soldiers at Interamnis, the Father being seven and forty years of
Age; they were created Emperors in the Island of Meningis, now called Girba.
Aemilian in the fourth year of his Government was slain at Spoletum, or Pontes
which by reason of his death was afterward called Sanguinarius, being a place
in equal distance betwixt Ociculum, Narnia, and the City of Rome; He was by his
birth a Moor, a man of a daring spirit, but not too rash; he lived seven and
forty years.

Licinius Valerianus.
LIcinius Valerianus surnamed Colobius, reigned 15 years; he was descended of
noble Parentage, but of a slow and stupid disposition, and not fit for any
public place either in Counsel or of action; He made his Son Galienus,
Augustus, and his Grandson Cornelius Valerianus, a Caesar: In their times,
Religianus in Moesia, Cassius Labienus Posthumus in France, (the Son of
Galienus being slain) were made Emperors: In the same manner Aelianus at Mentz,
Aemilianus in Egypt, Valerius in Macedonia, and Aurelius at Millain, assumed
the Imperial Title; But Valerianus making war in Mesopotamia, he was overcome
by Sapores King of the Persians, and not long afterward being taken, grew old
amongst the Parthians, in an ignoble servitude; for as long as he lived, the
King did set his foot upon his neck when he mounted on horsback.

Galienus.
GAlienus in the place of his Son Cornelius, did substitute his other Son
Salonianus; he was addicted to the uncertain love of Concubines, Salonina and
Pipa; but he colored his love to Salonina with the pretense of marriage; and
her Father the King of the Marcomans did grant him thereupon by covenant, one
part of the upper Pannonia; At the last, he marched against Aureolus, whom he
besiged at Pontus, and obtained it, which place afterward was for that cause
called Aureolus; he also besieged Millain, but by the contrivement of Aureolus,
he was slain by his own Soldiers, after he had reigned fifteen years, seven
with his Father, and eight by himself; he lived fifty years.

Claudius.
Claudius reigned two years, some are of opinion that he was the Son of
Gordianus; others say of the woman Licensa, by whom he was taught how to deport
himself toward a wife; he was appointed Emperor by the last Will and Testament
of Galienus, who sent unto him to Ticinum the Imperial Robes by Gallonins
Basilius. Aureolus being slain by his own Soldiers, he received the Government
of those Countries, and fighting against the Almains, not far from the Lake of
Benacum he cut in pieces such a multitude of them, that of their infinite
numbers scarce a half part remained; In those days Victorius was made Emperor;
And when Claudius understood by the Book of the Destinies, which he commanded
to be looked into, that a principal man of the Senate must die, Pomponius
Bassus who was then present, did offer himself to be a sacrifice for the
public: but he not suffering the Oracles to be frustrated, did give his own
life a free gift to the Commonwealth, having first expressed himself, that no
man of that order could be intepreted to be the principal man, but the Emperor
only. This was so acceptable to every one, that he was not only honored with
the Title of a Saint, but they also made him a Statue of Gold, and did place it
near unto the Image of Jupiter, and the Nobles also in the Court in the
remembrance of his piety, did consecrate unto him a Golden Image.

Quintilius.
HIs brother Quintilius did succeed him, who ruling but a few days, was slain.

Aurelian.
AVrelian born but of mean Parentage, for as some affirm, his Father was but a
Farmer in the Country betwixt Dacia and Macedonia under Aurelian the most
famous Senator; he ruled five years, and was not unlike either to Alexander the
great, or to Caesar the Dictator; for he upheld the City of Rome, and in the
space of three years delivered the Empire from all her Enemies, whereas
Alexander was thirteen year making a way by his Victories into India, and
Caesar was ten years in subduing France, and four years afterward in a war
with Pompey, and the Citizens of Rome. Aurelian in three great Battles was a
Conqueror in Italy, at Placentia near unto the Ryne of Meutaurus, at the Temple
of Fortune, and in the Fields of Ticini. In his time Septimius was proclaimed
Emperor amongst the Dalmatians, but he was presently beheaded by his own
Soldiers. In his time the Minters of money rebelled, whom he suppressed, using
against them the utmost cruelty; He was the first man amongst the Romans who
did wear a Diadem upon his Head; and arrayed himself in cloth of Gold made fast
with Pearls and precious Stones, which before his time the Romans were not
acquainted withal; He encompassed the City with stronger and larger walls then
before, and made orders, that the people should eat Swins flesh; He advanced
Tetricius, and made him Corrector of Lucania, having been before proclaimed
Emperor by the Soldiers in Gallia, elegantly upbraiding him, that it was more
majestical to rule some part of Italy, then to reign beyond the Alps. At the
last, by the treachery of his servant, who showed unto some Commanders (the
friends of Aurelian) their own names in a Book, as if Aurelian himself had set
them down and designed them to destruction, ^e was slain himself by them in the
midst of the way betwixt Constantinople and Heraclea: He was a fierce, cruel,
and a bloody man all his time, and the Murderer of his own sisters Son. After
his death there was no Emperor for the space of seven Months.

Tacitus.
TAcitus was the next who did take upon him the Empire, a man of an excellent
temper, who in the two hundredth day of his reign dyed at Tarsus of a Fever.

Florianus.
FLorianus succeeded him, but when the greatest part of that Cavalry had chosen
Probus, a man well experienced in the affairs of war, Florianus having as it
were in sport but personated an Emperor for threescore days, did with a Lance
open his own veins, out of which his blood issued so abundantly, that he dyed.

Probus.
PRobus a Dalmatian was begotten by a Father who was an husbandman, and a
Gardner; He ruled six years, and overcame Saturninus in the East, and
afterward Proculus and Bonosus who were made Emperors at Agrippina; He
permitted the Gauls and the Pannonians to have Vines, and by his Soldiers
hands, he planted the Hill of Alma at Syrmius and Aureus in upper Moesia with
Vines; He was afterward killed at Syrmius in a Tower enclosed with Iron.

Carus.
CArus was born in Narbona, and reigned two years, he immediately created
Carinus and Numerianus, Caesar's, and by a thunderbolt was slain at Ctesiphon.
His Son Numerianus being afflicted with a pain in his eyes, and carried up and
down in a little Litter, was slain by treachery, at the Instigation of Aper who
was his Father-in-law; And when by contrivement, his death was cunningly
concealed until Aper had got strength enough to invade the Empire, the Treason
was discovered by the most noy some smell of the dead Corpse. Sabinus afterward
invading the Empire, was slain by Carinus in the fields of Verona: This Carinus
did pollute himself with all manner of iniquities, he did put to death many
innocent persons by pretended accusations; he defiled the the Marriage beds of
many honorable Personages,; At the last, he was slain by the hand of that
Tribune whose wife he was said to have defiled.

Dioclesian.
DIoclesian a Dalmatian, the servant heretofore of Amelinus the Senator; his
Mothers name, and the name of the Town where he was born was called Dioclea, by
reason whereof until he was made Emperor, he was called Dioclea, and having
taken upon him the Government of the World, he changed his Grecian name into a
Roman; he reigned five and twenty years; He made Maximianus Augustus, and
created Constantine, Galerius, and Armamentarius, Caesar's; He gave Theodora the
Step-daughter of Herculius Maximianus to wife to Constantinus, having caused
him to put away his former wife. In his time Cerausio was made Emperor in
France, Achilleus in Egypt; and Julian in Italy; but they all fell by several
deaths; Amongst whom Julianus having a dagger thrust through his ribbs into his
Bowels, did throw himself into the fire: But Dioclesian of his own accord gave
up the Empire in Nicomedia, and spent his old Age privately in his own
possessions, and being afterward desired by Herculius and Galerius to take
upon him the Government of the Empire again, like a man flying from some great
and dangerous evil, he made Answer, I would you could go to Salon to see the
Plants which I have there planted with my own hands, you would then cer ainly
judge that I am not to be tempted to so great a trouble: He lived threescore
and eight years, the last nine years whereof he lived as a private man; He dyed
(as it is apparent) by a voluntary fea^; for being invited by Constantinus and
Licinius to their Marriage Feasts, and having excused himself, that by reason
of his age he could not be present, they did write back unto him threatening
Letters, in which he was charged to have favored Maxentius, and to favor
Maximinus, whereupon fearing some shameful death, he is said to have poisoned
himself. In his time Constantius, the Father of Constantine, and Armamentarius,
were called Caesar's August. When Severus was created Caesar for Italy, and the
Sisters Son of Maximinus Galerius for the East; at the same time Constantius
also was made Caesar. Maxentius was made Emperonr in a Village six miles from
Rome in the way as you go to Lavicanum. Afterward Licinius was made Augustus,
and in the same manner was Alexander made Emperor at Carthage, and so was
Valens also created Emperor; But Severus was slain by Herculius Maximinus at
Rome amongst the Inns; and his Corpse was put into the Sepulcher of Galerius,
distant from Rome by the way of Appius about nine miles.

Galerius Maximianus.
GAlerius Maximianus, his privy members being consumed, dyed; Maximianus
Herculeus was besieged at Massilia by Constantine, and being there taken was
strangled with a halter: Alexander had his throat cut by the Army of
Constantine. Maxentius when he was to fight with Constantine, having made a
Bridge with Boats a little above the Bridge Milvius, making haste on horseback
to secure the Bridge, did fall with his horse into the River, and there
perished, and through the weight of his Armor did sink so deep into the mud,
that his body could hardly be found again. Maximianus dyed a natural death at
Tarsus. Valens was put to death by Licinius. Having thus acquainted you with
the manner of their deaths, I will now give you a Character of their
dispositions; Herculeus Maximianus was by nature cruel, vehemently addicted to
lust, and foolish in Counsel, of ordinary Parentage, being born in the wild
parts of Pannonia; There is a place not far from Syrmius where now stands a
Palace wherein the Parents of Herculeus did follow mercenary labor; He dyed in
the sixtyeth year of his age, having governed the Empire twenty year; He begot
upon Eutropia the Syrian woman, Maxentius and Fausta the wife of Constantine,
to whose Father Constantius he gave his Step-daughter Theodora; But some affirm
that Maxentius by the imposture of the wife of Maximianus was brought from
another place, because she knew that it would be most acceptable to her Husband
to have a Son, whereas indeed he was not the Son of Maximianus. Howsoevet it
was, Maximianus himself was never beloved of any, neither of his own Father,
nor of his Father-in-Law Galerius.

Galerius Armentarius.
GAlerius, although rude and unexperienced in the way of Justice, was a man
otherwise commendable enough; he was well made of body, an excellent and a
successful Soldier: His parents were Country people, and keepers of Herds,
from whence he had his name Armentarius; He was born in Ducia and there buried;
the place where he was buried, he called Romulus, after the name of his Mother
Romula; He would insolently affirm, that his Mother mingled with a Dragon when
she conceived him, as did Olympias the Mother of Alexander the Great.

Galerius Maximinus.
GAlerius Maximinus was the Son of the Sister of Armentarius, and before he was
made Emperor he was called Daza; He was Caesar four years, and called Augustus
three years in the East: By his birth and education he was a Pastoral man, but
a great lover of wise and learned men; of a quiet disposition, but much
inclined to wine, in the excess whereof he commanded many unlawful things, of
which afterward he repented, and gave a charge to all his followers, that they
should not execute his desires except he was sober, or gave them a commandment
in the morning.

Alexander.
ALexander was by birth a Phrygian, fearful in his disposition, and by reason
of his old Age not fit to endure labor, so that all these whom last of all I
have named, being destroyed some one way, and some another, the Imperial Rights
descended to Constantinus and Licinius.

Constantinus.
COnstantinus the Son of the Emperor Constantius, and of Helena, reigned thirty
years: He being but a youth, the more religiously to observe the agreement
made, was a pledge to Galerius in the City of Rome, from whence he made an
escape, and to save himself from those who did pursue him, he killed all the
horses and the beasts he did meet with, to block up the way, and came safe to
his Father in Brittany, who at that time was a dying man. After his death by
the consent of all his friends that were present, and especially of Erocus King
of the Alemans who with Auxiliarie Soldiers did assist his Father Constantius,
and accompany him in his wars, he did possess himself of the Empire at Millain,
and married his Sister Constantia to Licinius, and made his Sons, Crispus born
of his Concubine Minervina, and his Son Constantius born much at the same time,
and Licinius the Son of Licinius, being but twenty Months of age, Caesar's. But
as Empires do hardly continue in concord, so there arose dissentions betwixt
Constantine and Licinius, and first of all Constantine did fall upon the Army
of Licinius at Cibalae near to the Lake Hiulca, taking the advantage of the
time of night, whereupon Licinius did fly unto Bizantium where he created
Martianus Caesar. Constantine having reinforced his Army, constrained Licinius
at Bythinia to surrender to him by the hands of his wife, the Imperial Robes,
upon condition to have only his own life saved. Not long afterward he was sent
to Thessalonica, where both he and Martinianus were strangled* Licinius was
threescoce years of Age, and reigned fourteen years, he was extremely covetous,
much addicted unto lust, sharp of apprehension, and not a little impatient; he
was a great Enemy to learning, especially to the pleadings at the Bar, calling
learning, through his ignorance, a poison, and a public plague; he was well
affected to husbandry, and to the silly people in the Country, because among
such he had his Education; he was a great observer of Martial Discipline and
most supestitious in the Institution of former Ages. A great suppressor he was
of Eunuchs and Courtiers, calling them the Moths and Rats of the Palace.
Constantine having possessed himself of the whole Empire, being as successful
in his Government at home as in he wars abroad, did (as it is thought) by the
^nstigation of his wife Fausta, put his Son Crispus to death; And afterward
being much condemned for it by his Mother, he caused his wife Fausta to be
thrown into a Bath of scalding water, where she miserably dyed; He was himself
most immoderately desirous of praise, and finding the name of Trajan to be
written upon the Walls of many of the Palaces, he called him a Wallflower; he
builded a Bridge over the River of Danubius. He adorned the Imperial Robes with
Pearls and precious Stones, and perpetually did wear a Diadem on his head; he
was qualified and enabled for many things, as to suppress calumniations and
tumults, and to nourish all good Arts, especially Learning; he himself would
read, write, meditate, hear the Ambassies and the Complaints of the Provinces;
He made his own Son and Dalmatius his Brothers Son, Caesar's; he lived
threescore and three years, and governed the Empire almost half of them alone;
He dyed of a disease, being addicted more in his life time to derision then
affability, whereupon he commonly was called Tracalla. In his first ten years
of his Government, he was called Excellent; In his next twelve years a Robber;
and in his ten last, an ungoverned Pupil, by reason of his immoderate Expenses;
his body was buried in Byzantium, which after his name was called
Constantinople; after his death the Soldiers did kill Dalmatius, and the Roman
Empire was divided into three parts, betwixt his three Sons, Constans,
Constantius, and Constantinus: Constans ruled over all Italy, Illyricum,
Africa, Dalmatia, Thracia, Macedonia and Achaia; the command of Constantius did
begin at the Propontick Sea, and reached over all Asia and the East; And
Constantinus did govern all beyond the Alps.

Annibalianus, Constantius, and Constans.
ANnibalianus the kinsman of Dalmatius Caesar, did govern Armenia, and the
Nations adjoining to it; In the mean time Constantius and Constans fell at
variance about the Dominions of Italy and Africa. Constantius a rash man, and
living like a Plunderer, being filthily drunk, whiles he endeavored to
entrench upon his Brothers possessions, did lose his own, and being taken, was
killed and thrown into the River of Alsa, not far from Aquileia. Constans given
much to hunting, whiles he followed the game in the Forest, Chrestius,
Marcellinus, and Magnentius, with some others of the Soldiery did conspire his
death, and having agreed upon the day; Marcellinus amongst many others did
invite him to Supper in pretense of celebrating the birth day of his Son; The
Feast continuing late in the night, Magnentius arising (as he said) to ease his
belly, did put on the venerable habit of the Emperor; which when Constans
understood, he made means to fly away, but was over-taken and slain by Gaiso
who with a select band of the Cavalry was sent after him. This was done at
Helena a Town not far from Peirene in the thirteenth year of his Reign; he was
made Caesar three years before, and he lived seven and twenty years; He was
lame in his feet, and had the Gout also in the joints of his fingers. In the
Division of his Dominion, he was fortunate in the temperature of the Air, in
the abundance of fruits, and for not being annoyed by the Barbarians, which
benefits had indeed been greater, if he had advanced his Lieutenants into the
Government of the Provinces, not by money but by merit: His death being
understood, Vetranius the General of the Army did take upon him the Empire in
Pannonia, of which he was not long afterward dispossed by Constantius; he
lived to a great age, and in a voluptuous life, being foolish almost to Idotism
it self.

Constantius.
COnstantius made Gallus his Uncles son Caesar, and married him to his Sister
Constantina. Magnentius also at that time beyond the Alps did create his
kinsman Decentius, Caesar: And Nepotianus the Son of Eutrophia who was
Constantines sister, did assume the Government of the Empire at Rome, whom
Magnentius in the eight and twentyeth day afterward did suppress. In his time
there was a great Battle fought at Marsia in which Constantius overcame
Magnentius; The strength of Rome did never more suffer then in this War, and
the Fortunes of the whole Empire were desperately shaken. Magnentius after
this, having retreated into Italy, did kill at Thicanum many of his pursuing
Enemies, who too improvidently did follow the chase, as it oftentimes falls out
in Victories. Not long afterward being shut up in Lions, with a prepared sword
(the pommel of it being set to the Wall level to his breast,) with all his
strength and the whole weight of his body he received the point, which running
through him (being a man of a great bulk, pouring forth his blood not only at
his wound, but as his mouth and his nose also) he expired, in the thirteenth
Month of his Government, and the fiftyeth year of his Age; His Parents were of
Gallia; he was a great Reader, acute in his Discourse, of a proud spirit, and
yet immoderately fearful, but a great Artist to conceal his fear under bold
pretenses. Decentius no sooner heard of his death, but strangling himself with
his own Garter he ended his life. Much about this time Gallus Caesar was slain
by Constantius; he ruled four years.

Silvanus.
SIlvanus being made Emperor, was slain in the eight and twentyeth day of his
Government; he was of a most pleasing and courtly wit, although begotten by a
barbarous Father; he was sufficiently instructed in and prone enough to learn
the Roman civilities.

Constantius.
COnstantius did honor Claudius Julianus the Brother of Gallus with the name
of Caesar, being about three and twenty years of Age. He in the Feilds of
Argentoratum in France did slay an innumerable company of his Enemies. The
bodies of the slain being piled up, did seem like so many Hills, and the blood
that flowed from them did seem like so many Rivers; Their famous King
Nodonarius was taken, all the Nobility were utterly overthrown, and the limits
of the Roman Power were restored: At the last fighting with the Almains, he
took their most puissant King Badomarius Prisoner: By the Soldiers of Gallia
he was proclaimed Augustus, but Constantius did urge him by his Ambassadors to
abandon that honor, and to descend into his former name and condition.

Julianus.
IVlian by softer Mandates did make Answer, that he more officiously would
obey, if the injunction laid upon him were confirmed by the Authority of the
high Empire, whereat Constantius being greatly offended, being more and more
inflamed with grief and choler, did contract a violent Fever at Mopsocrene
being situated at the foot of the Mountain Taurus; His indignation and want of
sleep did increase the malignancy of his disease, so that he dyed in the four
and fortyeth years of his age, and the nine and thirtyeth of his Reign, having
been Augustus four and twenty years, and reigned with Magnentius and his own
brothers sixteen years, and eight years alone; He was fortunate in all his
Civil Wars, but most unhappy in Foreign Wars; He was admirably expert in
Archery, and much given to meat, wine and to sleep, very patient of labor, and
desirous of eloquence, which not being able to obtain he envyed others; He was
much given to the love of his Attendants and Eunuchs, and to the love of his
Wives, with whom he lived very contented, not turning his lawful affections to
any unnatural or filthy lusts. Amongst all his wives he loved Eus^lia best, who
indeed was very beautiful, but by her Amantiae and Gordoniae, and other
importunate services, she much blemished the Emperors reputation, contrary to
the custom of modest Ladies, whose saving Counsels do oftentimes much assist
their Husbands. To omit other Examples, it is almost incredible how much
Pompeia Plotina increased the glory of Trajan, whose procurators did so oppress
the Provinces, that one of them is said in these words to salute every rich man
he did meet, with, What have thou on thy Table? From whence have thou it?
Deliver what thou have. She understanding of it, did reprove her Husband, that
he was so unmindful of his Honor, and caused him so much to detest such
exactions, that he afterward called his Exchequer the Milt, because that the
Milt swelling too much, all the rest of the members do consume. Julianus having
invested himself in the Government of the Roman Empire, being desirous of
glory, did make War upon the Persians; where being deceived by a Fugitive sent
by the Parthians for that purpose, who had round about enclosed him, and begun
to fall upon his Camp, he armed only with his shield did run out of his Tent,
and in too rash valor leading forth his Forces to the battle, he was run
through with a Spear by one of his Enemies rising from the ground; being
mortally wounded, he was carried into his Tent, and coming forth again to
encourage his Soldiers to the fight, his blood so issued forth that he dyed
about midnight, having first said that he would not (as the custom then was)
give any order for the succession in the Empire, least in the multitude of his
friends present, who with different Counsels did seek that dignity, the envy or
emulation of any of them through civil discord should procure any danger to the
Army. There was in him a vaste knowledge of Letters and of great affairs, which
made him to give such a countetenance to Philosophers and the wisest men of
Greece; He was but short of stature, and not strong, yet able through exercise.
There were in him some things which did diminish the glory of his virtues, as
his immoderate desire of praise, his superstitious worship of the gods, and a
valor more rash and daring then became an Emperor, whose safety being the
common good of all men, is diligently to be provided at all times, but
especially in War. The ardent desire of glory did so much overcome him, that he
could not be dissuaded by an Earthquake nor many other presages from his
Expedition into Persia, no nor by seeing in the night a great Globe to fall
down as if Heaven fell with it, could he be induced to appoint a more happy
time for that War.

Jovinian.
IOvinian the Son of Varronianus in the I Will of Singidona in the Province of
Pannonia, did reign eight Months: His Father having lost many children, was
admonished in a dream to call that child of which his Mother was ready to be
delivered, Jovinian; he was a man of a most gallant personage, pleasant of wit,
and studious of Letters. In the midst of a sharp winter, traveling from Persia
to Constantinople, he fell into a crudity of his stomach, and being oppressed
by the management of new his dignity, he dyed suddenly, being almost forty
years of age.

Valentinian.
VAlentinian ruled twelve years and about nine months; His Father Gratianus
was meanly born, and among the Cibalae was called Funarius, because that
carrying C^rds up and down to be sold, five Soldiers could not take one of them
from him; for this he was called to be a Soldier, where by degrees he did
ascend to the power of a Praetor. The Soldiers for his sake did bestow the
Empire upon Valentinian his Son, who at the first did refuse to accept it; He
made his cousin Valens Companion with him in the Empire, and afterward his Son
Gratianus, whom (by the persuasions of his Mother-in-law and his wife) being
but a child, he created Augustus. This Valentinian was of a comely presence,
of a sharp apprehension, and most eloquent in Speech, although he was not
forward to express himself; He was severe, vehement, and an enemy to vices,
especially to covetousness, of which he was a great punisher; and in all things
which I have spoken of him, he was most like to Adrian; He was well versed in
Antiquities, and invented new Arms and Utensils of War; He could draw the
figures of men exactly in Earth or Clay; He wisely knew how to make use of
place, time, and words. To conclude, he had been an absolute Prince, if he had
not given too much credence unto Flatterers, or had followed the advice of his
most approved and learned Counselors. In his time Firmius was slain attempting
the Empire in Mauritania. At the last, giving Audience to an Embassy of the
Guardians at Bergentium, by a disease in the blood, he was struck speechless in
the five and fiftieth year of his Age, and being of perfect sense and memory he
expired: Some affirm that this disease fell upon him through intemperance of
diet, his sinews being overstretched by too much saturity. He being dead,
Valentinian his Son being but four years of Age, was with his Mother brought to
Rome, and created Emperor by the procurement of Aequitius and Merobaudus.

Valens.
VAlens with his young Cousin Valentian reigned ten years, and five months.
Valens making an unfortunate War with the Goths was wounded with arrows, and
being brought into a most sordid Cottage, the Goths following the pursuit set
fire on it, where he perished in the Flame; He was to be commended for these
things. He was a good Counselor, just in altering of judgments, trusty to his
friends, not angry to any man's prejudice, and fearful enough when he saw cause
for it. In his time Procopius the Tyrant was put to death.

Gratianus.
GRatianus was born at Syrmium, and reigned with his Father Valentinian eight
years, with his Uncle and his brother three years, with the same Brother and
Theodosius four years, and with them all, Arcadius also being inserted six
months. He overthrew thirty thousand Alemans at Argentoratum in Gallia: Having
understood that the Goths and Triballians, and the Huns and Alans, Nations
more ruinous then destruction it self, had possessed Thrace and Dacia, as if
those Countries had been theirs by Inheritance, finding that the Roman Name and
State were in great danger to be utterly extinct, did send for Theodosius out
of Spain, and in the three and thirtieth year of his Age he did resign the
Government of the Empire to him. This Gratian was not meanly Learned; he could
make a Verse, speak eloquently, and lay open a Cause like a perfect Orator.
Night and day he made it his business to meditate on Archery, and the hurling
of Darts, thinking it a faculty of the greatest pleasure, and which carried in
it some divinity with it in it, with a steadfast dexterity to hit the mark
assigned him; he was a conqueror of his lusts, wine, and luxury* And he had
been good to all if he had addicted his mind to manage the Government of the
Commonwealth, in which he was defective both in knowledge to rule, and in
inclination to learn; for having neglected the Army, and preferred the Alani
(whom with a vast sum of money he had drawn unto* him) and being become such a
friend and companion of the Barbarians, that he would be seen in public with
them, and walk in their habit, he drew upon him the hatred of the Roman
Soldiery. In his time Maximius who rebelled in Britanie came into France, and
being received by those Legions who were discontented with Gratian, they did
put him to flight, and immediately afterward he dyed, having lived eight and
twenty years.

Theodosius.
THeodosius was the Son of Honorius, his Mothers name was Th^rmantia, he was a
Spaniard by his birth, but deriving his original from the Emperor Trajan; He
was made Emperor by Gratian at Syrmium* and ruled seven and twenty years; It is
reported that his Parents were admonished in a dream to give him this Name
whereby we might understand in Latin, that he was given us by God; There was an
Oracle also famous over all Asia, that one should succeed Valens in the Empire,
whose name should begin with the Greek letters, th, e, and o, with a
presumption whereof Theodorus being deceived, he was justly put to death for
his ambitious and immoderate desire of Sovereignty. Theodosius was an
illustrious Defender and an enlarger of the Commonwealth; for in diverse
memorable Battles he overthrew the Goths and the Huns who laid wast the Empire;
and having invaded the Persians, he compelled them to seek for peace of him; he
slew at Aquileia Maximius the Tyrant; who had killed Gratian, and challenged
all France to himself; He caused also Victor his Son to be killed, whom his
Father Maximius had proclaimed Augustus, when he was in the years of his
Infancy; He overcame also Eugenius the Tyrant, and Arbogastes, ten thousand of
their Army being cut in pieces; This Eugenius trusting to the forces of
Arbogastes, after he had slain Valentinian at Vienna, called himself Emperor;
but not long after he lost his life and Empire both togegether. Theodosius in
body and conditions did much resemble the Emperor Trajan, as the writings of
the Historians in those daye^ and his Picture do declare; so tall he wa^ in
stature, such was the proportion of his limbs, such was the color of his hair,
the same face, unless his cheeks were a little more thin by often plucking out
the hair by the roots; neither had he so great eyes; and I know not whether he
had altogether so great a flourish of beauty in his face, and such a
gracefulness in his gate; but I am sure their minds were most alike, so that
nothing can be said or read in books of the one, which may not properly be
translated to the other; He was gentle, merciful, and affable to all, and
thought that only in his habit he did differ from other men; he was munificent
to all, but magnificent to the good; he loved ordinary wits, and admired the
great ones (provided they were harmless; with a great mind he gave great
largesses, he loved the Citizens, and those most known unto him him by private
acquaintance, and enriched them with honors, money, and other benefits,
especially those whose good offices to him as toward a Father in the time of
his adversity he had approved; but for loving of Wine, and the desire of
triumphs, with which Trajan was aspersed, he so much detested them that he
found Wars, but did make none; and by a Law did prohibit all wanton meetings,
and to have Songs at Banquets, so much he did contribute to continence and
modesty, that he did forbid the marriage of Cousin*germans as an unlawful
thing: For learning, being compared to those who are absolute, he was not
extraordinary, but wise and prudent he was, and very diligent to read men in
their manners. He would hastily condemn the cruel deeds of the Ancients, and
those Enemies to public liberty, Cinna, Marius, and Sylla, and he did bear an
especial hatred to perfidious and ungrateful persons; He would suddenly be
angry, but he was apt to return to his first temper, and after a little pause
he would of himself be quickly appeased. Sometimes he would propound unto
himself the severe precepts out of Livy, or what Augustus was taught by him who
did read Philosophy unto him, that if he were angry at any time, before he
attempted to revenge the displeasure, he should repeat the four and twenty
Greek Letters, by means whereof the concitation of the spirit, which in a
moment was raised (the mind being otherwise employed) might in a little
respite of time be appeased. A brave man undoubtedly he was thus to exercise
his patience, and which is a proof of a singular virtue, after the regal power
confirmed by years, and much more after a civil Victory. What shall I speak of
his sollicitous care in providing of Corn, and to restore out of his own
treasure the vast sums of gold and silver taken away by force and consumed by
Tyrants, even when bountiful Princes do hardly give unto their Followers the
reversion of a few unfruitful fields, or of a plundered Farm? Neither can those
less things be forgotten, which being practiced within the Court, do more
attract the eyes and ears of all curious natures to behold them, as to
reverence the Uncle like the Father, to bring up the children either of the
dead Brother or Sister as his own, to embrace kindred and alliance with the
affection of a Parent, to make a neat and a merry Feast, but not a sumptuous
one, to frame the discourse to the quality of the persons, and observances to
Dignities, to have a discourse pleasant with gravity, a tender Father and a
loving Husband; He so exercised himself in sports, as to be neither thereby
engaged or wearied, and when he had leisure, he refreshed his spirits with
walking; He governed his bodily health with a good diet; And thus in the
fiftyeth year of his Age he dyed in peace at Millain, leaving in a peaceable
condition the two Commonwealths to his two Sons, Arcadius and Honorius; his
body was the same year in which he dyed, conveyed to Constantinople, and there
interred.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical TABLE, of those things which are most remarkable in this
HISTORY.
THe Abderits forced from their own Country by multitudes of Frogs and Mice, to
seek new habitations, page 237 Aborigines the first Inhabitants of Italy, p.
501 The abrogation of the Custom for the sacrifizing of men alive, p. 281
Abydus, p. 52 The Acarnanians alone aided not the Graecians against the
Trojans, p. 364 The Achaians fight with Nabis, p. 389 Their combination,
fidelity, and power, ibid. Adrian the Emperor, p. 555 The Adriatic Sea, and
why so called, p. 287 Adultery most severely punished amongst the Parthians, p.
481 Aeacides King of the Molossi, p. 232 The greatest part of that Name dying
about thirty years of Age, p. 202 Their Original from Hercules, p. 157 Aegeades
from whence so called, p. 114 Aegeus King of the Athenians, Father of Theseus,
p. 137 Egypt fortified at the vast expense of her King, p. 26 Egypt the
Granary of the Roman people, p. 526 The Egyptians superstitious, p. 17 The
fruitfulness and temper of Egypt, p. 24 Aemilius gave Law to the Macedons, p.
414 Aeneas came into Italy, p. 502 Aeneas dyed in the wars against Mezensius,
ibid. Aeolus heretofore governed Sicily, p. 75 The Aeolian Islands, p. 73 Aetna
Hill, and the perpetual burning of it, p. 74 The Aetolians lost their liberty,
p. 401 The Africans send back their tribute to the Carthaginians, p. 282 The
excellent words of Africanus, p. 400 His moderation in the receiving of his
Son, p. 397, 398 Agathocles twice a banished man, p. 306 Agathocles of a base
original, become tyrant of Sicily, ibid. Agathocles took away all hope of
flight by burning the ships, p. 313 Agathocles his death, p. 322 Agesilaus lame
in one foot, p. 101 Agis King of the Lacedaemonians, p. 179 Alcibiades of his
own accord goes to banishment to Elis, p. 82 Alcibiades his gallant courage,
wit, and personage, p. 83 Alcibiades called back from his command, to answer
for his profaneness, p. 81 Alcibiades knew the wife of Agis, p. 83 Alcibiades
goes again into banishment, p. 88 Alcibiades burned alive in his Chamber, p. 93
Alexander demands of the Athenians their Orators and Captains, p. 158 Alexander
in many battles having overthrown the Persians, does put upon them the yoke of
servitude, p. 274 Alexander marryeth Statyra the daughter of Darius, p. 196
Alexander would be worshipped as a God, and be called the Son of Jupiter
Hammon, p. 169 Alexander the Great, conspired against by Alexander Lyncestes,
p. 161 Alexander the revenger of his Fathers death, p. 153 Alexander determined
to die of hunger, p. 188 Alexander given to Wine and Choler, p. 146 Alexander
grievously wounded, p. 195 Alexander his dangerous fever at the River Cydnus,
p. 171 Alexanders dead body to be convayed to Hammon, by his own command, p.
202 Alexander King of Epirus was dis-invested by Antigonus of his Kingdom, p.
354 Alexander Caesar, p. 586 Alexandria on Tanais builded by Alexander the
Great, p. 140 Alexandria in Egypt builded by him, p. 169 The Original of the
Amazones, p. 30 The coming of their Queen Thalestris to Alexander the Great, p.
33 Amilco succeeded Hamilcar, p. 282 Amilco killed himself, p. 285 Amphitryo
dedicated Athens to Minerva, p. 36 The justice of Anaxilaus, p. 75 Annabal made
Captain before he was at man's estate, p. 372. Annibal sixteen years a Conqueror
in Italy, p. 447 Annibals policy to avoid the envy and the danger that might
attend his great wealth, p. 408. Annibals stratagem to overcome by Serpents, p.
409 Annibals death by poison, ibid. Annibalianus Caesar, p. 590 Antigonus
killed by Sandrocottus, p. 243 Antigonus threw the Diadem from him, p. 367
Antigonus War with Perdiccas, p. 217 Antiochus killed by the Parthians, p. 461,
462 Antiochus overcome and slain in banishment, p. 362 Antiochus overcome by
the Romans, p. 401 Antiochus suspected Hannibal, p. 392 Antiochus restored his
Son to Africanus, p. 397 Antiochia builded by Seleucus, p. 242 Antipater
kills his Mother Thessalonice, p. 245 All the Family of Antipater
extinguished, p. 248 Antoninus Caesar the Pious, p. 558 Appollo revenging
himself against Brennus, p. 341 Appius Claudius breaking the Peace with
Pyrrhus, p. 266 The use of Honey and Runnet found out by Aristaeus, p 220 The
Arabians weak and impotent, 473 Abdolominus made King of Sidon from the lowest
degree of Fortune, 167 Archidamus Commander of the Lacedaemonians, wounded, p.
108 The Argonauts, p. 407, 492 The Argyraspides overcome by Antigonus, p. 227
Aridaeus the Son of Philip reigns in Macedonia, p. 156 Aristides, p. 57
Aristotimus the Tyrant of the Epirots, his cruelty, p. 351 Aristonicus overcome
by the Consul Perpenna, p. 433 Aristotle Tutor to Alexander the Great, p. 204
The greatness of Armenia, and description of it, p. 490 Armenius the companion
of Jason, 491 Ascanius succeeded his Father Aeneas, p. 503 Arsaces the common
name of the Parthian Kings, p 484 Arsacides his mercy to conquered Demetrius,
p. 458 Arsinoes departure into banishment, p. 332 Artabanus killed Xerxes, and
he himself slain by Artaxerxes, p* 52, 53 Artaxerxes had one hundred and
fifteen Sons, p. 148 Artemisia that memorable and gallant Queen, p. 51 Arymbas
made Laws for the Epirots, p. 260 Asia the cause of many Wars, reduced into the
power of the people of Rome, p. 433 Assyrians afterward called Syrians, how
long they held the Empire, p. 6 Astyages of a King made Governor of the
Hyrcanians, p. 13 Athens one of the eyes of Greece, p. 92 Athis the daughter of
Cranaus gave a name unto it, p. 36 The Athenians hated by all men, p. 82 The
great wars of the Athenians with the Lacedaemonians, p. 88 The Athenians the
inventors of Oil, Wine, and the manufactures of Wool, p. 36 Attalus his
Parricides, and death, p. 431 Attilius his war against Antiochus, p. 403
Augustus Caesar his life and death, p. 526, etc. Aurelian Caesar, and his
gorgeous habiliments, p. 578
B
BAbylon builded by Semiramis, p. 5 Bactrians lose their liberty, and all
things, p. 485 Barce builded by Alexander, p. 196 Butti who so called, p. 219
Belgius Commander of the Gauls, p. 334 Beronice having revenged the wrong
offered to her, was killed by deceit, p. 358 Bessus delivered by Alexander to
the brother of Darius, p. 186 The River Bilbilis in which the Spaniards dip
their sleel, p. 518 Bomilcar fastened to the Cross, p. 316 Brennus Captain of
the Gauls killed himself at Delphos, p. 341 Brundusium builded by the
Aetolians, p. 180 The Brutians overthrew Alexander of Epirus, p. 181 Bucephala
builded by Alexander in the memory of his Horse so called, p. 192 Byrsa the
City of Carthage so called from the Hide of an Ox, p. 273 Byzantium besieged by
Pyrrhus, p. 134
C
CAepio the Roman Consul took away the Gold at Tholouzi, p. 406 Caligula, why
so called, p. 533 Calimander his faithfulness to Demetrius, p. 459 Calisthenes
the Philosopher his lamentable end, because he would not adore Alexander the
great, p. 190 Cambyses demolished the Temple of Apis, and his Army overwhelmed
afterward at the Temple of Hammon, p. 17 Candaules King of the Lydians, p. 14
The Cappadocians overcome by Perdiccas, burns all their movables, with
themselves, p. 216 Caracalla Caesar, p. 567 Caranus the first King of
Macedonia, by the Conduct and direction of Goats builds the City of Edyssa,
p. 114 Carthage builded before Rome seventy two years, p. 276 The Carthaginians
forbid to speak or write in Grerk, p. 295 The Carthaginians war with the
Sicilians, p. 75 Carus Caesar, p. 580 Cassander kills Alexander with his
Mother Arsinoe, p. 237 Castor and Pollux propitious and present to the
Locrensians, p. 289 Cecrops King of the Athenians, p. 36 Ceres her holy
Mysteries, p. 81 Caribdis that dangerous gulf, p. 74 Chrestos killed by
Mithridates, p. 450 Chion and Leonides conspire against Clearchus, p. 254 Cimon
overcomes Xerxes by Sea and Land, and his piety to his Father, p. 57, 58 Civil
war betwixt Caesar and Pompey, p. 494 Claudius Tiberius, p. 531 Claudius
Caesar, ibid. Clearchus banished amongst the Heraclians, and his cruelty
toward them, p. 255 Cleopatra the daughter of Philip marries Alexander King
of the Epirots, p. 141 Cleopatra married her own brother Ptolomy, and the
execrable murders committed by him, p. 455 Cleophis redeemed her Kingdom by
yielding to the lust of Alexander, p. 191 Clytus killed by Alexander, p. 187
Cocceius Nerva, p. 550 Codoman made Governor of the Armenians, p. 151 Codrus
the last King of the Athenians, and his noble death, p. 37 Commodus Caesar, p.
563 Conon banished to Cyprus, p. 100 Constans Caesar, p. 590 Constantinus
Caesar, p. 587 Constantius Caesar, ibid. Corcyra taken by Ptolomy, p. 347
Corinth demolished, p. 417 Crassus with all his Army overthrown by Horodes, p.
432 Critias and Hippolochus their just deaths, p. 95 Craesus King of the
Lydians taken, p. 13 Cyclops heretofore Inhabiting Sicily, p. 75 Cynegyrus his
great fortitude, p. 42 The Cyprian Virgins provide them dowries by the
prostitution of their bodies, p. 272 Cyrini builded by Aristaeus, p. 219
Cyricaenus kills Gryphina, p. 470 Cyrus makes war on the Medes, p. 11 Cyrus
makes war on the Sythians, p. 16 Cyrus suckled by a Bitch, p. 8 Cyrus
destroyed by the Scythians with all his Army, p. 17
D
DAcians their Original from the Goths, p. 407 Damascus a City of Syria, p. 427
Darius his march against Lanthinus the Scythian, and against the Athenians, p.
35 Darius in a great overthrow flying from Alexander, p. 161 Darius offers his
daughter in marriage to him, p. 170 Darius bound by his own men in golden
chains, p. 274 Darius Mother, Wife and Daughters taken Captive, p. 166 Darius
(another of that name) made King by the neighing of his Horse, p. 20 Decius
Caesar, p. 573 Diadamia the daughter of Aeacides, p. 233 Delphos Temple, the
description of it, p. 337 Delos the Treasury of Greece, p. 68 Demaratus King of
the Lacedaemonians, p. 44 Demetrius is slain, p. 356 Demetrius King of Epirus
dies, p. 367 Demetrius delivers himself to Seleucus, p. 248 Demetrius
fighting against the Parthians, is taken, p. 426 Demetrius unsuccess of all war
against the Jews, p. 427 Demophoon the Son of Thesius, p. 37 Demosthenes kills
himself, p. 80 Demosthenes corrupted by the Persians, p. 154 Deucalion
wherefore believed to have restored mankind, p. 36 Diadumenus Caesar, p. 568
Didius Julian Caesar, p. 565 Dido worshipped for a Goddess, p. 275 The deluge
in the time of Amphitryo, p. 36 Dindimean Jupiter plundered by Antiochus, p. 403
Dioclesian Caesar refused at first the Empire, p. 581 Dionysius teaching a
School at Corinth, p. 302 Dionysius the Tyrant killed by Treachery, p. 295
Dionysius his parricides and perfidiousness, p. 297 Domitian, p. 548 Domitius
Nero defiles his own mother, p. 538
E
EPaminondas his moderation, learning, valor and death, p. 110, 111 Ephesus
builded by the Amazons, p. 31 Ephestion most dear to Alexander, p. 199 Epigoni
their original, p. 185 Epirus the original of it, etc. p. 199 Evagorus King of
Cyprus, p. 90 Evander his coming into Italy, p. 501 Eviratedes slain by his own
Son, p. 486 Eumenes overcome by Antigonus, p. 225 Europus reigned in Europia,
p. 114 Eurydice her parricide, p. 119 Eurymedon Captain of the Athenians, p. 79
F
Fabricius Lacinus makes peace with Pyrrhus, p. 266 Fatua the wife of Faunus,
p. 502 Faunus King of Italy, p. 81 Faustulus the Kings shepherd, p. 504
Florianus Caesar, p. 579 Flaminius overcame the Macedons, p. 384 Flaminius in
two battles overcame Nabis, p. 389
G
GAlerius Maximinian Caesar, p. 583 Galerius Armentarius Caesar, p. 585
Galerius Maximinus, p. 586 Gallienus Caesar, p. 575 Gallus Caesar, p. 573 The
Gauls, deriving their humanity from whom, p. 507 Gyptis her strange marriage,
p. 506 The Gauls invade Italy, and possess themselves of Rome, p. 332 The Gauls
overcome the Macedons, p. 334 The Gauls Army utterly destroyed, p. 341
Gallo-graecia from whence so called, p. 345 Gargoris the most ancient King of
the Spaniards, first found out the use of Honey, p. 518 Geryon wherefore
reported to have three bodies, p. 521 Gobrias his gallant Achievement, p. 19
Gordianus Caesar, p. 571 Gordius made King, p. 162, his plough, p. 163, and the
ends of his Cord discovered by the sword of Alexander, ibid. Gratianus Caesar,
p. 601 Gryphus so called by reason of his nose, p. 469 his forcing his mother
to drink that poison which was prepared for him, p. 467 Gryphina her cruelty
470, her death, ibid. and the just death of Cleopatra by her youngest Son
Alexander, p. 471 Gyges, p. 15 Gylippus his Victories in Sicily, p. 78
H
HAbis first taught the Spaniards the use of the plough, p. 520 Hamilcar
wickedly killed by the Carthaginians, p. 304 Hamilcar (another of that name)
killed in Sicily, p. 282 Hanno his great treachery and grievous punishment, p.
301 Harpagus, p. 8 Helenus the Son of Priamus, p. 260 Helvius Pertinax, p. 564
Heliogabulus Caesar, p. 569 Heraclea the Seat of Tyrants, p. 255 Hercules
overthrew the Amazons, p. 32 Hercules and Bacohus the first Conquerors of the
East, p. 492 Hercylides, p. 99 Hiarbas King of Mauritania, p. 274 Hierotimus
had six hundred Sons, p. 473 The description of Hiericho, commonly called
Jericho, p. 430 Hiero nourished by Bees, afterward made King, p. 325 Hippias
the Tyrant of Athens killed, p. 42 Hippolyte married by Theseus, p. 32
I
Jason in the East worshipped as a God, p. 492 His expeditions with the
Argonauts into Colchos, p. 491 Iberia called Spain from the River Iberus, p.
513 Joseph preserved Egypt from Famine, p. 428 Joseph sold by his Brethren,
ibid. Joseph an infallible Interpreter of Dreams, ibid. Jovinian the Emperor,
p. 598 Israel had ten Sons, p. 427 Istrians their Original, p. 407 Italy called
Saturnia, p. 501 Julian Caesaer, p. 595 The Jews their Original, p. 428
L
Lacedaemonians overcome by the Athenians, p. 70, 71 The Ledemonians
Commonwealth, What? p. 62, 63 Lamachus slain by Gylippus, p. 78 Lampedo and
Marthesia Queens of the Amazons, p. 31 Laodice killed five of her Sons, p. 435
The Latins founded by Aeneas, p. 287 Leonidas his death and fortitude, p 47, 48
Leosthenes General of the Athenians is slain, p. 215 The Law being the Act of
Oblivion for facts committed in the time of War, first instituted by the
Athenians, p. 96 Litterature had her Temple at Athens, p. 36 Lucanians their
Original, p. 319 Lupercus the same with Pan and Lycaus, p. 501 Lycurgus King of
the Spartans, p. 371 Lycurgus Laws, p. 62 Lysander General of the
Lacedaemonians, p. 88 Lysimachus poysoneth his Son Agathocles, p. 257
Lysimachus, another of that name, killed his Son-in-law Antipater, p. 248
Lysimachus, the best of that name, objected to a Lion rampant with rage and
hunger, p. 240
M
MAcedonia subjected to the Roman Empire, p. 415 Machaeus crucified by his own
Father, p. 278 Mago made General of the Carthaginians, p. 279 The Magi put to
death, p. 19 The Marathonian field, p. 41 Marchus Antonius Caesar, p. 561
Marcus Cato his undanted gallantry, p. 413 Mardonius overcome, p. 54 Massilea
builded by the Phocensians, p. 505 Their Institutions, 507. Their love to the
Romans, p. 511 Matrimonies true Ornaments is modesty and shamefacedness, and
not gorgeous apparel, p. 292 Matheus King of the Scythians his policy, p. 135
Maxentius made Emperor, p. 583 The City Medaea builded by Medaea, the wife of
Jason, p. 493 Millain builded by the Gauls, p. 294 The Empire of the Medes
continued, 350 years, p. 13 Mergis slain by Magus, p. 18 The Messenians
overcome by treachery, p. 66 Midas instructed by Orpheus, filled all Phrygia
with superstition and Ceremonies, p. 163 Miltiades general of the Athenians, p.
41 Mithridates war against the Romans for the space of six and forty years,
435. His parricides, 440. His excellent Speech to encourage the Romans to the
war, p. 446 Moses possessed himself of Mount Sinai, p. 429 Mummius the Roman
General overthrows the Achaians, p. 417
N
NEoptolomur killed by Eumenes, p. 221 Niceas taken by the Lecedemonians, p. 80
Ninus first made war on his neighbors, p. 4 He overcame all the East, ibid.
Nisa the place where Bacchus was worshipped, p. 190 Numitor and Amulius, p. 503
O
Octavius takes Perseus with his two sons, p. 413 Olympias guilty of her
husband Philips death, 144. Her great fortitude at her death, p. 234 Olinthus
sacked by Mardonius, p. 53 Orthanes, p. 18 Otho Salvius, p. 540 Ovid banished
by Augustus Caesar, p. 529
P
PArmenio and Philotas killed by Alexander, p. 185 Parnassus Hill, p. 336 The
Parthians took Pompeys part. p. 497 The Parthians war with the Romans, p. 495
The Parthian Kings commonly parricides, p. 496 Pacorus slain by the Romans, and
his Fathers immoderate lamentation for him, ibid. The Parthians Original and
Name, p. 477 Pausanias affecting the Kingdom, was condemned, p. 57 Pausanias,
another of that name, killed King Philip, p. 142 Perdiccas his undaunted
courage, p. 211 Pericles gives his Fields to the Commonwealth, p. 70 The
Persians adore their Kings, p. 102 The Persians God is the Sun, p. 20 The end
of the Persian Empire under Codeman, p. 151 Pertinax Caesar called the Tennis
Ball of Fortune, p. 564 Phalantus love to his own people, p. 66 Philip of
Macedonia marryeth Olympias, p. 122 Philips perfidiousness and sacrilege, p.
127 Philomenes overcame the Thebans, p. 125 Ptolomy called Philopater, and
wherefore, p. 371 Philopaemenes general of the Achaians taken, p. 402 The
Phocensians seize upon the Temple at Delphos, p. 124 A Phoenix seen in Egypt,
p. 537 Phrahartes his parricides, p. 496, 497 Phrahartes driven into banishment
by the the people, p. 497 Pisistratus rules at Athens, p. 40 Polipercon slain*
p. 221 Popilius with a rod in his hand does circumscribe Antiochus, 418 Porus
King of the Indians taken, p. 192 Probus Caesar, p. 580 Philip Caesar, p. 572
Prusias attempting to kill his Son, was killed killed by him, p. 420 Ptolomy
the Son of Pyrhus utterly overthrows Antigonus, p. 346 Antigonus slain, p.
348 The great Praise of Pyrhus Father to Antigonus, ibid. Ptolomy the elder
flies from his Kingdom of Egypt to Alexandria, to his brother Ptolomy the
younger, p. 418 Promptalus out of a sordid stock and fortune chosen King* p.
422 The great luxury of Ptolomy of Egypt, p. 379 The parricide of the
Ptolomies, p. 331, 455 Pigmalion kills his Uncle Sichaeus, p. 270 The
Pyrenaean Mountains, p. 514 Pyrhus first of all brought Elephants into Italy,
264. His overthrowing the Roman Army, ibid. Pyrhus the Son of Achilles killed
by Orestes, p. 269 Pyrhus slain by a stone from the wall of his Enemies, p. 348
Pythagoras bred up in the learning of the Egyptians, 291. Pythagoras house
esteemed as a Temple, p. 293
Q
QVintilius Caesar, p. 557
R
REligion protecteth better then Arms, p. 164 Rhea a Vestal Virgin, p. 503
Romulus and Remus nourished by a she Wolf, ibid. Rome builded by Romulus, p.
505 The Romans would destroy Annibal by treachery, 388. The Arts of the Romans,
and how they did arise unto the Sovereignty of the world, is excellently
described in that speech of Mtthridates in the eight and thirtieth Book of this
History. Roxane with her Son killed by Cassander, p. 237
S
THe Sabbath, and the Religion of the Day amongst the Jews, 429. Sandracottus
from a mean Original advanced to the height of regal Majesty, p. 242
Sardanapalus his effeminate life, and manly death, p. 6. 7 The Scipioes
accustomed to overcome the Carthaginians, p. 396 Scylla and Charibdis, p. 74
The Scythians the most ancient of all Nations, 26. They founded the Parthian
and Bactrian Kingdoms, 28. They subdued Asia, 31. And were subdued themselves
by Alexander the Great, p. 186 Seleucus and his Posterity after him had all the
sign of an Anchor on their thighs, p. 241 Seleucus slain by the treachery of
Ptolomy, p. 258 Seleucus (another of that name) slain by his own mother, p. 465
Seleucus (another of that Name) killed by a fall from his horse, p. 362
Semiramis killed by her own Son, p. 6 Severus Caesar, p. 570 Sergius Galba, p.
539 Septimius Severus, p. 566 Sicily, the Description of it, 73. No Land more
fruitful of Tyrants, p. 75 Sidon so called, from the abundance of fish, p. 267
Silvanus Caesar, p. 593 Solons Laws, p. 38 Sophocles a Writer of Tragedies, the
General of the Athenians, p. 69 Sosthenes defends the Macedons against the
Gauls, p. 335 The courage of the women of Sparta, p. 347 Strato King of the
Tyrians, p. 268 Sulpitius fights against Perseus, p. 412 Sybares is by Cyrus
made Governor of the Persians, p. 13 The Syrian Kings derive their Original
from Semiramis, p. 427
T
TAcitus Caesar, p. 579 Tanais King of the Scythians, p. 4 The Tarentins
descended from the Lacedaemonians, p. 288 Theodosius Caesar, p. 602 Thrasibulus
overcame the Tyrants, p. 95 Tigranes overcome by Lucullus, p. 475 Tygris a
River in Armenia, p. 493 In what place the Giants made their war against
Heaven, p. 518 Titus Vespasian, p. 545 Trajan the Emperor, p. 553 Titus
Vespasian, the Father of Titus Vespasian, p. 542 The Drum called in Latin
Tympanum, the sign of fight amongst the Parthians, p. 480 The Athenian Tyrants
slain, p. 96 Tyrus a City famous before the destruction of Troy, 267. Tyrus
being taken by Alexander, the Citizens were all fastened to the Cross, and the
reason of it, p. 269 Triptolemus found out the use of corn, p. 36 Tyrtaeus the
lame Poet, with his Verses, incenseth the Lacedaemonians to the war, p. 67
Tyssaphernes the Leiutenant of Darius, p. 83 Theramenes killed, p. 93 Turnus
slain by Aeneas, p. 502 Thomyris Queen of the Scythians overthrew Cyrus, p. 16
V
VAlentinian Caesar, p. 598 Valens Caesar, p. 600 Valerius Levinus overcome by
Pyrhus, p. 264 The Venetians descended of the Trojans, p. 287 Ventidius his two
first happy encounters against the Parthians, p. 495 Virgil beloved by
Augustus, p. 528 Verona builded by the Gauls, 294. So was also Vincentia, ibid.
Virus Gallus Caesar, p. 573 Vexores King of Egypt, p. 4 Virgins to marry
without portions by Licurgus Law, p. 63
X
XErxes made King, p. 44 Xerxes beaten at Thermopylae by Leonidas, p. 48 Xerxes
burned Athens, p. 49 Xerxes makes war with the Gods, p. 49 Xerxes first of all
subdued the Jews, p. 430 431 Xerxes flying from Greece in a Fishersboat, p. 52
Z
ZOpyrus, his memorable Act, p. 21 Zopyron the Lieuteant of Alexander the
great, utterly overthrown by the Scythians, p. 182 Zoroastres found out the Art
of Magic, p. 4. He was King of the Bactrians, and overcome and slain by Ninus,
ibid.
The End of the Table.
Errata.
THe Errors committed in the Press may be thus corrected, p. 13, l. 21, r. back
into, p. 15, l. 3, r. he showed, p. 26, l. 11, blot out either, p. 30, l. 6, r.
the, p. 31, l. 2, r. whence, p. 38, l. 28, r. nightly, p. 41, l. 19, r. Author
of not, p. 47, l. 13, r. stood to it, p. 51, l. 15, r. taken, p. 65, l. 1, blot
out they, p. 78, l. 8, r. that, p. 88, l. 25, r. that, p. 91, l. 16, r. houses,
p. 115, l. 12, r. in the same, l. 17, r. Sepulture, p. 122, l. 14, blot out
now, p. 145, r. him, p. 46, l. 4, r. joyed in, p. 148, l. 2, r. one hundred and
fifteen, p. 162, l. 25, blot out and, p. 165, l. 24, blot out of it, p. 166, l.
9, r. whom, p. 174, l. 25, r. gave him his, p. 180, l. 20, r. home, p. 193, l.
9, blot out their bodies, p. 200, l. 15, r. Bouze. p. 207, l. 2, r. lament, l.
6, r. lived until that, p. 220, l. 13, r. big, p. 252, l. 25, blot out in, p.
292, l. 16, blot out both, p. 318, l. 19, r. pursued, p. 321, l. 28, r. least,
p. 322, l. 24, r. standers by, p. 329, l. 10, r. Court, p. 331, l. 26, blot out
and, p. 339, l. 22, r. begin, p. 340, l. 8, blot out laughing, p. 345, l. 7, r.
Kings, p. 351, l. 28, r. of his age, p. 353, l. 19, r. this, p. 358, l. 25, r.
so much, p. 359, l. 17, r. vanquished, p. 360, l. 30, r. and, p. 365, l. 19, r.
they proceeded, p. 365, l. 26, r. mortar, p. 372, l. 22, r. round about, p.
375, l. 6, blot out howsoever, p. 397, l. 15, r. benefits, p. 409, l. 5, r.
stowed, p. 414, l. 8, blot out hardly, p. 445, l. 4, blot out both, p. 447, l.
1, blot out that, ibid. r. for they, p. 447, l. 2, blot out who, p. 448, l. 6,
r. then those who have, p. 455, l. 13, r. but he, p. 459, l. 3, r. way, p. 513,
l. 1, blot out it is, p. 558, l. 1, r. Antoninus Pius, p. 514, l. 19, r.
vermilion, ibid. l. 17, r. lead.


