HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT


JAMES R.

WE have thought fit, as the Best and most Proper means to Establish a Lasting
Peace in this Our Kingdom, to Call a Parliament, and have therefore Ordered Our
Chancellor to cause Writs to be Issued forth for Summoning a Parliament to Meet
at Westminster, upon the Fifteenth Day of January next ensuing the Date of this
Our Royal Proclamation. And that nothing may be wanting on Our part toward the
Freedom of Elections, as We have already Restored all Cities, Towns-Corporate,
and Boroughs throughout Our Kingdom, to their Ancient Charters, Rights and
Privileges; So We Command and Require all Persons whatsoever, That they
presume not by Menace, or any other undue Means, to Influence Elections, or
Procure the Vote of any Elector. And We do also strictly Require and Command
all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Officers to whom the Execution or
Return of any Writ, Summons, Warrant or Precept for Members to the Ensuing
Parliament shall belong, That they Cause such Writ, Summons, Warrant and
Precept, to be duly Published and Executed, and Returns thereupon to be fairly
made according to the true Merits of such Elections. And for the Security of
all Persons both in their Elections and Service in Parliament, We do hereby
Publish and Declare, That all Our Subjects shall have free Liberty to Elect,
and all Our Peers, and such as shall be Elected Members of Our House of
Commons; shall have full Liberty and Freedom to Serve and Sit in Parliament,
notwithstanding they have taken up Arms, or committed any Act of Hostility, or
been any way Aiding or Assisting therein. And for the better Assurance hereof,
We have Graciously Directed a General Pardon to all Our Subjects to be
forthwith prepared to Pass Our Great Seal.

And for the Reconciling all Public Breaches, and Obliterating the very Memory
of all past Miscarriages, We do hereby Exhort, and kindly Admonish all Our
Subjects, to dispose themselves to Elect such Persons for their Representatives
in Parliament, as may not be Biased by Prejudice or Passion, but Qualified
with Parts, Experience and Prudence proper for this Conjuncture, and agreeable
to the Ends and Purposes of this Our Gracious Proclamation.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirtieth day of November. 1688. In the
Fourth Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. 1688.


