J2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon with flanking English
lion and Scottish unicorn
By the King,
JAMES R.

WHereas the Office of Postmaster General has been Erected by Act of
Parliament in the Twelfth year of His late Majesty's Reign, and the well
Ordering thereof is thereby Declared to be a Matter of General Concernment, and
of great Advantage, as well for Preservation of Trade and Commerce as
otherwise: And whereas also the greatest part of the Revenue and Profits
thereby arising, was by One other Act of Parliament in the Fifteenth year of
His said late Majesty's Reign Granted, and Assigned by His late Majesty unto
Us, by the Name of His most Entirely Beloved Brother James Duke of York, For
and toward Our Maintenance and Support. And whereas by One other Act of
Parliament made in the First Year of Our Reign, the Profits and Revenue of the
said Office was Settled upon Us, Our Heirs and Successors; Which Laws and
Statutes notwithstanding, several Persons for their private Lucre have lately
practiced, and do still continue in a secret and most Unlawful manner to make a
General Collection of Letters, and to give them Conveyance and Delivery for
Hire, without any Authority from the Postmaster General, whereby not only the
Revenue arising by the said Office is Diminished, but likewise several
Dangerous Correspondencies are Preserved and Maintained, and the Seditious
Designs of many Evil disposed Persons are very much Promoted: His Majesty
therefore for the Prevention hereof in time to come, and to the end that such
Persons who shall presume hereafter to Offend in like manner, may remain
without all Excuse, has thought fit by this His Royal Proclamation to Require
and Enjoin all His Loving Subjects, And does hereby straightly Charge and Command
all and every Person and Persons (other then the Postmaster General for the
time being, his Deputies or Assigns) that they presume not either directly or
indirectly to set up any Office, or to contrive or practice any way or means
for Collecting and Receiving of Letters and Packets, or to Carry, Recarry, or
Deliver the same with Speed and for Hire. And to this end His Majesty does
further Require and Command them and every of them, That they presume not to
set up any Foot-Post, Horse-Post, Post or Stage-Coach, or Packet-Boat for
Carrying or Recarrying of Letters and Packets, or to Employ or make use of any
which shall be set up for that purpose, other then such as shall be Licensed
and Authorized by the Post-Masster General for the time being, his Deputies or
Assigns. And because several Carriers, Drivers of Stage Coaches and Wagons,
Haglers, Masters of Ships, Pursers, or other Mariners, do very often, under
color and pretense of their respective Employments, intermeddle with, and
intrude upon the Office of the Postmaster General; His Majesty does hereby
more particularly and expressly Charge and Command all Carriers, That they
presume not to carry any Letters, other then such as shall concern the Goods
wherewith they are Charged, beyond the First Poststage to which they shall
arrive, and that they presume not to outgo their Packs or Wagon, or deliver
any Letters which they Carry, sooner or with more speed than their respective
Packs or Wagon shall arrive. And His Majesty does in like manner Charge and
Command all Drivers of Stage-Coaches, Haglers, and such like Persons, That they
presume not in any kind, or upon any pretense whatsoever, to intermeddle with
the Conveyance and Delivery of any Letters as aforesaid, but that they do from
time to time refuse all such Letters which shall be so tendered to them. And His
Majesty does also Command all Masters of Ships, Boursers and Mariners, That
they presume not to Carry any Ship-Letters, other than the Letters of
Merchants, Owners, and Masters beyond the first Post-stage to whsch they shall
arrive in England, and that they do there deliver the same unto the Deputy or
Deputies only of the Postmaster General for the time being. And if any
Carriers, Drivers of StageCoaches, Haglers, Masters of Ships, Pursers, or other
Mariners shall be found carrying of Letters unlawfully, or in any other manner,
they shall incur His Majesty's high Displeasure, and suffer the utmost Penalty
which can be Inflicted upon such as shall be found to have broken His Majesty's
Laws, and to be Willful Contemners of His Royal Command; And moreover, all
Letters whatsoever sent or conveyed by such Clandestine and Indirect ways, and
by persons not Lawfully Authorized, shall be looked upon as Letters of
dangerous Consequence, and shall accordingly be Seized and brought to One of
His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, or to some One or more of the
Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to the end the same may
be Opened and Inspected, and the persons Conveying or Sending them, may be
proceeded against according to Law. And for the better Execution of His
Majesty's Command, and as a means to Secure the Revenue arising by the said
Office, His Majesty will cause such Searchers, Waiters, and other Officers to
be Appointed in all convenient Places, as may be fit and proper for the
Discovery of such Practices, and carrying such Letters, to be Seized, and such
Offenders Names to be certified. And in the mean time His Majesty does strictly
Charge and Command all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Constables,
Bailiffs, Searchers of His Majesty's Ports, and all other His Officers and
Ministers whatsoever within their several Jurisdictions and Offices from time
to time, to make diligent Search for all Mails, Buggets and Bags, in any Ship,
Vessel, VVaggon, Coach, or other Unlawful or Unlicensed Carriage, and all such
Letters which they find to be Conveyed or Carried contrary to Law, to Seize and
send up to One of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, or to some One
or more of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, together with the Names of
the Persons Offending, to the end such further Proceeding may be had, as shall
be found agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm. And that no man
hereafter may complain for want of a Settled Post in or near particular
By-Towns or Places lying on the Post-Road, which Complaint has hitherto been
made the Excuse or Pretense for Sending or Carrying of Letters by other
Indirect and Unlawful Conveyances. His Majesty does hereby also Require and
Command the Postmaster General for the time being, to take effectual Care for
the Conveyance of all By-Letters, by Establishing Correspondencies at the least
Charge, and greatest Ease that may be to the Country, in all considerable
MarketTowns with the next adjacent Post-stages; And that he cause a Map or Card
thereof to be forthwith Printed, to the end that all His Majesty's Subjects may
know where, and to what place to address their respective Letters. And His
Majesty does further Charge and Command all and every Person or Persons, other
then the Postmaster General for the time being, His Deputies, or Assigns, That
they presume not to prepare or provide any Horses or Furnitures to Let to Hire,
unto, or in all or any the ThroughPosts, and Persons Riding Post by Commission
or without, to and from all and every the Parts and Places of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, where any Post-Roads are or shall be Settled and
Established, unless the Postmaster General, his Deputies or Assigns shall
first fail to Provide and Furnish the Person or Persons so Riding Post, with
sufficient horses and Furniture within the space of Half an Hour after Demand
thereof made, as they will answer the contrary at their Perils.

Given at Our Court at Windsor the Seventh day of September 1685. In the First
Year of Our Reign.
London,Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1685.


