J2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King,
A PROCLAMATION.
James R.

WHereas Our Dearest Brother of Blessed Memory, by His Royal Proclamation
bearing date the Fifteenth day of September, in the Twelfth year of His Reign,
for preventing the Exportation of Wool, Wool-Fells, etc. out of this Kingdom,
did strictly Charge, Prohibit and Command, That no manner of Wool,
Wooll-Fells, etc. should be at any time by any Person or Persons, whether
Denizens or Strangers, Exported, Transported, or sent out of this Realm of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or any the Isles,
Ports, Creeks or Places thereof, into the Kingdom of Scotland, or any other
Foreign Parts beyond the Seas, upon pain of His highest Indignation, and the
severest Penalties that by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm might be
Inflicted, as well upon the Offenders themselves, as their Aiders, Procurers,
Abettors, and Favorers. And to the end that the Custom-house Officers, and
other Ministers in and about the Ports of England might more strictly look to
the Observance of His Pleasure therein, He did further Charge and Command, That
if any Officers should consent, or connive at the unlawful Exportation of the
said Commodities, he should not only forfeit his Place, but incur other Pains.
And for the Encouragement of all such who should take care and pains to
Disclose, or make Discoveries of the Frauds or other Practices to evade or
defeat the true intention of the said Proclamation, did Declare His Royal Will
and Pleasure, That every such Person that should be the first Discoverer of
such Offenders, should be rewarded with the moiety, or one half of such Sum of
Money and other Forfeiture as should come unto him by any the offenses
aforesaid. Now We being Graciously inclined, as well out of Our own Princely
Care of the Welfare of this Our Kingdom, as induced by Our said Dear Brothers
Royal Example, to prevent as much as in Us lies, so great an Evilas the
Transportation of the Commodities aforesaid, by continuing the said Bounty, Do
hereby Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure, for the encouragement of all such,
whether Officers of the Customs or others, Bodies Politic, or private Persons,
who being legally Authorized thereunto, shall take care and pains to Seize any
Wool, Wooll-Fells, etc. or any Boats or Vessels Transporting the same contrary
to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or shall Prosecute any Persons
Offending against the said Laws, or Disclose or make Discovery of the Frauds,
and other practices to evade and defeat the true intention thereof, and shall
pursue the same to effect, and obtain a Certificate or Testimonial from the
Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and the Commissioners of the Customs for the
time being, that he has so done, that every such Officer, or other Body
Politic, or private Person, shall be rewarded with the moiety, or one half of
such Sums of Money, or other Forfeitures as shall come in to Us by reason of
any the Offenses aforesaid. And Our Lord High Treasurer of England, or Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being, are hereby Empowered upon
such Certificate or Testimonial, by his or their Warrant, to cause such Officer
or other Person to be Discharged of one moiety of such Sum of Money, or other
Forfeiture, as should have come in to Us by reason of any the Offenses
aforesaid. And it is not hereby intended that any Seizer of such Goods shall be
entitled to Our Royal Bounty as above, unless he shall effectually Prosecute
in the Court of Exchequer in all cases where it shall appear such Prosecution
is practicable. And further, no Composition shall be privately made upon any
Seizure, between the Seizer and Owner of the Goods, nor without the Direction
and Allowance of the Court of Exchequer, or one of the Barons of the said
Court; and that all Wool, Wooll-Fells, etc. Boats and Vessels hereafter Seized
by force of any of the said Laws, shall be brought to London, Hull, or Exeter,
and there disposed, to prevent Selling them again to the Owners, as has
hitherto too frequently been practiced. Giving also Charge and Command, that
all Persons of what Degree, Quality or Place soever, especially Our Officers
Military and Civil do diligently observe, and readily assist the due
performance of this Our Proclamation in all things, and requiring the Diligence
and Faithfulness of all Our Custom-House Officers on the Penalties aforesaid.

Given at Our Court at Windsor the Eleventh Day of July 1687. in the Third Year
of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1687.


