DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King,
A PROCLAMATION.
JAMES R.

WHereas the Commissioners of the Treasury of the late King, Our Dearly Beloved
Brother Deceased, Sidney Lord Godolphin, Sir John Ernely Knight, Sir Stephen
Fox Knight, Sir Dudley North Knight, and Frederick Thynne Esquire, on the Fifth
day of this instant February, for the better Improvement of the Revenue arising
by the Duty of Excise, did Contract, Conclude and Agree with Sir Peter Apsley
Knight, Sir Benjamin Bathurst Knight, and James Grahme Esquire, That they the
said Sir Peter Apsley, Sir Benjamin Bathurst, and James Grahme, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, should have, receive, and take the full
and whole Duty of Excise for the Term of Three years, to Commence from the Date
of the said Contract, Rendering to the late King, His Heirs and Successors, the
yearly Rent of Five hundred and fifty thousand pounds payable by Quarterly
Payments, The First Payment to be made at the Feast of the Annunciation of the
Blessed Virgin Mary next ensuing, under such Covenants and Agreements for
Payment and Securing the said Rent, as in and by the said Contract are Provided
for.

And whereas We have been Certified by the Opinion of Our Judges (whose Opinion
for Our greater Satisfaction herein We have Required) That the said Contract
made by the said Commissioners of the Treasury of Our Late Dear Brother is Good
and Valid in Law, and has Continuance during the said Three Years, as well for
that Part of the said Revenue which was Granted to Our said Dear Brother for
Life, as for that Part which was Granted to Him, His Heir and Successors, by
virtue of the Acts of Parliament which gave those Duties, notwithstanding the
Decease of Our said Dear Brother; To the intent therefore the said Sir Peter
Apsley, Sir Benjamin Bathurst and James Grahme, who have been made such
Contract with the said Commissioners of the Treasury, may have no Pretense to
withhold the said Rent from Us, and that Our loving Subjects, who are
Chargeable with the Payment of the said several Duties, may not incur the
Penalties inflicted by the Laws of Excise, for not making due Entries, or
Nonpayment, or Concealing of my Part of the said Duties, during the said Term
of Three Years, We do hereby Signify and Publish to all, Our loving Subjects,
That Our said Judges have Certified to Us their Opinions in Law, That the said
Contract has Continuance notwithstanding the Decease of Our said Dear Brother:
Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, And We do hereby strictly Charge and
Command all Our Commissioners and Sub-Commissioners of Excise, and all other
Our Officers Employed or to be Employed in the Collection of the said Duties,
That they be Aiding and Assisting to the said Sir Peter Apsley, Sir Benjamin
Bathurst, and James Grahme, and their Assigns, in the Collecting and Levying of
the said Duties, during the said Term of Three Years, according to the several
Powers and Authorities Placed in them by the several Acts for Granting of the
Excise. And that all Our loving Subjects chargeable with the Payment of the
said Duties do make their due Entries and Payments, as is Provided by the Laws
of Excise, during the said Term of Three Years, upon the Pains and Penalties to
be inflicted thereupon, according to the said Laws of Excise.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Sixteenth Day of February, 1684/5. In the
First Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by the Assigns John Bill deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1684/5.


