DIEV ET MON DROIT


JAMES R.

FOrasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God lately to call unto his infinite
Mercy the most High and Mighty Prince, King Charles the Second of most Blessed
Memory, the Kings Majesty's most dear and most entirely beloved Brother, by
whose Decease the Authority and Power of the most part of the Off ces and
Places of Jurisdiction and Government within this Realm, and in the Realm of
Ireland did cease and fail, the Sovereign Person failing, from whom the same
were derived. The Kings most Excellent Majesty in His Princely Wisdom and Care
of the State (reserving to His own Judgment hereafter, the Reformation and
Redress of any Abuses in Mis-government, upon due Knowledge and Examination
thereof) is pleased, and has so expressly signified, That all Persons that at
the time of the Decease of the late King His dearly beloved Brother, were Duly
and Lawfully Possessed of, or Invested in any Office, or Place of Authority or
Government, either Civil or Military, within this Realm of England, or in the
Realm of Ireland, or in any other His Majesty's Dominions belonging thereunto;
And namely, all Presidents, Lieutenants, VicePresidents, Judges, Justices,
Sheriffs, Deputy Lieutenants, Commissioners of Musters, Justices of Peace, and
all others in place of Government, either Meaner or Superior, as aforesaid; And
all other Officers and Ministers, whose Interests and Estates in their Offices
are determined, or ceased by the means aforementioned, shall be, and shall hold
themselves continued in the said Places and Offices, as formerly they held and
enjoyed the same, until His Majesty's Pleasure be further known.

And that in the mean while, for the preservation of the Peace, and necessary
Proceedings in matters of Justice, and for the Safety and Service of the State;
All the said Persons of whatsoever Degree or Condition may not fail, every one
severally, according to his Place, Office, or Charge, to proceed in the
Performance and Execution of all Duties thereunto belonging, as formerly
appertained unto them, and every of them, while the late Kings Majesty was
living.

And further, His Majesty does hereby Will and Command all and singular His
Highness Subjects, of what Estate, Dignity, or Degree they or any of them be,
to be Aiding, Helping and Assisting, and at the Commandment of the said
Officers and Ministers, in the Performance and Execution of the said Offices
and Places, as they and every of them Tender His Majesty's Displeasure, and
will answer for the Contrary at their uttermost Perils.

And further, His Majesty's Will and Pleasure and Express Commandment is, That
all Orders and Directions Made or Given by the Lords of the Privy Council of
the Late King, in His Lifetime, shall be Obeyed and Performed by all and every
Person and Persons, and all and every Thing and Things to be done thereupon,
shall Proceed as Fully and as Amply as the same should have been Obeyed or
Done, in the Life of the said Late King, His Majesty's most dearly and entirely
beloved Brother.

Given at the Court at Whitehall, the Sixth Day of February, In the First Year
of His Majesty's Reign of England, Scotland, France and Ireland.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1684.


