
Septima Pars Patentium de Anno Regni Regis Iacobi Secundi Quarto.
JAMES the Second, D' Con' Thome Dno Colpepper.
by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting. Whereas
Our late Royal Brother of Blessed Memory by His Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of England, bearing Date at Westminster, the eighth Day of May, in the one
and twentieth Year of His Reign, for the Considerations therein expressed, did
give, grant, and confirm unto Henry Earl of St. Albans, John Lord Berkeley, Sir
William Morton and John Trethewy, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, all that
entire Tract, Territory, or Parcel of Land, situate, lying, and being in
America, and bounded by and within the Heads of the Rivers Tappahanock alias
Rapahanock and Quirriough or Pattawomacke Rivers; the Courses of the said
Rivers, as they are commonly called or known by the Inhabitants and
Descriptions of those Parts, and Chesapoyocke Bay; together with the Rivers
themselves, and all the Islands within the Banks of those Rivers; and all
Woods, Underwoods, Timber, and Trees, Ways, Waters, Rivers, Ponds, Pools,
Watercourse, Fishings, Streams, Havens, Ports, Harbors, Creeks, Wrecks of
Sea, Fish, Royal Deer, Wild Beasts and Fowl of what Nature and Kind soever;
Mines of Gold and Silver, Lead, Tinn, Iron and Copper, and Quarries of Stone
and Coal, which then were or at any Time then after should be had, coming,
being, arising, renewing, accrewing, found, or taken within the Bounds and
Precincts aforesaid; together with the Royalties of Hawking and Hunting, for
themselves, their Heirs and Assigns, Servants and Tenants, in and upon the
Lands and Premises aforesaid, and in and upon every Part and Parcel thereof;
saving, excepting, and reserving to Himself, His Heirs and Successors, one full
fifth Part of all Gold Mines or Gold Oar, and one full tenth Part of all
Silver Mines and Silver Oar thereafter to be had or found within the said
Tract or Territory of Land: To have, hold, and enjoy all the said Tract,
Territory, or Portion of Lands, and all and singular other the Premises, with
their and every of their Appurtenances thereby granted or mentioned, or
intended to be granted (except as before is excepted) to the said Henry Earl of
St. Albans, John Lord Berkeley, Sir William Morton and John Trethewy, their
Heirs and Assigns for ever, to their only Use and Behoof, and to no other Use,
Intent, or Purpose whatsoever; yielding and paying therefore Yearly on the
Feast of St. John Baptist, to Him, His Heirs and Successors, the Sum of Six
Pounds Thirteen Shillings and Four Pence, at the Receipt of Iames-Towne in the
Dominion of Virginia, in lieu of all Services and Demands whatsoever, as by the
same Letters Patents, amongst several other Grants, Powers, Authorities,
Privileges, Licenses, Clauses and Provisoes therein contained, relation being
thereunto had, more fully and at large it does and may appear, in which amongst
several other Things there is particularly inserted this Proviso following:
Provided also, that as to so much, and such Part and Parts of the Premises
hereby intended to be granted, as within the Time and Space of one and twenty
Years now next coming shall not be possessed, inhabited, or planted at or by
the Means or Procurement of the said Henry Earl of St. Albans, John Lord
Berkeley, Sir William Morton, and John Trethewy, their Heirs and Assigns, these
Presents, and the Grant hereby made shall cease, determine, and be void; And
we, Our Heirs, and Successors, may dispose thereof to any other Person or
Persons whatsoever, any Thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.
And whereas the said Henry Earl of St. Albans, John Lord Berkeley, Sir William
Morton, and John Trethewy, their Heirs and Assigns, have by good and sufficient
Conveyances and Assurances in the Law, for valuable Considerations, sold,
conveyed and assured the said whole Tract, Territory, and Portion of Land, and
all and singular the Premises and every Part and Parcel thereof, and all their
Estate, Right, Title and Interest therein, together with the said Letters
Patents unto Thomas Lord Culpepper, eldest Son and Heir of John late Lord
Culpepper deceased, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, who is thereby become sole
Owner and Proprietor thereof in Fee Simple, to whom we are willing to give all
due Encouragement and Assistance, by confirming and enlarging the said Letters
Patents, and releasing the last before mentioned Proviso. Now know ye, That We,
for and in Consideration of the many faithful and acceptable Services done unto
Our late Royal Father and Brother of Blessed Memory, by the said John Lord
Culpepper, as also by the said Thomas Lord Culpepper to Our said late Royal
Brother and Our self, and all along from Time to Time, and for diverse other
good Causes and Considerations Us thereunto especially moving, of Our especial
Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, have given, and granted, and
confirmed, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give,
grant and confirm unto the said Thomas Lord Culpepper, all all that entire
Tract, Territory or Parcel of Land, situate, lying, and being in Virginia in
America, and bounded by and within the first Heads or Springs of the Rivers of
Tappanhanocke alias Rappahanocke, and Quiriough alias Patawomacke Rivers, the
Courses of the said Rivers, from their said first Heads or Springs, as they are
commonly called and known by the Inhabitants, and Descriptions of those Parts,
and the Bay of Chesapoyocke, together with the said Rivers themselves, and all
the Islands within the outermost Banks thereof, and the Soil of all and
singular the Premises, and all Lands, Woods, Underwoods, Timber and Trees,
Ways, Mountains, Swamps, Marshes, Waters, Rivers, Ponds, Pools, Lakes,
Watercourse, Fishings, Streams, Havens, Ports, Harbors, Bays, Creeks,
Ferries, with all Sorts of Fish, as well Whales, Sturgeons, and other Royal
Fishes, as all others whatsoever, Wrecks of Sea, Flotson, Jetson, and Lagan,
and all Sorts of Deer, Wild Beasts, and Fowl, of what Nature or Kind soever;
and all Manner of Deodands, Goods of Felons and Fugitives, Treasure Trove,
Waifs, Strays, Fines, Forfeitures, Escheats, Advowsons, Royalties and
Hereditaments whatsoever, with all Mines of Gold and Silver, Lead, Tin, Iron
and Copper, and all Quarries of Stone and Coal within the Limits and Precincts
aforesaid, which now are, or at any Time or Times hereafter, shall be had,
coming, being, arising, growing, renewing, accrewing, found, or taken within
the Bounds, Limits, Precincts or Places aforesaid: Saving, excepting, and
reserving to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, one full fifth Part of Gold Mines,
or Gold Oar, and one full tenth Part of all Silver Mines, and Silver Oar, now
being, or hereafter to be had or found within the said Tract, or Territory of
Land; To have, hold and enjoy all the said Tract, Territory, or Portion of
Land, and every Part and Parcel thereof, and all and singular other the
Premises, with their and every of their Appurtenances hereby granted or
mentioned, or intended to be granted, except as before is excepted, to the said
Thomas Lord Culpepper, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to his and their only
Use and Behoof, and to no other Use, Intent or Purpose whatsoever, yielding and
paying therefore yearly from henceforth, on the Feast of St. John Baptist, to
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, the Sum of six Pounds thirteen Shillings and four
Pence, at the Receipt of Iames-Town in Our Colony of Virginia* in lieu of all
Services and Demands whatsoever, the first Payment thereof to be made on the
Feast Day of St. John Baptist next ensuing the Day of the Date of these
Presents. And We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors further give,
grant, ratify and confirm to the said Thomas Lord Culpepper, his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, all and singular the Grants, Powers, Authorities, Privileges,
Licenses and Clauses in the said herein before recited Letters Patents
mentioned, granted, or contained, in as large and ample Manner to all Intents
and Purposes whatsoever, as if the same and every of them had been particularly
granted and expressed in these Our Letters Patents, except only the above
mentioned Proviso. And We do further of Our especial Grace, certain Knowledge,
and mere Motion, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, fully and absolutely for
ever release and discharge the said above mentioned Proviso, and every Part
thereof, and every Matter and Thing therein contained, in as large and ample
Manner to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever as if the same had never been
made, hereby declaring the same to be null and void. And the said Thomas Lord
Culpepper, his Heirs and Assigns, and the said Tract, Territory and Premises,
and every Part thereof, to be for ever freed, cleared, and discharged from the
same, so and in such Manner, that the said Thomas Lord Culpepper, his Heirs and
Assigns, may freely and absolutely enter into, have, hold, occupy, possess and
enjoy the said Tract, Territory, and all and singular other the Premises freed
and discharged of the said Proviso, and all Right, Title, and Equity thereupon,
to be had in as large, ample, beneficial Manner to all Intents and Purposes, as
if the same Proviso had been never had or made, any Thing in the said recited
Letters Patents, or any Thing therein or herein contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And We do for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, fully and absolutely release and discharge the said Thomas Lord
Culpepper, his Heirs and Assigns, and the said Tract, Territory and Premises,
and every Part thereof, from all Arrears of the said Rent of six Pounds
thirteen Shillings and four Pence due at any Time before the Day of the Date
hereof, and from all other Claims and Demands whatsoever, except what is in
these Presents excepted and reserved to Us, Our Heirs and Successors. And We do
hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, straightly charge and command the
Governor and Council of Virginia now and for the Time being, and all Judges,
Sheriffs, Escheators, and other Officers whatsoever, now and for the Time being
in Our said Colony severally and respectively, that they, or any of them, do
not intermeddle with the Disposal, or disturb the said Thomas Lord Culpepper in
the full and quiet Enjoyment of the before mentioned Tract and Territory, or any
Part thereof, or of the hereby granted Escheats, Advowsons, Royalties and
Premises, or any of them; but that they and every of them in their respective
Places and Stations be aiding and assisting to him the said Thomas Lord
Culpepper, his Heirs and Assigns, in and about the same, and in the Execution
of all and singular the Grants, Powers and Authorities hereby granted and
confirmed, or mentioned or intended to be hereby granted and confirmed,
according to Our Royal Intent and Meaning herein before declared. And lastly,
We do for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, declare and grant that these Our
Letters Patents, or the Enrollment thereof, shall be in and by all Things firm,
valid, and effectual in the Law, according to the Tenor and true Meaning of the
same, notwithstanding the not describing or setting forth, or not rightly or
truly describing or setting forth of the said Tract, Territory or Parcel of
Land, or any other the Premises hereby granted, or of the Buttings,
Boundaries, or Situation of the same, or of any Part thereof, or of any
Tenants, Farmers, or Occupiers of the Premises, or any Part thereof, or any
other Defect, Omission, Non-Recital, Mis-recital, Incertainty, or Insufficiency
in these Our Letters Patents, or any Act, Statute, Ordinance, Provision, Usage,
Custom, Restriction, or any other Matter, Cause or Thing whatsoever to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And although express Mention, etc.

In Witness, etc.

Witness the King at Westminster, the seven and twentieth Day of September. By
Writ of Privy Seal.


