royal coat of armsBy the King, A PROCLAMATION For Suppressing and Preventing
Seditious and Unlicenced Books and Pamphlets.
JAMES R.

WHereas in and by an Act of Parliament made in the Fourteenth year of the
Reign of Our late Dearest Brother King Charles the Second, Entitled, An Act
for preventing Abuses in Printing Seditious, Treasonable, and Unlicensed Books
and Pamphlets, and for Regulating of Printing and Printing-Presses, (which said
Act is, by another Statute or Act of Parliament made in the First Year of Our
Reign Revived and Continued) It is amongst other things Enacted, That no person
or persons whatsoever, not being Licensed in that behalf by the Lord Bishop of
the Diocese, nor having been Seven Years Apprentice to the Trade of Bookseller,
Printer, or Bookbinder, nor being a Freeman of the City of London by a
Patrimonial Right, as Son of a Bookseller, Printer, or Bookbinder, nor being a
Member of the Company of Stationers of London, shall, within the City or
Suburbs of London, or any other Market Town, or elsewhere, receive, take, or
buy, to barter, sell again, change, or do away any Book or Books whatsoever,
upon pain of Forfeiture of the same. And whereas of late several Persons not
being qualified by the said Act, and particularly great numbers of loose and
disorderly people commonly called Hawkers and Pedlers of Books, have taken upon
them to receive or buy several Unlicensed, Seditious, and many times,
Treasonable Books and Pamphlets, framed and contrived by malicious persons on
purpose to amuse and disturb the minds of Our loving Subjects, or for other
evil or indirect ends and purposes, and have carried, sold, and dispersed the
same about the Streets, and in other places of Public resort, and also in
Coffee-Houses, Taverns, and private Famil^es, to the great abuse and scandal of
Our Royal State and Government, and in open and manifest Breach and Contempt of
Our Laws. We therefore considering the great Mischief that does ensue upon such
Licentious and Illegal Practices, and being Resolved effectually to provide
against the like Mischiefs for the future, are pleased by this Our Royal
Proclamation, by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Command and
Require that the said Act be put in Execution, and duly and strictly observed
and kept: And We do also straightly Prohibit and Forewarn, That from henceforth
no person or persons commonly called Hawkers, or Pedlers of Books, or any other
person or persons whatsoever not being qualified as aforesaid to buy or sell
Books, do or shall presume to go about the Streets, or from House to House, to
Sell, or Expose to Sale any manner of Book or Books, Pamphlet or Pamphlets
whatsoever, nor do or shall by any ways or means whatsoever Buy or Sell, or
Expose to Sale any manner of Books or Pamphlets whatsoever, contrary to the
purport and true meaning of the said Act of Parliament, under such Pains,
Penalties and Forfeitures as by the said Act are Provided, and upon pain of
incurring such further Punishments as by the utmost Rigor of the Laws, and by
Our Prerogative Royal may be inflicted on such Offenders for their Contempt of
this Our Royal Commandment: Hereby strictly Charging and Commanding all Judges,
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other
Our Officers and Ministers; as also the Master and Wardens of the said Company
of Stationers now and for the time being, and all other Our Subjects whom it
shall or may concern, That they and every of them do from time to time use
their and every of their best and utmost Powers, Skills and Endeavors
respectively, for the utter Suppressing and Preventing of the Printing and
Publishing of all such Unlawful Books and Pamphlets aforesaid, and for
Prosecuting, Punishing, and utterly Suppressing all and every person and
persons offending in the Premises, according to the utmost Rigor of the Law,
and Our Royal intent and meaning herein Declared, as they Our said Officers and
Subjects do tender Our Pleasure, and will answer the contrary.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Tenth day of February 1687/8. In the
Fourth Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1687/8.


