DIEV ET MON DROIT


JAMES R.

WHereas the King's most Excellent Majesty has been Advertised, That diverse of
His Majesty's Natural born Subjects, as well Mariners as others, have and daily
do depart this Kingdom, and betake themselves to the Service of Foreign Princes
and States without License had and obtained in that behalf from His Majesty, in
manifest Contempt of His Royal Authority, tending to the Disservice of His
Majesty, and Prejudice of His Kingdoms, Dominions and Countries: For Redress
whereof for the present, and for the preventing the like Mischief for the
future, the King's most Excellent Majesty by this His Royal Proclamation by and
with the Advice of His Privy Council, does straightly Prohibit and Forbid all
and every Person and Persons of what Quality, Degree, or Condition soever
(being His Majesty's Natural born Subjects) from Entering into, or Listing
themselves in the Service or Pay of any Foreign Prince or State; And does
hereby straightly Charge and Command them and every of them upon their Bounden
and Known Duty and Allegiance, That they or any of them do not from henceforth
withdraw him or themselves, or depart from this His Majesty's Kingdom of
England, or any other His Majesty's Realms or Dominions, for or in Order to the
Entering or Listing him or themselves into Pay, or otherwise betake him or
themselves to the Service of any Foreign Prince or State either by Sea or Land,
without due License first had and obtained in that behalf: To all which His
Majesty will expect, and does Require due Obedience and Conformity, and does
hereby Publish and Declare, That all Offenders to the contrary shall not only
incur His Majesty's just Displeasure, but be proceeded against by Seizure of
their Goods, Persons and Estates, and otherwise according to the utmost
Severity of Law. And further His Majesty does hereby Authorize and Command all
and every His Governors, and other Officers of His Forts, and all and every
the Captains, Masters, and other Officers Serving and Employed in any of His
Majesty's Ships or Vessels at Sea, and all other His Majesty's Subjects
whatsoever whom it may concern, from time to time to Stop and make Stay of all
and every such Person and Persons as shall endeavor to Transport, or to Enter
or List him or themselves into the Service of any Foreign Prince or State by
Sea or by Land contrary to the true intent and meaning of this His Majesty's
Royal Proclamation, and also to Seize upon, take and bring back all such
Persons aforesaid as shall endeavor or attempt to Transport, or to Enter or
List him or themselves in the Service of any Foreign Prince or State as
aforesaid, either by Sea or Land, as they His Majesty's said Officers,
Commanders and Subjects will answer the contrary at their utmost perils.

Given Our Court at Whitehall the Second day of March 1687/8 In the Fourth Year
of Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1687/8.


