AN ANSWER TO ANOTHER Letter from Legorn, To an Eminent Merchant in Land.
October. 29. 1680.
SIR,
I Received yours from Aboard the Van-herring, and doubtless there is no
question to be made but the Mahometans and Algerines are as busy, not only of
our great Ship the Van-herring, but of the Lion Rampant, and the Golden Harp
that attend her. You make me tremble to hear of the Contrivance which was among
the Mahometans, to have blown up the Captain and his Council of Officers in the
place it self, at what time both He and they should have been met together. We
are not also ignorant how they would have Attacked our single Vessel with a
great Armado, having no other intention but to destroy and sink her.

These were their Villainous attempts some years ago. But to come closer to the
point, as you well observe, it was but the other day, that they put fire to the
great Cabin, and burnt it level with the water. And indeed it brought such a
Consternation upon the hon^st Mariners, that had in all probability done their
work, had they been as nimble to second, as they were to act. As to the rest of
their Malicious designs, and more particularly of the discontented Mariners
that were secured in the Gun-Room, and favored by the Lieutenant, I shall make
no repetition thereof, but tell you how far we may rationally hope for an
Alteration of affairs in our Ship. In the first place, The Person who is
chiefly entrusted with the great Cabin, and the two Boatswains, are such now
newly Chosen, for which the Mariners have a high respect, as being confident of
their great Affection for the good of the Ship. There is one among them that
has a great share in looking after the great Cabin, for whom the Mariners have
not so great kindness, as believing him too much a favourer of the Lieutenant's
designs. Him therefore they are about to displace, and it is thought 'twill be
speedily done; For that upon mis-apprehensions between the Mariners and the
Lieutenant, he would be always giving Sentence to the prejudice of the
Mariners, by which they thought their Rights and Privileges impaired.

The Grand Council of the Officers of the Ship are now Sitting, and are very
intent to discover the Designers and Designs that have been, and still are,
against the Ship. Before they Sat, the Lieutenant removed into the Lion
Rampant, at which the Impeached Mariners that are secured in the Gun-Room, were
not a little pensive, and hung down their heads; as indeed they have reason
enough to do. For though one of the Mariners that accused them to the Captain,
be since dead, yet there is another come in, that has Discovered much more. His
Testimony was somewhat decry'd at first by some of the Lieutenant's Friends;
but now, it is believed more favor will be shown him, and that Credit be given
to his Oath, that a person so much a Creature of the Mahometans may deserve.
That which did him no small kindness, was this, That the very first day that
the Grand Council of Officers sat, he discovered a very considerable
Mohammedan, who was walking in disguise upon the Deck among the great Officers
in the Ship, and hearkening to their discourses. But the great Officers ordered
him to be laid hold on; insomuch that the Lieutenant's friend was forced to
commit him into the Hole, upon the Testimony of that Mariner, which he had so
much slighted before: He has repeated his Discoveries before the Grand Council
of Officers, who have heard him with great attention, and seem to be not a
little concerned at what he has said, and have ordered him to give in what he
spoke by word of mouth, in Writing. One of the Members of the Great Council it
self, is at present suspended, till he clear himself of some things which are
laid to his Charge. There have been several Mariners, who have endeavored by
Papers and Writings to set the Captain and his Great Council at Varience. It Is
thought the Eye of the Great Council will be soon upon them, in regard that
they have already sent for one of them, who, it is thought, trusted too much to
the quickness of his Parts, and played too much upon the Discovery of the great
Plot against the Captain and the Ship. Thereupon the said Mariner, lately made
a Quartermaster, has left the Ship, or at least so hid himself among the
Ballast and Cordage, that he cannot at present be found. Some of the Mariners
inform against him, that he is a Mohammedan, and has been so for many years. As
for the Ships Cock-boat, which the Algerines, the most perfidious people in the
world, do so much endeavor to cut from her Stern, we are in great hopes that
particular care will be taken of it, in regard the Captain himself recommended
the preservation thereof to the Grand Council of Officers. Particular care will
be also taken, no doubt, of the Golden Harp, where a strict enquiry will be
made after the Mahometans and Algerines, that have raised Mutinies and
Divisions among the Mariners on that Vessel, on purpose to betray that Ship to
the Argerines themselves. In these and all those other concerns which you
mention, we make no question but that the Grand Council of Officers will be
very sedulous for the good of the Ship. There is that Harmony at present
between the Captain and them, which makes all the Mariners throw up their Caps,
and rejoice at no rate; Nay the very Mariners are turned devout too, and pray
for the Continuance of it with the greatest Zeal in the world: As being
absolutely confirmed in this Opinion, That if that blessing befall them, that
neither they nor their Ship will ever fall into the power of their Enemies,
either the Mahometans or the Algerines, whom they will have no reason to fear,
if their Captain and the Grand Council agree. By the next expect a farther
Account from

Yours, P. J.

Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway in Queens-head Alley in
Paternoster: Row. 1680.


