royal coat of arms
By the King,
A PROCLAMATION.
JAMES R.

AMongst other the advantages of these Our Kingdoms, the Staple Commodities of
Wool and Cloth are peculiar thereunto, and the Manufacture of the same under
several good and wholesome Laws made and Provided by the Wisdom of Our Royal
Ancestors for the better Regulation and Improvement thereof, has justly been
esteemed a principal Happiness of this Our Realm, and long been the Envy of
others Nations; And We (who equally desire to promote the Good and Welfare of
Our Kingdoms with any of Our Royal Predecessors and Ancestors) considering that
nothing can prove more destructive to the said Manufacture, then the
Exportation of Wool into Foreign parts, have as well by Our several Royal
Proclamations, as by a Considerable Charge of Our own expended therein, shown
Our Gracious Inclinations and Purposes for the Maintenance and Encouragement of
the said Manufacture, and for the effectual putting in Execution the Laws
already made against such Exportation, And yet the Methods taken for Prevention
of the great Abuses therein, have not hitherto met with answerable Success; But
the said Offense is now become a most notorious and common Nuisance by the
practices of diverse evil disposed Persons, who being neither terrified with the
Severity of the Laws, nor yet regarding Our Just Displeasure conceived against
them, do Combine among themselves, and together with others, Aliens and
Foreigners, sometimes by Stealth, sometimes by open Force and Violence, to
Export and Carry out of Our Kingdoms of England and Ireland diverse great
quantities of Wool, Wooll-fells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool,
Wooll-flocks, Fullers Earth, Fulling Clay, and Tobacco-pipe Clay, wherein they
are also Assisted by many dissolute and desperate Persons in great numbers,
insomuch that Our Officers and others duly Empowered, and endeavoring to
resist and prevent them therein, are often in peril even of their Lives, and by
the number of Offenders are much discouraged from doing their Duty. And whereas
diverse of Our Loving Subjects from diverse parts of this Kingdom, being Traders
and Dealers in the Woollen Manufacture, by their humble Petition have proposed
to Us, That they are willing to make a voluntary Contribution among themselves
as a farther means to Suppress the said Offenders, and for that purpose have
humbly besought Us to grant them Our Royal License and Authority to make a
Collection of Moneys to defray the Charge of Prosecuting and Preventing the
said Offenses and Mischiefs, which Charge will be very considerable in regard
of the great number of Offenders throughout Our said Kingdoms; We therefore out
of Our Gracious and Princely Care of the Good and Welfare of Our People, Have
thought fit by Our Royal Commission under Our Great Seal bearing Date the Eight
and twentieth day of June last past, directed to several Persons therein
mentioned, For preventing the Exportation to Wool, to Empower and Authorize
them, or any Seven or more of them, from time to time to cause to be Prosecuted
and put in Execution the several Laws made against the Exportation of Wool,
Wooll-fells, and other the things before mentioned, out of Our Kingdoms of
England and Ireland; And also to Collect, Gather and Receive, and to cause to
be Collected, Gathered, and Received from any of Our Subjects whatsoever, such
Sum and Sums of Money as they or any of them shall from time to time
voluntarily Contribute, Advance and Bestow, for and in order to the Preventing
the Exportation of Wool, Wooll-fells, and other the things before mentioned,
out of Our said Kingdoms, and for the better Discovery and Punishment of the
said Offenses, and to employ the said Moneys so Collected accordingly; Which
Voluntary Contributions so to be made by any of Our Subjects whatsoever, to the
ends and purposes aforesaid, We have thought fit by the Advice of Our Privy
Council, and We do by this Our Royal Proclamation, Allow, Recommend and
Approve, not doubting but Our Loving Subjects will cheerfully and readily
assist and promote so useful and public a Work. And further, as well in
pursuance of the aforesaid Laws, as in Virtue of Our Royal Prerogative, We do
again hereby straightly Charge, Prohibit and Command, That no manner of Sheep,
Wool, Wooll-fells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Wooll-flocks,
Fullers Earth, Fulling Clay, or Tobacco-pipe Clay be at any time hereafter by
any Person or Persons whatsoever, whether Natural-born Subjects, Denizens or
Strangers, Exported, Transported, Sent or Conveyed out of Our Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town or Port of Berwick upon Tweed, or any the
Isles, Ports, Creeks or Places thereof, into the Kingdom of Scotland, or any
Foreign Parts beyond the Seas, upon pain of Our Highest Indignation, and the
utmost Penalties which by the Laws and Statutes of this Our Kingdom may be
Inflicted upon the Offenders, their Aiders, Procurers, Abetters and Favorers,
their Lives and Estates; And Our further Will and Pleasure is, That all Wool,
Wooll-fells, Mortlings, and other the things before mentioned, and all Boats
and Vessels Seized and Condemned by Force of any the said Laws, shall be
brought to London, Kingston upon Hull, Exeter, or one of them, and there (and
not elsewhere) disposed of, to prevent Selling them again to the Owners, as
has hitherto been too frequently practiced. And lastly, We do hereby
straightly Charge, Require and Command all and every Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, Tythingmen, and all Officers of Our
Admiralty, and all and every other Our Officers and Manisters as well Civil as
Military by Sea and Land, and all and every Our Subjects whatsoever whom it may
concern, diligently to observe, and readily to Aid, Assist and Defend all
Persons concerned in the due performance of this Our Proclamation in all things.

Given at Our Court at Windsor the Twelfth day of August, 1688. In the Fourth
Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1688.


