DIEV ET MON DROIT

East India.
JAMES R.

WHereas We have been Informed by Our East India Company, That several of Our
Subjects, in Order to the carrying on of the Interloping Trade, contrary to Our
Express Prohibitions, have put themselves into the Service of Foreign Princes
and States within the East Indies, and some of them after they had been
retained by the said Company, and Transported thither at great Expenses, have
deserted their Service, and put themselves into the Service of the said Foreign
Princes, to the great endangering of so Beneficial a Trade to Us and this Our
Kingdom, unless timely Remedy be by Us applied for preventing the growing
Mischiefs which may thereby ensue: And Our said Company having humbly besought
Us by Our Royal Proclamation to Recall all and every of Our said Subjects in
the Service of any Foreign Prince or State within the East Indies, We by the
Advice of Our Privy Council, do hereby Publish and Declare Our Pleasure to be,
and do hereby strictly Charge and Command all and every of Our Subjects in the
Service of the Mogul or great King of Indostan, the King of Syam, the Queen of
Atcheen, or of Sumbajee Rajay, or of any other Foreign Prince or State, or of
the Dutch East India Company in the East Indies within Six Months after
Publication of this Our Royal Proclamation in the East Indies, to leave the
Service of all and every Foreign Prince and State in India, and to repair and
render themselves to Our General and Council at Bombay, where such as are
Merchants shall have liberty to reside and Traffic as Free Merchants, and such
as are Seamen and Soldiers shall be Employed in the Service of the Company at
the usual Rate of Wages paid by them to Seamen and Soldiers. And in case any of
Our said Subjects shall refuse to Trade and Traffic as aforesaid, or to enter
into the Service of Our said Company as aforesaid, then We do hereby strictly
Charge and Command Our said Subjects to repair into England, and to appear
before Our Privy Council in England, within One year after Publication of this
Our Royal Proclamation in India, upon Pain and Peril that such of Our said
Subjects who have deserted the said Companies Service, and shall be Apprehended
there after the times limited as aforesaid, shall and may be proceeded against
at a Court Martial there for such their Desertion; And upon Pain and Penalty
that such others of Our said Subjects who never were in the said Companies
Service, and shall not render themselves within the times aforesaid, whenever
they shall be found or Apprehended in India aforesaid, or else within this Our
Realm, shall and may be proceeded against either in India or in this Our Realm
as Contemners of Our Royal Commands, and shall incur such Fines and Forfeitures
as by the utmost Rigor of Law may be Inflicted on them. And We do hereby
Require Our General and Council of India residing upon Our Island of Bombay,
and Our President and Council of Our City of Madrasse residing in Our Fort of
St. George upon the Coast of Cormandel, to cause this Our Royal Proclamation to
be Published in all usual Places in India, and to be duly Executed according to
the Tenor hereof. And We do further Will and Require all Our Captains and
other Officers by Sea or Land in the East Indies, to be Aiding and Assisting in
the due Execution hereof.

Given at Our Court at Windsor the Seventeenth day of July 1686. In the Second
Year of Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1686.


