royal blazon or coat of armsBy the King. A PROCLAMATION Inhibiting all Persons
after the Four and twentieth day of June next to use the Trade of a Pedlar or
Petty Chapman, unless they be Licensed according to a Course lately taken by Us
in that behalf.
JAMES R.

WHereas by an Act of Parliament made in the Nine and thirtieth year of the
Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth; Entitled, [An Act for Punishing of Rogues,
Vagabonds, and Sturdy Beggars] It is amongst other things Enacted, That all
Pedlars, and Petty Chapmen wandering abroad, should be taken, Adjudged and
Deemed Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, and be Punished as by the said Act
is Directed; which Statute was in the Seventh year of the Reign of the late
King James Confirmed and Enacted to be put in due Execution: And whereas the
Trade of a Pedlar, or Petty Chapman has heretofore been used for the Benefit
and Ease of Our Loving Subjects dwelling remote from Cities and Market Towns,
and for that cause the Industrious and well disposed Petty Chapman, as well
before the said Statute as since, has been in some sort permitted to Travel
and use his Trade; And whereas under color of using the said Trade, many
Rogues and Idle Wandering Persons carrying about Trifles in the Habit of
Pedlars, or Petty Chapmen, so misbehave themselves, as they are indeed no other
but Rebels, Sturdy Beggars or Thieves, and many of them being of no Religion,
Carry abroad and Disperse without Inspection, Schismatical and Scandalous Books
and Libells, not only, to the prejudice of Us, and the Government in general,
but to the wrong of many of Our Subjects in particular: Whereupon We in Our
Princely Care desiring Redress and Reformation of all Abuses in this kind; And
yet that the Industrious and Honest Pedlar or Petty Chapman may be Tolerated
and Encouraged to Travel in his Uocation; And finding no better way to effect
the same, then by Licensing such as should be known to be of Good and Honest
Conversation, have by Our Letters Patents bearing Date the Nine and twentieth
day of April now last past, Continued the Office for that purpose formerly
Erected, and Appointed the same to be kept in some convenient Place within Our
City of London, and in any other Two or more Cities or Towns Corporate within
this Our Realm of England, or the Principalty of Wales, for the Licensing of
Pedlars or Petty Chapmen; and by Our said Letters Patents made certain of Our
Loving Subjects (of whose Care and Fidelity We have taken notice) Our Officers
in Order to the Licensing the said Pedlars and Petty Chapmen, and thereby given
unto them, their Deputies and Assigns, Power and Authority to Approve and Allow
of such Person and Persons to use the said Trade of a Pedlar or Petty Chapman,
as shall bring Testimony under the Hands and Seals of the Minister and
Churchwardens of the Parish where he or they shall Inhabit, Testifying the
Loyalty, Honesty and Abode of such Person or Persons, and of his or their
fitness to be Licensed to use the said Trade, and shall become Bound unto Us,
Our Heirs and Successors in the Penal Sum of Forty pounds to be and continue of
good Behavior toward Us, Our Heirs and Successors, and all Our Liege People,
and to Lodge only in Inns or Alehouses, and not to Travel on Sundays, and that
thereupon there shall be Licenses Drawn and Engrossed for the said Pedlars, or
Petty Chapmen, and be Sealed under the Seal of that Office, and Confirmed unto
them under Our Great Seal, to continue during Our Pleasure. And because many of
the former Abuses will not be clean taken away, nor the intended good of Our
Loving Subjects fully perfected, without the suppressing of such Dissolute and
Obstinate Uagrants as shall use the said Trade without License; And for that
the said Pedlars and Petty Chapmen of the better sort have not yet had Public
Notice of the said Letters Patents, nor taken Licenses accordingly, for that no
time was appointed for their Application in that behalf; We therefore do hereby
straightly Charge and Command, That no Person or Persons whatsoever, other then
such as shall be Licensed by force of, and according to the true meaning of Our
said Letters Patents, do attempt or presume to Wander, Travel, or Go abroad as
or in the Habit of a Pedlar, or Petty Chapman, to Buy, Sell or Utter any manner
of Wares or Commodities whatsoever, in any Place or Places whatsoever within
this Our Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
or in any part of them, or any of them, from and after the Four and twentieth
day of June next after the Date of this Our Proclamation, upon the Pains and
Penalties in the said Statutes mentioned and expressed. And We do hereby
likewise strictly Charge and Command all and singular Our Justices of Assize,
Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Our
Officers, to take notice of this Our Pleasure, and of the said Letters Patents,
and to be from time to time in all things Aiding and Assisting unto Our said
Officers, their Assigns and Deputies, in the due Execution thereof, and to take
care that the said Statutes, and the Pains and Penalties therein contained, be
duly Executed upon the Contemners or Neglecters of this Our Royal Commandment;
as they tender Our Pleasure, and will answer the contrary at their Perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Seventh day of May 1686. In the Second
Year of Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1686.


