royal blazon or coat of arms J R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
A PROCLAMATION OF THE Kings Majesty's most Gracious and General Pardon.
JAMES R.

WHereas soon after Our Coronation, We had given Order for preparing of a Bill,
containing Our most Gracious, General, and Free Pardon to Our Loving Subjects,
with intention to have passed the same into an Act in the first Session of Our
Parliament, but were unhappily prevented therein, by the late most Unnatural
Rebellion; which since it has pleased Almighty God by his Blessing upon Our
Arms, to Suppress, We have thought fit to renew Our Princely Intentions of
Grace and Mercy to Our Subjects, especially considering the steadfast Loyalty of
the far greater number of Our Subjects, who continued firm in their Obedience
to Us notwithstanding that Rebellion: And being persuaded that many of those
who joined themselves in that Rebellion being poor Laborers and
Handicraftsmen, were drawn and seduced thereinto by the subtle and crafty
Insinuations of some Ill-disposed Persons of greater Note and Quality then
themselves, and not from their own Evil Rancour of mind, and Traitorous
Aversion to Us or Our Government, whose Condition We in Our Princely Clemency
commiserating; And to the end their fears and despair of Our Mercy, may not
betray them to evil and lewd courses of Life, but that they may with safety
return to their Obedience to Us, and to their former Habitations, Labors, and
Employments. And that the minds of other Our Subjects may be quieted; and that
all Fears and Iealousies which may concern their security for any matter since
Our Reign, or in the Reign of Our late Dearly beloved Brother, be removed and
wholly taken away, as much as in Us lies, We of Our especial Grace and
Tenderness to Our People, do hereby Publish and Declare this Our most Royal and
Gracious Pardon; And We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors Pardon,
Acquit, Release and Discharge all and every Our Subjects (except Bodies
Politic and Incorporate, and such other Persons who shall be herein or hereby
excepted) of this Our Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and the Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, them and every
of them against Us, Our Heirs and Successors, of, and from all manner of
Treasons, Felonies, Misprisions of Treason or Felony, Treasonable or Seditious
Words or Libels, Seditious and unlawful Meetings and Conventicles, all Offenses
whereby any Person may be Charged with the Penalty and Danger of Praemunire;
All Riots, Routs, Offenses, Contempts, Trespasses, and Misdemeanors, and all
Judgments and Convictions for not coming to Church and of and from the
Forfeitures and Securities for the same, or any of them heretofore had,
committed or done, except as herein or hereby after is excepted. And Our Will
and Pleasure is, That neither Our said Subjects, nor any of them, nor the
Heirs, Executors or Administrators of any of them, be, or shall be sued, vexed
or disquieted in their Bodies, Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, for any
manner of Matter, Cause, Contempt, Misdemeanour, Forfeiture, Offense, or any
other thing heretofore suffered, done, or committed, or omitted against Us or
Our late brother, His or Our Crown, Dignity, Prerogative, Laws or Statutes, and
not herein or hereby after excepted. And that this Our Grant of General Pardon,
by the General Words, Clauses and Sentences before rehearsed, shall be reputed,
deemed, adjudged, expounded, allowed and taken in all manner of Our Courts and
elsewhere, most beneficially and liberally for Our said Subjects, thereby
Pardoned in all things not hereafter excepted, as if their particular Persons
and Crimes had herein been at large and fully expressed.

Excepted and always foreprized out of this Our Pardon, all Treasons Committed
or Done in the Parts beyond the Seas, or in any other Place out of this Realm;
And also Excepted all Offenses in Forging or false Counterfeiting the Great or
Privy Seal, Sign Manual, or Privy Signet, or any of Our Moneys Current within
this Our Realm, or of unlawful Diminution of any of the said Moneys by any ways
or means whatsoever, and all Abetting, Aiding, Comforting, or Procuring the
said Offenses, or any of them.

And also Excepted all voluntary Murders, Petty Treasons, Wilful Poysonings,
and all Offenses of being accessory to the same, or any of them, before the
Fact committed; And also all Piracies and Robberies committed upon the Sea,
Robberies upon the Highways, Burglaries in Houses, and all Offenses of being
Accessory to the said Offenses, or any of them.

And also Excepted the detestable and abominable Vice of Buggery, committed
with Man or Beast; All Rape and Carnal Ravishments of Women; All Ravishments
and wilful taking away or Marrying of any Maid, Widow or Damsel against her
will, or without the Consent or Agreement of her Parents, or of such as then
had her in Custody, and all Offenses of Aiding, Comforting, Abetting, or
Procuring the said Offenses, or any them.

And also Excepted, all Offenses of Perjury, Subornation of Witnesses, Razing,
Forging or Counterfeiting any Deeds, Escripts, Inquisitions, Indentures of
Appraisment, or other Writings, or Publishing the same; Forging or
Counterfeiting any Examinations or Testimonies of any Witness or Witnesses
tending to bring any Person or Persons into danger of his Life, and all
Procuring and Counselling of any of the said Offenses.

And also Except, all Treasons, Offenses, Misdemeanors and Contempts, other
then such for which Judgment of Praemunire has or may be given, or for not
coming to Church, of, and for which any Indictments, Actions, Bill, Plaint or
Information, or other Process at any time within six years last past, has been
commenced, sued or depended in any of His Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or
other His Majesty's Courts of Record held within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and County of Middlesex, and is there depending or remaining to be
prosecuted, or whereupon any Verdict, Judgment, Outlawry, or Decree is already
Given, Awarded or Entered; And all Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties thereupon
now due or accrued, or which shall or may be due, accrue, or grow to the Kings
Majesty, and all Executions for the same.

And also Except, all Informations and other Proceedings concerning Highways
and Bridges, or for Repairing County Goals, and all Fines and Issues set or
Returned thereupon since the year One thousand six hundred seventy nine.

And also Except, all Offenses in taking away, imbezling, or purloyning any
Goods, Moneys, Chattels, Jewels, Armore, Munition, Stores, Naval Provisions,
Shipping, Ordnance, or other Habiliments of War belonging to Us or Our late
Brother.

And also Except, all Offenses of Incest, Dilapidations, or Simony.

And also Except, all Contempts and Process thereupon issuing in or out of any
Court of Equity.

And also Except, all Recognizances, Conditions and Covenants, and all
Penalties, Titles and Forfeitures of Offices, Conditions, or Covenants
forfeited, accrued, or grown to Us or to Our late Brother, by reason of the
Breach or not performing of any Office, Covenant, or Condition whatsoever.

Also Excepted all Concealments, Frauds, Corruptions, Misdemeanors, and
Offenses whereby We or Our late Brother have been deceived in the Collection,
Payments, or Answering of Our Revenues, or any part thereof, or any other Money
due to Us or received for Us or Him, and all Forfeitures, Penalties, and Nomine
penes thereupon arising.

Provided always, That nothing in this Our Pardon contained shall Extend or be
Construed to discharge any Fines, Sums of Money recovered by Judgment, Fines
pro Licentia concordandi, Post Fines, Issues, or Amerciaments, lost, imposed,
assessed, set or entered, in any Court of Record whatsoever.

And also Except all Persons who are as to any Pains, Penalties, or
Disabilities whatsoever Excepted out of the Act of Free and General Pardon,
Indemnity, and Oblivion, made in the Twelfth year of Our late Brothers Reign,
and also out of any other Act of Free and General Pardon since that time.

Excepted also all Persons who after Conviction or Attainder of, or for any
manner of Treason, or Misprisions of Treasons have been Transported, and such
Attainted of other notorious Crimes or Felonies have been Ordered or Directed
to be Transported into any of Our Foreign Plantations.

Except also all and every Person and Persons who in a Traitorous and Hostile
manner Invaded this Our Realm with James Scott late Duke of Monmouth, and all
and every other person or persons who in the time of the late Rebellion under
the said late Duke of Monmouth were Officers, or had the Name or Repute of
being Officers in his Army.

Except also all Fugitives and Persons fled from Our Iu^tice into parts beyond
the Seas, or out of this Our Realm, who shall not return and render themselves
to Our Chief Justice, or some Justice of the Peace, before the Nine and
twentieth day of September next ensuing.

And also Excepted out of this Our Pardon the Persons hereafter particularly
mentioned, viz. George Speak of White Lackingtone Esquire Mary Speak his Wife, John
Speak Esquire their Son, Samuel Townesend of Ilmister, Reginald Tucker of Long
Sutton, James Hurd of Langport, George Pavior of the same, Gabriel Spratt of
Aish Priors, George Carry of Glaston, John Lewis of Babcary, Thomas Lewis of the
same, John Parsons of the same, Thomas Cram of Warmister (...) Place of
Eddington, Robert Gee of Martock, Hugh Chamberlain, William Savage of Taunton,
Richard Slape of the same, John Palmer of Bridgwater, John Webber of the same,
Henry Herring of Taunton, Thomas Hurd of Langport, Christopher Cook of Wilton
Clothier, Amos Blinham of Galhampton, Mrs. Musgrave School-mistress, Mrs. Sarah
Wye, Mrs. Elizabeth Wye, Mrs. Catherine Bovet, Mrs. Scading, Mrs. Mary Blake,
Mrs. Elizabeth Knash, Mrs. Mary Bird, Mrs. Mary Mead, Mrs. Susan Peck, Mrs
Elizabeth Barns, Mrs. Mary Burridge, Mrs. Hannah Burridge, Mrs. Grace Herring,
Mrs. Anne Herring, Mrs. Mary Waters, Mrs. Sarah Waters, Mrs. Elizabeth Germain,
Mrs. Grace Germain, Mrs. Hannah Whetham, Mrs. Easter Whitham, Mrs. Susan Tyler,
Mrs. Mary Goodwyn, Mrs. Sarah Longham, Mrs. Margery Sympson, Mrs. Sarah
Reynolds, Mrs. Mary Hucklebridge, Mrs. Margaret Hucklebridge, Mrs. Mary Baker,
Mrs. Mary Tanner, Mrs. Anne Tanner, Mrs. Elizabeth Gammon, Mrs. Sarah Stacy,
Mrs. Hannah Stacy, Mrs. Elizabeth Dyke, Mrs. Elizabeth Baker, Mrs Mary Smith,
Mrs. Mary Page, Mrs. Elizabeth March, Mrs. Hannah Grove, Mrs. Elizabeth Bisgood
of Taunton, John Tucker of Shepton Mallet, John Bennet of Alisbeere Gent. John
Greenway of Crewkern, Thomas Skinner of Dawlish Esquire John alias Robert Moor of
Haychurch, William Way of Comb S. Nicholas, Robert Hucker of Taunton (...)
Penny of Shepton Mallet, Thomas Hooper, Edward Keetch, William Parbury, (...)
Green, William Hussy, William Strode of Street Esquire Mary Bath of Wrington,
George Leg of the same, Edward Rogers of Banwell, John Rogers of the same,
Ralph Green, William Jobbins, (...) Manning, (...) Whinnell, John Baker of
Banwell (...) Worms of Warmister (...) Worms of the same, William Pardoe,
Nicholas Smith, John Edwards, John Collier, Henry Coals of Bridgwater, Richard
Blucock of Stoke Gursey, Henry Ireton, John Cragg alias Smith, Mary Jennings,
James Hooper, John Bennet, Joseph Gatch, William Thompson of London, Humphrey
Aldwyn of the same Thomas Love alias Alexander of the same, Richard Tucker of
Bishops Hull, William Crab of Aishill Gent. Francis Gough of the same, Francis
Vaughan of Criston Esquire Laurence French of Chard, Edward Matthews of
Lincoln's Inn Esquire Hugh Cross Senior of Bishops Hull, Samuel Bernardiston,
Benedict Hack of Culliton, Henry Quick of Uppolry, John Comb of Luppit, Henry
Gatchil, Nicholas Hoar, George Pippen of Dalverton Gent. Abraham Carry of
Taunton, John Huish of the same, Peter Terry of the same, Richard Raw of the
same, Maurice Frith of Wincanton Gent. William Tiggens of Forde, John Kerridge
of Lime Regis Mariner, Robert Parsons, Samuel Venner, Andrew Fletcher, John
Fowke, Robert Bruce, Anthony Bruce, James Fox, Joseph Gaylard, William Oliver,
John Woolters, Nathaniel Hook Clerk, Richard Lucas of Dulverton, John
Bettiscomb near Lime Regis, George Stucky of White Lackington, Thomas Saxon,
John Jesse, George Nigh of Cheddar, Joseph Francklyn of Worle Clerk, (...) Door
late Mayor of Limington, James Carrier of Ilmister, Nicholas Covert of
Chichester Gent. John Tripp of Shippham, Joseph Hearse of Badgeworth, Francis
Creswick of Fanham Esquire (...) Fudge of Wedmore, Colonel John Rumsey, Joshuah
Lock junior, Stephen Lobb Clerk, William Gaunt, Ralph Alexander, Bartholomew
Vermeuyden, Major John Manley Isaak Manley his Son, Walter Thimbleton, Aaron
Smith of London Gent. Sir William Waller, Slingsby Bethel Esquire Francis Charlton
Esquire Richard Goodenough, Nathaniel Wade, John Tellier, Richard Edghill, Samuel
Story, John Jones, John Vincent, George Bowyer, John Dutton Colt, Charles Earl
of Machlesfield, John Trenchard Esquire John wildman Esquire Titus Oats Clerk, Robert
Ferguson Clerk.

Provided that no Process of Vtlary at the Suit of any person Plaintiff, shall
be by virtue of this Our Pardon stayed or avoided, unless the Defendant appear
and put in Bail, where by Law Bail is necessary, and take forth a Writ of Scire
facias against the Party at whose Suit he was Outlawed. And that this Our
Pardon be not allowed to Discharge any Outlawry after Judgment, till
Satisfaction or Agreement be made to or with the Party at whose Suit the Vtlary
was obtained. And Our Will and Pleasure is, That this present Pardon shall be
of as good Force and effect to Pardon and Discharge all and singular the
Premises above mentioned, and intended to be Pardoned and Discharged, as if We
should by Letters Patents under the Great Seal have Granted particular Pardons
to every one of Our Subjects. And for the better manifestation of Our Gracious
Intentions and Desire herein, We do give leave that any of Our Subjects not
herein Excepted, may take and Sue out Our particular Pardon, pursuant to the
Tenor hereof. And for that purpose We shall Direct Our Secretaries of State to
present Warrants to Us for Our Signature, and give Order to Our Attorney
General or Solicitor, to prepare Bills for Passing Pardons to such as shall
desire the same. Provided always, That this Our General Pardon shall not extend
to any person that were in actual Arms against Us in the late Rebellion in the
West, who being now within this Realm, shall not within Three Months after the
Publication hereof, lay hold of this Our Pardon, and Testify the same by their
peaceable returning to their former Habitations, Labors and Employments.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Tenth day of March 1685. In the Second
Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1685.


