royal coat of armsA PROCLAMATION Against all Persons who have intrometted with
the Goods of Forefaulted Rebels and Traitors, etc.
JAMES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as We understanding, that several persons do at their own hand
Intromet with the Goods and Gear of those Rebels and Traitors lately forfaulted
by Our Parliament and Justice-Court, and others Fugitives and Rebels from Our
Laws; and more especially, Cut and Destroy the Woods, Trees, Plantings, and
Orchards of the Lands lately belonging to them, in high Contempt of Our
Authority, and to Our Enorm Prejudice, these Lands being annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Our Ancient Kingdom. And We being Resolved, that the
former Transgressors, as well as these who may hereafter be guilty of the said
Crimes, may be brought to condign Punishment: Do with Advice of Our Privy
Council, hereby strictly Require and Command all Our Sheriffs, and other
Magistrates within whose Jurisdiction the foresaid Abuse and Crimes have been
committed, to make strict Inquiry and Trial anent the Delinquents, and Sentence
and Punish them as well for their by gone Guilt aforesaid, as for what may be
done by them or any others in time coming, according to Our Laws and
Proclamations, as Committers of Thieft, and for Reset of Thieft. Certifying
hereby, Our said Sheriffs and other Magistrates, that if they fail in their
Duty herein, they themselves shall be liable, for concealing, to the same Pains
and Penalties, which might have been, or may be Incurred by the said
Transgressors, besides being otherways punished, as Our Council shall think
fit. And for Encouragement of such as shall any ways Discover either the
Negligence, Tolerence, or Connivance of Our said Magistrates, or the
Transgressors, so as they may be found guilty by Sentence. We hereby Declare,
That those Informers and Discoverers shall have for their Reward, the one half
of their Fynes, the other half thereof being to be paid in to Our Cash-keeper
for Our Use. And that Our pleasure in the Premises may be known; Our Will is,
and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters
seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and all the other
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom; and thereby
open Proclamation, in Our Royal Name and Authority make Publication of Our
Pleasure in the Premises that all Persons concerned, may have notice thereof,
and give Obedience accordingly, as they will be answerable; and Ordains the
Sheriffs of the several Shires to cause Publish this Proclamation.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Eleventh day of August, 1685. And of
Our Reign the first Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. COL MACKENZIE,
Cls. Sti. Concilij.
God save the King.
Edinburg, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, This may be Reprinted at London August the 21th. for J. C. 1685.


