The Absolution of A PENITENT, According to the DIRECTIONS of the Church of
England, With Respect to Sir W. Perkins, Sir J. Friend, and Mr. Cranburne,
lately Executed for High Treason.
Against Mr. COLLIER.
In a Letter from the Country to a Friend in London.
SIR,
I Have received Mr. Colliers Defense of himself, against the Remarks that have
been printed upon his Absolving of Sir William Perkins, and shall give you my
thoughts of it, with the same freedom that you desire them. I am sorry (since
you seem in some degree to be possessed with a favorable Opinion of his
Behavior) that I am forced to say, that my Sentiments are, That he has neither
acted Wisely, nor defended himself modestly upon this occasion; and as in the
Fact he proceeded without due Consideration, so in his Vindication he has
prosecuted it with Confidence and ill manners. You know my way, and therefore
will, I hope, take the less offense at the roughness of the Expressions; the
rather, because the Paper I write against, has given such provoking occasion.
But to proceed, as he says, let us hear how he be speaks the matter.

And First, He complains that his Presence and officiating at Tyburn, has been
too hotly censured, and very much misunderstood; he should have said,
Misrepresented for the sake of Friendship, and for a Token of Agreement between
the Old Church and the New. I cannot imagine in the name of Goodness, what he
means, by endeavoring to possess us, that we are mistaken. Would he persuade
us, That Sir William was Innocent of the Crime for which he suffered? Or, will
he inform us, That he did acknowledge the Blackness of it to him, with his
willingness to make all possible Reparation, and the Justice of his Execution,
particularly with regard to that Crime for which he was condemned, as Mr. King
had done before, to his Reputation be it remembered? Or, in fine, Would he deny
that he gave him Absolution? for this was the occasion of the Censures he
complains of, and that at which the Offense was taken. That a Man who stood
sentenced not barely as an Instrument, but also as a Contriver, and prime
Manager of the most Barbarous and Ungenerous Design of Assassinating the King
in cold Blood, should, without making a Public Abhorrance of the Wickedness of
the Intention, and showing the most sincere Disposition to give Satisfaction to
those he had endeavored to Injure; I say, here lay the Stumbling Block, that
such a Man, though he had done none of all this, should nevertheless, obtain so
easy and so glorious an Absolution! Surely this, whatever he may think, could
not but seem something Extraordinary.

But let us hear now his Report of the Case, for the better juding of the
Matter.

By which he acquaints us with his Visiting Sir William from time to time, and
at last, of his being refused that liberty from Wednesday till Friday at the
Place of Execution; from whence he infers, the Necessity of his Absolving of
him there. And now for my life, I cannot see why this must necessarily follow,
that because he could not Absolve him at Newgate, therefore he was obliged to
do it at the Gallows: This looks as if he was resolved to do it Right or Wrong,
in despite of all Opposition. But Sir William, he says, had Qualified himself
for Absolution, and therefore it could not be denied him. But how does that
appear? Let us see what Qualifications the Church of England requires of such
as desire to receive that Benefit from her Ministers, which consists in the
following particulars. First, That he be of a right Faith. Secondly, That he
repent him of all his Sins, which Repentance made known by his forgiving freely
from the Bottom of his Heart all Offenses against him; That he ask forgiveness
of whosoever he has Offended; And if he has done Injury or Wrong, that he
make Amends to the uttermost of his Power, etc. (For if the Injured Person
cannot be Forgiven of God, unless he remits that injured him, how shall he that
Wrongs others, and makes not Restitution hope for Pardon? And this Restitution
ought to be such, that to the extent of his Capacity, the Injured Person may no
Looser, nor in Danger of Suffering, either in Body or Estate by him.) These
things the Minister ought to exhort him to; if Mr. Collier did so, it seems Sir
William made little Account of his Exhortation, or else the Misunderstanding
was extraordinary between them.

For if Mr. Collier did set before him the Horridness of the Design to Murder
the King, and the Unnaturalness of his Assisting to introduce a Foreign Power
upon us, how came it that he did not press him to publish his Sorrow and
Repentance for having engaged therein, by inserting a Declaration of it to the
World, in that Paper which he believed he intended to leave behind him? Why did
not he urge him to make amends, by the Discovery of those Men, who he knew were
disposed through his means, to execute so great a Villainy? Must Compassion for
such Miscreants, overbalance the Consideration of the Life of a Prince left
to hazard, and the Embroiling of a Kingdom in War and Bloodshed? This may seem
to some Men, something like a Hero, but I am sure it is no Virtue to qualify a
Christian for the Pardon of his Sins. Sure Mr. Collier was so tender of his
Penitent as to omit these things; which yet, if we may judge by the visible
Effects, we have but too much Reason to fear he did. God deliver us from such
Compassion, as Sacrifices the Innocent to the Guilty, and gives Advantages to
such as would bring Ruin upon the Nation.

But not to lose our Defence-Maker, where he is now among his Particulars,
says, Some are offended at the Performance with Imposition of Hands, which he
justifies to be an Innocent and Ancient Custom. To which I reply once again,
that it was neither the Matter nor the Form, nor the Circumstances of Place
confider'd in themselves, that were so Offensive, but the unqualify'd State of
the Man, as appeared after by his Speech more plainly, to receive so Frank and
Pompous an Absolution. From such unworthy Prostitution of the Office of the
Church, arose the Scandal. Others, says he next, are shocked at the thing it
self. The Presumption of admitting a Person charged with so high a Crime, to
the benefit of Absolution; which, he says, is concluding too fast. And Answers
by the way of Query, Are all Damned that are cast in a Capital Indictment? If
so, continues he, then why are they Visited by Divines, exhorted to Repentance,
and have time allowed them to prepare for Death, and so forth. But if this
Gentleman be not too much in haste, I would fain know of him, for what sort of
People be designed this wise Query? Does he really think, that there are any
such as believe, that a Man condemned by the Law, is thereby made utterly
incapable of Repenting, and of receiving Mercy in the other World? I defy him
to point out to us any such; and in return I must tell him, that he does not
put the Question fair, but seems rather to shun it by a disingenious Evasion.
He knew well enough, that the Offense Was taken, as I said before, at the small
or no appearance, that there was of Sir Williams being in a State to receive
the Benefit of Pardon. Here he repeats again, That he had qualified himself,
and insinuates, that he had Recollected, Repented, and Resigned himself. The
consequences of which Acts, we afterward saw manifestly by his Behavior, with
respect to one of the chief, if not the greatest Crime that he could ever be
guilty of; which he Recollected with an Excuse, repented of without asking
Pardon, or making any Reparation for, but what he was forced to, which made up
his Resignation, and completed his Penitence. And where now shall we find
Reason to conclude, that Sir William was released in Heaven? Where are, I ssay
once again, those Marks of that deep sorrow, and hearty contrition which are
requisite on such Occasions? It Is true, we may and do hope, almost against
Hopes; but to be so positive in such Circumstances, was to conclude too fast by
his Favor. This I can assure Mr. Collier, that even some of his own Friends
think, the best they can say for him in this matter, is, that he has been
imposed upon, and that his Good Nature had in this Juncture, gained the
Ascendant over his Reason.

Page 4. He repeats again the Reason why he gave it him in Public; but this is
little to the purpose. The Grand Question is not so much, Why he did not give
it him privately? As, Why he gave it him at all? Hic Labor, hoc Opus. The rest
is mere Evasion, and a sly Eluding of the Difficulty. It is objected, says he,
That Sir William confessed himself acquainted with (he might have said, Privy,
however) to the intended Assassination. And here we have him fencing again with
his Queries; Did he tell it to me? If he did, say we, the Satisfaction he made
thereupon, was but very Indifferent: If he did (continues Mr. Collier,) Have I
revealed it, or any part of his Confession? Oh no: Then he had been within the
reach of the Cannon, and in danger of being made utterly Irregular: And he that
falls under that Curse, is for ever incapable of officiating, or giving any
more Absolutions. But let us see what the Canon it self says, for this Man is
endeavoring to make Black White to us, for all his show of Modesty. The Canon
is the 113, where it is provided, that Ministers may present Scandalous
Offenders: There is this Exception, That if any Man confess his Secret, and
hidden Sins to the Minister, for the unburthening of his Conscience, and so
receive spiritual Consolation and Ease of Mind from him; we do not any way bind
the Minister by this Constitution, but do straightly charge and admonish him,
That he do not at any time reveal and make known to any, the Crime committed to
his Secrecy, except they be of such Crimes, as by the Laws of this Realm, his
own Life may be questioned for concealing, under pain of Irregularity.

And now SIR, What can any one see here, that should compel Mr. Collier to
conceal what Sir William confessed to him of the Assassination? Nay rather,
Does not this last Exception oblige him to make known what he revealed to him,
it being provided particularly for the Security of the Realm; and when the
Matter disclosed, is, concerning the Assassination of the KING, surely it falls
under this Provision, without making so very large Suppositions. Sir William
could not tell him This for so great a Secret; it was Notorious at his Trial,
and all the World saw it proved against him. The Reserve in the Canon, was
intended to prevent the hurting of Men's Reputation, by Publishing such Faults;
which when known, would serve only to increase uncharitable Censures among
Neighbors; and for an Encouragement to a free and ingenuous Confession, and
not to stifle such Crimes and Practices as, should they take effect, would
invole us in the most miserable Confusion. If Sir William did confess
ingenuously, and like a true Penitent, he must have revealed the whole Design
to him; which had obliged Mr. Collier to press him to make a full Discovery,
and upon Denial, to refuse him Absolution. This was the least that could be
expected of him; and I appeal to any Man, Whether Mr. Collier acting so
contrary, has not given too much occasion for the Accusation against him of
Misbehaviour: But it seems it is necessary, That the Justice of the Nation be
Arraigned in every particular, and that these Men are agreed to acquit one
another. In fine, The whole Demeanor of Mr. Collier in this Affair, seems to
me, to be most surprising and unaccountable, that he should have, as I said, so
much Compassion for the Criminal, and so little Consideration of his Crime;
that he should first act so very unadvisedly, and then defend himself with so
much Shifting and Disingenuity. The best of his Defense, amounting to no more,
than endeavoring to represent himself Ignoramus. Has he revealed to me? Did I
see it in the Votes? Here I would ask Mr. Collier, How he came to be so
indifferent on this occasion? The Expectations from that Transaction were
great, and the News of it public beforehand. (The Report being made on
Thursday.) Methinks he who had been debarred the Liberty of Visiting him, it
may be upon that very occasion, should have had so much concern for his Care,
as to use all possible means to be informed of the Deportment of his Penitent,
in order to the great Work he was desired to perform for him, How did he know
what he might say to them? But he seems to have acted on this Occasion, like
those good humored Fathers, who out of tenderness to their Children, are
compliant, and sooth them in their Faults. Neglecting the more wholesome Rules of
Discipline, give me leave to say Sir, That as Sir William gave little sign to
the World of his Sorrow for his Guilt, which yet he ought to have done, he
having offended all; so in my opinion, Mr. Collier has in his Paper, done as
little either for his own or Sir William's Vindication. For my part, I cannot
perceive any thing in it, that should hinder us from being still of the
opinion, That he has behaved himself ill, and given just occasion for the Bill
against him. It is not the wiping of his Mouth, and saying with singular
Modesty, Wherein have I done harm? It Is not an unreasonable Complaint of
Hardships of his own procuring; it is not his disclaiming the Methods of
Murder, while he absolves and defends the Conspirators, both without and
against Authority, and the Laws of Common Justice and Humanity: Nor in fine,
it is none of all These, together with his very civil Reflection of Railing,
Mercinariness, and Malice, upon those that warn the World of the Evils of such
Practices, that will justify him before God or Man. But we shall still continue
to believe, That either Sir William learned his Behavior of Mr. Collier, or
that Mr. Collier has made his Defense by the Example of Sir William.

And now Sir, I Suppose you think it high time, that I should recollect and
make an end of this Letter, which that I may do the sooner, I shall pass over
his Outcry of the Priesthood, the Religion, and the Liturgy; it is pity he has
not joined the Cause for the greater Efficacy, together with his impertinent
and saucy Advice to the Clergy, with his distinguishing note of Ignorance upon
their People, and his Magisterial Menace, If for the future they do not teach
them better.

His canting Address to those in Power, i.e. they who bear the Temporal
Authority, that they would rectify their Mistakes, calm their Resentments, and
put a stop to their Severities. Paulo majora canamus. I supose he would have
them reverse the Judgment against Sir William, reduce things so their old
Posture, that K. James might be replac'd in the Throne, and the Bishops in the
Tower; that the Laws which were made for the defense of the the People, might
be dispensed with to their destruction, by virtue of which Prerogative, we
might once again behold Jesuits the Privy Council, Popish Judges in
Westminster Hall, Officers unqualify'd in the Army, and our Colleges and
Schools made Seminaries of Superstition and Idolatry, which by never to be
forgotten Experience we know must follow, could these Men bring about what they
are so zealous after. But I conclude, heartily desiring that they may see and
acknowledge their Error, and that they would, while there is yet opportunity,
unite with Us in our Common Defense, against the Public Enemy, which is the
unfeigned Wish, and earnest Prayer of

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, P. H. J.

Land. Printed by I. Dawks in Wardrobe Court in Carter-lane, 1696.


