royal coat of armsBy the King, A PROCLAMATION For Proroguing of the PARLIAMENT.
James R.

WHereas Our Parliament begun and held at Westminster the Nineteenth day of May
in the first year of Our Reign, was by Prorogations continued to the Tenth day
of May last past, and was then further Prorogued to the Two and twentieth day
of November next ensuing: And Our Royal Intention being to Prorogue Our said
Parliament to a further day; and being willing for the great Ease of Our Loving
Subjects, the Lords, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of Our said Parliament, to
dispense with their Attendance at Westminster at the day prefixed: We have
thought fit, with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Publish and Declare Our
Royal Will and Pleasure to be, that Our said Parliament be Prorogued from the
said Two and twentieth day of November next ensuing, to the Fifteenth day of
February next ensuing, to be holden then at Westminster. And Our said
Parliament is hereby Prorogued from the said Two and twentieth day of November
next ensuing, to the Fifteenth day of February next ensuing, to be held at
Westminster. And Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby strictly Require
and Command Our said Loving Subjects, the Lords, Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of Our said Parliament, that accordingly they give their Attendance
at Westminster upon the said Fifteenth day of February next ensuing, as they
will Answer the contrary at their Perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Eighth Day of October 1686. in the Second
Year of Our Reign. God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, ^^^^^ers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1686.


