I2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King, A PROCLAMATION For Restraining the Number and Abuses of Hackney
Coaches in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs
thereof, and Parishes comprised within the Bills of Mortality.
JAMES R.

WHereas Complaint has been made unto Us by diverse of Our loving Subjects of
the great Grievance and Annoyance, which the multitude of Hackney Coaches
lately set up, and now Driven about the Streets of Our City of London and
Westminster, and Suburbs of the same, are to them in their respective Trades
and Businesses; and also of the great want of some good Rules and Orders to be
observed by all such Persons, as are or shall be permitted to Keep and Drive
Hackney Coaches about the said Streets. And whereas the undoubted Power of
Punishing, Removing, Correcting and Restraining all public Nusances,
Annoyances and Disorders in the common Streets, Highways and Passages both of
Right belong unto Us, and having taken the same into Our Princely
Consideration, and being desirous to remove all Grievance and Annoyance from
Our loving Subjects, and to provide against the same in the best manner that We
can, We have thought fit, inorder to the remedying the Mischiefs and
Grievances aforesaid, to Constitute and Appoint by Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England, Our Trusty and VVelbeloved John Phelipps, Colonel Thomas
Napier, Thomas Price, Richard Sheldon, and Jerome Nipho, Esquires, to be Our
Commissioners for the Licensing Regulating, Ordering, and Governing, according
to the Instructions thereunto annexed; all Hackney Coaches to be Let and Driven
for Hire about the said Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs
thereof, or within the several Parishes comprised within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality: And to the end the Regulation intended by Our said Commission may be
effectual for the benefit of Our Subjects, We do by th^s Our Proclamation, with
the Avice of Our Privy Council, strictly Prohibit and Forbid all and every
Person and Persons whatsoever, from and after the Tenth day of December next
ensuing the Date hereof, which shall not be Licensed by Our said Commissioners,
or Three or more of them, to Stand with, or Drive for Hire any Hackney Coach in
any the Streets or Passages in or about the Cities or Places aforesaid, upon
pain of incurring Our high Displeasure, and receiving condign Punishment, as
Contemners of Our Royal Will and Command, and be further Prosecuted and
Punished for the said Abuses and Annoyances, by Fine, and such other ways as by
the Laws of this Our Realm are provided against such as commit public Nusances
in the public Streets and Highways: And for the due Execution of Our Pleasure
herein, We do further Charge and Command the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of Our
City of London, that they in their several Wards, and Our Justices of Peace
within Our said Cities of London and Westminster, and the Liberties and Suburbs
thereof, and all other Our Officers and Ministers to whom it appertains, do
take especial care in their respective Limits, That this Our Command be duly
observed, and that they from time to time Return the Names of all those who
shall wilfully Offend in the Premises, to the Commissioners for Licensing and
Regulating Hackney Coaches for the time being, to the end that they may be
proceeded against by Ind^cements and Presentiments for the Nuisance, and
otherwise according to the Severity of the Law, and demerits of the Offenders.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 25th day of November 1687. In the Third
Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1687.


