HIS MAJESTY'S ROYAL LETTER TO HIS PRIVY COUNCIL OF SCOTLAND, Concerning HIS
INDULGENCE.
JAMES R.

RIGHT Trusty and Right Wel-beloved Cousin and Counsel Right Trusty and Right
Wel-beloved Counselors, Right Trusty and entirely Beloved Cousins and
Counselors, Right Trusty and Right Wel-beloved Cousins and Counselors, Right
Trusty and Wel-beloved Cousins and Counselors, Right Trusty and Wel-beloved
Cousins and Counselors, Right Trusty and Wel-beloved Counselors, and Trusty
and Wel-beloved. Counselors. We greet you well. Whereas by Our Letter of the
First (...) of this Instant, amongst other Things, We did Recommand to you, To
take Care, That any of the Presbyterians, sho^^ not be Allowed to Preach, but
such only, as should have y^ Allowance for the same; And that they, at
receiving the ^dulgence therein mentioned, should take the Oath contain^ Our
Proclaimation, Bearing date, the Twelfth Day of February last past: These are
there to let You know, that thereby We meant such of them as did not formerly
take the Test ^y other Oath; But if nevertheless, the Presbyterian Preachers
does scruple to take the Oath, or any other Oath whatsoever, and that you shall
find it Reasonable or Fit to grant the Our Indulgence, so as they desire it
upon these Terms: It is now Our Will and Pleasure, We do hereby Authorize and
Require you, to grant them, or any of them Our said Indulg^ without being
Obliged to take, or swear the Oath in Our said Proclaimation mentioned, of
other Oath whatsoever, with power unto them, or any of them Respectively, to
enjoy the Be of the said Indulgence, (during Our Pleasure only,) or so long as
you shall find that they be themselves regularly and peaceably, without giving
any cause of Offense to Us, or any in Au^^^ rity and Trust under Us in Our
Government:) For doing whereof, these presents shall be to (...) and them, and
all others respectively, who may be therein respectively any way concerned
sufficient Warrant. And so we bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Thirty One day of March 1687, And of Our
Reign the Third Year.
By His MAJESTY'S Command.

MELFORT.

EDINBURGH, Printed at Holy-Road-House, by James Wa^^


