William ye III King of England Scot: Fran. and Ireland Prince of Orange etc.
Aetatis suae 38
portrait of William of Orange HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

AN Historical Account OF THE MEMORABLE ACTIONS Of the most Glorious Monarch
WILLIAM III. KING of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Prince of Orange,
etc.

Giving a true Relation of all that happened of consequence since his glorious
Expedition into England, from time to time; as also the happy Arrival of his
Royal Consort Queen Mary, and their being Proclaimed and Crowned King and Queen
of these Realms. The whole containing a Summary from his Birth to this day.

Together with the Names of several of those worthy Persons upon whom he has
conferred Honors and places of Trust since his being Proclaimed.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by H. Rhodes, next door to the Swan
Tavern, near Bride-lane in Fleet Street. 1689.

LICENSED, April 24: 1689.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE weight of this illustrious Subject might have required a greater
Undertaker, and made me have kept at an awful distance, whilst the most
celebrated Pens of Europe had interwoven and enameled the Birth and Rising,
Glories of so great a Prince, with all the Rhetorical and Heroic Accents and
Expressions that are capable of giving Life and Fire to the Minds of Men, and
raising their Souls to a highth capable of knowing the Center of true
Greatness; but with humble submission, not finding any forward in so invaluable
an Enterprise, I, though unworthy, have presumed to make this Essay, hoping it
will not be taken ill, since this, at least, is the Groundwork, upon which the
most aspiring Historian must build, when he consults the Golden Rolls of Fame
to raise a Pyramid of lasting Honor to the Memories of the World's undoubted
Worthies. In this Book, though small to appearance, you may find things as vast
in Extent as Virtue and Valor can enlarge them; and when I tell you it is the
Compendium of the Birth and Actions of the Great and Renowned Prince of the
House of Orange, with what more especially relates to his Redeeming us from
Popery and Slavery, by his generous Expedition, Valor, and Conduct, I might be
silent, since the World is sufficiently sensible of what I farther intend; yet
that Posterity may not forget so great a Deliverance, it is fit that it should
be Recorded till Time is swallowed up in Eternity.

You have, Reader, in this Book an Account of the illustrious Birth of a
Prince, born to be the Protector of the true Religion, and the Support (next
the Almighty Arm) of Christianity, coming nearest to its primitive Purity, with
his Advancement to early Honors, and his memorable Actions from time to time,
with the various dangers and hazards to which he has exposed himself, for the
Repose of Christendom, but more especially for the securing and promoting the
Protestant Religion. You have likewise a Discovery of Popish Cruelties, in the
wretched State and Condition of the Protestants in France, under the late
Persecution, from which you may gather what we might have expected and
suffered, had not this great Prince at so much Cost, hazard of his Person, and
indefatigable Labor and Industry, dispelled with the Rays of his early and
glorious Success, the cloudy Tempest that was breaking over our Heads; and to
be brief, you have an Account of all that has memorably passed from his Birth
to this day, and that more particularly in England, upon the
ever-to-be-remembered Occasion of his coming over as our Protector and
Deliverer, with the indefatigable Industry he has successfully used to
infatuate and defeat the Designs of our Enemies, and the Returns he has found
from a sensible and grateful People, and especially the Wisdom of the Nation
Assembled in Parliament, in Proclaiming and Crowning him, together with his
Royal Consort, King and Queen of England, etc. with the manner of the
performance, and what else can be required to set forth so illustrious an
History, the Subject of which may some Angel sound with a golden Trumpet to the
utmost Kingdoms of the Earth: which is the Wish of

Your humble Servant, S. J.

An Historical Account of the Life and memorable Actions of the most
Illustrious William Henry, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Prince
of Orange, etc.
WHen we undertake to Write of illustrious Persons, whose great Actions are
sufficiently known to the World, and whose Virtues and Candor have placed them
upon a Pinnacle of Fame, it is then that Rhetorical Strains, or flattering
Applause, is altogether to be laid aside, as vain and useless; for true
Diamonds require not the Art to set them off, like Counterfeits, but relying
upon their proper Luster make their value known, and shine in a kind of
careless Glory; wherefore considering the Illustrious Subject I am here to
handle, waving elaborate Circumstances, and Expressions not greatly pertinent
to History, or Matters of this kind; my Care and Endeavor shall be to keep to
Truth and Fact, and as much as in me lies to give a satisfactory Account of the
Birth and glorious Actions of a Prince, whose Fame has traveled with the Sun.

WIlliam Henry, of the Illustrious House of Nassau, our present Sovereign,
descended from that renowned German Family, that has been ever Famous, and to
which the Empire and all Christendom has been so much beholden, Son to William
of Nassau, Prince of Orange, by the Royal Princess Mary, Daughter to Charles I.
King of England, etc. was Born on the 14th. of November, in the year of our
Lord, 1650. his Father dying the preceding Month, after he had been Married
about nine Years, and done Actions worthy of his high Birth, in the Four and
Twentieth year of his Age, leaving this hopeful, Issue to dispell the Clouds
of Sorrow that began to spread themselves over most European Courts, upon
notice of a Death so unexpected, and a Loss so important.

This great Prince at his Baptism had for Godfathers the Lords States of
Holland, Zealand, and the Cities of Amsterdam, Delf, and Leyden, receiving the
Name of William Henry; and as he increased in years, under the Care of the
indulgent Princess, and such as were appointed to attend and wait upon him, he
gave early hope of what has since been sufficiently manifested.

At five years of Age he came to visit his Uncle, King Charles II who then was
at Breda, preparing for England, to take Possession of the Thrones and
Kingdoms, so long detained from him; where the King expressed his extraordinary
satisfaction to see the Prince his Nephew, and highly welcomed him; and soon
after the Estates General, having a particular Audience of the King,
recommending the firmness and fidelity of that Republic to his Interest, etc.
his Majesty in the most obliging Terms replied, That the Interest, if no other
Motives should induce him to it, of two Persons so nearly allied to him, as the
Princess Royal his Sister, and the Prince of Orange his Nephew, who live in the
Estate as part of it, must unavoidably endear it to him. However, there were
many Reasons of State, which obliged him to make with those Provinces a most
strict Alliance: And now the King's Departure for England being at hand, the
Estates General named Mr. De Gent. Deputy of Guelderland, Guelderwagen of
Holland, and Lampsins of Zeland, to wait upon the Queen of Bohemia, who was
then with the King, and the Duke of York, and Gloucester, who Lodged in the
Extroardinary Ambassador's House, to complement them on the Re-establishment of
the King, and the Revolution of the Affairs of England; and at the same time
Mr. Renswonde of Utreicht, Ripperdo of Hengelo, of Overysel, together with
Isbrants of Groaning, were deputed to the same Office, by the Princess Royal,
and the Prince of Orange.

The King being treated by the Estates General at the Hague, he sitting at the
middle of the Table-head, had on the Right Hand the Queen of Bohemia, on the
Left the Princess Royal, and there the Prince was present, a Seat being placed
on purpose for him to distinguish his Character, though in his tender years,
from Lords of great Rank and Quality, who were present at that splendid
Entertainment; and this order was observed whenever he Dined publicly with the
King, which he frequently did, as well at the Hague, as at other places; and
when the King left the Hague, his Highness, accompanied with Prince William of
Nassau, Governor of Friezeland, with sundry Nobles and Gentlemen, went before
him toward the Ships, on which, together with his Train, he was to embark for
England; and when he went on Board he was conducted to the Admiral's Ship by
the Queen of Bohemia, the Princess Royal, and the Prince of Orange, to whom at
his Departure he returned most obliging Thanks, and endearing Expressions of
Affection, which ended not but with his Life. These were the remarkable
Passages (as I may term them) in the Infancy of this great Prince: But it is
time to go on to those of his riper years.

A prevailing Faction growing up in the United Provinces, managed by Statesmen
that ambitiously strove to engross the Power, and enrich themselves as much as
in them lay, to overshadow the Brightness of this Rising Sun, to eclipse the
Family that had laid the very Foundation of the State, and by which Providence
would have it supported, though at the same time France pressed them with a
prevailing Army. Amongst those of the Faction, the De Wits were very forward,
for which, and some underhand Practices against the Person of the Prince, the
two Brothers, John and Cornelius, soon after felt the Rage of the People, who
out them to pieces; however those that remained struggled to keep themselves in
Power; and the better to do it, disbanded their experienced Forces and
Officers, putting in their steads the Sons of Burgher-masters, and such others
as they supposed would stickle for them against the Interest, of this Rising
Prince; however it lasted not, for within a while the French taking more
effectually the advantage of this oversight, swept away diverse of the Frontier
Towns, and entered deep, with great ravagement and devastation, into some of
the Provinces, which made the People consider of a General to lead their
Forces; whereupon in the beginning of the year 1672. the Prince was invested
with the Titles of Captain, and Admiral General of the United Provinces,
Honors his Ancestors had a long time meritoriously enjoyed to the
extraordinary contentment of the People, by having (next under God) been the
chief means of reducing those Provinces from Slavery into a State; when his
Highness, Marching at the Head of a few Troops, made good his Post at Nienkop
against the violent Attacks and Encroachments of the French, and so gallantly
ordered Affairs, that he made them retire with loss.

Upon the Ravage the French had made on the Frontiers, the people of the
Province of Holland grew discontented and displeased with their Magistrates,
attributing the Misfortune to their neglect; so that those of Dort broke into
open Mutiny, demanding to see the Megazines; but being put off, or refused,
suspecting some Treachery, they resolved to have the Prince made Stateholder,
nor would they by any means be appeased, till he was sent for, and confirmed in
that Dignity, which being passed into an Act, great joy ensued amongst the
People; and soon after the other Cities and Provinces consented to the like
Investment, and his Highness took his Place in the Hall of Audience, with the
Ceremonies the Dignity required.

Upon these Proceedings, and his Highness's returning ^o the Army at Bodegrove,
the Face of things were changed, and the late drooping Provinces seemed to take
new Life and Vigor; the French were manfully resisted, and the Bishop of
Munster forced from the Walls of Groaning by a slender Garrison, after the Loss
of a great part of his Army; so that now the Prince being very powerful in the
Hearts of the people, the De Wits were sacrificed to the popular Fury, for
conspiring against him and the Government, for the Burghers and others taking
Arms, and breaking in upon them, where Cornelius was imprisoned by the
Magistrates, and his Brother John at that time come to see him, they dragged
them thence with great Cries, and after a miserable mis-usage, hung them up by
the Heels in the Marketplace, and cutting them to pieces, sold their Joints
and Flesh by piecemeal, at great Rates, which were carried away by the Buyers
in a Triumph of Revenge.

The De Wits falling thus from their highth of Honor, Min Here Fagel was made
Pentionary with the Prince's approbation; and indeed deservedly, having been
the first, when only Pentioner of Haerlem, to open peoples Eyes upon the
inevitable Ruin that must have attended upon the continuance of the De Wits
Ministry, and thereupon the Elector of Brandenburgh wrote a most obliging
Letter to the States, to let them know he had received the News of the Prince's
Advancement and Settlement in the Honors and Dignities of his Ancestors, and
to assure them of his Friendship and good Will; so that the Provinces within
themselves being settled, it was thought high time to oppose the Insults of the
French; whereupon the Prince marched to dislodge their Out-gaurds, and came
upon them so unexpectedly and with so much terror as they lay at the Seige of
Utreicht, that he beat them into their Trenches, and took several Prisoners of
Note, which he commended to be kindly used, and sent to Amsterdam: And now
there being a Rumor that some Attempt was designed against his Highness's
Person, by some private means; so far it wrought, that from that time he has
been entreated to accept of a Guard for his Person, and although the season was
far advanced, he laid Seige to Woerden, a considerable Garrison, held by the
French, to the relief of which the Duke of Luxemburgh hasted, and was the first
time obliged to retire with considerable loss; but returning with a great
Re-inforcement, as the Toown was about to Capitulate, after an obstinate Fight,
and many killed on both sides, he put a succor of 300 Men into it, and with
considerable Loss retreated. This new recruit encouraging the Garrison, and the
Prince having lost in the Action Colonel Suylesteyme (who bore the fury of the
Attack, and faught valiantly, but being overpowered, and refusing Quarter, was
killed,) as likewise other brave Men, and now the Weather more incommoding his
Army than the Enemy, he thought it convenient to rise from before it, and drew
off without any molestation.

After these Proceedings, his Highness held a Council of War, and having given
necessary Orders, marched to Rosendale, where the General Rendezvous were
appointed, and there having mustered an Army to the number of 24000. he took
his March toward the Country of Liege, and obliged the Count de Duras to
retire to Stassemburgh with the Army he then had under his Command, being
desirous, if it might conveniently be, to give him Battle: but understanding
that the Count frequently shifted his Quarters, in a kind of a retiring manner,
the Prince after investing Tongeren with his own and such Spanish Forces as had
joined with him; and by that means not being able to draw him to a Battle, he
re-passed the Meuse, and after some longer attendence to that purpose, he
marched to Maestreicht, and sent a Party of Horse and Foot to take in the
Castle of Valcheren, which soon surrendered upon discretion; and there they
found a considerable Megazine, especially of Forage: And after that his
Highness having invested Charleroy without success, by reason of the sharpness
of the Weather, and taken Birch, an important Place, defended by three
Captains, and 300. Soldiers, Demolishing the Town, he marched through Brabant,
and put his Soldiers into Winter Quarters.

During these Transactions, the French in considerable Parties taking the
advantage of the hard Frost, marched over the Ice, and made some inconsiderable
spoil in the Villages, but upon the approach of his Highness they retired in
disorder, with considerable loss; and had the Passes been defended as the
States directed, most of them had perished in the Waters, by reason of the
sudden Thaw that ensued. About this time, to make amends for the mischief the
French had done Coeverden, was recovered covered a Place of great importance,
and from whence the Garison-Soldiers, by their frequent Inroads, had greatly
endamaged the Country. And now his Highness industriously labored to compose
homebred Differences and Discords, which he effected with the same facility
that attended all his undertakings, insomuch that all Animosities were laid
aside, and every Man applied himself to promote the public good of the
Country; and then he proceeded to visit the Fortifications, and give such
necessary Orders, as the Juncture of Affairs required.

The Spring advancing, the French King made great preparations against Holland,
invading them in Person with a powerful Army, whilst the Prince of Conde and
Duke of Luxemburgh were encamped at Utriecht, expecting Orders to fall into the
County. They had now likewise War with the King of Great Britain, with whose
powerful Navy the French joined; which made the the Prince to be very careful
in attending the motion of the French by Land, whilst the States prepared to
set out their Naval Forces; nor was such a Storm as then threatened the
Provinces, to be slightly regarded; for the French King laid Siege to
Maestriecht, with an Army of 42000 Horse and Foot, on the 10th. of June, it
being before blocked up by the Count De l' Orge, with three thousand Horse: In
this place was a Garrison of about eight or nine hundred Horse, and four
thousand Foot, Commanded by the valiant Monsieur d' Fariaux, who defended the
place with much Bravery to the last extremity, killing the French about 9000
Soldiers, besides Officers, and Men of great note; and then at the Petition and
earnest Entreaty of the Inhabitants, surrendered upon honorable terms, and was
soon after, for his Courage and prudent Conduct, made, by his Highness, Major
General of the Army: And at this Seige it was that the unfortunate Duke of
Monmouth signalized his Valor to the highth of Bravery; by which, and the
Courage of the English under his Command, the French King may be justly said to
make himself Master of this Place; after which, the French Army being drawn
off, and partly dispersed; the Prince drew together his Forces, and laid Siege
to Maerd, straitening it with 25000 Horse and Foot, which obliged the Duke of
Luxemburgh to bend his Forces that way; however the Place was taken without
much difficulty in four days, and Luxemburgh retired.

About this time the States entered into a League, with the Emperor and King of
Spain against France, whose Armies joining, at least in part, the Seige of
Bonne was pitched upon, into which the Prince of Conde had only the advantage
of putting 100 Horse, who passed the Sentinels under pretense of being the Duke
of Lorrain's Party, and 100 more attempting to do the like through the
Prince's Quarters, not only failed of success, but were most of them killed and
taken Prisoners, and 500 more, who were to support them, obliged to retreat
being beholden for their safety to the swiftness of their Horses: And now the
Town was closely pressed by the confederate Army, and the Governor summoned;
and although at the first he refused, yet perceiving the resolution of the
Besiegers to spare none they found in Arms if the Town was taken by Storm, and
the vigorous Attacks they made, at the end of seven days a Parley was beat, and
the Besieged granted honorable terms; they marched out to the number of 1500,
so that with little loss of Blood the Confederates became Masters of this City;
upon which the Prince of Orange drew off to Wesseling; and commanding in the
absence of Montecuculi the Imperial Army, he seized on the Castles of Lechnich
and Brevel; and now Success attending his Sword, he constrained the French,
although Turene had taken the Field with a considerable Army, to quit many
Places they conceived not to be tenable, or at least ways to draw out the
Garrisons to recruit their Army, which was not in a condition to make head
against the Confederates: Amongst those that they quitted was Herderwick,
Woerden, Utreicht, Bomniel, Campen, Elburg, and Hattein, and the Bishop of
Munster, who was in League with France, quitted Mempel and Stenwick; yet at
their Departure they exacted great Sums of Money from the Inhabitants in lieu
of their not firing the Houses; yet they dismantled many of them, and left
visible tokens of their Anger, for being constrained to quit those important
Places which they had gained at at a vast expense of Blood and Treasure. So far
did the terror of a young General in this Rising Glories work upon the minds
of this late insulting Nation, that they who had lately carried Ruin and
Devastation into the neighboring Country, began now to shrink together in their
own.

These were the principal Transactions to the end of the year 1673. and in
gratitude for the Services his Highness had done the States by his Valor and
Conduct, in freeing them from the Danger of their capital Enemies, and
recovering so many wealthy Towns, they confirmed to him the Dignity of
Stateholder, for the Provinces of Holland and West Friezeland, passing a Decree
to hold it not only for his Life, but to settle it upon the Heirs Male of his
Body, in lawful Marriage, for ever. Upon which his Highness for a time, made
it his Business with indefatigable care and industry, to settle the Province of
Utreicht, and other Countries that had been disturbed, and put out of order by
the Invasion of the French, and made such Reformation and good Regulation of a
Government that had been shaken and put out of frame, by the sundry and sudden
Revolutions, that he settled Matters to the admiration and content of all
Persons that had to do in it, so that they unanimously voted him
Governour-General, and Captain General of the Province of Utreicht, and the
honor to descend to his Heirs Male, lawfully born in Wedlock.

Whilst these things were doing, General Rebenhaupt, being aboard with a strong
Party, took Northom, and put a Garrison into it, beat the Munster Forces, that
in his absence were endeavoring to re-take it; and marched onward, stormed
Nigenbuys, yet the Garrison retiring to a little Castle, capable of making but a
slender resistance, were spared upon their throwing down their Arms, and
begging Quarter: But upon his going into Winter Quarters, and dispersing his
Men, General Negal, with the Munster Forces under his Command, recovered the
latter. However, the Bishop of Munster, perceiving the Tempest of War to gather
about his Countries, and finding the French King no way able to support him, he
thought it high time to treat of Peace, and accordingly clapped up one with the
Emperor, which more and more discouraged the French, so that the Marquess of
Belefouds, who succeeded the Marshall d' Humiers in the Netherland
Acquisitions, thought of nothing more than the deserting the Towns that yet
remained.

And in order to this, upon notice that the Prince was marching into Brabant
with 30000 Men to join the Spanish Forces, Tiel, Arnheim, Zutphen, and others,
were slighted, but not without great Sums of Money extorted from the
Inhabitants, to save them from Plunder and Burning; the Bishop of Munster
likewise relinquished Devenenter, so that all Overysel was at entire Liberty,
and had those Disorders the Enemy occasioned in Government rectified and
restored by his Highness's special Command, though for quitting these Towns the
Marquess lost the French King's Favor, and was for bidden the Court, the
better to color the Business, which his necessity, past all peradventure, had
obliged him to do; yet to repair this loss he fell into the French Conte, and
took Dole, Malins, and Becanson, making himself, in a short time, Master of
that entire Province: This made his Highness the Prince of Orange repair the
sooner to the Army at Bargen Opzoon, marching from thence to Mallins, guarding
the Fronteirs of Brabant, so that the French, though abroad with two powerful
Armies, durst attempt nothing farther on that side.

The Confederate Armies joining about the end of July, The Generals agreed,
That Count Souches should lead the Van, the Prince of Orange the Main Battle,
and the Rear-Guard to be commanded by the Count Montery, and so they proceeded
to oblige the Prince of Conde, who lay encamped with the greatest strength of
the French power, to a Battle; but not being able to draw him to it, and
perceiving the still fortified his Camp, the Confederate Armies drew off, in
order to besiege and take in some Places of Importance, which Conde no sooner
perceived, and understanding the difficult ways they were to pass, but he drew
out and pursued the Rear-Guard, as knowing the Vanguard and Main Battalia were
a great way advanced, and charged the Prince of Vaudemont, who consisted most
of Horse, which obliged him to send to the Prince of Orange for two Battalians
of Foot, who sent him three, under the Command of young Prince Maurice of
Nassau, and soon after the entire Army engaged by degrees in a doubtful and
bloody Fight, near the River Seneff, where at first the French had the
advantage, by reason the Confederate Army being, as is said, divided, could not
so soon unite as was convenient; however the Prince of Conde in conclusion was
obliged to draw off, and quit the Field, with the loss of about 7000 Men, and
amonst them sundry great Officers and Volunteers of note: Nor did the
Confederates lose less than 6000, and amongst them many Noblemen, besides
those that were wounded and taken Prisoners on both sides: And in this Battle,
which lasted for about the space of six or seven hours, his Highness the Prince
of Orange spared not to hazard his Person in the greatest danger, laboring
with his Voice and Example to encourage his Men, and restore the Battle where
he found it broken and disordered, by rallying the Troops and Battalions,
causing those that shrunk or gave back to advance, and with his Sword in his
hand, led them on to face the danger, omitting nothing that became a great and
experienced General; insomuch that General Souches, a Man of great prudence and
large understanding, gives a Character of him to the States of Holland in these
words.

I have endeavored (says he) to discharge my Duty, in attending his Highness
the Prince of Orange, during the famous, though bloody, Battle between the
Confederate Army and that of the most Christian King, the happy Issue of which
has proved very much to the Glory of the Prince, who showed, upon that
occasion, the Prudence of an aged Captain, the Courage of a Caesar, and the un
daunted Bravery of a Marius; all which, My Lords, is delivered by me without
Flattery, which is contrary to my Nature, etc. The Fight being over, and the
Confederates with a strong Party keeping the Field all Night, the Prince the
next day marched by Mons with his whole Army, and was recruited at St. Gilain
with five Dutch Regiments, and there he Quartered, whilst the Imperialists
marched to Queverain; when soon after General Rabenhaupt laid Siege to the
Greves, a strong Garrison possessed by the French, and as stoutly defended,
insomuch that he had been undoubtedly obliged to quit that Siege, had not the
Prince of Orange perfected it by the assistence he gave; for the Garrison
consisted of 4000 Foot, and 9 Troops of Horse, and in it 450 pieces of Cannon,
a hundred of them mounted, besides a large store of Ammunition and Provision,
yet this strong place yielded to the unconquerable Fortune of the Prince; for
finding the Imperialists and Spaniards not forward to hazard a second Battle
with Conde, who was by this time considerably reinforced, leaving the Gross of
his Army with Prince Waldeck, he came to the Siege of this place with 60 Troops
of Horse, which so animated the Besiegers, and daunted the Besieged, that the
Marquess De Chamilly, Governor of the Town, finding the great Breaches that
were made in the Walls, and the mischief done by the springing of the Mines, he
began to conclude it could not hold out a resolute Assault, and so coming to a
Parley, obtained honorable Conditions; by which means the Curb that this
strong Garrison had put upon the neighboring Countries was happily taken off,
and the Troops for the most part were put into Winter Quarters, and little of
the Action happened till the ensuing Spring; yet in consideration of the
farther Services the Prince had done the States, they of Guelderland offered
him as an addition to his other Honors, the Sovereignty of the Duchy of
Guelders, and the County of Zutphen; and though other Provinces intimated at
the same time that they would do the like, yet he would in modesty accept of
no other than that of Governor Hereditary of those Provinces; and being
confirmed therein, his first care was to settle the Affairs that had been
disordered, as prudently foreseeing that nothing conduces more to the happiness
of a Country, than a good Constitution of Government.

In the year 1675 the French by their great preparations demonstrating their
early Intentions to take the Field, the Confederates consulted the best methods
for the carrying on the War against France: But whilst that was doing the
Prince fell sick of the Smallpox, which Distemper having proved fatal to many
of his near Relations, created a sadness not only throughout the Provinces, but
almost every where where the news came; yet it lasted not; for in a short time,
through the diligence and industry of his Physicians, great signs of Amendment
appeared, which ended in a perfect recovery of his Health; when, as soon as his
strength would permit him, he hasted to the general Rendezvous, near Rosendale,
the better to attend the French King's motion, who was by this time in the
Field, and upon his March toward Brabant, having already besieged Limburgh, by
the Marquess of Rochfort,

The Prince before his Departure adjusted and reconciled several Differences,
and held a Conference with the Elector of Brandenburgh, who came to the Hague
to pay him a Visit. Great indeed was the Spoil the French made, quite
destroying the fruitful Country of Waes, which made the Confederate Armies
hasten to oppose them, and the Prince being at Rosendale, gave such necessary
Orders, as according to the measures that were then taken for carrying on the
Affairs, were best suitable: After which he marched with the Army under his
Command toward Mallins, upon notice the French were set down before Conde, the
King in person being in the Army, who caused the Siege to be carried on with so
much vigor, that before the Prince could put his Designs in Execution, in
order to relieve it, the Town was taken by storm; yet Quarter, after much
slaughter on both sides, was given to such as yielded, and they were made
Prisoners of War: And now his Highness having an Army of about 30000, daily
expected 10 or 12000 Spaniards to join with him; which conjunction soon
happening, he took a review of the Forces, and having an account that Bouchain
was besieged, and that the Governor, the better to defend it, had caused the
lower Town to be burnt down; a Council of War was held, in which it was
resolved to raise the Siege, or give the Enemy Battle; and accordingly his
Highness commanded the Prince of Vaudemont, to march privately with three
thousand Horse and Foot, to secure a Pass over the River Schelde, below Conde;
and at the same time the Duke of Holstein marched with 1500 Horse, and two
Regiments of Foot, through Mons toward Kieurain, to amuse the Enemy, and make
them believe the whole Army was coming to Attack them on that side, and
thereupon all the Forces marched without beat of Drum, or sound of Trumpet, in
two Lines; which made the French King, who lay with his Forces at Kieurain,
Soburgh, etc. to draw off, that he might cover the Siege, leaving the Marshall
d' Humieres, only with 4 or 5000 Men to guard the Pass; but upon the approach
of the Prince, finding himself to weak, he retired without disputing it, and so
his Highness, with the Duke d^ Villa Hermosa, encamped near Valenciennes; but
the French not being to be drawn out of their Retrenchments, i^ was not thought
expedient to attemp^ the forcing them to a Battle; so tha^ after may vigorous
Assaults the Governor of Bouchain capitulated and surrendered the Place.

The Prince of Orange perceiving thi^ Place lost, and that he could not forc^
the French to a Battle without great disadvantage, after some Councils held the
Siege of some important Place wa^ resolved on, and accordingly his Highness
laid Siege to Maestricht, having his Army increased by the Arrival o^ the
Osnaburgh Troops, under the Command of that Duke, and the Siege wa^ carried on
with great Resolution, an^ nothing omitted that the highest Conduct and Valor
was capable of performing; yet after a bloody and obstinate Resistance of the
Besieged, and the Approach of the French Army, wit^ a Resolution to relieve
them, his Highness thought it convenient to raise the Siege and draw off, which
he did i^ good order: A brief Account of which you may see in the following
Letter o^ (...) Here Dyck-Velt, sent to the States of Holland, etc.

Noble and Mighty Lords,
THE Attack upon the Horne-Work, was not made as was intended the 25th. of
August, but the day following before Noon, though without success, and the
Enemy being advanced with a very great Force to Tongres, it was unanimously
concluded by the Generals, that they could not be hindered from putting a
succor into the Place on the side of the Wycke, and that for several
difficulties that were foreseen, it would be the best and safest to draw off
the Troops from that side, and to put the whole Army into Battalia, without the
lines, near Lenaken; which was accordingly done the next Morning, and we
continued there till now. In the mean while all our Cannon, Ammunition, and
part of the Provision, together with the sick and wounded Men, where put into
the lightest Vessels, which could best pass, by reason of the extraordinary
lowness of the Water: Having seen all our Cannon embarked, and sent the Boats
away, some Skirmishes happened, in which the Enemy was still repulsed: It was
to have been wished that God would have been pleased to have blessed the
extraordinary Diligence, Vigilance, and Pains, which his Highness has with the
greatest Care and Application taken, during this Siege, and so great danger to
his Person, with better success for the good of the State; but seeing it has
not been his Holy Will, I pray that he will please, in other occasions, to give
the Arms of the State better success.


Philipsburgh being this while besieged by the Imperial Confederates, after a
furious Battery, and many vigorous Attacks, the Governor perceiving a general
Assault was intended, capitulated and surrendered it upon very advantageous
Articles to Prince Herman of Baden, who commanded in chief at that Siege.

The Prince of Orange having drawn off his Forces from before Maestricht, and
given the Marshall de Schomberg, who commanded the French Forces, all the
opportunity imaginable to engage, which he declined, thinking it sufficient
that he had relieved the Town, he decamped from Lenaken, and marched to St.
Tron, and there he sent the Regiments that had sustained the greatest Loss in
this Siege into Holland, to refresh and recruit, and so with the rest of the
Cavalry and Infantry, took his way toward Janche and Partuise, his Excellency
the Duke De Villa Hermosa leading the Van, the Duke of Osnaburgh the main
Battle, and his Highness the Rear-Guard, and although the French Army marched
after him, yet they attempted nothing upon his Forces, however the Troops being
alarmed drew up in Battalia to expect them. And now the Winter-season
advancing, and the time of Action over, his Highness left the Army under the
Command of Count Waldeck, and returned to Holland, where he was received with
many Demonstrations of joy, and proceeded to give the general Assembly of
States an Account of that Summers Campaign, so much to their satisfaction, that
the President in a most solemn manner congratulated his safe Return, in his
own, and in the names of all the States there assembled: As likewise did the
States of Holland by the Pensioner Fagel, acknowledging all the Kindness and
Gratitude imaginable, for the Care and Pains he had taken, and the Danger he
had exposed his Person to for the Honor and Service of the State.

In the year following, after a bloody and doubtful War, great were the
expectations of the People that a Peace would ensue; and the sooner to bring it
to pass, his Majesty of Great Britain labored by his Ambassadors and Envoys
in the Court of the Princes, and engaged for an Accommodation, after the
expense of so much Blood and Treasure as this vigorous War had exhausted, but
it went not on so prosperously as was wished by reason the French in the dead
of the Winter were upon their March toward the Netherlands, which retarded the
Negotiation, and by the first of March, they had invested Valenciennes with
between fifty and sixty thousand Men, under the Command of the Duke of
Luxemburgh, and the Count of Montal; nor was it long before the King came to
the Army with a great number of Voluntier Gentlemen. The Garrison of that City
consisted at that time of no more than 2000 Italians, Spaniards and Walloon
Foot, and of about one thousand Horse and Dragoons, Commanded by the Marquess
of Resburg, so that before any considerable Force of the Confederates could
take the Field, this City was formally besieged, and the Sieg^ carried on with
extraordinary vigor as well by throwing Grenades into it as battering it with
Cannon, running Trenches, Mining, etc. which so far facilitated the Enterprise
by continually allarming and wearying out the besieged, that the besiegers made
themselves Masters of the Counterscarp and Horne-work with little difficulty,
and turned the Guns they found there upon the City, which created such a
Consternation, that the Governor finding the Soldiers and Inhabitants no
longer willing to hazard themselves against the encroaching Enemy, and not
expecting any timely relief, he being at the same time wounded, and obliged to
keep his Bed, the Place surrendered upon discretion; yet the French King
commanded the Soldiers not to pillage it, and gave the Count of Risburg his
Liberty; when hightened with this success, he divided his Army, and at once
besieged Cambray, and St. Omers, the former of which, though well Garisoned, he
took without much difficulty, viz the Town, but the Castle, whither the
Soldiers retired to make their last Effort, held him in play much longer.

The Prince of Orange having by this time taken the Field, marched with the
Army under his Command, to the Relief of St. Omers, of which the French King
had no sooner notice, but he sent away part of his Army to strengthen that
Leagure maintained by the Duke of Orleance: Nor was it unseasonable, for the
Prince having passed many difficult ways as also the River Pene, gave the Duke
Battle, who had drawn off the greatest part of his Army to oppose him; and
though by the ill Discipline and Conduct of the left Wing, the disadvantage of
Ground and superior number of the French, after a long and doubtful Fight,
wherein he extremely hazarded his Person, and received two shots upon his
Armor; he found himself obliged to retire with some Loss: Yet such was the
Action, that the Duke returned not to the Siege in eight days after, for fear
of a second Attack, nor till he was assured his Highness had passed the Chanel
of Gaunt: and then after a furious Battery, the Garrison, who considered the
increase of his Army, and the little hopes they had of Relief, surrendered upon
advantageous Articles; and about this time News came, that the Citadel or
Castle of Cambray, after an obstinate resistance, had surrendered upon very
advantageous or honorable Conditions

This early success of the French King roused the Confederates, who hastened
their Armies from all Parts, and rendezvouzing near Alost, made a formidable
Body, all but the Army the Duke of Lorain had brought into the Field,
submitting to the Command of the Prince; which so amazed the French King, that
leaving the Marshall de Crequi, and the Duke of Luxemburgh, the former to
attend the motion of the Duke of Lorain, and the latter to observe the Prince,
he left the Field and returned to Paris; whereupon his Highness marched toward
Aeth, accompanied with the Duke De Villa Hermosa, and the Duke of Osnaburgh, in
order to dislodge the French that were quartered under its Walls, or oblige
them to Battle: but finding the Duke of Luxemburgh, who commanded there,
advantageously encamped between two Rivers, and well fortified, showing no
inclination to leave his Post, he at that time contented himself with the
making a flying Camp to prevent the French Parties straggling abroad, and
harrasing the neighboring Countries, and with the reft of the Army set down
before Charleroy, an important City, strongly Garisoned by the French, which
obliged the Duke of Luxemburgh, for the better strengthening his Army, to draw
the Soldiers out of diverse Garrisons, and by that means formed a Body of 40000
Men, with which he first endeavored to cut off their Forage and Provision,
coming from beyond the Sambre; and there the better to effect it, he strongly
entrenched himself, as knowing the cutting off the Forage must of necessity
distress the Prince, which accordingly succeeded, and was one of the chief
occasions that induced his Highness to draw off the Army and march to Sombrief,
and finding he could not oblige the French to a Battle without great
disadvantage, their chief aim being only to hinder his laying Siege to any
Place of note, he drew nearer Brussels, and there having given necessary
Orders, and left the Charge of the Armies to Count Waldeck, he passed from
thence to the Hague, accompanied by sundry Noblemen, as well English as
others, and there gave the States an Account of his Conduct, with which they
were very much satisfied, and returned his Highness their hearty Thanks for his
weary Enterprises, etc.

The French not appearing any ways inclinable to Action, or undertaking the
Siege of any important Place, his Highness taking leave of the States, embarked
for England, attended by the Earl of Ossory and diverse other Lords and
Gentlemen, on the Yatches sent for his Accommodation by His Majesty of great
Britain, King Charles II. and was attended by three English Men of War, and a
Squadron the States ordered to wait upon him, Commanded by Admiral Evertson;
there was also in his Train the Count of Nassau, and Mr. Odyck, and proceeding
with a prosperous Gale, safely arrived at Harwich the 19th of October, 1677.
where he was received by the Duke of Albemarle, and proceeding thence in the
King's Coaches to Ipswich, he was there very favorably received by his
Majesty, and a splendid Train of Nobility, as also by his Royal Highness, with
all the Testimonies and Expressions of real Joy and Affection, and on the 23d.
they arrived at White Hall, where his Royal Highness's Lodgings were prepared
for his Reception, and soon after it was known to what intent his Highness had
been invited over; nor did he on the 29th. of October fail, upon the Invitation
of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, to accompany His Majesty,
His Royal Highness, and the Court, to be a spectatour of the Cities magnificent
annual Triumph, and was splendidly entertained to his high satisfaction. Now
the King having chosen his Highness from amongst the Princes of Europe as the
fittest Match for his illustrious Niece, the Princess Mary, for which intent he
was invited to Court, he on the first of November declared his Intention in
Council, with which the Lords were extremely satisfied, as well in the Merits
of his Highness, as the security of the Protestant Religion, by so agreeable a
Match, and the better for the conservation of a Peace with the united
Provinces; whereupon the Council, to testify a farther mark of the contentment
they received, went in a body to Complement and Congratulate the Princess, and
then the Prince upon this happy occasion, as did afterward the rest of the
Nobility of the Kingdom, and others, a general satisfaction being every where
expressed; so that his Highness sent an Express to the States General, to
acquaint them with what was intended; the Sum of which was:

That in consideration they had by their earnest Wishes to him declared how
much they desired to see him Married, after he had well weighed the Reasons
that had induced him to it, in Conformity to their Desires, and the
Tranquillity of their State, he conceived he could not do better than to
address himself to the Princess Mary, eldest Daughter to the Duke of York, that
he had made his Request to have her in Marriage, both of the King and the Duke,
who had condescended to his Proposals and therefore he thought it requisite to
give their Lordships notice of it, expecting in return their speedy
Approbation, that he might the sooner hasten again to their Service.

Upon this notice of his Highness's Intentions, the States assembled to
consider the weighty Reasons that induced him to make so happy a choice in
placing his Affections on the most illustrious Princess in Europe, and with
much Joy and Gratulation approved them, testifying by a public Edict, the
satisfaction they conceived, and declaring the esteem of so great an Alliance,
made a resolution to observe it to the utmost of their power, and accordingly
sent their Approbation to his Highness on the 4th. of November, old Style, on
which day the happy Marriage was solemnized, the Ceremonies performed by the
Bishop of London, and the King gave the Princess: Nor did the News appear in
public but with the greatest Demonstrations of Joy imaginable, the Bells every
where rang, and Bon-fires flamed in the streets, and an universal consent
spread over the Kingdom, and Congratulatory Poems were made by the best hands
upon the occasion. But whilst every one was Reveling in Joy and Contentment,
the Prince had his thoughts employed upon the important Business of the State,
and having received the farther Complements and Congratulations of the Nobles
and Gentry, he on the 29th. took his leave of the Court, together with his fair
Princess, and with a Train of Noblemen and Ladies took his way to embark for
Holland, whither he was attended by several Men of War, and having a prosperous
Passage landed at Ter-heyde, and from thence passed to Hounsleyrdyke, where for
some time their Highnesses continued, and received private Visits till the
Magnificence that was to attend their public Entry into the Hague was
prepared; where upon their Ingress the Bridge was crowned with Garlands of
Triumph, and under them written,

Vxori and Batavis vivat Nassovius Hector Auriaco and Patriae vivat Britanica
Princeps. Here they found likewise the twelve Companies of Burghers drawn up in
Arms, and the People every where expressing their satisfaction with loud and
joyful Acclamations; and upon passing the Bridge 24 Virgins met them, singing
Songs prepared for the occasion, and strewing the way with fragrant Herbs on
each side the Coach wherein their Highnesses were; and arriving at the
Townhouse, they found a Triumphal Arch erected, through which they passed;
this Arch was beautified and adorned with a Sylvian Scene, and on the top a
Hieroglyphick of Amity, by the clasping of two hands, and a Motto, viz.

Auriaci his Thalamis, Bataevis dos Regia pax est. Then crossing the
Marketplace into the High Street, they found another Arch erected, with this
Motto, viz. Ingredere Auspicius Batavis Felicibus Aulam. and in the mean time
the Cannon was fired from all parts, and the Burghers gave several Volleys; at
Night the whole Country was enlightened with Bon-fires, and Fireworks of
sundry kinds and forms, and so with great joy and satisfaction passed the rest
of the Winter, little Action happening abroad in that season; yet the French
King made early preparations against the Spring, which obliged his Majesty of
Great Britain, as he had before designed, to labor to compose the unhappy
differences that had occasioned the expense of so much Blood and Treasure; and
in order to it he sent the Earl of Feversham to the French King, with
Instructions to negotiate a Peace between that King and the Confederates; the
purport of his Commission was to propose, That the City of Charleroy, Aeith,
Courtray, Tournay, Conde, Oudenard, Valenciennes, and St. Guilain should be
restored to the Spaniards, in consideration of which, the French King should
keep La French Conte entire; but this not succeeding, His Majesty of Great
Britain dispatched a Commission, fully impowring the Lord Hide his Ambassador
at the Hague, to make Alliance with the States General, mutually to stand by
and defend each other, till they could oblige the French King to Reason; the
English Parliament at the same time declaring strongly for it, and offering the
King considerable Sums of Money to carry on the projected Design against the
Disturber of Christendom.

The Alliance was to be carried on in order to the recovering a satisfaction by
such means as should be thought most expedient and best agreeable; and indeed
for a time it was vigorously maintained, the Parliament of England pressing it
with a more than ordinary Ardour, and the King sent the Lord Montague his
Ambassador to France, once more to press that King to a Compliance, making at
the same time new Levies of Horse and Foot: However the French King rejecting
the Propositions, was not idle, but made great preparations for War; whereupon
the King of Great Britain recalled his Forces that were in the French Service,
who were sent home without their Arrears. But whilst the Confederates were
agreeing about their Quota's or Levies, the French early in the Spring besieged
Gaunt, which being taken, by reason of the insufficiency of the Garrison to
maintain a place of that vast Circuit, they sat down before Ypre, which after
a resolute defense surrendered.

These Places thus lost for want of succor, made the Confederates draw out
from all Parts, the Prince of Orange being the first that took the Field, and
the Duke of Monmouth arrived at Bruges with about 3000 English Horse and Foot;
but the French King having done as much as he thought convenient at that time,
putting the greater part of his numerous Armies into Garrisons to refresh them,
he retired to Paris; but hearing the League against him continually
strengthened by new Alliances, and a Prohibition of the growth of his Kingdom,
he thought it no longer convenient to delay, but formed himself a Project of
Accommodation, to this purpose, viz.

That the Prince and Bishop of Strasburgh should be entirely restored to all
his Territories, Honors, Prerogatives and Goods, and Prince William of
Furstemburgh, his Brother be set at Liberty. That in relation to the Emperor
he would stand to his Declarations, insisting upon the Treaties of Westphalia,
offering to restore Philipsburgh or Friburgh. That to the King of Spain he
would restore Charleroy, Aeith, Courtray, Gaunt, Oudenard, and St. Guilain,
together with Chastlerains and all their Dependencies, but reserve to himself
Conde, Bouchain, Air, Cambray, Valenciennes, and Saint Omers, with all their
Castles and Dependencies, with La French Conte entire. That he would restore
Charlemont or Dinant to the Spaniard with the Emperor and Bishop of Liege's
consent. That the Confines between Spain and the Low Countries from the Sea
should be the Meuse, Newport, Courtray, Aeith, Dixmund, Mons, Oudenard, Namur,
and Charleroy, and those Bounds to be assured by those Places. That moreover to
the States General he would restore Maestricht, and allow the Commerce, as
formerly granted. That he would restore to the Duke of Lorain, according to the
Pyrenean Treaty, or surrender to him, excepting Nancy, all his Territories, and
in lieit of that City he would give him Toul, thereby only reserving to himself
a free passage into Alsatia. And farther demanded satisfaction for his Allies.
The proposals were not generally liked, yet after many Difficulties and
Refusals, the Treaty was at length signed by the Plenipotentiaries of France
and Holland, on the 11th. of August, 1678. yet the delays of the French King
proved extremely prejudicial to his Affairs, especially in lessening the
Reputation his Arms had gained; for whilst the Treaty held with indifferency,
and wavered without any certainty of coming to a conclusion, the Prince of
Orange having joined the Confederate Forces, they called a Council of War, in
which it was concluded that seeing Mons, a City of the Province of Hainault,
had been a long time Blocked up by the French, and that the Duke of Luxemburgh
was on his March with the Army under his Command, to prevent any Succors being
put into the City, that it was convenient to intercept him, and with this
Resolution the Prince and the Confederate Army set forward about the beginning
of August, and was joined in his March by six thousand Munsterians and
Brandenburghers, under the Command of General Spaen. The French upon notice of
his Approach removed from Soignes, where they had lain for some time encamped,
where the next day the Prince decamped with the Confederate Army, and from
thence marched toward Rockless, advancing the left Wing as far as the Abbey of
St. Dennis, that Place being the Duke of Luxemburgh's chief Quarters, facing
with his Right Wing Casteau, possessed likewise by the French; and although the
Passes were extreme difficult, which rendered the French more secure, yet the
Army being embatteled, his Highness commanded a Party to drive the French from
a Hillock they had possessed, which was performed with little difficulty; and
then he caused the great Guns to play upon the Enemy that had posted themselves
near the Cloister, adjacent to the Town; and though they strove to defend it
with their Cannon, yet after a considerable Battery, a Party of Dragoons
advanced, and after a sharp dispute drove them thence, and possessed the Place,
when in the mean time Adjutant General Collyer, seconded by General Delwick,
passed the Defiles, or narrow dirty Lanes, with admirable courage, contrary to
the expectation of the French, and drove them, after a strenuous resistance,
into their own Lines; when the Prince, accompanied by the Duke of Monmouth, who
fought by his side that day, fell in with great resolution and bravery,
encouraging by words and actions the Regiments that were advanced, and
signallizing his Valor above Report, which so animated the Regiments of the
left Wing that they followed each other till the Evening charging with great
resolution; and Count Horn bending the Cannon under his Charge against the
Battalions of French that were drawn up in the Valley, it greatly endamaged
them by battering their Ranks.

The Fight being thus begun, was carried on and maintained with much resolution
and bravery, the Prince, forcing his Passage to Casteau, which had been
Attacked by the Spaniards in the right Wing, where his Regiments of Foot-Guards
had the Vanguard under the Command of Count Solms, and was seconded by the
Regiments of Holstein, Roques, Sereres, and they supported by the English, who
through the natural aversion they had to the French, charged with such fury,
that the obstinate resistance the Enemy made could not sustain their
impetuosity; for after five hours dispute the French were driven from their
Post by the Regiments of Guards, who pursued them to the River Haines, on the
other side of Casteau: And in this Battle it was that the renowned Earl of
Ossory, who commanded the English, signalized his Valor; and indeed the whole
stress of the Battle lay upon the Infantry, the Cavalry not being very
serviceable in a Place of such narrow access, and so full of precipices. Night
putting an end to the Slaughter, the Duke of Luxemburgh finding his loss great,
and that he was no longer capable of making good his Post, drew off, under the
favor of the darkness of the Night, in much Silence and Confusion, and took a
new Post nearer Mons, covering his Army with a Wood on the one side, and on the
other it was secured by a River, leaving behind him most of the wounded Men,
with many Tents, and much Baggage and Ammunition.

The Prince upon this advantage, would have pursued the French to have given
them a total Defeat, and free the Town of Mons from the apprehension of Danger:
But whilst he was preparing to make a second Attack, an Express was sent him,
that the Treaty was signed between the States and the French King; however,
they congratulated his Highness upon this Success, in an extraordinary manner,
entreating him to be more sparing of their safety than to hazard himself in the
midst of danger; and the better to demonstrate at how dear a rate they esteemed
his preservation, they sent to Mr. Owerkirks (a Person who had enterposed
himself between the Prince and a French Captain, that in the heat of the Fight
was in a full Carier to charge him at adisadvantage) a Sword, whose Hilt was of
Massy Gold, a pair of Pistols inlay'd with Gold and a pair of golden
Horse-buckles.

Upon the News that the Treaty was signed, a Cessation of Arms ensued, and upon
the Duke of Luxemburgh's drawing off to the Country between the Muse and
Sambre, the Prince marched to Escousines, upon the Road to Nivelle, and there
being no farther Business in relation to warlike Action, he came to the Hague,
where he was received by the People, with the highest demonstration of Joy and
Acclamation; and this last success no doubt hastened the Conclusion of the
Treaty between France and Spain, which was agreed on the 17th. of November
following, yet it lasted not long, before the French King upon the claiming
several places in the Spanish Netherlands as Dependencies, blocked up
Luxemburgh, which obliged the King of Great Britain, Guarrantee of the Peace,
to interpose his Authority, as likewise did the States, by way of Mediation;
but the French King would not hearken to the quitting the claim he had laid,
unless the City of Luxemburgh might be put into his Possession, with all its
Dependencies, three Leagues round it; which being long debated, and the time
the French King gave to come to a Resolve being expired, without concluding any
thing of that Affair, the Marshall d' Humieres fell into the Spanish Provinces
with a numerous Army, and put them under Contribution, making great spoil, and
ravage in many places; and not so contented, but upon the Prince of Chimai's
(Governor of Luxemburgh) acting some Hostilities in their Territories, the
Marshall laid Siege to, and took Courtray, burning many places of lesser note,
constraining others to pay a Ransom for saving themselves from Fire; and in
conclusion, the Marshall d' Crequi came before Luxemburgh with an Army of
30000 Men, and cast a great number of Bombs into that City, which burnt and
demolished about Five hundred Houses, and so retired to put his Army into
Winter Quarters; and in the mean while the Negotiation continued between the
Arbritours to settle the Differences between the two Crowns; nor did they spare
any Diligence to create a good understanding, by proposing Equivalents; but the
Spaniards at that time, were so much averse, that the Mediators began to give
over the hopes they had conceived of accommodating Matters in dispute; nay the
Spanish Ambassador proceeded so far, as to press the King of Great Britain to
send over Forces to the Assistence of his Master; but the King told him, That
the urgency of his Affairs at home could not admit of sending Forces abroad,
but that he was willing to do the King of Spain all the good Offices that lay
in him, etc. as also to use his utmost Endeavors for the Peace and Repose of
Europe. But not satisfied with this Answer, they again applied themselves to
the States. General, but they being not willing to enter into any new
Engagement of War with France, the Ambassadors could not persuade them to make
new Levies, or to send any Forces to the Assistence of His Catholic Majesty;
nor could the Emperor give any assistence, by reason of the storm that
threatened him at that time in Hungary; so that indeed the whole State of
Europe being unwilling, or not in a condition to enter into a new War, it was
greatly hoped that this would oblige those that stood out to a compliance: And
the better to perfect an Alliance, a general Congress was held at the Hague,
where it was thought somewhat reasonable, that the True of Twenty years which
the French King had offered should be accepted, including the Allies on all
parts; which coming to a Resolve, and the Articles of Treaty agreed, amongst
other things, it was thought fit that the French King should restore to the
King of Spain, Dixmuyden, and Courtray, with their Dependencies, having liberty
to demolish the Fortifications; as likewise the other Places taken by force
since the 30th. of August, 1683. and that in consideration thereof, the King of
Spain should Surrender to him Beaumont, Luxemburgh, Chimai and Bovines, with
all their Dependencies; and to this purpose the Articles between the two Crowns
were concluded on at Ratisbon. And now the French King being at leisure, began
to grow exceeding troublesome to his Protestant Subjects, having, during the
former Transactions, put a very sensible Affront upon his Highness the Prince
of Orange; for whilst the Differences lasted between the French and the
Spaniards, they extremely wasted his Patrimony in Brabant, Burgundy, and
Luxemburgh, where the Prince of Isenguyn, supported by the French Interest and
Arms, had seized upon his Possession of Warnesson, Desburgh, Vianden, St. Vith,
Budgenback, etc. yet out of a generosity to his Country, in preferring their
Peace and Tranquillity before his own interest, he forbore at that time to put
in for Reparation; nor could the Violences the French King unjustly offered in
entering upon his Principality of Orange be less resented, by which Act he
seemed to have this farther design, viz. To hinder the Protestant Religion from
flourishing there; for upon the Persecution he raised in all parts of his own
Territories, many of the Protestants sent their Children to this Sovereign
Principality to be Educated in Learning; but this greatly displeasing him, he
sent his Orders to Monsieur Moran Super-intendent of Provence, to March a Body
of 2000 Men thither, under the Command of his Lieutenant General in Languedock,
to command the Magistrates of the Principality of Orange to send away all the
Children to their Parents, and not for the future to receive any more into
their Schools or Academies. To this unjust and unreasonable Demand they found
themselves constrained to consent, promising to give notice to the Parents of
the Children, that they might send for them home, hoping by this means they had
given the King satisfaction: But what can satisfy an ambitious and spightfull
Mind? for although this gave the Citizens hope they were in Peace, yet it
proved not so, for soon after Orders came to throw down the Walls of the City,
and the French Dragoons Quartering upon the Inhabitants, committed many
Indecencies and Disorders, compelling the People to Work in ruining their own
Fortifications, which being undermined, were blown up.

This News no sooner came to his Highness's Council, but they complained of it
to the States General, as a breach of the last Peace, urging, that Reparation
might be required for such unjust Proceedings against the Subjects of his
Highness, in the midst of a general Peace: Nor were the States wanting in
Writing to the King, and letting him know their Resentments for so great an
Injury, contrary to the Treaty of Nimeguen, pressing him for Reparation of the
damage his Highness had, contrary to Articles, sustained in the Violence done
to his Subjects: But they could get no other Answer from the French Court, but
that as for the Money extorted from the Inhabitants, those that extorted it had
no Order for it, and he had commanded Restitution to be made, and upon the
Peoples submitting to his Pleasure, he had withdrawn his Forces, and restored
the Inhabitants their Commerce according to their Desires; but as for the rest,
he alleged he had reason for what he did. This Answer, though it was neither
generous, nor pleasing, was all that could be got at that time, and so the
matter continues to a more favorable opportunity.

The Face of Peace now appearing amongst the Christian Princes, and Hungary,
being the greatest Scene of War, the States thought of Disbanding their
supernumerary Forces, and in order thereto advised with his Highness, who
assured them that there was no Person more desirous than himself to ease the
People of their Contributions and Taxes; but in consideration things were
scarcely settled, and that the neighboring Countries had not yet Disbanded, but
were in Arms, he thought it the safest way to continue them till they might be
assuredly free from the fear or suspicion of any sinister event, etc. And
according to this prudent and grave Counsel they were continued, it being
resolved by the States General, That the Extraordinary Forces should be kept up
to a farther time. And now his Highness being more at leisure, and desirous to
promote the good of his Country, betook himself to the reforming the Government
of Vtreicht, in which, during the Series of so tedious a War, some Disorders
and Irregularities had happened; which he redressed by prudently altering such
of the Magistracy as were looked upon unfit Persons to manage the Government,
and put such into their places as he found better capable of managing so
weighty a Trust; striving to promote and advance the welfare of the People at
no small expense of Pains and Treasure, contrary to the Methods of the French
King, who was then Dragooning his Subjects of the Protestant Religion, and
using all manner of ways to ruin them by Tortures, Confiscations, and
Imprisonments, and many such unchristian-like Proceedings.

And since we are come to this part, pardon the Digression, if I conceive it
not amiss to expose the Methods France has of late years taken to bring over
Protestants to the Church of Rome, that the Reader may the better distinguish
between the Actions of a virtuous Prince, who makes it his utmost care and
study to preserve and promote those that are under his Jurisdiction, and a
Prince that labors to ruin and destroy his Subjects.

I shall not trouble you with the Declaration put out against the Protestants
in the year 1669. or hardships they suffered before and since that year in
particular, till I come to the year 1680. In this year the King issued out his
Order, thereby depriving them in general of all manner of places of Trust,
Offices, and Services; reducing the meaner sort thereby to great distress, and
disanulling the more wealthy of what they had purchased with their Money, and
the price of their Blood: And the next year 1681, by a Decree of their Council,
all Notaries, Attorneys, Solicitors, and Sergeants, which made profession of
the Reformed Religion, were rendered incapable of their Employments; and the
next year the Lords and Gentlemen were commanded to discharge their Protestant
Officers and Servants; and in Eighty three, all Officers of the King's
Household, and those of the Princes of the Blood, were commanded to give place
to the Roman Catholics; and in a word, all manner of Persons of all
Professions, that were of the Reformed Religion, had a Prohibition by those
strict Decrees under severe Penalties: And so strict were they, that the
Midwives, unless Roman Catholics, durst not, but by stealth, perform their
Office, and by this means, some were constrained to suffer their Tongue to give
their Heart the Lie. These, for the encouragement as they pretended of
themselves and others, being called new Converts, were discharged from the
Payment of their Debts for the space of three years, and this was done the
better to disappoint their Creditors of the Reformed Religion with whom they
had mostly dealt: Nor content with this, by another way they quite discharged
them of such Debts as those of that Religion had contracted in common.

These Proceedings served only as a Prologue to that which was afterward acted
on the Unchristian-like Stage of France; for the Councils, influenced by the
Priests, who aimed more at the Estates of the Protestants than their Religion,
finding these ways not so effectual as they expected; and perceiving that many
of the more wealthy made over their Estates, and left the Country, exhibited a
Prohibition of selling, or alienating any Estates whatsoever, the King
annulling and breaking all Contracts, and other Acts, relating to such Sale or
Alienation, if it did not appear that after any such Act they did not stay in
the Kingdom a whole year; so that being deprived of all means to transport
their effects, and yet not suffered to enjoy them with any quiet, many
preferring a good Conscience before worldly Riches, proposed to leave all they
had, and with it the Kingdom; but this took no effect; for hereupon they were
forbidden it under severe Penalties, which drove them to so great a strait,
that they knew not what offer or proposal to make, finding every thing
hazardous and uncertain: But they were not long without new Proofs of Roman
Severity; for though they had already fleeced them, yet not so contented, the
Intendents in their Districts had orders to weigh them down, if possible, with
heavy Taxes, by charging them with those of the new Converts, who were
discharged from paying any, in favor of their pretended Conversion, or by
laying others on them, which they termed Duties; so that he who was before
assessed in the Roll for 40 or 50 Livres, escaped well, if he came off for 5 or
600, and those that delayed, or had not the Money, were obliged to quarter
Dragoons, and suffer Imprisonment till they had made payment. And to pass over
many things of the like Nature, though the Protestants neglected nothing,
either by way of Supplication, or endeavoring to justify their Rights, and
manifest the wrong done them before the Judges in the respective Provinces; it
was but like Water thrown upon lce, the more to harden it: But the Priests
fearing this manner of Submission might mollify the King, who is not over much
given to relent, they used all their Interests to push him on to a violenter
motion; so that the Papists gave out, he was resolved not to suffer any
Hugonots (so they called the Protestants) to live in the Kingdom; nor, like
Pharaoh, would he suffer them at the same time to depart.

The Project by this time being grown ripe for Cruelty, they began with Bearn,
where the Dragoons, committed their first Ravages, and after that, in High and
Low Guinne, Xantoigne, Poictou, High Languedock Vivarets, and Dauphin, with
some other places in those Countries; and after that in Lionois, Low
Languedock, Gevennes, Valees, Provence, and the Countries of Geix, and then in
Normandy, Bougoigne, Nivernois, Berry, and the Countries of Orleance, Tourain,
Anjou, Bretaign, Champaign, Piccardy, the Isles of France, and even in Paris it
self, and in all Parts where any of the Reformed Religion had Habitations, or
were fled for shelter; and the first thing the Intendents were ordered to do,
was to Summon the Cities and Commonalties, who were to assemble the
Inhabittants of the respective Places, professing the Protestant Religion, and
let them know it was the King's Pleasure they should turn Roman Catholics, or
they should be forced to do it; at which the poor people greatly surprised, in
an humble manner replied, They were ready to sacrifice their Lives and Estates
to the Service of the King, but their Consciences being Gods' alone, they could
not in that manner dispose of them.

Upon Refusal, the Dragoons who were at hand, were immediately sent for, who in
a furious manner seizing the Gates and Avenues of the Cities and Villages,
guarding the Passes that none might escape, they often came with their Swords
in their hands, crying Kill, kill, or else be Catholics; and wherever they
came, like the Locust, they devoured every good thing, being Quartered upon the
Protestants at discretion, with a Charge not to suffer them to depart out of
their Houses, or conceal any of their Goods, under great Penalties to the
Papists that should receive or comfort them; and having eaten up their
Provisions, and plundered all that was of value, which they sold to the
neighboring Catholics, they in an inhumane manner fell upon their Persons: And
now prepare to hear what even the Turks may blush to own.

After many Revilings, Curses, and Execrations, they proceeded to hang up Men
and Women by the Hair, or Feet, on the Roofs of Chambers or Chimney holes,
where putting Wisps of wet Hay on the Fire under them, they smoaked them till
they were almost suffocated; and when they had taken them down, if they would
not sign to an Abjuration they hung them up again, or tossed them to and fro
into great Fires till they were in a manner roasted: Under the Arms of some
they tied Ropes, and plunged them in Wells till they were half drowned,
swearing to finish their Lives there, unless they would promise to change their
Religion: Others they bound like Criminals, when putting to them the Question,
they placed Funnels in their Mouths, and pouted Wine down their Throats, till
having deprived them of their Reason, they obliged them to say they would be
Catholics: Some again they stripped naked, and pricked with Pins and Bodkins,
till they were no longer able to endure it: Others they led about by the Noses
with Pincers, and wounded them with Pen knives: They beat some with Staves and
dragged them, after much cruel usage, to the Churches, where they construed
their being present, though against their Wills, for an Abjuration: Some again
they kept waking, by tossing them from one Soldier to another, and throwing
Buckets of Water in their Faces for many Nights and Days; and the better to put
them into a disorder and confusion, clapped Kettles and Brass Pans upon their
heads, whereon they made a continual noise with the Hilts of their Swords, till
they had in a manner made the Party distracted: And where they found any sick
or languishing, thither they brought Drums and Trumpets into the Chambers, to
disturb and torment them from taking rest; nor did they in some Places forbear
to bind the Fathers and Husbands, whilst they forced and ravished their Wives
and Daughters before their faces: Of some they plucked off the Nails, of others
burnt the Feet, and blew with Bellows into the Fundaments of others, till they
were ready to burst; with many other Cruelties that Hell could inspire, or
witty horror invent, And if by all these Strategems they could not work upon
them to abjure their Religion and the Profession of the true Faith, then had
they noisome Dungeons prepared to imprison them in, where many of them
languished to Death; nor did the Rage against their Persons suffice, for they
demolished their Houses, cut down their Woods, spoiled their pleasant Gardens
and Ortyards, seized their Children, and thrust them into Monasteries, and put
them to be brought up under the tuition of Priests, and fold whatever was
saleable; and for those they found had escaped them, they hunted in the Woods
as for wild Beasts, miserably using such as fell into their hands.

In these cruel Proceedings of the French Papists to their own Countrymen,
there was a Decorum used; for, besides the Leaders and Military Officers, at
the head of these Tormenters marched the Intendents, and the Bishops, every one
in his Diocese; as also a Troup of Missionary Monks and Friars, etc. as for the
Intendents they gave such Orders as they thought most expedient for the
carrying on of the hopeful Conversion, and to restrain natural Pity and
Compassion, if at any time, which was but rare, it found place in the Hearts of
the Dragoons, or their Commanders: The Bishops were to take the Abjurations,
and to make a severe inspection, that it should be done in all points according
to the mind and intention of the Clergy, and the Missionaries were to be
assisting, in forcing the Abjuration. And when by this means they had forced
many to an outward compliance, they increased the sorrow of those that
persevered by sending them more Guests. Nor could the City of Paris, secure
such as retired thither, though Persons of considerable Quality; for upon
notice that several had fled the storm, and were sheltered in that great City,
leaving their Lands and Livings to the spoil and havoc of the Soldiers, they
were commanded within fifteen days to leave that Place, and retire to their
Habitations by a Decree of the Council; and although they humbly besought the
King to stop the Course of Cruelty that raged against them, those that
attempted it had no other Answer, than to be sent Prisoners to the Bastile; and
to prevent such as should attempt to fly from their Habitations, the Provosts
had Orders to scowre the Roads, and the Magistrates to stop and send back such
as they found removing, without exception: Nor were there Informers wanting on
this occasion; and if the Husband had concealed his Wife or Children, he was
tormented till he had brought them back again: Nor were some who pretended to
be new Converts, though for the most part the Off-scums and Refuse of Gaols,
less active than the Renegadoes of Algier to add to the misery of the suffering
People; nor would a bare signing the Abjuration serve turn, for they were
compelled to go to Mass receive the Communion, and tell their Beads, having
always Eyes over them; so that upon the least Information of neglect they were
severely fined, or thrown into their former miseries: Yet it pleased the Divine
Providence, that notwithstanding the Seaports were stopped and narrowly
watched, many of them got off and were kindly received in Holland and England,
and plentifully relieved, settling such as were capable of it in Business and
Employments: But upon notice of these Escapes, the Foreign Vessels in the
Ports were ordered to be searched and none to embark or be carried off without
he or she produced a Certificate from the Bishop or Curate, to certify him or
her a Roman Catholic; and several who attempted to escape were seized and
imprisoned as Traitors.

The storm, as to its fury, being a little moderate amongst the Laity, by
reason there was no great matters of Plunder to be had, they resolved at last
to begin with the Ministers, who had been hitherto pretty well secured in their
Persons, by the Edict of Nants, which allowed them limitary Congregations; but
the Court being of opinion that so long as they remained in France their
Authority would restrain the Protestants from changing their Religion, and
leave them but slenderly assured of their new Converts, the greater part of
which they well knew had done what they did by constraint; therefore in the
first place they labored to stifle their Writings, prohibiting all manner of
Books that should any ways instruct the Lay-Protestants, or were Written by
their Ministers: And although the French Clergy, to have it thought they were
not the Promoters of the Persecution, seemed unwilling to consent to the
Revocation of that Edict, yet it was soon after Revoked, and another made,
consisting of Twelve Articles. The first repeals and suppresses all former
Edicts in all their Extent, and ordains that all the Reformed Churches or
Chapels that are found in Kingdom shall be demolished. The Second prohibits all
sorts of religious Assemblies, of what kind soever, out of the Roman Communion.
The Third forbids the like Exercise to all Lords and Gentlemen of any Quality,
under Penalties of corporal Punishment, and confiscation of Estate. The Fourth
banishes all the Ministers, enjoining them to depart with in fifteen days-after
the publication of the Edict, under Penalty of being sent to the Galleys. The
Sixth promises Recompenses and Advantages to the Ministers and their Widows
that should change their Religion. The Seventh and Eighth for bid instructing
Children in the Reformed Religion, and ordain, that those who shall be
henceforth Born and Baptized shall be brought up in the Roman Catholic
Religion; enjoining their Parents to send them to the Churches under a penalty
of five hundred Livres as a fine. The Ninth allows four months time to such
Persons as have departed the Kingdom to return, or upon failure, to have their
Goods and Estates confiscated. The Tenth forbids all those of the Reformed
Religion, together with their Wives and Children, to depart, or to convey away
their Effects, under pain of the Galleys for the Men, and confiscation of Body
and Goods for the Women. The Eleventh confirms a former Declaration to punish
those that Relapse. The Twelfth declares, that as to the rest of the Subjects
of the Religion, they may remain in the Cities of his Kingdom, and Lands of his
Obedience, there to continue their Commerce and enjoy their Estates, without
trouble or molestation, upon pretense of the said Religion, on condition they
have no Assemblies under pretext of Praying or exercising any religious Worship
whatever.

The very day this Edict was published, so hasty were these Dragoon.
Converters, that they began to demolish the famous Church of Chreenton, the
elder Minister belonging to it being commaned to leave Paris within Twenty four
hours, and with all convenient speed depart the Kingdom; and thereupon he was
committed to the Charge of one of the King's Foot men, with an express Order
not to part with him till he was out of the Confines of France; but his
Colleagues had Forty eight hours given them to leave the City, and were
permitted to depart upon their Parole; and the rest had the time limited, but
with so many vexations, that none but Men of great firmness of mind could have
born it; for they not only denied them all their Movables and Books, but even
their private Papers, under pretense that they knew not whether they were
theirs, or belonged to the Consistory; but what was more cruel, they refused
their Fathers or Mothers, Brothers or Sisters, or any of their near Relations
to accompany them, though many of them were aged and infirm, and must, unless
supported by an extraordinary Providence, perish, without their succor and
assistence: nor was this all, for they kept from them their Children above the
Age of seven, and some, where they had a more peculiar spite against the
Father, that were scarcely weaned; nor would they allow a Nurse to the sucking
Children where the Mother's Milk was dried up, and she incapable of giving them
sustenance of that kind; and although they had Pasports, yet were they stopped
upon the Borders, in diverse places, by the malice of the Papists, under
pretense they must presently prove they were the same Persons mentioned, and
that there was no criminal Process, or Information charged against them, and
justify that they carried away nothing belonging to their Congregations; and
this they did upon no other pretense than to ensnare them by spinning out the
limited time for their Departure; for the days being expired, though they
themselves were the detainers, in plain terms they told them their time was
relapsed, and there was no hopes of escaping the Galleys.

But now the Ports, Ways, and Fords, and all Places throughout the Kingdom,
were so strictly guarded, and narrowly searched by the Officers of the Forts
and Customs, Soldiers and Peasants, that most of those that endeavored to
escape, were seized, and hurried to Prison, whereby the Gaols became thronged
and crowded; nor had they the favor of common Malefactors, but were thrust
into Dungeons, and noisome places, their Friends not daring to visit or relieve
them, by which means a great number perished through hunger, and other
inconveniences; and although the Twelfth Article promises to secure the Laity
in their Properties, Possessions, and Callings, yet the French Papists have not
forgot the Decree of Constance, wherein it is expressed, That no Faith is to be
kept with Heretics, as they call the Protestants, for the same cruelty and
inhumanity continued with as great Rage and Fury, where there was any plunder
to be had, or people of Note dwelling: In Picardy, Normandy, Le Berry,
Campaigne, Orleance, Neivernois, Belessois, and the Isles of France, nay, in
Paris it self, after the Edict was published, the Procurator-General, and some
other Magistrates, sent for the Heads of diverse Families, and declared to them,
That it was the King's positive Will that they should change their Religion,
and that if they would not comply they should be made to do it; and so
proceeded by Letters under the Princes Seal, to banish the Elders of the
Consistory, and such persons as they found, or at least conceived inflexible.

One thing is remarkable, viz. Monsieur Saignelay, Secretary of State, having
sent for to his House, under diverse pretenses; about 100 Merchants, and others,
he caused the Doors to be shut upon them, and instead of the business they
expected, presented them with an Abjuration, commanding them in the King's name
to sign it, declaring with a stern Countenance, they should not stir out at the
Door till they had done it: The purport of it was this, That they should not
only abjure the Heresy of Calvin, and enter into the Catholic Church, but
declare that they did it voluntarily, or without being forced or compelled to
it; and although they many ways excused it, yet being sharply reprimanded, and
terrified by his Threats, not being forewarned of such a danger, and doubting
the ill consequence that might attend it, they at last, not voluntarily, but by
constraint, signed that Abjuration: Nor by the power and influence of the
Clergy, did the Magistrates refrain to take away Children from their Parents,
to bring up in their superstitious way of idolatrous Worship, frequently
separating the Man and Wife, where they could gain upon the one, or the other,
to Apostatize. Nor did they spare to do this in Orange, the sovereign
Principality of his Highness the Prince, where the French King, by Right, has
no power, but taking away the Ministers by force, committed them to Prison; the
Dragoons, as it has been already hinted, doing there mischiefs much in likeness
as in other Places, as well to the people as to the Officers of his Highness,
to whom that Principality belongs. And much in this nature the Calamity of the
suffering Protestants continued in the Kingdom of France, to the year 1685. Nor
do they fail at this day to make good, as much as in them lies, what their
Clergy threaten in their Pastoral Letters, by making it their study to invent
new manner of Torments, the Magistrates being ever ready to assist them in the
Execution.

I might go on with this melancholy Story to the swelling of a large Volume,
and add to it the Cruelty of the Savoyards against the Protestants in the
Countries under that Duke, whose Miseries equal, if not exceed, that I have
mentioned; as likewise in sundry other places, and indeed in all places where
the Papists have power, but that the digression will seem too long; and
therefore I only give the Reader a taste of what has been served up in full
Banquets of Cruelty and Revenge, thereby to let those that are at this day
un-informed, know what they must expect, if they come into the hands of such as
account it meritorious to destroy Heretics, nor think it any Crime to break
the most solemn Oaths, and make void all Protestations and Engagements, when
they suppose it advantageous to their Interest, or Church's Cause: And note by
the way, that all of the Reformed Religion, who have separated from the
Traditions, Errors, and Idolatrous Worship of Rome, pass with them for no
other. These Proceedings however turned at last to the disadvantage of the
Persecutors; for, though for a time it enriched them, yet the number of People
that fled, or were ruined, occasioned the decay of Trade and Commerce, so that
those Revenues that supplied the French King's Coffers, and enabled him to vex
all Europe, by a tedious War being exhausted, notwithstanding he had taken
Luxemburgh from the Spaniards, he found himself in a low condition; for money
being the very sinews of War, and his Subjects not forward to lend, as appears
by the Answer of the Bankers of Paris, when he sent to them the last year for
several Millions of Livres, viz That they humbly begged his Excuse, forasmuch
that if they so far weakened the Bank, they could not support their Credit in
answering the Bills that should be drawn upon them; He then, I say, found that
when by such unjust means he depopulated his Kingdom, he fought against
himself: but to return.

The Prince of Orange all this while highly disapproved his Proceedings, and if
in Arms he did not oppose them, it was not for want of Will; but rather that he
on his part would keep the Peace inviolable, and rather bear, till a farther
opportunity, the affront and injury done him, in the wrong his Subjects of the
Principality of Orange had received, than involve the States in a new War;
which might have been justly excused, since the French were the Aggressors. But
to come yet nearer to the purpose:

Whilst his Highness was diverting and reposing himself from the Toils of War,
which now ceased by the conclusion and ratifying of the Treaty with France, His
Majesty of Great Britain, King Charles II. after five or six days
indisposition, departed this Life at his Palace Royal of White Hall on the 6th.
of February, 1684. not only to the extraordinary Grief of his Subjects, but of
all Europe, their Highnesses more especially bearing a superlative part in the
sorrow the loss of that good King occasioned, whose Funeral was privately
solemnized on the 14th. of February toward the Evening in King Henry the
Seventh's Chapel, where it was interred in Vault under the East End of the
South-Isle; Service being ended, and the Officers of his Household having broke
their Staves, the Royal Style was proclaimed by another of the Kings at Arms,
according to the Custom: And thus set this great Monarch, who had been so
useful and dear to the Interest of Christendom, making way thereby for his
Brother, who was immediately proclaimed, etc. and accordingly was Crowned at
Westminster, on the twenty third of April following, with much splendor and
magnificence, as is usual at the Royal Ceremonies of the Coronation of the
Kings of Great Britain, etc. and had the Condolement and Congratulation, the
one for the Death of King Charles, and the other for His Majesty's Accession to
the Throne, not only from the States General, but from most of the European
Princes. And now the States of Holland being in frequent Consults about the
Affairs of that Republic, between the Adjournments his Highness the Prince of
Orange diverted himself in visiting the Towns and Fortifications, and settling
Military Affairs; and the better to remove the Melancholy the Death of the King
his Uncle had occasioned, recreated himself at his Country Palace; when in the
mean while the Duke of Monmouth, and Earl of Argile, going from Holland with an
inconsiderable number of Men, the former to invade England, and the latter
Scotland, their Expeditions proved altogether successless for being severally
routed, and taken by the King's Forces, they suffered Death, together with
diverse others of their Adherents and Abettors.

In July, 1687. his Highness returning from Hounstyrdyke to the Hague, he there
gave Audience to several foreign Ministers, and then parted thence to visit the
Garrisons of Maestricht, Boisleduck, and others belonging to the States, and in
his Return was met by Her Royal Highness at Loo, he having in his Progress
given necessary Orders for the well governing and strengthening of those Places:

In December the Marquess d' Albeville, Envoy extraordinary from his Majesty of
Great Britain, had Audience of his Highness the Prince of Orange, and the
States of Holland, but they adjourning to the 7th. of January, great
preparations of Fireworks were made in the mean while to entertain Her Royal
Highness the Princess of Orange, on New-years-day, representing a Battle, with
four lines, ranged with several Batteries, lively expressing the manner of an
Engagement. Now the foreign Priests coming again into remembrance, and being
looked upon as Enemies to the Commonwealth, notwithstanding the intercession
that had been made on their behalf, the Court of Justice at the Hague drew up a
Decree, commanding them to retire out of the Country, and never to return
again, promising a Reward of 100 Ducatoons to any that should make discovery,
and settling a penalty of 600 Florins upon those that should harbor and
conceal any of them, for the first time; 1200 for the second; and corporal
punishment for the third Offense; whereupon a great many of them fled into
England, where indeed there was but too many before: And now the Spring coming
on, the Prince and Princess of Orange went to their Palace at Loo.

The King of England, for private Reasons of State, being about this time
desirous to call home the English Regiments in the Service of the
States General, the Marquess d' Albeville made it known immediately to their
Lordships, but they not willing to part with those Forces, he proceeded to put
in his Memorials, representing not only his Resentment of that Refusal, but the
danger of Officers and Soldiers might incurr; but the States having beforehand
disbanded them, and listed them under their own Command, as many as would enter
themselves, (which was the greatest Part of them, as well Officers as
Soldiers,) this business came to nothing; and although his Majesty had ordered
the Masters and Captains of Ships and Vessels, to give such as would return
free Passage, with promise of Advancement, yet not many came over.

In May the Elector of Saxony was splendidly entertained by his Highness the
Prince of Orange, at Hounslaerdyke, and the next day his Highness accompanied
him to Scheveling, where they went on Board a small Vessel that carried them to
a Squadron of 17 Men of War, arrived from Schonevelt, under the Command of
Vice Admiral Allemond, who sent upon their Approach two light Frigates, and a
Shallop, to meet them, and were saluted with the Cannon of all the Ships; when
having Dined on board the Vice Admiral, they returned to Scheveling, and from
thence his Electoral Highness of Saxony went to visit Delf, Rotterdam, Dort,
Maestricht, Liege Aix, and Cologne, and so returned home by the way of
Francfort; when in the mean while the Here Van Die acquainted the Prince of
Orange, and the States, with the Death of the Elector of Brandenburgh, a person
most firm to the Protestant Interest, and whose Death was regretted by the
Protestant Princes and States, so that both the Prince and the States of
Holland immediately nominated a fit person to go and make their Complement of
Condolence to the present Elector. The next month the Marquess d' Albeville,
acquainted the Prince and Princess of Orange, as also the States, with the News
of the Queen of England's being delivered of a Son, at their Royal Palace of
St. James's, on Sunday the 10th. of June; and soon after the News, by sundry
Expresses, was likewise made known to the King's Ministers in all the Courts of
Christendom, who, at a vast Expense and Magnificence, proclaimed it, and the
Conduits in London were commanded to run with Wine, and a Thanksgiving day was
likewise held for the Queens safe Delivery; Congratulations were made, upon
this occasion, by all the Foreign Ministers, and the Infant soon after ordered
to be prayed for in the public Prayers of the Church. Some Addresses were
likewise presented upon that occasion, and the Romanists flattered themselves
with a lasting Tranquillity; and so sure they thought they were of gaining the
point, that the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Bishops of Ely,
Peterborough, St. Asaph, Chichester, Bath and Wells, and Bristol (who had been
committed by an Order of Council to the Tower, for humbly beseeching his
Majesty by Petition to remit his Commands of enjoining his Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience to be read in the Churches, in time of Divine Service)
were brought to their Trials at the King's Bench Court Westminster, where,
notwithstanding all that was alleged against them, and the pressing Arguments
of a Popish Judge, then upon the Bench, their Candor and Innocence so fairly
and plainly appeared, that instead of their Adversaries proving that Petition a
Libel, it was evidently demonstrated that they had done nothing but their

The Papists, to leave no stone unturned that they might secure themselves for
the future as well as the present* used many Arts and Insinuations to sound the
Intentions and thoughts of their Highnesses, the Prince and Princess of Orange,
whereupon Mr. James Stewart took upon him, and that not without the King's
knowledge and approbation, as appears by the Letter writ to Minn Here Fagel,
Pentionary of Holland, and West-Friezeland, upon the King's publishing his
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and intention to take away the Test and
Penal Laws, which occasioned his Answer, in substance this, though little to
the satisfaction of the Roman Catholics, viz.

That their Highnesses have often declared, as they did more particularly to
the Marquess Albeville, his Majesty's Envoy extraordinary to the States, That
it is their Opinion, that no Christian ought to be persecuted for his
Conscience, or be ill used because he differs from the public and established
Religion, and therefore they could be content, that even the Papists in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, might be suffered to continue in their Religion
with as much Liberty as is allowed them by the States of the United Provinces,
and as for the Protestant Dissenters, their Highnesses did not only consent,
but heartily approved of their having an entire Liberty, for the full Exercise
of their Religion, without any trouble or hindrance, etc. That their Highnesses
were ready, in case his Majesty of England should desire it, to declare their
willingness to concur in the settling and confirming this Liberty as far as it
lay in them, and were ready, if desired, to concur in the Repealing the Laws,
provided always that those Laws remain still in their full vigor, by which the
Roman Chatholicks are shut out of both Houses of Parliament, out of all
Employments, Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, as likewise all those other
Laws, which confirm the Protestant Religion, and which secure it against all
the Attempts of the Roman Catholics. But that their Highnesses could not agree
to the Repealing of the Test, or those Penal Laws that tend to the security of
the Protestant Religion, since the Roman Catholics receive no more prejudice
from these than the being excluded from Parliaments, or from public
Employments, and that by them the Protestant Religion is covered from all the
Designs of the Roman Catholics against it, or against the public safety; and
neither the Tests, nor those other Laws, can be said to carry in them any
Severity against the Roman Catholics, upon Account of their Consciences; they
being only Provisions qualifying Men to be Members of Parliament, or to be
capable of bearing Offices, by which they must declare before God and Men, that
they are for the Protestant Religion; so that all this amounts to no more than
a securing the Protestant Religion, from any prejudice that it may receive from
Roman Catholics. That their Highnesses have thought, and do still think, that
more than this ought not to be asked or expected from them, since by this means
the Roman Catholic: and their Posterity would be for ever secured from all
troubles, in their Persons or Estates, or in the Exercise of their Religion;
and that the Roman Catholics ought to be satisfied with this, and not to
disquiet the Kingdom because they cannot be admitted to sit in Parliament, or
to be in Employment, or because those Laws in which the security of the
Protestant Religion does chiefly consist are not repealed, by which they may be
put in a condition to over-turn it. That their Highnesses also believed, that
Dissenters would be for ever satisfied when they should be for ever covered
from all danger of being disturbed, or punished for the free Exercise of their
Religion, upon any sort of pretense what soever.
These things we find in the Letter of that great Minister of State, as the
just Sentiments of their Highnesses, which did not at all please the Court; and
perceiving the Wind averse in that quarter, Mr. Stewart in his other Letter
tells the Pensioner a while after, That the Court was quite beyond it, and had
taken other measures, etc.

About this time an account being given by the persons who had it in charge,
and for that intent made it their Business to visit the most considerable
places in England and Wales, how the people stood affected, in relation to the
taking off the Penal Laws and Tests, if they should be chosen Members of
Parliament or were qualified for choosing. The King being at Windsor the 24th.
of August, he declared in Council, That pursuant to his Declaration he resolved
to call a Parliament, to meet the 27th. of November following, and ordered the
Lord Chancellor to issue out Writs on that behalf the 18th. of September, after
the sitting of that Council; and accordingly Writs were prepared, but were
stopped and recalled, upon certain notice that his Highness the Prince of
Orange was preparing for England, more of which I shall have occasion to
mention hereafter.

About the beginning of September, the Prince went to meet the Elector of
Brandenburgh, going from Loo on the 5th. for Minden, as also to meet some other
Princes and Noblemen of Germany; which so alarmed the French King, that the
Count d' Avanx, the French Ambassador presented a Memorial to the
Sates-General by the Order of his master, who mistaking the measures the Prince
intended at that time to take, complained therein, That the King his Master
being informed of the motions and Coferences that were made and held toward
the Frontiers of Cologne, against the Cardinal of Fustemburgh, and that
Chapter, he was resolved to maintain the Cardinal and the Privileges against
all those that should go about to trouble them, etc. No sooner did his Highness
return from that Conference to Loo, but Orders were taken to draw the Forces
together, in order to the Encampment upon the Mooker Hyde, and the Forces of
the other Princes had Orders to be upon their march, as those of Brandenburgh,
Hesse Cassel, etc. and on the 16th. of September the States assembled at the
Hague, where his Highness the Prince of Orange was present, continuing in
debating several matters of great weight and consequence, but as to the
particulars we are wanting; however it was generally suspected that the King
had Intelligence that the great preparatons of Naval and Land Forces were
intended for England; when contrary to expectation, His Majesty, in his
Declaration bearing Date the 20th. of September, relating to the Regulating
Elections, has this Clause, viz We are willing the Roman Catholics shall
remain incapable to be Members of the House of Commons, etc. and on the 26th.
an Order was published to restore the Deputy Lieutenants, and such Gentlemen as
had been put out of their Offices, and Commissions; and the next public
account we had, was the King's Proclamation, bearing Date the 25th. of
September, giving a large Account of his Highness's Intentions to pass the
Seas, and land in England, and the Marquess d' Albeville presented a Memorial
to the Deputies of the States General upon that Subject, yet the preparations
went on, and whilst the Marquess expected an Answer to his Memorial, the Troops
embarked, and her Highness, and the Marshall de Scomberg came to the Hague:
And so far wrought the News of these preparations, that Magdalen College in
Oxford was ordered to be restored and settled; settled; London was likewise
restored her ancient Charter; other Corporations were restored to their
Charters and Magistrates, and the Church of England had immediately the right
hand of Fellowship, which made many wonder to see things so suddenly changed;
the suffering Bishops were received into favor, and had leave to make their
proposals for the good settlement and constitution of the Government, and the
Popish Party that was so lately Paramount, began to droop; so wonderfully
wrought the terror of his Highness's Approach.

On the 15th. of October, the Infant who had before been privately Christened,
was publicly named, amidst the Ceremonies and Rites of Baptism, in the Chapel
at St. James's, by the Name James Francis*Edward, the Pope being God*father by
his Nuncio, and the Queen Dowager God mother, the King and Queen, with many
others, assisting. And now great preparations were made to take the Field, and
Sutlers encouraged to attend the Army, with more Freedom and Advantage than
formerly; for News came on the 23d. of October, that the Troops were all on
Shipboard; and that his Highness the Prince of Orange would embark so soon as
the Ships in the Texel had joined those that lay in the Maese, and that the
States upon the Arrest the French had made of the Dutch Ships in their Ports,
had published a Placart, prohibiting the Importation of French Commodities,
till they were released; and various reports, going abroad, the King put out a
Proclamation, prohibiting the spreading of Rumors and False News.

On Friday the 26th. Old-style, the Fleet having the Equipage on Board,
consisting of Fifty two men of War, and a very numerous attendence of
Victuallars, and Vessels for the Transportation of the Land Forces, Sailed
between three and four of the Clock in the Afternoon, from the Flats near the
Bril, with the Wind at South West and by South; the Prince embarked on a Vessel
of between Twenty eight and Thirty Guns; there likewise embarked the Count de
Solmes, the Count de Stirum, the Sieur Benting, the Sieur Overkirk, the
Marshall de Schomberg, his Son Count Charles, with several others, as well
English No^ men as Strangers; and the next day they came in sight of
Scheveling, when the Wind came more Westward, but the Weather not being
favorable, some ships and small Vessels, on which the Horse were on board,
suffered damage, and the Fleet by that means delayed; yet ^gain setting Sail on
the 3d. of Novem^^r, between ten and eleven of the Clock (...) the morning,
about half Seas over; (...) Fleet came within sight of Dover, ^^d were passing
by, till about five in ^he Afternoon; at what time they were (...) past that
place, without any inter^^ption from the English Fleet, who lay ^ithin sight of
them; and Stearing a Chanel course westward, the Wind at ^^st North-east, a
very fresh Gale. (...) the 5th. of November, about 300 ^il came into Torbay, in
the County of Devon; and several of them directly to ^rixam Key, and landed
there Soldiers (...) secure the landing of the rest, if any Opposition should
be made; so that five or six hundred presently got on Land, and put themselves
in a posture of De^ence, whilst the rest were fending on shore, some by Boats,
and some by the help of the Tide: And so far were the Country people from being
in a consternation, that on such occasions frequently falls out, that they on
the contrary not only congratulated his Highness's Arrival, but brought plenty
of Provisions and Necessaries for the Soldiers, and such as came on shore;
there being only three small Vessels missing of the whole Fleet; whereof two, a
Pink, and a Fishing-boat, were taken by the Woolwich, below Hole Haven; there
being on board some Horse: The other was a Fly-boat, taken by the Swallow
Frigate, having on board four Companies of Foot, of Colonel Babington's
Regiment, commanmanded by Major Collambine: However the men were kindly used,
especially the Soldiers; and these had not been taken, but by their separation
from the Fleet. As to the number of Horse and Foot, as also the Fleet, take the
following List, as it was said to be Printed in Holland.

HORSE.
THe Life Guard. Regiment of Guards Commanded by the Sieur Benting. Waldeck's
Regiment. Nassau. Mompelian. Ginckel. Count Vanderlip.
The Prince's Dragoons. Marrewis Dragoons. Segravemore. Sapbroeck. Flodorp.
Seyde. Oye. Suylestein.
Life Guard 197. Regiment of Guards of Benting, 480. Princes Dragoons, 860.
Marrewis Dragoons, 440 In all 3660. Troupers, 1683.
FOOT.
Foot Guards, Commanded by Count Solms, 25 Companies, 2000. s. Mackey, 12
Companies. Balfort, 12 Companies. Talmash, 12 Companies. A Regiment which was
formerly Bellisse, 12 Companies. A Regiment which was formerly Wachop's 12
Companies. A Regiment which was the late Earl of Ossories, 10 Companies.
Breckevelt, 10 Companies. Holstein, 10 Companies. Wirtemberg, 10 Companies.
Hagendorn, 10 Companies. Fagel, 10 Companies. Nassau, 10 Companies. Carelson,
12 Companies. Brander, 10 Companies. Prince of Breckvel, 10 Companies. In all
164 Companies, at 53 in a Company. 8692 2000 Guards. 10692.

The FLEET.
Men of War, 65. Fly-Boats, 500. Pinks, 60. Fireships. 10. 635.
So by this it appears, that his Highness had effectually 14352. persons under
his command, not accounting those that came over Volunteers; and these, past
peradventure, rather increased than diminished, during the Fleet, which by this
Account consisted of 635. great and small Ships and Vessels, lying in the
Roads, for some time after this List was published. But to return again to
Torbay.

His Highness having in good order landed the greatest part of the Horse and
Foot, and given Directions for the speedy landing the rest, and the Cannon to
be un-shipped, for the more convenience at Topsham, he marched toward the City
of Exeter, with the general Approbation, Shouts, and Applause of the People,
who flocked from all parts to welcome him; and diverse Gentlemen of those parts
came to wait upon him, and tender their service upon his approach, the Bishop
retired, and the Gates were closed, by Order of the Mayor, but without
baracadoing or fastening, so that being soon opened, an advanced party entered,
and was joyfully received by the Inhabitants, a great many of them having
before their coming, listed themselves for the service of the Prince; and into
this City his Highness entered with great Splendor the Friday after his
landing, and took up his Residence in the Bishop's Palace; giving a strict
command to all the Officers and and Soldiers, that they should behave
themselves orderly and civilly, to all manner of persons, duly and diligently
observing to defray their Quarters, and offering no manner of Injury nor
Violence, under severe Penalties, and such Regiments as that City could not
quarter, were appointed other Stations.

In this City, in a full Auditory, his Highness's first Declaration was read;
showing the Reasons of his coming over, and inducing him to appear in Arms in
the Kingdom of England; for the preserving the Protestant Religion, and for the
restoring the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland, and Ireland; setting
forth, How they had been manifestly Violated by Evil Counselors, and
Ministers of State, to the great Oppression of the people, and endangering the
Subversion of the Religion, and Established Government of these Kingdoms, and
to bring them under Popery and Slavery: With many other cogent and pressing
Reasons, set forth at large in that Declaration; and especially a clause
wherein his Highness expresses his doubts, as likewise those of the Nation,
concerning the true Birth of the Infant; and this part it was, that caused the
King to call the extraordinary Council, that met in the Council Chamber, a
White Hall, on the 22d. of October, where, before a considerable number of
Peers, Ministers of State, Officers of the Household, the Judges, the King's
Council, the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen of the City, etc. where the
Depositions of 41 Persons as to their knowledge in that matter, consisting of
both Sexes were given in; and on the 27th. of October they were enrolled in the
Court of Chancery, together with those of the Earl of Huntington, and Earl of
Peterborough, who were not present when the Depositions were taken in the
Council Chamber, but given in the Chancery Court: All which Proceedings are
printed at large, and not greatly to our purpose; but to them I therefore refer
the more inquisitive Reader.

The Prince continuing still in the City of Exeter, gave necessary Orders for
the Settlement of the Revenue of those Parts, arising by Excise, and other
Duties, where the King's Officers were at that time remiss in their Attendence,
some of them being Roman Catholics, and fled, he appointed the Lord Wiltshire,
Mr. Herbert, and Mr. Row, Commissioners, for the more prudent Management, and
sent out Parties to purchase Horses for their Service; His Highness recreating
himself at times, by taking a view of the Country, but his Army almost hourly
increasing, he commanded detached Parties to advance, and possess themselves of
convenient Posts; and in the mean time we had News that the Lord Delamere came
to Manchester with a strong Party, and there declared for His Highness the
Prince of Orange, and made a Speech to his Tenants, and others, desiring them
to meet him the next day at Bodon Downs, the intended Place of Rendezvous;
where accordingly he found a great appearance, who willingly submitted
themselves to be disposed under his Command: But the Lord Lovelace being on his
way to join with the Prince, with a Party of Horse, was surprised in his Inn at
Cirencester by the Militia; and (after a stout resistance, in which the Major
that commanded, together with his Son, and some others, were killed,) his
Lordship was taken Prisoner, and afterward carried to Gloucester, but was there
rescued by a Party of the Prince's Horse.

The King upon notice that his Highness the Prince of Orange had left Exeter,
and was advancing with his own and the additional Forces that were come in,
caused the Train of Artillery to be drawn out of the Tower, being before
prepared on Carriages fit to March; and passing toward Salisbury, he prepared
his Equipage to be at the Head of his Army, which was ordered to draw together
about Salisbury, and accordingly setting out from White Hall with no great
Attendence, he arrived there the 19th. of November, about Four in the Evening,
and was met by the Duke of Berwick, the Earl of Feversbam, and other
Commanders, on Horseback, a Mile from the Gates of the City, where he was
attended by the Mayor and Aldermen, in their Formalities, to the Bishop's
Palace, appointed for his Lodgings; and there perceiving an almost general
falling off of the Nobility and Gentry, as well as the Forces under his Pay,
and that diverse Lords were up in the North, he issued out a Proclamation,
bearing Date the 20th. of November, offering a Pardon to all his Subjects that
had taken up Arms under the Prince, if they returned in Twenty Days, and
rendered themselves to the Officers Military and Civil, etc.

Whilst these things happened, a Party of the Prince's Men being abroad, and
advancing beyond their Strengths, were pursued and charged by Coll. Sarsfield,
with 70 Horse, and 30 Dragoons and Granadiers; and overtaking them at
Wincanton, they posted themselves behind the Hedges; upon which the Dragoons
and Granadiers were obliged to dismount, and march up to the Hedges, so that
they began to Fire very briskly on both sides, and several were killed and
wounded; but Colonel Sarsfield getting into the Field with his Horse, and
Charging them in the Rear, they were most of them killed and taken Prisoners.
Amongst the Slain was one Cambell, a Lieutenant, who commanded them; and on the
King's Party four were killed, and Cornet Web mortally wounded.

This slender Success was clouded, upon Notice that the Earl of Bath had Seized
upon Plymouth, and made the Earl of Huntington, the Governor thereof,
Prisoner; the whole Garrison declaring for His Highness, upon reading his
Declarations; the Fleet likewise began to grow cold, and many of the Commanders
began to declare for the Prince; so that the King not thinking it convenient to
hazard a Battle with an Army he could no ways ensure to his Interest, upon the
near Approaches of the Prince's Forces, (with whom were now a great part of the
Nobility) he hastily left Salisbury, drawing off those Forces he had there, and
remanding the Train of Artillery returned to White Hall, where he arrived on
the 26th. of November, in the Evening, and appointed Colonel Beville Skeleton
Lieutenant of the Tower, in in the Place of Sir Edward Hales; and according to
what had been desired by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in their Petition,
gave Order to the Lord Chancellor, for Issuing out Writs for the Summoning a
Parliament to sit the 15th. day of the ensuing January, and Commissioners were
nominated to treat with the Prince: A Proclamation was likewise published to
give timely notice to those that were Electors, or would stand for Candidates:
The Bishop of Exeter was likewise nominated Lord Archbishop of the long vacant
See of York, and did Homage to the King the day after the Ceremonies of his
Translation from the Sea of Exeter to the Archiepiscopal See of York; which
were performed at Lambeth, by his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
assisted by the Bishops of St. Asaph, Ely, Rochester, and Peterborough.

Whilst these things were doing, News came that the Lords in the North had
seized upon York, and made the Governor Prisoner, declaring for the Prince of
Orange, and disarming all Papists of note, their Number and Power daily
increasing; so that the Lord Mollenax, who was up with a party for the King in
those Parts, found himself in no condition to make any head; but soon after was
deserted by most of his Followers; and the strong Garrison of Hull was secured
to the Interest of His Highness, by the Deputy Governor, and by the Assistence
of the Soldiers of his Party, the Townsmen, and some Seamen that were in the
Port; the securing it, according to the Relation, being on this manner.

On the 3d. of December, about 9 of the Clock, the Guards being set, and the
Tat-too over, the Deputy Governor, as it was his place, was preparing to go
the Rounds, but the Lord Langdale, the Governor, told him he had appointed the
Lord Montgomery, and Major Fountain, to supply that Duty for the Night;
whereupon some Words passing, the Deputy Governor made his Party, and drawing
up the Soldiers in Battalia, siezed the Guards, and made the Lord Langdale, the
Lord Montgomery, and others, Prisoners; and at break of day a Party was sent
over the Bridge, to seize the Castle, and Block-Houses, with the new Citadel;
so that the Inhabitants and Seamen concurring with the Soldiers, that strong
Place was entirely secured, and the Mass-House demolished with great joy, and
ringing of Bells, and the Prince's Colors were placed upon the high Church;
the Papists that had come thither for shelter were turned out, and the
Governor dismissed, and guarded a part of the way to his House, to prevent the
danger that threatened him from the Mobile, who began to be very insolent.
Diverse other places declared likewise for the Prince; and the Duke of Beaufort,
who had Commanded the County Militia, perceiving he could not in that kind
advantage the King's Affairs, which were now grown desperate, betook himself to
his Retirement; so that the Militia found themselves disbanded.

The Noblemen who were sent to treat with his Highness the Prince of Orange,
about accommodating the affairs of the Kingdom, not being able to effect in all
points what the King desired, the Infant, which had been sent to Portsmouth,
either as supposed the securest place, or to pass the Seas, was sent for back
in great haste; and the Priests began to shift for themselves, Father Petre was
missing, with diverse others, who it is supposed, perceiving the desperateness
of their condition, made an early escape; and several Councils were held, most
of them privately in the King's Closet, to advise what was to he done in the
Juncture of affairs; when on the 9th. of December, in the Evening, News came
that greatly alarmed the Court, and put it for the most part in a hurry and
consternation, viz. That the Prince's Forces had made their way through
Reading, and gained the Pass of Twyford-bridge, without any considerable
resistance: And thus we find the account of this Action.

About 1500 Horse, and 3 Troops of Irish Dragoons being quartered, or posted in
the Town of Reading, were put into a Consternation upon the Report, that a
strong advanced Party of the Prince's Army were on their march to beat up their
Quarters; so that after some Consultation of the Officers, it was concluded
they should draw off to Twyford-Bridge, and there make good their Post, which
accordingly they did; but the Scouts that were sent abroad to discover, coming
in, and giving them an account that the Roads were clear, the Commander in
chief commanded that Claverhouse Regiment of Scotch Horse, and the Irish
Dragoons, should march back, and repossess the Town of Reading, which they did
on the Eighth of December at Night, with Orders to be in readiness, and upon
their Guards to prevent surprise; so that most of them kept on Horseback, some
in the Marketplace, and others at the Posts assigned them; but there being yet
no news of the advanced Party, they were commanded by their Officers to alight,
and refresh themselves and their Horses; when at ten of the Clock in the
Morning, the Trumpet sounded to Horse, the Prince's Forces being at the Town's
end, almost before they were discovered, whereupon a sharp dispute ensued, with
brisk Firing on both Parties; the Irish Dragoons bearing the brunt of the
Encounter, though the Scotch Horse in small detatched Bodies made some Firings;
but they were overpowered, driven out of the Town, and obliged to retreat to
Twyford-Bridge; and in conclusion, many of the King's Party Deserted, and the
rest were constrained to quit the Pass, and make the best of their Retreat. In
this Skirmish we cannot learn that above Thirty were killed, and several
wounded. But now the King having no considerable Forces, especially none
capable of making Head against a prevailing Army; the Queen, who had been at
Wind for the day before, to fetch the Infant, taking her solemn leave of the
King, crossed the Thames on the Tenth of December, about Three in the Morning,
where her Coaches waited for her; and so with the Child, and a slender
Attendence, made for Dover, or some Port near it, and there took Shipping for
France, where she soon after landed, and had a place of Residence appointed her
by the French King.

The Queen having left White Hall, as also a great many of the Courtiers, the
King the same Evening called an extraordinary Council; and sent for the Lord
Mayor of London, and the Sheriffs; who waiting upon His Majesty, were, amongst
other things, charged to have a Care of the City, and keep it in Peace and
Quietness, as much as in them lay, and then were dismissed: However, the
Council held a long Debate, and a meeting was appointed the, the next Morning;
but, contrary to the Expectation of almost the whole Kingdom, the King, about
Three a Clock in the Night, took Barge at the Privy Stairs, with a small
Equipage; and went down the River on his Departure, without giving notice to
any of the Officers of his Household, who were then in

The King's Departure, was no sooner spread abroad, but the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal that were about Town assembled; and finding White Hall full of
Consternation, after some Debates, they gave order for the dismissing Popish
Officers and Soldiers; and giving Directions for the keeping of that Palace
from Pillage or Spoil, which in that Confusion might have happened, they
adjourned immediately to the Guild Hall of the City of London, where, by their
Order, the Lord Mayor had summoned the Court of Aldermen, and thither they sent
for Colonel Bevil Skeleton, Lieutenant of the Tower; and ordered him, to resign
up that important Citadel to the Lord Lucas, in trust of the City, till other
Measures could be taken; and proceeded to approve and sign the following
Declaration, viz.

We doubt not, but the World believes, that in this great and dangerous
Conjuncture We are Heartily and Zealously concerned for the Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties and Properties of the
Subject; and we did reasonably hope, that the King having Issued out his
Proclamation and Writs for a Free Parliament, We might have rested secure under
the Expectation of that Meeting; but His Majesty having withdrawn himself, and
as we apprehend, in order to his Departure out of the Kingdom, by the
pernicious Counsels of Person, ill-affected to our Nation, and Religion, We
cannot, without being wanting to our Duty, be silent under the Calamities
wherein the Popish Counsels, which so long prevailed, have miserably involved
us: We do therefore unanimously resolve to apply our selves to his Highness the
Prince of Orange, who with so great Kindness to these Kingdoms, so Vast Expense
and so much hazard to his own Person, has undertaken (by endeavoring to
procure a Free Parliament) to rescue us, with as little Effusion of Christian
Blood as possible, from imminent Dangers of Popery and Slavery.

And, we do hereby declare, That we will with our utmost Endeavors assist his
Highness in the obtaining such a Parliament, with all speed, wherein our Laws,
our Liberties, and our Prosperities may be secured; the Church of England in
particular, with a due. Liberty to Protestant Dissenters; and in general; the
Protestant Religion and Interest, over the whole World may be supported and
encouraged; to the Glory of God, the Happiness of the Established Government,
in these Kingdoms, and the advantage of all Princes, and State, in Christendom,
that may be herein concerned.

In the mean time we will endeavor to preserve, as much as in us lies, the
Peace and Security of these great and populous Cities of London and
Westminster, and the parts adjacent, by taking Care to disarm all Papists, and
secure all Jesuits, and Romish Priests, who are in or about the same; and if
there be any thing more to be performed by us; for the promoting His Highness's
Generous Intentions for the public Good, we shall he ready to do it as
Occasion shall require.

This was signed by the two Archbishops, five Bishops, and Twenty two
Noblemen; and it was there concluded, that the Earl of Pembroke, the Lord
Viscount Weymouth, the Lord Bishop of Ely, and the Lord Culpepper, should
forthwith attend his Highness the Prince of Orange, with the said Declaration;
and at the same time acquaint him with what was farther done at that Meeting.

The Lords having left the Guild Hall, the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and
the Common Council assembled, and amongst other Matters it was agreed by Vote,
that an Humble Address should in their Names, and on the behalf of the City, be
presented to His Highness the Prince of Orange, In haec verba.

May it please your Highness,

WE taking into Consideration Your Highness's fervent Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, manifested to the World in your many and hazardous Enterprises; which
it has pleased Almighty God to bless you with miraculous success, we render
our deepest thanks to the Divine Majesty for the same, and beg leave to present
our humble thanks to your Highness particularly, for your appearing in Arms in
this Kingdom; to carry on, and perfect your glorious Design, to rescue England,
Scotland, and Ireland, from Popery and Slavery; and in a Free Parliament to
establish the Religion, the Laws, and Liberties of these Kingdoms upon a sure
and lasting Foundation.

We have hitherto looked for some Remedy for those Oppressions and imminent
Dangers we, together with our Protestant Fellow Subjects, labor under, from
His Majesty's Concessions and Concurrences with your Highness's just and pious
purposes, expressed in your Gracious Declaration;

But herein finding our selves finally disappointed by His Majesty's
withdrawing himself, we presume to make your Highness our Refuge, and do in
the Name of the Capital City, implore your Highness's Protection; and most
humbly beseech your Highness to vouchsafe to repair to this City, where your
Highness will be received with universal Joy and Satisfaction.

This Address being highly approved by all present, Four Aldermen, and Eight
Commoners were appointed to wait upon his Highness, and present him with the
said Address; and accordingly it was presented, and very favorably received.

And the Lieutenancy of the City of London, being the same day assembled, drew
up an Address to be presented to his Highness, on the behalf of themselves, the
Militia, etc. which being to the same Effect with the former, we think it
needless to insert.

This Address was delivered by four of the Members of the Lieutenancy, and very
kindly received by his Highness. By this time the Earl of Feversham, then
commanding the King's Forces, having received His Majesty's Letter, by which he
understood he had withdrawn himself; and wherein he received such Orders as the
King thought necessary to leave, he sent to acquaint his His Highness the
Prince of Orange with what had happened in the following Letter

SIR,
HAving received this Morning a Letter from His Majesty, with the unfortunate
News of his Resolution to go out of England, and that he is actually gone, I
thought my self obliged, being at the Head of his Army, having received his
Majesty's Orders to make no opposition against any Body, to let your Highness
know (with the Advice of the Officers here) so soon as it was possible, to
hinder the Misfortune of Effusion of Blood: I have ordered already, to that
purpose, all the Troops that are under my Command, which shall be the last
Order they shall receive from me, etc.


This Order caused the Troops to fall off and disband, as well because they
knew themselves without a Head, as not knowing how to come by their Pay, if
they continued in the Service; and indeed many of the Foot Soldiers were driven
to great extremity; being by this Disbanding destitute of Moneys, Lodging, and
other neccessaries, and had for a while nothing to subsist, but the Charity of
the People: And although the Irish Battalion seemed for a time obstinate to
continue in Arms, yet the Commands they received from His Highness the Prince
of Orange, and the necessity that they felt, constrained them to submit.

This Dispersing of the Solders, made his Highness publish a Declaration,
requiring all Commanders in chief, by Beat of Drum, or otherwise, to call
together the several Officers and Soldiers, belonging to their respective
Regiments, Troops, and Companies, in such places as they should find most
convenient for their Rendezvous; and there to keep them in good Order and
Discipline. And likewise directing and requiring all such Officers, and
Soldiers, forthwith to repair to such places as shall be appointed for that
purpose by the respective Colonels, or Commanders in chief.

Whilst these things passed in the Army, the multitude got together in diverse
places, spoiling and demolishing the Popish Mass-Houses, and Chapels; much
defacing the Dwelling Houses of several Eminent Papists, who were fled for fear
of being secured; and though the Magistrates labored to quiet the Tumults and
Disorders of this kind, yet they found their Authority too feeble, till the
Mobile had spent their rage in London, etc. They pulled down the Convent of
Monks in St. John's, which had been two Years Building at a vast Expense, and
Burnt the greatest part of the Timber and Materials in Smithfield; having
before siezed some of the Goods, as they were removing them, and burnt them in
Holborn: They likewise defaced and demolished the Chapels in Lime-strect and
Lincoln's Inn Fields, with that of the Spanish Ambassadour's at Wild-house,
where violently breaking into his Excellency's Lodgings, they got great store
of Plunder, in Plate, Money, and ri^ Goods, etc. And in like manner they served
the Lodgings of the Resident of Florence, in St. James's Hay-Market; and
offered diverse Affronts and Abuses to other Houses, gathering in such Numbers
from all parts, that it is almost incredible; insomuch, that neither the
Watches, nor Trained-Bands, thought it safe to oppose the Torrent; but the next
day it was pretty, well allayed and then search was made in diverse places for
such as were fled from Justice; and amongst others, to the no small wonder of
the People, the Lord Chancellor Jeffries was taken, at a blind House in Hope
and Anchor Alley in Wapping, disguised like a Sailer, and endeavoring to make
his escape in a Vessel that lay by the Key for Hamborough; and being brought
before the Lord Mayor, who by reason of an Indisposition that then siezed him,
not being capable of examining the Matter, he was contented to go the Tower to
preserve himself from the rage of the Rabble, that loudly threatened him with
Destruction; and being guarded thither with a Detachment of the Trained-Bands
was received by the Lieutenant of the Tower; to whom, upon Notice, the Lords at
White Hall sent a Warrant of Commitment, to keep the Body of George Lord
Jefferies, Baron of Wem, in safe Custody, etc.

On the 4th. of December, His Highness the Prince of Orange came to Windsor
about Three in the Afternoon, and was received with most profound respect and
submission by the Mayor and Aldermen in their Formalities, the Steward of that
Corporation Congratulating his Arrival in a most Elegant Speech; and afterward
he went to the Prince of Denmark's Lodgings, prepared for his Reception: And
whilst His Highness was preparing for London, News came that the King
attempting to pass the Seas at Feversham in disguise, was stayed by some of the
Townsmen who were fearching for such as were endeavoring the like, who being
ignorant that it was his Majesty, carried him in a rude manner to a house in
the Town; taking from him some Jewels, considerable quantity of Gold, and his
Crucifix of a great Value: Not did those rude People desist from their
Incivilities, till a Gentleman coming to see the Prisoners they had taken, and
knowing the King, fell on his Knees to pay him duty; whereat the multitude
being strangely surprised, a great part of them retired, and others begged his
Majesty's Pardon, offering to restore what they had taken from him; but he
would not receive his Gold again, but gave it them in Generosity, as a free
Gift.

The Lords at White Hall hearing of his Majesty's being at Feversham, sent to
wait upon him, and pray him to return to his Palace Royal; to which he seemed
not at first inclinable; though being pressed to a Return, he at last
consented. But His Highness the Prince of Orange having fully determined to
come to London with all speed, he thought it in many respects improper for the
King and himself to be there at one and the same time in the present State of
Affairs; upon notice his Majesty was returning, he sent Monsieur Zulestein to
meet him on the way, and entreat him to return to Rochester; but Monsieur
Zulestein missing him by taking another Road than that by which he came, the
King arrived at White Hall the 16th. of December in the Evening, attended by
diverse Noblemen, and a Guard of Horse; and from thence he sent the Lord
Feversham to invite his Highness to come to St. James's, and take that Palace
as his Place of Residence, with what number of Troops he thought convenient.

The Prince deliberating upon this, with the Lords at Windsor, the day before
he had appointed to be in Town; and having communicated to them the Message,
and left them to debate the matter; it was agreed that it was in no kind
advisable, for the Prince to accept the Invitation; and there being on the
other side a necessity the Prince should be in Town, the next day the Lords
thought the shortness of time could admit no better Expedient, than that the
King might be desired to remove to some Place within a reasonable distance from
London; upon which Ham, a House belonging to the Duchess of Lander-dale, was
concluded on; and in order to this, a Paper was drawn, and Signed by the
Prince, viz.

WE desire you the Lord Marquess of Hallifax, the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the
Lord Delamere, to tell the King that it is thought convenient, for the greater
safety of his Person, that he do remove move to Ham, where he shall be attended
by Guards, who will be ready to preserve him from any disturbance.

Given at Windsor the 17th. of December, 1688.

This Paper being Signed by the Prince, the three Lords mentioned therein, were
appointed to carry it; and it was resolved before the delivery, that his
Highness's Guards should be possessed of all the Posts at White Hall, to
prevent the possibility of a disturbance from Guards belonging to several
Masters; which, besides other ill consequence, might peradventure have involved
even the King's own person in the danger that might have happened from any
dispute; it was by computation supposed, that the Prince's Guards might have
reached them by Eight at Night; but it so fell out, by reason of the dirtiness
of the ways, etc. that it was past ten, before they were come, and in drawing
the King's Guards from White Hall, so much time was spent, that before the
Lords could proceed in their Message, it was past twelve; in which, that they
might, preserve all possible Decency and Respect, and not suddenly break in
upon the King, with a Message of this kind; they sent to the Lord Middleton,
his principal Secretary of State, the following Letter.

My Lord,
THere is a Message to be delivered to His Majesty from the Prince, which is of
so great Importance, that we, who are charged with it, desire we may be
immediately admitted; and therefore desire to know where we may find your
Lordship, that you may introduce,

My Lord, your Lordships most Humble Servants, etc.


This Letter was signed by three Lords, and the Lord Middleton sent back word
by the Messenger, he would be ready at the Stairs of the Guard-Chamber, to
carry the Lords to the King, where accordingly they found his Lordship, and he
brought them to the King, whom they found in Bed; and after having made an
Apology for coming at a time that might disturb him, the Prince's Message,
before mentioned, was delivered to him, which after he had read, he said he
would comply with it; the Lords, as they were directed, humbly desired, that if
it might be done with convenience to His Majesty, that he would be pleased to
remove so early, as to be at Ham by Noon, to prevent by that means, his meeting
the Prince, in his way to London: To this the King readily agreed, and
afterward asked if he might not appoint what Servants should attend him, to
which the Lords replied, it was left to His Majesty to give Order in that as he
pleased. And after the Lords had taken their leave, and were gone as far as the
Privy Chamber, the King sent for them again, and told them that he had forgot
to acquaint them with his Resolution before the Message came, to send the Lord
Godolphin the next Morning to the Prince, to propose his going back to
Rochester, he finding, by the Message, Monsieur Zulestein was charged with,
that the Prince had no mind he should be at London; and therefore he now
desired that he might rather return to Rochester: the Lords replied, that they
would immediately send an account to the Prince; of what His Majesty desired,
and did not doubt of such an Answer as would be to his satisfaction; and
accordingly they immediately dispatched back again a Messenger, who finding the
Prince at Sion, gave him an account of all that had passed, and before Eight of
the Clock in the morning, had a Letter from the Sieur Benting, by the Prince's
Order, agreeing to the King's Proposal of going to Rochester; and accordingly
the Guards and Barges being made ready to attend him, his Coach and Sumpters
appointed likewise to follow him, he reached Gravesend on the 18th. in the
Evening, and passed over Land in his Coach, attended by several others, where
His Majesty was pleased to choose the House of Sir Richard Head, for the place
of his Residence at that time.

One thing there was remarkable between the King's first withdrawing himself
and his return, which considering people are apt to conclude might be designed
for a general Notice for the Papists to have risen in Arms, and fell upon the
Protestants in their Houses, had not his Highness's Prudent Conduct broken
their Measures, and rendered their Purpose insignificant, and that was a general
Allarm, given in the dead of the Night, at almost one and the same time, in the
most considerable Cities and Towns in England, upon pretense the Irish were
killing, burning, and destroying all before them, which appeared to be carried
on industriously, by persons set on purpose to spread that false Allarm, or it
could not other ways have been done in so many distant places at once, which
put people into a great Hurry and Consternation, till day appeared, and
convinced them of the Fallacy; so that whatever was intended, God prevented its
taking effect. And now the satisfaction of the longing People drew near, for on
the day the King left White Hall, His Highness the Prince of Orange, with a
very splendid Equipage, entered the Town, about three in the Afternoon, and
came to he Palace of St. James's, where he received the Complements of all the
Nobility, and other persons of the chiefest Quality in Town; and at Night the
Streets were enlightened with Bonfires, the Bells every where ringing, and all
places filled with a large demonstration of unfeigned Joy, so that the Face of
things were visibly changed; insomuch, that even the Rabble, that a little
before ^ould know no Order, were now calm, and in a through quiet.

Upon the Arrival of His Highness, the Common Council of the City of London
assembled, and unanimously agreed and ordered, That all the Aldermen of that
City, and their Deputies, with two Common Council Men for each Ward, should
wait upon, and congratulate His Highness, upon his happy Arrival at such a time
and place as his Highness should appoint; and that the two Sheriffs, and Mr.
Common Sergeant should wait upon him to know his pleasure when he would be
attended by that Committee; and accordingly the next day they attended His
Highness at St. James's; and on the 20th. the Lord Mayor being indisposed, the
Aldermen and their respective Deputies, with some of the Common Council-men of
each Ward, waited on the Prince to congratulate him on his happy Arrival; which
was performed by Sir George Treby, in a Florid Speech.

The High Sheriff, Nobility, and Gentry of the County of Cambridge, about this
time drew up and signed an Address to his Highness; wherein they not only beg
his Protection, and implore his aid to restore these Kingdoms from Popery and
Slavery; but also assure his Highness, that they will contribute their utmost
endeavors in perfecting so Glorious a Work, and return his Highness their
unfeigned thanks for the Progress he has made already, with great Cost, Labor,
and Hazard, both by Sea and Land, etc. which was presented to his Highness, and
received with particular marks of his Favor. And now the King's Forces that
were disbanded, not having any certain Stations, or places of gathering,
Quarters were appointed the respective Troops and Regiments, whither the
Officers and Soldiers, were commanded forthwith to repair; and seeing many had
embezzled their Arms, and Order was put forth, signed by his Highness,
commanding those that had them in custody, to re-deliver them to the Soldiers,
the Officers of the Ordinance, or common Stores of the Tower, etc.

Whilst these things happened, the King, after several days continuance at
Rochester, withdrew himself, with a slender Train, about twelve of the Clock in
the Night, on the 22d. of December; making a back way with great secrecy and
caution to the Seaport; where he embarked, and was afterward known to be
landed in France, and favorably received by the French King; having left a
Paper behind him, given out to contain his Reasons, for withdrawing himself.
And Portsmouth that held out with some Obstinacy, under the Duke of Barwick,
and Sir Edward Scot Deputy Governor, submitted and received a Garrison sent
thither by the Prince's Order.

On the Twenty Fifth of December, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, assembled
at the House of Lords at Westminster, humbly proposed and requested of his
Highness, To take upon him the Administration of public Affairs, both Civil
and Military, and the Disposal of the Public Revenue, for the Preservation of
the Protestant Religion, Rights, Laws, Liberties and Properties, and of the
Peace of the Nation; and that he would take into his particular Care the
present Condition of Ireland, and endeavor by the most speedy and effectual
means to prevent the danger threatening that Kingdom; all which they requested
his Highness to undertake, and exercise, till the meeting of the intended
Convention, 22d. of January, etc.

At the same time this great and honorable Assembly made their request to his
Highness, desiring him that he would cause his Letters to be Written,
subscribed by himself, to be sent to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being
Protestants, and for Election to the several Counties, Universities, Cities,
Boroughs, and Cinque Ports of England, Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
for Electing Persons fitly qualified; so that being duly chosen for Knights of
the Shire, and Burgesses, they might meet, and sit at Westminster, the Twenty
Second of January ensuing. And these were signed by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal then assembled.

On the 26th diverse of the Members of Parliament in the Reign of the late King
Charles II. and the Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London, pursuant
to his Highness the Prince of Orange's Desire, met at St. James's to whom his
Highness made a gracious Speech, in the following words.

YOU Gentlemen that have been Members of the late Parliaments, I have desired
you to meet me here to advise the best manner how to pursue the Ends of my
Declaration, in calling a free Parliament, for the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, the restoring of the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom,
and settling the same, that they may not be in danger of being again subverted.

And you the Aldermen, and Members, the Common Council of the City of London, I
desire the same of you; and in regard your numbers are like to be great, you
may, if you think fit, divided your selves, and sit in several places.

Upon which, they immediately agreed to go to the Commons House at Westminster,
where being sat, they chose Henry Powle Esquire their Chairman, and upon Debate
they resolved upon Heads for an Address to be made to his Highness, and
appointed Persons to draw up and prepare the same; and in the Afternoon it was
done accordingly, read, and approved; and his Highness having appointed to
receive it the next day, he was attended by them, and the Address read by Mr.
Powle, much to the same effect, as what had been before proposed by the Lord,
viz.

Returning his Highness their hearty and unfeigned Thanks, and expressing their
extraordinary acknowledgement of the care he had taken of the Religion, Laws,
and Liberty of the Kingdom, etc. entreating him to take upon him the
Administration of Government, and use to that end the public Revenues; to take
speedy Care of the Stats of Ireland, and issue out his Circular Letters for the
calling a Convention to sit at Westminster, on the 22d. of January, etc.
Whereupon his Highness was pleased to declare to this effect, That (being a
matter of weight) he would consider of it, and give them an answer the next day.

On the 28th. of December in the Morning the Lords attended his Highness at St.
James's, who gave them this answer:

My Lords,

I Have considered of your Advice, and as far as I am able I will endeavor to
secure the Peace of the Nation until the meeting of the Convention in January
next; for the Election whereof I will forthwith issue out Letters, according to
your Desire; I will also take care to apply the public Revenues to the most
proper uses that the present Affairs do require; and likewise endeavor to put
Ireland into such a Condition that the Protestant Religion, and the English
Interest may be maintained in that Kingdom: And I farther assure you; that as I
came hither for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and
Liberties of these Kingdoms, so I shall always be ready to expose my self in
any hazard for the defense of the same.

The Lords having made their Thankful acknowledgment for this Speech so
suitable to their Desires, the Gentlemen who had served as Members of
Parliament during the Reign of King Charles II. together with the Aldermen and
Common Council of the City of London, waited upon him in the Afternoon, to whom
his Highness was pleased to give the same answer.

Nor was there only a Pleasure conceived in England, for His Highness's
Success, and prosperous Proceedings; but on the first of January, (New-Style)
all the Persons of Quality that were at the Hague appeared at Court, to
complement her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange, and in the Evening their
Electoral Highnesses of Brandenburgh arrived there, and were conducted to the
old Palace, which was prepared for them, whither her Royal Highness went to
visit the Electoress, and splendid Entertainments were made upon the occasion.

On the 30th. of December His Highness was pleased to issue out his Declaration
for authorizing Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers and
Ministers, to Act in their respective Places, that were in Office the first of
December, Papists excepted, with a Charge to be careful and diligent in their
Places and Trusts, for preserving the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom, and
relieving the Poor, etc.

And now the Country People and others scouting abroad, had gleaned a great
number of Persons, whose desire of Safety had caused their withdrawing, amongst
whom was the Earls of Salisbury and Peterborough, Lord Chancellor, Sir Edward
Hales, Sir Thomas Jenner, Charles Hales, Dr. Obadiah Walker, Richard Graham,
Philip Burton, and many others, as also nine Jesuits, viz. John Leybourn,
Charles Poulton, Ralph Clayton, Joseph Gifford, Robert Jenison, William Locker,
Francis Calamy, and Thomas Kingsley, with many more, who are in safe Custody;
and his Highness having issued out his Circular Letters for choosing Members to
be present at the Convention the Elections were carried on in most Places, as
it were, with one consent, without any appearance of those Strivings and Heats
that have too often attended former Elections; and that there might no
disturbance or hinderance happen upon the occasion of the Soldiers quartering
in Cities and Boroughs, they were ordered to draw off, except Garrisons, to
other Quarters, till the Elections were over; which was punctually observed,
with an exact and ready Obedience; and soon after his Highness put forth a
Declaration for the better quartering of the Forces.

This Declaration, though the people seemed no where unwilling to quarter the
Soldiers, according to their ability, highly satisfied them in the Prince's
Justice, and good Intentions; so that the Association for the preservation of
his Person has been promoted, in the Signing, through all the Countries of
England, with much freeness and alacrity; a Copy of which, as it was drawn up,
and signed at St. James's, by the Lords and Gentlemen, take in the following
Words.

WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, who have jointed with the Prince of
Orange, for the defense of the Protestant Religion, and for maintaining the
ancient Government, and the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, do engage to Almighty God, to his Highness the Prince of Orange, and
to one another, to stick firm to this Cause, and to one another in defense of
it, and never to depart from it till our Religion, our Laws and Liberties are
so far secured to us in a Free Parliament, that we shall be no more in danger
of falling under Popery and Slavery: And whereas we are engaged in this common
Cause under the Protection of the Prince of Orange, by which means his person
may be exposed to dangers, and to the desperate and cursed Attempts of the
Papists and other bloody Men; we do therefore solemnly engage both to God, and
to one another, That if any such Attempts are made upon him, we will pursue not
only those that make them, but all their Adherents, and all that we find in
Arms against us, with the utmost severities of a just Revenge, to their Ruin
and final Destruction: And that the Execution of any such Attempts (which God
of his Mercy forbid) shall not divert us from prosecuting this Cause which we
do now undertake, but that it shall engage us to sarry it on with all the
vigor that so barbarous a Practice shall deserve.

His Highness having, as is before mentioned, been pleased to take upon him the
Administration of the Civil and Military Power, and by reason of the sudden
change and alteration of Affairs the the public Revenues had been put out of
Order, as to the method of Collecting, and placing and dis-placing the
Collectors, he issued out a Declaration, commanding all Collectors, Receivers,
and Officers, not being Papists, authorized and employed by the proper
Commissioners of the Customs, Excise, Hearth-money, or any other Branch of the
Revenue, to proceed in the Managing, Receiving and Levying the said Revenue, as
formerly; and that all Magistrates and Officers should be assisting to them in
their respective Stations, the better to enable them to make their due
Collections and Receipts. And moreover, his Highness taking into his charitable
Consideration the necessitous Condition of the poor people, as well Handicrafts
as others, destitute of employment, out of a sense of their wants, caused a
considerable Sum of Money to be distributed amongst those of the Out-Parishes
of the Cities of London and Westminster. But now the Papists, notwithstanding a
former Declaration, commanding them, not being Housekeepers,, Merchants, or
Servants to the Queen Dowager, etc. to depart the Cities of London and
Westminster, continuing in contempt of that Declaration, and appearing in great
numbers, his Highness was pleased by another Declaration, dated the 14th. of
January, to command them within three days to depart the said Cities, and ten
miles compass, or otherwise to be taken, proceeded against, and expect the
utmost severity that the Law for their Offenses can inflict upon them;
commanding all Magistrates to make diligent search, and apprehend and imprison
such as should be found in Contempt of the said Declarations, etc.

The Fame of his Highness's Success being sufficiently known in the United
Provinces, three Deputies were sent to congratulate his Success, who landing at
the Tower were received with the Discharge of the Cannon, and other signal
Respects, as became their Character; from whence they passed to the Lodgings
appointed for them, in the Coaches sent to wait upon them, with a splendid
Equipage.

His Highness had no sooner signified to the City of London that the public
Treasure was in a manner exhausted, and not sufficient to defray the necessary
Expenses of the Nation, but a Committee was ordered to attend him to know the
Sum that might supply that defect, and 100000 l. being named and proffered to
be secured, and re-paid, with Interest, in six Months, a great many eminent and
generous Citizens immediately came to the Guild Hall of London, and offered
their Subscriptions, which were there accordingly taken, almost to admiration;
for in a short time, about 300000 l. was subscribed, and directions being given
for the Receivers to attend, it was brought in with such Expedition, that they
were forced to increase their number.

These being the most weighty Affairs transacted in England, let us a while
look into those of Scotland, our Sister Kingdom, where we find that upon his
Highness's Arrival in these Parts, the terror wrought so effectually with the
Popish Ministers of State, and others, that found themselves launched beyond
the Laws of that Kingdom, and Constitution of Government, that they thought of
nothing more than shifting for themselves, some of which had the luck to
escape, and others were seized; the multitude was up in diverse places,
demolishing the Mass-Houses, and not only contented with that, but committed
sundry Disorders, and in the Encounters and Scuffles that were thereby
occasioned, even in the City of Edinburgh, several were killed and wounded,
which made the Noblemen and Gentlemen attend him, to lay before his Highness
the willingness of the people of Scotland, to submit to his Protection, etc.
and upon notice of their Intentions, his Highness the Prince of Orange, having
caused to advertise such of the Scotch Lords and Gentlemen, as were in Town, to
attend in a Room at St. James's, on the 7th. of January, about three in the
Afternoon, his Highness met them. there, and made to them the following Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

THE only Reason that enduced me to undergo so great an Undertaking was, that I
saw the Laws and Liberties of these Kingdoms overturned, and the Protestant
Religion in imminent Danger, and seeing you are so many Noblemen and
Gentlemen, I have called you together, that I may have your Advice what is to
be done for the securing the Protestant Religion, and restoring your Laws and
Liberties, according to my Declaration.

As soon as his Highness had retired, the Lords and Gentlemen went to the
Council Chamger at White Hall, and there having chosen the Duke of Hamilton
their President, debated what Advice was sit to be given his Highness in that
juncture, but came to no Conclusion, farther than to give the Clerks that
attended Instructions to draw up in Writing what they then thought most
expedient.

On Tuesday the 8th. of January the Honorable Assembly met again, and the
Writing was presented; upon which they debated the most expedient way for
Convening the general meeting of the Estates of Scotland, and at last agreed in
their Opinion, ordering the Writing to be fair drawn over with the Amendments.

On Wednesday, the 9th. of January, they met at Three of the Clock, and the
Address was prepared, giving his Highness Thanks for his Pious and Generous
Undertaking, for preserving the Protestant Religion, and restoring the Laws and
Liberties of these Kingdoms; desiring him to take upon him the Administration
of the Affairs, Civil and Militatary, and dispose of the public Revenues, and
Fortresses of the Kingdom of Scotland, until the general Meeting of the States
of the Nation, which they humbly prayed his Highness to call, to be holden at
Edinburgh, the 14th. of March next, and to issue out his Letters for the
calling them, being Protestants.

These being the Heads and Substance of this Address, it was subscribed by 30
Lords, and about 80 Gentlemen, and was presented to his Highness in their
presence, by the Duke of Hamilton at St. James's, who thanked them for the
Trust they reposed in him, and desired a time to consider upon so wheighty an
Affair: When the next day his Highness again met the Scotch Lords and Gentlemen
at St. James's, and made them the following Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

IN pursuance of your Advice, I will, until the Meeting of the Estates in
March next, give such Orders concerning the Affairs of Scotland, as are
necessary for the Calling the said Meeting, for the preservation of the Peace,
the applying of the public Revenue to the most pressing uses, and putting the
Fortresses into the Hands of Persons in whom the Nation can have a just
Confidence; and I do farther assure you, that you will always find me ready to
concur with you in every thing, that may be found necessary for the securing
the Protestant Religion, and restoring the Laws and Liberties of the Nation.

By this time the Earl of Crauford, the Earl of Louthian, and others, being
come to Town, the former of these Earls desired his Highness that they might
subscribe the Address, which was accordingly granted, his Highness leaving
signal marks of a high satisfaction in the Countenances of the noble Assembly,
which demonstrated how much they were pleased with his Answer; nor no sooner
did the News arrive at Edinburgh, but it was received with the ringing of
Bells, loud Shouts, and Acclamations of Joy, and in the same manner swiftly
overspread that Kingdom.

The English Soldiers many of them having been imposed upon by ill affected
Persons to doubt their Pay, etc. his Highness was pleased to put forth a
public Assurance, that he had taken care for the satisfying and making good to
every Officer, and Soldier, their full Pay and Arrears, due to them until the
first day of January, 1688. and for the making constant and punctual payment of
Subsistence Money, and clearing of the Army in the usual method, without any
the least diminution of their former Pay, ordering all Officers to repair to
their respective Commands, and Soldiers to their Quarters and Rendezvous, under
such penalties as a refusal may incur; and that nothing might be wanting on his
part, His Highness in another Paper gave the like notice and assurance to the
Seamen belonging to the English Fleet, under the Command of the Lord
Dartmouth. And now the Royal African Company entreated his Highness to do them
the Honor of taking upon him to be their Governor for the ensuing year, and
made him a Present of 1000 l. in their Stock, worth 2000 l. which he very
favorably accepted.

Now the great Convention, on which the Eyes of all Europe are fixed, drawing
near, the Members who were chosen and returned came to Town, the Houses were
prepared for the Reception of the august Assembly, and on the 21th. of January
the High Sheriff, with all the considerable Gentlemen of Estate in the County
of Cambridge, having unanimously entered into an Association, whereby they
solemnly engage themselves to stand by His Highness the Prince of Orange, with
their Lives and Fortunes, in his glorious Design of Redeeming these Kingdoms
from Popery and Slavery, Mr. Cotton of Madingly was to wait upon His Highness,
and presented it in the Name of the County, to which His Highness was pleased
to return a very gracious Answer.

On the 22th. of January, according to the grand Appointment, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, assembled at Westminster, the Lord
Marquess of Halifax officiated the Place of Speaker, in the House of Lords, and
the Commons chose Henry Powle Esquire to be their Speaker, who accordingly took his
place: After which a Letter from his H^ghness the Prince of Orange was read in
both Houses on the Occasion of their Meeting, viz.

My Lords,
I Have endeavored to the utmost of my power to perform what was desired from
me, in order to the public Peace, and safety, and I do not know that any thing
has been omitted which might tend to the preservation of them, since the
Administration of Affairs was put into my hands; it now lies upon you to lay
the Foundation of a firm security for your Religion, your Laws, and Liberties.

I do not doubt but that by such a full and free Representative of the Nation
as is now met, the Ends of my Declaration will be attained; and since it has
pleased God hitherto to bless my good Intentions with so great success, I trust
in him that he will complete his own Work, by sending a Spirit of Peace and
Union to influence your Counsels, that no interruption may be given to a happy
and lasting settlement.

The dangerous condition of the Protestant Interest in Ireland, requiring a
large and speedy succor, and the present state of things abroad, oblige me to
tell you, That next to the danger of unseasonable Division amongst your selves,
nothing can be so fatal as too great delay in your Consultations; the States,
by whom I have been enabled to rescue this Nation, may suddenly feel the in
Effects of it, both by being too long deprived of the Service of their Troops,
which are now here, and of your early assistence against a powerful Enemy, who
has declared War against them; and as England is by Treaty already engaged to
help them, upon any such Exigencies, so I am confident that their cheerful
Concurrence to preserve this Kingdom with so much hazard to themselves, will
meet with all the Returns of Friendship and Assistence which may be expected
from you, as Protestants and English men, when ever their Condition shall
require it.


This Letter being read, and unanimously approved and applauded, with the
highest satisfaction, the Lords and Commons resolved upon an Address, to be
presented to his Highness, of Thanks for what he had done, and humbly to desire
him to continue the Administration of public Affairs, till farther application
should be made by them to his Highness, Which Address being presented to his
Highness on Wednesday the 22th. of January, he was pleased to return them this
Answer, viz.

Die Mercurii 23. Januarii, 1688/9. My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am glad that what I have done has pleased you, and since you desire me to
continue the Administration of Affairs, I am willing to accept it; I must
recommend to you the consideration of Affairs abroad, which makes it fit for
you to expedite your Business, not only for making a Settlement at home upon a
good Foundation, but for the safety of all Europe.


After this an Order was passed on the same day, That no Papist, or reputed
Papist, should presume to come into the Lobby, Painted Chamber, Court of
Requests, or Westminster- Hall, during the sitting of the Convention.

Then the Speaker of the honorable House of Commons put the House in mind of
the present Affairs of the Kingdom, recommending the speedy care of providing
for its safety to the respective Representatives, declaring The danger it was
lately in, and putting them in mind of the desperate State of Ireland; He
farther minded them of the growth of France, and concluded in recommending
these things to their prudent Care and Conduct, etc.

After these and other weighty considerations, an Order was made by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, for a public Thanksgiving, for our great
and miraculous deliverance from the imminent Danger that so lately hung over
our Heads.

Thursday the 31st. of January instant, being appointed for the City of London,
and Ten Miles distance, and Thursday the 14th. day of February following for
the rest of the Kingdom.

Thus all things concurring toward a happy Settlement, and Uniting of
Protestants, etc. in England and Scotland, let us look a little into the
Affairs of Ireland, which as yet has not the like prospect, as being very much
inhabited by Native Irish Papists, devoted Enemies to the Protestant Religion.
The Earl of Tyrconnel, whom the King had made his Lieutenant, or Deputy of that
Kingdom, taking the advantage of the hurry and disorder the Affairs of England
had put the People into, magnified their Fears, and used his endeavors to gain
them to a Revolt, but finding the Protestants in no wise forward to join or
take part with him, he instantly sent his Letters through all the Provinces and
Countries, to cause the Gentry and Peasants to take up Arms on the behalf of
the King, and the defense of their Religion, declaring, if the King himself
should in that juncture desire it, he would not deliver up his Sword; so that
leaving no endeavors to strengthen himself untried, he in a short time drew
together a formidable Army, and secured diverse Places of strength, fortifying
the Houses and Castles of several Noblemen; whereupon, it was thought fit to
send to him, and know his Intentions; but no farther satisfaction, at that
time, could be gained, than that he was resolved to stand for the King's
Interest, and expect his Commands, etc. and accordingly upon notice that he,
upon his a second time withdrawing himself, was in France, the Report went
current, that he sent thither to know his Pleasure; in the mean while, though
he offered no open Hostilities to the Protestants, yet in many Places he
oppressed them by Quartering his Soldiers at discretion in their Houses,
seizing their Arms, and taking Hostages.

His Highness the Prince of Orange having taken upon him, at the request of the
Lords and Commons, the farther Administration of Government in Civil and
Military Affairs, proceeded to the most effectual means for the better settling
the Army, and taking care for their Payment; and the better to assure them, and
encourage men of worth and true Valor, the sale of Offices, or Military
Employments are laid aside.

And now the Wisdom of the Nation having thought it, as we head, necessary to
have the presence of her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange in England, upon
this great juncture of Affairs, thereupon a Convoy of Men of War, as well
English as Dutch, was ordered to wait upon her till her Equipage could be got
in a readiness and the Wind served to bring over her Highness, etc.

During the Joy of the People, in expectation or the Arrival of her Royal
Highness, and the preparations for her Reception, we had News from France that
the King and Queen of England were frequently visited by the French Nobility,
and entertained with the accustomed Grandeur; and that the French King gave out
that he would have extraordinary Forces in the Field, early in the Spring, to
oppose the gathering Armies of the Confederate Princes, and States of Holland,
promising to himself those advantages which only Time can make out, or
determine: In opposition to which, and to disable him in the lessening his
Revenues, an Address was agreed on by the honorable Convention, Assembled at
Westminster, upon the great emergency of Affairs, to desire and entreat his
Highness the Prince of Orange to issue out his Proclamation for the prohibiting
the Importation of French Commodities, and the going out of any Ships hence for
France, farther recommending the State of Ireland, as its present Condition
requires, to his Care. On Wednesday the 30th. of January, being the anniversary
Solemnity for the Murder of King Charles I. Dr. Sharp, Dean of Norwich,
Preached before the House at St. Margarets Westminster; and on Thursday the
31th. of January, the day appointed for Thanksgiving, in the City of London,
and Ten miles round it, for the success of his Highness the Prince of Orange,
in the miraculous Deliverance he brought this Kingdom, etc. Dr. Gilbert Burnet,
now Bishop of Salisbury, according to the desire of the House, Preached before
them in the same Church, there being a numerous Assembly, who at the close of
that Sermon expressed an extraordinary satisfaction, the whole course of it
being managed with much Learning and Prudence, in every respect suitable to the
occasion of the day, and the Prayers appointed were read in the other Churches,
with the same acceptance.

And because the sixth of February was at hand, to prevent the Thanksgiving
formerly appointed to be held on that day, an Order of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, bearing date the second of the same Month, was made public in these
words:

Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, assembled at Westminster, that
the Day of Thanksgiving on the 6th. of February Instant, on which Day the late
King James II. came to the Throne, shall not be observed in this Kingdom.

Things being in this forwardness, a great many Citizens of London and
Westminster appeared in the Court of Requests with two Petitions, one to the
Lords, and another to the Commons, both to this Effect, viz. That they most
humbly desired that his most Illustrious Highness the Prince of Orange might be
speedily settled in the Throne, by whose Courage, Conduct, and Reputation, the
Nation and the Protestant Religion might be defended from Enemies abroad and at
home. That Ireland might be rescued from its deplorable Condition, and finally
the Kingdoms settled on a lasting foundation in Peace and Liberty.

These being received, and many weighty Considerations urging it, her Royal
Highness's Coming over was hastened, and being on her Departure for England,
the States General, the States of Holland, the Council of State, the Courts of
Justice, and all other Colleges, either in Body, or by their Deputies, made
their Complements to her on the Occasion; and the like was done by foreign
Ministers, and all other Persons of Quality; and at her Leaving the Hague, the
Magistrates entreated that the Burghers might attend her in Arms; but She
excused it; however the States of Holland appointed three of their Body to wait
upon her Royal Highness to the place of her Embarquing; sending Orders to the
Sieur d' Allemonde, and the Ships under his Command, to join Admiral Herbert,
who from England attended her with a Squadron of Men of war, and sundry
Yatches, for the better convenience of Transportation; and having a prosperous
Gale, on the 12th. of February, in the afternoon She safely arrived at
White Hall, having been saluted by the Guns of the Forts, Ships in the road and
those of the Tower, where the Royal Banner was displayed, and by that Example
the Ships likewise had put out their Flags and Streamers.

Great was the Joy upon the safe Landing of her Royal Highness, as appeared by
the repeated Acclamations of the People, and other public Demonstrations; and
that Night She received the Complements of the chief Persons of Quality. And
now the Two Houses thought it no longer necessary to delay Proclaiming the
Prince and Princess King and Queen of England, so that having at large declared
the Reasons for the Abdication of James II. laying down therein the
Illegalities in former Proceedings and Miscarriages in Government, etc. they
came to a Resolve, That William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, should
be Declared King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, with all the
Dominions thereunto belonging, to hold the Crown, and Royal Dignity of the said
Kingdoms and Dominions to them, during their Lives and the Life of the Survivor
of them; and that the sole and full Exercise of the Regal Power be only in, and
executed by the Prince in the Name of Himself and the Princess, during their
joint Lives; and after their Deceases, the Crown and Royal Dignities of the
Kingdoms and Dominions, to be to the Heirs of the Body of the Princess; and for
default of such Issue, to the Princess Ann of Denmark, and the Heirs of her
Body; and for default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of the Prince of
Orange.

And praying the Prince and Princess to accept this, accordingly the following
Oaths were appointed to be taken by such Persons of whom the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy might be required by Law; and farther, that the former
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy be Abrogated: After which the Oaths were
Enacted, viz.

I A. B. do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be faithful, and bear
true Allegiance to their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary.

So help me God.

I A. B. do Swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine, and Position, that Princes,
Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I
do declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has
or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence, or
Authority, Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual, within this Realm.

So help me God.

These and others, too many to be here inserted, being the Proceedings in order
to the Proclaiming, on the 13th. of February, the Two Houses went to acquaint
the Prince and Princess of Orange, in the Banqueting House, with what they had
done; and having received Their Consent thereto, the Lords and Commons, about
Eleven of the Clock, went down to White Hall Gate, where the Officers at Arms,
Sergeants at Arms, Trumpets, and other Persons, concerned in the Solemnity,
being assembled, by order of the Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, St.
Thomas St. George, Knight, Garter Principal King at Arms, having received a
Proclamation, and the Officers at Arms being Ordered by the House of Lords
forthwith to Proclaim it, York Herald, after the Trumpets had thrice Sounded,
Proclaimed it at White Hall Gate, Garter Reading it to him by Periods in the
Presence of the Lords and Commons, and a great Concourse of People, etc. and at
the end of the Proclamation the Palace, and all the adjacent Places, resounded
with the Echo of a general Joy, and loud Satisfaction; and from thence in
Excellent Order they proceeded to Temple Bar where (as the Ceremony is in this
Case, according to Custom) finding the Gates shut, two of the Officers at
Arms, attended by a Sergeant at Arms, and two Trumpets, knocked, and thereupon
the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex being informed of the Occasion of their
Coming, Ordered them to be opened, and the whole Proceeding entered (except the
Bailiff of Westminster, and his Men, who returned, as being obliged not to pass
the Bounds of their Liberty,) and here the Lord Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen,
received them in their Formalities, and a second Proclamation was made between
the two Temple-Gates, in the same manner and order; and the Lord Mayor,
Sheriffs, Aldermen, etc. falling into the Proceeding, they passed to
Wood-street-end in Cheapside and there made a third Proclamation, and a fourth
before the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, every time concluding with Shouts and
Acclamations of the People, who filled the Streets, Balconies, and Windows, in
great multitudes, and to prevent any Disorder, such an Excess of Joy might
occasion, four Regiments of the City Militia were in Arms to line the Way, for
the better convenience of Passage.

The Pomp of the Solemnity being over, and night coming on, the Bells and
Bonfires made a second Proclamation of the Peoples Satisfaction, and the news,
by the Thundering of the Cannon, was in a short time carried, by taking the
fire of the Guns from one Ship to another, beyond the Island it self; nor were
their curious Fireworks and Devices wanting on this Occasion; and the
Solemnity was more especially concluded with Magnificent Entertainments at
Court; and soon after their Majesty's, with the like Demonstration of Joy, were
Proclaimed in all the Cities and Principal Burghs, Towns of England, and
Dominion of Wales.

On the 15th. of February His Majesty returned both Houses a very Gracious
Answer to their Declaration, wherein he expressed Himself highly satisfied with
what they had done, and was pleased to promised them the utmost of his Care and
Protection, for the preservation of their Religion, Laws, and Liberties: and
that He would be willing to concur with them in any thing that should be for
the Good of the Kingdom, and to do all that in him lay to advance the Glory
and Welfare of the Nation.

About this time a Complaint was made, that diverse disorderly Persons,
notwithstanding a former Declaration, strictly enjoining the contrary,
continued to destroy the Deer, Timber, and Underwoods, in diverse Chases and
Forests. Farther Notice was published, Commanding all Mayors, Sheriffs,
Justices of the Peace, and others, whom it might concern, to seize, or cause
Persons found offending therein to be seized and proceeded against, according
to Law, without expectation of Pardon, if found guilty. And farther considering
that diverse had attempted to escape to Tyrconnel in Ireland, to aid him in
oppressing the Protestants of that Kingdom, Orders were taken for stopping the
Ports of Chester, Beaumaris, and Holy-head, and other Ports, and Creeks, on the
Irish Sea, and not to susser any Person or Persons whatsoever to go for
Ireland, unless those by whom a Pass was produced from his Majesty, or one of
his Principal Secretaries of State.

The Recorder, Sheriffs, and Common Sergeant of London having been to wait on
their Majesty's, by Order of the Lord Mayor and Common Council, to beg leave
from them to attend their Majesty's to Congratulate their happy Accession to
the Throne, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, went in a Body, and had the
favor of Waiting upon their Majesty's in the Banqueting House, and were
Graciously received, being admitted to Kiss their Majesty's Hands. And now we
received continual Relations of the Joy that was conceived throughout the whole
Shires of England, etc. Upon the several Proclaimings of King William and Queen
Mary, Expressed by Ringing of Bells, making of Bonfires, and drinking their
Healths.

On the 18th. of February in the morning the King went from White Hall, in his
Barge of State to the Parliament-Stairs, where he was received by several of
the great Officers, and others, the Yeomen of the Guards, and Gentlemen
Pentioners, making a Lane from the Waterside to the Door going up into the
Prince's Lodgings; the Proceedings being in this manner: First went the
Officers at Arms, then the Noblemen, bearing white Staves, and after them
Sergeants at Arms, the Garter King at Arms between two Gentlemen-Ushers,
immediately before the Sword of State, which was born by the Duke of Somerset,
having on the Left hand the Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, with his
Marshal's Staff, next went the Marquess of Winchester, bearing the Cup of
State, then the King, followed by an Officer of the Guards, and other Persons
of Quality, the Gentlemen Pentioners closing the Rear; and his Majesty being
come into the Prince's Lodging, was invested with his Sur-coat and Mantle of
Crimson Velvet, bordered with Gold-Lace, and furred with Ermins, as also with
the Collar of the Order of the Garter; and as soon as the Crown was placed upon
His Head, the Officers at Arms, and the Sergeants at Arms entered the House of
Lords, and the Noblemen, who preceded his Majesty, having placed themselves on
each side of the Throne, and his Majesty, whose Train was born up by Noble-mens
Eldest Sons, being-seated on the Throne, the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod
was commanded to summon up the Commons, who being accordingly introduced into
the House of Peers, and their Speaker conducted to the Bar, with the usual
Formalities, and the Lords being in their Robes, His Majesty made a most
Gracious speech, in which he was pleased to let them know how sensible he was
of their Kindness, and how much he valued the confidence they had reposed in
him; Assuring them that he would never do any thing that might lessen their
good Opinion of him, putting them in mind of the Allies abroad, and the hazard
they may run, especially Holland, unless some speedy Care were taken: That a
good Settlement was necessary at Home; particularly recommending to them the
dangerous State of Ireland, and the Methods to their spedy consideration.

On the 2d. of February the Lord Bishop on London, with the Clergy of the City,
to the number of an 100 waited on their Majesty's with an humble Tender of
their Fidelity and Duty, and being Graciously received, were admitted to kiss
their Majesty's Hands, the King at the same time being pleased to give them a
full Assurance of of his great Affection to the Church of England, and of all
the Protection and Encouragement to them, for which he gave them his Royal
Word; concluding with Assuring them, that they should ever find it so, and they
might depend upon it, the Houses resolved into a free Parliament. His Majesty
went on the 23d. of February by Water to the House of Lords, attended with the
usual Solemnity, and being in his Royal Robes, with the Crown on his Head,
seated on the Throne, and the Commons being sent for, His Majesty gave the
Royal Assent to an Act, for removing and preventing all Questions and Disputes
about the Assembling and Sitting of the present Parliament. And having disrobed
himself, he was attended to the Waterside with the like Ceremony as before,
and in the afternoon their Majesty's went to Hampton Court.

On the 28th. of February two Proclamations were issued forth by the King and
Queen, the one at the Request of the Honorable House of Commons to apprehend
Robert Brent, Gentleman, late of the Inner- Temple, charged with High Treason,
who procuring himself to be Bailed had left them, and fled from Justice, with
the Reward of 200 l. to any person that should discover or apprehend him, and
those that should conceal, or further his Escape, to be proceeded against with
the utmost severity according to Law.

The other for the bringing in and restoring of Arms that had been Embezled, or
Lost, during the Disorders and Disbandings amongst the Soldiers, that had been
in pay under the late King James; and upon advice that the Earl of Tyrconnel
labored to draw the Irish more and more to his Party, and confirm those that
were already in Arms with him, by laying before them the Danger already
incurred, their Majesty's, to leave them that should obstinately persist,
without excuse, issued forth a Proclamation, offering amongst other things
Pardon and Indemnity for all things, by those of the Earl's Party, if they laid
down their Arms, and retired themselves to their respective Habitations, and
Places of Abode, and there peaceably behaved themselves as good Subjects ought
to do; as likewise that they should upon this (ondition enjoy in full freedom
their Estates according to Law, and those of the Roman Church, upon such
Consideration to have all the Favor, for the private Exercise of their
Religion that the Law allows, with a promise speedily to call a Parliament in
that Kingdom; but on the Contrary declaring them Rebels, and Traitors. etc. and
their Lands and Possessions forfeited, and to be disposed and distributed to
those that should be Aiding, and Assisting in reducing the Kingdom to its due
Obedience.

This Proclamation it is thought, whether hindered by Tyrconnel's violence from
coming to the knowledge of the Vulgar, or creating a fear in his followers,
made him fly to his Last refuge of more strictly disarming the Protestants, as
well those in Cities that fell into his hands, as Gentlemen who were retired to
their Houses, where his Soldiers committed sundry Outrages of an high Nature,
Robbing and Pillaging without remorse or pity, though under a color excused
himself, by giving directions to the Magistrates to see that no wrong should be
done; however when Complaints were made, he urged necessity compelled his Men
to do what they did; yet the Protestants, especially in the North, stood to
their Arms, and repelled force by force, getting some supplies of Ammunition
out of Scotland, keeping the Town of Sligo, and other places of strength, with
a Longing expectation of the Arrival of the Forces and necessary Provisions
from England, to be thereby enable to carry on the War, and recover what has
been taken from them by the Irish Papists.

And now the duty of Hearth money being looked upon by the Commons, as a
grievance to the Subjects, and represented as such to his Majesty, the King was
pleased to send a message that he left it to their considerations, either to
regulate it, or to take it away, which was received with great satisfaction,
and forthwith the thanks of the House were ordered to be returned his Majesty
for his gracious Message; and on the 1st. of March in the Afternoon, the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament assembled, Waited upon his
Majesty in the Banqueting House and and there presented an Address of thanks,
wherein they expressed the Joy and Satisfaction they conceived at so
unpresidented an offer, humbly craving leave to present their Assurance, that
they-would make such grateful and affectionate returns, as were suitable to
his Majesty's most Gracious Intentions, and be so careful of the Support of
the Crown that the World should see, to the discouraging his Enemies, that his
Majesty reigns in the Hearts of his People, etc.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons Assembled in Parliament, made
likewise and Address to his Majesty, expressing therein how highly they were
sensible of their great and Signal deliverance, etc. And that being fully
convinced of the restless Spirits, and continued Endeavors of his Majesty's
and the Nations Enemies, for the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and
the Subversion of the Laws and Liberties, they unanimously declared, that they
would Stand by, and Assist his Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes, in
Supporting his Allies abroad, in reducing Ireland, and in defense of the
Protestant Religion of the Kingdom.

To this his Majesty was pleased to return them a very Gracious Answer,
expressing therein the valuable Esteem he had for Parliaments, and especially
for this, expressing his Satisfaction of the Confidence and Trust they had
reposed in him, and that it should be his Care never to give any Parliament
cause of distrust; and withal recommending to them the care of the Allies
abroad, and minding them of the great Expense the States of Holland had been
at in the Expedition and Zeal they had to promote it, and to second his
Majesty's Endeavors even with a neglect of their own Safety, not doubting but
their Generosity would not only enable him to make good his treaty with those
States, and repay what they actually laid out, and of which an account should
be given, but support them to their utmost Ability against the power of their
Enemies, considering both Interests were upon one and the same Bottom. As to
safety, his Majesty was likewise pleased to mind them of Ireland, and to let
them know, that in his opinion 20000 men would be required to render the
reducing it short and easy, as likewise setting out a Fleet which in
conjunction with that of Holland, might be so entirely Master of the Seas that
nothing might be sent from France to Ireland, or elsewhere, that might give a
disturbance to us or our Allies; farther recommending to their consideration
the settlement of the Revenues, that they might be collected without dispute;
promising that whatever should be given in order to public ends, should be
strictly applied to them, with many other Gracious expressions; concluding that
as they so freely offered to hazard all that is dear to them, so he would as
freely expose his Life for the Support of the Protestant Religion, and the
Honor and Safety of the Nation.

And now the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common
Council assembled as a grateful Acknowledgment to the Lords and Commons for
their excellent Conduction in Affairs, and especially their resolution to
assist and stand by his Majesty in supporting his Allies abroad, in reducing
Ireland, in defense of the Protestant Religion, and Laws of the Kingdom, drew
up two humble Addresses of Thanks, one to the Lords, and the other to the
Commons, which were presented and very kindly received; the first of these was
presented by the Recorder, and the last by the Sheriffs of the Honorable City,
who were dismissed with expressions of high Esteem, etc. For the said City an
Address of Thanks was likewise presented to his Majesty by the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council, upon his most condescending and unparalleled
Goodness in the Message he was pleased to send to the two Houses, in relation
to the Duty of Hearth-mony, promising as bound in duty and great obligations,
to be ready to serve and assist his Majesty as far as they were able in the
support of his Crown and Dignity, and for the maintaining the Protestant
Religion and Laws of the Land, and the speedy relief of the distressed
Protestants in Ireland, etc.

About this time we had News that the greatest part of the Regiment of Foot,
late commanded by the Lord Dumbarton, and some Companies of Fuziliers, made a
Mutiny near Ipswych, and seized on the Money sent down to pay them, with four
Fieldpieces, and refusing to obey the King's Orders, marched away, doing great
damage, and bringing a greater terror upon the Country people, proclaiming
King James, etc. whereupon both houses Addressed his Majesty that he would be
pleased to take such effectual Course, as in his Princely Wisdom should be
thought fit for the suppressing and bringing them to Justice; and that in the
mean time he would issue out his Royal Proclamation, declaring them and their
Adherents to be Rebels and Traitors, requiring all good Subjects to apprehend
subdue and prosecute them, etc. To which His Majesty was pleased to answer,
That he thanked both Houses for their Address, and that he had sent a Force of
Horse and Dragoons sufficient to suppress them, and that he would issue out a
Proclamation, as was desired.

On the 16th of March His Majesty went by water to the House of Lords, attended
with the usual Solemnity, and being in his Royal Robes, seated on the Throne,
and the Commons sent for up, His Majesty gave the Royal Assent to an Act
impowering him to apprehend such Persons as he should find just cause to
suspect are conspiring against the Government, and to an Act for annulling and
making void the Attainder of William Russel Esquire, commonly called Lord
Russel, and then in a gracious Speech, amongst other things, recommended to
them the settling the Oaths, to be taken by all persons to be admitted to
places of Trust; so that Papists might be excluded, and room left for all
Protestants that are willing to serve, the better to strengthen us against the
common Adversaries; and the same day a Proclamation was signed by His Majesty,
declaring those mutinous Officers and Soldiers, together with their Adherents,
Rebels and Traitors, etc. commanding all good Subjects to apprehend, subdue and
prosecute them as such.

To show this was no general defection of the Soldiers, but rather these few
drawn into so great a folly and oversight by sinister means, the same day an
Address was humbly presented to His Majesty, signed by the Officers superior
and subordinate, with the unanimous Subscriptions of the private Soldiers of
the Regiment of Foot under the conduct of the Right Honorable the Lord
Mordant, expressing therein their unfeigned Loyalty, willing Obedience, and
ready Zeal to serve his Majesty in all places and on all occasions. Nor was it
long ever those in Rebellion were brought under; for on the 19th of March the
Regiments of Horse commanded by Sir John Lanier, and Colonel Langston, having
joined the Dutch Troops of Horse and Dragoons, under the command of Lieutenant
General Ginkell, and being informed that the Rebels were marching toward
Seaford, they advanced in good Order, the Dragoons, making the left Wing; the
Rebels no sooner perceived the Troops, but they drew up in Batalia, planting
their four Fieldpieces to the best advantage, having on one side a great
Hedge, and on the other considerable Waters, which obliged the Dragoons to
swim; but perceiving the Resolution of the King's Troops to reduce them to
their Obedience, they beat a Parley, and laying down their Arms, surrendered upon
discretion; so that there were taken the four Fieldpieces, and twenty Officers,
and five hundred Soldiers were made Prisoners, and sent up to London, under a
Guard of Horse, and there secured in diverse Prisons, whilst another party of
Horse continued to search after such as had dispersed, some of which were
afterward taken, and secured in diverse Prisons.

Sir John Chapman, Lord Mayor of the City of London, dying on the of March, the
worthy Thomas Pilkington Esquire since being Knighted, elected Lord Mayor of that
City for the remaining part of this Year, was on the 22d presented to the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal, and afterward sworn at the Hustings,
according to Custom, and at five in the Afternoon was sworn without the Tower
Gate by the Right Honorable the Lord Lucas, chief Governor of the Tower, in
pursuance of their Majesty's Writ to him directed, and of the ancient usage at
such a time as the Exchequer Court is not holden at Westminster.

Having before made mention of the intended Convention in Scotland, and now the
time appointed for its sitting being come, it will not seem foreign to this
History to insert some remarkable passages and Transactions relating to it and
the Affairs of that Kingdom.

On the 14th of March, in obedience to the King of England's Letter, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons assembled at Edinburgh in one House, as
the Custom is, and chose Duke Hamilton their President, and considering the
Duke of Gourdon, a Roman Catholic, held the Castle, whose Cannon commanded the
City, they made an Act, by which they empowered the Earls of Lothain and
Tweddale to repair immediately to the Castle of Edinburgh, and to require him
and others of his persuasion there, in the Name of the Estates of this Kingdom,
to remove out of that Castle in twenty four hours after notice given, and to
leave the Charge thereof to the next commanding Officer, being a Protestant,
and that he, and those that were with him, upon such a compliance, should have
assurance from the Estates, to be secured and indempnified as to any thing they
had acted in that or any other Station, contrary to Law, as being Papists.

This done, they nominated a Committee of Election consisting of 15 persons,
five of each Estate, and after some debate, whether the Lords Spiritual were a
distinct Estate, or only a part of the same Estate with the Lords Temporal,
which was laid aside by the House, inclining to the Negative, and rejecting the
Protestations against the sitting of the Earl of Argile before his Father's
Attainder was taken off. A Motion was made, that in consideration the City was
full of People, and many of them armed, to prevent disorders, it was not
inconvenient to command all persons, who were not Inhabitants, nor immediately
belonging to the Members of this Convention, to depart the place, but it was
the Opinion of the House, that the Castle, in the command of whose Cannon the
City was, ought to be first surrendered, and for their better assurance, a
Committee was ordered to take care that no violation of the Peace were made.
And the next day the Duke of Gourdon having sent a Paper by way of Excuse, for
holding the Castle contrary to the mind of the Estates, it was read, and
advantageous Terms offered him, and those with him, in consideration of a
speedy Surrender; but soon after he discovered his Design was only to trifle,
that he might gain time, which obliged them to send for such a competent number
of armed Men, as was capable to block it up, and prevent the Excursions of the
Besieged; so that small bickerings frequently happened, though without any
considerable damage. In the mean while two Letters came to the Convention, one
from King William, and the other from the late King, of which only the first
was approved, and the Convention proceeded to take measures much like those of
England, declaring the Throne vacant, etc. and made preparation in order to
fill it, suffering Men and Arms from England to enter that Kingdom, and it was
in fine concluded, that King William and Queen Mary should be crowned King and
Queen of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the Crown offered them with an Instrument
of Government to settle and regulate particulars.

Whilst these things passed in Scotland, with others of the like purport, a
Proclamation by the King and Queen was issued out give to notice to the Peers,
and such as had any Claim, or Right of Tenure, that the Royal Solemnity of
their Coronation was to be celebrated April 11th 1689. and on the 21st of March
his Majesty going to the House of Lords, attended in the usual solemnity, and
being in his Royal Robes, seated on the Throne, and the Commons being sent for
up, gave his Royal Assent to an Act for granting a present Aid to their
Majesty's; and on the 31st of March the Right Reverend Dr Gilbert Burnet, being
before Bishop elect of Salisbury, was consecrated according to the form
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, in the Chapel of the Palace at Fulham,
by the Lord Bishops of London, Winchester, Landaff, St Asaph, and Carlisle, by
virtue of a Commission granted to them by his Grace the Archbishop of
Canterbury.

On Apr. 3. his Majesty went by water to the House of Lords, attended with the
usual solemnity, and in the usual manner gave the Royal Assent to an Act for
exhibiting a Bill in the present Parliament for naturalizing the most Noble
Prince George of Denmark; also to an Act for Reviving of Actions and Process
lately depending in the Courts of Westminster, and discontinued by not holding
of Hilary Term, and for supplying other Defects relating to Proceedings at Law;
likewise to an Act for punishing Officers or Soldiers who shall mutiny or
desert their Majesty's Service; and in the Afternoon a Chapter being held of
the most noble Order of the Garter, Duke Frederick Marshall de Schomberg,
General of his Majesty's Forces, and Master General of the Ordnance; and the
Right Honorable William Earl of Devonshire Lord Steward of his Majesty's
Household, were elected Knight-Companions of the Order, and invested with the
Garter and George, having been first Knighted by the Sovereign with the usual
Ceremony; and Dr. Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury, was sworn and admitted
Chancellor of that Order. On the 5th. of April his Grace the Duke of Ormond
was installed in St. George's Chapel Knight-Companion of the Noble Order, by
the Duke of Grafton, and the Earl of Rochester, two Knight-Companions, who were
thereunto Commissioned by the Sovereign, with the usual Ceremonies; which done,
his Grace entertained the Commissioners, together with diverse Persons of
Quality, and the Officers of the Order, at a noble Dinner, at the middle
whereof Garter King at Arms, accompanied with the Officers at Arms, proclaimed
his Grace's Style.

About this time His Majesty caused notice to be given to all Protestant
Officers that had been disbanded in Ireland, or lately quitted their Commands,
they who were not yet employed in his Service to bring in their Names and
Certificates of their former Commands, in order to their entering into Service,
and Pay, etc. and to prevent false and seditious Rumors, as to the lessening
the Pay of such Soldiers as should be sent over to the Low Countries, His
Majesty was pleased to issue forth his Proclamation to assure them of full
English Pay, and upon the English Establishment, as full to all Intents as any
other Regiments of his own Subjects of the same Quality, remaining in the
Kingdom of England.

The Parliament assembled at Westminster, having duly weighed and considered
the high consequence, as to the security of our Religion, Laws, etc. in the
Efficacy of a Coronation, an Act being drawn up, it passed the Royal Assent the
9th of April, in the 1st Year of their Majesty's Reigns, entitled, An Act for
establishing the Coronation Oath.

The Oath in manner and form to be tendered.
The Archbishop or Bishop shall say. Will you solemnly promised and swear to
govern the People of this Kingdom of England, and the Dominions thereto
belonging, according to the Statutes in Parliament agreed on, and the Laws and
Customs of the same?


The King and Queen shall say, I solemnly promise so to do.


Archbishop or Bishop. Will you to your power cause Law and Justice in Mercy to
be executed in all your Judgments?


King and Queen. I will.


Archbishop or Bishop. Will you to the utmost of your Power maintain the Law of
God, the true Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed Religion
established by Law? And will you preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy of this
Realm, and to the Churches committed to their Charge, all such Rights and
Privileges as by Law do or shall appertain to any of them?


King and Queen. All this I promise to do.


After this the King and Queen laying his and her hand upon the holy Gospel,
shall say, King and Queen. These things which I have here before promised, I
will perform and keep, So help me God.


Then the King and Queen shall kiss the book. And this Oath by the same Act is
to be administered to all the Kings and Queens that shall succeed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm at their respective Coronations, by one of the
Archbishops or Bishops, and to be done in public.

Thus every thing being in a readiness, and the expected day arrived, their
Majesty's being come from White Hall to Westminster, the Heralds began to put
the Proceedings in order, the Peers in the Lords House, and the Peeresses in
the painted Chamber; so that about eleven in the morning their Majesty's and
the whole Proceeding were conducted into Westminster Hall, where at the upper
end a Throne being erected, their Majesty's took their Seats under their Cloth
of State on the inside the Table, which done, the Master of the Jewel-house
presented to the Lord High Constable the Sword of State, also the Sword
Curtana, and the two pointed Swords in their order, who in the like order
delivered them to the Lord Great Chamberlain, and he having drawn them out of
the Scaboards, laid them on the Table before their Majesty's, as likewise the
Spurs. After which the Dean and Prebendaries of Westminster bring the Crowns
and other Regalia, presented them severally, and then they were delivered to
those Lords whose Office or Trust it was to bear them. Then the Proceeding
began from Westminster Hall to the Abbey, where being entered, and each seated
or placed in order, the Lord Bishop of London began with the Recognition, which
ending with a general Shout and universal Acclamation of Joy, their Majesty's
offered, and the Lords who carried the Regalia offered them at the Altar
severally to be there disposed; after which the Litany was sung by the Bishops
of St. Asaph and Bangor; which ended, the Communion Service began, the Epistle
taken out of the 1 Pet. 2. ver. 13, 17. was read by the Bishop of Carlisle, and
the Gospel out of Mat. 22. 16, 22. was read by the Bishop of St. Asaph, after
which followed the Nicene Creed, and by this time the Bishop of Salisbury being
in the Pulpit, after repeating the Lords Prayers took his Text 2 Samuel 23.3, 4.
viz. The Lord God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, he that
rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God; and he shall be as the
Light of the morning when the Sun rises, even a morning without Clouds, as the
tender Grass springing out of the Earth, by clear shining after rain.

The Sermon, which lasted half an hour, being ended, their Majesty's took the
new established Oath before mentioned, and after Veni Creator, was sung, and
the Holy Oil consecrated, their Majesty's were conducted to their Royal Chairs,
placed on the Theater, where the Honorable Members of the House of Commons,
who with their Speaker were seated in the north Cross, might have a full
prospect, and there being disrobed of their Crimson Mantles, their Majesty's
were solemnly anointed, and presented with the Spurs and Sword, which being
offered up, and redeemed by the Earl of Portland, their Majesty's were invested
with the Imperial Robes and Orbs, after that with the Rings and Sceptres, and
about four of the Clock the Crowns were placed on their heads by the Lord
Bishop of London, assisted by the Lord Bishop of Rochester, upon which the
Drums beat, the Trumpets sounded, the great Guns were fired, yet were drowned
in a manner by the loud shouts and joyful Acclamations of the People; and the
Peers and Peeresses putting on their Coronets, the holy Bible was presented to
their Majesty's; and after the Benediction they vouchsafed to kiss the Bishops,
and then Te Deum was sung, and they ascended the Throne; the Archbishop and
Bishops doing jointly Homage, and kissed their Majesty's left Cheeks, and after
them the Temporal Peers did the like, whilst the Medals were cast about by the
Treasurer of the Household, inscribed on one side, Ne totus absumatur, and on
the other Gulielmus and Maria Rex and Regina. After this began the Communion,
their Majesty's making their second Offering, and having received the Holy
Sacrament they went in State into St. Edward's Chapel, where being divested of
the Imperial Palls, etc. and robed in Purple Velvet, returned to
Westminster Hall with their Crowns of State on their Heads, the Peers and
Peeresses wearing their Coronots where a very splendid Entertainment was
furnished at sundry Tables, and between the first and second course Charles
Dymcke Esquire their Majesty's Champion, came on Horseback completely armed,
between the Lord High Constable and Earl Marshal, both on Horseback, and made
his Challenge, which was pronounced by York Herald in these words, viz.

If an Person of what degree soever, high or low, shall deny or gainsay our
Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, King and Queen of
England, France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, to be rightful King and
Queen of this Realm of England, or that they ought not to enjoy the Imperial
Crown of the same, Here is their Champion who says he lies, and is a false
Traitor, being ready in Person to combat with him, and in this Quarrel will
adventure his Life against him on what day soever be shall be appointed.

After which their Majesty's Styles were proclaimed in Latin, French, and
English, and about eight in the evening they returned to White Hall.

This caused great Rejoicing in Holland as well as England, the States ordering
it to be expressed by Bells, Bonfires, and Fireworks, etc. The Convention in
Scotland declared their Majesty's King and Queen in the following manner, viz.

After the Vote had passed, the Estates, assisted by the Ld. Provost,
Magistrates, and Council of Edinburgh, attended by Lion, King at Arms, Heralds,
Pursuvants and Trumpets, went to the Cross on foot, proclaimed their Majesties'
King and Queen of Scotland, and deputed some of the Estates to offer the Crown
with an Instrument of Government for settling that Kingdom,

A Table of the chief Ministers of State, and Officers of Trust, newly made by
the King and Queen of England.
The most Honorable Privy Council. HIS Royal Highness Prince George of
Denmark, Duke of Cumberland, etc. Lord A. B. Cant. Marquess of Caermarthen, E.
of Danby and L. President of the Council. Marquess of Halifax, L. Privy Seal,
D. of Norfolk Earl-Marshal of England. Duke of Bolton, Marquess of Winchester.
E. of Lindsey L. Great Chamberlain of Engl. E. of Devonshire, L. Steward of his
Majesty's Household. E. of Dors. and Midds. Ld. Chamberlain of his Majesty's
Household. E. of Oxford. E. of Shrewsbury, his Majesty's Principal Secretary of
State. E. of Bedford, E. of Bath. E of Macelesfield. E. of Nottingham,
principal Secret. of State. E. of Fauconberg. E. of Monmouth Lord Mordant. E.
of Montague. E. of Marlborough, Lord Churchill. E. of Portland Mr. Bertinck
Groom of the Stole to his Majesty. Visc. Newport, Treasurer of his Majesty's
Household. Visc. Lumley. Visc. Sidney. Ld. Bishop of London. Ld Wharton. Ld.
Delamere. Sir Robert Howard Knight. Sir Henry Capell Knight. Sir John Lowther Barronet,
Vice-Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household. Mr. H. Powle Speaker of the H. of
Commons. Mr. Edward Russell. Mr. Richard Hambden. Mr. Hugh Boscawen. Thomas
Wharton Esquire Comptroller of his Majesty's Household. William Harbord Esquire
Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal. Sir John Maynard Knight. Sir Anthony Kecke
Knight. Sir William Rawlinson Knight.
Commissioners for the Office of Lord High Admiral. Arthur Herbwert Esquire Earl of
Carbery. Sir Michael Wharton Bar. Sir Thomas Lee Bar. Sir John Chichely Knight.
Sir. John Lowther of White-haven Bar. William Sacherverill Esquire
Lords of the Treasury. Earl of Monmouth. Lord Delamere. Lord Godolphin. Sir
Henry Capel Knight. Richard Hampden Esquire
New Knights of the Garters. Duke Frederick Marshall de Scomberg. General of
his Majesty's Forces and Master-General of the Ordnance. Earl of Devonshire.
Duke of Ormond.
New Bishops. Dr. Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury. Dr. Trewlawny B. of Exet.
Ld. Lovelace Captain of the Band of Gentlemen-Pensioners. Ld. Lucas Chief
Governor of the Tower of London. Ld. Willoughby of Eresby Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster. Sir Henry Pollixfen Knight. Attorney General. Sir George Treby
Knight. Solicitor-General. Clerks of the Privy Council. Sir John Nicholas Knight. of
the Bath. William Blaithwayt Esquire Charles Montague Esquire Richard Colling Esquire
Commissioners for the Customs. Hon. George Booth Esquire Sir Richard Temple Bar.
and Knight. of the Bath. Sir John Worden Bar. Sir Robert Southwell Bar. Sir Robert
Clayton Knight. Sir Patient Ward. Thomas Pelham Esquire
Commissioners for the Excise. Sir Henry Fane Knight. Sir Henry Ashurst Knight. Sir
Humphrey Edwin Knight. Thomas Frankland Esquire Francis Parry Esquire John Danvers Esquire John
Wilcox Jun. Esquire
The Lords Lieutenants appointed by his Majesty. Bedford E. of Bedford. Berks
D. of Norfolk. Bucks E. of Bridgw. Cambr. E. of Bedford. Chesh. Ld. Delamere.
Cornw. E. of Bath. Cumb. E. of Carlysle. Derby E. of Devon. Devon E. of Bath.
Dorset E. of Bristol. Essex E. of Oxford. Glouc. E. of Matclesfied. Heref. E.
of Matclesfield. Hertf. E. of Shrewsbury, during the Minority of the E. of
Essex. Hunt. E. of Manchester. Kent E. of Winchester. Lanc. E. of Derby. Leic.
E. of Rutland. Linc. E. of Lindsey. Midds. E. of Clare. Monm. E. of Macclesf.
Norf. D. of Norfolk. Northum. Ld. V. Lumly. Northamp. E. of Monm. Not. E. of
Kingston. Oxon E. of Abingdon. Salop Ld. Visc. Newp. Some. L. Vis. Fitz-harding.
Southamp. D. of Bolton. Stafford Ld. Paget. Suffolk Ld. Cornwallis. Surrey D.
of Norfolk. Sus. E. of Dors. and Midd. Warw. E. of Northampt. Worcester E. of
Shrewsb. Westminster. Sir. J. Lowther. Wilts. E. of Pembroke. York East R.E. of
Kings. -- North. R.E. Falconb. -- West Rid.E. of Danby S.N. Wales E. of Maccl.

A List of the Chaplains to be waiting on their Majesty's.
March. DR. Horneck. Dr. Bright. Mr. Kidder. Dr. Fowler.
April. Dr. Tillotson. Dr. Stillingfleet. Dr. Stratford. Mr. Young.
May. Mr. Brograve. Dr. Scott. Dr. Alderidge. Mr. Wake.
June. Dr. Fuller. Dr. Grove. Dr. Ironside. Dr. Baily.
July. Dr. Hescard. Dr. Megott. Dr. Tennison. Mr. Bramson.
August. Dr. Belk. Dr. Hough. Mr. Wiggan. Mr. Williams.
September. Dr. Sharp. Dr. Craddocke. Dr. Edwards. M. Staino.
October. Dr. Goodman. Dr. Beveridge. Dr. Freeman. Dr. Turner.
November. Dr. Jane. Dr. Smith. Dr. Hall. Dr. Doughty.
December. Dr. Patrick. Mr. Pelling. Dr. Horden. Mr. Blagrave.
January. Mr. Lamb. Mr. Manningham. Dr. Hooper. Dr. Mills.
February. Mr. Fielding. Dr. Only. Dr. Brabant. Dr. Mountague.

Officers newly made to the Queens Majesty. EArl of Wiltshire, Ld. Chamberlain.
Ld. Coot Treasurer. Abel Tassind' Allone Esquire Principal Secretary, and Master of
Requests. Countess of Derby, Groom of the Stole.

FINIS.

