DIEV ET MON DROIT

White Paper in England.
JAMES R.

WHereas the making of the best and finest sorts of Writing and Printing Paper
has been by great Charge and Industry brought to perfection, whereby many
thousands of Our Subjects who are destitute of Employment, and are Burthensom
to the Parishes wherein they live will be set on Work, and vast Sums of Money
which are daily sent abroad for Foreign Paper, preserved in this Our Kingdom.
And whereas the Governor and Company of White-Paper-Makers have made it appear
to Us, That (to their great Loss and Discouragement) several evil disposed
Persons, Foreigners and others, designing to destroy the said Manufacture, and
to hinder its Establishment here, have endeavored to Corrupt, and as well by
promises of Reward, as by Menaces, to withdraw the Companies Servants from
their Service, and have lately conveyed several of them beyond the Seas: For
the preventing of such and the like Designs and Practices for the future, and
for the Encouragement of so good and profitable a Manufacture in this Our
Kingdom, We of Our Princely Care have thought fit to give the said Governor and
Company all possible Encouragement, and to take them into Our Royal Potection;
And We do by this Our Royal Proclamation, by and with the Advice of Our Privy
Council, Strictly Prohibit and Forbid all and every Person and Persons, of what
Quality, Degree or Nation soever, to Corrupt, Withdraw, or Iutice away, or
attempt by any ways or means to Corrupt, Withdraw, or Iutice away from the said
Company, any Person or Persons whatsoever who now are, or at any time hereafter
shall be Employed in their Service, upon pain of Our highest Displeasure, and
of being Punished with the utmost Severity, as Violaters of Our Laws. And for
the better and more speedy Discovery and Apprehending of Offenders in this
kind, We do hereby Grant unto the said Governor and Company, and their
Successors, full Power and Authority under their Common Seal, from time to time
to Constitute and Appoint a fit Person at each of their respective Mills, who
shall have Authority to Apprehend and Carry any Offender or Offenders, before
some one of Our Justices of the Peace, in order to be proceeded against
according to Law. And as a further Encouragement to the said Company, We have
Prohibited, and do hereby Prohibit the Exportation of all Linnen-Rags, Glovers
Clippings, Parchment Shreds, Calves Pates, and Waterpieces, being necessary
Materials for the said Manufacture; And We do hereby Charge and Command the
Commissioners, and every of the Officers of Our Customs to see the same duly
Executed; And We do hereby also strictly Charge and Command all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and all other of Our Officers and Ministers
whatsoever whom it shall or may concern, at all times, and upon all occasions,
to be Aiding and Assisting to the said Governor and Company, and their several
Officers, Agents and Servants, in the due Execution of this Our Royal Will and
Pleasure herein before Declared, and in the Apprehending, Seizing and Punishing
of all Offenders touching the Premises, as they tender Our Pleasure, and will
answer the contrary at their utmost Perils.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Nine and twentieth Day of April, 1687. In
the Third Year of Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1687.


