A true Copy of a LETTER Sent by S. J. an Eminent Minister of the Church of
England, TO Sir Tho. Armestrong Prisoner in Newgate, on the 18th of this
Instant June, 1684.
Sir Thomas,
NOw is the day at hand in which your strong held Soul and Body must be
disunited and dissolved by Death: I shall not here stand to mention the
hainousness of your crime, and the Merits of your Death. You are now shortly to
appear before the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, for whose unavoidable
Assize I hope you prepare for; Conscientia mill testes, there is no Bribing,
no Subornation of Juries nor Evidence; If your own Heart Condemn you, God is
greater then your Heart, and knows all things: It is no great matter to stand
upon those punctillions of honor, how, or after what manner you shall make
your exit, and Death close your Eyes; Whether longer or shorter? whether Nobly
or Ignominiously? (as to Worldly Fame) whether in the Field or in the Bed?
whether by the Axe or the Gibbet? It is your Soul I aim at: It is true your
Crime was great here, (I beg your Pardon) I do not intend to insult over one,
Mortuus* in Lege, a dying Man a dead Lion: But that I may by these just
considerations, raise the Spring of your Soul to a right consideration, and a
true pitch for Eternity; and as your Life makes atonement to the King, it must
be your true Repentance, Prayers and Tears with strong Sighs and Groans that
must make atonement through Christ to God Almighty, which is the only thing I
heartily desire for, and am fellow Labourer with you: That this your sincere
and true Repentance may so animate your Soul, that may prepare it for an
Eternal weight of Glory.

The best Cordial I can give you, or prescribe to you in this present Disease (
In terticulo morbis) is the Word of God: Where I shall first advise you to Read
as soon as may be, That you find your Soul hovering after Eternal Happiness, is
the 88 Psalm, both as it is in the Bible and also altered something in the
Common Prayer Book: There is nothing in the whole Word of God does more
correspond with your present condition. And this truly humbling to you, and
inclining your Soul to seek for Soul saving comfort, turn to the 55 of Isaiah 6
and 7 ver. Other promises of Mercy I doubt not but you will apply to your self,
and in that safe way and Method our dear Lord and Savior has Scoured out unto
you, from his own Promises and Intercession. Thus prepared like Moses the
Servant of the Lord, when he had by God himself his day and place appointed for
Death, in the 32 of Deuteronomy. and so on, He is nothing dismayed, but Sings his
Song, makes his Speech, gives his Blessing, goes cheerfully up at the Command
of God and Dies. I pray God so Blessed a Saint may be your Pattern, and that
your Sins may be freely Pardoned, and your Soul may be Eternally saved.

Is the most Ardent desire, and Prayers of him that was your Acquaintance, and
now a poor Intercessor at the Throne of Grace, for you.

LONDON, Printed for A. Bancks.

Entered according to Order.


