J2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King, A PROCLAMATION For putting in Execution the Law against
Importation and Selling of Foreign Buttons, and Prohibiting all Foreign Buttons
whatsoever.
JAMES R.

Whereas for the Encouragement of great Numbers of the Inhabitants of this Our
Kingdom, a good and profitable Law was made in the Fourteenth Year of the Reign
of Our late Brother of Blessed Memory, Entitled, An Act Prohibiting the
Importation of Foreign Bonelace, Cutwork, Imbroidery, Fringe, Bandstrings,
Buttons, and Needlework, That no person or persons whatsoever should from and
after the Twenty fourth day of June One thousand six hundred sixty two, Sell or
cause to be Sold, or offer to Sale within the Kingdom of England, or Dominion
of Wales, or Export any Foreign Bonelace, Cutwork, Imbroidery, Fringe,
Bandstrings, Buttons or Needlework, made of Thread, Silk, or any or either of
them in Parts beyond the Seas, or Import, Bring in, Send or Convey, or cause to
be brought in, Sent or Conveyed into the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of
Wales, any such Foreign Bonelace, Cutwork, Fringe, Imbroidery, Bandstrings,
Buttons, or Needlework made of Thread and Silk, or any or either of them,
beyond the Seas after the First day of May, which should be in the said Year of
Our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty and two, upon Pain that all and every
person and persons who shall Sell, or cause to be Sold, or offer to Sale any
such Foreign Bonelace, Cutwork, Imbroidery, Fringe, Bandstrings, Buttons or
Needlework, shall Forfeit and Loose for every Offense by him Committed contrary
to the said Act, the Sum of Fifty pounds, and the whole Bonelace, Cutwork,
Imbroidery, Fringe, Bandstrings, Buttons, or Needlework so Sold, or caused to
be Sold, or uttered to Sale; And upon further Pain, That all and every person
and persons who should Import, Bring in, Send or Convey, or cause to be brought
in, Sent or Conveyed into this Our Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales,
any such Bonelace, Cutwork, Imbroidery, Fringe, Bandstrings, Buttons or
Needlework, should Forfeit and Loose for every Offense by him Committed
contrary to the said Act, the Sum of One hundred pounds, and the whole
Commodities aforesaid; And although by the plain intent and meaning of the said
Act, all Foreign Buttons whatsoever were Prohibited to be Imported or put to
Sale within this Our Kingdom, Yet We are given to understand, by the Humble
Petition of many of Our Poor Subjects brought up in the Trade of Button-making,
that several persons of late for their own private Lucre* have Imported and
Sold within this Our Kingdom, diverse great quantities of Foreign Hair-Buttons,
to the utter Ruin of multitudes of Families who have been Exercised and
Maintained in and by the Trade of Button-making, as well in and about Our City
of London as other parts of Our Kingdom, whereby the great Mischiefs intended
to be Redressed by the said Act, are likely to fall heavy upon Our Poor
Subjects, and humbly Praying the timely Interposition of Our Princely Care
therein, We were most Graciously pleased to hear the Matter Debated by the
Council of the Merchants Importers, and of the Button-Makers before Our Self in
Council; Upon Hearing whereof, receiving Satisfaction, That by the true meaning
of the Law, all manner of Foreign Buttons were intended to be Prohibited, and
that the late Practice set on Foot of Importing Hair-Buttons, if continued,
will Overthrow and Frustrate the main Design of the said Act, to the inevitable
Ruin of Multitudes of Our Poor Subjects, as was fully made appear to Us; And
being likewise satisfied that the late Practice received Encouragement from the
Doubtful Penning of some Parts of the said Act, though the Principal Scope and
Design of the Law was to Exclude the whole Manufacture of Foreign Buttons,
which possibly may engage Our Poor Subjects of that Trade in many Expensive
Suits at Law: For prevention whereof, and the Mischiefs which are likely to
ensue upon such an Evil Practice, We have thought fit, by and with the Advice
of Our Privy Council to Publish and Declare Our Pleasure to be, That the said
Act be duly and effectually observed and put in Execution against all Importers
and Sellers of Foreign Buttons, according to the true intent and meaning of the
said Act. And to prevent all Disputes herein for the future, We do by this Our
Royal Proclamation strictly Charge, Prohibit and Command, That no Person or
Persons, Natives, Aliens or others do, or shall from henceforth Import or Bring
in, or cause to be Imported or brought into this Our Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, or Port or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, any Foreign Buttons
whatsoever, made or to be made in any Foreign Parts whatsoever, by way of
Merchandise, or to be Sold, Bartered or Exchanged. And that no Person or
Persons shall at any time hereafter Directly or Indirectly Buy, Bargain or
Contract for or concerning the Importation of any Foreign Buttons, of what sort
or kind soever, or Utter or Sell any Foreign Buttons whatsoever, which from
henceforth shall be Imported from any Parts beyond the Seas, upon Pain of such
Punishment as by Law may be Inflicted upon Contemners of Our Royal Authority.
And We do further Charge and Command as well the Commissioners of Our Customs,
Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, VVaiters, and all other Officers of Our
Custom-Houses and Ports in Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Our
Port or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and also all Our Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Headboroughs, Constables, and other Our Officers
Civil within Our said Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Port or Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, to Seize and Destroy, or to cause to be Seized and
Destroyed all such Foreign Buttons which from henceforth shall be Imported or
Bartered, Sold or Exchanged contrary to Our Royal Pleasure herein Declared, in
whose hands soever they shall be found, and to Bind over, or cause to be Bound
over, the Offenders herein, to Appear in Our Court of Kings Bench, to Answer
their Contempt herein at Our Suit, and to be in all other Respects from time to
time Aiding and Assisting in all things requisite for and touching the
Observation and Execution of these Our Commands, as they will Answer to Us the
contrary.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Eighteenth day of November, In the Third
Year of Our Reign.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1687.


