DIVES AND LAZARUS.

Dives and Lazarus, or rather, Devilish DIVE. Delivered in a Sermon at Paul's
Cross; by R. J. Preacher of the Word, etc.






DIVES AND LAZARUS. Or, Rather Devilish DIVES.

Delivered in a Sermon at Paul's Cross; by R. J. Preacher of the Word.

Very necessary for these Times and Purposes; published for the greater comfort
of those that taste the bitterness of Affliction.

Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

The One and twentieth Edition.

LONDON, Printed for W. Thackeray, at the sign of the Angel in Duck Lane. 1677.

Dives and Lazarus. Or, Rather Devilish DIVES.
Luke 16. Verse 19, etc. There was a certain Rich man clothed in Purple and
fine Silk, and fared well and deliciously every day.

20. Also there was a certain Beggar named Lazarus, which lay at his gate full
of sores.

21. And desired to be refreshed with the Crumbs that fell from this Rich man's
Table: Yea, the Dogs came and licked his sores.

22. And it was so that the Beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's Bosom; the rich man also died and was buried.

23. And being in Hell torments, he lift up his eyes, and saw Abraham a far
off, and Lazarus in his bosom, etc.


THese words (Right Honorable) Right Worshipful, and) beloved, have relation
unto the precedent verses in this Chapter, wherein our Savior Christ, from the
thirteenth Verse, to the seventeenth, reproves the Covetousness of the
Pharisees by showing unto them; that no man can serve two Masters, that is, God
and Riches. All these things heard the Pharisees, which were covetous, and they
mocked him: Whereupon he aptly and fitly takes occasion to relate this Parable
of this Rich man and Lazarus.

Hearken, and I will speak of a great Rich Man, that flourished here on Earth
in all Pomp and Abundance, that shined in courtly Purple Robes, that was
clothed in Bussus and fine Silk, and fared deliciously, that was iodged
softly, that lived pleasantly. But understand what became of this Rich man; His
years being expired, and his days numbered and his time determined, he was
invited to the fatal banquet of black ugly Death, that makes all men Subject
to the Rigor of his Low; his Body was honorably buried, in respect of his
much Wealth; but what become of his Sold That was carried from his Body to
dwell with the Devil; from his Purple Robes, to burning Flames, from his soft
Silk and white Byssus, to cruel Pains, in black Abyssus, from his Palace here
on earth, to the Palace of Pluto in Hell; from Paradise to a Dungeon, from
pleasures to pains, from joy to torment, and that by hellish means, damned
spirits, into the Infernal Lake of Bottomless Barathrum, where is woe, woe; As
alas, Where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 25. The wicked
shall be turned into Hell, and all the People that forget God, Psalm. 6.

Hearken also of a certain Poor Beggar clothed in Rags, with miseries pained,
pained with griefs, grieved with sores, sorely tormented, unmercifully
condemned, lying at this Rich man's Gate, desiring to be refreshed but with the
crumbs that fell from the Rich man's Table; the Dogs had more pity than this
Rich man, on this distressed creature, for they came to visit him, they come to
comfort him, they came and licked his sores.

Well! his time being also determined, he went the way of all flesh, and death
was the finisher of all his miseries and griefs; Vita assumsit mortem, ut mors
vitam acciperet, He dy^d once, to live for ever. And what became of his Soul?
It was carried from his Body, to his Master, from a House of Clay, to a House
not made with hands, from a Wilderness, to a Paradise, from an earthly Prison
to a Heavenly Palate, from the Rich man's Gate, to the City of the Great God,
from pains, to Pleasures, from Miseries, to Ioys, from A clam's Corruption, to
Abraham's bosom. I was carried by Angels into the Quires of Angels, to have his
being and moving in the very moving Heavens with God himself; Vbi vita, and
victus, and copia, and gloria, and salus, and pax, and eternitas, and bona
omnia; Where is life, and food, and abundance, and glory, and health, and
peace, and eternity, and all good things: All above all that either can be
wished or desired. And this is the Subject that I am to speak of in your
presence. Sed quid primum? What shall I say first? Let it please you to
consider the argument of this Scripture, which is twofold.

1. Our Soviour Christ hereby advises all rich men to be merciful to their
poor Brethren in this life, lest they find no mercy in the life to come. 2. He
does comfort all poor men, that although they are afflicted in this life with
great miseries and calamities, yet they shall be comforted in the life to come,
and rest in Abraham's bosom.
The parts of Scripture are four.

1. The life of the rich man, in these words: There was a certain rich man,
clothed in Purple, and fine silk, and fared deliciously every day. 2. The life
of the beggar, in these words: Also there was a certain Beggar, named Lazarus,
which was laid at his Gate, full of sores, etc. 3. The Death of the Beggar, in
these words; And it was so, that the Beggar dyed, and was carried, etc. 4. The
Death of the Rich man; The Rich man also died and was buried.
In the first part, I note these three Circumstances.

1. What this Rich man was, and whether there were any such man, or no. 2. What
his Apparel was, not mean nor ordinary, but Purple and fine Silk. 3. That his
diet was, not base nor homely, but delicious; and not once, nor twice, but
every day.
In the life of the Beggar, I find four Circumstances.

1. Where he lived; in no Palace or house, but at the Rich Man's Gate. 2. How
he lived; neither in Health nor Wealth, but miserable, full of Sores. 3. That
he desired in this life, not Lordships, or houses, or land, or gold, or silver,
but Crumbs to save his life. 4. Who showed the Beggar kindness in his life? not
the rich man, but the rich man's dogs: The Dogs came also and licked his sores.
In the Death of the Beggar, I note these three Circumstances.

1. What became of his Body being dead? No mention hereof is made in holy
scriptures; It may be buried with little or no respect, because he was a poor
man, or else cast into some ditch by reason of his sores. 2. What became of his
soul? It went not out to Purgatory (for there is no such place) but it was
carried into Abraham's bosom. 3. By whom? By Angels, it was carried by Angels
into Abraham's bosom.
In the Death of the Rich man, I note these two Circumstances.

1. What became of his Body being dead? It was honorably buried, because of
his great substance. 2. What became of his Soul? It went to Hell: He being in
Hell Torments, lift up his eyes and saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his
bosom.
Of these in Order.

And first in the Life of the Rich man, we noted what this Rich man was,
whether there was indeed any such man, or no; wherefore here may a question
arise, whether this be a Parable or History? The writers hereof do not agree.

Marlorat says, Quanquam quibusdam, haec simplex Parabo! a esse videtur, tamen
quia bis Lazari nomen exprimitur, remgestam narrari probabile; Some are of that
mind, that this is a Parable; yet because (says he) Christ twice expresses
the name of Lazarus, it argues that he spoke of a thing that was so done
indeed.

Likewise says Franelscus Lambertus, Credendum magis esse historiam and
exemplum-verum quam Parabolam; It must be believed, that this is rather a
History, and a true example, than a Parable.

But Theophilactus is of a contrary opinion, Parabola haec est, and non vera
Historia: This is a Parable, and no History.

Erasmus also says, that it is but a Parable, whereby Rich men may learn to be
merciful to their poor Brethren, that they may speak for them in the Day of
Vengeance and Wrath.

Stella also says, Erat qvidem homo non quidam vir: He speaks of the
species, not of the individuum, as one particular man, therefore it is a
Parable.

Many writers there are also, that rather aiming at the Arguments and
Observations herein, have not set down their Audgements whether it be a Parable
or History; Therefore it might seem wisdom in me to suspend my judgment also
herein, especially since Marlorat says; Parum refert, an sit Parabola, an
Historia, modo summam doctrinam teneant lectoris; It greatly skilleth not,
whether it be a Parable or History, so that we duly consider the Doctrine
herein.

But because it is requisite that I also show mine Opinion, I will return my
Verdict according to my Evidence: and therefore in naked truth I find and hold,
that it is a Parable; and my reasons are these two: First because our Savior
in the beginning of this Chapter does relate a Parable of the Rich man that had
a Steward, etc. Therefore he continues in this Chapter to open his mouth in
Parables, according to the Prophet: I will open my Mouth in Parables, and show
dark sentences of old time. Secondly, because the Rich man cried out of Hell
unto Abraham, and Abraham answered the Rich man, which needs must be understood
parabolically; for the damned in hell cannot see nor hear the Saints that are
in heaven, neither by reason of the distance of place, and also because of many
spears and or us that are betwixt heaven and hell, neither shall they see or
know what is done there. And again, Abraham's tongue is dry, and eleaveth to
the roof of his mouth, therefore he cannot speak so loud as to be heard out of
heaven into hell: Therefore it is but a Parable. But here we fee; first, that
the wicked are so little reflected with God, that he will not vouchsafe so much
as to name them. I will not (says David) speaking in the Person of God, make
mention of their Names within my lips. And again, such as be foolish shall not
tarry in my sight, for thou hate all them that work vanity: And have not our
sins also deserved that we should not be remembered of God, and that he should
utterly forget us? that is, take away his love and favor from us: Yes verily,
for what pride, envy, and impiety is there here practiced among us? Pride
against God, envy against men, and impiety against our own souls and
consciences; having touched even the very Tropic of all Wickedness, so that
our Sins cause God to forsake us, and not to Remember us. Plutarch in the Life
of Theseus, reported of one Plea, a Woman, that Robbed all Passengers that
passed by her Palace, called Crommyonia, where she dwelt; which History may not
unjustly be applied to our sins, for they, like Plea, rob us of grace, of
Favor, of Blessings, of good Name, and of God's love too: Solum peccatum
homicidiu: It is sin only that cutteth our throats. It was the sin of Egypt
that plagued Egypt; and it was the Sins or this City, that plagued this City,
although now the Lord has spared it a good season; yet let us not presume of
his long-sufferance: For if punishments argue sins, and sins plagues, have we
not cause to sear great miseries to ensue. I continue this point therefore with
the Hrophet Isaiah, Woe be unto them that draw on wickedness with cords of
vanity, and sin as it were with a Cartrope: I heard a voice, saying: Woe, woe
unto the inhabitants of the earth: whereupon one notes that there is, Triplex
vae, primum vae, propter culpam, secundum propter tribulationem mundanam,
tertiam propter aeternam poenam: There are three kinds of woe, the first woe is
for sin and offenses, the second for worldly tribulation and misery, the third
for the everlasting pain. All these woes did the rich man feel; two of them
were vegun here on earth, and the third was finished being in hell torments.

Secondly, Let us consider what his apparel was, purple, and fine white, as
some will have: but we read, kay endriydsketo to porphyran kay bysson; which
word Bysson, although some take it for fine Flax, yet let it here be understood
of Silk, There was a very great difference betwixt the apparel of John the
Baptist and this man; John's raiment was Camels hair, with a leathern girdle
about his sayns, which did argue repentance and mortification in him: But this
rich man's Apparel was purple and fine silk, whose outward apparel did argue the
pride at his heart; the outward habit for the most part resembles the inward
habit and condition of the mind. Pride, as says one is grounded in the heart
of man, a vice most loathsome to God, hateful to men, and hurtful to the soul.

But let us consider the third Circumstance in the life of the rich man, to
wit, what his diet was, Deliciously every day: And here we see what the
children of this world delight in, namely; in fullness of meat: Qui neglecto
superiorum culen Baccho indulgent; Venerique ministrant: Who neglecting the
serving of God, have given themselves to serve Bacchus and Venus. Hence one
notes, Gula delectationem non necessitatem querit; A gluttenous person eats
more for pleasure than necessity: So did this rich man, so did our first
Parents, it was not through need or necessity, that they did eat of the
forbidden tree, but through wantonness, pleasure, and idleness. Such is the
strength of gluttony, that it is called, Blandus Demon, dulce venenum, suave
peccatum quam qui habet seipsum non habet, quam qui non haber, peccatum non
habet, sed ipse totum est peccatum: Gluttony is a flattering Devil, and
pleasant sin, and a sweet Poison, which whosoever uses, has not the use of
himself, which whosoever has not, has no sin, for he is all sin it self. Besides,
it has an especial affect; for it does, as Gregory says, generate Lust.

Therefore it is well noted, that it is, Amissio temporis, naufragium
castitatis, ruina corporis: the loss of time, the shipwreck of honesty, and
the ruin of the body. To be short, it was glutony that caused our parents to
transgress: It was gluttony that caused Lot to commit incest: It was gluttony
that caused Esau to sell his birthright: It was gluttony and drunkenness that
caused Nabal's death: It was glutony that lost Belthasar's Kingdom.

Be not thou desirous of dainty Meats, says Solomon, for he that loves
banqueting shall be poor, and he that delights in Wine, shall not be rich.

Also, here I cannot but commend the temperate diet of our well-fed Monks; O
Monachi, vestri stomachi sunt amphora Bacchi; Monks Bellies are Bacchus 's
Barrels: Like unto their Countryman Alpicius a Roman, famous for his gluttony.
The Righteous eat, and are satisfied, but the belly of the ungodly has never
enough, Prove. 13. There are therefore two kinds of eating; Moderate, as that of
John the Baptist; and that of Elias, David, and Daniel: Immoderate, as this of
the Rich man, which fared deliciously.

And so let us a while leave this Rich man, and consider the second, which is
the Life of the Beggar.

There was also a certain Beggar named Lazarus, etc.

Poor Lazarus! what lying at a Gate, and full of sores too? Would not this Rich
man afford thee some out-house to lie in, to shroud thee from storms and
tempests? no! would not his servants pity thee? no! would not his Children
speak for thee? no! would not his wife entreat her husband for thee? no! had
thou ever done them any wrong? no! but Lazarus, it may be thou art stout, and
oftentimes beggars will be chusers: thou perhaps would have some great Alms,
or some Copihold, some Farm of this Rich man? no! or thou would have some
delicate Meat? no! many dishes? no! or would sit at the Table with his sons
and servants? no, no! what is it then that thou do desire? Nothing but crumbs
to refresh my Soul; nothing but Crumbs to save my Life; nothing but Crumbs,
Crumbs, that fall from the Rich man's Table, I know that he fares plentifully,
and that he may well spare them.

What shall I say of the hardness of this truel rich man's heart? let me speak
for Lazarus unto this rich man: yet I shall but asinam comere, get nothing of
this hard fellow. I have a Message unto thee, O thou rich man, from the great
God of Heaven, and he does desire thee that thou respect the Beggar that lies
at thy gate, pained with sores, pained with grief, and even starved through
hunger; and I beseech thee in Gods stead, that thou have pity on this Beggar,
as God shall have pity, mercy, and compassion on thee, and look what thou
layest out, it shall be paid thee again. But he answered, I warrant you he is
some runnagate Rogue, and so long as he can be maintained by such easy means,
he will never take any other trade upon him: nay, but good sir, let it please
you only to behold this poor creature; which suppose it were granted, and he
coming to the Gate where this wretched object lay, seeing him bewrayed with
sores, betattered with Rags, and the dogs licking him, stoping his nose, with a
squeamish face, and disdainful look, began to say unto him: I see thou art some
lewd fellow, that such miseries happen unto thee, and such plagues come upon
thee, it is not for thy goodness, or righteousness that these afflictions light
on thee. But he replied: O good Master some Comfort, good Master some relief;
good Master some crumbs to save my life, I shall dye else, and starve at your
gate; good Master, I beseech you for Gods sake; I beseech you for Christ's sake,
take some pity, some compassion, some mercy on me. But he with an angry look,
disdaining Lazarus, said: Away hence thou idle Rogue, not a Penny, not a
Morsel, not a crumb of Bread; and so stoping his nose from the seent, and his
ears from the cry of Lazarus, returned unto his Palace: And this poor man's
Throat being dry with crying, his Heart fainted for want of comfort, his tongue
cleaving to the roof of his mouth, being worn out with fastings and miseries,
starved at the Rich man's Gate. Now must I speak for dead Lazarus, against this
rich man. Nam si hi tacuissent, nonne lapides clamabunt: If I should hold my
peace, the very stones would cry. O thou rich miser, and more than cruel
wretch, Lazarus is dead, he is dead at thy gate, and his blood shall be upon
thee, thou shewedst no mercy unto him, no mercy shall be showed to thee, thou
stopedst thy ears unto his cry, thou shall cry and not be heard. It is inhumane
wickedness to have no compassion on distressed Lazarus, but most of all to let
him starve at thy gate for want of food: what did he desire of thee but only
crumbs to save his life? Is it not a small thing, I pray thee, that thou having
abundance of meat, should see him starve for bread? that thou flourishing in
purple and silk, would see Lazarus lie in rags, that thou seeing even thy dogs
have pity on him, thou would have no pity upon him thy self? What eyes had
thou that would not see his Sores? What ears had thou, that thou would
not hear his cry? What hands had thou, that would not be stretched out to
give? What heart had thou, that would not melt in thy Body? What soul had
thou, that would not pity his silly soul, this wretched Body, poor Lazarus? If
the stones could speak, they would cry fie upon thee: If thy Gods could speak,
they would condemn thee of unmercifulness: If dead Lazarus were here, his Sores
would bleed afresh before thy face, and cry in thine ears, that thou art
guilty, guilty of his blood, and that thy sin is more than can be pardoned. Why
should I not tell thee the Portion that is prepared for thee? This shall be thy
Portion to drink: Let thy days be few, and let another take thine office; let
thy children be fatherless, and thy wife a widow; let thy children be vagabonds
and beg their Bread, let them seek it also out of desolate places; let the
Extortioner consume all that thou have, and let the Stranger spoil thy Labor:
Let there be no man to pity thee, nor to have Compassion on thy fatherless
Children: Let thy Memorial be clean forgotten, and in the next Generation, let
thy name be clean put out: Let him be an accursed example to all the world; let
him be cursed in the City, and cursed in the field; let him be cursed when he
goes out, and when he comes in: let him be cursed when he lies down, and
when he rises up; let all Creatures, and the Creator himself forsake him,
Angels reject him, Heavens frown at him, Earth open thy mouth, Hell receive
him, Spirits tear him, Devils torment him, let no mercy be showed unto him,
that showed no mercy. Thus shall the miseries of Lazarus be revenged by the
just plagues that shall justly fall upon the rich man's head.

But here let us first observe the little or no whit of mercy that the Children
of this world show to the Godly in this life, how basely they use them, and
unmercifully respect them: They gaped on me with their mouths, as it had been a
roaring Lion, they stood staring upon me, saying, fie upon thee, fie upon thee,
we saw it with our eyes: so did this rich man stare upon poor Lazarus, crying,
fie upon thee, loathsome forsaken object: Therefore here we see, that there was
in him, Triplex peccatum nefas in Deum, malicia in proximum scelu in scipsum:
Impiety toward God, cruelty toward Lazarus, and vengeance against himself: And
the little Mercy that Bloody-minded Herod showed to the Innocents, sufficiently
proves this place, whereupon St. Gregory thus applies: Quare horrendum, etc.
Why should that horrible decree, that cruel Edict proceed out from Herod, that
the young Innocents should be slain? Why should none but Herod, that Sycophant,
that blood-sucker be appointed to act this Cruel, this Woeful, this more than
unnatural Tragedy? What harm had they done him? what ill thought against him
was imagined by them? What occasion of murder was offered by them? What Injury
or Wrong was pretended against him, that the City of Rhama should for no cause
be filled with Butchers, that should murder the Innocents, and destroy new
born Babes; In Rhama there was a voice heard, Iamentation, weeping, and great
mourning. Who can with Tongue declare the miseries and calamities in the town,
that there should be such a lamentation, such a weeping consent of Children, of
Mothers, Fathers, and Kindred, miserably crying out to the merciless
Murderers, to save their lives: who can deplore the many and sundry faces,
manners, innocent smiling looks of these pretty babes, on their fatal
Executioners? that the poor infant so soon as it was born and cleaved to the
breast, should receive a deadly wound through his bowels? and the woeful Mother
offering the child a dug, was constrained to seek her infants blood in the
dust; yea, and oftentimes the cruel slaves for have, with a sword, carelessly
murdered Mother and Infant together. We cannot without Tears rightly consider
these things: Neither was this capital sentence of Herod only against Infants
that were but one year old, but if any had lived to the Age of 2 y. that they
also should be slain. Here is painted out most plainly the manner and savage
dealing of the wicked world toward the Children of God, how unmercifully they
do use them, like as Cain used Abel, and Achab dealth with Naboth, or as the
rich man dealt with Lazarus. But here let the ungodly merciless learn, that
they that show no mercy to poor Lazarus in this world, shall find but little in
that to come. And let Lazarus learn also, since his miseries are so great and
so many in this life, to look for a better in that life, where there is no such
cruel dealing. Let us then with Stella loath this world, for Impossible est in
hoc mundo esse and non timere, and non dolere, and non laborare, and non
periclitari: We cannot possibly live in the world without fear, danger, sorrow,
pain, miseries, and suchlike as Lazarus felt.

Secondly, In the life of Lazarus I noted how he lived, to wit, miserably, and
full of sores, and yet this rich man would not pity him. Christ could not of
his mercy but eure the Leper, when he saw him full of sores and leprosy, and
Elisha could not but out of humanity teach Naaman the Assyrian to wash himself
in Jordan, that he might be whole; but this rich man would not help the poor
Beggar, neither by his counsel, purse, table, or crumbs, but let him alone to
pining misery at his gate.

Here we note in the person of Lazarus, the great miseries and afflictions that
the Church of God does endure in this world.

Great are the troubles of the Righteous, says David; not small, or few, but
great and many, Psalm. 34. Again, He will thoroughly purge his floor; not
slightly, nor by halfs, but thoroughly, Mat. 3. And he will search Jerusalem with
candlelight, lest he should over-slip any wickedness therein.

So that as S. Bernard says, Iasordibus genetamur, in tenebris conversamur, in
doloribus parimur: We are begotten in uncleanness, we are nourished in
darkness, and brought into this World with bitterness. Triplices enim sunt
dolores scilicet orbis mundi and inferni: there are three kind of sorrows; the
sorrows of the heart, the sorrows of the world, and the pains of hell. Prima
sunt ex natura, secundi ex necessitate tortii pro equitate: We sorrow in heart
by nature, we sorrow in this world of necessity. The third shall happen to the
rich man in Hell of equity, when he shall confess himself to be justly plagued.

And further to prove this Plague, we have many examples in the Scripture, but
that well-known one of Job may not be omitted, whose miseries were more than
many, and intolerable: As first, he being a just man, and one that feared God,
to be thus plagued: for when one Messenger was relating tragical news to him,
there came another on the neck of him, like the waves of the Sea; while he was
yet speaking, there came another; while the other was yet speaking, there came
another; yet this good man had not so much as an hours respite to breath, or to
receive comfort and consolation by any means: His goods were lost, his body
plagued, his servants slain, his sons were dead, and no creature left to
comfort him, but only a froward wife to grieve and vex his heart. Miscria est
copia tribulationis, and inopia consolationis, quando multifarie quis patitur;
and a nemine relevatur; Misery is then a Sea of Tribulation, and scarce a drop
of Consolation, when a man is oppressed many ways, and relieved by no means.

For further Proof hereof, add hereunto the Miseries and Affliction of that
Blessed Saint the Virgin Mary, the Mother of Christ; for so soon as her
Eye-pleasing Babe was born, her Troubles with his were entangled. First she was
constrained through Herod's Cruelty to fly from Bethlem, into the Land of
Egypt, to the Land of Israel from thence, from the Land of Israel to the parts
of Galilee, from thence to the City of Nazareth: Thus the holy Mother, with her
more than holy Son, was compelled to fly for fear of their Lives, and to take
their Diet and Lodging where they could find it. The Foxes have holes, and the
birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has not whereon to rest his
head, Mat. 8. From the hour of his birth, until he was twelve years old, she
never slept, but in fear of her life and her Son too, being both hated of the
Red Dragon, and persecuted by Herod, and the World. He came unto his own, and
his own received him not. But when her Son came to thirty years of age, O I
cannot express nor speak her griefs, for grief! when as she saw him betrayed
and given into the hands of Wicked Men, when as she saw him haled and pulled
from pillar to post, when as she saw him sent from Anas to Caiphas, from
Caiphas to Pontius Pilat, to be unjustly condemned; when as she heard that
fatal Sentence of Judgment proceed from Pilate and the Jews, Crucifige; when
as she saw her Son stripped of his Coat, and beat with Rods; when as she saw his
head crowned with sharp thorns, that pure red blood trickled down on his sacred
face; when as she saw him led to execution; when as she saw him hoist upon the
Cross to suffer death before her face; O how she wept and wrung her hands, when
as she saw his hands spread abroad and nailed to the Cross; Oh how she bedewed
her pleasant lovely Cheeks with bitter brinish Tears; when she saw his Side
pierced with a Spear, that blood and water issued out, as out of a Rock? Oh she
cried out, O ye that pass by, O ye that stand by the Cross; have ye no respect
of my Son? When as she saw him bow his head, O how she beat her breast, when as
he gave up the Ghost! Oh how her Heart melted within her! Who can with unworthy
Words declare the Misery of this Worthy Saint?

The Adamant-stone is dissolved in Blood; and let either the Miseries of Mary,
or the blood of Jesus Christ mollify our stony hearts, and cause our eyes to
run over with streams of tears.

O that my head were a well of water, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I
might weep for the miseries that the Saints of God, and Martyrs of Jesus Christ
have suffered in this Life: But what counsel shall I give in misery? Truly to
learn Patience, which is defined thus: Patientia est obedire Deo in tole;
randis adversis, sed ita, tamen ut non Deo irascamur, nec aliquid contra
mandata facimus: Patience is a virtue that teaches us to obey God in our
miseries; but so that we be not anngry with him, nor rashly charge God, nor do
any thing against the Will of God, but patiently bear what his pleasure is to
inflict upon us. I do conclude this point with the Psalmographer: The patient
abiding of the poor, shall not perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18.

Thirdly, In the life of the Beggar we noted what he desired in this life,
crumbs, desired to be refreshed with the crumbs that fell from the Rich man's
Table. Out of these words I do observe that the Godly do desire no great
matters in this Life, they thirst not after honor and promotion, but if they
have wherewith to serve their present necessities, therewith to be content:
Habeus victum and vestitutum, says our Savior Christ; Having Food and
Apparel, be therewith content. But the rich man he must fare Delicately, and
fat himself for the slaughter, Gulosus habet cor in ventre, lascivus in
libidien, cupidus in lucro: The Gluttons heart is on his belly, the wantons
heart is on his lust, and the covetous man's heart is in his Chest: But here,
since Lazarus does request but Crumbs, let us yield to his Request, and let us
learn to be merciful, Misericordia dolor ex est alterius concepta miseria, and
ad succurrendum purpensio; Mercy is a kind of grief that comes by thinking on
other Men's Miseries, and willing to show comfort: Hence the word is derived,
Misericordia quasi miserum cordans: Mercy, because it procures sorrow of heart
to think on Miseries. Or, Misericordia quasi mittens seorsum rigorem cordis;
Mercy, because it strikes an extreme cold to the heart: Or as some will have
it, Misericordia quasi mira suavitate rigans corda: Mercy, because it pours a
wonderful sweetness on the heart of him that receives comfort by some man's
mercy. O how pleasant would this merry have been! Oh how sweet would crumbs
have been unto the heart and soul of Lazarus, if he could have had them! But
there is, Triplex misericordia propria paterna fraterna; Prima ad seipsum,
secunda patris ad filium, tertia ad proximum: Mercy is threefold; there is a
proper Mercy, a Fatherly Mercy, and a brotherly Mercy. The first belongs unto
our selves, the second is from the father unto the son, and the third is from
our selves to our neighbors, from each one to other: Concerning the first,
David says, So long as thou do good unto thy self, Men will speak well of
thee. Of the second we read, The Father seeing his Son a far off, ran on him,
and kissed him, Luke 15. Of the third we read of the mercy of the Samaritan,
which he showed unto him that fell among Thieves. Then have mercy on Lazarus,
which is in distress; let us not like the Levite pass by Lazarus that lies
wounded, and more than half dead: Have mercy I say, on Lazarus, which is a
member of Christ; have mercy on Lazarus, and God shall have mercy on thee;
Blessed be the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. And so set us consider
the fourth part, in the life of the Beggar; Who showed this Beggar merey? Not
the rich man, but his dogs.

The dogs came and licked his sores: The rich man's Dogs by licking Lazarus,
taught their Master to have mercy on him; but he would not, therefore he had
worse than a dogish nature, and cruel heart. But here first we note Gods
Providence toward his Children; he will have them comforted and fed, though by
dumb and only sensible creatures: So the dogs here came and licked Lazarus
sores. So Elias was fed by Ravens to save his life, King, 19.4. And thou shall
drink of the River, and I have commanded the Ravens to feed thee there. This I
say, is done by Gods Pro^ ence; therefore what tender care, and careful respect
God has over his Children here we see. The mercy of God is threefold: Prima,
speciosa, secunda spatiosa, tertia preciosa: The first is beautiful to behold,
the second is spacious, the third is precious to thy Soul. By the first,
Lazarus and us all are created; by the second, Lazarus and us all his believing
Children are redeemed; by the third, us, and all are carried into Abraham's
bosom to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, In that Dogs came and licked Lazarus sores, when the rich man
himself forsook him; we observe the sensible dumb Creatures of the earth (are
in their kinds) better than many men. Therefore it is that God complains by
the mouth of the Prophet; The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters
crib, but my people will not know me, says the Lord. So the dogs here knew
Lazarus to be pained, but the rich man would not vouchsafe to know him:
Therefore his own dogs condemned him of merciless cruelty. It is worth the
noting that which Pliny reports of dogs, Fidilissimi homini ante omnia sunt
Canes and equi; Dogs and Horses are most loyal and loving unto man, above all
other Creatures. Again, Quod impetus eorum and sevitia mitigatus ad homine
concidente humi: That their savageness and cruelty is mitigated when one does
fall to the ground: But Lazarus humbled himself on the ground, and lay in the
dust, yet this Rich man has no pity on him, he relieved him not. Soli nomina
sua canes norunt; Dogs only of other sensible Creatures know their names.

I would all Christians would remember their names, and what belongs thereto:
how when they were incorporated into the Church, they vowed to forsake the
devil, the world, and the flesh. Again, Soli vocem domesticam agnoscu canis:
Dogs know the Voices of them that are in the house: If one come at midnight and
chastise them, they will cease to bark; they will know the householders voice,
and them of the household, I would men would learn to know Christ their
householder, and the voice of the Prophets and Preachers of this houst old.
Again, Scrutantur vestigiacanes; They search the foot-paths of their Masters.
We will not follow the paths of righteousness, nor tread in the footsteps of
our Master Christ, although he has said, Learn of me: and although the Apostle
does earnestly exhort us, Be ye followers God as dear children, Persequitur
enimicum Canis, A Dog chaseth an enemy, but our enemy the Devil chaseth us. See
that Medicinable virtue that is in a Dogs tongue, for it heals, and was
comfortable to Lazarus. Man's tongue cutteth and kills. Thy tongue, says
David, cutteth like a sharp Razor; and the tongue that tells lies, slays
the soul. But now let us consider the third part, which is the death of the
Beggar.

It was so that the Beggar died. Here is the Adage fulfilled, More optima
rapit, deterrima relinquit. Now must I speak of Tragical matters, of Funerals
and Obsequies, of dissolution and death; which is called by many Metaphors in
the Holy Scriptures, as sometimes, Transitas ex hoc mundo ad Patrem; a Passage
or going out of this World to the Father. Sometimes Dissolution, so Paul calls
it, Cupio dissolvi, and esse cum Christo, I desire to be loosed, and to be with
Christ. Sometimes Lucrum, Gain; as in the Philippians: Death is to me
Advantage, Sometimes Somnus, a Sleep: So Abraham and David slept with their
Fathers. Sometimes Sominantio, a sowing; it is sown a natural body, it rises
again a spiritual body; and it is thus desined, Mors est separatio animam
corpore requies a laboribus, and miseriis hujus secul^. Death is a separation
of the soul from the body, a rest and quietness from all Labors, Pains, and
miseries of this wicked world. But there are three kinds of death, to wit,
Corporal, Spiritual, and Eternal.

The Corporal death of a natural separation of the soul from the body, etc.

The Spiritual Death is twofold: there is Mors Spiritualis piorum and impiorum:
There is a spiritual Death of the Godly, and of the Wicked: The Spiritual death
of the Godly, Mors peccati and mundi decitur; It is to dye only unto sin and
the world: the Spiritual death of the ungodly, Est mors fidei and animae, is
the death of Faith and Righteousness, and the soul, which the ungodly taste of,
although they be yet living.

The Eternal death is, Sempiterna infelicitas and miseria, quae secunda mors
dicitur: An everlasting unhappiness and misery, when the soul is separated from
God, and the company of all Saints, which is called the second death.

Moritur ergo homo temporaliter, moritur spiritualiter and utiliter; moritur
spiritualiter, and damnabiliter.

Man may therefore taste of three deaths:

First, Corporal: Secondly, Spiritual, and Profitable: Thirdly, Spiritual and
Damnable.

Primum Christus suscipit: secundum docuit: tertiam demavit.

The first is a Temporal Death, that Christ did suffer himself.

Non qui noluit, sed quia voluit, mortuus est Christus.

Not because he wanted power to withstand Death, but because he would dye
willingly, and offer a Sacrifice for the whole world that do believe in him.

The second, that is the Spiritual profitable Death to dye unto sin and the
world, he taught by his own Example: Ye are Dead with Christ.

The third, that is, the spiritual Everlasting Death, he shall give unto the
Reprobate in the Day of Judgment: Go ye cursed into Hell fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels.

But in the Death of the Beggar: First, we noted what became of his Soul, It
was carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom. Whereby we Learn the Immortality of
the Soul. Pithagoras was the first among the Grecians, That Taught the Soul was
immortal. The Philosophers also, and Heathen Poets do prove the Immortality of
the Soul.

Credit enim retro de terra quod fuit ante
In terram, sed quod missum est ex aetheris oris,
Id rursum Coeli fusgentia templa receptant.
The part of man that was made of Earth, went to Earth; and that part as came
from Heaven, went to Heaven again. But leaving these, we prove by Scripture the
immortality of the Soul, Man was made a living soul; Therefore the soul is
Immortal. And here in the Text, Lazarus being Dead, His soul was carried into
Abraham's bosom.

Here therefore is the damnable Opinion of the Atheists overthrown: For if they
deny God, they must also deny that they have souls, and so consequently that
they are not men. But St. John teaches them, That all things were made by the
Word of God, and without it nothing was made; Therefore if they are made, they
are made by the Word of God; and if a Reasonable Soul, which do acknowledge and
Believe in the Creator. Anima est primum principium vita perse subsistans,
incorporea ac incorruptibilis. The soul is the first beginning of life,
subsisting of it self, incorporeal and incorruptible. St. Austin, Anama est
spiritus est substantia incorporea, corporis sui vita sensibilis, invisibilis,
rationalis, immortalis. The soul of Man is a spiritual, or incorporeal
substance, sensible, invisible, reasonable, immortal: For as he also says,
Solum homo habet onimam rationalem: Only man with an immortal soul. Lazarus
soul was carried into Abraham's bosom, which is a quiet haven, which the
Faithful have gotten by the troublesome Navigation of this life, that is the
Kingdom of Heaven. There is, Duplex Regnum, Gratia, and Gloriae: There are two
Kingdoms, the one of Grace, the other of Glory.

Here therefore we note that the Souls of the Elect being separated from their
Bodies, are presently in Ioys, and are carried into Abraham's Bosom; so called,
because it belongs only to the Faithful. Well then, Lazarus soul went to
Heaven; and Christ said to the Thief on the Cross: This Day shall thou be with
me in Paradise: Not to Morrow, or next year, but this day. Therefore the souls
of the Elect being separated from their Bodies, are in joy and rest. As also on
the other side, the soul of the rich man, and the damned, after they be
separated from their bodies, are in hell torments.

And thus much concerning the place whither Lazarus soul was carried being
dead, namely, into Abraham's bosom.

Lastly, we noted by whom, by Angels: It was carried by Angels into Abraham's
bosom. An Angel does signify a Messenger, according to the Etemology of the
word, and this Name is Proper to them in respect of their. Offices: But they
are refined otherwise; Namely, to be Ministering Spirits, created to the Glory
of God, and Benefit of his Church, and there are nine orders of Angels, as
Divines do write, and as we gather out of Scripture.

1. The first, are they that we call Seraphims, Qui semper Dei amore ardens,
who always burn with the love of God, they glister and shine in brightness, and
their office is Bonitatem Dei confederare, to meditate on the goodness of God.
2. The second are Cherubims, Qui priucipaliter relucent divini numinis radio,
who principally do give a reflex of the brightness of God; and they do Virtutes
Dei considerare, consider the virtues and quality of God. 3. The third order
are Throni, a regal seat; and their Office is, Assistere Dei Throno, to stand
about the Throne of God. 4. The fourth are Dominationis, Dominions, and they
do, Instruers in spirituale bello, instruct and direct men in the spiritual
combat that is between the flesh and the spirit. 5. The fifth are Principatus,
Principalities, and they do, Principes regere, and homines decere, Guide
Princes, and teach every one to reverence men in their place and calling. 6.
The sixth are Potestates, Powers, and they do, Potestatem daemonum coercere,
restrain the Powers of the Devil. 7. The seventh are, Virtutes, Virtues, and
they do Miraculi operari, work Miracles. 8. The eighth are Archangels, Qui
summae nunciant, who declare wonderful things. 9. The last order, are Angels,
Sed hominibus magis propinqui, more near to Men in Office, and they do, Homines
ad divinam cognitionem docere, teach men the Knowledge of heavenly things.
Behold I will send my Angel which shall go before thee, and keep thee in the
way; Exodus 2.3. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, that thou dash not
thy foot against a stone, Psalm. 92. Angels do instruct the ignorant: So the
Angel did teach Joseph to fly into Egypt from Herod's cruelty. Angels do
attend the souls of the Faithful, being separated from their Bodies, and carry
them into everlasting joy and rest, as is manifest in this place.

We see therefore the tender care and Love of God, which has three properties,
sweetness, wisdom, and strength. He loves us sweetly, in that he took on him
our flesh: He loved us in his wisdom, in that he prevented the blame that
should light on us: He loved us by his strength, when as he endured the bitter
gangs of death for our sakes. Therefore he shall be called, Amicus dulcis,
Consiliarius prudens, adjutor fortis: A sweet friend, a wise counselor, and a
strong helper; and so let us consider the fourth and last part, which is the
death of the Rich-man.

The Rich man died also, etc. Here we may see, that Death is the way of all
flesh. Death shakes Cedar and Shrub, death calls away the Rich-man from his
pleasure, and Lazarus from his pain, and all must obey when death calls. It
is not the Majesty of a Prince, nor Holiness of a Priest, strength of Body,
feature of Face, Wisdom, Beauty, Riches, Honor, nor any such secular Regard
can plead against death, or Privilege a man from the Grave, Statutum est
omnibus semel mori; The Decree is out, all must die once: All must taste of
this distastful Cup of Death. Let us know then that the pale Horse, and he that
sits thereon, whose name is death comes running on toward us, all that is
within us, and without us, are remembrances of death. The Sun rising in the
East, and setting in the West, shows our rising and falling, our coming in,
and going out of this World. All cry unto us, we must away, we must hence; as
Christ said: My Kingdom is not of this world. Death is a separation of the soul
from the body: the Husband separated from the wife of his youth, the Father
separated from his Children whom he dearly loved; the Children from their
Parents, the Master from his Servant, and the Servant from his Master; thus
Parents and Friends, and all must part.

The first Circumstance of the Rich-man, is to know what became of his body? It
was Honorably Buried. But here we see, that honorable burial does not profit
the Damned soul. Tares are sown as well as Wheat all times; yet the one grows
up for the fire, the other for the Barn: Gather the Tares in bundles and burn
them, but gather the Wheat into my Barn, Mat. 13.30.

But let us lastly consider what became of his Soul.

And being in Hell torments, etc. But because none can so well relate miseries,
and none can describe the Torments of Hell so well as he that has felt the
same, let the rich man himself speak, and let us hear him what he says, he
being in Hell Torments, he thus begins: O wretch that I am, why did I suffer
Lazarus to starve at my Gate? for which I am shut in the Gates of Hell. Why did
I not give Lazarus a Crumb of Bread? for which I cannot have here now one Drop
of Water to cool my Tongue. Why did I show Lazarus no mercy on Earth? for which
no mercy is showed to me in hell. What shall I do? for I am tormented in this
flame, I will cry unto Abraham, Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that
he may dip the top of his Finger in Water, to cool my tongue. I am tormented
here; Abraham, I am torn in pieces here; Abraham, I am plagued and continually
pained here; Abraham, here my purple Raiment is flames of fire, my light is
darkness, my day night, my companions are devils; O how they hale me! O how
they pull me! Oh how they vex and torment me! Here my feet are scorched, my
hands are seared, my heart is wounded, my eyes are blinded, my ears are dulled,
my senses confounded, my tongue is hot, it is very hot: send Lazarus therefore
Abraham with a Drop of Water to comfort me; one Drop good Abraham, one Drop of
Water.

But Abraham answered him: Thou damned wretch once thou did disdain Lazarus,
once thou did refuse Lazarus, once thou did scorn Lazarus; now Lazarus
shall disdain, refuse, and scorn thee: once thou stopped thine ears from the
cry of Lazarus, now he stops his ears from thy cry: once thou turnedst away thy
face from Lazarus, now he turns away his Face from thee: once thou deniedst
crumbs to Lazarus, now he denies water to thee, not a spoonful, not a drop of
water.

Oh Abraham, but now if I had my goods, I would give Lazarus all for a drop of
Water: now if I had a Million of Gold, I would give it all for a drop of water:
now if I had a world of Wealth, I would give it all to Lazarus, therefore good
Abraham one drop: But he answered; No, not a crop. Not a drop! then cursed be
the day wherein I was born, and cursed be the night wherein I was conceived;
cursed be my father that begat me, and cursed be the mother that bare me;
cursed be the place that kept me; cursed be the Delicate Robes that Clothed
me; cursed be the Delicate Meat that fed me: let me be most accursed of all
Creatures both in Heaven and Earth. And so leave we him cursing, who indeed was
most accursed; and learn that the souls of the damned being separated from
their bodies, are in hell Torments.

Hell is described by many Metaphors, as horrible Darkness, a Land as black as
Darkness it self: also unquenchable Fire. Ibi erat fletus and stridor, dentium
fletus quidem ob ignem qui non extinguitur, stridor dentum ob Vermem qui
nonquam moritur: There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; weeping for the
Fire that shall never be quenched, gnashing of teeth, for the worm that never
dies. Also it is called, Infernus, a Dungeon, a bottomless Pit: Infernus lacus
est sine mensura, profundus est sine fundo, plenus ardere incomperabili, plenus
dolor intollerabili: Hell is a Lake that cannot be measured, so deep that it
is without bottom, sull of intolerable heat, full of incomparable plain: Also
Gehennam, a Valley nigh unto Jerusalem, wherein was a Chapel in the which the
Idolatrous Jews did sacrifice their children unto a Brazen Image, called
Moloch, which being made hot, enclosed them in the belly thereof: and lest
their cry should move any to pity them, they made a horrible noise with Drums
and other Instruments: whereupon the place is called Tophet. Thus will the Lord
speak with his enemies in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.

But some may demand, where this place of Hell is? If I should take upon me to
declare that, it would appear unto me Anibalem Phormo, as the Adage is, and I
were mad out of my Element: I had rather with safety hereby teach that there is
a Hell to punish the merciless Rich-man, and the damned: He being in Hell
torments: therefore there is a Hell and Torments both.

There fore to conclude all in one word, and to Apply all that has been spoken
to this present time and place, let us in our Vocations learn to have mercy on
Lazarus, that is, on our Poor Brethren, that we may find mercy, and that mercy
may rejoice in Judgment: And you that are Magistrates of this City, think upon
Lazarus that lies in your Streets, that pineth at your Gates, that starveth in
your Prisons for want of crumbs: Hark how they cry, Bread, bread, a Loaf of
Bread for Jesus sake. Who would not hear them? Who would not Pity them? Who
would not comfort them? Also see that you choose Good and Merciful Officers in
your Spittles and Hospitals, that may feed Lazarus, and not all their own
Purses and Bellies, as the Rich Man did. And you that sit in the seat of
judgment, and are Gods here on Earth, let the matter be rightly judged between
the rich man and poor Lazarus; let equity be in your right hand, and justice in
your left; consider that Lazarus is poor, and that he is not able to wage Law
against the Rich man, yet defend him, and let him have right. Defend the
Fatherless and Widow. See that such as be in need and necessity have their
right: then shall the righteous God of Heaven bless you, and bless the Land for
your sake: then shall we be with Lazarus in the Blessed Place of Rest; which
the Blessed Jesus grant us for his mercies sake, Amen, Lord Jesus Amen.

FINIS.

