J2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King A PROCLAMATION.
Containing His Majesty's gracious Indemnity.
JAMES R.
JAMES the Seventh, by the Grace of God King of Scotland, England, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all and sundry Our good Subjects, whom
these Presents do or may concern, Greeting:
We taking into Our Royal Consideration, that notwithstanding the Prudence,
Justice, and unparallelled Clemency, which did ever accompany the Government of
Our most Dear, and most entirely beloved Brother, King Charles the Second, of
ever bless^^ ^^^mory; Several Wicked and Seditious Subjects, did break out into
open Rebellions, and Conspiracies against His (...) Person and Government. And
albeit God did on all occasions manifest his wrath against them and their
Enterprises (...) their Designs were Defeated, and several of their persons
brought to condign and just punishment, yet some few of (...) were either so
malicious, or foolish, as to be ensnared by others to presevere in their
Hellish Principles and Practice^ both in Defiance of all Law and Justice, and
in open contempt of the Reiterated Pardons, published and offered by his said
late Majesty. And now Our Royal Prudence, and the Care of Our People obliging
Us to take full Information of the chief Movers, and most active Instruments in
these pernicious Commotions, before We Determine Our Royal Pleasure concerning
them, which We hope to again in a very short time; yet as a Demonstration of
Our Indate Clemency (which also has shined in the whole Line of Our Royal Race)
and of Our Resolution to imitate the glorious Example of our said Dearest Royal
Brother, We have Resolved to Pardon; Likeas, We do hereby Pardon, Indemnifie,
and Forgive all Our Subjects in Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, under, and
below the degree of Heretors, Liferenters, Wodsetters, Burgesses of
Burghs-Royal, and vagrant Preachers, of all Rebellious, Treason, Seditious,
Insurrections, Reset, Intercommuning, Fire-raising, Robberies, Slaughters, Free
quarters, Lea(...), Concealing of Treason, and of all Crimes in general
Committed by them, or any one of them, by Word, Writ, or Deed, against Our
Government and the Laws of Our Kingdom, in any time preceding the Date of this
Our Royal Proclamation. Declaring hereby all and every one of them Free and
Secure from all Punishment, or Trouble for the same, either in their Persons,
or Goods, in all time coming. Excepting only as to such Fines, for which
already Sentences are pronounced; And likewise excepting from this Our gracious
Pardon, all those who are guilty of the Assassination of James late Archbishop
of Saint Andrews, (...) Person, Minister at Crasfarn, Thomas Kennoway, and
Duncan Stuart. And We do hereby Declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That this
Act of Indemnity and Pardon, shall be extended to all who are at present
declared Fugitives; Providing these Fugitives make Address within twenty days
after the Publication hereof, to Our Privy Council, Our Justice-Court, or any
of Our Sheriffs in Our said Kingdom, Testifying their acceptance of this Our
Pardon, by taking the Oath of Allegeiance, or otherwise finding Caution to
Transport themselves out of Our three Dominions of Scotland, England, and
Ireland, before the twentienth day of May, next ensuing the Date of these
Presents, and to live Peaceably after the said Publication, until they shall
Transport themselves, and never to return to any Part, or Place of Our said
Dominions, without a License from Us, or Our Privy Council aforesaid, under
pain of Death. And We do Command, That this Our Pardon and Indemnity be applied
and understood in the most ample Sense and Meaning, whereof the Words are
capable, and that no person included therein be Troubled or Molested, for any
Cause aforesaid in Judgment, or out with the same in any time hereafter. And
lastly, To the end all our good Subjects may have notice of this Our Royal Will
and Pleasure; We do hereby Command Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren
Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, to make timeous
Proclamation hereof, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh.

Given at our Court at White Hall the twenty Sixth of February 1684/5. And of
Our Reign the first Year. By His Majesty's Command, JO. DRVMMOND.

EDINBVRGH, the 2d day of March, 1685.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council Ordains his Majesty's gracious
Indemnity above-written to be Published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, with
the usual and accustomed Solemnities; and thereafter Ordains the same to be
Printed and Published at the whole Market Crosses of the Head Burghs of the
Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, by the several Sheriffs and
others concerned: and Recomends to the Archbishops and Bishops, to cause their
several Ministers Read from the Pulpit on a Lords Day, after Divine Service,
His Majesty's said gracious Indemnity, that all Persons concerned may have
notice of the same.

Col. McKENZIE, Cles. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty:

And Reprinted at London, by George Croom, at the Sign of the Blue-Ball in
Thames Street, over against Baynard's-Castle, 1685.


