
By the King, A PROCLAMATION Prohibiting His Majesty's Subjects to Trade within
the Limits Assigned to the Governor and Company of Adventurers of England,
Trading into Hudson's Bay, except those of the Company.
JAMES R.

Whereas Our Dearest Brother King Charles the Second of blessed Memory, did by
His Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing Date the Second
day of May, in the Two and twentieth Year of His Reign, Incorporate a Governor
and Company for carrying on a Trade in the North-west parts of America within
the Streights and Bay, commonly called Hudson's Streights; and did Grant unto
them and their Successors, the Sole Trade and Commerce of all those Seas,
Streights, Bays, Rivers, Lakes, Creeks, and Sounds in whatsoever Latitude they
should be, lying within the Entrance of the Streights commonly called Hudson's
Streights, together with all the Lands, Countries, and Territories upon the
Coasts and Confines of the Seas, Bays, Lakes, Rivers, Creeks and Sounds
aforesaid, which were not then Possessed by, or Granted to any of the Subjects
of Our said Royal Brother, or Possessed by the Subjects of any other Christian
Prince or State, Thereby Creating and Constituting the said Governor and
Company for the time being, and their Successors, the true and absolute Lords
and Proprietors of the same Territories, Limits and Places aforesaid, and of
all other the Premises, with express Prohibition to all other the Subjects of
Our said Royal Brother to Trade to the Parts aforesaid. And whereas We are
satisfied that the said Company has for many years with great Industry, and at
a very great Charge and Expense, Settled diverse Factories, Erected several
Fortifications, and maintained the Trade in the Parts aforesaid, to the great
Honor and Profit of this Our Kingdom, until of late several ill-disposed
Persons not being Members of the said Company, nor Licensed by them, preferring
their private profit before the public good, have contrary to the said Royal
Grant, in a clandestine and disorderly manner, Traded into those parts, to the
apparent prejudice, if not destruction, of the Trade aforesaid, and in manifest
Contempt of Our Prerogative Royal; and the better to color their evil
practices, do frame Designs to Hire, or do Hire themselves out in the Service
of, or in conjunction with Foreigners to Sa^l to the Parts aforesaid, to
undermine and destroy the said Companies Trade. We, taking the Premises into
Our Princely Consideration, do not only give Leave and Direct, That the Persons
who have so contemptuously violated the said Companies Charter, be Prosecuted
in Our Name at Law in order to their condign Punishment according to their
demerits; But for prevention of the like evil practices for the future, We
have thought fit, with the Advice of Our Privy Council, to Publish and Declare
Our Royal Will and Pleasure to be, and We do hereby strictly Prohibit and
Forbid that none of Our Subjects whatsoever, except the said Governor and
Company and their Successors, and such as shall be duly Licensed by them at any
time or times hereafter do presume to send or Navigate any Ship or Ships,
Vessel or Vessels, or exercise any Trade whatsoever directly or indirectly on
their own accounts, or in the Service of, or in conjunction with any Foreigner
or Foreigners whatsoever, to, in or from the said Streights and Bay, called
Hudson's Streights, or to, in or from any Bays, Rivers, Creeks or Places
whatsoever, by what names or denominations soever they or any of them have been
heretofore, or shall hereafter be called or distinguished, that now are or lie
within the Entrance of Hudson's Streights aforesaid, in what Latitude or
Longitude soever the same or any of them do, does or shall lie, remain or be
within the Liberties, Territories, or Privileges of the said Company, upon
pain of Our high Displeasure, and the forfeiture and loss of the Goods,
Merchandises, Ships and Vessels which shall be taken or found Trading in any
the Place or Places aforesaid, or within the Limits aforesaid. And We do
hereby strictly Charge and Command all and every Our Subjects of what degree or
quality soever, now Trading or Traffiquing, or designing to Trade or Traffic
to or from the Parts aforesaid, or any of them, contrary to the true meaning of
the said Companies Charter, That they forthwith do cease and forbear such their
Trade and Traffic, and withdraw themselves from the parts aforesaid. And We
do further hereby straightly Require and Command all and singular Our
Governors, Lieutenant-Governours, Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Generals, Judges of
all Our Courts of Admiralty, Commanders of Our Forts and Castles, Captains of
Our Royal Ships, Justices of the Peace, Provost-Marshals, Marshals,
Comptrollers, Collectors of Our Customs, VVayters, Searchers, and all other Our
Officers and Ministers Civil and Military by Sea or Land, in all and every of
Our Dominions or Plantations, and all other Our Subjects whatsoever and
wheresoever, to take effectual care that no person or persons whatsoever
(except the said Company and their Successors, and such as shall be duly
Licensed) do send or Navigate any Ships or Vessels, or exercise any Trade
directly or indirectly from any of Our Kingdoms, Dominions or Plantations
whatsoever, contrary to the said Charter granted to the said Company as
aforesaid, to any the Places or Limits aforesaid, or from thence to any of Our
said Kingdoms, Dominions, Plantations, or other Places; And if any person or
persons shall presume to act or do in any wise contrary to this Our Royal
Proclamation, We do Will, Require and straightly Command all and singular Our
said Governors, Lieutenant-Governours, Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Generals,
Judges of Our Courts of Admiralty, Commanders of Our Forts and Castles,
Captains of Our Royal Ships, Justices of the Peace, Provost-Marshals, Marshals,
Sheriffs, Comptrollers, Collectors of Our Customs, VVayters, Searchers, and all
other Our Officers and Ministers Civil and Military by Sea or Land in every of
Our said Dominions and Plantations, and all other Our Officers, Ministers and
Subjects whatsoever and wheresoever, that as often as need shall require, they
and every of them respectively be Aiding and Assisting to the said Company,
their Factors, Deputies, or Assigns, to Attach, Arrest, Take and Seize all such
Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, Goods, VVares and Merchandises of such person
or persons as shall be Used, Employed, or Traded in contrary to the Charter
Granted to the said Company, wheresoever they shall be found, for Our Use, upon
pain of Our high Displeasure, and as they will answer the contrary at their
Perils.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the One and thirtieth day of March 1688. In
the Fourth Year of Our Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1688.


