By the King. A PROCLAMATION.
JAMES R.

JAMES the seventh by the Grace of God; King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and sunury our good Subjects, whom these presents do or may concern,
Greeting:
We having taken into our Royal consideration the many and great
inconveniences which have happened to that Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland of
late years, through the different persuasions in the Christian Religion, and
the great Heats and animosities among the several Prosessors thereof, to the
ruin and decay of Trade, wasting of Lands, extinguishing of Charity, contempt
of the Royal Power, and converting of true Religion and the fear of God, into
Animosities, Names, Factions, and sometimes into Sacrilege and Treason. And
being resolved as much as in Uslyes, to Unite the Hearts and Affections of our
Subjects to God in Religion, to Us in Loyalty and to their Neighbors in
Christian Love and Charity, Have therefore thought fit to Grant, and by our
Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal and absolute power, which all our
Subjects are to obey without Relieve, Do hereby give and Grant Our Royal
Tolleration to the several Prosessors of the Christian Religion alter named,
with and under the several Conditions, Restrictions and Limimitations
after-mentioned. In the first place, we allow and Tolerate the moderate
Presbyterians, to Meet in their private Houses, and there to hear all such
Ministers, as either have or are willing to accept of Our Indulgence Allanerly,
and none other, and that there be not any thing said or done contrary to the
well and peace of Our Reign, Seditious or Treasonable, under the highest Pains
these Crimes will Import; nor are they to presume to build Meeting Houses, or
to Use Outhouses or Barns, but only to Exercise in their private Houses as said
is: In the mean time it is our Royal will and pleasure that Field Conventicles
and such as Preach or exercise at them, or who shall any ways Assist or Counive
at them, shall be prosecuted according to the utmost severity of Our Laws made
against them, seeing from these Rendezvouzes of Religion, so much Disorder has
proceeded, and so much disturbance to the Government; and for which after this
our Royal Indulgence for tender Consciences there is no Excuse left. In like
manner, We do hereby Tolerate Quakers, to meet and exercise in their Form, in
any Place or Places appointed for their Worship. And considering the severe and
cruel Laws made against Roman Catholics (therein called Papisbs) in the
Minority of Our Royal Grandfather of Glorious Memory, without his Consent, and
contrary to the duty of good Subjects, by his Regents and other Enemies to
their Lawful Sovereign, our Royal Great Grandmother Queen Mary of Blessed and
Pious Memory, wherein under the pretense of Religion they Clothed the worst of
Treasons, Factions, and Usurpations, and made these Laws, not as against the
Enemies of God, but their own; which Laws have still been continued of Course,
without design of Executing them, or any of them, ad terrorem only, on
Supposition that the Papists relying on an External Power, were incapable of
Duty and true Allegiance to their natural Sovereigns, and Rightful Monarchy: We
of Our certain Knowledge, and long Experience, knowing that the Catholics, as
it is their principle to be good Christians, so it is to be dutiful Subjects,
and that they have likewise on all Occasions shown themselves good and faithful
Subjects to Us, and Our Royal Predecessors, by hazarding and many of them
actually losing their Lives and Fortunes in their Defense (though of another
Raligion) and the maintenance of their Authority against the Violences and
Treasons of the most violent Abbetrors of these Laws, Do therefore with Advice
and Consent of Our Privy Council, by Our Sovereign Authority; Prerogative Roya,
and Absolute Power aforesaid, Suspend, Stop, and Disable all Laws and Acts of
Parliament, Customs or Constitutions made or Executed against any of our Roman
Catholic Subjects, in any time past to all intents and purposes, making void
all prohibitions therein mentioned, Pains or Penalties therein Ordained to be
Inflicted, so that they shall in all things be as free in all respects as any
of our Protestant Subjects whatsoever, not only to exercise their Religion, but
to enjoy all Offices Benefices, and others, which We shall think fit to bestow
upon them in all time coming: Neverthless it is Our Will and Pleasure, and We
do hereby Command all Catholics at their highest Pains, only to exercise their
Religious Worship in Houses or Chapels; and that they presume not to Preach in
the open Fields, or Invade the Protestant Churches by force, under the pains
aforesaid, to be inflicted upon the Offenders respectively, nor shall they
presume to make public Processions in the High-Streets of any of Our Royal
Burghs, under the Pains abovementioned: And whereas the Obedience and Service
of Our good Subjects is due to Us by their Allegiance, and Our Soveraignity and
that no Law, Custom, or Constitution, Difference in Religion, or other
impediment whatsoever can exempt or discharge the Subjects from their Native
Obligations and Duty to the Crown, or hinder Us from protecting and employing
them, according to their several Capacities, and Our Royal Pleasure, nor
restrain us from consering Heretable Rights, and Privileges upon them, or
Vacuate or Annul these Rights Heretable, when they are made or conferred: And
likewise considering that some Oaths are capable of being Wrested by Men of
Sinistruous Intentions, a practice in that Kingdom fatal to Religion, as it was
to Loyalty; Do therefore, with Advice and Consent aforesaid, Cass, Annul and
Discharge all Oaths whatsoever, by which any of Our Subjects are incapacitated
or disabled from holding Places, or Offices in Our said Kindom, or enjoying
their Hereditary Rights and Privileges, Discharging the same to be taken or
given in any time coming, without Our special Warrant and Consent, under the
pains due to the Contempt or our Royal Commands and Authority; and to this
effect, we do by Our Royal Authority aforesaid, Stop, Disable, and Dispense
with all Laws enjoining the said Oaths, Tests, or any of them, particularly
the first Act of the first Session of the first Parliament of King Charles the
Second; the eleventh Act of the foresaid Session of the foresaid Parliament;
the sixth Act of the third Parliament of the said King Charles; the twenty
first and twenty fifth Acts of that Parliament; and the thirteenth Act of the
first Session of Our late Parliament, in so far allanerly as concerns the
taking the Oaths or Tests therein prescribed, and all others, as well not
mentioned as mentioned, and that in place of them, all Our good Subjects, or
such of them as We or Our Privy Council shall require so to do, shall take and
Swear the following Oath allanerly, I A.B. Do acknowledge, Testify and
Declare, that JAMES the Seventh by the Grace of God, King of Scotland, England,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. is rightful King, and Supreme
Governor of these Realms, and over all persons therein, and that it is
unlawful for Subjects, on any pretense, or for any cause whatsoever to rise in
Arms against Him, or any Commissionated by him; and that I shall never to rise
in Arms, nor Assist any who shall do so; and that I shall never resist his
Power or Authority, nor ever Oppose His Authority, to His Person, as I shall
answer to God, but shall to the utmost of my Pewer Assist, Defend, and Maintain
Him, his Heirs and Lawful Successors, in the Exercise of Their absolute Power
and Authority, against all Deadly, so help me God. And seeing many of Our good
Subjects have, before Our Pleasure in these matters was made public, incurred
the Guilt appointed by the Acts of Parliament abovementioned, or others; we by
Our Authority and absolute Power, and Prerogative Royal abovementioned of our
certain Knowledge, and innate Mercy, Give Our ample and full Indemnity to all
those of the Roman Catholic or Popish Religion, for all things by them done
contrary to Our Laws or Acts of Parliament, made in any time past relating to
their Religion, the Worship and Exercise thereof, an for being Papists,
Jesuits, or Trassickers, for hearing or saying of Mass, Concealing of Priests
or Jesuits, or breeding their Children Catholics at home or abroad, or any
other thing, Rite, or Doctrine, said, performed or maintained by them, or any
of them: And likewise for holding or taking of Places, Employments, or
Offices, controry to any Law or Constitution, Advices given to Us or Our
Council, Actions done, or generally any thing performed or said against the
known Laws of that Our Ancient Kingdom; Excepting always from this Our Royal
Indemnity all Murders Assasinations Thefts and such like other Crimes, which
never used to be comprehended in Our general Acts of Indemnity. And We command
and require all Our Judges, or others concerned, to explain this in the most
ample sense and meaning Acts of Indemnity at any time have contained: Declaring
this shall be as good to every one concereed, as if they had our Royal Pardon
and Remission under Our Great Seal of that Kingdom, And likewise Indemnifying
Our Protestant Subjects from all Pains and Penalties due for hearing or
Preaching in Houses; provided there be no Treasonable Speeches uttered in the
said Conventicles by them, in which Case the Law is only to take place against
the Guilty, and none other present: Providing also that they Reveal to any of
our Council the Guilt so Committed, As also excepting all Fines or effects of
Sentences already given: and likewise indemnifying fully and freely all Quakers
for their Meeting and Worships in all time past, preceding the publication of
these Presents; and we doubt not but Our Protestant Subjects will give their
Assistance and Concourse hereunto on all occasions, in their respective
Capacities: In consideration whereof, and the Ease those of Our Religion and
others may have hereby, and for the Encouragement of our Protestant Bishops,
and the Regular Clergy, and such as have hitherto lived Orderly, We think fit
to declare, that it never was our Principles, nor will we ever suffer Violence
to be offered to any Man's Conscience, nor will we use Force or invinsible
necessity against any Man on the account of his Persuasion, nor the Protestant
Religion, but will protect Our Bishops and other Ministers in their Functions,
Rights, and Properties, and all Our Protestant Subjects in the free exercise of
their Protestant Religion in the Churches; and that we will and hereby promise
on Our Royal Word, to maintain the Possessors of Church Lands formerly
belonging to Abbeys, or other Churches of the Catholic Religion, in their full
and free possession and Right, accordiug to our Laws and Acts of Parliament in
that behalf in all time coming; and We will employ indifferently all our
Subjects, of all Persuasions so as none shall meet with any Discouragement on
the account of his Religion, but be advanced and esteemed by Us, acording to
their several Capacities, and Qualifications, so long as we find Charity and
Unity maintained; and if any Animosities shall Arise, as We hope in God there
will not, We will show the severest Effects of Our Royal Displeasure against
the Beginners or Fomenters thereof. Seeing thereby Our Subjects may be deprived
of this general Ease and Satisfaction, We intend to all of them, whose
Happiness, Prospirity, Wealth and Safety, is so much Our Royal Care, that We
will leave nothing undone which may procure these Blessings for them. And
Lastly to the end all our good Subjects may have notice of this Our Royal Will
and Pleasure, We do hereby command Our Lion King at Arms and his Bethren
Heralds, Macers, Pursevants and Messengers at Arms, to make timeous
Proclamation thereof at the Market Cross of Edinburgh; and besides the Printing
and Publishing of this Our Royal Proclamation, it is Our express will and
Pleasure that the same be past under the Great Seal of that Our Kingdom per
saltum, without pasing any other Seal or Register: In order whereunto this
shall be to the Directors of Our Chancellary and their Deputies for Writing the
same, and to Our Chancellor, for causing Our Great Seal aforesaid to be
Appended thereunto, a sufficient Warrant,

Given at our Court at White Hall, the Twelfth of February 1686/7, And of Our
Reign the Third Year. By His Majesty's Command, MELFORT.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburg, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1687.

This may be Reprinted February the 28th. R.L.S. By George room, at the Blue
Ball in Thomes-streets, near Baynard's-Castle, 1686/7


