royal coat of armsBy the King, A PROCLAMATION For the better Execution of the
Office of making and Registring Policys of Assurances in London.
JAMES R.

WHereas Our late Royal Brother King Charles the Second, did by several Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of England, Grant to Sir Allen Broderick and his
Assigns, the Office of Making and Registring of all manner of Assurances,
Policys, Intimations, Renunciations, and all other things whatsoever, that
should be made upon any Ship or Ships, Merchandises, or any other thing or
things in the Royal Exchange, or in any other Place or Places within the City
of London, by any manner of Person or Persons whatsoever, of what Nation,
Condition or Quality soever he or they be, either going out of this Realm or
coming in, or going or coming into any other Place or Places whatsoever, for
his own Life, and the Life of William Broderick Merchant, and for One and
thirty Years after the death of the Survivor of them, with the Fees and Profits
thereof. And whereas several persons pretending to be ignorant of the said
Grants, and not respecting the Public Good, nor considering the great
Advantages which would most certainly accrue to the Merchants and other Traders
of the said City of London, by a due and ready compliance therewith, Do for
their own private Lucre, presume to erect and set up private Offices for making
Policys of Assurances, and make no Entries thereof in the Office aforesaid, by
which means Merchants and other Traders not being able to know what Assurances
are made upon any Ship or Goods, do frequently Assure more then the value of
such Ship and Goods, to the great discouraging of Trade. We have therefore
thought fit by th^s Our Royal Proclamation, with the Advice of Our Privy
Council, to Publish and make known the said Grants of the said Office to all
Our loving Subjects, to the end all Persons concerned may have recourse
thereunto, and that all Frauds and Abuses touching the Execution thereof may
for the future be redressed, and the Persons Interessed therein, quieted and
settled in the Possession thereof, according to the purport and intent of the
said Letters Patents; We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all manner of
Person and Persons whatsoever he or they be, as well Our own Subjects as
Strangers, who within the Royal Exchange aforesaid, or in any other Place or
Places within Our said City of London, shall make or cause to be made any
manner of Assurance either upon Ships, Goods or Merchandises, or of Moneys
taken upon the Hazard or Safe Proceedings of any Ship or Ships, Goods or
Merchandise, or of any other thing whatsoever touching or concerning the same,
That from henceforth the same be made and Registered by the Assigns of the said
Sir Allen Broderick pursuant to the said Letters Patents, and that no other
Person or Persons do presume to Erect any other Office or Off^ces for Making or
Registring any Assurances or Policys contrary to the said Letters Patents, as
they will answer the same at their Peril.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this 30th day of April 1686. In the Second
Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. 1687.


