
By the King, A PROCLAMATION For the more effectual Reducing and Suppressing of
PIRATES and PRIVATEERS in AMERICA.
JAMES R.
WHereas frequent Robberies and Piracies have been, and are daily committed by
great numbers of Pirates and Privateers as well on the Seas as on the Land of
and in America, which has occasioned a great prejudice and obstruction to the
Trade and Commerce as well of Our Subjects, as of the Subjects of Our Allies,
and has given a great Scandal and Disturbance to Our Government in those
Parts. And whereas We being resolved to take some effectual course for the
putting an end to all such Outrageous Insolences, have therefore thought it
requisite to send a Squadron of Ships into the Parts aforesaid, under the
Command of Our Trusty and Welbeloved Servant Sir Robert Holmes, Knight, Our
Governor of Our Isle of Wight, and have otherwise given him all necessary
Powers for Suppressing of the said P^rates and Privateers, either by Force, or
assurance of Pardon, and have Constituted and Appointed the said Sir Robert
Holmes Our Sole Commissioner in that Affair; Now to the end that this Our Royal
Purpose may be the better put in Execution, and that none of the said Offenders
may have any cause of excuse or pretense left for want of a due Advertisement
of Our Intended Mercy and Clemency toward them, upon their withdrawing
themselves from their said wicked and Piratical courses for the future: We are
Graciously pleased hereby to Promise and Declare, That in case any such Pirate
or Privateer Pirates or Privateers shall within the space of Twelve months next
ensuing the Date of this Our Proclamation, either in Person, or by their Agents
Surrender, or become obliged to Surrender him or themselves unto the said Sir
Robert Holmes, or any other person or persons appointed by him, or such other
person or persons as in case of his Death shall be further Constituted and
Appointed by Us, within any of Our said Islands, Plantations, Colonies, or
(...) or Land, lying between the Tropiques of Cancer and Capricorn in America,
and in case any Pirate or Privateer, Pirates or Privateers shall within the
space of Fifteen months next ensuing the Date of these Presents, Surrender, or
become obliged to Surrender him or themselves to the said Sir Robert Holmes, or
any others Appointed as aforesaid, in any other parts of America, or within Our
Kingdom of England, and shall give sufficient Security to be approved of by the
said Sir Robert Holmes, or in case of his Death, by such other person or
persons as shall be further Appointed by Us, for his or their future good
Behavior, We will, upon such humble Submission, and after such Security given,
Grant unto such Pirate or Pirates, Privateer or Privateers, Our Gracious, Full
and Ample Pardon for all Piracies or Robberies committed by him or them upon
the Sea or Land before the Date of these Presents. And We do hereby straightly
Charge and Command all and singular Our Admirals, Uice-Admirals Chief
Governors, Captains, Commanders, Mariners, Seamen, and all Our Officers and
Ministers of and in all and every Our said Islands, Plantations, Colonies, and
Territories whatsoever, and of all and every Our Ships of War and other
Uessels, and all other Our Officers and Subjects whatsoever, not only to be
Aiding, Favoring and Assisting in their several Places and Stations, unto the
said Sir Robert Holmes, and such other Person or Persons as shall be appointed
as aforesaid in and for the more effectual Reducing and Suppressing of all
manner of Pirates and Privateers within the Limits and Parts aforesaid, or any
of them, but also (upon the producing a Certificate or Instrument under the
Hand and Seal o^ the said Sir Robert Holmes, or such other Person as in case of
his Death shall be further Appointed by Us, signifying that an^ Pirate or
Privateer, Pirates or Privateers has or have Surrendered him or themselves unto
the said Sir Robert Holmes, or su^^ other Person or Persons appointed as
aforesaid, and given Security for their future good Behavior according to the
Tenor of these Presents) to permit and suffer the said person or persons
lawfully to Pass and Travel either by Sea or Land, wit^out any Let, Hindrance
or Molestation whatsoever, to or from any of Our said Islands, Plantations or
Colonies, or into Our Kingdom of England, as soon as conveniently may be, in
Order to his or their receiving Our full and Gracious Pardons aforesaid, and
that in the mean time no Indictment, Process, or other Proceeding shall be had
in any of Our Courts of ^^cord, or elsewhere, against any such person or
persons producing such Certificate or Instrument, for any Piracy or Robbery b^
him or them committed as aforesaid, before the Date of these Presents. Provided
always, That if any of the said Offender or ^ffenders whatsoever shall after
the Publishing of this Our Proclamation, in contempt thereof, and of Our
Princely Mercy and Clemency to them hereby offered, wilfully and obstinately
persist in their Piracies, Robberies and Outrageous Practices, or shall ^ot
Surrender themselves in manner aforesaid; Then We do hereby expressly Direct and
Command, That all and every such pers^^ and persons shall be pursued with the
utmost Severity, and with the greatest Rigor that may be, until they and every
of them ^e utterly Suppressed and Destroyed; We Declaring it to be Our Royal
Purpose and Resolution, That they and every of them ^^all from thenceforth be
finally Excluded and Debarred from receiving any further Favor or Mercy. And
lastly We do hereby (...), Annul and make void all Proclamations by Us formerly
Issued touching the Premises herein above mentioned, or (...) them.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this Twentieth Day of ^anuary, 168^. In the
Third Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by Charles (...) to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 168^


