royal coat of arms
By the King,
A PROCLAMATION.
JAMES R.

FOrasmuch as the Great Preparations made to Invade and Conquer this Our
Kingdom, require Our utmost Care in providing for the necessary Safety and
Defense thereof; Wherein We Resolve (through God's Assistance) not to be
wanting: And to the intent that Our Enemies who will bring the heavy and sad
Calamities of War, may not strengthen themselves at their coming hither by
seizing the Horses, Oxen and Cattle of any of Our Subjects, which may be useful
and serviceable to them for Burden and Draught: We have therefore thought fit,
and We do by this Our Royal Proclamation (Published by and with the Advice of
Our Privy Council) strictly Charge, Require and Command all and every the Lords
Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants, of Our respective Counties adjoining to
the Sea, and all Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, and all and
every other Officers and Ministers, Civil and Military, within their respective
Counties, Cities, Towns and Divisions, that they cause the Coasts to be
carefully watched, and upon the first Approach of the Enemy, to cause all
Horses, Oxen and Cattle, which may be fit for Burden or Draught, and not
actually Employed in the Service and Defense of Us, and the Country, to be
driven and removed by the space at least of twenty Miles from the Place where
the Enemy shall Attempt to Land, and to secure the same in such Effectual
manner, that they may not fall into the Hands or Power of any of Our Enemies:
Wherein nevertheless it is Our Will and Pleasure, that the respective Owners
may suffer as little Damage and Loss, as may be Consistent with the Great and
Public Safety of the Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the 20th day of October, 1688. In the Fourth
Year of Our Reign. God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1688.


