By the KING, A PROCLAMATION.
JAMES R.

JAMES the Seventh, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc:
To all and sundry Our good Subjects, whom these Presents do or may Concern,
Greeting.
Since Accession to the Throne of Our Royal Ancestors, Our chiefest Care has
been to procure the Security, Peace and Happiness of Our Subjects, by all the
ways Our Paternal Care of Our People could suggest to Us, especially by
removing the Pressures of Penal Laws in matters of mere Religion, and
forbidding all differencing Oaths and Tests, whose unreasonable Weight hung
heavy on Us and Our People, Precluding both from Our Native-freedom and
Birthright; And this We did by Our Royal Declaration of the date the 1^ of
February 168^. In which Declaration, We were pleased, for the great and weighty
Causes and Considerations therein mentioned, and by virtue of Our Sovereign
(...). Prerogative Royal, and Absolute Power, so plainly Acknowledged by
several Acts of Parliament, and especially by the 2d. Act of Our first
Parliament; To Give and Grant Our Royal Tolleration to all the Professors of
the Christian Religion therein named, and with and under certain Conditions,
Restrictions, and Limitations, judged by Us for the Time to be necessary.
Requiring and expecting, that all Our good Subject would give their Assistance
and Concourse thereunto, on all Occasions, in their respective Capacities;
Suspending, Disabling and Stopping all Penal Laws, Acts of Parliament, Customs
or Constitutions, made or executed against Dissenters for matters of mere
Religion. And further, We did Cass, Annul and Discharge, all Oaths whatsoever,
by which any were Disabled from holding Places or Offices, or enjoying their
Hereditary Rights and Privileges; Discharging the same to be thence forward
given or taken, without Our special Warrant; Stopping, Disabling, and
Dispensing as well with all Laws enjoining the said Oaths and Tests, as with
the other Penal Laws therein mentioned; and Declaring, that it never was Our
Principle, nor would We suffer Violence to be offered to any man's Conscience,
or Force to be used against any man, on the account of his Persuasion; And that
We would employ indifferently all Our Subjects, of all Persuasions, so as none
should meet with any Discouragement on the account of his Religion, but be
Advanced and Esteemed by Us, according to their several Capacities and
Qualifications, so long as We should find Charity and Unity maintained: And if
any Animosities should arise, that then We would show the severest Effects of
Our Royal Displeasure against the Beginners or Fomenters thereof, seeing thereby
Our Subjects might be deprived of that general Ease and Satisfaction that We
did intend to all of them, whose Happiness, Prosperity, Wealth and Safety were
so much in Our Royal Care, that We would leave nothing undone that might
procure these Blessings for them. We did likewise Declare, that We were
resolved to maintain Our Archbishops of the Protestant Religion, with all the
inferior Clergy, in the full and free Possession of their Rights and
Privileges, as they now enjoy them, and all Our Protestant Subjects, in the
free Exercise of their Religion; As likewise, the Possessors of Church or
Abbay-Lands, in their Full Right of their Possessions, according to Law, in
that Case already provided; Likewise, Granting Our Indemnity, with such
Exceptions, as in the forsaid Proclamation is more fully expressed. Thereafter,
We thought fit to Explain and Enlarge the same, by Our second Declaration,
bearing date at Windsor, the 28 day of June last bypast, of which the Tenor
follows.

JAMES the Seventh, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and sundry Our good Subjects whom these Presents do or may concern,
Greeting.
Whereas by Our Royal Proclamation of the date the 12 day of February 1686/7,
We were graciously pleased for the Causes, and on the Terms therein mentioned,
to grant our Royal Tolleration to the Professors of the Christian Religion
therein named, With and under certain Restrictions and Limitations, All which
are in the said Proclamation more at length expressed: We now taking into Our
Royal Consideration the sinistruous Interpretations, which either have, or may
be made of some Restrictions, therein mentioned. Have thought fit by this Our
Royal Proclamation, further to Declare, that We will Protect Our Archbishops,
and Bishops, and all our Subjects of the Protestant Religion, in the free
Extercise of their Protestant Religion, as it is by Law Established, and in the
Quiet and Full Enjoyment of all their Possessions, without any Molestation or
Disturbance whatsoever, And We do likewise by Our Sovereign Authority,
Prerogative-Royal and Absolute Power, Suspend, Stop and Disable, all Penal and
Sanguinary Laws, made against any for Nonconformity to the Religion
Established by Law, in that Our Ancient Kingdom, or for Exercising their
respective Worships, Religions, Rites and Ceremonies; All which Laws are hereby
Stopped, Suspended and Disabled so all Intents and Purposes. And to the end that
by the Liberty thereby granted, the Peace and Security of Our Government in the
Practice thereof, may not be Endangered, We have thought fit, and We do hereby
straightly Charge and Command all our Loving Subjects, that as We do freely give
them leave to Meet and Serve God after their own Way and Manner, be it in
private Houses, Chapels, or Places purposely Hired or Built for that use, so
that they take care that nothing be Preached or Taught among them which may any
ways tend to Alienat the Hearts of Our People from Us, or our Government, and
that their Meetings be peaceably, openly and publicly held, and all Persons
freely admitted to them and that they do signify and make known to some one or
more of the next Privy Counselors, Sheriffs, Stewards, Baillies, Justices of
the Peace, or Magistrates of Burghs-Royal, what Place or Places they set apart
for these uses, with the Names of the Preachers.

And that all our Subjects may enjoy such their Religious Assemblies, with
greater Assurance and Protection, We have thought fit, and do hereby Command,
that no Disturbance of any kind be made or given unto them, under pain of Our
Royal Displeasure, and to be further proceeded against, with the outmost
Severity, Provided always, that their Meetings be in Houses, or Places provided
for the purpose, and not in the open Fields, for which, now after this Our
Royal Grace and Favor shown (which surpasses Hopes, and equals the very Wishes
of the most zealously concerned,) there is not the least shadow of Excuse
lefts. Which Meetings in Fields; We do hereby strictly Prohibit and Forbid,
against all which We do leave Our Laws an Acts of Parliament in full force and
vigor, notwithstanding the Premises; And do further Command, all Our Judges,
Magistrates, and Officers of Our Forces, to prosecute such as shall be guilty of
the said Field-Conventicles or Assemblies, with the outmost Rigor, as they
would avoid Our Highest Displeasure, for We are confident, none will (after
these Liberties and Freedoms We have given to all, without reserve, to serve
GOD in their own way) presume to meet in these Assemblies, except such as make
a pretense of Religion, to cover their Treasonable Designs, against Our Royal
Person, and the Peace of Our Government. And Lastly, To the end all Our good
Subjects may have notice of this Our Royal Will and Pleasure, We do hereby
Command Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Matters, Pursevants;
and Messengers at Arms, to make timeous Proclamation thereof at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh; And besides the Printing and Publishing of this our
Royal Proclamation, It is Our Express Will and Pleasure, that the same be past
under Our Great Seal of that Our Kingdom per saltum, without passing any other
Seal or Register. In order whereunto, these shall be to the Directors of Our
Chancery and their Deputs, for Writing the same, and to our Chancellor, for
causing Our Great Seal aforesaid to be Appended thereunto, a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court as Windsor the 28 day of June 1687. And of Our the Third
Year.
And in pursuance of Our Royal Intentions therein expressed, We have Dissolved
all Our Judicatures of Privy Council, Session, Exchequer, Justiciary, and
Magistracy of Our Burghs-Royal, that by their Acceptations of new Commissions
on the terms of Our Royal Pleasure as above-expressed, We might Convince the
World of the Justice of Our Procedure, as the Universal thanks of Our People
has manifested their Joy, for so unexpected, unhoped for Blessings, terminating
at once their Persecutions, and freeing Our Self from the bad Consequences
thereof, too manifest, too manifest in bypast Reigns, to be forgotten in this;
And yet there are still some Enemies to Us, and to their own Peace, who labor
to lessen the Happiness Our People enjoy, by Fears and Jealousies, that it will
not be lasting; But We will let them, and all the World know, that Our Care,
shall be more indefatigable, to Prevent and Defeat their Malice, than they
shall be to Contrive or Act the same. And therefore, We have again thought fit
to Declare Our Royal Intentions, to Stand to, and Maintain Our first
Declaration, of the date the 12 of February 1687, in so far as it is above
repeated, and as it is Explained and Enlarged by Our second of the date the 28
of June, according to the true Meaning and Import of the same. And if any shall
be so bold as to refuse their due Concurrence with, or Obedience to Us in these
Points, they shall find the weight of Our Royal Displeasure, so as to terrify
others from the like Undutifulness to Our Royal Authority, whilst on the other
part, such as Dutifully Obey and Act as become them, shall Enjoy the Comfort of
Our Royal Protection and Favor. And to the end all Our good Subjects may have
notice of this Our Royal Will and Pleasure, We do hereby Command Our Lion King
at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms,
to make timeous Proclamation thereof at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh. For all
which, This shall be to all Persons respectively, who may be therein any way
Concerned, a sufficient Warrant.

Given under Our Royal Hand and Signet at Our Court at Whitehall the 7th day of
May 1688, and of Our Reign the Fourth Year. By His Majesty's Command, MELFORT.

Edinburgh. May 15, 1688. Present in Council.

The Earl of Perth Lord High Chancellor. The Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews
The Lord Archbishop of Glasgow The Lord Marquess of Athol Privy Seal The Earl
of Linlithgow The Earl of Strathmore The Earl of Lauderdale The Earl of
Fraquair The Earl of Belsarras The Lord Viscount of Tarbas The Master of
Balmerino The Lord President of Session The Lord Advocat The Lord Justice Clerk
The Lord Castehill General Major Grahamt of Claverhouse The Lord of Niddrie.
THe above-written Proclamation from His most Sacred Majesty, being Read in His
Privy Council of Scotland, was (in pursuance of His Majesty's Royal Commands)
Ordered to be Published the Morrow, at the ordinary time, with all due
Solemnities. Extracted forth of the Records of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council by me.

WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
EDINBURGH, Printed by the Hier of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1688.


