J2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King. A PROCLAMATION For the careful Custody and well Ordering of the
New River brought from Chadwell and Amwell to the North parts of the City of
London.
JAMES R.

WHereas by Authority of two several Acts of Parliament made and Ordained in
the Third and fourth years of the Reign of Our late Royal Grandfather King
James (of blessed memory) the River now running fron Chadwell and Amwell, in
Our County of Hertford, to the North parts of Our City of London, was at the
great charge of Our said Grandfather, and other the Undertakers happily made
and finished, since which time the water thereof is dispersed by Pipes and
Branches through the several Streets and Places of our said City, the Liberties
and Suburbs of the same, and elsewhere, to thebenefit and ease of Our Subjects
there inhabiting, as well for the cleaning and sweet keeping of them in the
times of Infection, as the preservation and safety of the Houses and Buildings,
Goods and Riches therein, from the fearful danger of fire casually happening;
And such was the care and Providence of Our said Grandfather, that the water in
any place in the course thereof should not at any time be troubled or corrupted
(whereby the health or lives of the people might suffer or be endangered) that
by his Letters Patents of Incorporation dated the One and twentieth day of
June, in the Seventeenth year of his Reign over this Our Realm of England, he
created and erected a Governor and Company, successively to Regulate, and
carefully to Oversee all things appertaining to the said River; and several
strict Orders and Commands were made and given by Our late Royal Father (of
blessed memory) for preservation of the said River, and preventing of such
things as might be prejudicial thereunto; Notwithstanding which, the present
Governor and Company have represented unto Us, That great abuses are daily
committed: We therefore taking into Our Princely consideration, That the
preservation of the said River is of great and esp^cial consequence, are
Graciously pleased by this Our Royal Proclamation (with the advice of Our Privy
Council) Exactly to Charge and Command, That all and every the Grants, Clauses
and Rest^^^ons in the said Acts of Parliament, Letters Patents, and in all
other Our Letters Patents, Orders and Proclamations concerning the said River
Enacted, Made, Established, Granted or Confirmed, be from time to time
carefully obeyed, observed, and performed; And We do hereby strictly prohibit
and forbid all and singular the Inhabitants of Our City of London, the Suburbs
and Liberties thereof, Our City of Westminster, and also the Inhabitants of Our
several Counties of Middlesex and Hertford, and likewise all the Plummers,
Paviers, and other, Artificers whomsoever, and every of them, That they nor any
of them, do or shall presume at any time or times hereafter, without the
privity, permission and allowance of the Governor and Company aforesaid for
the time being, to intermeddle with the said Works, or any of the Pipes or
Branches thereof, or to convey or derive any Pipe or Branch, pipes or Branches
of the said Water, into then, or any of their houses, or other places, nor
shall fetch or carry the water out of said River, the Pipes or Branches
thereof, (...) otherwise hinder, waste or consume, disturb, infect, abuse or
corrupt the same River, by setting up of Grates, overflowing of Grounds, making
of Trenches or Drains, filling of Ponds, Fishing, watering of Cattle, keeping
of Geese or Ducks thereupon, casting of Carrion thereinto, or by doing or
permitting any misusance, annoyance, let, stoppage, or prejudice whatsoever to
the stream of Our said River in any part of the Current thereof, nor shall cut,
spoil, take away or destroy any the Branches, Bridges, VVharfs, Posts, R^ils,
Banks, Bounds or Fences to the said River in any wise belonging or
appertaining, or therewith enjoyed, or lying near, or behoful to the same; And
that the said Governor and Company, their Officers and Servants shall have
free Liberty in the daytime, in the presence of a Constable, to Search any
House, Yard, or Backside where they shall suspect any Branch or Branches are
laid contrary to their knowledge, upon pain of Our high displeasure, and of
such pains, penalties and punishments, as by the Laws ^d Statutes of this
Kingdom, or Our Prerogative-Royal can and may be inflicted upon the Offenders
for contempt of Our Royal VVi^^ and Pleasure herein declared: And We do hereby
straightly Charge and Command all Mayors, Justices of Peace, Commissioners ^f
Sewers, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other Our
Officers, and Ministers and Subjects within Our said C^ties of London and
Westminster, the Suburbs and Liberties thereof, Our Counties of Middlesex and
Hertford, whom the same shall o^ may concern, That they and every of them
hereafter be vigilant and circumspect, that Our Royal Will and Pleasure herein
declare (...) be from time to time effectually observed; And that they and
every of them in their several Offices and Places respectively, without ^xcuse
or delay, be upon all occasions aiding and assisting to the said Governor and
Company, their Officers and Ministers, in t^^ strict observance and execution
of all and singular the Powers and Authorities, Limitations and Restraints
herein before menti^^ed, and in the Grants and Prohibitions aforesaid
contained, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, when
they all be thereunto required by them or any of them, as they and every of
them tender Our Pleasure, and will avoid the contrary at t^^ir perils.

^^^en at Our Court at Whitehall the Fifth day of March 1685/6. In the Second
year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Cha^^^s Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1686.


