DIEV ET MON DROIT


JAMES R.

WHereas not withstanding the good Provision made by diverse Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, Prohibiting the Transportation of Sheep, Wool, Wooll-fells,
Woollen-yarn, Mortlings, Shorlings, Wooll-flocks, Fullers Earth, and
Fulling-Clay, out of this Our Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town and
Port of Berwick upon Tweed, or any the Isles, Ports, Creeks or Places thereof,
into the Kingdom of Scotland, or into Foreign parts beyond the Seas; By which
Laws and Statutes, besides the pecuniary Penalties and Forfeitures thereby
Imposed, such Transportation is declared Felony, not only in the Transporters
thereof, but also in their Aiders and Abettors; and notwithstanding the several
Proclamations of Our late Dearest Brother, and Our Self, in pursuance of the
said Laws; diverse persons evilly-disposed to the welfare of this Our Kingdom
and Dominions aforesaid, presuming upon Our Lenity in not exacting the
Penalties aforesaid, upon the Lives and Estates of such Offenders, as by Law We
might, have assumed to themselves, and do daily licenciously assume to
themselves in Defiance of Us, Our Government and Laws aforesaid, not only
clandestinely, but by open Force and Violence with Armed Companies of Men, the
Liberty to Convey and Transport the Commodities aforesaid into parts beyond the
Seas; and also to Rescue the same out of the Hands and Possession of Our
Officers of the Customs, and others acting in their Aid, when by virtue of Our
Authority the said Commodities have been Seized, and in Riotous and Tumultuous
manner have beaten and wounded Our said Officers, and those acting in their
Aid; We, taking the same into Our Princely Consideration, and duly weighing the
evil consequence thereof to the Staple Manufacture of Clothing in this Our
Kingdom, have thought fit, by the Advice of Our Privy Council, and We do, by
this Our Royal Proclamation, as well in pursuance of the aforesaid Laws, as in
virtue of Our Royal Prerogative, straightly Charge, Prohibit and Command that
no manner of Sheep, Wool, Wooll-fells, Woollen-yarn, Mortlings, Shorlings,
Wooll-flocks, Fullers Earth, or Fulling-Clay, be at any time or times
hereafter, by any person or persons whatsoever, whether Natural-born-Subjects,
Denizens or Strangers, Exported, Transported, Sent or Conveyed out of Our
Kingdom, or Dominions aforesaid, or any the Isles, Ports, Creeks, or places
thereof, into the Kingdom of Scotland, or into any Foreign parts beyond the
Seas, upon pain of Our highest Indignation, and the severest Penalties, which
by the Laws and Statutes of this Our Realm may be inflicted upon the Offenders
themselves, their Aiders, Procurers, Abettors and Favorers, their Liv^^ and
Estates. And We do hereby Declare, That We will cause to be effectually put in
Execution the Laws and Statutes aforesaid, and will exact the Penalties
accruing, as by Law We may. And We do hereby straightly Charge and Command all
Our Officers and Ministers, as well Civil as Military, to be Aiding and
Assisting to Our Officers of Our Customs, and others duly Authorized to put in
Execution the said Laws, and all others acting in their Aid.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Sixth Day of April 1688. In the Fourth
Year of Our Reign;
GOD SAVE THE KING.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1688.


