royal coat of armsBy the King, A PROCLAMATION Appointing a time of Public
Thanksgiving and Prayer throughout the Kingdom.
JAMES R.

IT having pleased Almighty God (Who in signal manner has blessed His Majesty
and this Kingdom under His Majesty's Government, with great Prosperity, Peace
and Plenty) to give His Majesty also apparent hopes and good assurance of
having Issue by His Royal Consort the Queen, who (through Gods great Goodness)
is now with Child: And forasmuch as Increase of Issue of the Royal Family is a
public Blessing, and (under God) a great Security of Peace and Happiness to
this Kingdom: His Majesty therefore has thought fit (at the humble request,
and by the Advice of His Privy Council) to Appoint a time, upon this occasion,
to render Public and Hearty Thanks, throughout the Kingdom, for this great
Blessing already begun, and to offer up Prayers to Almighty God for the
continuance thereof: And His Majesty does accordingly Appoint, Command and
Require, That upon the Fifteenth day of January next, within the Cities of
London and Westminster, and Ten Miles thereabout, and upon the Nine and
twentieth day of the same Month, in all other Places throughout this Kingdom,
Public Thanks, and Solemn Prayers be offered up to Almighty God upon the
Occasion aforesaid: And for this purpose His Majesty has signified His Royal
Pleasure to the Right Reverend Fathers in God Nathaniel Lord Bishop of Duresme,
Thomas Lord Bishop of Rochester, and Thomas Lord Bishop of Peterborough (being
his Majesty's Commissioners Constituted for Exercising the Episcopal
Jurisdiction within the Diocese of London) forthwith to prepare a form of
Prayer and Religious Service, which may be suitable to this occasion; Which
Form of Prayer and Service His Majesty will cause to be Printed and Published,
and by the Right Reverend the Bishops Sent and Distributed throughout their
several and respective Diocesses, to be observed and used in the Churches and
Chapels of this Kingdom upon the several and respective days before mentioned:
And lastly, His Majesty does Charge and Command all His loving Subjects to take
notice hereof, and to demean themselves in all things accordingly.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 23d day of December, 1687. In the Third
Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1687.


