BY THE KING, A PROCLAMATION, Containing His Majesty's Gracious and Ample
Indemnity.
JAMES REX.
JAMES the Seventh by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all and sundry Our good Subjects, whom
these Presents do, or may concern, Greeting.
We having been graciously pleased, by Our Proclamation for Indulgence, for the
better uniting of the Hearts of Our Subjects amongst themselves, and removing
of all Discords and Jealousies, which the difference of Religion, and of their
several Persuasions did occasion and foment amongst them, To allow to all Our
Subjects, of whatsoever Persuasion, the free Exercise of their Religion, upon
the Terms, and with the Provisions mentioned in Our Gracious Proclamation for
Indulgence: And We still persisting in Our Princely and Fatherly Care of the
Peace, Quiet, and Prosperity of all Our Subjects, and that We may at once
extinguish all Fears and Jealousies, that any of Our Subjects may have
deservedly incurred, by their Crimes and Delinquencies against Our Laws, and
convince all Our Subjects, even the most obstinat and irreclaimable, of their
Happiness and Security under the Protection and benign Influence of Our most
Auspicious and most Clement Government; Therefore, We, of Our unparalelled
Clemency and Goodness, do, by virtue of Our Sovereign Authority, Absolute Power
and Prerogative Royal, and from the Fullness, and Plenitude of the same, Parden,
Remit, Indemnifie, and for ever Acquit all Our Subjects, of whatsoever Quality,
State, or Condition, of all Crimes, of Perduellion, Rebellion, Treason, or
Concealing of Treason; Harboring, Reset, Supplying, Corresponding and
Intercommuning with Rebels; and all other Species's or Kinds of Lase-Majestie,
as well Common, as Statutory; and of all Crimes of Leasing-making, Depraving,
or Mis-construing of Our Laws, Mis-constructing of Our Proceedings, or
Mis-representing to Us any of Our Subjects; or Us to Our Subjects; with all
other Crimes, Offenses, Delinquencies, or Transgressiens of whatsoever Nature,
or Quality, Committed, Acted, or Done by any of Our Subjects, by Word or Writ,
or any other Acts of Commission or Omission, preceding the Date of these
Presents, which Directly or Indirectly, are, or may Import, by any Inference,
or Construction, the Contravention of any Law, Act of Parliament, Custom, or
Constitution of that Our Ancient Kingdom, or may Infer any Pain or Punishment
against any of Our Subjects, to the prejudice of their Lives, Fortunes,
Estates, Fame, or Reputations, either ad vindictam publicam vel privatam; Or
for Damage and Interest: All which, We, by Virtue of Our Royal Authority, and
out of the Plenitude, and Fullness of Our Power, Will, Ordain and Declare to be,
and are hereby Pardoned, Acquitted, Indemnified, and put in Perpetual Oblivion,
for now and ever. Declaring and Ordaining, that this General Pardon and
Indemnity, shall be as Valid and effectual to all Our Subjects, for their
Exoneration, and Security in the Premises, as if every particular Crime,
Offense, Delinquency, or Mis-demeanor were herein particularly set down; and as
if Remissions were past under Our Great Seal for the same; Wherewith We, for
Our Self, and Our Successors, have Dispensed, and hereby do Dispense for ever,
Likeas, We do hereby Prohibit and Discarge any of Our Ministers or Judges, to
call in question, any of Our said Subjects, either Criminally or Civilly for
the same in any time coming:And do Declare and Ordain, that this Our General
Indemnity shall be Interpreted in the most Benign, Favorable and comprehensive
Sense, the same can admit of, for the Security of Our Subjects in the
premises. Excepting always forth and from this Our Indemnity, all
Forfaultures and Sentences or Dooms thereof, and that as to the Estates only
thereby Forefaulted, but without prejudice to the Persons hereby Indemnified,
and their Memories and Posterities, against whom the said Sentences or Dooms
were given, and pronounced; As likewise, Excepting all Pecuniarie Fines or
Mulcts already paid or Transacted: And generally, Excepting all Fines exceeding
One thousand Merks Scots the Fine, imposed upon Heretors and Liferenters, as to
which Fines, nevertheless not paid or Transacted, and yet hereby Excepted: It
is Our Royal Will and Pleasure, that all Execution, Personal or Real therefore
be Suspended, for the space of one year hereaster; during the which time, We
are Resolved to take the same into Our Own Gracious Consideration. And further,
Excepting forth, and from this Our Indemnity, the Murderers of James late
Archbishop of St. Andrews, the Murderers of Mr. (...) Pearson, Minister at
Carsfairn, and of Thomas Kennoway, and Duncan Stuart at Swine-Abbay; As also,
all Murders, Witchcrafts, Assassinations, Depredations, Roberies, Spulzies,
Thests and Mutilations of private Persons; All which Crimes, and those guilty
thereof, are no way to be Comprehended in, or have any Benefit any manner of
way, by this Our Pardon and Indemnity; And likewise in particular, Excepting
the Persons and Estates of Mr. Robert Ferguson Preacher, Partick Hume,
sometimes called Sir Patrick Hume of Polwart, Andrew Fletcher, sometime of
Saltonn, and Mr. Gilbert Burnet. Doctor of Theology:As also, Coll Mcdonald and
his Associats, who were accessory to the late Opposition made to a Party of Our
Forces, under the Command of the Deceast Captain Mckenzie of Suddy, lately in
Lochaber: As also, all false Coyners, and all persons now in Prison for public
Crimes, from all Benefit of the same; With which Exceptions and Restrictions
allanerly, and no other, We hereby Publish and Declare Our Pardon and Indemnity.

And Lastly, To the end all Our Good Subjects may have notice of this Our Royal
Will and Pleasure, We Do hereby Command Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren
Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, to make timeous
Proclamation thereof, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh; For all which, these
Presents shall be to all persons whatsoever, who may be therein any way
concerned, a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the twenty fifth day of September, 1688. And
of Our Reign, the fourth Year. By His MAJESTY'S Command, MELFORT.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty: Anne DOM. 1688.


