A SERMON Preached at the CONSECRATION Of the HONORABLE Dr. HENRY COMPTON,
Lord Bishop of OXFORD, IN LAMBETH-CHAPPEL, On Sunday, December 6. 1674.

By WILLIAM JANE B.D. Student of Christ-Church, and Chaplain to his Lordship.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be sold by R. Littlebury, at the
Kings-Arms in Little-Britain, 1675.

To the Right Reverend Father in God HENRY, LORD BISHOP of OXFORD.
My Lord,
ALthough I am too conscious of the manifold defects of this poor Discourse, to
lay any claim to your Lordships acceptance, as the encouragement of its
Publication; yet I have had such great experience of your Lordships favor, as
to conceive some hopes, that it may find the same shelter with its Author under
your Lordships patronage, and protection, When I first received your Lordships
command, which engaged me upon this duty, I esteemed it a great Honor, than my
own ambition could ever have aspired to. It was happiness enough for me to bear
any part, how inconsiderable soever, in that days Solemnity, which in the
judgment of all, who have a real kindness for the Church, was so signal an
argument of Gods Care and Providence over it. But since by my entire
resignation of this weak performance (as I was in duty bound) to your Lordships
Judgment, it is no longer at my own disposal, and that, which I thought too
mean to attend your Lordships CONSECRATION, has been thought fit to live with
the remembrance of it: I have this further favor to request for it, that I may
be allowed to thrust it forth into the world under your Lordships Name. I shall
only add my unfeigned desires to the God of Heaven, that (as he has been
pleased, in this declining Age, to raise up to his People, such an able
instrument of his Glory, so) he would go on to give success to your Lordships
designs, answerable to the expectation of your Country, and the necessities of
his Church. Which shall ever be the daily Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships Most humbly devoted Chaplain, WILLIAM JANE.

ACTS 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, over
the which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood.
WE read in the 17th verse. of this chap. that St. Paul sent from Miletas to
Ephesus, and called (...) the Elders or Presbyters of the Church. In this verse.
which contains a considerable part of his Visitation Sermon, he tells them
(...), the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops.

This seeming confusion of Names in this and other places of Scripture,
indiscriminately applied to the Pastors and Officers of the Church, was the
pretense of Aerius, though Pride and Ambition were the reason to infer a like
communion in the dignity of Bishop, and Presbyter, and a total parity in their
Office. And though this is surely a very slender argument to any considering
men, to violate the unity of Christians, and to cashier that form of Government
which ad been received universally in the Church, from the Apostles days unto
their own, upon a pretense, that Antichrist begun betimes; yet neither is it so
slight and despicable, but that it has exercised the greatest Wits in all Ages
(even those, in which it cannot be pretended that Truth was twisted with
design) in endeavoring a probable solution of it. For, to omit the
interpretation of some, that, such as were Presbyters, when St. Paul sent for
them, he here consecrates Bishops, by telling them, that the Holy Ghost had
made them so, (as being a groundless and arbitrary conjecture,) if we consult
those Opinions which carry the greatest vogue and reputation in the World, we
shall scarce find one, in which two have consented, when we have excluded those
from the number, who do not pretend to deliver their own sense, but professedly
transcribe from others. The immediate question, wherein our Authors are
divided, is, Whether Bishop, and Presbyter were two distinct Orders at the time
of the writing the Books of the New Testament, or in a small space of time
after, the one were superadded to the other? Those who defend the latter, are
further subdivided as far as the subject will admit. For we are told on the one
hand, that the names of Bishop and Presbyter were once promiscuously given to
the inferior Order of the Clergy, which were afterward used with distinction,
when, for the future preventing of Schism, Episcopacy was introduced upon it^,
which seems to be the Judgment of St. Hierome. And with greater probability on
the other, that they were indifferent appellations of the higher Order of
Church Officers, to whom the name of Bishop became then appropriate, when upon
the increase of their charge, by the multitude of their Proselites, inferior
Presbyters were universally admitted, in some measure to ease them of the
burden. An opinion with infinite accuracy and variety of learning first
cleared and defended by the Reverend Dr. Hammond. They who have pitched upon the
defense of the former part of the main Question, That both Orders were Coaeval,
and distinguished from one another by their Author, at the Primitive
institution of them, are yet more divided in their explications. For some tell
us, which Dr. Hammond admits for probable, that the world Presbyter is the
Scripture appellative of the inferior Order of the Clergy; whereas both were
common to the Bishop, in as much as both Offices designed by them, were
eminently vested in him. St. Chrysostom on the contrary, thinks it no
inconvenience at all, that the distinction of Offices should remain inviolate,
notwithstanding the confusion of names: Whereas a third Opinion sufficiently
distinguished from the other two, asserts, that Bishop and Presbyter were
common denominations of the second Order of Priesthood; those whom we now
style Bishops, being at that time called Apostles: A Comment first suggested by
Theodoret, and since maintained by the Judicious Hooker in the days of our
Forefathers, and with a little variation by the learned Thorndike in our own. I
have not produced these Opinions to compare them with one another, or to examine
the several claims which each of them pretends to truth, but only considering
them jointly, to make these few remarques upon them all.

And first our Assertors of the Presbyterian Hierarchy, may do well to consider
whose Cause it is, which is with so great eagerness maintained by them: No the
Cause of God, or of his Church, but of a noted Heretic, infamous upon the
records of Epithanius, St. Austin, Philastrius, and other Fathers of the
Church, for the point in question, and consequently branded for the same by the
Church it self, whose Judgments those Fathers expressly testify. He who was
notorious in his own time, for the great disturber of the word, is now set up
by our pretended Disciplinarians for the great Champion of Truth. Nor do they
so much help themselves, by saying, that Arrianism was Aerius his Heresy, (and
indeed Epiphanius calls him an Arrian altogether,) as give us occasion further
to observe the secret, and mystical connection between Arrius his Doctrine, and
Aerius his Discipline. I do not assert, that St. Ignatius was Prophetical, in
affording the Church throughout his Epistles, such signal testimonies against
both: Yet surely they ought to have been well weighted by those learned men,
who have rejected the works of that renowned Father, before they chose, rather
than part with a Creature of their own interest and fancy, to quit the
advantages of those pregnant authorities against the Socinians, incomparably
clearer than all the Fathers of the Church put together, for the first 300
years. It is not my purpose to lay the Heresy of Arrius to the charge of
Aerius his followers, or to inquire into the causal influence of the one upon
the other. But methinks this one reflection, how much Socinianism, which is but
Arrianism improved, has thriven and prospered, under the influence of the
Presbytery in our neighbor Nation, and (as it is greatly to be suspected) in
our own, might prove a motive sufficient to our dissenting Brethren to
consider, that Heresy and Schism go usually together, and to renounce that
Schismatical Discipline, which we have seen by woeful experience so notoriously
to shelter an Heretical Doctrine.

2. We may observe, that however learned men have dissented as to the
particular periods of the Commencement of either Order, yet in this they all
agree, that a superiority of the one above the other, is of Apostolical
institution: Which observation, if any man think to elude from the authorities
of Ignatius, Irenaeus, Origin, St. Ambrose, or St. Austin, I desire him only to
read the learned Spalatensis his Examen of their Testimonies, to make him for
ever ashamed of obtruding them any more. Nay so evident is this in the ancient
Records of the Church, that the Reverend Bishop Bilson, out of Eusebius,
Hegesippas, Socrates, St. Jerome, Epiphanius, and others; has given us as exact
a Catalogue of the succession of Bishops from the Apostles, in the four
Apostolical Sees, till the first Council of Nice, as ever the Roman Archives
could at any time give of their Consuls, or our common Chroniclers of our
Kings, since the Conquest. From which consideration, we have ground for an
answer to a twofold pretense of the Advocates of Presbytery, the one in taking
from us the Testimony of Ignatius, the other, in urging against us the
Authority of St. Jerome.

As for the first of these, it is Monsieur Dailles's principal argument from
the Phrase, that that blessed Martyr always makes a distinction in the names of
Bishop and Presbyter, which the Apostolical writings do so confessedly confound
with one another: But if this be his highest evidence, as it is manifest from
his writings, that it is, it is but a small advantage to his Cause, and cannot
possibly support it self against any one of those various Hypotheses, which we
just now mentioned for a solution of the doubt. For first, those who think that
the Christian Priesthood was originally preserved in one Order, and at length
by the Apostles, distinguished into two, though after the writing of their
Epistles, will rationally presume that the distinction of names took its date
from the distinction of the things, which Salmasius himself has owned against
Petavius; and that the ceasing to use the words promiscuously, can never take
off from our Author the credit of an Apostolical writer, notwithstanding the
pretended inconformity thereof to the writings of the Apostles themselves. But
secondly, if we admit their opinion, who conceive the Orders to be distinct
even then, when the names were common, yet supposing, that the Scriptures use
them promiscuously, there is a visible reason, why Ignatius should distinguish:
For though two different things may sometimes indifferently pass under the same
names, when either they are used to express some notion or character, that
holds in common to them both, or the subject matter determines the
signification; yet when in the same proposition they are both to be represented
in their proper and distinct Idea, according to all the laws of speaking or
writing, they will necessarily require distinct and proper appellations. For
how improper had it been to have expressed the peculiarities of several
dignities, in the same Style and Character, and to make a difference without a
distinction? How incongruous to common sense, to specify three distinct
Ecclesiastical Orders, under the names of Presbyters, Presbyters and Deacons?
and in enforcing the subjection of the one to the other, bid Presbyters be
subject to Presbyters? So that upon the whole, the great quarrel of our
adversaries against Ignatius is this, that his language is not like their
opinion, irrational and absurd.

As to their second refuge, to wit, the authority of St. Jerome, I shall not
interpose dogmatically in a Controversy, in which the most able Schoolmen, and
other learned Writers are so much divided. It is the confident asseveration of
Medina, that St. Jerome, and other of the Fathers, agreed in the Heresy of
Aerius, but that the Church prudently tolerated that in the one, which for
different reasons it condemned in the other. But upon this principle he will
hardly be able to secure himself against the force of Bellarmine's reply, How
the Church then continued the pillar and ground of truth, while She forsted
Heretics in her Bosom? And how we can produce the Catholic Fathers as
testifiers to the Christian Doctrine, who in any one point of it symbolized with
Heretics, deserted the sense of the Church, and turned aside to the Flocks of
the Companions? And surely, though St. Jerome might differ from others as a
private Divine in some Interpretations of Scripture; yet he so long kept
himself sound as a Catholic Christian, while he did not obtrude any of them
against the tradition of the Apostles, and the unity of the Church. And
therefore, though I do not agree in his particular opinion, as holding Church
Government settled by our Savor himself, in a clear and manifest
subordination; yet I do not desire, among all the Fathers of the Church a more
pregnant testimony, than St. Jerome will afford us for a like imparity of
Church Officers by Apostolical institution: For it is he, who in his Epistle to
Evagrius, expressly calls it an Apostolical tradition, and founded in the Old
Testament, that whatsoever privilege Aaron and his Sons, and the Levites
enjoyed in the Temple, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons might justly challenge in
the Church. It Is he who informs us, on the 23 of St. Matthew, of the Apostles
practice of ordaining Bishops and Presbyters in the several Provinces, where
they Preached the Gospel. It Is he who styles the Governors of the respective
Churches, the Contemporaries of the Apostles, by the name of Bishops, as Mark
of Alexandria, Linus, Cletus, and Clemens of Rome, James of Jerusalem,
Ignatius of Antioch, and Policarp of Smyrna. And though his opinion were, that
Bishops were postnate to Presbyters, as instituted for the prevention of
Schism, yet I appeal to himself for a witness, that the remedy bears date from
the disease, even from that time when it was said at Corinth, (which was surely
in the Apostles days,) I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas, as
appears in his Comment upon Titus. Surely therefore St. Jerome never dreamt
that Episcopacy was Antichristian, nor ever designed to effect that from
evidence of Scripture, which has been since attempted by the power of the
Sword. Ignatius his advice, for the subjection of Presbyters to their Bishop,
suited well enough with his Principles, as indeed it did with those of all
Christendom besides, till at last men's interest led them on as to urge
Presbytery from St. Jerome, so to quote St. Paul for Rebellion.

3. But thirdly, from the consideration of this great variety of Opinions, to
salve this confusion of names, it may perhaps be seasonable to enquire, whether
there be really found in Scripture such a Communion of names, as is pretended.
I am conscious, that herein I advance an Hypothesis against many great and
justly venerable Names: And therefore, I shall only humbly propose a twofold
distinction, for the clearing those places of Scripture, which concern the
point in question. The first is, between the Universal Church, and those
particular Provinces, wherein Churches were planted under their respective
Rulers. In the former respect I grant, that the word Presbyter is indifferently
applied to the Chief Governors of the Church, and that they are the same
persons, who are in one place called (...), and in another, (...). Which word,
whether it were Translated into the Church from the Jewish Synagogue, or else
taken from Age, which brings experience, and consequently fits for Government,
was in those days rather an appellative of dignity, than a distinctive
character of an Office. And therefore generally in the Acts of the Apostles,
while Jerusalem and Christendom were in a manner of the same extent, the word
Presbyter, which in particular Churches was still a title of Honor, had hear a
more ample, and undetermined signification.

But if any of our adversaries take advantage from this concession, I desire
him only to consider, that the Apostles are oftener called by the name of
Deacons, than the chief Governors of the Church, by the name of Presbyters. As
Deacons of God and of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. Deacons of the New Testament, 2
Cor. 3.6. Deacons of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.7. Deacons of righteousness, 2 Cor.
11.15. Deacons of the Church, Col. 1.25. I confess that our Translation in
these, and other parallel places, always read Ministers in stead of Deacons,
(as is observed in thirty places in the vulgar Latin of St. Jerome,) yet it is
the very same word, which is rendered Deacons in the Epistles of Timothy and
Titus. Which containing Apostolical Directions for the management of Particular
Churches, ( de statu Ecclesiastia compositae, as Tertullian speaks) distinguish
Church Orders by their Names, and Titles, as well as their Offices, and Powers.
And therefore, thought in respect of the Universal Church, the principal Rulers
are sometimes styled (...), to signify their Superiority over the Brethren;
sometimes (...), to denote their immediate Ministration, and attendance upon
Christ, the great Bishop of our Souls, and Apostle of our profession: Yet
nothing will follow from hence, but that in particular Churches, they might be
both limited, and restrained, the one to the second Order of Priests, the
other, to the Attendants upon the Bishops: So that this observation gives the
same ground for Deacons to contest with Presbyters, as it does for Presbyters
with Bishops. And thence, because the Apostles, and the Brethren, are
indifferently called Disciples, they will, by this way of arguing, strengthen
the pretense of the Independents; and (as it is worded by a learned Writer) hold
the stirrup to the Congregations, to throw themselves out of the Saddle.

But secondly, If this Communion of names be pretended in particular Churches,
(as at Philippi, Ephesus, and Creet,) I shall crave leave with Epiphanius, to
make another distinction o particular Churches from one another. For he in his
Refutation of Aerius his Argument drawn from the Communion of names, objects to
him his not understanding the Histories of the Primitive plantation of
Churches, asserting, That at the first forming of them, (which could not be
perfected in an instant) there were in some places, Bishops without Presbyters,
and in other, Presbyters without Bishops; which could be no inconvenience for a
small space of time, since those, who planted them, were sufficiently enabled
to supply the defect of either. He never observed this confusion of names,
which has been since pretended, (as neither did any, that went before him) but
thought this one consideration to be valid enough, to convince his adversary
both of error in Interpreting Scripture, and of Ignorance in the Monuments of
the Church.

But granting all that we have hitherto asserted, and moreover, that the
objection from the plurallity of Bishops, mentioned at Ephesus, and Philippi,
be fully taken off upon this presumption, that in the Apostles days, there were
more Bishops than one in a City, 'till a more perfest Coalescence was at length
made between the Jewish, and the Gentile Converts; yet notwithstanding, it may
be still demanded, What is all this to the case before us? For here in a
particular Church (the Church of Ephesus) the same persons in the same Speech,
are called both Presbyters and Bishops. To which I answer, that if (...) denote
the universal Church, my first distinction holds good: But if not, I have the
Testimony of Irenaeus, (an authority next to Apostolical,) to extend the word
Church, beyond the City of Ephesus; and Bishops and Presbyters, beyond one
Order of the Clergy. For so he writes in his Third Book, and Fourteenth
Chapter; In Mileto enim Convocatis Episcopis, and presbyteris, qui erant ab
Epheso and a reliquis proximis Civitatibus. To which the late Vindicator of
Monsieur Daillee, seems to return an answer, by giving Irenaeus the lie; A Divi
Lucae narratione seorsim abit. But surely, when St. Paul says, verse. 25 All
you, among whom I have gone Preaching the Kingdom of God, he seems to intimate
a greater extent than the single City of Ephesus will amount to, and
consequently, to give us some ground for a reconcilement between Irenaeus and
St. Luke: And therefore, I shall make no other use of our Authors reply, than
to observe another instance of the hard fate of the Fathers of the Church,
however ancient and Apostolical, when they cross men's Interests and Opinions.
For if we urge them with Ignatius, he is spurious, and suppositious, and
therefore to be rejected; if with Irenaeus, he is false and fabulous, and so
not to be believed.

I have thus far explained the difficulty arising from the phrase of the Text,
and therein justified my dissent from our English Translation, in reading
Bishops instead of Overseers.

And as the Reverend Fathers of our Church, at His Majesty's Restoration,
thought fit to change the place, which this passage of Scripture formerly had
in the Book of Ordination; so I have here given some reason, why that which was
formerly a part of the Epistle for the Ordination of Priests, may now be made
the Text of a Sermon, at the Consecration of a Bishop.

In which are comprised all the principal arguments, which may enforce a
Bishops vigilance and circumspection, in the management of his Pastoral Charge,
and urge home the Caution of the Text, Take heed therefore. The Topics to
persuade a more than ordinary Care in any duty, are generally four: All which
we meet with in this place.

1. The excellency of the thing Cared for, the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. 2. The Person Concernment in it, arising from the
peculiar trust reposed in him, the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops. 3. The
danger of miscarriage, in the following words, For after my departure shall
grievous wolves enter in among you. 4. The possibility of preserving the thing
Cared for; which though not fully expressed, is sufficiently implied in these
Phrases, of Taking heed to your selves of feeding the Church.
Of these briefly, and in the their order, as far as the greater business of
the day will permit.

And first, of the excellency of the thing Cared for, The Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own blood.

Where we may observe a manifest point of Christian Doctrine, by immediate
consequence deducible from the words (to wit) the Divinity of our Savor: A
truth, which offers it self to us, with such uncontrollable clearness, that the
Socinian finding it staring him directly in the face, to elude the evidence,
corrupts the Text, reads Christi in stead of Dei, (which yet in the Syriack
Edition, whence he takes it, seems rather an Exposition than a Version) and
thereby offers the same violence to the Temporal Word of God, as he had done
before to the Eternal. And as some Barbarous Nations are said to have cut out
the Tongues of their abused Captives, lest they should disgrace them, by
publishing their wrongs and injuries, having first robbed Christ of his
Divinity, he finds himself obliged to rob the Church of the Scriptures, which
bear witness to the truth of it.

But this is consistent enough with his Principles: For having so loosly
settled the notion of a Church, as to make an universal Apostasy commence from
the very death of the Apostles, he had no great reason to overvalue the Blood
of Christ, which had procured such a short lived, and uncertain benefit. He
might justly presume the price was not very great, where the purchase was so
little regarded. But let Socinus go on with as much scorn, as he pleases, to
slight the one, and trample upon the other; a true Catholic Bishop, that knows
it cost more to redeem a Soul, will hence take an argument to infer, that his
watchfulness over his Flock, ought to rise in some proportion to that esteem
and value, which his Lord and Master has set upon it. He will not forfeit, or
betray his trust, for the sake of silver and gold, and those other corruptible
things, which he well knows, were utterly unable to redeem it: But considering
it as purchased by the blood of Christ, he will judge it worthy to be preserved
and cared for, though with the expense or hazard of his own: It was for the
Churches sake, that the Son of God came down from Heaven, emptyed himself of
his Glory, exhausted a richer than all the world could afford besides. For this
end, was the great Bishop of our Souls (...) (according to the critical
importance of the word, Consecrated to his Episcopal Office) by strong crying
and tears, by death and blood. So costly and chargeable was his Consecration,
that he seems to decline, and deprecate it, with a Nolo Episcopari, Father if
it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; And we may justly thinks his Father
would have saved him, if a meaner ransom could have saved the World.

This then (Holy Fathers) is that Sacred depositum which is committed to your
Charge, so often repeated in the Office of the Church for this Solemnity, even
the greatest gift that ever was poured forth upon the Sons of Men, the precious
blood of the Son of God, the unsearchable riches of Christ. It lies upon you
therefore to testify, that the blood of Christ was not spilt in vain, and to
accomplish that redemption, which your Lord has merited: That neither through
your miscarriage, may Christ be defeated of his purchase, which are the Souls
of men; nor the Church of her price, and privilege, the merit of her Saviors
Blood.

But I pass from the invaluable excellency of the thing cared for, to the
second motive of the Text, even your own concernment in it, arising from the
consideration of the Person by whom you are entrusted, The Holy Ghost has made
you Bishops.

As the gift of the Holy Ghost was the signal prerogative, whereby the Church
of Christ outvyed the luster of the Temple, and which our Savior at his
departure, thought and abundant compensation to his Disciples for the defect of
his Corporal presence with them; so amongst all the noble purposes, for which
he was then poured forth upon all Flesh, there is no one thing represented in
Scripture, which he seems to have a more visible, and immediate concern in,
than the erecting and authorizing a Ministry, commissioning for Church Offices,
and enabling for the discharge.

This is that great Work, which, however meanly esteemed, or scornfully treated
in this World, was in the estimation of our Savior, one of the choicest
Largesses, which at his Triumphant ascending far above all Heavens, he thought
fit to shed forth upon his Church. And thence we find, Matthew 28.28. that when
after his ascension, he tells his Disciples, all power is given to me in Heaven
and in Earth; the first and great instance, wherein he imparts it to his
Followers, is a Commission for the Ministry, Go ye therefore, and teach all
nations: And accordingly, that triumphant Psalm, which the sweet Singer of of
Israel prepared to be Sung at the removal of the Ark, whence God did use to
deliver his Oracles from between the Cherubins, the adumbration of our Saviors
removal from Earth to Heaven, is by the Apostle repeated and accommodated
thereto, Ephesians. 4.8. and completion verified in this, that he gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers.

These were the Gifts he then received for men, as a standing Testimony, that,
though himself were departed, the Lord God dwelt still among them. No wonder
therefore to find in the Text, the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops; since
their very employment, is one of his peculiar donatives, as that of Timothy is
expressly called his (...), in each of his Epistles.

It were an easy matter to extend this consideration beyond the Church of
Ephesus, and to trace the interest of the Holy Ghost, in constituting Church
Governors from the first Foundation of Christianity to this day, to find him
not only once fitting Bezaleel, and Aholiab with Skill, and Wisdom, for the
Building a material Tabernacle; But in every Age, empowering and qualifying
serviceable Persons, for the Strength and Beauty of his Church. This was the
Commission, which the great Bishop of our Souls produced for himself, at his
entrance upon his Pastoral Charge, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, and has
anointed me to Preach the Gospel, Luke 4.18. Nor was this merely personal to
our Savior, as Baronius would have it, who confines that Text to the first
year of our Saviors Preaching; but when he comes to Ordain a Succession, we
shall find this to be the Rite, and Solemnity of the Consecration: As my Father
sent me, so send I you. Where, if the similitude will not infer the Gift of the
Holy Ghost, the next words will express it, And he breathed on them, and said,
receive ye the Holy Ghost, John 20.21. And after that he bids them tarry at
Jerusalem till they were endued with power from above, Luke. 24.49. which is
Interpreted Acts I. endued with the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost must first say
separate, before Saul and Barnabas undertake the Charge. Acts 13.2. Nor could
the laying on of hands have made Timothy a Bishop, unless Prophecy had gone
before: And lest these should seem choice, and peculiar instances of an
extraordinary deputation of some persons, to whom God was pleased to vouchsafe
extraordinary Revelations of himself, (and we know those, who have hence
inferred, that Timothy and Titus were Evangelists) not fixed and standing
Officers of the Church, (as Walo Messalinus, and others.) We have the full
attestation of Clemens Romanus, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, of the
Apostles practice of Ordaining Bishops, out of those whom they had Converted,
(...), after they had first tried, and approved them by the Revelation of the
Holy Ghost, whom Clemens Alexandrinus also calls (...), such as the Holy Spirit
had designed, and signified to them: Nay, so clear is this truth of the
Spirits, superintendency in these great Solemnities, through the ancient
Monuments of the Church, that Cardinal Baronius, however a stiff Asserter of
the Popes Encroachments, both upon the right of Bishops, and the Holy Ghosts
prerogative in their delegation; yet is forced by the evidence of truth, to
confess, that as Christ breathed the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, in like
manner have they transferred the same upon all their Successors to this day, in
as much, as they must undoubtedly partake of the Spirit of Christ, who minister
in Christ's stead, in the Sacred Offices of his Church.

It is an opinion, fastened upon Durandus, that when God made the World, he
threw it out of his Hands, and left all things in it ever since to act of
themselves, from those several principles of Life and Motion, which he
distributed among them at the Creation. A like conceit have some endeavored to
introduce into the Church, that the world Spirit, in Holy Scripture, is to be
confined to that plentiful effusion of it upon the Apostles, on the day of
Pentecost, those miraculous Gifts and Graces, which in the infancy of
Christianity, accompanied the Preaching of the Gospel. Which Commission being
personal to the Apostles, by consequence, expired withy them; so that their
Successors in the work of the Ministry, for any concern the Holy Ghost has in
them, are left to shift for themselves, or at most, to subsist upon that stock
of reputation, which was at first gained in the World, by the mighty Signs and
Wonders of their inspired, and gifted Predecessors. But as the Schools, from
the common Principles of Reason, have solidly maintained against the former,
that so precarious and dependent is the Creature, as such, both in its being,
and operation, that should God subtract his influence and concurse, whereby
every moment he makes it, and works with it all its operations, are immediately
suspended, the whole Creation falls asunder, and molders into its primitive
Confusion; so a like assertion, if the Scripture were silent, would common
sense and experience suggest to us, for a Confutation of the latter. For so
powerful are the batteries that are daily made by the Lusts of Men, and the
Malice of the Devil, and so impotent and unarmed a thing is the Church of God,
considered in it self, to withstand the assaults of either, that not only the
gates of Hell, but the powers of the World, would long ago have finally
prevailed against it; but that it was ever Founded upon the Rock of Ages, and
Supported by the Hand of Heaven.

The daily Sacrifice had long since ceased, and the abomination of desolation
been standing in the Holy Place. And Christ's Mystical Body had not so long
survived his Natural, did not the same Spirit, which was at first breathed into
it, go on continually to actuate, and enliven it. Surely therefore, now, as
well as then, there is a heavenly Treasure in earthen Vessels, and the
continuance of the Ministration is from God, and not from us. He is God, and
not Man, and therefore the Sons of Jacob are not consumed. Bishops are the
Stars in Christ's own right Hand, and from this arises the utter impossibility
for the Tail of the Dragon, to sweep them away, for the force of Men to pluck
them thence, or for the powers of Darkness to extinguish them. The Apostles
then, did not carry their Commissions with them to the other World, which, they
knew, were left them for a perpetuity of succession in this, both for them, and
their Heirs for ever. 'Twas he told his Disciples, who was never yet taxed with
being worse than his word, Behold I am with you to the end of the World, He
could not mean it, doubtless, of their persons, who did not long survive him,
nor can the (...), notwithstanding some bold Criticisms upon the words, refer
to any other period of time, than that, wherein the Fabric of the World shall
be dissolved, when Time it self shall be no more. He is still therefore with
their Successors, as he was with them after his Ascension, Vicaria spiritus
presentia, as Tertullian speaks, though not in the various distributions, and
admirable virtue of their (...), the extent of their Jurisdiction, and
extraordinary measure of their revelations; yet in the effectual Administration
of all those Ordinances, which were to reside for ever in his Church, in order
to the salvation of the World. Such are the Preaching of the Word,
Administration of the Sacraments, Ordaining Ministers, Ordering
Church Discipline, inflicting Censures, and the power of the Keys: All which,
as long as they are necessary, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, so long
is the presence of the Holy Ghost necessary, to authorize persons to dispense
them. Well therefore may we presume, that our Veni Creator Spiritus, is not
said in vain at this great Solemnity, nor can we possibly overlook that visible
instance of his peculiar Presence, in the Consecration of this day.

For though we live in an Age, wherein not only the work of the Ministry is
become the derision of Fools, but even wise Men pretend to discern the dreadful
symptoms of a departing Candlestick, and a tottering Church; yet it has
pleased him, who perfecteth strength in weakness, and is nearest at hand in the
greatest exigents, to raise up the Sons of Nobles, to become the Princes of his
People, to stop the Mouths of the one, and to refute the Prognostics of the
other.

He places over us, in the same persons, both a glory, and a defense; by the
one, to take off scandal, by the other, to strengthen the Church. Blessed
therefore be the Name of our great God, in whose Hand are the Hearts of Kings
that has stirred up the heart of Ours, to make this closer connection between
the Civil and Ecclesiastical interests, and in the same choice, effectually to
provide for the perpetuity of the Church, and for the establishment of his
Throne.

We have thus seen, that God has not failed hitherto to make good his promise
to his Church, that the Comforter shall abide with it for ever: But since these
instances have not proved so successful, as to silence the Contradiction of
foolish and unreasonable men, I shall briefly consider some of the most
plausible pretenses that are made use of, to shake the stability of the Church,
and turn the Holy Ghost out of his Office.

First then, the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, and therefore not the Civil
Magistrate. It is an objection of the Romanists, against the English
Reformation, that the power of Order has ceased in our Church, ever since the
departure from the Church of Rome, as being now utterly dissolved into the
Kings deputation of Commissioners for the Administration of Ecclesiastical
Affairs. And though the scandal be abundantly refuted, by the sacred Rites, and
Solemnities of this day; yet we have had those among our selves, who in stead
of denying the charge, as they justly might, have pretended to justify the
Church, by owning the accusation. For we are told, by the Disputers of this
World, that the Church is nothing else, but a Christian Commonwealth, and that
all pretense of Divine authority and obligation upon Conscience, abstracted
from the power of the Sword, is a mere Imposture, and destructive to the State.
Thus, by the old Stratagem of the Enemy of Mankind, is the Church, as was once
its Author, traduced as an enemy to Caesar: Though, I hope, the Case may be so
plainly stated between both, as to vindicate the Rights of the one, without
incurring the Jealousy of the other.

The contrary assertion, to what we have laid down, can be maintained only upon
one of these three Grounds.

First, that there was no right for Christians to associate together for the
Worship of God, according to the profession of Christianity, antecedent to the
Command or Allowance of the Civil power.

Or Secondly, supposing a Society of Christians, that there was no right of
Rule or Government, vested in the Officers and Pastors of it.

Or thirdly, supposing a Church power, that it escheated to the supreme
Magistrate, when the Church became incorporate into the Civil state.

The first of these, though perhaps the ultimate resolution of the other two,
resolves it self into Blasphemies beyond the confutation of the Pulpit. We must
thence pronounce all the Conventions of Christians, even those assemblings of
themselves together, which the Apostle commands his Hebrews, not to forsake, to
be so many unlawful Conventicles, and not exempt the first Council at
Jerusalem, from the accusation which we are sure was managed by the presiding
of the Holy Ghost. We must affix the blackest note of Infamy upon the Apostles
and the Primitive Christians, and ascribe a right to the Heathen Magistrates,
which shall justify the persecution of Christianity. We must arraign the Noble
Army of Martyrs, whose Heroical Courage we hitherto solemnize of foul
Self-murder, as well as folly, in being prodigal of their Blood, to no
purpose, running upon the Sword without a warrant, and laying down their lives
in the defense of a proposition, when they had no obligation to profess it, and
so execute their Names, and Memories, as the Heathen did their persons, by
owning, that they suffered deservedly. But surely, if we have not forfeited our
Faith, as well as our Charity, we may conclude they had hard measure enough at
their Persecutors tribunals, and therefore may be dismissed from ours.

The second pretense is somewhat more plausible, That there is such a Society,
as a Church, and Officers placed in it, but such, whose only business it is to
teach and to declare the will of God, without any rule or authority committed
to them, over those who shall1 receive it. Against which we might reason with
the Learned Grotius, upon Luke 6.22. that there is no necessity of assigning a
positive and express Precept in Holy Scripture for granting the Society of the
Church, established by God; all those things are virtually commanded in it,
which are absolutely necessary to preserve it in its purity, and its being.
Such is the power of Discipline and Government, as is evident, from the common
notion of Societies in general, and the peculiar nature of this. But not
contenting our selves toargue merely from natural Reason, in a positive
Institution of this kind, as transcends the sublimest disquisitions, and
closest deductions of it, if we consult the pattern in the Mount, or the
settlement of the Church in the New Testament, which contains the Covenant of
Grace, whereupon it is founded, we shall find in the Church, as in the Ark,
which was the Type of it, the rod of Aaron, as well as the Tables of the Law,
and discover in it the manifest traces of a paternal and imperative, though no
coercive Jurisdiction. We shall there find the Enacting of Laws, as in the
first Council at Jerusalem, a promulgation of the Decrees that were made by the
Apostle and Elders, which was done by Paul and Barnabas, through the Cities,
Acts 16.4. a Judiciary process against offenders, I. Tim. 5.19. a punishment of
the guilty, as appears in the incestuous Corinthian, and in the same instance,
the absolution of the Penitent, and relaxation of the Censure. We shall find
there the persons with whom the management of these great affairs was
entrusted, dignified and distinguished by the Titles of (...); all which import
Rule and Authority, whereto they were solemnly Sanctified and set apart, by a
visible and Sacred Rite of Imposition of hands: All which, if they are duly,
and impartially considered, will sufficiently evidence, that these things were
something more than Pageantry and Show, that there was a Government in the
World, subsisting upon a different claim, from that of the Roman Empire, that
Christ sent forth his Apostles, not only as Sheep among Wolves, but as Pastors
among Sheep; and that he had a Kingdom, though not of this World.

Thirdly therefore, that this Spiritual Authority was dissolved, and melted
down into the Civil, when the World came into the Church, and the Empire became
Christian, must be made out one of these three ways; either from the original
right of the Empire, the revelation of God, or the reason of the thing. The
right of the Empire stands upon this basis, that the Power of the Church
depended upon the confederation and consent of Christians, which the Supreme
Magistrate may at his pleasure draw back and resume into himself.

But first, against this pretended agreement of the Primitive Christians, we
may argue, from all those instances of the agency of the Holy Ghost; in
constituting Church Officers, which we have mentioned already: All which bear
evident Testimony to a positive Institution, and a Divine Authority.

But secondly, supposing it for the present, I demand, Whether the Primitive
Christians had a right to enter into those confederacies antecedent to the
command or allowance of the Empire, or no? If not, we are brought back again to
the Apostate Principles of the Leviathan. And though I should grant Mr. Seldom,
that Christians, after the death of our Lord, had the allowance of the State,
by that Act of the Empire, which tolerated the Jews; Yet to say, that the
Society was legally dissolved, when they came more narrowly to be enquired
into, is to take off the Glory of Martyrdom from those, who notwithstanding the
Edicts of the Empire, kept on the Assemblies of the Church, and the brand of
Apostasy from others, who pleaded for themselves, that they had left them. If
it be said, that the Society of the Church, had this right of mutual
Confederation, the case is just where it was. For whether the Governors of the
Church subsist immediately by Divine Right, or no; yet if the Church, as a
Society, for the better maintaining of Christianity by Divine Right, be enabled
to appoint them, obedience is justly due to them in the Affairs of
Christianity, independent upon the Powers of this World. And surely, water will
rise no higher than the place from whence it descended; nor can the Empire ever
come to challenge the Rights of the Church, which were antecedent to any Act of
it, unless it have pleased the Great Sovereign of both, to declare his Pleasure
for transferring them. For if the Church be a Society, immediately constituted
by God, then can it not be dissolved in time, but by the same Power, which
established it at the beginning. But where is there to be found in Scripture,
any shadow of an Ordinance for this Temporary condition of the Church? Surely
all things there seem to run in another strain. If Timothy be instructed by St.
Paul's; how to behave himself in the Church of God, he is forthwith charged to
keep the Commandment unblameable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. If the Angel of Thyatira be reprehended for the remiss exercise of his
Authority, he has likewise a command from our Savior, to hold it fast and
maintain it 'till his coming. Christ did not appoint Pastors in his Church,
only 'till the time of Constantine; but 'till we all come in the unity of
Faith, and the Knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man. Which woeful
experience will assure us was not effected in Constantine's days, nor will it
ever be, 'till the consummation of all things: The darkness which over-spreads
our understandings, can never be dispelled, but by the Light of Glory; nor can
our hearts be entirely reunited, but by that Charity, which never fails.

There remains therefore only the last way of arguing, and that is from the
reason of the thing: For thus it is pleaded, that unless both Powers reside
entirely in the same Persons, they must both expect the same Fate which attends
a Kingdom divided against it self, by reason of daily and vexatious contentions
between the Church and Commonwealth, the Sword of Justice and the Shield of
Faith; and which is more than this, in the breast of every Christian, between
the Christian and the Man.

Thus what we deny to Nature, shall be effected by Grace; the Gospel of Peace
shall retrieve a State of War; and this pretended Order and Government, become
but another name for Confusion.

And though I have before barred this Method of Reasoning, by supposing
Christianity to be a positive Constitution of Divine Grace, (albeit Religion in
general, be a moral Virtue,) yet because the Charge is of so high a Nature, as
if the Churches claim of Power from God, rendered it incapable of the Protection
of his Vicegerent, and Christ's coming to fit Inhabitants for another World,
were a means to dis-people this; I am obliged, for the removal of suspicion, to
propose these following considerations.

First therefore, though other Religions may be justly presumed prejudicial to
the public Peace, in as much as the Devil, who is the Inventor of them, is
withal the Author of Confusion in the Government of the World; yet such is the
peculiar genius of Christianity, that where-event is, either Preached or
Received, it can create no Jealousy in in the State. The ground upon which
this Assertion stands, is this, that it disclaims all title to the Sword, but
leave him that takes it, to perish with it, though it be drawn in the defense
of Christ himself.

Surely he that had legions of Angels at his command, in stead of sending forth
Apostles to Convert men to the Faith, might have Commissioned Generals, to
destroy the Unbelievers. But this, in the esteem of Infinite Wisdom, was judged
more Military than Religious, and the way of Propagating his Gospel had been
inconsistent with the design of it.

This therefore being supposed, that Christianity leaves the power of the Sword
in those hands, in which it finds it, how can it possibly make any alteration,
as to any Temporal Condition, vhich is professedly maintained by it* And
therefore, that great bugbear of Imperium in Imperio need not be so terrible as
men would make it, as long as their Objects, Ends, and Offices, stand as really
distinguished as their Obligations. And these were the Thoughts that Christians
had of their Religion, as long as Christianity was understood. In the Church
then, as of old in Israel, there was no Smith to provide Swords and Spears,
though against their persecuting Philistines.

And though this entire renunciation of all claim to any thing wherein the
Civil Power was concerned, proved unable to protect them, either from Slander
or Persecution; yet that which exited the rage and fury of their Enemies, was
rather an averseness to the Christians Doctrine, than any jealous concern for
their own safety. It being abundantly evinced by the ancient Apologies of the
Church Writers against the Gentiles, that though they did not believe the
Christian Faith, they could not in Civil justice persecute a Christian No,
their Lives then were a Transcript of their Doctrine, and their Obedience was
looked upon as a trial of their Faith. To obey Authority, was taught and
practiced under a Nero, and their Submissions were as unparalelled as their
Provocations. And we may truly suppose under the Roman Emperors, that had the
Doctrine of Obedience been as thoroughly received by their Heathen Subjects, as
it was Preached by St. Paul, and practiced by his believing Romans, they had
effectually provided for the public tranquillity without any farther need of
Forts and Armies to secure it.

But secondly, the supposal of Divine Right in the Governors of the Church,
where Christianity is received into the State, abates nothing of the natural
Right of the Civil Power, in matters of Religion. This assertion depends upon
the foregoing: For if Christianity makes no change at all in any Temporal
concern of the World, then a Christian State has the same right of ordering the
Affairs of Christianity, so that nothing be done by virtue of it, which may
create a prejudice to the State, as any other Kingdoms of the World have in
that Religion which they profess. For no Nation ever yet openly pretended that
great holdness with their Gods, as to make Religion, at pleasure, become either
true or false; but they therefore profess any Religion, because they first
suppose it to be true. Religion therefore being first established, whatsoever
it be, all that afterward follows, is a nomination of persons to dispense it,
giving Laws for the due Administration o it; setting bounds and limits to the
exercise, calling Assemblies to consult about it, ratifying their Decrees with
civil Sanctions, and receiving Appeals, in case of a corrupt Management, and an
unjust Sentence. All which, Christianity so entirely devolves upon the
Magistrate, that those who have taken the greatest pains to clear the
fundamental Right of the Church, have withal proved the most able, and vigorous
Assertors of those inherent Prerogatives of the Crown: And, whenever they come
to be disowned through the Christian World, then, and not before, let the
Church lie for ever under that guilt and odium, which men now make it their
business to cast upon it. Let Kings cease to be her nursing Fathers, and Queens
her nursing Mothers: In the mean time it bears the same notion with Religion in
general, in reference to the powers of the World, save only in this, that it
addresses it self to them with greater obligations to take it into their
protection, that is, with greater evidence of a Divine Authority.

Thirdly, however it has come to pass, through the Debaucheries of Men, and the
Malice of the Devil, that Religion (as a Learned man observes) has been a
politic Engine in some men's hands, and made use of for the battery, as by
others, for the defense of the State; yet the Government of the Church of
England, which is the subject of our present debate, stands as clear, and
justifiable to the World altogether as our common Christianity.

For as for the Essentials of it, if once Religion be dismissed from the
Accusation of turning the World upside down, I would fain know, what further
latent mischief can be in this, that one man in a certain Precinct, or Diocese,
take care, that all, who profess Religion, live in obedience and conformity to
the Rules of it. And this is all which we claim, as essentially pertaining to
Episcopal Jurisdiction. As for the Secular advantages of Temporal Privileges,
and Power, since we thankfully own them to be the mere accessions of Humane
bounty, they can cause no jealousy in the Author of them, 'till we see the
Streams contend with the Fountain, and the Beams of the Sun, with the Sun it
self. Our Church never owned their Religion, who compare the Church to the Sun,
and the Empire to the Moon, but Receives all these Temporal favors, as the
Arbitrary donatives of the Civil Power, not in any wise her own, but entirely a
borrowed luster. And, which is for the Eternal reputation of our Church, she
has learned to want them, as well as to abound with them; and can be equally
loyal both in the loss, and the enjoyment. Which we need go no further for a
proof of, then her Canons, and her Practice: Both which, have given us an
evident demonstration, that she was the surest support, during the standing of
the English Monarchy, and next to the Royal Family, the greatest sufferer in
the fall.

But fourthly, if we take this Principle, that has raised such great clamours
against the Divine right of the Church, and view it in those conclusions, which
unavoidably flow from it, we shall find it the most contumelious and
destructive to Government, of any thing that has appeared against it. And
though I do not charge the conclusions upon all, who have owned the Principle;
yet we may be allowed to take them from one, who well enough understands, and
is not ashmed to speak out the just consequence of his premises.

Does not he then, who denies the Obligation of Christianity, upon this ground,
that there is no Law antecedent to the Civil Sanction, at the same time take
the Law of Nature out of Men's heart, and a God out of the World, who is the
Author, and Avenger of it? And does he not thereby put a People that should
profess it, out of the protection of the Law of Nations? For what Faith can be
expected from him, who does not yet own it to be his Duty? And how can he
acknowledge it to be his Duty, who denies a God to revenge and punish the,
violation of it? Does not he, who makes the arbitrary pleasure of the
Magistrate the sole Rule and Standard of Good and Evil, take away from the
Prince, the deserved commendations of Justice, and Wisdom, and all those other
Virtues, which are the most sparkling Diamonds in his Crown, making no
difference at all between Tiberius and Antoninus, Nero and Titus; the pest, and
the darling of Mankind? Is the Prince any thing beholding to him for this
pretended extent of the bounds of the Civil Power, who at the same time places
that power in possession, and strength, and the same right in an usurping
Tyrant, and the undoubted Sovereign? Does not he, who holds it his duty, to
forswear Christianity at the command of the Magistrate, declare himself
perfidious to the Government, as well as an Apostate from the Faith? For what
trust can be reposed in him, in Civil Matters, who can renounce that solemn
Covenant into which he was Baptized, and openly professes, his Oath is not to
be believed, when his Religion is called in question? Or what tie can the
Magistrate have upon him, who can make so bold with his God.

So fatal and pernicious is this exorbitant right of the Leviathan's
Commonwealth: It is a two edged Sword, which he puts into the Magistrates
hands, the one merely pretending to protect the People, the other really
designed to destroy the Prince. Such are the absurd Paradoxes, which the denial
of Church Power resolves it self into. All which, with a great many others, are
so gross and prodigious, that if ever the Church has showed her self undutiful
to the State, it is in suffering such a pestilent Enemy to Government to enjoy
the benefit of her Communion.

There is a second pretense, against the interest of the Holy Ghost, in a
Bishops Consecration, That Christ gave the fullness of his Spirit only to St.
Peter and his Successors, but nothing to the other Apostles, who seem to be
joined in Commission with him. So that whatever power and authority is enjoyed
by Bishops, who succeed them, they hold it not immediately from Christ, but
only as Suffragans of his pretended Vicar. But, since this is a point, in which
the Roman Schools are divided among themselves, as appears, by the contrary
assertions of Soto, Victoria, Alphonsus a Castro, and others; and the Dispute
seems at last to be resolved, rather into the exercise of the Power; or, as the
Schools love to speak, the application of the matter of it, than the power it
self; it is properly the subject of another consideration, and does not so
directly contradict, what we have hitherto concluded from the Text. And
therefore, I shall proceed to raise an inference, or two, from the Holy Ghosts
Concerment in the collation of Episcopal Power, which will likewise take in the
remaining part of my Division.

First then, if the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, you may hence infer the
weight and burden of your Calling. It is sure no ordinary employment, where the
Commission for it comes under the Broad Seal of Heaven. 'Twas God that gave the
Law upon Mount Sinai, and therefore Moses, who was to deliver it to the People,
exceedingly quakes and trembles. And, if St. Paul be rapt up into the third
Heaven, to receive Instructions for the Gospel, we presently hear of his
Reproaches, and Distresses, and the great trouble coming upon him, from the
care of all the Churches. No wonder therefore, if, when he had acquainted the
persons here in the Text, with the derivation of their Authority, he forthwith
presents them with a prospect of their danger. His own encounter at Ephesus,
could not procure that rest, and quiet for the Bishops, he left behind him, but
that after his departure, there were beasts to be fought with still. For this I
know, that grievous Wolves shall enter in among you.

I shall not here take upon me the work of an Historian, nor give an account,
how in all Ages of the Church, the lusts of the Flesh, and the Devils of Hell,
have, with their utmost Malice, set themselves against it. If we do but open
our Eyes, and behold the present face of Religion among our selves, we shall
find arguments enough to call forth your utmost circumspection. A great door is
open to you, and many adversaries.

For if that turbulent Spirit of Rebellion and Disobedience, which, not long
since possessed, rent, and tore this Nation, and was, by a Miracle of his
Providence, a while since cast out, walks about night and day, seeking to
return to the place from whence he came, with seven other Spirits, more wicked
than himself, so to make our last estate prove worse than the former: If there
are so many Tobiahs, and Sanballats, that envy the remainders of the prosperity
of Sion, so many Zebahs, and Zalmunahs, that say to one another, Let us take
unto our selves the houses of God in possession, that seek to alienate, or
diminish the Churches Rights, robbing God in Tithes and Offerings, and then
say, Wherein have we robbed him? If the fiery Jesuit on the one hand, and the
restless Fanatic on the other, bend all their wit and power, first to smite
the Shepherd, and then to scatter and glean up the Sheep; compassing Sea and
Land to make Proselytes, and when they have gained them, making them ten times
more the Children of Hell, than themselves: If what St. Paul, Prophesied at
Ephesus be now fulfilled with us, that of our selves men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, and stretching the Articles
of the Church of England to so much a greater latitude, than the Catholic
Church allows, that for as much, as in them lies, Pelagius and Socinus, shall
find here both shelter, and encouragement. Lastly, if there be so many
Heretics in the World, that corrupt the Church of Christ, Schismatics that
divide it, and Atheists, that contemn it; It is then surely high time for you
to look about you, to contend earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered
to the Saints; to join your Heads, your Hearts, and your Hands together, to
support the tottering Ark, which is now no longer Criminal, and keep it from
ever returning into the Tents of the Philistines, which we have seen so
miraculously redeemed from them.

But secondly, notwithstanding all these disadvantages, if the Holy Ghost have
called you to your Office, you may rest assured, that he will own, and protect
you in the discharge. If you held your Callings from the World, the frowns of
the World might discourage you: But since it is God that sets his Seal to your
Commission, you serve a Master; who, let the World be never so impatient, will
assuredly make good your Patent, assert and justify your Authority. When God
says concerning Cyrus, I have called him, Isa. 48.15. it follows in the Text,
and I will make his way prosperous. If God say to Jacob, I have called thee, no
wonder to hear the encouragement he forth with gives him, When thou go
through the water, I am with thee; and through the Rivers, they shall not
overflow thee.

It seems to be an opinion among the Ancient Fathers, that every Bishop has
two Guardian Angels. For besides that, which is common to him with every man,
he has another, as he is a Bishop, appointed him at his Consecration.

But the stability of your Function (Holy Fathers) has a surer ground than in
these fancies of men. Even the God of Angels vouchsafes to become your peculiar
Guardian. And if the Church, like Jacob's Ladder, though the foot of it be on
Earth, has its head in Heaven, there are not only Angels ascending and
descending, but God himself leans upon the top of it, and keeps it firm.

A consideration this of great weight and moment, especially under the
apprehensions of public danger: It being usual with men, in such exigents as
those, to betake themselves to their own Counsels and Contrivances; and when
these fail, to despond, and give over; nay, sometimes with a more preposterous
piece of Policy, to make Shipwreck of a good Conscience, in hopes to escape
the storm. But surely, if we own such a thing as Divine Protection, which is
never forfeited, but by distrust, we shall ever find it, try it when we will,
that the best way to secure our selves from danger, is to be doing our duty.
For this infallibly engages God of our side, who will be with us, as long as we
are with him. It is safer for the Mariner in a Tempest to ride out the Storm,
then to strike to Shore. And we need not fear Drowning, as long as Christ is in
the Ship.

And therefore, let the Heathen rage, and the Nations take Counsel together; he
that sits in the Heavens, shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have
them in derision; he can shatter their Councils, blast their Designs, defeat
their Purposes, and ruin their Confederacies: And will never fail, openly to
demonstrate, that his Church is founded upon a Rock, too firm to be shaken by
the combinations of men; even upon the promise of God, and the Graces of his
Spirit, things eternally invincible by the gates of Hell.

Nor has God ever left himself without witness of this peculiar presence in the
greatest distresses of his Church. Even at the first founding of it, when in
all humane probability, it was so little enabled to stand out against the
machinations of the World; yet, then did the Almighty reveal his arm, and exert
his Power, and in spite of all the oppositions both of Earth and Hell, made his
own Counsel to stand, and flourish. 'Twas he of old, that upheld an Athanasius
contra mundum, and effectually rescued his Church from that deluge of
Arrianism, which to all appearance, had swallowed it up, and overwhelmed it.

Lastly, to name no more, but this Church of ours, under those signal instances
of his afflicting providence, the sinking our gates, destroying our palaces,
and slighting the strong holds of Sion, when that dreadful storm had utterly
sunk both the Government of our Church, and our hopes of its recovery; yet even
then did the Spirit of God move upon the face of the waters, 'till at length
the dry land appeared, and again reduced it to that beautiful order, which has
made it ever since the object of Malice, and the mark of Envy.

Surely therefore, he who had a favor for Sion, when her Stones were in the
dust, has not left off his concern for it, now it stands upon its pillars. But
rather on the contrary, if the present methods o his Providence can give us any
rule for a conjecture, he seems to have some further work in hand, for the
establishment of his Church, while he singles out persons of such worth and
eminence, for the undertaking.

But thirdly, if the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, you are entrusted by
one, who will assuredly take an account of the Administration. It appears in
the Records of the ancient Church, that they never brought a Bishop to public
penance. Of which practice, this seems to be one reason among others, that,
since there was no spiritual power on Earth above him, they reserved him to the
future Judgment, the tribunal of a Lord, who alone was higher than he. And
therefore, though a Religious Constantine thinks fit to cover the faults of his
Bishops with his own Purple, and the whole Christian World at this day were as
forward to hide, as they are on the contrary, to reveal their Fathers
nakedness; Yet all these coverings signify nothing to him, who looks through
them all, to him who pondereth the heart, and weighs the spirits of men. All
things are naked and open before him, with whom you have to do, and will one
day appear so before the World, Angels, and Men. Take heed therefore unto your
selves and to the flock, as those that must give an account. And do thou (O
Lord) give that success to their Labors, that they may give it with joy and
not with grief. Let thy Urim and Thummim be still with thy holy ones, that
their Doctrine may be no other, than that whereto thy Holy Spirit has set his
Seal, and their Lives and Examples may be as Sacred, as their Callings. Put
Courage into their Hearts, and a Terror upon their Faces, that with all
boldness they may speak thy word, and maintain a constant resolution to
withstand the Corruptions of the Times, that so in the last day, when the great
Shepherd of the Sheep shall appear, to make his final Visitation, they may
receive the Blessing, which belongs to those, whom the Lord when he comes
shall find so doing.

Well done good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a little,
enter now into the joy of thy Lord.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, three Persons and
one God, be ascribed, as is most due, by us, and by all the World, all Power,
Glory, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now, and for evermore, Amen.
FINIS.
P. 13. l. 20. suppositious r. supposititious.


