Verus Patroclus: OR, The Weapons of Quakerism, The Weakness of Quakerism:
BEING A Discourse, wherein the choicest Arguments for their chief Tenets are
Enervat* and their best Defenses Annihilat; several Abominations, not
heretofore so directly Discovered, Unmasked: WITH A Digression Explicative of
the Doctrine anent the necessity of the Spirits Operation; AND An Appendix,
Vindicating, Romans 9. From the Depravations of an Arminian. By William Iamison.

Tit. 3.10. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition,
reject.

Edinburgh, Printed in the Year, 1689.

TO THE Right Honorable, The EARL of DUNDONNALD, Lord Cochran, etc.
AS, my Lord, amongst the innumerable precious Benefits and Blessings, which
God has graciously vouchsafed to Mankind, or to any part thereof, His Word,
Statutes and sacred Oracles infinitely surpass, excel, and, so to speak, obscure
all the rest by far, more than the Sun does eclipse the lesser Luminaries: so
according to that common saying, Corruption optimi, pessima; Nothing by many
degrees is so mischievous, noxious, and deadly as the Corruption and
Depravation of these lively Oracles; For thus, tho by a cursed accident, The
Wine of our Fathers Kingdom is turned into Wormwood, and that Heavenly and
unpressed Honey into Gall; whereby the greater part of the visible Church has
perished! For the Poison has this most unhappy advantage above all others,
that it is of an hydropick nature, making the infected, the more they have
drunk, so much the more desirous to drink. Hence that sagacious Spirit, the
grand Enemy of Mankind, judged this the choicest expedient and mean, for
restoration of his falling Kingdom: For to speak nothing o^ the first 4000
years of the World, he has ever, since the very infancy of Christianity, to
his outmost, put this in practice, always raising up such as were most famous,
or rather infamous, through their corrupting, abusing, and detorting the Word
of Life, and Charters of our Salvation: Of which kind, in the early days of
Christianity, were Cerinthus, Montanus, the Cataphrygians, Samosatenus, Arrius,
and a multitude beside. But these first Essays, by reason of their palpable and
direct overturning of the undoubted Fundamentals of Christianity which rendered
all their sophistry, tho never so subtle, most suspected, proved inefficacious
to do the Business, tho in some respect, infectious enough. Therefore the Lord
having by many Means, and in special, by the first four Councils, blown away
these pestiferous Mists, and cleared up to men's minds, these grand Truths of
the Holy Trinity, the Godhead of Christ, the Unity of his Person, the
Distinction of his Natures, and the like. The Method was altered, and the
following opposers of Truth acted by the same Spirit, that the former were,
went more subtly to work, not only forbearing to oppose these Fundamentals,
but, in show at le^st, endeavoring to defend and assert them: By which it came
to pass, that they were more easily believed in all they said, by the too
simple people. In the mean while they secretly and slily sowed their Tares
under the specious pretext of Unity, Order, Decency, Ornament, and ancient
Tradition. Under the covert of these and the like, was the whole Mass of
Paganism introduced, gilded only with the varnishing Title of Catholic
Doctrine. For thus in stead of the humility of a Gospel Ministry, was brought
in a Prelatick Hierarchy, in imitation of the Pagan Protoflamines, which at
length procreated to the World the Man of Sin, to head this degenerating Church
in their Wickedness: And so they had Unity, which was worse than Division; and
an Order, that became the cause of the most horrid Confusion the World has
hitherto seen. Thus also the simplicity of the Gospel was turned into Heathnish
Pageantry; and the glory of the Church of God did degenerat into a mere worldly
pomp and grandour. But at length how sad and miserable became the case of the
Church, when through the power of humane inventions, delivered under the name
of Tradition, and the Dictats of the Romish-depute of the old Dragon, such
poisonous dregs became the best part of the essentials of their Religion!
Justification before God, ascribed to the belief and practice thereof, and
Justification by Faith in the Son of God, decried and maligned! Thus were the
same fundamental Truths, which had been more openly assaulted by the former
Heretics, now no less powerfully, but more subtly almost overthrown. But so
soon as the Lord, as it were by the dawning of a second-Christian-day, had
discovered Romes Abominations, and rendered her hateful to all good Men; the
old Artist and his associats changed their method, tho not their design,
impugning again more openly, these fundamental Truths they had assaulted in the
early days of Christianity; But that the Weapon, already blunted, might yet
cut, behold a new Artifice! For these attempts were not made, for the most
part, by these who persisted in the company of the now deservedly hated Church
of Rome, but by these who were in appearance the Deserters and Opposers
thereof: Under the covert of which, they far more securely infected many, who
were in communion with the reformed Church, impudently asserting, that the
chiefest points of Christianity we^e Popery, on this account that the Papists
had not expressly denied them. These were known by many names, as Servetians,
Anti-trinitarians, Socinians, and the like. But more general was that of
Anabaptists, comprising in it self all these, and many other such Vipers. The
true progeny of these Anabaptists are these, now known by the Name of Quakers,
the men with whom Ideal, who for design and method, are all on^ with the bulk
of both ancient and modern Heretics. Two Artifices were alternatively used by
the ancient Heretics: and by a continued succession derived unto our present
Adversaries, the one of which was to abuse the Scriptures; as if one should
mould a Bushel of Jewels, into the shape of a Dog, Toad, or the like hateful
Creature. The other, when in spite of all these shifts, they were Convicted out
of the Scriptures, to turn upon the Scriptures themselves, as being not free of
their own Errors, nor of Divine Authority. How exactly the Quakers write after
their Copy, none acquainted with their Doctrines, sees not. I hope therefore
it shall not be unprofitable, if the following Discourse shall unfold more
particularly these practices of our Adversaries, which I with a humble
confidence can averr; and moreover I make some Discoveries, in particular of
this more spiritual Mystery of Iniquity, by none I know hitherto directly
undertaken. Moreover, this my Treatise can be judged by none altogether
superfluous, who considers, that the whole Land is ready to be overspread
with the Hemlock o^ Pelagianism, now known by the name of Arminianism, with
which the bulk of the Prelatick Clergy is already infected, for with this
Heresy I have several Rancounters. But I will not trouble your Lordship with a
further account of this my small Undertaking; Yet this I crave leave to say,
that whatever I intended of this kind, it was designed for your Lordship, not
for instruction; for to a higher pitch, and that not without ground I presume
your Lordship to be arrived, but only for a testimony of my gratitude to your
Lordships most Noble and Munificent Grandfather, whose large bounty to the
Learned, and Learners, did liberally extend it self to me also, tho most
undeserving. Wherefore if there were any worth in this my small Essay, your
Lordship by right of succession may challenge a propriety therein. Neither were
your Lordships Virtues unknown to me, while I had the honor of receiving my
Education under the same Roo^, and at the same time with your Lordship. But the
special motive of my ambition to prefix your Lordships Name to my sheets, is,
that your Lordship by undoubted arguments has proved your self, to be a
sincere lover of the now much deserted and maligned Truths of GOD, and a true
favourer of his afflicted Church, trampled on these many years by oppressing
Lords, that never had lawful Dominion over her: whose Prelatical Yoke and
Hierarchy, as it has proved the stair, by which, beside many other Tyrants,
the Pope has got to the unmeasurable height, at which he is now arrived, so it
is ready to become the bridge, and pave the way for his Retroduction into
Britain, with this much I thought to have troubled your Lordship several Months
ago, but then could not, for May last, my Papers not being admitted to the
Press without the allowance of the then public Inspectors, were given to
Doctor Munro, thereunto appointed by the Prelat of St. Andrews, by whom I was
prohibited the publication thereof, unless I razed out of them, all mention of
Popery whatsoever. So great has the zeal of these good men been against
Popery, that so far as they could, they would not suffer it so much as once to
be named. Yet do I not complain of any wrong done to me, but only show to your
Lordship, and the World, to how sad a pass things were then brought! Go on
therefore, my Lord, espousing the Cause of the true Protestant Interest, in
opposition to Popery, and whatsoever has a tendency thereto: Thus shall your
Lordship add the truest luster to your Nobility, by causing the Heart of the
destitute, and widow Church to sing, and bringing the blessing of her that was
ready to perish upon your Lordship. And however matters shall succeed, your
Lordship shall be Feasted with the Delicacies of a good Conscience, in respect
of which, the choicest Banquet of Cleopatra with her Anthony, are far from
amounting to the coursest of Commons. In which, that the Lord may prosper your
Lordship, and bestow upon your Lordship and Family, his choicest Blessings, is,
and shall be, the earnest Prayer of, my Lord,

Your Lordships most humble and devoted Servant, WILL. JAMISON.

To the Judicious READER.
THou will perhaps say, that this Treatise is but an Illade after Homer, or a
thirteenth Enclo; So much already to so good purpose being written on this
Subject: I therefore hold my self obliged to answer this Objection, by rendering
thee an account of the Reasons that moved me to this undertaking; which were,
the dangerousness of, though but the least infection, by this deadly Disease.
The Proximity, or nearness of the Contagion. The wonderful readiness of its
Patrons to broach Books, and Papers, bearing the Names of Answers of whatsoever
is said, or written in opposition to it. That Quakerism is most dangerous, and
the embracing thereof, of a lamentable and dreadful Consequence; none that
seriously compare its Principles with those of Christianity, can be ignorant. I
say, that compares seriously, for others who have their Eye only, ad verum
corricem; taking an overly view of the outside of things, may perhaps judge
this difference not so great, and the Consequence of the Reception of Quakerism
not so dismal. And apprehend that the worst things of Quakerism are only some
ridiculous Stoicisms, and antic Toys, which, notwithstanding requite all the
want of Civility, and good manners with sport and laughter, which thereby
accreweth to the beholders. But by this their sloth, and neglect to compare the
Doctrine of this Party with the Scriptures, they render themselves more capable
to swallow down their poisoned wills, and eat out of the Pot filled with
nothing but death. For as Ignoti Nulla Cupido, as a man cannot greatly love
that which he knows not, though it be good, so neither can he sufficiently
hate it, be it never so evil. Indeed their carelessness, and negligence meriteth
no less. For certain it is, that bitter is no more contrary to sweet, darkness
to light, than the Doctrine of Quakers is to that of Christ; being no other
thing but a hodge-podge of the damnable Heresies, with which Christianity has
been from its infancy assaulted, and wrested, with to so good success, that
few, though otherwise most audacious, have ventured to Patronise them, under
their proper names, and genuine colors; but only under a mask and vizard, and
new names and titles; all which are to be found in their Doctrine mixed, and
compounded together, as if the Enemy of Mankind, mindful of that common saying,
Ut quod non Possunt, singula juncta valent, had Collected in one body, all his
broken and foiled Troup^: having somewhat changed his manner of Order, and
Marshalling thereof, with which he may make the last one fall.

The truth of this could easily be evinced, were this a place convenient, and
the Sequel will afford many instances, by which the Reader may judge of the
rest. Moreover, supposing that Quakerism were far less noxious than it is,
seeing in every corner of the Land, there be many of its Defenders swarming
among all people, it cannot be judged unnecessary to give an Antidot against
it, more than to write Rules against any infectious D^sease, raging in a Land.
Even although many things of this kind were already extant; especially seeing
these Papers, with which I present thee, are both without Prolixity, and also
discover some things of great concernment, which, for any thing I know, were
never so fully, or directly handled by any others, which, I hope, may in part
justify my undertaking. But the thing most moving me to trouble the World with
any Treatise of this kind, was, that no sooner did any Piece in opposition to
Quakerism, see the light, but presently there came forth another, bearing the
name of a Refutation thereof. At this I did not a little wonder; for after a
most impartial, and serious weighing of their Principles, in the balance of
the Sanctuary, I found them (to say no more) directly opposite to the holy
Scriptures. I therefore, with all seriousness, perused severals of the most
elaboured Pieces, which had not been as yet answered; comparing them with
these, against whom they wrote. After all which, my thoughts were quite
altered; for I left off to admire their promptitude of answering, and fell to
wonder at their impudence, seeing in every point, they in stead of Confuting,
Confirm what their Adversaries say against them. In short, all the best of
their answers, are either a quite omission, and passing by the substance of
what is brought for the overthrow of their Doctrine, or at best mere shifts, or
else a most audacious asserting of these things In Ter^^o^s, which are
s^fficient in the estimat of all Christians, to render the Maintainers thereof
more abominable than worst of Pagans, though they were but only inferred by a
long thread of consequences, which the Eternity of Christ's Manhood, and the
Souls being a part of God, no less loudlie than impiouslie asserted by them,
sufficiently witness. These, I say, they either directly maintain* even in
their last pieces, or else can never be brought to disown them. Of which
dealing, the Sequel will give diverse undeniable instances, which indeed is the
main Scope of this discourse. Among these Authors, I bestowed most thoughts
upon Robert Barclay His Vindication of his Apology, which I found made up of
untruths, perversions* false suppositions. As for example, to Vindicat and urge
most of the places of Scripture brought in His Apology; as the foundation of
his Doctrine, he supposes that from the same texts his Adversary inferred our
contrary doctrine, and thinks it sufficient to desire his Adversary to prove
our Doctrine from these places. These are the proper Elements of this
Composition, but to make up a fourth, he knowing that by all men the Quakers
were accused of ma^chless railing, takes the Start, and fills no small pa^^
of his book, accusing His Adversary, as an unparalelled railer: The ground of
which accusation is, that his adversary, as occasion serves, tells his
Reader, that the Quakers, and this Apologist, among the rest, were no less
gross and abominable than Arrians, Socinians, Pelagians, Papists, Libertins,
Anabaptists, and the like. His Symbolizing with which he adventureth not to
deny: Which although at other times he does, yet groundleslie, as these Papers
will in part, and more fully, an entire Colation of Quakerism with the
Principles of these Sects, will demonstrate to any, who has but the least
Spunk of ingenuity, and Candor. I forbear to say, although I could, that our
Vindicator is no novice in the very Crime, of which he so often accuses his
adversary. However the matter be, he might have forborne his accusations of
that which he knew his Brethren, to be of all Men most guilty, which, not to
mention others, Buroughs answer to Bennets queries, and Hub^erthorns reply to
Sherlok, evidently witness, Quis tulerit Grachos de sedi^^one querentes. The
like I say of Geo: Keith in his book, entitled, Truth defended (evil enough, I
am sure) For in it he never speaks to the purpose, or touches what His
Adversary Mr. John Alexander had said, or else marreth in stead of mending the
matter: for others, I forbear to speak of them, these mentioned being the most
learned of their Authors. Neither can I expect any better dealing, than these
and the like have met with, and although they, as some of them have begun to do
al^eady, upbraid me with the infirmity in which divine Providence has stated
me, they will instead of doing their business hereby, only show to the World,
that they have been too docil of a bad Lesson, taught them by the Phari^ees
long ago. John. 9. Neither do I intend at present to trouble my self and
others, with whatsoever they shall give under the name of an answer, seeing the
badness of their cause will not permit them to give any better, than What they
have given to others: In which, they have been so unhappie, that one would have
thought, that they of purpose verified that saying of the Poet, Causa
patrocinlo non bona major erit. And although they say, that this is only but a
shift to save me the labor of a reply. I value it not, but appeal to all the
Reformers. Confessions of Faith, yea and all the Reformed Churches, as
sufficient ^mpires in the case. Yea and in many points to all Christians of
whatsoever profession, except the Socinlans, who retain nothing of Christian
Doctrine, but only arrogat to themselves the name. Neither let them say with
Rob: Bar: Vind: Sect: 6* That our Doctrine is contrary to that of some of the
reformed Churches, in most weighty points, as for example Election, and
Reprobation and the like; because in these we oppose the Modern Lutherians,
seeing (as Wendelin in his Exercitations, and in special Exerc. 16, 17, 18. Has
fully evicted) the Modern Lutherians are altogether opposite in these points to
the ancient Lutherans, such as Herbrandus, Hesnusius, Brentius, and most of all
Luther Himself: And therefore are so far as touching these points, from
deserving the name of Reformed, that they ought to be accounted their capital
adversaries. But not to prefix a long preamble to a short discourse: In a word,
I say, that as the Doctrine of Quakers is a heap of Non such Bl^sphemies* so
their defenses are mera (...), Subtertuges so naked and silly, that one would
admire, how any rational man could satisfy himself with them, but Qui bibit
inde, furit, procul hinc discedite, queis est
Cura bonae mentis, qui bibit inde, furit.
He straight runs mad who drinks hereof, Flee hence, who ever had
A Love unto your precious Souls,
who drinks hereof runs mad.


Touch not, taste not, handle not the unclean things. For which end I present
thee with these Sheets, of which that thou may reap profit, and advantage to
thy Immortal Soul, standing in hazard from the infection of the Mortal disease
of Quakerism, is* and shall be the earnest Prayer of thy Servant, to serve thee
in the Lord.

William Jamison.

CHAP. I. Of the Holy Scriptures.
A GOOD Name is better than precious ointment, says the Preacher, Eccl. 7.1.
Whosoever therefore intend to bring either Persons, or Things under Disesteem
and Contempt, labor in the first place to Spoil them of any Good Name, or due
Titles belonging unto them, to the end, They may the more easily Effectuate
their Purpose; This Method the Quakers have thought very fit and apposit,
whereby to discredit, and finally to overthrow the Holy Scriptures. For in the
first place, they endeavor to rob them of the chiefest Titles, and most famous
Elogies, with which the Holy Ghost has adorned them: among which, that of
being called the Word of God, is not the least. An Instance of this may be
James Nailor, who in his Answer to the Jews, page* (...) Says, It Is the Devil
that contends for the ^^^^ptures to be the Word of God. Others of Them say*
They are not the Word of God, but the Words of Men that spoke them freely: Yea
generally, All the Quakers unanimously deny, that the Scriptures are, or ought
to be called the Word of God: But in so doing, they flately contradict God
speaking in the Scriptures; For there they are most frequently called the Word
of God, As Number. 3.16. Deuteronomy. 5.5. 1. King. 12.24. Ier. 1.2. and 6.10. and 20. 8.
Hos. 1.2. Amos. 8.12, Zeph. 2.5. Luke. 22.61. 1. Sam. 9.27. Mark. 7.13.
compared with 10. These Scriptures, and many others that might be Cited,
unanswerably prove that the Scriptures are, and ought to be called the Word of
God. Several of these Passages with many others calling the Scriptures, or a
part thereof the Word of God or of the Lord in the singular number, are adduced
by Mr Brown Chap. 4. N. 2. To all which Robert Barclay's reply Vind: page 31,
is a flat contradiction of these Scriptures, saying, That the thing which the
Prophets spoke, was only the words which came from the Word of God. Judge
therefore, Reader, if such replies as these can either help the Author, or hurt
his adversaries.

Notwithstanding these Men have something to say for themselves, and so had
they who denied the fire to be hot, or the snow white.

Their first Reason, why the Scriptures are not the Word of God, is, Because
Christ is called the Word of God: but this reason says nothing, but upon
supposition that one word, or phrase cannot undergo diverse acceptations, which
is most false, yet Robert Barclay in the Vindication of his Apology Page 31. to
strengthen this Reason, says, that one epithete (or attribute) cannot be
predicated, (or affirmed) of two things (...) (or by way of eminence) without a
gross contradiction: But in this he only bewrayes his own ignorance of the
Laws of a Contradiction, and his desire of contradicting the Scriptures with a
show of Reason: For whether by the Word of God* Christ or the Scriptures are to
be understood this Elogie is still ascribed to either of them, with a peculiar
eminency; But by the diversity of the acceptance the Contradiction is removed,
which diversity may be easily Perceived by any that read or hear the
Scriptures, or other Discourses, in which mention is made of the Word of God:
As for Example, who could read these two Texts of Scripture, Mark. 7.13. and
Rev. 19.13. but they would presently see, that in the latter of the Texts, by
the Word of God, Christ is to be understood, and in the former, the Scriptures?
except he were altogether stupid, and so there is not the least appearance of a
Contradiction. Therefore in short, where by the Word, Christ is understood,
(...) Word is taken improperly, viz. For a Person, the essential and
substantial Word of God, in so much as Christ is the Principal Declarer of the
Mind of God, or upon other such accounts, such improper Attributes being
frequently ascribed to Christ, as a Door, a Vine, and the like. But on the
other hand, where by the Word of God, we are to understand the Scriptures,
there (...) Word is taken in a more proper acceptance, for a discourse
composed of Letters and Syllables.

The same Author has yet another Reason, and it is a rare one, viz. That there
are more words in the Scriptures than one, Therefore they cannot be called the
Word of God. Behold, Reader, with what ridiculous Shifts, these men endeavor
to uphold their impiety, and oppose themselves to God! Who but he that desired
the Fools Coat, would thus reason? It is a lie to name an Epistle sent from one
Person to another, a Letter, because in it there are more Letters than one. Not
only the Jews who were Christ's Enemies, but even the Apostles themselves, had
done right in the judgment of this Quaker, if when Christ* Mark 7.13, called
the Scriptures the Word of God, they had flatly contradicted him, and said,
this is a lie, seeing there are more Words in the Scriptures than one. Here is
ridiculous folly and impious Blasphemy mixed together. And yet worse, (if worse
can be) unavoidably follows this their Doctrine, even that the Son of God was
not from Eternity, For according to them, when it is said, Hos. 1.2. The
Beginning of the Word of the Lord, the meaning must be, the beginning of Christ.

With the like sacrilegious audacity they endeavor to bereave the Scriptures
of that sweet and heart-melting Title of the Gospel, saying, Matthew, Mark Luke
and John, are not the Gospel, but the Letter. The Defense of this wicked and
bold Contradiction of the Scriptures, William Pen undertaketh in his Rejoinder
to John Faldo, Page 117. His Reasons, whereby he would prove it, are, 1.
Because the Gospel is called the Power of God to Salvation, so are not the
Scriptures. To which I answer, That the Scriptures may as well be called the
Power of God to Salvation, as the Gospel, seeing it was the same Doctrine which
the Apostles both preached to the People, and committed to Writing: And the
Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith by this Doctrine, when it
is committed to writing, as well as when it was Preached by the Apostles. 2. By
the Power of God to Salvation, no other thing can be understood but the Mean,
Organ, or Instrument, whereby God exerteth, or puts forth his Power to the
saving of Sinners: Which kind of Metonymie is frequent in Scripture.

The next Reason to prove that these Books ought not to be called the Gospel,
which the Man's copious invention brancheth into two, is, That the Gospel is
everlasting, and was Preached before the Scriptures were, therefore they are
not the Gospel. Ans. 1. The Principles of Truth are everlasting, and were
before any Quakers Books were extant, Therefore a Pamphlet, which the Quakers
have entitled, The Principles of Truth carries as a token of what is within,
a lie in the Frontispiece thereof, which I believe William Pen will hardly
admit. Ans. 2. The Doctrine contained in those Books is the same with, and
therefore no less everlasting than the Gospel proclaimed by the Angel, Rev.
14.6. cited by Pen.

His two last Reasons whereby he would prove those Books not to be the Gospel,
are that the Gospel is but one; and that it is glad Tidings, but the Books of
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John are four, and but Narratives, and not glad
Tidings, are of the like nature with the former: For he knows well enough
that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John deliver not a contrair Doctrine one to
another, but only diverse Narratives of the same Doctrine; All which Books
contain the glad Tidings of the Birth, Life, Death, and Resurrection of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior of the World: And this I assert in opposition to
this Quaker, who here discovers himself in his own Colors, in that he
denies that the Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John contain glad Tidings;
what could the Devil himself utter more black and Hellish than this? Behold,
Reader, with what ridiculous Sophistry these men can cheat their own Souls,
which is so blunt, that a schoolboy would be ashamed to bring it forth, and
what black, and Hellish Impieties they not only swallow down themselves, but
with open face avouch before the world. Lastly, if these Books, as for example,
Mark ought not to be called the Gospel, and by the Gospel ought always to be
understood the power of God, or the essential Attribute of Gods Power (for thus
they with abominable Suenchfeldius understand Romans 1.16.) then the meaning of
Mark* 1.1. must be the Beginning of the Power of God, of Jesus Christ the Son
of God; which place, if it have any Sense thus understood, must have a black
one, viz. That the Power of God. i. e. God Himself was not before Mark wrote
his Book, or else, that the first Verse is a lie; let them choose which of them
they will admit.

2. But with no less Earnestness, and Industry do these men labor to clothe
the Scriptures with base Epithets, and contemptible Aspersions, than to bereave
them of the honorable Titles, and Divine Encomies, of which God their Author
has thought them worthy; not unlike the Heathens, who the better to induce
Lions and other Wild-beasts to devour the Christians, sewed them in Skins of
other Beasts, hated by these to whose Fury they exposed them; This Charge I
make out by these following Expressions of the Quakers; for they ordinarily call
the Scriptures the Letter, and by way of Disparagement, Writings, as the
Queries given to Mr. John Alexander witness, such a Letter, about the meaning
of which not two are agreed; Robert Barclay's Apolog. cap. 2. Ink and Paper,
Cited by Mr. Hicks in his Dialogues, Page, 41: And that, It is Idolatry to call
the Scripture, a Means; George White-head, in his D. P. page 13. and account
them no better than an old Almanac, witness Hollbrow, cited by Hicks, page, 20.
And that it is dangerous for People to read them, Fox, and Huberthorn, in
Truths Defense, page 101. And that Faith grounded on the Scriptures, is but an
empty and implicit Faith, and bespeaks such Persons void of the knowledge of
God, Christ, and to be yet in their sins, And that such Men walk in their own
Fancies and Imaginations, Christ ascended, page 11. and that that which is
spoken from the Spirit of Truth, in any (to wit) of the Quakers: Is of as great
Authority as the Scriptures, yea greater, George White-head, in his Apolog.
page 49, And he that persuades the People, to let the Scriptures be a Rule of
Faith, and Practice would keep the People in darkness, for whoever walks by
the Rule without them and teach men so to do, would make void the Covenant of
Life and Peace; Edward Burrows, page 62. And that is no Command to me, which is
a Command to another. Neither did any of the Saints act by a Command that was
given to another. Edward Burrows, page 47. And again he says, such as go to
Duty in imitation of the Letter, which was a Command to others, their Sacrifice
is an abomination to the Lord. And Page 105. That they that take up a Command
from the Scriptures, are in the Witchcraft. And that if the Bible were burnt,
as good an one might be writ, Says one Nicolas Lucas, cited by Mr. Hicks,
Dialog. 2. Page 5. and evinced by him against Pen, Dialog. 3. page, 86.
Moreover, William Pen in his Rejoinder, to John Faldo, page, 70. Says, but we
have good Reason to deny them to be the Rule of Faith, and Judge of
Controversies, which can neither give nor govern Faith, nor judge of
Controversies, and again page 73. In short, The Scriptures are not the Rule,
but a Declaration of Faith and Knowledge. And Chap. 3. page 35. He endeavors
what he can to render the Scriptures altogether uncertain, Saying, I cannot but
observe after what a suspected rate the Scriptures have been both first
Collected, and then conveyed through the several succeeding Ages. And again,
Are we sure that the Judgment of those who Collected them, was sufficient to
determine what was Right, and what not? For that which gives Scripture its
Canon, is not plurality of Voices, but that Word of God, which gave it forth;
If that Divine Counselor preceeded not, what assurance have our
Anti-revelation-adversaries of their Doctors Choice, and granting, that they
have not rejected any Writing given forth by the Holy Ghost (which is a great
Question) and that which they have given us, was in the main Writ by his
Inspiration (which I believe) Yet how we shall be assured that in above 300
years, so many hundred Copies as were doubtless taken, should be Pure, and
Uncorrupted, Considering the private Dissensions, the readiness of each Party
to bend things to their own Belief, with the growing and succeeding Faults of
leaving out, adding, transposing, etc. which Transscribers might be guilty of,
perhaps more through Carelessness than Design, is beyond John Faldo's Skill upon
his principles to inform us. From hence we may observe the uncertainty of John
Faldo's Word of God, who by Authorities can never prove the Scriptures to be
given forth by Inspiration, nor that they are truly collected, neither could
these Persons, who first made them Canonical, be assured of the exactness of
those copies, they then found Extant; Nor was the Collectors Judgment
infallible, And to come nearer to our Times, Learned Men tell us of little less
than 3000 several Readings in the Scriptures of the New Testament in Greek.
Thus ye see he labors with all his Pith, to overthrow the extrinsical
Arguments, whereby the Divinity of the Scriptures is proved: And on the other
wing of this Ethnic Army, Robert Barclay Assaulteth the intrinsic Arguments,
and Divine Characters, imprinted on the Scriptures; saying in his Apolog. Chap.
2. That they do not think that the Authority of the Scriptures, does depend on
any Efficacy, or Virtue placed in these Writings. and in his Vindication (I had
almost said Abridgment of his Apology) he denies, That there is any stamp of
Divine Authority upon the Scriptures; and impiously ascribes the same to some
other Spirit, separate from, and besides the Scriptures, which cannot be the
Spirit of God, Seeing he himself asserteth elsewhere, That this Spirit is in
all men, and the Scripture says, That some men have not the Spirit of God. But
shall not the Scriptures, which were dictate by the living God carry something
of the Style of the Author? Shall the writings of Livy, Virgil, or Cicero,
carry such Evidences that they were theirs? So that a Humanist may distinguish
the True from the Counterfit, although he had never heard these men immediately
relate, Sing, or Declaim; Surely this will be denied of none but a Quaker:
Shall then God himself be outstripped and overcome by these Writers? The
Scriptures then according to the Quakers have no Majesty of Style, no harmony
of Parts, no Scope of the whole etc. Nor any such Notes, whereby they may
declare themselves to be the Dictates of the Living God. Hence we may see, That
these men are fitter Companions for Porphyrie and Celsus, the two Heathnish
Champions, than for a Christian, seeing they bend all their Wit and Skill to
revive again Heathnisme under the name of Quakerisme. I shall only add for
confirmation of my Assertion the Words of Benjamin Furly a Quaker in Rotterdam,
cited by Mr. Hicks, in his Quakers appeal answered, page 16. There is nothing
(Says he) in the Scripture that is a Duty upon me, or which I am obliged to
Obey, because there recorded; Whatsoever is a Command to me, I must not receive
from any man, or thing without me, nay, not the Scripture it self; yea it is
the greatest Error, in the world that ever was invented, and the ground of all
Error, to Affirm that the Scriptures ought to be a Rule to Christians.

3. By this time I have abundantly justified my Charge, having set down already
so much of this blasphemous Doctrine, as I am confident, has filled my Reader
with Horror and Indignation, if he retain but the least spark of Christianity,
or love to the Holy Scriptures. And O that while we consider these
Abominations, we could mourn and tremble in Contemplation of our heavy
Transgressions, that have provoked the Holy God in his just Judgment, to let
loose and permit these satanical Spirits to rage abroad, and pollute the very
Air with their poisonous Breath, and pestiferous Blasphemy! This last passage I
should not have set down, were it not that Robert Barclay, in his Vindication
of his Apology, of the many scores of passages, quoted out of the Quakers own
Books by Mr. Brown, to prove the blasphemousness, and absurdity of their
Doctrine, in the Defense of this only, adventureth to say somewhat, I shall
therefore set down what he says, and refute the same: His words are. Vind.
Page 37. But what he urges of this further. Page 57. and 59. from the saying of
some Quakers, affirming that it is not a Command to them which is given to
another, albeit I might justly reject it, as impertinent till he prove it, for
the Reasons above Declared upon this occasion; yet because he mentions Benjamin
Furley in Rotterdam, having some Knowledge of that Matter, I answer, whether
will he say, All the Commands in Scripture to every Person therein mentioned,
are binding upon every individual now. If he dare not, say they are, as I know
he dare not, how must I then distinguish betwixt what binds me, and what binds
me not? must it not be by the Spirit, (suppose it were only subjectively, as he
will confess) enlightening the understanding to make the Distinction: Then it
seems it is the operation of the Spirit that makes them know their Duty, and
sure they cannot obey before they know. But if he say, that tho they should
want that operation of the Spirit, and did not know nor acknowledge them to be
their Duty, yet that they are binding upon them, neither Benjamin Furley, nor
any Quaker will deny. But even the Commands of Gods Spirit, and the Precepts of
the Scripture, which now concern all, are binding upon all, so that they shall
be justly condemned for not obeying, albeit by the perverseness of their hearts
and Wills, they either refuse to obey, or will not acknowledge them; so that
his urging of that Page 60, and 61. And his pleading for it, is unnecessary,
and needs no Answer; yet who could say, they could obey to any advantage of
their souls, without this operation of the Spirit, since whatsoever is not of
Faith is sin? But as to these words said to be written by Benjamin Furley, he
is challenged to prove they are his without adding, or diminishing (and it is
very well known, the adding or diminishing of two or three words in a few lines
will quite alter the Sense) and before he has answered this Challenge, and
freed himself from the just Censure of a Callumniator, albeit he take the help
of his Author Hicks, he will find his folly in accusing men at second hand
proofs, and upon the Testimony of their Adversaries. Thus he. All the Reasons
he gave above, why he ought not to vindicate the blasphemous Passages cited out
of several Quakers were, because these Passages were cited by these that are
adversaries to Quakers, such as Hicks, Stalham, and the like, who still cite
Book and Page of the Quakers, where they are to be found, so truly, that this
Vindicator has not one instance to give where they have dealt unfaithfully;
Hence this Reason according to him proves his Vindication unworthy of an
answer, seeing the citation of Passages is enough to Vindicate these Authors
from an unjust charge. Therefore let it be observed, that the whole multitude
of Passages which are fraughted with Blasphemies and Absurdities, even to the
begetting of an utter detestation at the Principles of this party, in the
hearts of all the Lovers of the Holy Scriptures, which are cited by Mr. Brown,
remain without any Vindication, or Mollification, except that which rendereth
the Author of this Vindication ridiculous, and the Principles of his party more
abominable. But let us come to the Matter of Furley, of which he says, he has
some Knowledge, we may therefore expect a sufficient Resolution about it (as
for other passages of this Nature, he insinuates a profound ignorance
concerning them) wherefore he meriteth a sharp Censure from his Brethren, for
undertaking that of which he was altogether ignorant, and they the note of
folly, for the permission of the publication of the same, for in Reason we
ought to suppose that they revised it. In the first place, The Dilemma
wherewith he endeavors the Protection of his Brother, is altogether
impertinent, and helps him not a whit, for seeing he insinuates, that there
are no subjective Revelations, and elsewhere clearly denies, that there are
any, this Dilemma if it can do any thing, it will only be Argumentum ad
hominem: And so according to the Quakers, men shall not be bound to obey any of
the Commands of God: As for Example, to abstain from Murder except the Lord by
an immediate objective Revelation, such as he gave to Moses or the rest of the
Prophets, enjoined this unto them. Behold, Reader, the dangerous Conclusion!
The abominablenesse of which makes this Vindicator use many Shifts, and
Tergiversations to varnish the same, notwithstanding of which it inevitably
recurreth, and sticks fast unto him. 2. Neither does this Dilemma involve his
Adversary, or any of the Reformed in any thing like the absurd Doctrine of the
Quakers, for although the subjective illumination of the Spirit be very
necessary for the true Understanding of the Scriptures, yea and of absolute
necessity for such a knowledge of them, whereby we know God revealed in them,
so that we have true Love and Fear, and Faith in him as the Effects, and
Concomitants of this knowledge; yet he that shall deny, that any Reader of the
Scriptures, tho endued with sound Reason, only can distinguish between Commands
given to a particular People, for a certain time, such as to offer Sacrifice,
or to abstain from Swines-flesh, and these who bind at all times, as for
example, Not to profane the Name of God, or to honor Parents, must have
abandoned the exercise of Reason. 3. While he alleges, That neither Benjamin
Furley, or any other Quaker will deny, that Scripture Precepts, which concern
all are binding upon all, he openly contradicts Furley, who denies, that he
ought to receive any Command, from any man, or thing without him, yea or from
the Scriptures themselves; And further denies without any limitation, that the
Scriptures ought to be called a Rule. And all this, tho most blasphemously and
absurdly, yet most consonantly to the Quakers Principles: Our Vindicator, in
stead of doing Service to his Party, notably prevaricateth their Cause, not
sticking to give away their great Principles, while other shifts for defense
thereof fail him. 4. What he adds, without the operation of the Spirit men
cannot obey to the good of their own Souls, is altogether impertinent, as if
one should in answer to a Man enquiring, what Duties he ought to perform to
such a Superior, tell him, what for the time he was in case to perform, so as
to reap any Advantage thereby, which would be, as the Proverb goes, falcem pro
ligone dare. 5. He quietly slideth over, without so much as naming these words
of Furley* (viz.) yea it is the greatest error of the World, that ever was
invented, and the Ground of all error, to affirm, that the Scriptures ought to
be a Rule to Christians: which Doctrine, as it rendereth any Lover of God, and
his Word secure from being tainted with Quakerisme, so that the palpableness of
the Blasphemy is an Antidote to the Poison; in like manner, it has rendered
our Vindicator speechless, denuding him of his Shifts of Primary and Secondary
Rule, under the Protection of which distinction the Quakers would fain shroud
themselves: For in these words of Furley there is no mention of a Primary, or
Secondary Rule, which without doubt Furley had made, if he had believed the
Scripture to be a secondary Rule, seeing certainly he was not ignorant that the
Quakers were branded, with the name of being Enemies to Scripture. 6. In the
last place our Vindicator declares, that all he has hitherto said, in D^fence
of Furley, was, but the patrociny of a very bad and indefendible Cause, in that
he would fasten upon his Adversary, the Falsification of Furleys Words: For if
they were falsified, why attempted he to defend them as they were, while the
sense was quite altered and perverted, as he insinuates; Moreover, if those
words of Furley were falsified, he was bound to have vindicated, and delivered
them, as they were written by Furley, which doubtless he was in case to do, if
there had been any such thing, seeing he professes that he has Knowledge of
the Matter, which he does not profess concerning any Quaker, mentioned in his
Adversaries Book: Hence it is evident that his Adversary is not at all guilty
of the ignominious Epithets of Fool and Calumniator, but whether or not they
light upon the Author, I leave it unto men of Judgment to consider.

4. From what is said, it is most evident, that the Scriptures according to the
Judgment of Quakers are in no sense, to be counted a Rule, and lay no
obligation upon any to believe, and walk according to them. Hence William Pen
says, that the Spirit of God, who is God, is the alone Rule of a Spiritual
Christian; (viz.) of Faith and Life; for of that he is handling Rejoin. Page
76. And this the most of their Arguments, if they prove any thing, intend. As
for Example, that common Topic of the Quakers (viz.) That which was the Rule
of the Patriarchs Faith, before the Scriptures were written, is the Rule of
ours now: But I subsume that the Scriptures of the old, and New Testament were
in no respect the Rule of the Patriarchs Faith. Ergo according to the Quakers,
the Scriptures in no respect can be called the Rule of Faith and Manners: but
finding that the grossnesse of this Doctrine bewrays it self, and too
palpably unmasketh its abettors, they have invented several distinctions, under
the Covert of which they might shroud themselves, and elude all the Arguments
whereby the Scriptures are proved to be the Rule of Faith and Manners: As that
the Scriptures are the Verbal and Histicorical Rule of Faith, which is the
Devils Faith, but not of saving Faith. Thus speaks William Pen Rejoin. Page
71. But that wherein they place their Sacred Anchor, or main strength is that
of Adequate and Primary, inadequate or secondary Rule, asserting that the
Scriptures are not the adequate or complete, and Principal Rule of Faith and
Manners, but only an inadequate, in-compleat and secondary Rule, That is, that
the Scriptures contain not all that we are bound to believe, or do, and that we
ought to believe or practice nothing, tho never so clearly holden forth, or
commanded in the Scriptures, as for example, that God sent his Son into the
World, or that we ought to love God or our Neighbor, except by a miraculous
Revelation from Heaven, (as Hubberthorn in his Reply to Sherlock speaks) we
be told the same thing over again: By which Revelation we ought, say they, to
examine the Scriptures: And because we deny this Doctrine, and abhor it as
the Floodgate of all errors, They cry out, that we are carnal, Enemies to the
Spirit, void of Light; upon this ground also, the Ministers that make the
Scriptures the Rule of their Doctrine they call by the Names of Baals Priests,
Thieves, Devils, Enemies of God, with a thousand of the like denominations,
wherefore that the State of the Controversy may appear, and our Adversaries be
deprived of their lurking places, I premit this assertion, in order to the
production of true and saving Faith two Principles are required, First, The
Declaration of the Object, or thing to be believed or practiced, which is
commonly called in the Schools Objective Revelation. This may be either
immediate, as it was of old to the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles: To whom
God himself immediately did speak, and dictate his will without the Intervention
of any thing; as a medium, or mids, Declaring that Revelation to the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, or it may be mediat, as it was in respect
of those, to whom the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles delivered it, and as
it is in respect of us, for whose sake the Prophets and Apostles wrote it. Romans
15.4. The other thing necessary for the Production of Saving Faith, is the
operation or influence of the Spirit of God, whereby the vail of natural
blindness is removed, and the eyes of the soul, or the understanding are
opened to know, and believe the wonderful things contained in Gods written Law,
and to see these divine Characters that are imprinted upon the Scriptures, and
to understand the Scriptures from the Scriptures themselves: so that the Person
thus savingly illuminated, attends to, and heartily closes with what is
delivered in the Scriptures: And this is ordinarily called Subjective
Revelation, or more properly, Illumination, or an application of the Revelation
made already, hactenus factae, as Dr. Baron. speaks. This Doctrine is clear
and most intelligible to all that will not close their eyes: The Truth of which
is proven by the following Scriptures. Psalm. 119. 18. Luke 24: 46. 2 Cor. 3.15,
16. Rev. 3.18. Act. 16.14, 15. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. This Distinction is very
requisite for clearing of our purpose, and liberateth our Doctrine from the
Circle, which is falsely objected unto us by both Papists, and Quakers.

A DIGRESSION, In which the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, anent the
necessity of the Spirits Operation, in order to firm, and saving Knowledge, and
belief of the Holy Scriptures is Explained, and Vindicated from the Exceptions
of Papists and Quakers.
FIrst, all the Reformed Churches do with (...) Consent assert, that in order
to a firm and saving knowledge, and Divine Faith or believing of the Scriptures
the illumi^nation, and operation of the Spirit of God, illumi^nating, and
preparing the Soul is absolutely necess^^ry, this all the Confessions witness,
and our D^^vines, such as Calvin in his Institution, Polan^ in his Syntagma,
demonstratively evince. The Doctrine is impugned on the one hand by the
P^pists, who object first, that we commit a Ci^^cle. 2. That we are guilty of
Enthusiastic dottages, of which we justly accuse the Anabaptists, and Quakers,
and the like Enthusiasts; with these the Socinians, and other Enemies of the
grace of God, join forces accusing us of the same Crimes. On the other hand,
the Quakers perceiving themselves unextricably in the briers, and unwilling to
be alone, affirm confidently that we cannot separat our selves from them; as to
this matter.

3. In order to the silencing of both these parties, who like Samsons Foxes,
when they appear most opposite one to another, even then conspire most firmly
the ruin of the Church of God: I premit; that in order to the production of
true Faith, in God's ordinary way, and method, two things are necessary as the
principles thereof, the Word and the Spirit. The Word they call principium
objectivum, an objective principle, or an objective revelation, because the
Scriptures concur objectively declaring truths to be believed, even, as the Sun
objectively demonstrateth, and shows things that may be seen, though no eyes
were open to see them: so the Scriptures hold forth clearly all that we ought
to believe and do, even though the understanding of none were opened to behold
the wonders contained in Gods written Law. And again as the Scriptures hold
forth other Truths, so they evidently declare, and manifest the Characters of
their Divinity; Even as the Sun proves himself to be the Sun, by his own
irradiant, and illustrious Beams of Light. And as the Sun must be supposed to
be an objective light declaring himself, and other things: The same we say of
the Scriptures, that in themselves they contain, and hold forth these heavenly
Rays, and glorious Beams, and Characters of Divinity, prior to the Spirits
opening of the understanding, and enclining the will for pe^ception, and
embracing thereof. Now no^withstanding of al^ this, poor mankind blind by
nature, should be in perpetual darkness, if his eyes were not opened. Hence
another Principle is necessary viz. The Spirits gracious operations
enlightening, and ^weetly enclining, fi^ting, and disposing the Soul; which is
the subject, or recipient of this light, to understand, and believe the things
contained in these heavenly Oracles. And all these the Spirit does; not by
dictating or telling into the ear, or mind that such and such excellent things
are contained in these Writings; as a man making an oration, to commend such or
such a thing, but (as we said already) by removing the natural mist, and
darkness, modo efficientis, aut D^vini instrumenti; by way of Efficient or
divine ^nstrument in the Hand of God: For the Divine B^auty, and Celestial
Glory of the Scriptures is so transcendent, that the removal of the natural
blindnes^, and pravity of the will, is enough for ravishing of the hearts into
ardent Love, obsequious Obedience, and (in a word) a most en^ire, and total
captivity unto them. This working of the Spirit upon the soul, is commonly
called Subjective Revelation, because it terminateth upon the soul, which is
the subject, or recipient of the light contained in the Word, and may be more
properly called an application of Divine Revelation, than Revelation it self.
This subjective working of the Spirit, both the Scriptures themselves, and all
sound Divines illustrat, according to them, by the opening of the eyes, Ps.
119.18. Eye Salve, Rev, 3.18. Which Examples both illustrate, and prove the
purpose, yea it is observable, that in all the Scriptures the Holy Ghost
mentions no other kind of Revelation as necessary to Salvation; but only
objective, which indeed was sometimes immediate, but not necessarily so, but
other some times mediat, and this subjective Revelation, or illumination of the
Spirit: In a word for any thing we can find is all one, whether the objective
Revelation be mediat, or immediate, providing it be Divine, see among other
Scriptures Ps. 119.18. Luke 24, 46, Act. 16, 14, 31, 32, 33, 34. 2. Cor. 3, 15,
16. Rev. 3.18.

4. Having premised, and illustrated this distinction, I come in the next place
directly to remove the Objections. And first that of the Circle, in which the
Papists endeavor to entangle us. For they object; that we being demanded, how
we know the Scriptures to be the Word of God? we answer, by the Testimony and
Opertaion of the Spirit: And again being demanded, how we know the Spirit of
Truth, and discern it from the Spirit of Error? We answer by the Scriptures.
Hence they conclude that we run the round, and answer the same by the same, and
so make a complete Circle. To which I answer that there is here no Circle, for
a Circle is progressus ab eodem ad idem eodem modo cognitum. A Progress from
the same, to the some thing, by the same kind of Argumentation. But so it is
not here. For there is not the same way of Argumentation. For the Word
concurreth objectiv^ly, declaring, and holding forth what are the true (...) or
Characters of the Spirit of God argumenta^ively: so that we can reason, because
such a Spirit, v. g. He that confesses Jesus Christ has come in the Flesh, is
said by the Scripture to be of God; therefore I know, and believe that this is
true Doctrine, and that this Spirit is of God. But on the other hand we make no
such use of the Spirits inward Testimony, or Operations. We do not with the
phanatical Enthusiasts reason thus, the Spirit, or a strong impulse, which they
call the Spirit, bids me believe that such and such Books, are the Scriptures,
therefore I believe them to be so. We say, no such thing. We only say, that the
Spirits operations, are necessary for disposing the Soul, to perceive, and
understand the things contained in the Scriptures themselves, and apply the
same, so that either for his own satisfaction, or redarguing of others, he
still rationally deduceth all his Arguments from the Scriptures, making them,
or (which is all one) God speaking in them, the formal Object, and ultimat
ground wherein to resolve his Faith. Two Examples I will give to illustrat my
answer, and then I have done. The first is that known Example of the Eye Salve,
and the Sun: For one by the Eye Salve, or some efficacious Medicament of this
nature removing the Tunicle, may come to the sight and knowledge of the Sun: So
that he may say, by means of the Salve, or its opening of the Eyes he sees,
and knowe^h the Sun, and again by the Suns light he may perceive what is
Eye Salve, and what not. This egregiously illustrateth the purpose, and yet is
many stages from a Circle. The second Example is of a Log^cian, his Reason, and
his Systeme of Logic, which contains Rules, to discern sound reason from
fallacy and sophistry. For the Logician knows by his own reason, that such a
Book is sound, containing true Reason, and not fallacies. This he can
demonstrat by his own Reason, as the mean, and yet does not thus argument, my
own reason teaches me so, therefore it is so, but from reason in actu
exercito, and the nature of the things contained in the Book, which by means of
his own reason he sees to be clear Truths. And again by the Book he knows
what is sound reason, and what not. By this time, I hope we are fully freed of
the Circle; in which the Romanists would fain have us entangled; being covetous
of company: for I could requit them with two unextricable Circles, if time did
permit.

5. I come to the Removal of the second Objection, viz that we cannot
distinguish our selves in this point from Quakers, and the like Enthusiasts.
This Objection not only the Papists, but also the Quakers urge what they can,
to the end, that they may make the Reformed Churches symbolize with themselves.
To this purpose Robert Barclay in his Apology attempted to make Calvin, the
French, and Dutch Confessions, and the Westminster Divines Patronisers of their
Doctrine; because they said, that we cannot firmly know, and savingly believe
the Divinity of the Scriptures, without the inward Testimony, or Operation of
the Spirit of God. But he calls the Divines of Westminster dark, dishonest,
and confused, because they did not separat the Word from the Spirit: but said,
that this Testimony, or Operation of the Spirit was in and with the Word, but
neglects the consideration of, Isai. 59.21, the Scripture upon which they
build this their saying. And again Vind. page 33. Where he abridging his
Apology brings up again these things, ut respondeant ultimae primis, he
neglects the special, and chief Reasons, whereby his adversary page 61.
showed that there was no discord between Calvin, French, and Dutch Confessions,
and our Divines. Add hereto that it is well known that there was never the
least controversy between the British, and Transmarine Protestants on this
head, but contrariwise a most entire harmony. Having therefore discovered this
nonesuch weakness, and extreme disingenuity, I come directly to the objection,
and answer both Papists, and Quakers together, we distinguish our selves from
these Enthusiasts; for, first the Work of the Spirit, the necessity of which we
maintain is only subjective, being rather, if we will speak properly, an
application of the things revealed in Scripture, than a Revelation, or
Testimony strickly so taken; whereas the Revelation to which the Quakers
pretend, is altogether objective, like that of the Prophets. 2. We assert, the
sufficiency of the Scriptures as a Rule, containing all things necessary to be
believed, or done: Which they deny. 3. We assert the Scriptures to be the
principal, and ultimate rule into which our Faith is lastly to be resolved.
Hence we examine all Doctrines of men, all internal Suggestions by the
Scriptures* as the infallible Test, or Touchstone; hence we maintain that the
Spirit's Testimony is still in, and with the Word, so that it may be known,
what is the true, and what is the false Spirit by the Word, so that the work of
the Spirit is; to enlighten the understanding, and dispose the soul to perceive
the Characters of Divinity, naturally ingraffed in the Scriptures. All which
the Quakers deny, and assert the quite contrary. Now this our Doctrine is by a
full, and most harmonious consent delivered, and asserted by the reformed
Churches, and most eminent, and shining lights therein. Luthers words are, that
if any thing should deliver any Doctrine, which it could not prove by
Scripture, he would spit in its face, knowing certainly that it were the Devil.
Sinopsis Pur. Theol, Disp. 2 Page 20. But the Holy Ghost by these Divine
Characters of the Scripture, begets Divine, and saving Faith in our hearts.
Maccov. Loc^. Com: page 28. The Testimony of the Spirit is a light, so
enlightening our understanding, that it follows it sweetly, and shows the
arguments in the things themselves, impressed in the things which are to be
believed, but before unknown. Woleb. Comp. Theol: page 4. The Spirit of God
persuades the hearts of Believers internally of the Divinity of the
Scriptures, in so much as he opens the eyes, and illuminateth the heart of
him, who after previous invocation of the Spirit of God reads the Scriptures,
so that by this illumination the man shall behold the wonderful things of God,
and acknowledge Gods Voice speaking in the Scriptures. The like Doctrine has
Wallet, in his Sinopsis Papi^migener. Contr. in many places, where he asserreth
in terminis, that this Testimony of the Spirit is (...), and with the
Scriptures. The Words of godly, and learned Whitaker are clear as they are
cited by Mr. Crawford in a short but learned trac^at de Princ. fi^. obj. et
effect: Whereas ye say that we reject the Testimony of the Church, and judge
our selves taught by the alone internal persuasion of the Spirit, we hold the
Ministry of the Church in honor: internal persuasions without the external
word we shun, as sanatical impostures; we judge out of the scriptures, we
believe with the scriptures, or because of their Testimony, and therefore
Heretics, i. e. Enthusiasts we neither are, nor can be. But of all men must
clearly Calv. Inst. L. 1, C. 9. asserteth our Doctrine, and strongly refuteth
these Enthusiasts, for Sect 1. he thus speaks, furthermore these who having
rejected the scriptures, imagine to themselves a way, I know not what of
approaching to God, are to be judged not so much poss^ssed with error, as acted
with madness, there have arisen of late some giddy heady persons, who
disdainfully pretending the rule of the spirit cast off all reading, and deride
the simplicity of these who follow the dead, and killing Letter (as they term
it) But I would know of them what spirit that is, by whose breathing they are
so lifted up, as to be bold to despise the Doctrine of the scriptures as
abject, and childish; if they answer, it is the spirit of Christ, that security
must be very ridiculous, for I believe they will grant the Apostles of Christ,
and others faithful in the primitive Church to have been illuminat by no other
Spirit; but none of these learned from it to contemn the word of God, but every
one of them had them rather in greater reverence; as their writings plainly
testify. And indeed so it was foretold by Isaiah, for when he says, my spirit
which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart
out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed for ever; he does not tie
the people of the Jews to an outward Doctrine, as if he taught them the first
principles, but rather, that it will be the true, and full felicity of the
Church in Christ's Kingdom, to be ruled no less by the voice, than spirit of
God. From whence we collect, that what are inviolably conjoined by the Prophet,
are most sacrilegiously separat by these Villans. And again Sect. 2. If any
spirit neglecting the Wisdom of God, bring any other Doctrine he is justly to
be suspected of vanity and of a lie. What when satan transfigureth himself into
an angel of light, what Authority shall the spirit have with us except it be
discerned by some sure Character? and he is clearly demonstrat to us by the
Voice of God, except these miserable men desire willingly to run into their own
Destruction, when they rather seek the spirit from themselves, than from the
spirit of God. But they pretend that it is unworthy that the spirit of God, to
whom all things are to be subjected, should be subjected to the scriptures, as
if it were ignominious to the Holy Ghost to be every where alike, and conform
to himself, and never diverse, indeed if it were tried by a humane, angelick or
any other Rule, he were to be corrected, or chastised (if ye will) but while it
is compared with it self, while it is considered in it self, who will then say
that there is injury done to it, and so it is brought to a Trial I confess,
but such a one, as that thereby he would manifest to us his Majesty, it ought
to be sufficient to us, as soon as the spirit manifests it self to us, but
lest the delusions of satan should creep in under the notion of the spirit of
God, he would have us know him in his image imprinted in the scripture, he is
the Author of the scriptures, he cannot be unlike, and diverse from himself,
whatever therefore he shows himself to be in the scriptures, such he must be
forever. That is no con^umely to him, except we judge it honor worthy to
forsake, and degenerat from it self. Much more to this purpose has the
Reverend and Judicious Author, with which he confounds these spiritual
Antichristians, as well these of our time, as of his own, and indeed if one
should read this Chapter, and not know the Author, he would presently conclude
that it had been written of direct purpose against the Quakers. Judge
therefore, Reader, if Robert Barclay had any ground to allege him as the
Patroniser of his Doctrine. The fourth Difference betwixt us and the Quakers
consists in this that we as^err, if there be a God in Heaven, the Books of the
Old and New Testament may be evinced to have proceeded from him even to the
silencing the most profligat, though sharp witted Atheists; if any such merit
this epithet, whereas on the other hand They deny any Characters of Divinity
ingraffed in the Word, as has already and shall yet more appear, and thus they
expose the jugular Vein of Christianity to the Heathens, and indeed the whole
tendency of all their writings, and discourse, is to decry, and vilify these
sacred Oracles, and though they deny this, to the end they may the better cheat
silly Souls, I care not, for out of their own mouths and Books they shall be
judged, and found guilty. These abominations are not committed in a Corner. It
can be made out by the unanimous consent of all the reformed Churches, which is
certainly sufficient in the case. But many other differences I could give, but
these may suffice for answer to the second Objection. From all which I
conclude, that between the extremes of the Papists Church, and the Quakers
Spirit, medius tutissimus ibit, the midway by resolving our faith ultimately in
the Scriptures, or in God speaking in them, is the safest way: And as two
extreme Vices never agree more in the nature of Vice, than when they reced most
from Virtue lying in the middle, and therefore seemingly or physically reced
from one another; so the greater odds that seem to be between Papists and
Quakers they are the more nearly relied in error: for the Papists have gone too
low, resolving their faith ultimately in men; the Quakers on the other hand,
attempting to go too high, have contracted a Vertigo, hence they Ixion-like
thinking to find the fair Juno of divine Revelation, but lighting upon a cloud
of their own brain, in stead thereof have procreat the strange Hippocentaurs of
their monstrous Doctrines; at which the World now admires, and is amazed.

5. Our Assertion, that the Scriptures are the adequate, complete, and primary,
or principal Rule of Faith, and Manners, we build on these following Arguments
and first,

That which was dictate, or given out by the ^^fallible God, and contains the
whole Counsel of God, may well serve to be our complete, and principal Rule;
but the Scriptures were given out, and dictate by the infallible God, and
contain the whole Counsel of God, ergo, they may well serve to be a complete,
and principal Rule. The Major is most evident, for what further certainty
either ought we, need we, or can we seek, for what we believe or do, then the
words of the most veracious, and unerring God? and no other thing can be
understood by a complete Rule, but that which contains all things to be
believed, or done. The Minor I prove by parts, and first, that the Scriptures
were given out, and dictat by God, is clear from 2 Timothy, 3.16. All Scriptures
are given by inspiration of God. 2 Pet. 1.21. Prophecy came not of old time, by
the will of man, but holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost. Moreover our Adversaries, at least the more learned, and cautious of
them have not yet adventured to deny it, but in words at least grant it. The
second part is no less evident from Act. 20.27. Where Paul says, that he had
not shunned to declare to his hearers all the Counsel of God, compared with
Chap. 26.22. where the same Apostle says, that he taught no other things than
those that were in Moses, and the Prophets: Hence it is clear, that even a part
of the Scriptures, and by a good consequence, all the Scriptures contain all
that God has willed us to believe, or do. The second Argument is,

That which was the principal Rule to the Jews, is the principal Rule to us.

But the Scriptures were the principal Rule to them.

Therefore, they must be the same to us.

The Major is Robert Barclay's; for which he pleads at large Apol. Cap. 2.
The Minor I prove thus, That from which the Jews might not swerve, to the right
hand, or to the left, and to the decision of which they were ultimately bound
to stand, in all Doubts and Controversies, and that upon highest pains, was the
principal Rule. But from Gods written Law, they were commanded not to swerve,
or stray to the Right hand, or left, and were bound ultimately to stand to its
Decision in all doubts, and Controversies, and that under highest pains:
Therefore to them it was the primary Rule; the Major Proposition is
incontrovertible, The Minor is proved from two most pregnant places of
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 5.31, 32. and 17, 9, 10, 11. In both which places by the Law
is to be understood, that which God gave unto the Jews by Moses in writing, as
is evident to any, that read the Texts. Which Texts have been egregiously
vindicat by our Divines writing against Bellarmin, and the rest of the
asserters of papal infallibility: with whose shifts I am certain all that the
Quakers can say will be found to co-incide. 2. This Minor Proposition is clear
from Is. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony: If they speak not according to
these, it is because there is no light in them. The first Shift that the
Quakers use to elude the force of this Scripture with, is, that by Law and
Testimony, is meaned the light within. So says Robert Barclay in both
Apology, and Vindication: but for this exposition we must take their word, for
none of them gives the least color of Reason for it: But that by this Law the
Scriptures are to be understood these following Texts evince, Exodus 32.15. and
34.29. Deuteronomy. 31.24, 26. 2 King. 22.8. Nehem, 8. v. 3, 8. Psalm. 78.5. Again God
commanded, that even the King himself (and consequently the rest of the people)
Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. Should live according to this written Law, to the end, be
might fear the Lord; under which all the Duties of Religion are ordinarily
comprehended. Now shall any be so stupid as to believe, when a doubt arose, that
the King was not bound to apply himself, to this written Law, for the
discussing thereof? or that, tho the Kings doubt had been most clearly
discussed by the Law, he was bound to wait for a miraculous Revelation from
Heaven to determine him? I say, who in his wit will believe this? yea, to think
so, is to deny the immutability of God. Moreover this is by far the more
frequent acceptance of the Word, Law or Testimony. Hence when the saving Work
of Grace is understood by the Word Law, there is something added, whereby we
may understand that the Word Law is to be taken in a more unusual acceptance,
as Romans 7.23. and 8.2. But we need say no more, for they sufficiently overthrow
this their Exposition, in that they give nothing for the proof thereof, except
it be their own most absurd Hypothesis. But Robert Barclay has yet another
shift: he grants that this place may be understood of the Scriptures, and
asserteth that this is only spoken to the Jews, and therefore that to them the
Scriptures were a more principal Rule, than to us; and that as they were to try
all things by the outward Law, so we are to try all in the first place by the
word within, and accuses his Antagonist of base disingenuity, for leaving out
these words in the first place: And grants only that the Scriptures were a
more principal Rule to the Jews, but denies that they were the primary Rule.
Ans. Whatever be understood by Law and Testimony in that place, whether it be
the Scriptures, or Spirit it must be the primary Rule, for to this Law they
were ultimately bound: for the Law and Testimony spoken of here, was the
ultimate, and Principal Rule, because whatever was spoken not according to
these was to be rejected, as the product of darkness. 2. It is evident that
this Law and Testimony, here spoken of is the absolutely principal, and
ultimate Rule, because to seek to it, is all one with seeking unto God: The
Text is, Let a people seek unto their God, viz. speaking in the Law and
Testimony, which is put for one and the same thing. Hence we see that this Law
and Testimony, here spoken of, was the absolutely principal Rule to the Jews.
In the third place, the Charge of disingenuity, that he lays to his
Adversary, is altogether groundless: for certainly he, or any man else of
Sense, and Reason, was bound to understand those words, In the first place, in
the one branch of the Parallel, as well as in the other, otherwise his Parallel
will not only hault, but prove wholly lame, and without sense; now seeing as I
think, he will not deny that his Adversary ought to suppose, he had to do with
a Man of sens^ and Reason, who dealt but rationally in understanding both
Branches of the Parallel to run alike He ought not thus to accuse him, but
sein^ he will have himself to be thus understood, to the end that he may evite
a self Contradiction, let u^ see if he have any advantage hereby: Now the (...)
why he makes his Parallel so manked, is that (...) may not be compelled to
grant the Scriptures, (...) have been the primary Rule to the Jews; and so this
he earnestly pleads: but if they were not a primary and principal Rule to
them, and so but a secondary Rule only, and yet have not such a high, and
principal place under the New Testament, as under the old, then they shall not
be so much as a secondary Rule to us, and therefore but a tertiary only. And if
this be not beside a Contradiction to the Quakers own concessions, who grant
the Scriptures to be a secondary Rule, a complex of most horrible impiety, most
wild and absurd nonsense that can readily be imagined, I leave to the whole
Christian World to judge: from which many other wild dottages clearly flow,
such as, The Spirit it self is but a secondary Rule, even although it be a Rule;
or else, that although the Church have a tertiary, yet it wants a secondary
Rule: with these and many other such horrid, and most nonsensical Consequences
is this Doctrine of the Quakers inseparably attended. And whereas in the last
place he requires proof, wherefore Mr. Brown rejects the version of the
Septuagint, we shall only refer him to solid Baillie in his Chronology, and
acute Voglesange in his Theological exerci^rations, where he will find the
Septuagint rejected with Reason enough. Thus far Robert Barclay.

George Keith, the other Champion of the Quakers, in hi^ Book against Mr. John
Alexander (falsely called Truth Defended, its true name being Truth depraved)
Page, 80, Shewet^ his cause to be mortally wounded, with the force of this
Scripture Argument, for he dare not expressly deny, that by Law and Testimony
the Scriptures are to be understood, and indeed he really grants it, in that
he adventureth not to handle any of the places of Scripture brought by Mr.
Alexander. for the proof thereof, and yet he detaineth the Truth captive, and
will not confess, that which he dare not deny. The shift which he uses is the
same with Robert Barclays second shift, vi^. That tho the Scriptures are in
this place to be understood by Law and Testimony, yet it will not follow that
they are the principal Rule, especially in Gospel times: which shift is the
same way removed, that Robert Barclays was. And here he essayeth to prove, that
people are sent to the Dictate, Word, or Light within, from 2 Pet. 1.19* Deuteronomy.
30.14. Romans 10.8. Ioh. 3.20, 21. John. 12.36. Which places make not a whi^ for
his purpose, yea diverse of them cut the Jugular Vein of Quakerism, as shall be
evinced in due time, He has moreover here a harangue, by which he would prove,
as it seems, that God and Christ dwell personally in Believers, as God
dwells in the humane Nature of Christ, which is most abominable and false,
and tho it were true, yet should make nothing for him; for God and Christ, can
only be said to dwell in Believers, whose Temples they only are. But if he
means that God dwells in Believers, only in respect of the habits of Grace,
implanted in their Souls, whereby they are enlightened, quickened, and upstirred
to believe, and practice the Doctrine contained in the Scriptures, then he
says nothing* for this indwelling, or God thus indwelling is not our
principal Rule of Faith, and Manners, but the chief Leader and efficient Cause
of Grace in the Soul. And thus this hodge-podge of most impertinent Words,
resolves at length into a direct begging of the Question.

Argument, 3d. Christ and his Apostles proved their Doctrine from the
Scriptures, referred their hearers unto them; for the final Decision of the
most grave, and weighty controversies, that ever arose in the world, and sent
all people unto them, as unto a sure and undeceiving Light, by the guidance of
which, we may pass through this dark World, and be kept from Hell in the
^lose; Ergo the Scriptures are the primary Rule. The Consequence is clear, if
we attend unto the Description of a primary Rule laid down above. The
Antecedent I prove from Math. 22.29, 31, 32. Ioh. 5.39. Act. 17.11. and 13*
from the 14. to 42. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. Luke 16.31. Our Adversaries like bats,
hateing, and striking at the Light, assault most of these Scriptures. And first
they endeavor to deprave, Matthew. 22.29. by telling us, that it will no more
follow, that the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith, and Manners than the Power
of God: yea the Power of God, say they, is rather the Rule, being that which
quickneth the Soul and Body; without which none can truly know the Scriptures,
thus talks George Keith, in Truth Defended Page 68. But this is only a roving
at pleasure without consideration, what be said, providing that the name of the
last speaker be obtained; for here he confounds the Rule with the power,
whereby we walk according to the Rule: Hence, as I admonished above, he
fights not against our Doctrine, but against the fiction of his confounding
brain; for whoever said, that Euclide cannot be a Rule, for Geometricians to
walk by, because it cannot instill a faculty of reason in an Idiot* without
which it cannot be understood? surely, he that should thus Reason, would be
accounted of all men most ridiculous. And yet no less ridiculous is this silly
sophister; for he reasons the same way. But that I may fully declare either
the profound stupidity or willful prejudice of this Quaker. I suppose that a
man in discourse with another about the Kings Power, ignorantly denies that
the King can do something, which by the Laws of the land he is allowed to do;
the other checks him thus, you err, not knowing the Laws of the Land, and the
power of the King; And then proves from the said Laws, that the King has
^ower to effect that which the other denied. Now should not any man, that
concluded from this man's discourse, that the power of the King is all one with
the Laws of the Land, or that the power of the King is our Rule in C^vils, no
less than the Laws of the Land are, expose himself to the scorn of all knowing
persons: And yet he inference of thi^ Quaker differs not a whit from such a
blockish Conclusion. Hence we may see, that these Men's design i^ not to speak
well, but to speak last. The next place is, Ioh. 5 39. To which Robert Barclay
Vind. Page 43. attempting to make answer, to the end that he may put it beyond
all doubt, that he is a devout Servant to his Holiness, and a true Roman
Catholic, stiffly asserteth, that the Word is to be taken in the indicative
mode, superciliously rejecting not only all the reformed, and Body of primitive
Interpreters, but also the very Jesuits themselves, in whom there is any spark
of Conscience, or Candor, who all understand it in the imperative mood, and
good Reason they have so to do, seeing the reading of the Scriptures is all
along through the whole Scriptures both commanded. Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19. Deuteronomy.
29.29. Exodus 13.9: Ios. 22.5. Deuteronomy. 6.8. and 11.18. Isa. 8.20. 1 Timothy 4.13.
with many others, and commended Deuteronomy. 33.10. Neh. 8.2, 3. Act. 17.11. and
18.24. 2 Timothy 3.15. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. Rev. 1.3. Besides many more, which are
sufficient to convince these men of palpable falsehood, and blasphemy. Moreover
there is sufficient ground from the Context, abundantly to make out our
exposition; for Christ appeals to the Scriptures, as sufficient to decide the
then present controversy betwixt him and the Jews, saying, These are they that
testify of me. Where he wills them to give heed to Moses writings in order
to the decision of the Controversy. v. 46. Had ye believed Moses, ye would have
believed me. But this subterfuge failing him, he has yet some others, which we
must also remove: he asks therefore in the next place, whether the words that
Christ spoke to the Jews, which are recorded in Scripture, were less binding to
them than the words spoken by Moses and the Prophets? If they were less
binding, (says he) then he overturneth his own tedious Reasonings, by which he
labors to prove that they are obligative, and also he must show how they are
binding now upon us; and if he say, they were binding to the Jews, because
spoken by Christ, his proof falls to the ground. Ans. 1. Perhaps he pleased
himself with this Argument, having racked his wit to invent sophistry, tho
blunt (as shall appear presently) whereby the more to delude his already deluded
admirers; But I am sure, to any rational man that is in earnest, it will not
have the weight of a Walnut: Nor trouble him much, even tho he were not in case
to answer it, seeing if this word be to be taken in the imperative mood, as we
have even now demonstrat, then it is as clear as the noon-sun, that Christ
sends the Jews to the Scriptures, for the ultimate decision of the greatest
Controversy in the World, upon which their one thing depended: Otherwise the
Jews might still have with good Reason replied, that this would not do the
turn, seeing the Scriptures themselves were but a secondary Rule, to be
subjected unto another, without the Determination of which, they could never
acq^iesce in the Scriptures decision, how clearly soever they speak for the one
party, and against ^he o^^er. I answer 2dly, that the words of Christ spoken
both before and at that time, were binding on the Jews, he having given
sufficient proofs of his Deity; Notwithstanding of which Christ refers them
to those Writings about the divinity of which they were beyond all doubting*
and had abundance of subjective, as well as objective certainty: To these, I
say, he refers them as the Principal Rule, and Test, whereby to determine
the great Controversy then in agitation: I say, in a Word that the words,
Christ and his Apostles spoke, and now recorded in Scriptures, were of
themselves no less binding on the Jews, than these spoken by Moses and the
Prophets, tho the Jews, throw their wilful ignorance, and prejudice, which was
their own great fault [the great Cause of which, was the neglect of the
Scriptures, which testify of Christ] did not believe the Divinity of the one,
as they did that of the other; hence one of the horns of this Dilemma is
broken, and his consequence a mere non sequitur. He here grants, that if
Christ's Doctrine ought to be tried by the Scriptures, then much more private
Enthusiasms: But denies, that it will hence follow, that the Scriptures are
the primary Rule, which I prove; for if the Doctrine of Christ be subject to
the Scriptures trial, then no man can deny, that even these things, which are
divine immediate Revelations, may be brought to the Scripture trial, that we may
know, whether they be divine or not, as well as the Jews ought to bring the
Doctrine of Christ to the Scriptures, that they might clearly see, whether it
was divine or not, seeing whatever can be said for exemption of these
Revelations from trial, with good ground; might be said for exeeming of the
Doctrine of Christ. Moreover by granting, that private Enthusiasms ought to be
tried by the Scripture, he yields all he was this whole time pleading for,
which was, that, it might be lawful to embrace any impulse, or suggestion,
which he thought was the Spirit of God, without further examination thereof.

The third Scripture* viz. Act. 17.11. is so clear, that our Adversaries can
find nothing wherewith to darken and deprave it. It is true, that Robert
Barclay, Vind. page 44. says, It is the same way answered as John 5.39.
Therefore I say, our meaning is the same way vin^icate. N^xt all his verbal
shif^s are wholly excluded here, seeing such an high commendation given by the
Spirit of God to these Bereans, ought to have no less weight with us than a
Command.

The next place assaulted by them is 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a more sure word of
prophecy etc. which place they will have to be understood of the Spirit, not ^f
the Scriptures; of which assertion, Robert Barclay page 26. gives this Reason,
that the Description or Narration of a thing, is not more sure than the hearing
or seeing of the same, and therefore the Scriptures, which are but a Narration,
and Description of such and such things, cannot be more sure than the sight or
hearing of the same. Hence he would infer, that the discovery, the Apostles
had made to them upon the mount were really surer, than the Scriptures, but not
so sure as the Spirit. George Keith, Truth Defended page 63. has a long
discourse, which resolves in this, that the Apostle is making a Comparison
between Gods outward Word to the Ear, and inw^rd to the Heart, which he says,
is more sure to a man, than Gods immediate speaking, if it be heard with the
outward ear. But such reasoning as this is as easily everthrown as invented:
for it presupposes that there cannot be immediate Revelation, where the
Testimony of the senses goes along; And so their spirit is an enemy to sense:
Otherwise why should this glorious vision made to the Apostles, of the Truth of
which they had divine, and infallible evidence, to whom God spoke as immediately
as to Moses on the Mount, be accounted uncertain, and suspected in respect of
the Spirit? 2. To talk at this rate is to presuppose, that wherever God
reveals himself unto any person, some other way, than by speaking into his
ear; that this Revelation brings along with it its own evidence, and
persuades the soul to embrace, and close with it, as divine, which is both
groundless, and therefore false and contrary to their own principles, who
assert, that unless the understanding be well disposed, Revelation, tho
immediate is not evident. 3. It insinuates, that the Apostle in this
comparison, gave out that one of the things compared, was in it self really
more uncertain than the other, which is most false, seeing considered in
themselves, both real immediate Revelation, and the Scriptures, have all
certainty possible, therefore this is only to be understood in respect of us,
to whom the Scriptures are more sure, in that they are less subject to be
counterfeited, or wrested by either the Devil, or our own sancy, than immediate
Revelations are. The Apostle has also his eye upon his Contrymen the Jews,
to whom he speaks, who tho they were now Christians, gave in special manner
credit to the old Testament, as Act 17.11. and else where. 4. Tho by this more
sure word of Prophecy were understood immediate Revelations, the advantage that
the Quakers could reap thereby could not be great: For this Word of Prophecy
being studied and attended to, is recommended to us by the Apostle, as that
whereby we may come to the genuine interpretation of the Scriptures: Hence it
will follow, even according to the Quakers exposition, that the Scriptures are
the principal Rule of our Faith* seeing that if any of the two be it, the Text
to be explained, much rather than the means or helps, whereby it is to be
explained, ought to have this Denomination; we have seen the invalidity of his
Reason, as also the small advantage, tho it had been valid. We shall in the next
place show, why by this more sure word of Prophecy, we understand the
Scriptures: And first, because any phrase of the like import (as for this (...)
a prophetic Word, or Word of Prophecy, it is not in all the Scripture beside,
for any thing I know, in so many syllables) such as the Prophets Luke 16.29.
Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20. The Law and the Prophets Math. 7.12. Are
always taken for the Scriptures, so that when any did utter such expressions,
but especially, while they discoursed of a guide in Faith and Manners, they
were still understood, as speaking of the Scriptures, who (I pray) ever
understood that phrase Luke 16.31. Moses and the Prophets any other way than
that Joh. 6.45. It is written in the Prophets. And indeed, if our Adversaries
were not e^^ronted and impudently bold, they would not adventure to cause a
phrase of Scripture to speak that, the contrare of which, at the first view it
proclaims. 2. Who but one that would adventure upon any thing, would make
this phrase, Word of Prophecy in the 19 v. to speak any other thing, than the
Prophecy of the Scriptures in the 20 verse, or simple Prophecy in the 21 verse,
seeing to do this, destroys the whole Connection of the Context. 3. The same is
evinced by the connection of this with the following Words, for the Apostle
gives his Reason in the 20 Verse, why in the 19 he had admonished to study the
Scriptures, viz. that unless they diligently search, and study them, they
would be ready to miss the genuine, and fall into a private meaning of the
Scriptures, that is one which the Scriptures, if well attended to, would not
yield. 4. The same is evinced from the general commendation given by the Spirit
of God to the searchers of, or attenders to the Scriptures. as Isa. 8.20. Ioh.
5.39. Act. 17.11. With many other places, which are sufficient Commentaries to
this Text: Whereas on the other hand, these our Adversaries, no less void of
Reason, then fraughted with audacity, cannot bring one Text commanding us to
search or take heed to the Light within: Add to all this, that these our
Antagonists contradict the stream of Orthodox Writers; upon this place, who all
give their joint suffrage unto our exposition, as Luther, Calvin, Bullinger,
Christophorus Imlerus, Beza, the Dutch Divines, who give the same gloss with
us, yea I dare averr with Confidence, that if we except some old Montanists,
Cataphrygians, or the like ancient Enthusiasts, or of later times, the
Munserians, or such Libertines, none hitherto expone this place as the Quakers
do; But we must yield to them, for, Hi soli sapiunt, alii velut umbra vagantur;
Doubtless they are the Men, and Wisdom shall die with them: But I leave them to
grapple with their Brother, William Pen, who in his Rejoinder before cited,
page 334. yields unto us that which they so stiffly deny. viz. that by the
More sure word of Prophecy the Scriptures are to be understood, and I pass on
to the vindication of Luke 16.31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. Rob: Barclay in
opposition to Mr: Broun, Vind. page 39.40. reasoning from this place that the
Scriptures are the principal Rule of Faith, says, first, That it will not
follow from the Scriptures being more sure, than the Testimony of one risen
from the dead, that therefore they are more sure than the Testimony of the
Spirit. I Ans. Let him once prove, that every Man has such a Spirit, as
Quakers do allege, and then let the Spirit go hand in hand with the
Scriptures; but this he shall never be able to do. 2. This will follow, that
Moses and the Prophets were a Rule to the Church at that time, Yea even the
primarie Rule, otherways might not Abraham have said, The Spirit of God
directs every man immediately, If they hear not him, they will hear none else,
but this he said not: Therefore Abraham (or rather Christ in the Parable)
judged the Scriptures the principal Rule on Earth. As for what he says
concerning the Scriptures, being a principal Rule to the Jews only, is nothing
to the purpose, unless he prove that they are not so to us, which if he has
done, we have seen above, 3. Certainly the voice of one of the glorified
Spirits, coming from Heaven, where they behold the face of God, is no less to
be accounted immediate Revelation, than the voice of the High Priest unto the
People, when he came out from the Holy of Holies, which in the Quakers account
was immediate Revelation: But the Quakers can make what they will to be Divine
Revelation. To the end that this may more fully appear, we shall consider a
passage in his Apology, page 4. where he makes an Objection, viz. That after
the Dispensation of the Law, Gods Method of Speaking was altered. To which he
answers, that Gods speaking was immediate always to the Jews, in that it was
immediate always to the High. Priest, from between the Cherubims. To which I
Reply, This Answer is strange, In that he says, The mind of God revealed by
the High Priest unto the People, was to them immediate Revelation, for
certainly a thing delivered from one person to another, by the hand of a third,
comes unto that person by the hand of another, which other must either be a
Medium or Midss, or else, he must say that three make but two, which is a
ridiculous Contradiction. 2. We say that even according to the Quakers
principles Gods way of revealing himself to us now is as immediate as it was to
the Jews, because we have these that were inspired by God speaking unto us,
though dead: hence they have no reason to go about to prove the Scriptures, not
to be the principal Rule of Faith on this account, that they are not immediate
Revelation, for that which they contend to have been immediate Revelation, was
no more immediate than the Scriptures.

My fourth Argument I draw from. 2 Timothy 3.15. And that from a Child thou have
known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise through Faith unto
Salvation.

From which place, I thus Reason.

That which is able to make such an one as Timothy, called the Man of God v 17.
Wise through Faith unto Salvation, must be a sufficient Rule of Direction, to
guide us in our Christian Course.

But the Scriptures are able to make Timothy, or the Man of God wise unto
Salvation; Therefore they are a sufficient Rule, or Directory to guide u^ in
our Christian Course: And here it may be observed, that R. B. Vind, page 40,
41. is so pressed with the force of this Argument, that he can find no better
off-come, but to challenge his Adversary as guilty of perversion of Scriptures,
because he compared the 15 and 17 verse^ together, saying, that the Scriptures
were abl^ to make the man of God perfect. But to challenge a man for
perversion, upon such a ground as this, is an evident token of too much
perverseness; for if he had but looked unto the 15 verse, he might have seen,
they are said to be (...), able to make Timothy, which was a Man of God, wise
through Faith unto Salvation, where there is an ability or sufficiency in some
kind of Cause ascribed to the Scriptures. Now no other sort of ability or
sufficiency can be imagined, if it be not that of a Rule, or causae Exemplaris
seu directivae, for Faith is added as the instrumental Cause; or as the
apprehender; Hence I evidently infer, that the Scriptures are the adequate and
primary Rule, for if there were some things to be believed and practiced, not
contained in the Scripture, or if the Scriptures were subject to another Test
or Rule to be examined thereby, without which other Tests or Rules, we might be
deceived and misled, then the Scriptures could not in truth be called able to
make the Man of God wise through Faith unto Salvation. But we need not insist,
for how clear soever the matter be, little Justice, Truth, or fair dealing is
to be expected at the hands of those who call Scriptures compared, Scriptures
perverted, and deny that as false, the Truth of which themselves cannot but
see: for I query, what difference can be imagined between these two phrases,
able to make Timothy, which was a man of God, wise unto Salvation, and able to
make the Man of God perfect: To abuse the Scriptures at this rate, I think is
gross and impious enough, and yet no better all along does this Author treat
them: Of which a pregnant Example follows, for Vind. page 41. in opposition
to Mr. Brown, proving the sufficiency, and perfection of the Scriptures from
Ioh. 20.31. 2 Cor. 3, 14. Psalm. 119.70. He says, that from this Doctrine, it
would follow, that all Bo^ks written after such a time were superfluous. If
this answer be sufficient, many a superfluity there shall be in Scripture, for
if the writing of a Book after there are so many written as contain all things
necessary for Faith and practice, (if we say) the writing of another Book,
which may be either explicative of the Books before written, or contain many
things for the been esse of a Christian, be superfluous, how much more then
shall the repetition of the same things, in the same words, and the same method
be superfluous? but according to him the former is true: well then the Quakers
Conclusions are, that the scriptures are Battologies. Lastly, (for we love
rather to plead by the weight, than by the multitude of Arguments) we evince
that the Scriptures are a complete, adequate, and primary Rule of Faith, and
manners; by the Testimony of our Adversaries themselves: And first, that they
are an adequat and complete Rule is granted by R. B. who Vind. page 36.
speaks thus, next he carps at my saying, the chief Doctrines of Christianity,
are contained in the Scriptures, asking where we may find the whole Doctrine of
the Christian Faith? I answer freely, In the Scripture. And again R. B* and
George Keith with joint suffrages grant, that the Scriptures are a full enough
Declaration of all Doctrines, and principles both essential and integral of the
Christian Religion. Quak. confirm: (or rather self confuted) page 38. Behold,
Reader, thou have our Adversaries granting to their own Contradiction all we
plead for. The other Branch (viz.) that they are the Primary Rule, our
Adversaries themselves also at unawares grant, for Rob: Barclay, in his second
These, says, that the Spirit is not to be subjected to the outward Testimony
of the Scriptures as a more noble Rule, where it is clear that according to him
the Spirit may be subjected to the Scriptures, tho not as to a more noble and
certain Rule. Now this being granted, the Cause is yielded, for it is certain
that a primary rule is in no case to be subjected unto its secondary, or the
Rule which is ruled by it. For I think the Acts of Parliament are not at all to
be subjected to these of an inferior Court. Now if the Quakers would hold by
this, and grant that a man swerveth not from his duty, tho he subject all
suggestions, and motions to the Scriptures as a sure Trial, and Test thereof,
let them call it a more noble Rule, or what they will, they might the more
easily be born with. But it is evident, by their pleading for the Spirit as
their primarie Rule, that they will in no Case subject their impulses and
Motions to the Scriptures. Our Adversaries grant also, That the Scriptures have
proceeded from God, and therefore infallible. Now I hope that which is
infallible, needs not be subjected unto, and tried by a more sure Rule; for
more sure than infallible, is impossible. I know nothing they can say, except
that which G. K. said on the stage at Aberdeen, That we may beguile our selves
with them, (viz.) by interpretation thereof. To which I answer, That the
effective illumination of the Spirit of God, is sufficient to secure us from
this hazard, which is no more objective Revelation than the Eye Salve is the
Sun.

6. But our Adversaries soon repenting of their Liberality, endeavor to
overthrow all their own Concessions, and to prove that the Scriptures are
neither an Adequate, nor Primarie Rule* some of their Objections we shall name,
that the Reader may Judge of the rest: And first they Object out of Bellarmine,
de Certitudine Just. That the Scriptures cannot show unto a man, that he has
true Faith; for, (say they as the Jesuit did before them) Such a man's Name is
not in all the Word of God: For although the Scriptures contain the true marks of
Faith; who shall persuade me that I have these Marks? that I believe? that I
obey? Thus R. B. reasoned in his Apology; To which his Antagonist answers,
'That it is no less absurd to say, that this is the work of a Rule, than for R.
B. Supposing that he had killed a man, to deny that the Law could put him to
death, because no Law says, that R. B. has killed a man; or to deny that he
is a Quaker, because the Law says no such thing of him in particular. To
which he replyeth, Vind. page 45.46. That such examples are poor Arguments, and
miserably halt, for R. B. says he, his Confessing himself to be a Quaker, and
acknowledging every one of their Doctrines, is enough to prove him one in the
sense of the Law of the Land, and the Judge is to condemn him as a Murderer, if
convict by witnesses, that he really did the dead, and both these relate to
outward things, which can be proven by outward Testimonies; for without the
certainty of the evidence, the Judge cannot pronounce his Sentence: But is a
man's own confessing or affirming that he has the true Ma^ks of Faith, enough
to prove he has them? and what are the Witnesses, (to apply the examples of
committing of Murder) by which a man shall know he has these Marks? and who
shall examine the witnesses? and judge of the certainty, and clearness of their
Evidence? must it be the man that is accused? who uses that method? Ans. 1.
Both Doctrine and proof he has learned from his old friend Bellarmin, who de
Cert. Just. calls the same Sophism a Theological demonstration, contradicting
not only the Scriptures, but diverse of the Papists themselves, as Amesius
shows: Bellarmin also accounts this Inspiration of the Quakers, the only
way whereby a man can be firmlie assured of his having Faith, or that he shall
have Salvation. And therefore appropriateth it to St. Francis, and St. Galla,
and the like, which dottage is sufficiently refuted, exploded, and derided by
Ames, and others, who have undertaken the Refutation of Bellarmin. Hence we may
see, that if there be a Jesuit more opposite to the Reformed than another, with
him he joyneth hands, He is therefore to be accounted amongst the grossest of
Jesuits, and these his Romish Cavills are to be neglected, being an hundred
times sufficiently enervate by our Divines in their Writings against Papists,
especially in their answers to Bellarmin, out of whose Quiver he has stolen
this long ago blunted weapon. 2. The task incumbent to him was to evince, that
it belongs properly to the Rule of Faith; to tell a Man. v. c. John or James
in particular, that he has true faith, whatever therefore he says besides
this, is besides the purpose. But 3. ex abundanti, The bare and simple
Profession of Quakerism will no more prove one to be a Quaker in earnest, than
the simple Profession that one has Faith, will prove him to have it indeed;
Seeing a man may profess himself to be a Quaker, and yet be a Jesuit, providing
there be any difference between them: there is therefore more required, viz,
that for any thing Men can know, such a man lives according to the principle
of the party, and no more is necessary for the begetting a Judgment of
Charity, than that a man profess the principles of Christianity, and Seriously,
for any thing Men can know, practice accordingly; but no infallible Evidences
that another has true Faith, are any ways necessary; but only Moral Rational
Grounds of certainty, those may be had; As for the other viz. infallible
Evidences, those are only necessar to ones self, and these they may h^ve by the
Scripture applied in Christian prudence and Spiritual Wisdom, the Scriptures
themselves being the Rule whereby to make the Examen, or Search. Is. 8.20. Ioh.
5.39. Act. 17.11. 2. Tim. 3.15. 16, 17.2 Pet. 1.19, 20. And the enlightened
Conscience, the Judge, the Spirit of Adoption, or a filial Disposition,
inclining the Believer to come to God; as a Child unto a Father, with both
great Confidence, and Reverence, together with the renewed Spirit of the
Believer himself. Romans 8.15, 16, the witnesses. Hence his ant^-christian
Cavills fall to the ground, and the similies no more halt; the other Examples
brought for the illustration of any Matter, for all similes halt in some
respect, otherwise they should not be similies, but the same; and to think the
similies here used cannot hold, because both Judge, and witnesses, are inward
in the matter, illustrated by these Similies, is not only without, but against
Reason; For even as the one thing being outward, and to be proved to others,
not to the Murderer himself, who knows it well enough, requires an outward
Judge, and outward witnesses; So the other thing being inward, the infallible
Testimony of which, the Person himself stands only in need of, requires
inward Judge, and inward Witnesses.

7. The same Author has another Objection prosecuted at large in his Apology,
and abbreviated in his Abridgement; falsely called his Vindication* Page 44.45.
which is, that there are many things that the Scriptures cannot determine, as
particular individual Actions; to which Mr: Broun had answered, that general
Rules were enough, leaving the rest to Christian prudence, and Wisdom, and also
that there should be need of a particular Rev^lalation for every particular
Action, as Eating, Drinking, etc. Yea every particular Word. This Consequence
he denies, saying, that from Spiritual to Natural Actions, the necessity of
this Revelation will not follow. I answer first, The Consequence which he
denied he proves himself, for the Reason why Spiritual Actions need particular
inspirations, is because of their being either Sin, or Duty, that they may know
how to give Spiritual Worship, and leave Carnal Worship, but this Reason he
grants to stretch it self to natural Actions, saying, if he say, those natural
Acts under some Circumstances may be sin, or duty, I confess then the
Revelation of the Spirit is needful. Therefore if particular Immediate
Revelations be necessary for the performances of Spiritual Actions, they are
also necessary for the performance of Civil, or Natural Actions, seeing there
is nothing more sure, than that every individual Action is so Circumstantiat as
to become either Sin or Duty. 2. Who was ever so absurd, and ridiculous as to
deny that any System, as for example, of Mathematics, or Military Discipline,
is a perfect Rule to guide any Mathematician, or Soldier, upon this account,
that those Books comprehend not the Names of all Mathematicians, and Soldiers,
that ever should exist, with all their particular Actions, and the
Circumstances thereof? I am sure that such a one should be esteemed by all Men
to have lost his Wits: and yet no better than such are the Quakers Achillean
Arguments. Next he pleases himself in reckoning up some differences amongst
Ministers: As for example, those called Remonstrants, and public
Resolutioners, and hence would infer the Insufficiency of the Scriptures, for
decision of Controversies, and this he thinks so strong, that he requires a
particular answer to it, least (Says he) he, viz. Mr. Brown be said to leap
where he cannot step. Ans. If this do any thing it will overdo, seeing he dare
not deny, that both Paul and Barnabas had immediate Objective Revelations, who
notwithstanding grew so hot in their Contention. Act. 15. that they parted one
from another, of whose meeting again we hear not in all the Scriptures. But he
labors so to fix that upon the Scriptures, with which the Corruption of men is
only to be Charged, that he wounds himself while he thrusts at his
Adversary, seeing if this Reason be Valid, Objective Revelation is no more a
sufficient Rule than the Scriptures: as this Instance of the division of Paul
and Barnabas evinceth. Beside these, the Quakers have a heap of Topics, to
prove the Scriptures not a perfect Rule, such as, they cannot be a Rule to deaf
persons, therefore they cannot be a rule to those that hear; and most men know
not the Original Tongues. Ergo say they, the Scriptures cannot be a complete
Rule. They object also, the variety of Readings, Interpretations, and the like,
which they have scraped out of Bellarmin and his brethren, and therefore
deserve no more answer than what has been given to them. William Pen in his
Rejoinder, Part 1. Chap. 5. has this Objection, the Scriptures cannot try, and
examine particular Motions, and Prophesies, saying, that Paul Act. 16. reproved
not the Spirit of Divination, which possessed that (...) Philippi, from the
Scriptures; therefore they cannot be a Rule of Faith, and Life. But I deny the
Antecedent, for had James Nailor but brought that particular Motion, whereby he
was prompted to receive Divine Worship, to Scripture trial, he might have found
his Spirit to have been the father of (...), and Arch-deceiver of Mankind: but
as the Papists to cover the rest of their abominations, have invented one
greater, and more dangerous than them all, that is their Churches
infallibility, So this Spirit of the Quakers, knowing that upon Trial, he will
be found a Counterfeit, has taken the Council given by Alcibiades to Pericles,
that is, to study how he may secure himself from the hazard of a Trial. Hence
these men are in all probability beyond the reach of a Conviction, but the many
Instances, not only of other Antiscript^rians, but even of themselves, who have
been most pitifully and palpably acted by the Devil, whom they notwithstanding
took for God, might teach them at length, to suspect their Spirit, and try
before they trust. As for the Prophesies of future Events, they may well be
brought to the Scripture Test, to the end we may know whether the thing
Prophesied may be expected, without contradicting the Scriptures, as for Paul's
reproof of the Spirit of Divination, it is most irrationally Objected, Seeing
Paul was immediately Inspired, and a Writer of Scripture himself. 2^y. This
Action was most Consonant to Scripture, being abundantly warranted by that
promise of Christ Matthew: 10, to his Apostles, that they should cast out Devils.

They use also many Arguments against the Scriptures being the principal Rule,
of which the Chief and Ground of almost all the rest (with which they stand and
fall, and therefore meriteth particular Consideration) is this, the Scriptures
are not the Fountain it self, but a declaration of the Fountain; therefore they
are not to be accounted the principal Original of all Truth, and Knowledge, nor
the adequat Primary Rule of Faith and Manners, thus reasoned Rob: Barclay in
his Appology. This consequence is by his adversary judged a Demonstration of
the Authors folly, page 57. as being altogether ridiculous, saying, who ever
dreamed that the Scriptures were God, or the Spirit of God? To which (...)
Barclay, Vind. page 37. thus Replyeth, he says, I come nearer to the Core of
my design, which is to set up Enthusiasms, in affirming, that the Scriptures
are not the Fountain, but a Declaration of the Fountain, and yet the Man,
within three or four lines, confesses it himself, ascribing it to my folly, to
dream any man thinks so; (thus ^e goes backward and forward) which he
illustrateth by the Example of Laws, But if it be so, are not they to be
blamed, that account them the principal Original of all Truth and Knowledge?
whither the other branch of my deduction follows from this: That they are not
to be accounted the primary Rule of Faith and Manners, will appear when the
Arguments and Objections relating to that, come particularly to be mentioned;
and whereas he thinks this is absurd, and not making for my Design, because God
Himself is the Fountain, and yet not the Rule, he mistakes the matter as urged
by me: For I argue, that the Scriptures are not the Original Ground of
Knowledge, but God, not simply considered, but as manifesting himself in divine
immediate Revelations in the hearts of his children, which being the new
Covenants Dispensation, is the primary and adequate Rule of Christians: For I
was never so absurd as to call God simply considered, or the Spirit of God, (in
abstracto) not as imprinting Truths to be believed, and obeyed in men's hearts,
not contrary but according to Scripture (for he cannot contradict himself) the
Rule of Christians, and this may serve to answer all his Cavills upon this
Theme. Thus he. Answer, in his Apol. he thus reasoned, the Scriptures are not
the Fountain, but a Declaration of the Fountain, therefore they are not the
principal original of all Truth, nor the adequate or primary Rule of Faith. Now
this Argumentation, which is all one with, fallacia plurium interrogationum,
has a consequent made up of two parts, and therefore there are to be
considered here two consequences, of which the first, or the consequence as to
the first part of the inference his adversary calls a demonstration of the
Authors folly, as proving that which never man denied, viz. that the Scriptures
are not God himself: I add that this is also a demonstration of his Malice, for
in this his ridiculous argumentation he would persuade the world, that the
Reformed Churches (for against them in that place he bends his weapons)
assert, that the Scriptures are God himself: Upon this account I say his
Adversary accuses him of folly; now in stead of a better offcoming, he gives
out that his adversary first denied his Antecedent, and then again presently
confessed it; whereas he never impugned the Antecedent, but blames him for his
consequence, of which (as we have already said) the first part is very
ridiculous, proving the thing that never one denied; and malicious, belieing
the whole Reformed Churches, and the second part, viz. Because the Scriptures
are not the Fountain, therefore they are not the adequat and primary Rule of
Faith, a Rope of sand. The coherence of which will be made out ad Calendas
Graecas. He says, that the second Branch of his Deduction will appear, when
the Arguments, and objections relating to that, come particularly to be
mentioned, which is nothing to the purpose in hand; for unless he prove, that
the Scriptures are not the primary and adequate Rule of Faith from this one
Topic, that they are not the Fountain, but a Declaration thereof, the argument
is gone. Hence all this wrangling is but a further proof of his Weakness and
Malice. In his following Words, he confounds the Principal Rule, and the
Original Ground together, which are things most distinct; and therefore these
words are altogether void of good sense, or at best they are ridiculous, in
that they speak nothing to the purpose: For he might well have known, if he had
pleased, that by the Primary Rule, is understood that which is now among the
hands of Christians, according to which they ought to examine ultimately all
sort of Doctrines, and opinions of men, or yet suggestions from within
concerning divine things, and reject, or receive as they disagree, or agree
with this Rule. If in this sense, he had understood the primary Rule, he had
not given such mysterious Niceties. But the Question is not, if God be greater
than the Scriptures? for as man is above the word of a man, so is he above
them; But the Question is, whether or not the Scriptures contain all things
necessary in order to Faith, and practice, and whether or not we ought to see
that every Doctrine we embrace be according to them? and if swerving from them
we ought to reject it, tho an Angel from Heaven should teach it? Thus we
understand the primary Rule; and while he does not so, he but mistaketh the
Question. 2. This Acyrology, or improper speech, to call a person a Rule, is a
grand inductive of Confusion, for who ever called a teacher a Rule, for only
the dictats taught are the Rule. Here we see that these new Teachers are
contrary to all men, in their acceptations of Words as well as in Doctrines.
But whereas he says, that he was never so absurd as to call the Spirit of
God, simply, or in abstracto a Rule, but as he imprints Truths in the hearts of
Believers, he does not answer these things which he calls Cavills; for these
Rules imprinted in the Soul, are not God, under what notion soever he be taken:
a Declaration of the Fountain, is not the fountain it self. Hence the Quakers
grand principle that immediate objective Revelations, are the primary Rule of
their Faith, falls to the Ground, and these imprinted Rules are but only
secondary: Ergo even according to what is here gained from the Quakers, the
Scriptures are equal even in their primariness, to immediate Revelations, for
the one can no more be called the primary Rule, than the other, and that by the
Quaker his own Concession. Moreover seeing these immediate Revelations, imprinted
on the Soul, are not the primary but secondary Rule, then certainly they ought
to be examined according to the primary Rule. Now to assert this is most
impious: Seeing these Revelations must be supposed to be self evident, and their
Divinity already undoubtedly apparent. For this is to maintain that we ought to
doubt whether or not there is veracity in God, and (horresco referens) Judge,
that the God of Truth may prove the liar, and deceive us. But once more, how
shall these imprinted secondary Rules be examined! not by other words or dictats
of whatsoever kind, for to do this will cost the examiner a journey to in
finitum, to which he will not come in haste, seeing these other Dictats or
Revelations are not the Fountain, but a Declaration of the Fountain, more than
the first; and to assert, that these Revelations may be examined according to
God himself, and not by the Word of God, is to go some stages beyond the
wildest of nonsense, and again there is very good Reason to wonder, why any
Revelation should be more primary than the Scriptures, both being given by the
same Spirit, seeing the primarinesse is not the immediatness, but the chief
binding power, and the prerogative to be the touchstone of all Doctrines. Now
this notion of a primary Rule being had, there is very good Reason to wonder,
why the Dictats of the Spirit should be preferred before the Scriptures, seeing
God has told, (whether mediatly or immediately, it is all one: the Quakers
themselves dare not deny that God has indeed said it) that they are able to
make the Man of God wise unto salvation 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. And has commanded,
and commended the perusal of them, as the Book in the determination of which we
ought finally, and surely to rest, in the matters of greatest import, Isai.
8.20. Ioh. 5.39. Act. 17.11. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. With many other places. But on
the other hand in all the Scriptures there is not so much as the least
intimation that all persons within the Church, and fa^ less all men, have
divine immediate, Objective Revelations, by which they may examine, and discern
good from evil, and here he is very angry with his adversary, because he
accused him of confounding in his Apology, the principal Rule, and the
principal Leader, and yet as though he had not confounded them completely
enough in his Apology, he here again in his Vindication in one and the same
page viz. 38. both calls the Spirit, as imprinting Truths into the Soul, the
primary Rule, as was even now cited: and also the same Spirit the principal
Leader, as imprinting Rules into the Soul, to walk by, by which Rules must be
understood the Truths he spoke of just now above here the Reader may see, that
not only the same thing is both Principal Leader, and principal Rule, but also
that there is not so much as a Metaphysical formality betwixt them, for both of
them is God under the notion of imprinting Rules or Truths, into the soul, yet
the confidence (I shall not say the impudence) has he to deny that he
confounded them.

8. But the Quakers well knowing, that if God speaking in the Holy Scriptures,
be admitted Judge of the present Debates between us and them, Or if the Holy
Scriptures be not Esteemed False, Ambiguous, and Nonsensical, then their cause
is lost, and their great Diana of Immediate Revelations, and the rest of their
Monstrous, and Impious Doctrine falls to the ground, they assert with the
Papists, that the Spirit of God Speaking in the Scriptures is not his own
Interpreter, and so bereave the Scriptures of that which is the Soul, Sense,
and Marrow thereof, denying all Scripture Interpretation, though never so
Genuine and Clear, except they have Immediate Objective Revelation, to tell them
that such a Meaning is true: Hence they say, they may very well reject all our
Interpretations, and Consequences of Scripture, seeing we do not pretend to the
Spirit that gave forth the Scripture, but declare our selves Enemies to it:
Thus replyeth George Keith to Mr. John Alexander. Truths Def. Chap. 8. Behold,
Reader, the grossest of Popish Shift^^ to defend the grossest of Popish
Doctrine; for the Papists still say, that we can know nothing Certainly,
because we reject their Doctrine of Infallibility, and just so do the Quakers,
maliciously belying the whole Reformed Churches, Impiously crying out that they
are Enemies to the Spirit of God, and that because we examine all Doctrines and
Practices by the written Word of God. Hence we find that the Spirit the Quakers
pretend to, is Diametrically opposite to the Scriptures, and therefore the
Spirit of Lies, and Delusion; at this they are enraged, and cannot away with
it, Nam trepidant immisso lumine manes. Hence William Pen thus speaks, Rej.
Page 72. Let them show me that Scripture, that plainly and uninterpretatly
tells me such a proposition is true, and such a One is false, that only
consists of their additional Meanings; such a new Nicknamed People Right, and
such wrong, and they do their business; If they cannot, as it is impossible they
should, they must have recourse to some thing else to Rule, and Determine, and
what can that be besides that Eternal Spirit. Thou see, Judicious Reader,
that according to the Quakers, God speaking in the Scriptures cannot tell us
what is true, or what is false, who are Right, or who are Wrong; of the same
Nature is that which the Quakers have in their Queries to Mr. John Alexander,
in which they often require an Answer to be given in plain words of Scripture,
and in particular Querie 10. They have these Words. We (say they) expect plain
Scriptures from you for this, without any Shuffling, Meanings, Consequences, or
else never pretend Scripture Rule more; but acknowledge that it has been your
Meanings, and Consequences which have been your Rule; Hence according to this
Doctrine our Savior labored but in vain, when he proved the resurrection of
the Dead from the Scriptures; Matthew. 22.31, 32. for the Sadducees might have
answered, that such express words were not in the Pentateuch, viz. That the
dead should rise again, and therefore they were not bound to believe it, tho
the inference were never so clear, except they had a new immediate Revelation,
which they might have said we have not, and who could have proved the contrary;
yea, if this Doctrine be true, a man does not sin, tho he worship the
Crocodile, Ibis, Dog or Cat with the old Egyptians; yea, a man may believe, or
do whatever comes into his brain, for no where in the Scripture is any man in
particular, as for Example, Robert, Anthony, or Christopher forbidden, or
commanded to do any thing. According to this principle also, they deny all
Means, and helps for expounding of the Scriptures, all Commentaries and
Expositions, witness amongst others these words of Geo: Fox in his Primmar to
Europe. Page 37. What are the Means of searching out the meaning of the
Scriptures? one whereof you say is a Logical Analysis, and what is a Logical
Analysis of the Scriptures? and Robert B. Vind. Page 29. Impiously denies,
that the Holy Ghost is a Distinct Person of the Trinity, and that upon this
ground, because as he says, these Words are not found expressly in Scripture;
The same way Rob: B. in his Apology understands that place 1 John. 2.27.
(...), or as the words at the first sound, and without any explication, or
clearing of them, argumenteth from them; He that has an Anointing abiding in
him, teaching him all things, so that he needs no man to teach him, has an
inward and immediate Teacher, and has some things inwardly, and immediately
revealed unto him. The same way also he understands and expounds Jer.
31.34. So that whatever they say, or can say, to liberate their Doctrine of
this most weighty, but just Charge, they shall only twist Contradictions the
faster. And suitable to this Doctrine i^ the Practice of Quakers, who
notwithstanding that they Endeavor to persuade the World, that they are
Illuminat, as the Prophets and Apostles were, yes, if not more; have never yet,
for any thing I can learn, benefited the Church by commenting upon any one Book
of Scripture, but account all Commentaries and such Treaties useless, and
unworthy, except by detorting of them, to find out some thing opposite to the
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches. Now certainly if these men be so Illuminat,
as they would bear us in hand, there can be no reason Alleged, whey they
benefit not the World, by illustrating the Scriptures, with clear Commentaries,
and such Helps as may be most (...) for understanding thereof, if it be not
that they either Envy the World of such a Good, which I think they will not
say, Or else that all such Help; are superfluous. And indeed this they stick
not to say, publishing to the World in Print, that all Catechetical Doctrine
and ^nstruction is the Doctrine of Antichrist, and learned from Papists; yea
the very Scriptures themselves they call by way of De^raction the Letter in by
Divinity, and worse. Add to all this, their Doctrine of silent waiting, their
railing against studied Sermons, and explications of Scripture. And that in all
their Pamphlets they use not to exhort men to search the Scriptures, according
to the Example of Christ Jesus; but in stead thereof, the Light within. These
and many other things which might be said, sufficiently evince, that this their
Revelation or new Light, is unto them in place of Commentaries, Catechism^, or
any other Helps for understanding the Scriptures; yea and the Scriptures
themselves: So that this one Darling of theirs, renders all others needless:
Moreover, they deny with the old Manichees, that any part of the old Testament
is binding upon us, and as for the N. T. William Pen says, that the far
greater part thereof is altogether lost, and sticks not to say, that without
their Spirit, we have no more certainty of the Scriptures than of the Popish
Legends. Add to all this, that this Doctrine of the Quakers, viz. That the
Scriptures are not the principal Rule of Faith, and manners, or chief Judge of
Controversies, is downright Popish, and (as good reason they should be) both
their Arguments to prove it, and their Answers to our Arguments against it,
altogether Coincide with those of the Romanists, which might easily be
illustrat in every particular; Some Examples we have given already, to those we
may ad one other viz. Rev. 22.18. From which place we usually reason, that the
Canon of the Scriptures is completed; to which place the Papists answer, that
this prohibition is only to be understood of the book of the Revelation alone,
and that it will no more follow from this place, that Traditions ought not to
be added to the Scriptures, as a part of the rule of Faith and Manners, then it
will follow from Deuteronomy. 4.2. That the Prophets and Apostles were to write no
Scriptures afterward; To this purpose may Bellarmin answer and the rest of the
Jesuits. The same way directly answers Robert Barclay (as these may do with
the like support of their cause) both in his Apology, and Vindication; and
when Mr. Broun tells him* that this as all the rest is a Popish shift; He
replies Vind. page 35. in these words, what then, I could tell him an hundred
Arguments used by him, which the Papists also use against us; will he say it
follows they are invalid. But how pitiful and shameful this shift is, none see
not; for can he say, that his Adversary had an hundred Arguments common to him
with Papists, tending to the overthrow of the Doctrine of the reformed
Churches, which they hold in opposition to papists, either this he must say,
otherwise he only discovers a desperate Cause, and an Effronted Defender;
For certainly there are Arguments common to both us and the Papists, by which
we defend the Truth of the Christian Religion in opposition to Heathens, and
Jews, yet none except he that is altogether careless of what he says, or that
minds to infer Quidlibet ex quolibet (as they say) will affirm, that
Protestants are Papists, or Papists Protestants upon that account. Hence it is
clear, that as there is not the least shadow of a Difference between Papists
and Quakers in this point, so this Quaker is conscious of it, seeing, he could
not but know that if this shift did him any Service, to distinguish him from a
Papist, It will no less distinguish a Papist from himself, and prove him to be
no Papist; So we see that the very shifts that these men use, under the covert
of which they may Lu^k, contribut only to the more clear Detection and
Discovery of their wickedness, in promoting what they can this downright Popish
Doctrine, and gross Hypocrisy, in refusing the Name, when they cannot but know
that they are guilty of the thing.

CHAP. II. Of Immediate Revelation.
AS the Quakers have rejected the guidance of the Spirit of God, speaking in
the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make the Man of God wise unto Salvation;
so they have most impiously and self-deceivingly given up themselves to the
guidance of something, which they call the Spirit of God, as we have heard: and
again in contradiction to this, the Soul of Christ extended and dilated, of
which, say they, every man is a partaker. But most frequently they call it, the
Light within, or simply, the Spirit, which they make the chief and principal
Rule of Faith, and manners, to which Spirit God himself speaking in the Holy
Scripture must do obeisance. Which Doctrine although we have already everted in
the former chapter, we shall notwithstanding here propose and vindicate a few
Arguments for the further overthrow thereof, and detection of the gross
abomination and horrid delusion attending their principles, And first I will
propose and vindicate an Argument proposed by Mr. Brown; Quakerism the plain
way to Paganism page 46. Which Argument Robert Barclay attempteth to solve
Vind: page 17. which is this, If since the Apostles fell asleep, and the Canon
of the Scriptures was closed, all that have pretended to immediate Revelation,
as a primary Rule, have been led by a Spirit of error, then it is not the way
of Christ

But the former is true.

Ergo. etc.



To this he answers 1. that Mr. Brown begs the Question, in his presupposing,
that there are no Apostles now, and that the Canon of the Scriptures is closed;
against which exception I reassume the Argument thus.

If since the Apostles, whose Names are mentioned in Scripture, fell asleep,
and John wrote the Revelation, all that pretended to this kind of Revelation
have been led by a Spirit of error, then this is not the way of Christ;

But the former is true.

Ergo, etc.

There can now no exception be made against the M^j^r, for none will deny, that
the Apostles whose names are mentioned in Scripture are dead, and that John
has written the Revelation, and well enough he knew that Mr. Brown understood
no other thing than what we have now said, and yet so covetous has he been of
shifting, that he behoved to have one, though he could not but know that it
would serve no longer than it met with an impugner. I now come to his answer to
the Minor, which Mr. Brown makes evident by an induction of many Sects, and
Heretics, pretending to immediate Revelation, all which are known and not
denied by Quakers, to have been led by a Spirit of error, to which we may add
many of the Quakers themselves, such as I^: Nailor, Susanna Parsons; who as
P^get relates, being moved by this lying Spirit, fruitlesly attempted to raise
from the dead, another of the Quakers, one William Pool by name, who had
murdered himself, and Gilpins, of whose lying Spirit see at large in Clerks
Examples; also John Toldervy, of whom see a little Book called, foot out of
snare; Robert Churchman and many others, of whom you may read at large in Mr.
Increase Maithers Book. And he requires an instance of the contrary, which is
the only way to answer an Induction; In stead of which he says, that he is
bound to prove, that there was never one pretending to immediate Revelation,
but he was also led of the Spirit of error, which he has done unt^l he give an
instance to the contrary: or else show another way of answering an induction,
which will be new logic; which perhaps he may do, for he and his Brethren are
very displeased with the old. 2 ly. That he may not be alone in this sore
stresse, he says that Mr Menzies does thus answer Dempster the Jesuit: which
is an impudent falsehood, for neither the Jesuits medium nor probation of his
Minor, is in the least like the Argument which we now vindicate; for the
Jesuits Argument was this, That Religion cannot be true Religion which has no
peculiar ground, or principle to prove that it is a Religion, and conform to
the true sense and letter of the Scripture, or Word of God; and he subsumes,
But the Protestant Religion has no peculiar ground, etc. Ergo it cannot be a
true Religion. Hence it is evident that these two Argumentations have nothing
of consanguinity; For if these two Argumentations had stricken alike at the two
parties, against which they were framed, then the Jesuits Argument should have
run thus; Whosoever since the Apostles fell asleep have pretended to, or
pleaded for the Scriptures as their principal Rule, have fallen into palpable
errors and open blasphemy, so that they became marks of Gods heavy judgment.
Now where should the Jesuit have found such a long Catalogue of these, as Mr.
Brown has found of deluded Enthusiasts. But which is the main thing and quite
refutes the most falsely and impiously alleged coincidence of these Arguments,
how easy should it have been to have adduced not only one instance to the
contrary, but whole volums thereof, ye^ not only the whole primitive Church for
diverse Centuries after Christ, and all the Reformed Churches, both these whom
men are pleased to call Calvinists, and Lutherans, together with the Greek, and
Abassine Churches; But likewise the most grave, wise and learned of the
Romanists themselves. By this time I hope this arch-falshood of the Quaker,
whereby he would hide the shame of his desperate cause, already appears; again
I answer directly to the Jesuit, and the Quaker his patron, that if we may
believe the ablest, and fiercest of our Adversaries, such as Bellarmin,
Contaren, Salmeron, the chief of the Doctrines, which we hold in opposition to
pope^y are most agreeable to the true Sense of Scripture.

His third answer is, that some of the primitive Protestants, such as George
Wishart and John Huss had immediate Revelation, But, nequisquam Ajacem possit
super are nisi Ajax, that he might be sure no other should refute him, he
refuteth himself, and rendereth his instance altogether unserviceable, by
granting they did not pretend to it as the ground of their Faith, and obedience
in all matters of doctrine and worship? Lastly to the instance of Ia: Naylor,
they answer, that he repented again; which answer is an evident confirmation of
what we plead for, viz^ that the Quakers Spirit is ready to give them the
cheat, and deceive them, for I believe Ia: Naylor acted but according to his
light when he received Divine Worship. From this argument we may observe these
things first, if it hold as cogent, this is a serious Truth which he says.
Vindic. page. 25. is absurdly affirmed by James Durham (as he speaks) viz. that
Christ spoke his last words to the Church, that is, put a close to these
writings which were to be a Rule to the whole Church; for if all that pretend
the like commission, or such immediate Revelation of the rule of their Faith
(about which the question is) were led by a Spirit of error, then the
Revelation was the last Scripture written, and sure, for any thing he knows,
ought to be written, there is no reason to believe that there is any more to be
written. 2 ly. Observe, that this Argument is demonstrative, for such are all
inductions which have no instance to the contrary. 3 ly. It destroys wholly
the Quakers cause; for this kind of Revelation being disproved, the very
proprium quarti mod^ of the Quakers is destroyed.

2dly. Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, and all the holy men
that were inspired by God, to compile a rule of Faith, and Life, could by
Infallible Evidence, and infallible proofs, even to the Conviction, and self
Condemnation of the greatest Opposers, demonstrat, that they were sent of God,
but nothing of this kind the Quakers can do; yea, they are so far from it, that
they can bring no more Evidence, or Credentials for their Rule of Faith, or
pretended Revelation, than the most wicked Enthusiasts, as for Example John of
Leyden and his followers, whom the Quakers themselves dare not deny to have him
Acted by a most wicked Spirit of Delusion; seeing therefore, they will not
subject their Revelations to the infallible test of the holy Scriptures, but
contrariwise will Impiously make the Scriptures stoup to their Revelations,
they can be no more certain, that they are not acted by the Devil, or at least
by their own giddy-brain, and erroneous fancy, when they bear us in hand, that
they are inspired by the Spirit of God, than they of Manster were. To this
Argument they decline so far as they can a direct answer; Therefore, Robert
Barclay Replyeth to Mr. Broun. Vind. page 21. How comes it that others
pretending to be led by the Scripture as their Rule, as much as John Broun have
been deceived, since the Scripture declares nothing but Truth; But how silly
this is I have shown above and more largely in my Apology in these paragraphs
which I observed he most foully omitted. And indeed this is a fine Argument, he
has provided for Atheists, and Scepticks, for it renders all Faith, even that
of the Patriarchs uncertain: For since their ground, and warrant of Writing the
Scripture, was in his own account Inward, Immediate and Extraordinary
Revelations, and if such be, as he affirms, uncertain, then the truth of the
Scriptures which depends upon such, must necessarily be uncertain, since the
Stream cannot be more pure than the Fountain. Thus he; This Reply resolves
into two Hypothetick Propositions (as for the Paragraphs of which he here
boasts as unanswered, which take up six pages in his Apology, filled with
Railing and Gall, against all the reformed Churches, they prove only that the
Scriptures through men corruption are subject to abuse, which never man
denied.) The first is, if the Scriptures through the Corruption of men, may be
wrested and abused to the Patrociny of Errors and corrupt Practices, then although
men clearly understand, and firmly believe them, and square their Practice
exactly according to them; Yet they are no more able to be a Rule unto them,
than these Revelations can be which John of Leyden held. The second is, He that
will not admit of such Revelations as cannot be distinguished from these which
led their followers into the most Blasphemous Opinions, and most wicked
Practices imaginable, He (I say) that will not admit of these for his principal
Rule, but prefers unto them the Scriptures, which can both be invincibly
demonstrated to have proceeded from God, and also call themselves sufficient to
make one wise unto Salvation, provideth an Argument for Atheists and Scepti^ks:
But thus does Mr. Broun reason against the Quakers, and except this and the
like other grounds, the Quakers have none for this heavy Charge. For that his
Adversary called the Revelations of the Apostles and Prophets uncertain; Is a
most palpable Untruth, the least shadow of which cannot be found in all his
Writings, except they deduce it by such unreasonable Inferences as these. And
now, Reader, speak thy mind in good earnest; Think thou that this man was in
his wit, or to be numbered amongst Rationals, when he made these Deductions, by
which their palpable Impieties are indeed antidots against seduction. But these
men have an ordinary Trick of comparing their own Revelations, of the Divinity
of which they can give no Signs, to these of the Apostles, and Prophets, that
were to the conviction of all Opposers, proved to be Divine; and thus give
away, and betray the Christian Cause; in laboring to defend their own
Dottages. In the next place therefore, let us take a short view of the Quakers
principal Rule, compared with ours, that it may more fully appear, which of the
parties provide an argument for Atheists and Scepticks; And 1. We cannot know
whether they ha^^ any Revelations at all, they may be lying unto us for any
thing we know, we have only their naked Word for it; whereas on the other hand,
it is beyond denial that we have the Scriptures. 2ly. It being given that they
have Revelations of some kind, from whence are they? from Heaven? their own
fancy? or from Hell? This we cannot know, they neither do, nor can give any
mark to distinguish them from these Revelations, which all the world are
persuaded to have been from Hell, or at least from a Vertiginous Fancy. Go to
then, let them speak their mind, and attempt the retortion of the argument (if
they dare) upon the Scriptures. They yet more fully prove, that their
Revelations are not from Heaven, while they affirm that they are common to all
men, which (if the experience of the World, yea, of the word of God may be
judge) is most ^alie. 3ly, Making a Supposition, which will never come to a
solid Position, that they have divine Revelations, we yet cannot know for what
end they are given; whether to be a principal Rule or not, or whether or not
through their own corruption, they do not wrest and misunderstand, or tho they
do understand them, if they walk according to them (nothing of which can be
(...) of the Scriptures) we can hear nothing, nor (...) nothing, but some men
still amusing the World, Crying a new Light, without giving any Evidence or
proof thereof, but only their own Word, and so are always their oun witnesses
in their own cause, and therefore by all rational men ought not a little to be
suspected. 4ly. This Spirit, inward Light, or Revelations of the Quakers, for I
take all for one, can never be able to determine Controversies; Seeing two
different parties may both of them adduce these Revelations to prove
contradictory Assertions. Now Seeing neither of the parties, is in case to
Evince that his Revelations are from God more than the other, the Controversy
must remain for ever undetermined, Seeing they have no common principle in
which they can concenter and meet. And thus stands (for Examples sake) the
case betwixt Quakers and Ranters, agreeing in this principle of immediate
Revelations, and yet (if their books be to be believed) bitter Enemies to one
another in several points, for which both of them allege Revelations as their
grand Principle, and neither of them can evince their Revelations to have
proceeded from God, more than the other. Hence we most rationally conclude that
the Controversies betwixt these two parties are indeterminable, so long as they
stick to this Principle. Now this Argument in no ways (...) be retorted on the
Scriptures, for though there have been through the corruption of men, wresting
the Scriptures, many Controversies, and that even amongst these who assert that
the Scriptures (...) the Principal Rule of Faith, and Manners; yet wh^ can say,
that this is through default of the Scriptures, seeing our Adversaries cannot
deny, but that they speak both Sense and Truth; and that when there is a real
Contradiction between two, disputing cocerning any Doctrine, or Sense, and
meaning of any text of Scripture, this Text speaks for the one, and against the
other, tho the one of the parties, either through Ignorance cannot, or through
prejudice will nor see it; and that the sense thereof may be brought forth to
the light, so that there shall follow a mutual Agreement between the two
dissenting parties, and consequently that the Scriptures of their own Nature,
are apt for the removal of differences about things contained in them. We have
heard their retortion, let us now hear their direct answer, which is, that
their fruits declare them to have the Spirit of God; Thus its answered in their
Quakerism confirmed, to the Students of Aberdeen; For which forsooth they bring
Scripture proof from Matthew. 7.15, 16. where fruits are made the Test for trying
whether one be a true or false Prophet. But what fruits these thorny prickling
Plants have brought, and do daily bring forth, the world is not ignorant. If to
deny the Holy Trinity, the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, the resurrection
of the Body, and to assert the Souls of men, yea and devils to, to be God
Almighty, (of which abominations we shall ere we end this Treatise, undeniably
prove the Quakers to be guilty) and in a word, to vomit out their Malice, so as
to endeavor the overthrow of whatsoever God in his Sacred Word has commanded
us, either to believe or do. If these (I say) be the fruits of the Spirit? then
indeed the Quakers have them, and abound in them, and other Fruits we know
none, except (which are of little worth) some Stoicisms, and ridiculous
whimsies, in which also some of the M^humetan and other Monks have gone far
beyond them; yea, with these men. Envy, Pride, Contempt of all others, are so
predominan^, that tho by this Character only, it is easi^y judged by what
Spirit they are acted. Add to all this, their constant custom of horrible
lying, Perverting, and Railing; of which take one or ^wo Instances in the
practice of one o^ their chief leaders Rob: Barcl. for Vind. page 60 He says,
that his Adversa^ie inferred from the Quakers Doctrine of Christ's dying for
all, that Infants come to heaven without Christ; But how gross an un^ruth is
(...), will be evident to any that read Mr. Broun, Cap 6. Number. 14. where he
infers this horrible consequence, from their de^ying of Original Sin; and
again page 64.65, he says, that the Westminster Confession says, that God did
predestinat to everlasting damnation the most part of men, without any respect
had to their sin; But a more palpable and horrid lie, has scarce been hatched;
for (...) that Confession chap 3.. 7. It is expressly said, that God (...)
^rdain them to Wrath for their sins. Of the like nature, is that which he says
page 170; That his Advers^ry chap 27. makes a Preaching to the Devil, and that
a Minister at Lige^wood, made a Prayer to the Devil; whereas he only ^nfer^eth
from the Quakers Doctrine, that they may make a Preaching to the Devil. And as
for Railing, their whole writings are Stuffed with it. See for example
Hubberthorn against Sherlock, whose whole Pamphlet, is nothing but an he^p of
furious Railing, his best Language being, Thief, rude Fellow, Enemy to God etc.
See also Edward Burroug^s in answer to Philip Bennet, whose best language is
Serpent, the lake is prepared for thee, and such language as this is the marrow
of the Quakers refutation of their adversaries Books. For in these two now
Named Discours^s, there is hardly the shadow of so much as an Essay to answer;
But this is the way how they gain the day, and obtain the last word. How fair
an occasion is here offered to show to the world by a particular Enumeration of
their horrid and monstruou^ practices that their frui^s are the Grapes of
Sodom, and the wine of Gomorrah; But they are but too too well known already;
we forbear therefore to rake into this Dunghill, Certain it i^ that the works
of the Angel of the bottomless pit* will as soon prove himself ^o be an angel
of Light* as the Fruits of these High-pretenders, will prove them to be acted
by the Spirit of God.

But more fully to confirm or rather illustrate this argument I shall show the
Identity of their Spirit with that of the old Anabaptists in several
particulars.

A short parallel between the old Libertine Anabaptists, and the new, who are
known by the name of Quakers.
1. Muncer and the Anabaptists with him denied that the Scriptures, or external
word (for thus they spoke that they might the better vili^y the Scriptures were
the Word of God, but only a Testimony thereof; and said that the Word of God
was a certain heavenly thing distinct from the Scriptures. Bullinger adversus
Anabaptistas lib. 1. cap. 1. The same is the downright Doctrine of the Quakers;
only there is this difference, that the Quakers express themselves in this
matter with more rage and fury, than (for ought I can find) the Anabaptists
did, as the Reader may may see cap. 1.. 1. of this Treatise.

2dly. Muncer with his disciples preferred that which they called immediate
Revelation and inspirations, (busked with the specious Title of Fathers will,
as the Quakers Revelations are now with that of the Spirit) to Gods written
Word. Bullinger Ibid and cap. 2. and passim alibi. Sleidan: comm: Calvin:
Instit: lib, 1 cap. 9. In this point also the Quakers are their successors, or
rather the same, the name being changed, seeing they with Robert Barclay propos.
2, 3. assert, that not the Scriptures, but the Spirit, is the principal Rule of
Faith and Manners.

3dly. The old Anabaptists asserted, that the express Words and Phrases of the
Scriptures are to be adhered to, without any exposition, interpretation or
deduction. Bulling: lib. 1. cap. 8. and alibi. In this also their genuine
children the Quak^rs follow them with both feet, as is evident in this Treatise
cap. 1.

4ly. The Anabaptists of old asserted that the whole Old Testament is now
abrogate, and pertains not to a Christian, nor has any obligation or force
upon him, in which wicked Doctrine as they followed the Manichaeans, so at this
day the no less wicked Quakers follow them, asserting that nothing recorded in
the old Testament is binding and incumbent to us, but as it is ratified by
Christ in the new, and has precept or Authority from it, as is affirmed by
Robert Barclay Vindic: P. 178. number. 5. Hence it is evident that according to
them, no part of the Old Testament is more obligatory or binding upon u^, than
the words of Aratus, or such heathen Poets are, and yet these men will not
stick in contradiction to these their own words to say, we calumniat them. If
we draw from this or the like passages that they deny the Authority of the Old
Testament, Robert Barclay Ibidem.

5ly. Both Anabaptists and Quakers deny Original Sin; for proof of which see
cap. 3. of this Treatise.

6ly. The Anabaptists, Muncer and the rest of his sect taught, that Christ made
no Satisfaction for sins: and compared these who taught the contrary to the
rabble of Scribes and Pharisees. Bulling. lib. 1. cap. 11. they taught also that
its damnable and dangerous Doctrine, to assert that we are justified by the
righteousness of Christ, or by Faith, and not also by Works, Bulling lib. 4,
cap. 1. and Sequ. In which Doctrine the Quakers have not only equalized but
outdone and outstript their Ancestors, as cap 5. of this Treatise more
abundantly evinceth; and here it is to be observed once for all that all the
Capital adversaries of the Christian Religion, how contrary soever they may be
or seem to be one to another: symbolize in this grand heresy, and conspire
together the overthrow, and subversion of the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, or the imputed Righteousness of Christ, which is acknowledged by all the
Orthodox, to be articulus stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae, the grand pillar of
the Christian Doctrine, without the support of which all must go to ruin;
Hence, (to name no others) Pelagians the bulk of Papists, Socinians, and the
old Libertine Anabaptists, and their successors now called Quakers,
harmoniously agree in deriding, and abominating this Cardinal and Fundamental
Doctrine of the imputed Righteousness of Christ.

7ly. These Anabaptists asserted the possibility of fulfilling the Law.
Bulling. lib. 1. cap. 8. and that they were arrived at a perfection of degrees
and without sin, Bulling. lib. 1. cap. 11. From this the Doctrine of the
Quakers differs nothing; yea the latter has far outdone the former; for
besides that they commonly assert, that men may altogether fulfill the Law in
this life, and be without sin; For the denial of which Robert Barclay promised
continually to rail upon all the reformed; they to the horror of all men assert
that man is equal with God; which I evince from the Words of Hubberthorn in
chap. 4. of this Treatise, and that the Soul is a part of God, which is made
good from the words of the famous, and leading Quakers, Ibid.

8ly. These Anabaptists with blasphemous Melchoir Hofman, denied the
perseverance of the Saints, Bulling. lib. 3. cap. 13. with whom these Quakers
also conspire, which any man in reason may judge a contradiction to their
Doctrine of perfection; however they commonly maintain it with Robert Barclay,
Prop: 9. with his Apology and Vindication thereof; contradicting his own
express words cap. 2. where explaining that text 1 John 2.27. He had asserted
that the unction there spoken of does remain for ever in these to whom it is
given.

9ly. These wicked Anabaptists with their abominable Leader David George,
denied the Resurrection of the Flesh, or of the same body, talking much of the
Resurrection of another more spiritual body Bulling. lib. 2. cap 10. In this
also the Quakers are not a whit short of these, as is made manifest chap. 5. of
this Treatise.

10^y These abominable Anabaptists, following their pernicious Leader, Michael
Servetus, denied the Sacred Trinity, and the Divinity of Christ; In this
blasphemy also the Scholars excel the Masters, as the Reader may find at large
made out chap. 4. of this Treatise.

11ly. These Anabaptists asserted, that the Ministers of the Gospel ought not
to be tied to the explaining of Scriptures; that all in the Church ought to
speak by turns, that which they judged the Spirit offered unto them: that the
Ministers ought to have no certain Stipend, and many other things of this sort,
Bulling. lib. 1. cap. 8. which is at this day the known Doctrine of Quakers.

12ly. These Anabaptists denied that a Christian ought to be a Magistrate, or in
any case make war; to take or administrate oaths, to trouble any man upon the
account of his Religion, or to prohibit any kind of Religion; In all which
points, the Quakers exactly jump with them; for tho they do not in words deny
the lawfulness of Magistracy, yet seeing they expressly deny the lawfulness of
all Wars, and Oaths, and maintain an unbridled Liberty, to do whatsoever is
right in a man's own eyes, all which is their known Doctrine, by most clear
consequence, they take away all use of Magistracy and Magistrates.

13ly. Anabaptists with Servetus and the Socinians spoke contemptibly of the
Sacraments, and denied Infant Baptism; but the Quakers have gone a further
length, not only denying, but railing against both Sacraments, laboring by
might and main, to abolish these pledges of the Love of God out of the World, I
could easily prove the sameness of the Doctrine of the Muncerian Anabaptists,
with that of the Quakers in many other particulars: But at present these may
serve to show, that both of them are acted and guided by the same Spirit; which
is that at present intended by us.

3ly. If the Spirit, or the light within every man; were the Supreme, and
principal Rule, then those who persecuted to death the Apostles, and Saints of
God did not sin in so doing; but I am sure the latter is false, Ergo the
former. The Consequence of the Major is most evident, for they followed their
light within, thinking thereby they did God good service, John. 16.2. neither
can they say, that then the day of all these persecutors visitation was past;
for Paul himself was one of them, whose light taught him, that he according to
all that he had for light ought to do many things against the Professors, and
Servants of Jesus Christ, Acts. 26.9. whose day of visitation I think the
Quakers themselves will not say was expired.

4ly. Divine light, or that light which is of God is always consonant to it
self; but so is not that which the Quakers call their spirit, or the light
within every man; for nothing is more evident than that the light within one
man, is quite contradictory and opposite, to that within another, and that even
in the most weighty, necessary and soul-concerning things in all the world; as
the many and great controversies in all ages, do but too too well make out:
neither can it be said that every one of these who oppose the truth, either act
against their own judgment, or that sometime before they knew and embraced the
Truth in their heart, and afterward did not hearken to that light: this we say
cannot be said; for it is clear from the earnestness, and zeal of both
Heretics, and Heathens for their own erroneous Principles, that they really
think as they speak: yea have not many sacrificed their lives, to their own
fantastic and damnable Opinions, which Opinions from the very beginning of
their use of Reason, they did still hold; but not to multiply instances, all
this is clear in the Person of Paul, for certain it is, that when he persecuted
the Church, he both acted according to his judgment, and that he always was of
that judgment, and never counteracted his light within, and tho he confessed
that he did it out of ignorance, yet this will not help them, for certainly
this was all the light he had, if we may believe himself, and therefore he
never had a true light within, until the day of his miraculous conversion.

5ly. This Principle viz. That if every man follow his light within, he cannot
stray from the Truth, overthrows the whole ^a^^ick of Quakerism with one
blow; for there are many in the world (of which I am one) who by all the Light
they have attained unto, and after the most impartial search, firmly believe,
without so much as one check from the light within to the contrary, that
Quakerism is the path way to utter destruction; It must therefore be so, if the
Doctrine, that every one must follow his light, be true.

6ly. If God suffered the most part of men in the time of the Old Testament to
walk in their own way^, then all and every one has not sufficient Grace and
Light whereby they may come to Salvation; But the former is true Acts. 14.16.
Ergo the latter. The evidence of the consequence strangely straitneth Bellarm:
de great. and lib. arbitr: for he would ^ain wrett this Text, telling us, that
its meaning is, The Grace of God did not so largely flow them as afterward,
notwithstanding such a measure of Grace sufficient to divine Providence was not
wanting; but thus he dissembleth the question, which was whether or not it
pleased divine providence to give a sufficient measure of Grace, to every
^ndividual of the Posterity of Adam* 2ly. There are many Nations in the world,
of which I believe, the Jesuits, and Quakers will not say, that they have now
more than sufficient Grace to bring them to Salvation, Ergo if all Nations had
less under the Old Testament, than these nations have now, they had not
sufficient Grace* 3ly. The context evinceth our purpose, for the witness of God
there spoken of, is only the common benignity of Providence, viz. fruitful
seasons, food and gladness, from which indeed they might have gathered, that
there was a God, but was this grace alone sufficient to bring them to
Salvation? this, Quakers and Jesuits must either say, or else that the Apostle
had not wit enough to speak to the purpose, for he might have mentioned this
sufficient Grace, and Light, as a Testimony of God in their hearts, and told
them that this Light within would have led them to Heaven, if they had pleased,
whereas contrariwise, he tells them no such guide, but that they were
permitted to walk in their own ways, and the same Apostle tells the
Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.12. That they were without Christ: And yet in contradiction
to this, the Quakers maintain, that these Gentiles had the Light of Christ, and
Christ within them. This Answer of Bellarmin I have set down and refuted,
because it is all one in substance with that which the Quakers use to give to
this and the like Texts.

7ly. Our next Argument we deduce from Ephesians. 2.12, and 4.8. Thus, These who
are without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers to the
Covenants of Promise, have no hope, are without God in the World, have their
understandings darkened through the blindness that is in them, being alienated
from the life of God, and have blind Hearts, and are past feeling; add to
these, 2 Timothy 2.26. That some are taken captive by the Devil at his will. Now
these that are in this case, cannot have Grace and light sufficient to
Salvation: But the Gentiles are said here to be in this sad condition; Ergo
they had not sufficient Grace and Light. The Major, which can be only
questioned, the Spirit of God has in these places invincibly corroborat, by
rejecting all the Shifts, and quibles that Jesuits and Quakers are able to
feign.

8ly. This Doctrine of the Quakers is clearly overthrown by these Scriptures.
Amos. 3:2, You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, etc. Psalm.
147.19, 20. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments to
Israel, he has not dealt so with any Nation: as for his Judgments they have
not known them; Praise ye the Lord. What can be more clear, than that these to
whom God did not give his Word, Statutes and Judgments, never had a light
sufficient to guide them unto Salvation? and yet the Quakers, Quakerism
confirm: page 2. who without all shame or conscience, care not what they deny,
or what they affirm, providing they can find words to the purpose, or not to
the purpose, all is one, have the confidence to deny it: Their reasonlesse
Reason is because in John 1.5. its said, that the light shined in darkness: For
who but a Quaker will infer from these words, in which the Evangelist
asserteth, that Christ is the true God, who in all ages manifested himself in
some measure to the world, by which manifestation of God in the Works of
Creation and Providence, the world might perceive indeed that there was a God,
but could not notwithstanding comprehend God, so as to see and perceive that
God the Creator, should in the fullness of time, cloth himself with man's Flesh,
and become the Redeemer, for to this kind of Knowledge and Comprehension,
supernatural and divine Light was necessary; now (I say) who but a Quaker will
from this in^er that all nations, in all ages, had the Knowledge of the Word,
Statutes and Judgments of God? For, sure I am, these who are altogether
ignorant of them, in the Judgment of all men, (who have not with the Quakers
renounced the Scriptures) will be esteemed void of a light sufficient to guide
them to Salvation, with the like impudence page 5. they deprave yea and really
contradict Jude v. 19. where the Apostle positively asserteth, that some men
have not the Spirit; for they tell us that men in one sense may be said not to
have the Spirit, and in another sense to have it, even as a rich man who
improveth not his money* both has it and has it not in diverse senses,
according to which Christ said, from him that has not, shall be taken away,
that which he has: But this perversion is too palpable, for surely the
Apostle, whose Pen God guided, intimates no such thing, nor insinuates the
least respect wherein these ^^en can be said, to have the Spirit; whereas our
Savior, whose words they groundlesly add^ce to color their contrad^ction of
the Apostle, p^ainly tells us that these evil servants, really had gifts
which they abused, by neglecting to improve them; But on the other hand, the
Apostle here has no such thing, yea he tells us that these men were twice
dead, i. e. I think, as dead as can be, or altogether void of the Spirit; yea
it can be no more alleged, that these men in any sense had the Spirit, than
that clouds only swelling with wind, can be said to be filled with water; yea
without all exception, or restriction, they are called, sensual, and I think
few that care what they say, will affirm that such have the Spirit of God;
where does the Apostle in all this Epistle, ever compare these men, to these
that have money, but do not occupy it? as the Quakers groundlesly, and
therefore falsely give out; and yet these are the men who cry out upon us, for
making any Pa^aphrases upon, or Consequences from Scripture, though never so
clearly deduced from the Text, while they themselves by more than a poetic
license, ob^rude upon the world flat contradictions of Scripture, for the
meaning thereof. Add ^o these, that some things are absolutely necessary to be
known in order to Salvation; the Knowledge of which can never be evinced that
all men had, or have, therefore it is most groundless to assert, that all men
have a sufficient light to guide them to eternal life, to which Robert Barclay
replyeth, that the knowledge of these things is only necessary necessitate
praecepti, that is, because they are commanded us; not necessitate medii, i. e.
in plain English, That Faith in Jesus Christ, the knowledge of the Distinction
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or that Christ is God and Man etc. is not
needful in themselves to be known, or believed in order to Salvation; but how
little soever respect he has to the Scriptures, he ought to have had some care
and consideration of his own Doctrine, for his first These is, these words John
17.3. this is eternal life etc. where it is plainly asserted without any
distinction, or limitation, that the Knowledge of the Father and the Son, as
one sending, and one that is sent, and therefore distinct the one from the
other, is called eternal life it self, i. e, (if any thing) a mean so necessary
to eternal life, as that without this knowledge it cannot be obtained.
Moreover, the very Notion of Faith (without which none can be saved) implies
nothing less than a closing with God through Christ, and therefore
necessarily, and of its own nature, and not with a respect to a command only,
presupposes the knowledge of the distinction of Father and Son, and of the
Divine and Humane Nature of Christ, held forth under the Old Testament: as one
to be incarnate in the fullness of time; and in the New Testament as actually
incarnate, and really and in due Time come in the Flesh.

9ly. Before I come to the Quakers Objections, I will overthrow one other of
the Quakers Principles, upon which the whole Fabric of Quakerism is builded;
which is, That in fallen man, there remain no relics of the Image of God, and
that by the fall, his understanding is so darkened, that he cannot by all the
Light of Conscience, reason, and common notions, perceive or gather, from all
or any of the works of creation and providence, that there is a Sup^em being,
or a God that created him, and all things b^side. In a word they utterly deny,
that which is called the natural knowledge of God, or natural Theology; and
deny moreover, that man in his fallen state, can think, or do any thing that is
in it self, or as to the substance of the action ^ood; This Doctrine (which the
Quakers have learned from their dear Friends the Socinians, as they are
constrained to defend, so seeing they assert that every Son, and Daughter of
Adam have within them a light and guide sufficient for Salvation; and the World
clearly perceives that there is no Light common to all Mankind, except some
small Relicts of that once bright shining Image of God, like the dim sparkles of
an extinguished Lanthorn, which are never able to show the wandering Traveler in
the dark night, his way homeward; They are necessitate to say, that this Light
is supernatural, and a fruit of the purchase of Christ, and consequently that
man, as to the things of God, has no more Natural Light, than an Ox or Ass:
See Rob: Barclay's fourth These and his Apology cap 4. and Vindication sect 5.

10ly. The falsehood of this Doctrine, we evince by these following arguments;
and 1. It is not imaginable how one can be rational, and yet not be in case to
infer from all the works of Creation, that there is a supreme cause and being;
we say this is not imaginable except to a Socinian and Quaker, who can imagine,
at least say, they can imagine what they will. Now the Quakers, Quakerism
confirm: page 3. Grant that Conscience and Reason, are distinguished from the
saving Light of Christ, in all men, and the Revelation thereof as a natural and
super-principle natural, are distinguished. Well then, seeing reason is natural,
and man is rational, how can he, if he but contemplat these admirable Works of
Creation and Providence, and exercise his reason in so doing, not conclude that
these are the Product of an Infinite and Omnipotent Creator, who is to be Loved,
Feared, and Adored? which thoughts of themselves or as to the substance of the
Action are certainly good, and more Laudable than the Quakers silent waiting,
which differs nothing from sleeping, although they place a principal part of
their worship therein.

11ly. Secondly, whatever is in man, and common to all Mankind, is natural, but
some sparks of the knowledge of a Deity, as also some thoughts and desires that
are good in themselves, as for example, the desire of self-preservation, are in
man, and common to all mankind; Ergo some Relicts of the knowledge of God, and
thoughts that are of themselves really good, are natural. The Major is most
evident, for I defy all the Socinians and Quakers in the world, to give one
Instance to the contrary: the Minor is no less undeniable, seeing there is no
nation in the world, tho never so barbarous and inhumane, who has not some
notions of a Deity, and desire to preserve themselves. But I know the Quakers
dare not deny it, otherwise they will overthrow all their universal Grace, and
Light by them pleaded for.

12ly. Thirdly, that which is originally born with every one, and grows up to
more and more maturity, as he in whom it is, grows up, is undoubtedly
natural; But some remainders of the knowledge of God are Originally, i e. in
the principle and inclination (as they speak) born with man, and grow up to
more and more maturity, according to the growth of him, in whom they are, Ergo
they are natural. The Major is beyond controversy: The Minor therefore they
can only deny, which yet is no less clear than the major; for they grant that
some things that respect natural Sciences, and the prudent management of the
affairs of the world, are not supernatural; See the forecited Vindication page
52. But certain it is, that some sparkles of the knowledge of a Deity, are as
common and appear as early as these things which they deny not to be natural.

13ly. Fourthly, That which is common to Devils, is not supernatural; but to
know and believe, that there is a God, which is of it self a good thought, is
common to devils. To this Robert Barclay Vind page 51. answers, That once the
Devils had this knowledge from a spiritual nature, and tho they have fallen,
yet they mey retain the memory of it: for that their Fall and man's is every way
alike, none will affirm. But surely if he had not wilfully closed his Eyes,
that he might not see the Truth, he might have clearly perceived this to be a
most pitiful prevarication, for what tho the fall of Angels, and the fall of
Man, were not in all respects alike, can any man not altogether void of reason,
conclude thence; that the thing which is common to devils with men, can be
supernatural, or Grace in the one more than in the other? Again, Surely there
is no reason in the world to say, that the devils retain their Memory, more
than their understanding; For certainly the understanding is altogether as
essential, if not more, to the rational creature, as the memory. Moreover, to
say that the devils retained no knowledge of God, but the bare remembrance that
they had knowledge of God, is completely to contradict the Apostle James,
asserting chap 1.19. that the devils believe that there is one God and tremble;
for to believe a thing, in the judgment of all men, presupposes some
knowledge thereof, and can be no more called an Act of the memory, than tasting
can be called seeing, which is performed by the Eye; or Smelling, that which is
performed by the Ear. Again, presupposing, which is possible, though not true,
that the Devils had no memory of their knowledge of God, It is beyond all
doubt, that these active, Sagacious, and skilful Spirits in the works of
Nature, can easily conclud from these admirable Effects, that there is a
Supreme Cause, first being, the Creator of all things: Now to say, that they
can know that there is one God, and conclud from the works of Creation and
Providence, that this God is most powerful, most wise etc. and yet to say that
they have no principle of knowledge, whereby they can know this, is to assert
that there is a Sream without a Source, or a Tree without a Root, or a Beam
without the Sun. Lastly, If the Devils have only the memory of their knowledge
of God, and yet believe that there is a God and tremble, then we may infer,
that our first Parents, before the promise of the Messiah was made unto them,
had no Divine Light, or Seed left in them, contrary to Robert Barclay's belief
Vind page 49. Seeing our first Parents might retain the memory of the knowledge
of God, they had but just now lost; But it is needless to dwell upon such
nonsensical absurdities, for the Quaker may as well affirm, that ^ man may pay
his debt, and sustain himself with the memory of the money he once had, as that
the Devils can know so much of God, as without doubt they know, by the alone
memory of the knowledge they once had.

14ly. Fifthly. That which will accompany the wicked to Hell, cannot be called
Grace, Divine or any thing Supernatural; but some relicts of the knowledge of
God will accompany the wicked to Hell: Therefore these cannot be called Grace,
D^^vine, or any thing Supernatural; The Major i^ beyond all controversy; The
Minor is also mos^ evident, for otherwise the never-dying-worm could not feed
upon them, whose torment consists most in the extremly bitter, and sad
reflection upon, and consideration of, the various Attributes of God, with
reference to themselves; Exem: gra. from the consideration of his immutable
Justice and infinite Power, they conclude the impossibility of their releif.
But we need not insist on this, seeing none that read Luk 16. can be ignorant
that these Souls have some knowledge of God, except either wilful prejudice,
or some thing of that kind, has already preoccupied their minds.

15ly. Sixthly, That men have naturally some relicts of the Image of God, and
can do some things contained in the Law of God, we most firmly conclude from
that express T^x. Rom 2.14. the Gentiles that have not the Law, do by nature
the things contained in the Law. The Quakers, and amongst others, Rob: Barclay
in his Apology ^lately contradicting the Text, Alleges, that man naturally
can know, or do nothing contained in the Law of God, because v 15. these
Gentiles of whom this is spoken, are said to have the Law written in their
hearts, which writing of the Law in men's hearts, is elsewhere in Scripture
counted a part of the new Covenant. But this reason M^. Brown chap 5. n. 24.
has fully e^ervat, showing by many demonstrations, that the writing of the Law
in the heart, cannot at all be taken in this place, for any part of the New
Covenant, the removal of which arguments, the Quaker not so much as attempteth,
and yet can impudently publish a lie to the world; that he has vindicat his
Apology; Yea, in stead of answering the Arguments, he confirms what his
Adversary says, and contradicts himself: For Vind page 51. He grants that
men by Nature, or Natural Light, have knowledge of Politics and the prudent
management of worldly affairs, and other things of that kind. Hence I conclude
that even according to the Quaker himself a man may be said to have the Law of
God written in his heart, and yet have no new Covenant Dispensation, Seeing the
second table of the Law, which is a Rule, for Politics, and prudent
Administration of worldly affairs, is the Law of God as well as the first. The
Quaker added a second reason in his Apology to prove that by NATVRE in this
place, is not to be understood, the corrupt nature of man, viz, because then
the Apostle should contradict himself, who says 1 Cor. 2.14* that the natural
man cannot know the things of God, amongst which things of God, the Law must be
accounted, which Romans 7.12. Is called Holy, Just and good; which contradiction,
Mr. Broun utterly denied to follow upon our exposition of this place, showing
at large, Number. 25. the complete harmony of these places, notwithstanding of our
exposition, to which the Quaker thinks it enough to reply, that the meaning
given by Mr: Broun to the Text in hand, cannot be reconciled with what the
Apostle says 1 Cor 2.14. unless upon some supposition (but what that is he
tells us not) above by him denied. Now, Reader, had this man a respect either
to Cause or Credit, who thought to cheat the world with such pitiful nothings
as these? For this was one of his Apologetick arguments, whereby to overthrow
the common Exposition of this Text, and to establish the gloss put upon it by
the Socinians, whom he never leaves to follow; and instead of urging this
Argument, takes the part of the defendant, and so gives up the cause: for his
answer ridiculously supposes, that we urge this place 1 Cor. 2.14. as an
Argument against us, which they urge as an Argument against us: And although
his Adversaries Exposition cannot stand, but upon a supposition denied by the
Quaker, it is little matter, for we know the whole Gospel cannot stand, but
upon many suppositions denied and cried out against by that blasphemous party.
And here page 51. he Alleges, that he acknowledges the fall of man, more
fully than his adversary does* because according to his adversary, fallen man
retained some Relicts of the Image of God, by virtue whereof he can do
something really good; whereas on the other hand, according to the Quakers
Doctrine, man by the ^all was wholly degenerate, retaining nothing of the Image
of God, in whom albeit there remained a Seed of righteousness, yet no
otherwise* than as a naked seed in barren ground, by virtue of which he could
do nothing, until visited by a new Visitation, which he received by virtue of
Christ as Mediator.

Ans. In the judgment of all men who are not so effronted, as to give such
inconsistances for a sufficient Refutation of their Adversaries; It will be
counted a complete contradiction, to say, that fallen man has no Relics of
the Image of God, and yet notwithstanding, has a Seed of Righteousness in him,
Seeing that Righteousness is one of the chief parts of the Image of God. Ephesians.
4.24. But the truth is, there is a Mystery latent under this doctrine, which we
must here discover: The Mystery is this, the Quakers have no other Christ than
this that was left in Adam, and remains in man in his fallen condition, to
which they give many great names, as Light, L^fe, Measure of God, God himself,
and among others most frequently, the Seed; for the more full manifestation of
which, take these following passages 1. Naylor's love to the lost, page 32.
Christ is the Election, and the Elect Seed, and George Foxs Great mist; page
24. the promise of God, is to the seed that has been loaded as a Cart with
sheaves by the S^nner, which seed is the hope of Christians, or that which was
loaded as a Cart under sheaves. George Keith in his way c^st up, page 99, 100,
108. Ex^oneth it to be Christ or the life of Christ; and in his Immed. Revel:
page 44, 45, 46. Says, when God created Man, he put his Image Christ, the
express Image of himself in man, he breathed into him the breath of Life, he
lived in God; and Christ the light of men, was his life and lived in him, then
the Lamb was not sl^in, Christ the Lamb, the life of man. -- But when man
sinned -- So the Lamb came to be slain in him from the Foundation of the world;
that holy meek -- nature, the Lambs nature was slain in him -- the bowels of
the fathers Love stirred in compassion to the work of his own hands, that of
the Pure creation in man, which though shut up in death, yet it remained and
perished not, as to its being, it did not become a nothing, but remained a
being, and this is the lost, which God sent his son into the world to seek and
to save, not to seek and save the old Adam that birth of the Serpents
begetting, but to destroy it, for it is not capable of Gods Salvation, but that
which Christ came to save, is that of God which proceeded from him, the seed of
God in man, the seed of Abraham, whereof Abrams old decayed body as good as
dead, and Sarahs barren womb was a Type. Moreover, by this Light of God, for
all is one, they understand Christ, or God himself, as shall afterward be more
fully made out, by several express Assertions of the Quakers. Hence we may see
that the Doctrine of this man is most damnable, who acknowledges no other
Christ, but the small and dark Relics of the Image of God in man's soul, and
that his Hypocrisy and dissimulation is unparalellably great and hateful; in
that even while he pretends to aggredge the fall of man most, he then exalts
man even in his lapsed Condition; beyond which it is hardly possible to elevat
the nature of man, for from what is here quoted, and shall be more largely
afterward alleged out of their writings, it is evident that they believe, or
at least would persuade others to believe, that Christ has a Personal union
with every Son and Daughter of Adam. To all this he adds a most blasphemous
and absurd Intimation, that this Seed, (which to him is alone with Christ or
God,) stands in need of a new Visitation of Christ, to raise it up and make it
active. Also here because his Adversary says from Romans 7.14. and 1 Cor. 3.1.
that the Apostle and all Beleivers, are in a certain respect carnal, he thinks
he has gotten him in a notable absurdity, Saying, his Divinity will run thus;
the Devil and all unregenerate men, are in a certain respect spitual, and the
Apostle and all regenerate men, are in a certain respect Carnal; But if there
be any absurdity, in saying that the Apostle and all Beleivers, are in a
certain respect Carnal, it will light upon the Scriptures, according to which
his Adversary spoke, and thus the Quakers covertly pursue their Design of
wounding the Scriptures, through the sides of their Adversaries, and although he
shall answer that the Apostle Rom 7. did speak of another in the person of
himself, I care not seeing to all the fifteen Arguments whereby Mr: Broun proved
the Apostle to be there speaking of himself, and not of another, the Quaker
thinks it enough to say, He gives us a Preachment upon this place without a
syllable more for Solution of these arguments. As for these words, that the
Devils are in a certain respect Spiritual, they are none of his Adversaries;
However the devil may be called Spiritual, in respect of his nature, seeing
whatever is a Spirit, may be called Spiritual; as well as what is a Body, may
be called Corporeal. Hence it is Evident, that the Quaker's pretended
Absurdities, and Blasphemies, which he would fix upon his Adversary, resolve
into mere fictitious Ho^goblines, fit only to fright Children.

16ly. Seventhly, If Fallen Man retain no knowledge of God, no Principles of
common Honesty and Morality, then there is no difference between a Man and a
Brute, neither can it be told in what the wisdom of the Wise Gentiles, of whom
the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 2. who notwithstanding could not perceive the
things of God until they were again revealed, consisted: but the latter is
false in both its parts, therefore the first; Robert Barclay Vindic. page 52.
answers that the Wisdom of these Gentiles did consist in the wise and prudent
Management of worldly Affairs, for it is not yet proved, says he, that it is
necessarily united to a Knowledge of God, and things Spiritual, since it is
said of some Beasts, that they have something of this, such as Bees and Ants.
And that notwithstanding Man differs from a Brute in many things, as in the
knowledge of numbers* Mathematical and Mechanical Demonstrations, Is the
Knowledge of such natural Truths, (that two and three make five, and the whole
is greater than the part, and all that is deduced therefrom) the Knowledge of
the things of God? but these Evasions are as easily everted as invented, for
who can deny that by the same species or kind of Knowledge, and reason whereby
man can deduce excellent politic, and Oeconomick Conclusions and order a
Commonwealth, or Family, he can also conclude from the beautiful Fabric and
comely order of Heaven and Earth, and the admirable Providence of God apparent
therein, that there is a first and supreme Power, from which these things did
proceed, and by which they are guided into their proper ends: And indeed in
this did consist the wisdom of the wise Heathens, as is evident to any that
have but the least acquaintance with the writings of Plato, Aristotle and such
other heathnish Philosophers, to whom the invisible things of God, even his
eternal Power and Godhead, were made manifest by the things that are made,
being by them ponderated and contemplated Romans 1.20. Certain it is, that it is
as easy by the same kind of Knowledge and Reason, to know that every effect
has a cause as to know that the whole is greater than a part; But the Quaker
grants, that by natural light only a man may know this latter Axiom with
whatsoever can be deduced from it, Ergo he may as easily know the former, with
whatsoever may be deduced from it; but from this former Axiom the natural
Philosophers firmly conclude, that there is a Supreme Cause, Ergo a man having
natural Light only may conclude from this Axiom, which is imprinted on the
hearts of all men, that there is a supreme Cause, or Author of all things,
which is God. Moreover it is certain, that the defect of the Wisdom of the
Heathens, is every where by Scripture placed in this, that by it they could not
perceive Christ, and the Mysteries of the Gospel; which as they were to the
Jews a stumbling Block; so they were to the wise Greeks foolishness; and no
where in this, that they could not so much as know that there is an Omnipotent
and Just God, which ought to be reverenced and served, though with what kind of
Worship they knew not; and that we ought to do unto another, as we would he
should do to us. Again, that a Brute has more knowledge in Politicques or
Oeconomicks than it has in Mechanics, or Arithmetic is false and ridiculous
for indeed they have alike in both* for if the Be can imitate the Politician,
or the Governor of a Family, she can also be the ape of the Mechanic, and
prettily imitate him in making Cells to contain honey; the hen also, when she
hatcheth, or has brought forth, can perceive if any be wanting of her Eggs or
Birds. Hence I may conclude that the Hen is as skilful in Arithmetic as the
Be is in policy; the hungry dog also will be very loath to part with any
piece of the Morsel he has gotten into his clutches. Hence I may as well
conclude that a dog understands that Axiom viz. that the whole is greater
than the part; as the Be or Ant understand the Fundamentals of policy and
Oeconomie. But it is needless to dwell any longer in the refu^ation of these
things which are no less unreasonable than impious.

17^y. Our eight Argument we draw from Romans 1.19, 20. Because that which may be
known of God is, etc. from which place our Divines have always concluded
against the Socinians, see Pareus on chap. 1. to the Romans dub. 16. and why
may not we with as good Reason against the Quakers, infer. That there are some
relics of the Divine Image or Natural Knowledge of God left in man; against
which inference Robert Barclay page 52. says that by (...) that which is to be
known of God, is not understood any thing which man retained in the fall, but a
new visitation of Light and Grace: And 2 dly that tho this Knowledge of God be
common to all men, yet they receive it only by this new visitation of Grace and
Light: But to answer at this rate, is only loudly and confidently to proclaim
that his Doctrine is pure Paganism, for who that ever thought there was any
Necessity of the Christian Religion in order to Salvation, wou^d dare to
affirm, that what was common to the Heathens, yea and devils also was as really
saving, and the fruit of Christ's purchase as that which is proper to the godly:
For surely this kind of Knowledge of God, of which the Apostle here speaks,
and says that it is learned by the contemplation of the Creatures is common,
not only to all the Heathens, but even to the Devils themselves. I hope we have
by this time sufficiently demonstrated, that there are some relics of the
knowledge of God, and something of the principles of Morality remaining in man,
even considered in his lapsed Condition. We have also vindicated so many of Mr.
Browns Arguments as the Quaker thinks fit to take notice of, many others he
has left untouched, see for Examples sake chap. 5. number. 28, 29, 30. But indeed
the Quaker here as he does all along plays like the Dog in Nile, making a
mint and then to his heels again; for he either leaves the Arguments and Proofs
of his Adversary, as also his answers given to his Arguments altogether
untouched, or else opposes such pitiful Trifles, as being examined and
pressed, instantly resolve in the apples of Sodom; and yet certainly here, if
ever, the Quaker was concerned to have played the man, and given sufficient
ground for this Doctrine: For with this light all the Quakers Religion stands
and falls, which indeed is nothing but the mere Remainders, and small spunks
of that sometimes bright Image, that shined in our first Parents, which although
they can never be quenched, yet are never alike, or sufficient to reveal these
Mysteries; The knowledge of which, is absolutely necessar to Salvation, or to
lead man through the dark and dangerous Wilderness of this World, into the more
excellent Canaan of eternal rest: And therefore there is no Light common to
mankind sufficient for Salvation, seeing all men have no other Light common to
them, but this, which we have evinced to be altogether natural; and yet this
natural Light, is to the Quakers, their God, their Christ, their Grace, their
Scriptures, and whatsoever else is necessary to Salvation. That it is to them
their Rule, or in stead of the Scriptures, we have seen already; and that this
Light also is to them in stead of God and Christ, or that in their account,
this Light of reason and Conscience, for no other is common to all men, is God
himself, these following passages evince: In him was Life, and the Life was the
Light of men. If the Life be the Divine Essence, the Light must be so also; for
such as the Cause is, such the Effect must be; Thus George Whitehead in a
Manuscript cited by Hicks Quaker. Appeal answered page 4. and Will Pen to defend
this passage from the absurdities with which it had been loaded by Hi^ks, in
his first Dialogue page 3, 4. such as, that then the Sun, Moon, Star, or Stone,
is God, ^pe^keth thus. George Whitehead inferring from John 1. That if the Life
was of the Divine Being, the Light must be the same, for as the Cause is, so
is the Effect; it was never George Whitehead's principle or words, that the
Life, which is the Light of men, is but in it self a mere Effect; for he owns
it in its own being to be no other, than God himself counterf: Christ: detect,
ed p^g 56 and again Will. Pen. Reason against railing. page 56 We assert the
true Light, with which every man is enlightened, to be in it self the Christ of
God, and the Savior of the world. The same Will^ Pen, Quakerism a new Nickname
page 9, 10. All men are enlightened -- this Light is Divine, because it is the
very Light of the world, which is God, not any effect of his power as a created
Light, as some men fancy, and George Whitehead Dipl, p^: page 13. to call the
Light in every man a mere Creature, is contrary to John 1. In him was Life, and
the Life was the Light of men, which Light, is Divine and Increated.

Also George Fox great Mist: page 10. Some c^ll the Light Consci^nce. -- which
Light was before Co^sc^ence was or Creature was, or Created, or made Light was;
He ma^e the Sun* the Moon -- and the Light was before th^se were made; and p^g
23. some call it a natural Light, which Light was before the word Conscience
was or a na^ural Light the Sun, Moon, or Stars either; for all things that were
made, were made by it, the natural Light, or made Light, are created Lights, It
made the Sun, Moon, and Stars, they were made, and here it is the natural Light
to the natural Eye, and the light that every man is enlig^tne^ with, that
comes into the world, was before these were made, glorified with the Father
before the world began, Idem page 185. The Light which every man that comes
into the World, is enlightened withal, is Christ, by whom the world was made.
And page 331. The Light which every one that comes into the world is enlightened
withal, is not Conscience, for the Light was before any thing was made, or
Conscience named.

George Fox younger, in a Collection of his Works page 171. Thus speaks, All
mind that Gift of God in your selves, which makes you sensible of your pr^sent
condition, you must receive the living principle of God, in your own particular
vessels, which principle I call the Light, it being a proper Name for it;

But I shall not desire to tie up any of you, to give this principle of Truth
only the name of Light, I shall not matter if you call it the Truth, or the
gift of God, are a measure of the eternal Being.

Now, Reader, did ever the Sun shine upon such a Black and Blasphemous Company
of men* who durst assert that that dim Light, by which most men have enough ado
to perceive that there is a Suprem Being, and notwithstanding of which
knowledge, they are Ignorant of the true way of the Worship of God, the Mystery
of the Sacred Trinity, the Person of Christ Jesus, his Natures, and Offices,
and are at every turn ready to deceive, and be deceived, I say, did ever a
company of Men outdo, yea, or ever equalize these Quakers, who dare as^e^t such
a Light as this to be God? Notwithstanding of this their matchless exaltation
of this Light within every man, they again at other times, and when occasion
serves, depress and bring low, the same as much as before they cried it up;
For they assert that the Light within any particular person, ought to yield and
stoop to the light of their Church, or constitut body, For William Pen, Spirit
of Alex: page 14. says, We deny that to be a Light, which opposes the
judgment of the body. Ibid page 4.5. We as a body have power to determine,
therefore we abhor, renounce, rebuke with all severity that rude imagination of
the Hat-on in public prayer; and Sp. of the hat page 21, We have the power, and
will not such as are in the power do right. Ibid. the body will have a true
sense, feeling, and understanding of Motions, Visions, Revelations, and
Doctrines, therefore it is safest to make her the touchstone in all things
relating to God. Behold, Reader as, the Quakers with the Papists reject the
Scriptures from being the Suprem Rule, and ultimat Judge; So they no less than
the grossest of the Romanists ascribe an Infallibility to their Church, and
make this the suprem Rule, and ultimat Judge, to which every man's Light within
must stoop and yield though never so clear: which is one of the grossest Errors
of Popery; But yet it is infinitely more gross and impious in the Quakers, for
in so doing, they proclaim the fallibility of that which they maintain to be
Christ, and God, and subject it unto another, as capable of deceiving, and
being deceived, which Impiety, I am sure is scarc^ equalized.

18ly. Although the absurdity of this Doctrine, may of it self abundantly
secure us, that we need not b^ much concerned, let them use what Arguments they
will to prove it; we being certain, that whatever arguments can prove this,
will equally serve to prove whatever enters into any man's fancy; yet I will
propose, and enervat these of their arguments which seem to be most strong, and
plead most for them. One of which is proposed by George Keith, Truth-defend:
page 87. A Divine Law in all men is an inward immediate Dictat, but there is a
Divine Law in all men. Of this Argument singled out of all that ever George
Keith wrote, as the choicest Masterpeice, to uphold Quakerism, and overthrow
the authority of the Scriptures, he is so confident, that by it alone, he
thinks to strike the Cause dead; But he is hugely mistaken* for if by a
divine Law, he understand any other thing beside Conscience, and Reason, which
he himself, together with his Brother Rob: Barclay: Quakerism confirm: page 3.
acknowledges, to be only natural. We deny his Minor, the proof of which we
expect ad Kalendas Graecas; And thus the great Argument of one of the greatest
Champions of the Quakers, evanisheth into smoke at the very first handling
thereof. 2ly. Rob: Barclay. Vind page 39. thus reasoneh, what if I should say,
is not God a Light? And is not he in every man? and is not this Light within
the increated Spirit? The Reader may here observe, that this Author is
diffident of this Argument, and fearful to bring it forth; and good reason he
has; for by this reason he only evinceth, that which he elsewhere by all means
endeavors to evite, viz, that the Quakers Grace, and Light, is common to
Devils and damned Souls,, for God can no more be said to be in every Son and
Daughter of Adam without exception, than in these wicked Spirits, if he think
othewayes, let him essay the proof of it. 3ly. For the sufficiency of their
universal Light, they thus argue: That which we sin in not obeying, is
sufficient to Salvation; but in not obeying the Light within, we sin, therefore
it is sufficient to Salvation. But this Sophism is too palpable, and gross to
take with any that is not altogether willing to be deceived; for the Major
proposition thereof is most false, otherwise the lawful commands of every
Parent, Heathen, as well as Christian, should be a sufficient guide to
Salvation, for disobedience to these, is as really a sin, as disobedience to
our own Light. 4ly. To prove that there is a Divine Light purchased by Christ,
in every man, they adduce John 1.9. That was the true Light, which enlightneth
every man that comes into the world: for Vindication of which place it shall
suffice to overthrow what Rob: Barclay has said in the Vindication of his
Apology page 91. For the confirmation of the Quakers gloss on this text: of
which Mr: Broun, Quaker: path way to Pagan: page 151, 152, 153, 154. had given
diverse expositions, as 1. that Light may be here taken for the Light of
reason, 2ly. That by every man, is not to be understood every individual, but
only every one which is savingly enlightened; these expositions with others, he
at large evinceth and illustrateth from Scripture and reason; and shows that
the Quakers join with the Socinians in their exposition. Now whereas, if the
Quaker had done any thing to the purpose, he ought to have refuted these
exposi^ions; but in stead thereof he says, his adversary must be much puzzled
with this Scripture, for he knows not what way to take it: But this I confess
is a strange inference, for the Quaker from abundance, infers penury, and
because his adversary gave diverse expositions, any of which will serve the
turn, Ergo (says he) he knows not what to answer. I was wondering at this
Consequence, but I presently remembered that the Quakers were Enemies to Logic.
He himself diverse times has given several meanings of one place, as for
Example, Isa. 8.20. much therefore he has been puzzled to answer our arguments,
proving the Scriptures to be our principal Rule, which I do really believe, tho
upon another account: Now it is observable that this Quaker almost every where
endeavors to turn Defendent, when he should be impugnant; for the Scriptures
from which he drew his arguments in his Apology, fa^ling him, so that he can
prove nothing from them, his Adversary having removed the vernishing of his
Sophistry, he bends his whole wit in his Vindication to find out Evasions,
and Distinctions, to defend his own gloss, and this artifice he uses here,
which, think of it what he will, will serve for nothing, except to discover hi^
Weakness and Conviction of a bad cause; and whereas he flouteth at his
Adversary inferring from v. 5. of this chapter, the darkness comprehended it
not; that by darkness is meant man in his natural Estate, in which Estate he
can comprehend what is natural; we say whereas he flouteth at him, inferring
from this, that man while in that Estate, is void of all Spiritual and
supernatural light* saying, is not this a learned Refutation, Reader? He
^heweth only good will (as they use to say) to have the Doctrine of the
Reformed become a mocking stock, and shame rubbed upon it, if he could; for all
the expositions given by the Reformed Churches, on this place, quite contradict
that of the Quakers, except he will call Socinus, and the like, Reformed
Protestants; But the thing incumbent to the Quaker was, the urging and
vindicating of his Reason, viz. that if man in his natural estate cannot
comprehend this Light, who notwithstanding can comprehend the things of Nature,
Ergo by this enlightening with which every man is said to be enlightened that
comes into the world, is not understood the Light of Nature and Reason; which
consequence he shall never be able to prove, for although the Light it self viz.
Christ, be supernatural, and the incomprehensible God of Nature, yet these
little Beams or Sparks of Reason and Conscience which are the Effect and Gift
of this great Ligh, Christ the Son of God, and Second Person of the Trinity, no
less than of the Father and Holy Ghost, are altogether natural and
comprehensible. Many places of Scripture beside this they detort and deprave,
to the end that by the Scriptures themselves they may destroy the Scriptures,
and prove that the light within, (which they being pitifully deluded, take for
the Spirit of God,) is the Supreme Rule of Faith and Manners; all which glosses
fall to the ground, tho upon this one Account, that they have couched in them,
this most dangerous and blasphemous falsehood viz. that the dim and dark Light
of nature, is not only sufficient to guide us to Salvation, but (which ought to
be heard with horror) is God himself. One of which Scriptures is John 14.26,
27. and 16.13. whence they would infer that all Believers are led by immediate
objective Revelation, as the Apostles were, because (say they) the way that the
Apostles were taught, which is by immediate Revelation, is there holden forth as
common to a^l Believers, and the words to (lead) and to (teach) in their proper
and native signification denote always an immediate objective leading or
teaching. Thus Reasons To. Barclay, Vind. page 19.20. to which I answer, that
these being two of the main places that he brought for proving the Spirit to be
the principal Rule of Faith and Manners, he ought to have given some other
thing, than bare assertions, if he had in good earnest intended to overthrow
what his Adversary chap. 3. n. 27. said against his meaning of these places,
which he has not in the least done, for why may not immediate objective
R^velat^on be promised to the Apostles in these places, and yet not unto all
Believers, but subjective only, whereby they may understand and apply these
Truths that were taught immediately to the Apostles and Prophets, upon whose
Doctrine the Faith of all Believers is founded as its principal Rule, and
Foundation Ephesians. 2 20. Even as the like Ph^ases hold forth an immediate
objective Teaching to some, and yet that only which is merely mediate as to
others as Neh. 9.20. comp. with v. 30. 1 Kings 8. 36. Psalm. 132.12. Deu. 32.12.
Moreover that the words to [ lead] and [ teach] hold forth a mediate objective
Teaching, or a subjective Illumination far oftener in Scripture than immediate
objective Revelation, is manifest to any that are acquainted with the
Scriptures, which if the Quakers deny, seeing they are the opponents, they ought
to condescend to a collation of places, and show the contrary. Lastly, whatever
the Quakers say, we cannot help it, certain it is that no man of sound Judgment
will deny, that when one reads the Scripture^, and has his mind illuminated
by the Spirit of God, that he may understand the wondrous things in Gods Law,
but such an one has that promise of which we now speak fulfilled unto him, and
thus the only Scripture argument which Robert Barclay attempts to urge in his
Vindication, falls to the ground, for all the rest of the Scriptures from
which he deduced his Apologetick Arguments he slideth over, without any
Vindication thereof, Robert Barclay Apolog. page 38. has another Argument,
which because he complains, as if it were not sufficiently solved by his
adversary chap. 3. numb. last. I will set down here, and answer formally, that
there may be no just ground of Complaint, The Argum^nt thus runs; That unto
which all Professors of Christianity of whatsoever kind, do at last recurr, and
because of which all other grounds, are commended and accounted worthy to be
believed, must of necessity be the only Rule most certain and immovable ground
of all Christian Faith, but the inward immediate objective Revelation of the
Spirit is that etc. Ergo. Resp. the Minor is ambiguous, and therefore most
fallacious, for according to this kind of reasoning, they may conclude, that a
man just now possessing a piece of land formerly enjoyed by his Ancestors, by
Virtue of a Right granted to them by a Prince deceased many ages ago, spoke
mouth to mouth, with that Prince dead ages out of mind, Thus, that unto which
the present Possessor of such a piece of Land when pressed to the last,
recurreth un^o, and for which other Grounds or Charters are commended or valid,
must of necessity be the most immovable ground of, and Warrant for his
possession of such a piece of Ground; but the Grant and Donation of such or
such a Prince given many ages ago, first by word of Mouth, tho again committted
to writings, is that which the present Possessor being pressed to the last
recurreth to, Ergo the present Possessor had immediate Discourse mou^h to mouth
with a Prince many ages back ere the present Possessor was born. Certainly
these must be admirable Fellows who can conclude, and that in modo and figura,
qui^libet ex quolibet, and thus their strongest Arguments, serve only to prove
the Authors to ^e in a paroxism of folly, moving laughter in a very Heraclite.
But ex abundante I answer directly to this their blunt Sophism, tho forsooth
the Quak^rs Achillean Argument; Thus, But inward, immediate objective
Revelation is that to which all Christians recur etc. this is inward, immediate
objective in Respect of the Apostles and Prophets, I grant; in Respect of the
present Professors of Christianity, I deny, and let them urge the membrum
negatum. Of the like Nature is another, and that the chief of his Apologetick
Arguments, viz. Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and some others had immediate objective
Revelation, therefore the whole Church had it; the Consequent his Antagonist
chap. 3. numb. 11. denies, as not having the least shadow of Reason, let us
therefore see how he vindicateth this Argument which is a sine quo non to the
whole frame of Quakerism, and for this all that he says Vindic: page 24. is,
that then it seems there was more of Gods immediate Revelation in those dark
times, even by his Adversaries Confession, than now under the Gospel, where the
chief pastors of the Church according to him, are to expect no such thing:
neither is it proved that others not mentioned, had no immediate Revelations.
Answ. true it is that even in these dark times, there was in some respect viz.
of immediate Revelations, more of God, than there is now, and yet less in
another sense, viz. in respect of more large propagation of the Truth of God,
and of the large Measure of Grace dispensed unto Believers under the New Test:
But what says this to the probation of the Quakers tremulous consequence? how
does it prove, that because some few had these Revelations, all and every one
within the Church had them? this is a baculo ad angulum, neither are we bound
to prove the contrary affirmanti enim incumbit probatio: It is enough for us to
tell him, that it is a groundless fancy to assert it, for how will he prove;
ex. gr. that ever Abel had immediate objective Revelation? and thus the third
Proposition of his second These, that God did always reveal himself by his
Spirit, i. e. by immediate objective Revelation to every one of the
Church,falls to the Ground; and with it, the fourth viz. that these
Revelations were, the formal object of the Faith of the Saints, for if it be
altogether groundless to say, that every Saint had them, as we have now seen:
it is no less groundless to say, that they were the formal Object of their
Faith, and with these also his fifth Proposition, viz. that the same i. e:
immediate Revelation, continues to be the formal object of the Saints Faith.

-- ea lapsa repent ruinam
Cum sonitu trabit, and Tremulum super agmina late
Incidit.
Like the Trojan Tower, its couplings being cut, the whole Fabric of
Quakerism, tumbleth down about the ears of its Authors, and builders,

CHAP. III. Concerning Original Sin.
HAving canvassed the grand principle of the universal Light, and spirit of the
Quakers, I shall consider some of the chief points of their Religion, and lay
open the absurdity and blasphemy thereof, that the Reader may the better judge
of the root, having seen the Fruit, and of the B^sis by the Superstructure. The
first of these shall be the doctrine of Original Sin, which they jointly deny*
asserting that Adams Sin, can be imputed to none but himself, and therefore
none are guilty of the transgression of our first Parents, an^ so liable to
punishment until by their evil walking* or actual sins, they become
transgressors. This Doctrine, although not so an (...) as the Ap^stles and
Prophets, yet is as old as the Doctrine of pestif^rous Pelag^us, the first open
asserter thereof, with Celestius his Disciple. Hence all who denied the
Doctrine which now the reformed Churches hold ^^ent Original sin, were esteemed
guilty of Pelagi^nism; which notwithstanding Robert Barclay: Vin^: sect 5. Numb
5. would fain deny but to ^o purpose, except to contradict what he himself said
in his Apology chap 4. where he grants, that Augustine with whom all the
Orthodox wholly agree in this point, did hold the same Doctrine with the
Westminster Confession, in opposition to the Pelagians, to which Confession of
his, tho now by himself retracted, or rather contradicted, I will add the words
of Vincentius Lyrenensis chap 35. adversus haeret: cited by the Author of
Melius inquirendum, who before Caelestius the monstrous Scholar of Pelagius,
ever denied that all mankind stood guilty of Adams apostasy from God? Moreover,
whosoever will be at the pains to read the Magdeburgick History, centur. 5.
colum. 577, 588, 589, 590. And compare it with the Doctrine of the Quakers in
this point, he will find an exact harmony, between them and the Pelagians, both
in Doctrine, and Probation thereof. But we need add no more, seeing Robert
Barclay, in the place just now cited, after several serpentine windings and
turnings, to the end he may (tho he retain the thing yet) evite the Name,
wholly rejects Augustine, and therefore give^h up the Cause, ridiculously
enquiring at his Adversary, if he will assert every thing that Augustine said,
ridiculously (I say) seeing the question is, if Augustine did not hold our
Doctrine anent Original Sin, as the Antithesis to that of the Pelagians in this
point, which Pelagians have had many successors, tho known by other Names, as
Socinus, and his School, and holy and pure Anabaptists (as they called
themselves) and were by contrariety of speech, called by others, the Fry of a
deluded Enthusiast, Thomas Muncer; The horrid abominations of which Sect, and
this their Doctrine of Original Sin among the rest, that famous reformer
Bullinger, has by Scriptures and Reason, so hammered, that one in reason
should have thought, that it should never have had a Resurrection, as may be
seen Lib: 1. cap 11. adversus Anabaptistas, where he also to purpose
vindicateth Zuinglius from the calumny of the denial of Original Sin, wherewith
first the Council of Trent, although contrary to their own Light, as judicious
Soave observes, and of late Rob: Barclay, both in his Apology and Vindication,
has traduced him.

Secondly, Although this Doctrine has by many Ages been assaulted most fiercely,
by corrupt men, both of subtle wit and earnestness of Intention, yet the
providence of God has sufficiently pre-occupied, what they have said or can
say, and fortified all who truly believe what God has said in His Word, where
there is good Store both of Sword and Buckler, for managing of this War; and of
these many I shall here excerpt and vindicate a few. And First, Genesis 2.17. For
in the Day thou Eatest thou shall surely Die, or Dying thou shall Die, where is
a clear proof of our Doctrine, whence we reason, as well against Pelagians,
Anabaptists, Socinians and Quakers, as against the Papists, who deny Original
sin in Infants after Baptism; Thus: Infants Die, Ergo they are guilty of
Original Sin, seeing according to this present Text* Death is the punishment
due to the breach of the Command. To this the Pelagians, as Augustine in several
places, and particularly Quest. 3. C. 899-tom 4. colum. 666. And the
Socinians, as Pareus on the place shows, with other Enemies of the Christian
Religion, and at this day the Quakers answer, that Bodily death is not included
in this Threatening; But besides that the Pelagians were anathematized for this
doctrine by one Council of Carthage, consisting of 224 Bishops Photius
Biblioth. Colum. 42. This answer is evidently false, seeing that by this word
(Death) frequently in Scripture, Bodily as well as Spiritual, is understood,
and by the Phrase, to die the Death, the separation of Soul and Body is
frequently holden forth: Moreover none can deny that Bodily Death of it self is
an evil, and no evil could have befallen Mankind persevering in the State of
Innocence; But Chap. 3.19. Will aabundantly dissolve all doubts about the
meaning of the text to any unbyassed Men: Where God himself, describing the
punishment of Adams transgression, denounce^h and foretells his return to the
dust, as not the least part thereof. But we need not multiply reasons for the
vindication of this text, seeing none, except Socinians and Pelagians, oppose
our meaning thereof, and the reason adduced by our present adversaries, common
to them with the Socinians, and in particular Crellius, for its overthrown, in
strength excels not a cobweb, although they pitched upon it, as the only
weapon, which had any Teeth or keenness therein* The reason is, Adam died not
that day that he did eat, therefore (say they) Bodily death is not Comprehended
in the threatening: Neither has this reason any stronger nerves than the rest
used by Pelagians and Socinians, which yet for ought any thing I can find, the
Quakers do not use, judging them (as it seems) unfit to serve their turn;
Therefore Robert Barclay tho he had Apolog: chap 4. Fought with this Reason as
the only prop of his cause; his adversary chap. 5. number. 8. Having hewed it in
pieces) in his Vindication essayeth not the reinforcement thereof, only Sect.
5. number. 3. In stead of a Vindication has its repetition, adding, that death as
it is now circumstantiated with Sickness and the like miseries, is a
consequence, but not a punishment of Sin, which distinction is most
Blasphemou^, as here it is made use of, seeing it insinuates that God
Transgresses his own Law, by inflicting more misery on fallen man, than was
denounced in the Threatening. Either this he must say, or else that Sickness,
and Death, as they are now circumstantiated, are not inflicted by God, which I
am sure is little better than the former. But to shut up all, he says, that
his Adversary has not said enough, to proselyte him to his Opinion,
notwithstanding that he had so d^shed his reason, upon which it was builded,
that the Quaker attempteth not the Restoration thereof: He adds further as a
reason why his Adversary had not said enough to proselyte him, that death to
Adam in the state of Innocence should have been a pleasure and not a pain;
which reason is altogether reasonlesse, seeing the reason why death is pleasant
to any, is its being the port to free Men from all evil, and especially from
Sin, without which Adam should have wholly remained, if he had persevered in
his integrity; but it is too evident, that the Quaker is of Bellarmins mind who
de Statu primi Hominis, alleges that man during his Integrity was not free of
concupiscence and evil inclinations; which doctrine makes God the Author of
sin. But I leave this matter, only I cannot but here observe, which I might do
in most places and weightiest points of Robert Barclay's Vindication; that per
fas aut nefas (as they say) the Quakers must have the last words* for who will
think it requisite to write after one, who can tell his Adversary that he has
not said enough to proselyte him, and yet never so much as essay to vindicate
his own, or remove his adversaries reasons, as Robert Barclay does here, and
yet publishes his book to the world, as a sufficient answer or refutation of
what his adversary had said, living in the mean time without so much as an
attempted vindication, these points with which the whole frame of Quakerism
stands and falls; for if Bodily death was included in the threatening, then
our doctrine of Original sin is proved, which doctrine once being evinced, all
the pretended absurdities and blasphemies, which Socinians, Quakers and others
infer from our Doctrine of Original sin and Reprobation, fall to the Ground,
and they are, if they be Christians, obliged to remove these themselves.
Further its clear from Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is Death, where death
without exception of any kind of death is called the wages, not the consequence
only of sin, as the Quaker both in his Apology and Vindication Sect. 5. number. 8.
in contradict^on to the express Text, expounds it; neither is his reason more
weighty, than his exposition is sound, which is, that the whole Creation
received a decay by Adams fall, and yet Herbs and Trees are not to be called
sinners, seeing the Apostle is not here speaking of herbs and trees, but of Men
Women who are capable of receiving the wages of sin, as being the workers
thereof, and certainly one may with the like reason, say that H^rbs and Trees
are capable of eternal life as that they may be capable of the wages of Sin.
His other shift which he has Ibid: by which also he destroys the former, viz.
that by death is not to be understood Bodily Death, because Eternal Life is put
as the Opposite of the death here spoken of, and obtained by Christ Jesus, and
yet natural death is not avoided, is not much better then the former, seeing
that after the resurrection, the Bodies of the Godly, shall live as well as
their souls, and the reunion of both does belong to Eternal Life, and so
natural Life is comprehended in Eternal Life, as well as Spiritual Life; and
tho believers die a Bodily Death, yet it is not a punishment to them, on this
account that the Sting and Bitterness thereof is removed by Christ, who did
bear the same, otherwise death is in it self a punishment, being the separation
of Soul and Body, the most strictly united friends and companions in the World.

3ly. Our Doctrine of Original Sin is clearlie evinced from Romans 5.12. As by
one Man, Sin entered into the World and Death by Sin, etc. together with the
following verses; whence diverse strong arguments may easily be collected, for
1. The Apostle that he may prove justification not to be by works but by Faith,
or the imputed righteeousness of Christ; makes a comparison betwixt the two
common Heads or Representatives, Adam and Christ, in this, that both of them
represented the parties related to them, the same way, so that Adam was a Type
of Christ in his standing in the room of one party as Christ did in the Room
of another, by bearing of their Iniquities Isa* 53.11. By being made sin for
them, 2 Cor. 5.21. (i. e.) by Imputation thereof unto him, for no otherwise
this text can be understood without Blasphemy; that they may be made the
Righteousness of God in Him, i. e. by imputation of it to them, as their Sin
was imputed to him; Therefore Adam the Type, stood in the name and Room of
Mankind, so as his doings or failings were imputed to them. Robert Barclay
Vindication, Sect. 5. numb. 7. Alleges that this comparison spoileth all our
doctrine, because if the Righteousness of Christ is not to be imputed to men
for Justification, until they actually join with it apprehended by Faith, so
neither is the unrighteousness and disobedience of Adam, imputed to Men for
Condemnation, until they actually join with it. But I wonder not to see a man
intending by right or wrong to Stick to his preconceived opinions, make use of
Fig-leaf defenses, when he can find no other: For may not Children before they
come to the use of Reason, be justified and Saved by the Righteousness of
Christ imputed unto them, and by consequence, others before the use of reason
stand guilty of Adams sin imputed to them, which is the Conclusion he fain
would evite. Moreover he may as well say, that Adams Sin does not at all hurt
any of his posterity, until they having the use of reason, actually join with
it, which yet he no where says, but grants the contrary in several places
of this Section. 3ly. Omne simile claudicat, this parallel ought not
necessarily, to be stretched to every particular mode and circumstance, but
only to the particular which is intended here, viz. the Imputation of what the
two common representatives did or suffered, unto the parties represented by
them; but the Quakers have Learned Bellarmin's Art, who by racking of this
Parallel thought to overthrow our Doctrine of Justification by faith. 2. The
Sin of Adam is such, that if this Text have any sense at all, by this Sin of
his, all have sinned, and by it Death without exception is brought upon all
Mankind. 3. It is such a sin of which they are guilty who have not sinned after
the similitude of Adam, seeing death reigned over them, for death can reign
over none but Guilty persons, but Infants are subject to Death, tho they have
not sinned after the similitude of Adam, i. e. by actual transgression, Ergo
Infants are guilty of Adams sin. 4. This Offense of Adams was of such a nature,
that the Guilt of it, or judgment flowing therefrom, came upon all the party
represented by him, to the condemnation thereof, i. e. (if it be any thing) so
that this party stood really condemned thereby. v. 18. But all Mankind were
represented by Adam, Ergo all Men are condemned by the sin of Adam imputed to
them: To this Robert Barclay answers Vind. page, 101. That Judgment or Guilt
is not expressed in the Original, which is true, but while he says, it ought
not to be supplied, one would expect that he should give a better answer, which
I looked for; but all that he gives, is an individuum vagum [Something] which
supplement denudeth the Text offense, making a Welshmans hose thereof;
therefore certainly there can be no other thing understood, but either
Judgment, as our Translation has it, or Condemnation, as the version of
Tremellius out of the Syriak, or Guilt, as Beza: Seeing the effect thereof was
the condemnation of the whole party represented by Adam, as the Text clearlie
shows. But to declare his Harmony with Rome he follows the Versio Vulgata,
which in this place has nonsense supplying nothing. From all that is said, I
argue thus, that sin which is described to us by the Apostle, that he says
brought death upon all Men, that men Sinned by it, and were made Sinners, even
they who could not as yet actually sin, that they all became Guilty of Death
and condemnation; that Sin by imputation is the sin of the whole Nature,
included in Adam, and renders the whole nature obnoxious to death and
condemnation; but the first Sin of Adam is thus described to us by the
Apostles, etc. Ergo, that sin is the sin of Nature, etc. Robert Barclay denies
the Major of this argument, and that to the admiration of all Logicians, seeing
no connection can be clearer in the World, as might easily appear to any that
consider it; for who can deny (not to mention other Members of this Argument)
that if these who had not actually sinned, are made sinners by this
Transgression of Adam, then this is the Sin of the whole Nature, or imputed to
it, which is our Doctrine of Original Sin; who I say will deny this? Seeing
there is no other thing in the consequence then in the antecedent, except a
variation of words and Phrases holding forth the same thing, which yet cannot
be counted a Tautology in strict Syllogistical a^g^mentation, the scope of
which is to evince the same sense by a clearer phrasiology or way of speaking.
2. He says that in this argumentation, words not in the Text are foisted in,
viz. they who have not actually sinned: But in this he only bewrays his Own
and his Brethrens capital error* that the Scriptures ought not to be
interpreted or reasoned from; for his adversary used only this argument as a
clear deduction from the Text, and yet because it is not in so many words in
the Text, he rejects it; yea he says Ibid. let him show me the place of
Scripture that says that Infants are guilty of Adams sin. Behold, Reader, how
the Quakers new light has extinguished the light of sound reason, and provided
for their ancestors the Sadducees a shield, such as it is, toward off the
argument of our Savior, whereby He to purpose proved the Resurection from the
dead; but had Robert Barclay been there, he had given him more ado, by saying,
show me the plain Scripture that says the dead shall rise again: Moreover we
say that this follows clearly from these words, in whom all have sinned. To
this he answers, that it is to be understood of all that could sin, i. e.
actuallie having come to the use of reason* but this answer has in its bosom a
blasphemous falsehood that the righteousness of Christ, cannot be imputed to
Infants, and therefore that they are not saved by him only, and come to Heaven
throw his Righteousness, for whatever he say for the defense of this h^^
^nswer, does of its own accord tend to the protection of this Blasphemy; for
altogether with the like reason, it might be replied to any pleading from this
Chapter that the Justification and Salvation of Infants is to be ascribed to
the Righteousness of Christ; that these are only righteous for the
Righteousness of Christ, who could be righteous, i. e. After the use of reason
actually joined themselves to that Righteousness. 2. He may as well say, that
these received hurt and damage by the sin of Adam, who could receive it, i. e.
actually join themselves to it, for there is alike reason for both. His reason
why Infants cannot sin is, because they are under no Law, for the proof
whereof, he refers me to what he has said above, whither with him I will
return, which is number. 4. where he requires in what Countries they use to kill
all the Children whose Fathers are put to death for their crimes? To which I
reply, 1. That it is enough to prove Children to be under a Law, that tho in
nonage or unborn, they undergo forfeiture and deprivation of Goods and
privileges, for no evil of their own, but their Fathers misdemeanors only. 2.
Both in divine and humane writing, Children are recorded to have suffered
death, who had committed no actual sin, and yet suffered the same punishment
with their Fathers who had actually sinned: In divine story, the Sodomites* I
am sure were put to death for their crimes, all whose Children were killed with
them Genesis 19. Behold, reader, how easily his most perplexing questions are
resolved. The like fell out to the Children of Core Numb. 16. The Children of
Achan Jos. 7. and to the Canaanitish Infants; the Children of Benjamin; the
inhabitants of Iabesh-Gilead: of the like examples humane Histories are full,
of which the reader may see good store collected by that excellent divine
Turret. in vol. 1. loco. 9. Quest 9. page 671. I am sure there is nothing more
common than for Kings or Commonwealths to sack the Cities and Countries of
Obstinate rebels, and thus to destroy the Children with the Fathers, and to
kill the hostages of Covenant-breakers, without respect and regard to their
age, examples of which see in Livie decade tertia. 3. If in any point of
Religion and Faith, the admirable depth of the judgm^nt and Secret Counsel of
God, be to be seen, certainly it is be observed here; for I am sure Man's
luxuriant reason, can find so much to object against even the very inherent
corruption of Man, his miseries tho in nonage, and his deprivation of the
image of God, as being the effects or sure consequence of Adams eating of the
forbidden fruit, as may send the answerer to Paul's Sanctuary Romans 9.20. Who
art thou etc. We answer therefore, 1. That Adam was a public person, standing
and falling in the Room of his posterity, in whose name and behalf, the
Covenant of works was made with him as their representative, so that his first
sin was not personal, but the sin of the whole Nature: To this Robert Barclay
replyeth number* 6. requiring Mr. Brown to prove by plain Scriptures, that Adam
ceased to be a public person after he had committed his first sin. Answer, he
denies not, if this be proved, but that our Doctrine of Original sin will
stand, for so much he here insinuates; I therefore with the more cheerfulness
prove, that Adam did cease to be a public person, which is evident from this,
that he died in that day he did eat, and therefore made the Covenant void and
null, now certainly no Man with reason can say, that a Man dead in Law, as Adam
was after the breach of the Covenant by eating, can in his future actions be a
public person, in respect of the same Law broken by eating; Therefore seeing
the day he did eat, did put a term to this Covenant of Life (as no man with
reason can deny it) and a period to this common headship, for the one of these
stands and falls reciprocallie with the other; it is clear and manifest to
all, that Adam after his fall was no more a public person. Moreover the sin of
Adam whereby we were damnified, is still holden forth as one, and not as many
sins; as for example Romans 5. All along in the comparison betwixt Christ, and
Adam.

Robert Barclay replyeth, that we may as well hence conclude; that we are only
justified by the first act of Christ's obedience, and so have nothing to do with
Christ's death and sufferings. But by his favor Bonum oritur ex integra causa,
Malum autem ex defectu q^ovis. The Scriptures every where, and in particular
Isa. 53. throughout express a long series of doings and sufferings agreed upon
in the Covenant of Redemption, none of which could be wanting for the
fulfilling of the bargain and accomplishment of our Salvation: Whereas on the
other hand, one defect in Adam was enough to complete (so to speak) his fall,
and make the breach of the Covenant, it being an evil thing, for the making of
which one defect is enough. And thus his Gordian, and insoluble knot (for so he
accounts it) is with all easiness untyed. But we need not insist on this,
seeing he endeavors to Shre^d himself, under the covert of his accustomed
antiscriptural dottage, calling for plain Scripture; that is, That Adam was a
public person before his fall, in so many Letters, and Syllables, knowing well
that unless underproped with such damnable hypotheses his Doctrine cannot
stand; but he buyeth bad Wares at a full dear price, for with the same breath
he overthrows both his own Apology, and Vindication, with whatsoever beside
he has written in the defense of his principles; seeing these are not found in
the Scriptures in so many Letters, and Syllables: But I again return to his
seventh number, and in it next he alleges Augustine as the Patron of his
opinion, in contradiction to his own Apology Chap. 4. Where he granted Augustine
to be of the same Opinion with his Adversary, acknowledging that according to
the mind of Augustine, Infants even before their birth are Guilty of Eternal
Death, and the pains of Hell. Thus he either speaks self contradictions, or
would make Augustine to do it. 2. The words of Augustine, from which he would
conclude this self contradiction are these Sermon. 7. Ex verb. Apostoli, what do
ye think to say? And whose ears can hear it? Did they sin themselves? Where I
pray you did they sin? When and how did they sin? They know neither good nor
evil. Shall they sin that are under no Command? Prove that Infants are sinners,
prove what is their Sin, is it because they weep, that they sin? Do they Sin,
because they take pleasure, or repel trouble by motion, as dumb Animals? If
these motions be sin, they become greater sinners in Baptism, for they resist
most vehemently. But I say another thing. You think they have sinned; otherwise
they had not dyed, but what say ye of such as die in there Mothers womb? Will
you say they have sinned also? You Lie, or are deceived. etc. Thus Augustine in
opposition to the Pelagians, who to evite the force of the arguments of the
Orthodox proving Original sin, did assert, that Children presently after their
birth become actual Sinners. And yet from this the Quaker will conclude that
Augustine in these words contradicts his own doctrine of Infants being guilty
of Original Sin; of which there is not the least appearance, seeing this will be
admirable Logic to infer from Augustine his proving of Infants not to be
guilty of actual sin, therefore he denied them to be guilty of Original sin:
Now what wou^d not these Men adventure to say in the dark, when they are so
audacious, as to publish to the world in print, that Augustine denied Infants to
be guilty of Original sin, when his own works do every where, and the World
proclaim the contrary: yea and the Quaker himself also confessed it. Here he
alleges that the Apostle no where says that Children, are under any Law;
which is true, if he understand it in so many words, which yet notwithstanding
may be gathered from the 13. and 14. verses of this Chapter, where the Apostle
having said, That there is no Sin, where there is no Law, subjoyneth that
nevertheless Death, (which I have in my former Section, proved to be a
punishment) reigned even over these who had not sinned after the Similitude of
Adam: Which holds true of Children who never sinned actually as Adam did.
When he sees that it cannot be denied, that in this place (...) is of the same
meaning with (...) he would have (...) to repeat (...) making the words to run
thus, In which, or by occasion of which, death, all have sinned. A Pelagian
exposition, making men sin by imitation only, and the righteousness of Christ
to be the occasion, and pattern only; and not the price of our acceptance, and
Salvation. And although he say, that this is resolved by a serious consideration
of the comparison between Christ and Adam, as stated by him in his Apology.
This is not to be regarded, seeing after an impartial search, nothing of this
resolution can be perceived: He ought therefore to have showed u^, how in
particular he had in his Apology preoccupied our argument, whereby they are
proved to be amongst the grossest of Socinians, who make the death and
sufferings of Christ an occasion, or example only whereby to walk, and so to be
saved: But not at all the procuring cause of Salvation, but Vltra posse non
datur esse. But indeed this is a fine way of Vindicating ones Doctrine, to say
in opposition to their Adversaries argument how pressing soever, in the general
only, you do not understand our doctrine aright, or consider what we say. And
upon this answer only erect his Triumphal Arches, and Cry Victoria.

4. Our Doctrine is to the conviction of all, except of the Old and New
Pelagians, evicted from Ephesians 2, 3. and yet Rob: Barclay (following Bellarmin,
who played the like audacious pranks with Romans 4. whereby we evince against the
Papists, Justification to be by Faith) would turn our weapons against our
selves, and overthrow from this place our Doctrine of Original Sin, alleging
that Men's evil walking, is the cause why they are counted the children of
Wrath: But if the Apostle had so meaned, in all likelihood, he should not have
spoken so generally as he did; but had made some Intimation, that Children were
excepted, which he neither here, nor any where else does* 2. This Phrase by
Nature, is still taken in Scripture, for, so soon as a thing has a being, or
for its very rising, or Original: which these Scriptures confirm. Romans 2.27.
and 11, 24. Gal, 2.5. and 4.8. 1 Cor. 15.44, 46. Hence we thus with Calvin, in
opposition to the Pelagians, on the place reason What is naturally in every
one, is in them from their very Original; and therefore if all be the Children
of Wrath, or (...) to wrath by Nature* they are so (...) their very Original.
These Scriptures, and this Argument of Calvin used by his Adversary Robert
Barclay in his Vind^* Is so far from attempting to answer; that he makes not
the least mention thereof. From which one Omission, though there were no more,
any may easily see, that his book deserves nothing less than the name of a
Vindica^tion.

3. We add as a good secondary Confirmation, that the primitive Church used
still this place to prove the same Doctrine, which we hold of Original sin, in
opposition to the Pelagians, denying it; and in particular Augustine de Fide ad
Petram diaconum Cap. 26. who says firmissime tene, hold most constantly, and
without so much a^ once wavering, that every one who is conceived by the
conjunction of man and woman, is born with Original sin, under the power of
ungodliness, subject to death* (which he explaineth of eternal, as well as
bodily death, Ibid) and upon the same very account a Child of wrath, concerning
which the Apostle says, and we were by nature the Children of wrath. And the
like Doctrine, did Fulgentius, and fourteen bishops with him assert, as also
Theodoretus, Primasius and Haimo on the place, taking by nature etc. to import
all carnally born, and partaking of the nature of Adam, and so to be verified
of all brought forth by the conjunction of man and woman. To this argument
drawn from Orthodox antiquity, Rob. (...) Vind. Sect. 2. N 5. replyeth, what
then* ^oth that render our doctrine null? Answer, Not indeed to a Pelagian;
which every where, and in special here by his open Patrociny of this Here^y, he
fully demonstrateth himself to be, notw^thstanding that at other times he would
fain deny himself to be one, studying to evite the name, tho he hug their
^lasphemy. Their answer to our Argument drawn from Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen in
iniquity etc. Which by all the Orthodox, both primitive writers, as Augustine
passim, and the Reformers, as Luther, in his Confession is understood of
Original sin, is most strange, viz That David speaks of the sin of his
Mother, and not of his own. To which it is replied that thus the marriage duty
shall de condemned. To this Rob. Barclay, Vind: Sect 5 N 7. returns a denial
of the inference; which yet is clear; seeing wherever in all the Scriptures, any
did bewail the sins of their progenitors, they still specified and pointed at
the sin in particular, as Neh. 9. with many other places; but here if any
particular fact be specified, it must needs be that of the Marriage duty,
therefore the inference holds good, and here I cannot but take notice of one
of his pungent answers, or rather questions (if ye will) Which he proposes ubi
modo in these words, And I desire yet to be informed of him in what Scripture
he reads of Original sin, and whether, if the Scripture be the only Rule, he
cannot find words fit enough to express his Faith? or must he shift for them
else where? Thus he, but in Lieu of these, I return him another question, and
desire to be informed of him, whether or not he reads of Actual sin, or
finds this in so many words? Behold then Reader* the desperate tendency of
Quakerism, which is to make men believe that there is no sin at a^ m^ntioned in
the Scriptures, and therefore, not at all prohibited: For seeing on the account
that the phrase Original sin, is not found in Scriptures, he denies our
Doctrine how clear so ever it be proved, by Scriptural deductions: he gives
good ground to another* for inferring ad hominem, that there is not such a
thing as Actual sin, seeing the phrase Actual sin, is no where in Scripture to
be ^ound, more than that phrase Original sin.

The same Truth may be yet further demonstrated by several other pregnant
arguments. As first,

Infants for the sin of Adam, are deprived of the Image of God therefore there
is no reason to deny, that they can be accounted guilty of his sin. The
Antecedent is denied by none of our present Adversaries. The Consequence is
also firm, for its a punishment, yea, the greatest of punishments, equal with,
if not greater than the torments of hell, to be deprived of the Image of God,
and therefore of his comfortable presence, Communion, Love, and Favor. 2. The
Scripture is ignorant of any persons that go to Heaven, except these that were
guilty persons, these whose sin Christ did bear: Er: Children who have never
committed Actual sin, are guilty before God. The Consequence is beyond all
^xceptions. The Antecedent also remains firm, until our Ad^ersaries adduce
some place of Scripture, showing that some persons who never were guilty go to
Heaven, or are saved without the merits of Christ. Moreover, it is clear from
the whole tenor of the Scriptures, that none are saved but sinners; which was
Christ's errand to the Earth; (...) the Scripture no where makes any
distinction, betwixt guilty persons, and sinners: and no where says, that any
are saved, but these whose sins Christ did bear, and one would in reason think,
that this can least of all men, be denied by our Adversaries, who assert that
Christ died for all men without exception: Therefore if Infants be not guilty,
there is no reason to say, that Christ ^ied for them, or did bear their sins,
therefore we with all reason enquire, which our Adversaries according to their
principles can never be able to answer, how Infants, if not guilty come to
heaven, without the Death, and Merits of Christ? They are altogether void of
reason, while they with Rob: Barcl. for want of a better answer enquire, How
these whom we account Elect Infants come to Heaven? Seeing our reply is at hand,
viz: that they are acquitted before God, by the imputed righteousness of Christ.

3. Certain it is from the whole tenor of the Scriptures, and in special Rev*
22.15. That these who in the sight of God are dog^, are guilty persons, and to
be excluded from Heaven, and therefore to be thrust into Hell, but whole
Nations without any exception are such. Matthew. 15.26. Therefore Infants being a
part of these Nations, deserve to be excluded from Heaven, and sent to Hell.
Add to this, that some Children are said by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.14. To be
altogether destitut of Holiness, which persons, Heb. 12.14. So long as they are
so, cannot see God. Some of the Fathers in order to prove the Guilt of Infants,
flowing from Adams transgression, made use of Genesis 17.14. The man-child that is
uncircumcised, shall be cut off. This Deduction of some of the Ancients Mr:
Broun mentions page 132. But expressly telling, that he will not urge it, but
infers notwithstanding from this place, that Children may be in some sense
capable of breach of Covenant; and therefore under a Law, desiring his
Adversary to chew his cud upon this inference, which if true, overthrows all
this Socinian Doctrine anent Original sin, which still presupposes, that
Children are under no Law. For reply to which Rob: Barcl. Vind* page* 62.
introduces Mr. Broun as if he had willed him, to chew his ^ud on this first
deduction, viz. that, of some of the Fathers; passing by the second, viz Mr.
Broun's own inference, without so much as mentioning thereof; whereby he
declares that it has broken his Jaws, or at best, is not yet digested.

4, None can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven except they be born again. Ioh.
3.7. But surely this new birth, or to be born again, is the gift of God, and a
privilege which he may withhold from whom he will, and therefore without
prejudice to his justice may exclude whosoever has it not, from the Kingdom of
Heaven, but none are excluded from it, but guilty persons, which I believe none
will deny, therefore Infants may well be accounted guilty persons.

6. The main Objection, and that for any thing I know, upon which the bulk of
all their Objections depends, against our Doctrine of Original sin* the
Socinians and Quakers draw from Ezekiel 18.20. The Son shall not bear the Fathers
iniquity etc. Hence they infer, That no sin can be imputed. To which it is
answered, that this will not follow seeing the Lord is there stopping the mouth
of the wicked, but yet que^^lous Jews, as tho they had been altogether
guiltless themselves, and punished for their Fathers transgressions only; To
whom the Lord asserteth that they had sin enough themselves; for which they
might be punished and does not at all say, that no sin can be imputed to
another, this meaning we say, beside that it is evident from the Context, must
of necessity be admitted, otherwise there shall be a flat contradiction between
this, and many other texts. As for example the second Command* This text Mr.
Broun page 119. cleared, and everted what the Quakers had said from this place;
therefore he in his Vindication page 55. not being in case to force the tex^, to
speak for him again, says the words are plain. The Son shall not die for the
Fathers iniquity. And therefore they must stand to the overthrow of his
Adversaries Doctrine. Such a Comb^t^nt as this is not fit for a second essay.

CHAP. IV. Of GOD.
IN this Chapter, I shall prove the Quakers guilty of three things, each of
which, is enough to Unchristian the maintainer thereof. 1. That they deny the
holy Trinity with Arrius and Sabellius. 2 That their Doctrine makes God the
Author of in. 3. That they hold the Soul of Man to be God.

First, we shall evince, that this Sect really denies the Trinity of persons
in the Godhead; and is as abominable, if not more, as the old Arrians,
Sabellians, Macedonians, or the latter Arrians, as the Socinians. And in the
first place, we shall give you the words of George Fox, a Quaker of great note,
in his ^rimer to Europe, page 37. What is the Trinity in Unity? and whether all
these words be ^ot of men's Wisdom and Teaching? Ans. To every particular Query
and word that is queried of you here, and what was their first ground and root,
and ^o the light bring it out, and the first ^uthor of them, and whether or no
all this body has not gotten up since the Apostasy, in the transgression,
where men's wisdom teaches words, and the words the Holy Ghost teaches, is
foolishness to them. Whether or not this is so? Answer me, yea, or no: What are
the three Persons in the Trinity? How are the three Persons, subsistences of
the Diety? How is the Trinity not the number numbering, but the number
numbered? How is the opinion of the Trinity not only a Church Tradition, but a
Doctrine expressed in the Scriptures?

How is the word Hypostasis, which you acknowledge any singular Substance, used
Metaleptically? or by taking one thing for another, for a person. Heb, 1.2.
Since ye say, a person is a singular, ^ational, and complete Substance, and
differing from another by an incommunicable property? Answer me this, and all
the Terms, and Words, and Queries, and things before mentioned. What be the
Wisdom that has taught them, and Ground, and Root they are come from? And
whether or not they have all come up amongst Christians, since the days of the
Apostles? And learned of the Heathens that knew not G^d, that transgressed the
life, that had nothing but their own Wisdom to teach them, who was taught by
their own Wisdom, and whether that is not pleasing to a carnal man that knows
not the things of God How are the Words, Persons, Trinity (...) which ye grant,
are not found in so many Syllables in the Scriptures, yet agree thereto?

And George Keith in his Quak: No Popery page 47.104. Says, that, To speak of
Persons in the Godhead, is an uncertain, unscriptural Notion, and a barbarous
heathnish Term.

The Doctrine and Principles of the Priests in Scotland, page 19, 20. It is a
lie that the Scripture does declare of the three persons, or of the Trinity.
Add to all this, that in all their Treatises, there i^ nothing found concerning
the Holy Trinity, except enough of this kind of Doctrine, of which we have
given the Reader a taste.

I will in the second place show, that thi^ Doctrine is all one, if not worse,
with the Doctrine of the execrable Arrians: For their Doctrine was, That the
Son is separated, or divided from the Eternal, and Ineffable Substance of God
the Father. In opposition^ o which, The Council of Nice, says, chap^ I. in
their Symbol, That the Son is (...), i. e. of the same individual Substance
with the Father, Rufin. lib. 1. Now it is to be observed, whoever hitherto
contradicted the Doctrine of this Nicen Symbol, were accounted by all
Christians, Arrians. And upon this ground, abominated by the whole Church Cane
pejus et angue, as they speak Next, I assert, that whosoever denied that the
Son was (...) Patri, that is, of the same individual Substance with the Father,
were by all the Orthodox counted Arrians, So that in that unhappy Council of
Ariminum, when the Arrian Bishops had deceived some of the simpler sort,
through their Sophistry, and made them through their own simplici^y and
ignorance of the Greek-tongue, to grant that the Son was not (...) Patri, they
were judged to involve them in the profession of Arrianism; which is clear from
Ruf. Hist. Eccl. Lib. 1 Cap. 2^.

The Argument wherewith they endeavor to prove, that the Son was not
Consubstantial with the Father, was, that the word (...) is not found in
Scripture, which appears from this last cited Author. They used also this
Argument at a Convention at Carthage in the time of Hunnericus, with such
impudent clamours, that they deafned their hearers. Christianus Matthias in his
Theat. Hist. page 744. So the Reader may se^ here, that the Quakers have learned
both their Doctrine and Proofs thereof, from the Arrians: They ought therefore
to have the Name, seeing they have the thing.

I will here subjoin the words of a late Arrian, in a Pamphlet of his called
Antith: Christ et Antichristi, which the Reader may find inserted and refuted
in the 7 Tom. of Zinchius his Works, which Words are his 20 Antith. to be found
in Za^ch. Col. 872. 2. Tim. 1. Hold fast the Form of sound Words, which thou
have learned of me* The Apostle enjoined this to Timothy, and a^^ the Ministers
of the Church, to the end that they may flee strange Words and Phrases in
speaking concerning God and the Mysteries of Faith, that they may be content
with these, which he himself used in delivering the Doctrine of Religion, these
words, Trinity, Essence, three persons ^n one e^^^nce:

although they be neither used by Christ nor Paul, but invented by the Councils
and Fathers: yet say the Orthodox, they are necessarily to be kept in the
Church; therefore let them confess as the matter is, that they are not the
disciples of Christ and the Apostles, seeing so rashly they strive against their
precepts, and the divine similitude, wherewith the Prophets and Apostles did
holily express the Mystery of the knowledge of God, and Christ, being laid
aside, they study new Forms, and in teaching the Church, they have the same
oftentimes in their Mouth, not without vile Ignominy both to the doctrine, and
Church of Christ.

Behold now reader the identity of the doctrine of Quakers with that of
Arrians, from whom they have learned it.

But some perhaps may object, saying, that this identity is only in words, to
whom I answer, Either the things impor^ed by these words and phrases, and given
by Christians Generally as the meaning thereof, and contained in Scripture or
not: now if the first be true, then to stir up strife about these words, proves
only the raisers thereof ridiculous. But 2. Supposing that the things
themselves, which Christians understand by these words, or phrases are holden
forth in Scripture, then to deny that we may use them, is founded on this
Hypothesis viz. that in Explication of Scriptures or disputs about the meaning
the^eof it is impious, and unlawful to use any words or phrases except they be
(...) or in the same Letters and syllables in Scripture, tho we be never so
sure, that as to the sense and meaning thereof, they be found in the
Scrip^ures, but this Hypothesis, if true, overthrows all Scripture
consequences, interpretation of Scripture, blasts the hope of ever getting
Heretics refuted, which none will deny except ^n Arrian, or the like
Heretics, and while these deny it they only oppose their own practice to their
own opinion, seeing they themselves as other d^sputant^, endeavor to draw
Consequen^es from Scripture, and paraphrase upon it to make it peak for
themselves: Now that this absurd and blasphemous consequence sticks fast to
this their Hypothesis, appears from no few places of Scripture, and among
others Math. 22.31, 32. For if our Savior had stuck to the mere Letters and
Syllabl^s of Exodus 3.6. I am the God of Abraham, etc. without deduction of a
consequence from them, and so an exposition of them, he should never from these
words have evinced against the Sa^ducees, the Resurrection of the dead. But I
need not stay longer to evince this, for certain it is, and already proved, not
only from the Quakers obstinate denial of a free and positive Con^ession of
their Faith, anent this matter, but also from their useing of the same weapons
with which the Arrians attempted the subversion of this truly Catholic
Doctrine, as also sufficiently by the express words of Fox and these of the
Principles of the Priests; but this Arrian Self Contradicting shift they are
forced ^o us^, being conscious to themselves as the Arrians before them, that
their Doctrine cannot be proof against the firm and demonstrative deductions,
which the Orthodox bring from Scripture, with which as so many Battering-Rams
they with ease overthrow this Antirripitarian Impiety. Therefore the other
Branch of the Dilemma viz. That the sense of these words, i. e. That which all
Christians understand, as the Me^ning thereof according to the Quakers, is not
in Scripture. And indeed this is the Truth: And so the Quakers are Arrians, the
evicting of which is the intent of this present discourse. But yet farther that
this is Truth, viz. That the Quakers are Arrians* if not worse, and deny that
fundamental Doctrine of the persons of the ^oly Trinity, and that the Son of
God, and the Holy Ghost also are of the same substance with the Father, and
distinct persons from him, is most evident from their perpetual hellish
raisings at the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, calling it an Abominable and
stinking Doctrine, as these that heard them told me, and when they were
reproved, their reply was, thou know not the Truth. Again they demonstrate
to the world, that they are the Frye of Arrius, while they reject the Common
Translation and Exposition of Heb. 1.^. Admitted by all except the Arrians and
their Brethren: For if the word (...) ought not to be rendered Person or
Subsistence, as all the Lexicographers, and in particular Scapula, Pasor,
Scrivelius upon the word, and all the Interpreters both ancient (as Pareus, in
locum shows, and modern, Dutch Divines, and English Translation render it)
but, Substance (for certainly thus it must be rendered, ^f the word Person, or
Subsistence be rejected) then it shall irresisti^ly follow that the Father and
the Son are divided in substance, which was the Doctrine of Arrius, both in
Ma^ter and Term^; hence it is clear^r than daylight, that these men are his
Disciples, yea it is to be observed that if the word (...) in this place ought
to be rendered Subsistentia or Persona, then if a man believe the Scriptures,
and that words are the true Symbols of things, it is not possible that he be in
Judgment an Arrian: A^ contrariwise if a Man believe, that the word ought to ^e
rendered Substance, presupposing the Truth of the Scriptures, and that words
are the true Idea's of things, he cannot but be an Arrian. Hence that for named
Arrian Antithesi 4 ta apud Zanchium, page 854 of his forecited book, says He^,
1. Christ is the splendour of the Glory of God, and figure of His Substance,
Christ is the invisible God Himself, says the Church of Rome: For this Arrian
still calls all the oppose^s of Arrianism, members of the Church of Rome, as
the Quakers do now. But it may be here objected, that several very Orthodox
Writers have in this place, translated ^he Greek Word (...) by that of
Substantia; to which I answer, that all the Orthodox, both Ancient and Modern
while they thus spoke, did take the word Substantia, in the sense that both
they, and we do the word Persona or Subsistentia. This our Ass^rtion may be
most evident to any, though but a little acquainted with the ancient and Modern
Orthodox (i. e. the opposers of Arrians and Socinians) writers. For Augustine
who in several places, and in particular lib. 5. and 7. De Trinitate ascribes
to God three Substances, or three Subsistences indifferently, yet
notwithstanding elsewhere, carefully distinguishes them* and in particular; de
fide ad Petrum Diaconum ^ap. 1. where he says, for if, as the substance of
the Father and the Son is one, so also they were (...) one person, then there
should be nothing a^ all which truly could be called a Trinity. Hence we se^
that this word Substantia did bea^ a twofold Signification* in the first of
which it may be well put into the re^t as Equivalent with, or the Synonymum of
the word Persona without the least shadow of prejudice to our Doctrine; it were
easy to show the like ou^ o^ Hilarious, and others of the Ancients. I shall
content my self to set down the words of Photius Patriarch of Constantinople in
his Bibliotheca Col. 299. Giving his Judgment concerning a book of Pierius an
ancient Pastor, saying, as touching the Father, and the Son he believes
piously, except that he says that they are two Substances, and as many
Natures, howbeit not so as he adhereth to Arrius; for as may be gathered from
what goes before and follows, he uses the word, Substantia, for, or in the
same signification with the word (...) or persona: See the same Author Col.
783, De Libris Ephremi Pariarchae Theopolitani, where he confirms at large
this our assertion. Now observe, serious Reader, of how great a consequence in
the Judgment of those who are in this great point most Orthodox, the right or
wrong use of these words, about which we now treat, was esteemed, and also that
they took them in the same sense, for which we now plead. But I forbear to add
more out of the an^ients. For Calvin Inst. lib. 1. cap. 13. Sect. 2. affirms
this our proposition of all the Ancient Orthodox without exception, and Socinus
ingenuously confesses it. Of the Modern writers, I affirm the same, as is
clear from Calvin ibid. and Tremellius in His version of the Text out of the
Syriak, Pome^ranus on the place and others. It is clear then th^^ we have both
name and thing in Scripture, and indeed this Text does so clearly hold forth
this truly Catholic Doctrine, that George Keith is forced to discover that
which he by all means endeavors to palliat: For Truth Defended p. 76.79. He
says that this Text is to be understood speaking of Christ as Man only. Now I
am sure, if he could make out this, he should do a piece of non such service
unto the Arrians and Socinians, for this is one of the Texts that they with
greatest Care endeavor to pervert, and wrest, and the Orthodox to vindicate,
inferring always from it the Divinity of Christ; but this he shall never be
able to make out, for there is nothing more clear than that the whole Context
and Scope of the Apostle does evince, that this place speaks of Christ as
God; and again who d^re say, except the Arrians and Socinians, with George
Keith, that Christ as Man can be called the Brightness of the Fathers Glory, or
the express Image, or Character of the Father: Man indeed was made according to
the Image of God, but certain it is, that no Creature in Scripture is called
the Image of the Father, hence when Christ Col: 1.15. Is called the Image of
the invisible God; Divines take the the word (GOD) for the person of the
Father, neither at all can it be otherwise understood, for Christ is there
called the first born of every Creature, and he by whom all things were
Created, and Consist: Hence Christ must be called the Image of the invisible
God according to his Godhead, and by ^ good Consequence by (God) must be
understood the Person of the Father as a distinct Subs^st^nc^ from that of the
Son. From all which I conclude, that so firm is the Truth of our Doctrine, that
the very things that seem to infringe and weaken it, resolve only into a fair
Occasion of, and making way for its clearer Evidence and stronger Corroboration.

Add to all this, that the primitive Church carefully retained these Words, and
Phrases, as either being in Scripture, in Terminis, or bottomed thereon, and as
being the true Symbols of these Divine Things, whereby the Church might most
fitly express her mind, and repel the Sophistry of Heretics, both before, but
esp^cially after the rise of the Arrian Heresy: H^nce Justin Martyr has a
book entitled (...), and describes a Person of the Holy ^rinit^ (...), etc.
And Damas^^^e Orth. fide, and others follow him in this Description. These and
the like Phrases are generally found in the works of the Fathers, as Irenaeus,
Tertullian, and others before the rise of Arrianism, but especially after it,
as Augustine, Athanasius, Hilarious, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Rufinus,
Sozomenes, and many others, diverse of which, as Augustine, and Athanasius, has
books with Titles expressly concerning the Holy Trinity: But as I sa^d before,
after the rise of the Arrian and Sabellian Heresies, the Church with greater
Care and Acuracy, distinguished the words, Substance, and Subsistence, as he
that pleases may see in Ruf. l. i. Cap. 29 and in the History of Sozomenes,
writing of the Council of Alexandria. Notable also to th^^ purpose, and never
to be forgotten are the words of Athanasius, who in his Symbol thus speaks,
Whosoever will be saved; before all things, it is necessary, that he hold the
Catholic Faith, which Faith, except every man keep wholly, and inviolat,
without doubt he shall eternally p^rish; this truly is the right Catho^ick
Faith, that we worship one God in Trinity, and the Trinity in Unity, without
confounding the Persons, neither separating the Substance, etc. From which
Time, to this day, the Church has Religiously Observed these Words, and
Phrases, whereby She might express the Truth, and distinguish her self from
that Porphyrian sect of the Arrians, (as C^^stantin the great called them) and
other Here^ick^. By this Time. I am confident that he that will not close his
Eyes, may perceive that the Doctrine of Quakers, is all one with that of
Arrians, Macedonians, Sabellians, which is the purpose of this Discourse. But
yet ex abundanti, I will transcrib a Passage or two further, The first of which
is in Truth Def. This complete Arrian, and self contradicter, having said page
75. That, It is only the ^^scriptural Terms of Trinity, and Persons, which he
denies, and not the Mystery, page 77. He gives himself the lie, and palpably
bewrays his Arrianism, in these words. And if Io: Alexander ^ir definition of
a Person be received, that it is an Intelligent Being, subsisting
incommunicably or distinctly, one from another, I do not see, for my part but
that three Persons, at this ^ate; shall infer (...) Intelligent Beeings,
subsisting incommunicably, and consequently three Gods. Behold, Reader, the the
Arrian dashing against the same stumbling-stone, upon which Arrians, and
Socinians have always broken their necks. For upon this very Account, that it
seemed to them to infer three Gods, the Arrians and Sabellians of old, and the
Socinians at this day always malign, and endeavor what they can, to render
odious that most necessary Doctrine of the Holy Trinity. With this passage of
George Keith, well agrees what Hubberthorn in his Reply to Sherlock impiously
belloweh forth page 19. That there is no Scripture for the Catholic Faith, and
Trinity, and three Persons.

Before I pass this Matter, I cannot but take Notice of the strange dealing of
George Keith, attempting to make Augustine a Patroniser of his Arrian Doctrine;
For in Truths Def: Cap 5. The Quaker h^th these Words. And indeed Augustine in
his 5 and 7 Books of the Trinity, not only says, the Words (three Persons)
are improper, but disputes against them, as I suppose. Io. Alexander for all
his School Logic, and Philosophy shall hardly be able t^ answer his Argument,
the substance of which, (...) my best remembrance, is this, The word Person,
either it signifies somewhat absolute and simple, or relative; to say the
first is absurd, otherways ther^ shall be three absolute Beeings, or Essence's
in God, which is absurd; If somewhat Relative, which is referred or relative to
another, as Father is relativ^ to a Son (and therefore a Father is Father of
a^nother, and no man is his own Father) the^ to say, the Father is a person, is
to say, the Father is the Person of some other, and so of the rest, which is
absurd, to the which Argument, not as mine, but really Augustin's, I leave Joh.
Alexander to answer. Thus George Keith. Ans. It seems that the Intent of the
Quaker is, to fasten a false Contradiction on Augustine; for none ever used the
word Person, in Application to the Holy Trinity, more frequently than Augustine
has done, as is obvious to any, that has but a little acquaintance with his
Works. And de Trinit. Lib. 5. Cap 8. He asserteth that the Latin Fathers, yea,
and these of greatest Authority among them, still used the word Person, as the
most fit that could be imagined, for the expressing of this Holy Mystery. To
whom he assenteth both in this place, and else where, in the same Books, Cited
by George Keith. We may hence see, what the drift of the Quaker is, even to
render both the Persons and Doctrine of the choicest Champions of Christ,
odious and contemptable, by making them speak self-contradictions, and that in
these very points, anent which, if the Body of the Christian World be not
grossly deceived, they were of all men, most Orthodox. 2. This same Father, de
Doctrina Christi. Lib 1. Cap 5. Alleges, that the word Causa, cannot
sufficiently enough agree to God. And Cap 6. That the word Deus, is not fit
enough, whereby God can be expressed. Sure I am, that in both these Books,
mentioned by the Quaker, he says nothing whereby we may conclude, that he is
more disliking the word Person, than the word Causa, or Deus. But shall I
think, that George Keith judges, that according to the mind of Augustine, God
is not the Creator, or first cause of all things? And that we sin in expressing
him by the Name of God? I do not think that the Quaker will assent to this, and
yet no more Reason has he to say, that according to Augustine, it is dangerous
to say, that there are three Persons in the Trinity. For the main Reason why he
thinks that there is some inconsistency in the word (Person) for the full
expressing of that inexpressible Mystery, he gives de Trinit. Lib 7. Cap 4 In
these words, When they enquire of us, what Three? or how these Three shall be
called? we set our selves to find some special or general Name, neither can we
find it, because the supereminency of the Dei^y exceeds the strength of our
Eloquence, and God is more truly Comprehended by the Mind, than expressed by
the Tongue, and more truly existeth, than comprehended in the Mind. This I say,
is the Reason, why Augustine thinks the word (Person) not sufficient enough,
for the Declaration of this incomprehensible Mystery: But the same is the
Reason why, de Doctrina Christ. Lib 1. Cap 5. He thinks that the word Cause
cannot agree to God: Hence it is apparent, That an Atheist might as well, and
with as good ground allege, that Augustine in the forecited places did
patronize his Atheism, and publish to the world that God is not the Supreme
cause of all things, or that there is not a God. 3. I have with care perused
these Books of Augustine, but could not at all find this Argument which George
Keith fathereth upon him: I Answer therefore the Argument not as Augustin's,
but as a sinnowless Argument of George Keith, drawn from a simily of natural
things, which has little or no proportion to that which is Infinite. Hence I
say, that it can have little or no weight. But again the Argument is false, and
Ridiculous, on this Account, that the Quakers make every Father, the Person of
his Son, which I am sure is absurd enough. For as a Father is the Father of
another, and yet a distinct Person from another, so God the Father, is the
Father of God the Son, and yet a distinct Person from God the Son. Hence the
similie ^rought, not by Augustine, but by the Quaker, for the overth^ow of the
Truth, tends to the Illustration, and clearing thereof. From all this Lea^n
how disingenuous Dealers these men are, that can find no better Means for the
defense, and propagation of their Doctrine, than to deceive the Simple, by
borrowing the Names of the Ancient Wort^ies, whereby to cover their blasphemous
Doctrine. Thus their best refuge is to broach Lies, in Hypocrisies.

2. I shall prove that according to the Quakers Doctrine, God is the Author of
sin, which I thus Evince.

God is the Author of every Substance, but according to the Quakers Doctrine,
Sin is a Substance. The Minor I prove, Grace is a Substance, which is their
Common Doctrine, therefore sin is a Substance also. The consequence Rob:
Barclay Vind: page 49. denies, which I thus prove, the Antecedent viz. that
Grace is a Substance, they endeavor to prove by these Reasons. First because
it is in and by this inward, and substantial Seed in their hearts, as it comes
to receive nourishment, and to have a Birth, and Geniture in them, they come to
have these Spiritual Senses raised, by which they are made capable of Tasting,
Smelling, Seeing, and Handling the things of God. Thus reasoned Robert Barclay
In his Apology page 95. This is also the Doctrine of George Keith in his Immed.
Rev. That this Light, or Seed, or Grace, is a Substance, because it may feel,
hear etc.

Robert Barclays second Reason is, because it subsists in the hearts of wicked
men, even while they are in their wickedness. Now if Sin may hear, feel, and
perceive, as well as Grace and Light, and if it may feel, or perceive the
things of Satan, as really as Grace feels, or perceives the things of God, and
if sin may be in the. heart of a real godly person, then sin is a Substance,
according to the Quakers; Otherwise these Reasons are reasonlesse: But the
former is true, therefore the la^ter. The Consequence of the Major is most
firm. For sin in the heart of one that is truly godly, is the same way to be
considered, as Grace, and Light in the heart of the ungodly in this point. For
I judge this be the Reason, why the Quakers Judge that this is the Reason, that
the Being of Grace in the Heart of a wicked Man, while in his wickedness
proves it to be a substance viz. Because it can be where its contrary is, and
strive, and wrestle with it, which is as evident concerning sin in the heart of
a godly man, as is clear from Romans 7. Gal. 5, 17, and also from Experience,
which I believe our Adversaries themselves would hardly deny, seeing they grant
that all Persons, that have real Grace are not at all times, after Conversion
free of sin, and wrestling with it. Hence the Charge that they most maliciously
lay to the Reformed Churches viz. that they make God the Author of Sin, is
justly returned upon themselves, seeing God is the Author of every Substance.
Which is yet more clear from the twelfth Query, sent to Mr John Alexander viz.
What is Original Sin? Whether it be not the Devil? yea or nay? For does not the
Original signify the Beginning? What did Christ come to destroy? Was it not
the Devil and his Works? What is more clear, than that in those Queries of the
Quakers, God is made the Author of Sin? seeing that unless they profess, and
avow Manicheism, God created the Devil, and this is yet more clear, if clearer
can be, by George Keiths Defense of this Querie Truth defend: page 177. Where
he can find no better Defense of this blasphemy, than to call it in effect a
purposeless heap of words without all scope, saying, that the Devil may be
called sin, in a certain sense by a Metonymy, as Christ is called
Righteousness, or sin, called the old Man. And thus George Keith acts like
himself, that is plays the ridiculous babbler, for page 59. in Defense of that
Query viz. If every Title in the Bible be the word of God? he says, that to
query a thing, will not conclude, that the questionist does positively affirm,
or deny what is queried. The same way he deals here with his Antagonist. For
if the Quakers understood no other thing, then the Devil may get the Name of
sin, as any cause may get the name of its effect: Then both they, and he in
their Defense, prove themselves to be pitiful, purposeless wranglers, making a
stur in the World about nothing: And of set purpose involving their Discourse^
in such non^ensical Nice^ies, that none shall know the meaning thereof: Hence we
may see, that it is but vain Labor to give any Answer to the Quakers. For
whatever they have said, you cannot fix upon them, be as clear as it will; they
will in their next Essay explain it to you in a sense, as opposite to that,
which in the Judgment of all rational men, their words carry; as Black is
opposite to White, or Light to Darkness. For what is more clear from the Words
of the Query than that the Devil is sin it self? seeing I think no Man, except
George Keith, will desire us to believe that all these Questions are given out
for needless amusements of the World, importing only these things; about which
there is not the least shadow of a question, or doubt, for who ever doubted
that the Devil was the cause of Sin? Neither is his abuse of Scripture more
to^lerable: seeing the Apostle uses a figurative Speech, which in a matter
known, and about which there is no debate; as the Matter was, about which the
Apostle speaks, may contribute much to the illustration, and clearing of the
purpose: but far otherwise was it, wheresoever Christ, or the Apostles en^red
into any direct D^sputation, or reasoning, where they always so spoke, as these
with whom they Reasoned might have easily understood what these Questions, and
Reasonings tended to. In a word he that of set purpose involveth, and rendereth
unintelligible his Discourse about Matters of such moment, in the Judgment of
all Rationals proves himself either a Fool, or a Knave: Therefore whether
George Keith will, or not, we must do these Questionists right, and believe
that they thought as they spoke, that is, that the Devil is sin it self. And
therefore God is the Author of sin.

3. I come now to the third thing, of which I promised to prove the Quakers
guilty, viz. That the Soul is God, or as they with the like blasphemy speak a
part of God. And first to clear the way for the Souls Divinity, they deny its
Humanity; For Hubberthorn in his reply to Mr. Sherlok page 29. says, there is
no Scripture which speaks of a Humane Soul. And again page 31. to Mr. Sherlok
saying that God is not a Spirit, as Angels, and the Souls of men are; he
replyeth, saying this is confusion: For Christ says, God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him; must worship him in Spirit, and Truth. And there thou
art raced without the Doctrine of Christ. And page 30. in opposition to Mr.
Sherlock, who had accused the Quakers of professing, and blasphemously boasting
of their Equality with God, he thus replyeth* Thy boasting is excluded without,
in thy Generation. And thou art excluded from the life, and mind of the
Apostle, who said, Let the same Mind be in you that was also in Christ Jesus,
who being in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God. Phil.
2.5, 6. And this thou calls blasphemy, and so thou have showed what Spirit
thou art of; contrary to the Apostle, here we have Blasphemy in its highest
Degree, and an Equality with God pro^essed, and boasted of; For the Effectation
of which being prompted thereunto by the grand Enemy of Mankind, Our first
Parents fell from their Excellency, and most happy Condition: And except Christ
had interposed, had forever lien together, with all their Posterity into that
whirle pool, and gulf of Incomprehensible Misery, only for the desire of
aspiring unto ^his, of which these Heaven dar^ing blasphemer* boast themselves:
so that what the Poets feigned of the Giants contending with the gods, for an
Equal Right to Heaven with them, the Quakers act in Reality. But the following
discourse will evince, that an Equality with God will not please them, except
they have also an Identity: For George Fox the great Prophet, and King of the
Quakers in his great Mist. page 90. In answer to one, that said there is a kind
of infinitness in the Soul, yet it cannot be infinitness in it self, speaks
thus, Is not the Soul without beginning* coming from God, returning to God
again* who has it in his hand, and Christ the Power of God, the Bishop of the
Soul, which brings it up to God, which came out from him? has this a
beginning, or ending? and is not this infinite in it self? again George Fox
tells us in the forecited book page 29. that Magnus Byne says that the Soul
is not infinite in it self, but a Creature, and R. Baxter says it is a
Spiritual Substance, wher^unto George Fox Replyeth, Consider what a Condition
these called Ministers are in: they say that which is a spiritual Substance, is
not infinite in it self, but a Creature: that which came out of the Creator, and
is in the Hand of the Creator, which brings it up unto the Creator again,
that is infinite in it self. Again Great Mist. p. 100. The Quakers are accused
for saying, there is no Scripture that speaks of a Humane Soul: And for
affirming that the Soul is taken up unto God; Hereunto George Fox thus
answers, God breathed into Man the Breath of Life, and he became a Living
Soul. And is not this that which comes out from God? is in Gods hand? part of
God? from God? and to God again?from these passages it is most evident, that
both the Soul of man; yea and the Devils themselves (which I tremble to think)
must be God over all; Seeing according to these monsters of men, that which is a
spiritual Substance, is infinite of it self, and not a Creature, and therefore
God himself: For none will deny that both the Souls of men, and the Devils
themselves are spiritual substances. Hence it will follow, that God, or a part
of God (as they most blasphemously speak) commits sin, which confirms that
which we said before viz. that according to the Quakers Doctrine, God is the
Author of sin. From this Monstrous Doctrine it also follows that God, or a
part of God is condemned, and is, and shall be tormented in Hell for ever. It
follows also from this Doctrine, that God is divided in parts, and that one
part of him is Bishop, and Ruler over another. These and a thousand other such
hellish Blasphemies follow upon this Doctrine, in which it is needless to
insist. For as Calvin said, Fatuitas dogmatis me securum reddit. The very
Poison it self being so black, and hellish, at its very first appearance
carries along with it a sufficient Antidot. For we may well Cry out with
Photius Col 403. of the wicked Maniehean, and Heathnish ^a^er of Christ,
Agapius, who was the Quakers Ancestor in this Blasphemy, O hudge madness! and
indeed (if such a sad matter did permit any Jesting) One might readily fancy,
that the Devil were now doting through old Age, for certainly he seems to be
deprived of his ordinary Slight and Subtility, that could find no gilding, or
Varnishing, whereby to cover the Superlative Impiety of this Doctrine: but what
he wants in Deceit, he has requited in Strength, who could thus Captivat,
and Impose upon the Judgment of Rational Animals, so that they drunk down this
Potion so manifestly pestiferous. Several of these passages were cited by Mr.
Broun. The palpable abominableness of which, wholly rendered them incapable of
any Defense, or show of any honest meaning: And the manifest Evidence thereof
from the Quakers own Books, made them altogether unden^able: Therefore Robert
Barclay (as he deals with all the rest) passes them over with Silence. And
yet, as if a Sport could have diverted any serious Man; from the abhorrency of
Quakerism, in the last Section of his Vindication, he makes himself
ridiculous, saying, that Mr. Hicks, who cited some of these passages; Succumbed
in a Disput against the Quakers, and from this, gives out that Hicks, and such
others, are not to be believed, say what they will of the Quakers,
notwithstanding that Robert Barclay adventureth not to challenge either Mr. B.
or Hicks of any particular miscarriage, in their particular Citations of the
Quakers Books. This was therefore a strange Influence and more admirable, than
that of the Remora upon a Ship, that Hicks his supposed failing had on this
multitude of blasph^mous passages, that it loosed R: Bar: and his Brethren,
from any Obligation to answer for them, though they be to be found exactly as
they are cited. He here mentions several Books written by Quakers, as answers
to what Hicks and Faldo has said, and among there is, Pen's Invalidity of Faldo's
Vindication. In which book Pen sometimes proclaims himself a Sadducee, as in
the point of Resurrection: sometimes a Papist, as in the point of
Justification. At other times, more Antichristian than most of Pagans;
Endeavoring with might and main, not only to robb the Holy Scriptures of their
Divinity, but also of common Sense: Of which Doctrine the Reader has gotten a
taste above. And O that it might be the lot of all the obstinate Opposers of
the Truths of God, thus to bewray at once, both Weakness, and wickedness, even
when they think to appear like so many Goliahs for strength, and to Justify
their Adversaries Charge, even while they attempt the removal thereof! as
William Pen has done. This horrible Impiety, these men following the
Manicheans, (whom Augustine de Civ: Dei. Lib. 7 Cap 2, 8. de Genesi ad Lit.
refuteth both in principles, and Probation) father upon the Holy Scriptures,
viz. Gen 2, 7. where it is said, That God breathed into man's nostrils, the
Breath of Life, or Lives. On this place also Ro^ Bar. Vind Sect 5, par. 1,
foundeth, (or at least seems to found) his opinion of a Substantial Light,
and Seed distinct from the Soul, that remained with Adam after his fall. But
these Opinions though contrary to one another, are both contrary to the Truth:
For there is nothing either in the Words, and Phrases, or Scope, and Context
that favors either of them (...) does not in the least favor either of
them, which according to the consent of the best Hebreans, is to be taken
Metaphorically, and efficiently, not properly, sive instar Causae materialis,
materially. Neither does the word (...) help them any more, which according to
the mind of all sound Interpreters, as Pareus on the place shows, and
Lexicographers, as Buxtorf, Lewsden, Bithner, Leigh, signifies only, the
rational Soul of man. Hence the Opinion of Rob: Bar. is overthrown. Moreover,
this word is used Isa. 2.22. where the holy Ghost says, that Man's breath is
in his nostrils; to the end that he may demonstrate the frailty of man. Hence
we may conclude, that nothing of God, or of his Divine Nature can by the force,
or significancy of this word be necessarily imported, (...) which sometimes
signifies Beasts, as well as Men; All the forecited Authors understand by it,
the Soul of man: And tell us that these who are no more critical considering it
is in the plural number, take Sensitive, as well as Rational, here to be
meaned. Others judge this Criticism to be neglected, because that oftentimes in
the Hebrew a word is Voce pluralis, and significatu singularis Vide Leigh
Critica Sacra page 72. The word (...) yet further confirms, that no other
thing is to be understood in this place, but the soul of man. For the Dust of
the Earth formed by God into the Body of man, and this breath of Life, became a
(...) or a living Soul, as also that the Soul of man is nothing Divine properly
so called; Seeing this word sometimes signifies the body of man. As Psalm.
16.10. and elsewhere signifies any living creature. Moreover, the scope of the
place, which is to repeat more fully the Creation of man, which in the former
Chapter was more shortly hinted at, evinceth that there is nothing here to be
understood, but the creation of the Soul, and Body of man. But we need not
insist to prove our negative from this place, seeing this is the only place, on
which our Adversaries build their Affirmatives. It is enough for us, to
challenge them to bring forth the least appearance of reason for them, which as
they have not done hitherto, so shall never be able to do. Again as they to the
horror of all men elevat the Creature, not only to an equality, but an
Identity with the Creator, and so make that which is less than nothing all in
all, and God over all blessed for ever, so with equal Impiety they bring down
the glorious God, levelling him with the dust, and subject that most pure and
Impassible being, to the weakest frailties of Mankind, Alleging that Christ
weeped as God, and not as man over Jerusalem, but that they may want all ground
of Complaint; Let us hear themselves, who in the principles of the Priests of
Scotland page 33. say It was asked of him viz. Henry Foreside, of a fore
ordained number to destruction, and for what Christ wept over Jerusalem. He
answered, as he was Human, he mourned and his godhead decreed them to hell,
this is a lying Doctrine of the devil, for after, many of them of Jerusalem
came to be converted, as ye may read in Acts 2. And many of the Priests came to
be obedient to the Faith, for all being gone astray both Jews, and Gentiles,
Rom 2.9. concluded under sin, the pure, the Eternal tendered over them; who had
stopped their ears, and closed their eyes to that which was pure of God in
them, that they might have come to that which is pure, and have been gathered
under Christ's wings, Mat. 23, 37. Who is pure, and so have been converted, and
healed, and have heard with their ears, and seen with their Eyes. And as for
the word (Humane) that is not Scripture Language, it speaks not that Language.

CHAP. V. Of Christ, and of his Benefits.
THE Quakers in words, commonly acknowledge that Christ is God and Man, and
account it a wrong, when they are accused of the denial thereof: But beside
these two Natures they really maintain a third, viz. a Spiritual and Heavenly
nature in Christ, which they call the Heavenly man, Christ Jesus, which
heavenly man, they say, did exist before the incarnation of Christ Jesus, and
assert, that on the Flesh and Blood of this man, the Church in all Ages did
feed. For George Keith in his way cast up, page 38, 93, 96. Says, Christ as
Man, was and is before all, the first and the last, Id: page 90. The Man Christ
influenceth all Men by his life, and is in them; and page 93. The word made
flesh created all things, and the word only is is not properly the Christ.And
George Keith in that Book contendeth at large, that Christ before his
Incarnation was as properly the Christ as he is now. And in the same book page
94 he says Christ as man came down from Heaven Idem ibid. Christ's Flesh and
Blood came down from Heaven. page 94, 95, Thus Christ has Spiritual Flesh and
Blood, page 95. Of his Spiritual flesh and blood did the Saints of old eat and
drink. page 97.98. He says, The Man Christ is to be understood prove. 8.23, I
was set up from everlasting from the beginning, or ever the earth was. And Ps.
110.1, 2, 3. and page 99, 100, 108. It was this life of Christ as Man, that was
pressed as a Cart etc. Amos 2.13. page 100.108, 109. Thus (says he) Apostats
crucify to themselves again the Son of God. Heb. 6.6. page 100. Thus has
Christ been crucified by the wicked from the beginning. Ibid. Christ the
Heavenly man lived in Abraham and Moses. page 102. Christ was true, and real Man
before he was born of Mary, page 103. The word was made flesh from the beginning
and dwelt in us. page 104. According to his Heavenly Nature, even as Man, He
(Christ) was the son of God. page 123. The Man Christ is every where, That is,
his Soul is extended into all, in his divine seed and body, which is his
Heavenly Flesh and Blood. From all which, beside other most horrid absurdities
and blasphemies which follow upon this their Doctrine, this is a clear
consequent, That Christ has three Natures. To this they answer Quak. Confir:
p. 33* That it will no more follow from their Doctrine, that Christ has three
natures, than it will follow from ours, who assert that Christ assumed into
Union with the Divine nature, a Body, and a Soul. But this answer is easily
repelled, for a Body and a Soul considered both together make up but one humane
nature: Whereas according to their Doctrine, he was Man before his incarnation,
and again man by incarnation, seeing every incarnation brings a man to the
World: Which incarnation they have not yet denied (at least in words) And
therefore Christ has two entire humane Natures, and yet these strictly
conjoined together in one man. Which doctrine makes our blessed Lord a
downright Monster.

2. The Quakers doctrine, as it rendereth the Humanity of Christ altogether
Monstrous, so it quite annihilateth, and destroys his Divinity. For
Christopher Atkinson a known Quaker in a book of his entitled The Sword of the
Lord in oposition to the sixth of the propositions (which Philip Nigh, Thomas
Godwine, and Sidrah Simson drew up at the appointment of Cromwell, whereby he
might regulate himself in the tolleration of Sectaries) viz. Christ is God,
said, Hear Sotish minds your imagined God beyond the Stars, and your carnal
Christ which ye would make appear through your Heathnish Philosophy, is utterly
denied, and testified against by the light. In these words the Godhead of
Christ is so evidently denied, ye^, and his manhood too, that the Quakers are
able to put no Commentary, or gloss upon them (which is their usual custom,
whereby to varnish, and make any thing speak what they will) And therefore to
the Students of Aberdeen who Quak. Canvass. page 82. Have objected this passage
unto them, they answer Quak. Conf. page 36 that they cannot light upon
Aitkinsons book. But it is not to be believed that such active, and bussie
Spirits for the promotion of Quakerisme, as Robert Barclay and George Keith
are, men of so great acquaintance; and correspondence with the Quakers in
England could not obtain the sight of a book, which certainly is frequent
enough there. But it mattereth not much what they say, for they stick not to
deny passages that are verbatim in their own books. Of which kind of dealing
take one place of many which might easily be given Will: Pen, Sand: Found: page
26 says, that Christ fulfilled the Law only as our pattern or example. And
yet Rea^: against Rail. page 78 counts his adversary Hicks a forger for
repeating these words, and stif^y denies that there is such a passage there,
saying, I am very certain that the word (only) was not there. See Hicks Dial.
3. page 74, 75, 76. Where you shall find a large bundle of the like impudent,
and inexcusable lies. They say also, they can prove, that Christopher Aitkinson
was not a Quaker, which they may easily say; but they ought to have proved it,
not said it only, otherwise these words serve only to testify their
dissatisfaction, with the ingenuous plainness of Aitkinson, in which he
unma^keth, and ^ayeth open to the World, what the rest of the Quakers involve
in Clouds of strange and mysterious Language, equivocal, and hardly
intelligible terms; being the only covert, that they can find under which to
shreud their abominable Doctrine. Lastly, say they, If he deny Christ (...) be
Man, we disown him, who do say that Christ is both God, and M^n. This is a good
confession* And a man that knew them not, might easily thin^ that we wronged
them, by charging them wit^ the denial of the Divinity of Christ. But
notwithstanding hereof, this confession serves only to prove these Men guilty,
of most wicked hypocrisy, lying, and self Contradiction to put a cheat upon
the World, and cover their abominations: For whosoever takes but an overly
veiw of the passages above cited of George Keiths way cast up; he may clearly
see, that if these passages be true Doctrine, the greatest arguments, for
establishing the Divinity of Christ are for ever gone. For I appeal to the
writings of all who have refu^ed the Doctrine of Arrius and Socinus, if prove.
8.23. Be not brought as one of the main texts to prove the Eternity, and
Divinity of Christ; as also Psalm. 110 by which Christ himself silenced, and for
ever stopped the mouths of the Pharisees, who denied his Godhead, Matthew. 22,
43, 44, 45, 46. Neither is there a greater argument, than that by him all
things were Created: And yet if these forecited passages be true, the denyers
of Christ's Divinity have an easy answer, that all these things are verified of
Christ as man only; And so the greatest arguments for the Divinity of Christ
fall to the Ground. Now let any man judge if the Quakers do not what in them
lie to overthrow the Divinity of Christ, seeing they endeavor to undermine,
and destroy all the arguments by which it is underpropped. Moreover this
Doctrine robs God of his incommunicable attributs, in ascribing
Omnipresence, or Ubiquitie to a Man. But before I leave this point, I propose
this dilemma to the Quakers.

If all things were created by Christ as Man, then either the Manhood of Christ
is created or not; if created, then it is created by it self, than which there
is nothing more absurd; If uncreated, then there is an uncreated man, and a man
that is coeternal with God. Which Blasphemy its hardly able to equalize, far
less to outdo. From all which it is most evident, that the Quakers do what in
them lies, to evert the fundamental Doctrines and basis of the Christian
Religion viz. the Godhead of Christ. And in this they are more wicked, than the
professed Arrians, or Socinians, that they add deep dissimulation, and
hypocrisy to their horrid impiety, whereas the Arrians and Socinians more
ingenuous than they, profess in words what they really believe. It is also
clear that in stead of their Christ, they embrace a mere chimerical non*
entity: seeing there is nothing more contradictiorie, than that either the Soul
or the Body of a man, which is a mere creature, can be every where, or from
Eternity. Lastly observe that the Quakers put no distinction betwixt their
Christ, and their light within, and that the light within is nothing but the
small dark Relicts of the Image of God, or the dimm light of nature, as we have
already evinced. And so their Christ, their God, and all that is dear unto
them, resolve at length into this almost quenched spunk, in which, all who have
trusted, in stead of finding the safe port of Eternal happiness, have always
met with certain Shipwreck.

In favors of this Spiritual AntiChrist, or Antichristian figment, which they
account for their Christ, they decry, vilify, and do what they can to
overthrow whatever ought to be precious and dear to a Christian (for what will
they not deny, seeing they deny the Godhead of Christ) they therefore with open
mouth blaspheme, and deny Jesus Christ as a person without them, or as any
thing distinct from their Imaginary Christ, or light within, of many which we
could cite, take a few passages for proof hereof; and first Geo: Whith: Dip.
Pl. page 13. Jesus Christ a person without us, is not Scripture Language, but
the Anthropomorphits, and Mugletonians. And in his Appen: to Reas* against
Rail: page 21. The Socinian tells us of a personal Christ, and that the man
Christ Jesus our Lord has in Heaven a place remote from Earth, a humane body,
but does he believe him to be the eternal God, while he imagines him to be a
personal Christ, a humane Body so Limited, and confined to a remotness? And
William Pen counterfit christian page 77* 78. Give me one place, that mentions
Christ to be a distinct person without us, art thou destitute of common Sense*
as to think of proving the Quaker no christian, because he denies, that
Doctrine not expressed in the Scripture? George Fox Great Mist: 206 If there be
any other Christ, but he that was crucified within, he is the false Christ, and
he that has not this Christ that was risen, and crucified within, is a
reprobate* Though Devils and reprobats may make a talk of him without. And
Great Mist: page 207 God's Christ is not distinct from his Saints* nor his Body,
for he is within them, not distinct from their Spirits. Ib. page 16. Such are
deceived that say, Christ is distinct from His Saints. Moreover the Quakers
Doctrins and Principles of the Priests in Scotland page 33 in opposition to Mr.
Henry Foreside, who said, that Christ mourned over Jerusalem as He was Humane;
answer, as for the Word (Humane) it is not Scripture Language, it speaks not
that Language. Certainly by this speech of these Quakers no other thing can be
understood, but that Christ has no Humane Nature: For though the word (Humane)
were not found in the Scripture, if the thing imported by it be found in
Scripture* then they must confess themselves to have been ridiculous, and
purposeless pratlers, which I believe they will not do: and therefore its
evident that they deny the Humane Nature of Christ. Again the Quakers speak, as
contemptibly of the Body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, as if he were the
basest of Men, as these words of Isaac Peningtoun witness, can outward blood
cleanse? We must enquire therefore, says he, whether it was the blood of the
Vail? Or of that Spiritual Man, viz. of Flesh, Blood, and bones which took on
Him the Vail, or Humane Nature? And the Mystery of iniquity Lies in the Blood
of Christ, says Edward Billings: And Hubberthorn in his reply to Mr. Sherlock
who had said, that Christ was not capable of Faith and Repentance, says, here
I charge thee to be a liar, and Slanderer; for he was capable of Faith, and
Repentance. What then is clearer than that according to these Men's Doctrine,
the Spotless Lamb of God was really defiled with sin and stood in need of
another Savior to believe in? Moreover (as we have already heard) they still
distinguish between the outward and inward body of Christ, wickedly and
absurdly ascribing to their imaginary inward body of Christ, all that the
Scripture attributes to the Blessed Body of Christ, that dyed at Jerusalem,
such as sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and ^he like, by which distinction
they render as much as in them lies, the passion, Death and Resurrection of
our Lord Jesus at Jerusalem, altogether vain and idle actions. And in favors
of this their inward body, they call the body that our Lord took of the Virgin
Mary, only a garment: and that it is no constituent of Christ; and that Luke
2.26. Where its said, that it was revealed to Simeon, that he should not dye,
till he should see the Lord's Christ, is to be understood of a Spiritual sight,
or of seeing the Christ within, Will. Pen. Rej. to John Faldo part 2th: c. 9.

4. As these men deny Christ himself, so they deny consequently all the
benefits purchased by him: For they say that Christ dyed only to be a pattern
and example to Believers; hence Will. Pen* sandy found: page 26 says, unless
we become doers of that Law, which Christ came not to destroy, but as our
example to fulfill, we can never be Justified before God: Nor let any fancy
that Christ has so fulfilled it for them, as to exclude their obedience from
being requisite to their acceptance, but only as their pattern. Thus it is
evident that the Quakers are altogether Socinians in their Judgments of the
ends of the death of Christ, and so join themselves closs with them, and
Papists in the Doctrine of Justification; yea, Rob. Bar. denies not but that
his Doctrine of Justification is all one with that of the Counsel of Trent. For
the proof of which let the reader compare Mr. Brown Chap. 13. N. 8. with Rob.
Barclay his Vindication Sect. 8. N. 1. and Apol, p. 137.139. He accuses
Luther, and the Body of the Primitive protestants, as great depravers of the
Doctrine of Justification, and doers of as great hurt by this their doctrine,
as ever they did good, by what they brok down of Babylon.

But I will give you their doctrine yet more fully in their own words, and
first Will. Pen, serious Apol: page 148. Has these words. and indeed this we
deny viz. Justification by the righteousness that Christ fulfilled in his own
person for us; wholly without us, and boldly affirm in the Name of the Lord to
be a doctrine of Devils, and an arm of the Sea of Corruption, which now does
deludge the World. And again Edward Burrows p. 33. To that query of Philip
Binnet viz. Whether none be accounted righteous in the sight of God, in whom is
any Corruption, or failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer every
demand of Justice? Answers thus, Here thou polluted Beast makes it manifest
what thou have been driving at all this while; which is that thou would have
thy corruption, and filthiness to be accounted righteousness in Gods sight.
that so thou may wallow in filthiness; but John says, he that commits sin
is of the Devil, the Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works
of the Devil, and thou Man of Sin would have it stand. God does not accept
any, where there is any failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer
every demand of Justice. And Will. Pen Reas: against Rail. page 80. We must not
conceive that his, viz. Abraham's personal offering, was not a justifying
righteousness, but that God was pleased to count it so; nor was there any
imputation of another Righteousness to Abraham: but on the contrary, his
personal obedience, was the ground of that just imputation, therefore that any
should be justified by another righteousness imputed, and not inherent in him,
is both ridiculous, and dangerous. Edward Burrows page 32. Thou Beast to whom
the plagues of God are due, and upon whom the wrath of God must be
accomplished, who would have another righteousness than that which Christ
works in the Saints. Pen. San: Fund: page 25. Justification is not from the
imputation of another Righteousness, but from the actual performing, and
keeping of Gods righteous statutes, Ibid. page 25.30. It is a great abomination
to say, God should condemn, and punish his innocent Son, that he having
satisfied for our sins, we might be justified by the imputation of of his
perfect righteousness. Why should this horrible thing be contended for by
Christians.

5. With the like f^cility I could show, that the Doctrine of the Quakers is in
every point contrary to the Doctrine of Christ; contradicting, and vilifying
all his Ordinances, and denying all his benefits. I shall content my self with
one great instance viz. Of the Resurrection of the dead. Concerning which
point, the Quakers are downright Sadducees: For, in the hearing of many
witnesses Geo: Whitehead said, This Body shall not rise again. Hicks Quak:
appeal ans* page 21. and Will: pen. Reas. against Rail. p. 133. Such a
Resurrection is inconsistent with the Scripture Reason, and the belief of all
Men right in their wits. And Ibid: page 34. For shame, Let us not make such
stir against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, for the absurdity of that is
rather outdone, than equaled by this carnal Resurrection: And the same William
Pen in his Invalidity, (I should have said his Validity, seeing he all along
Justifies his adversaries charges) of Mr. Faldos Vindication, has a Chapter
prolix enough to defend his down right Sadducism. Yea what is more clear in all
the Scriptures than Christ's visible appearance to judgment: And yet Geo: Whith.
Christ Ascended (so, that according to him he shall never descend) page 22.
Says, they are like to be deceived, who are expecting that Christ's second
coming will be a personal coming.And Ib. he denies, that he shall come
visibly; for although, says he, He shall come in the like manner, yet every
like is not the same. And no wonder it is, that the Quakers deny the visible
return of Christ to Judgment, seeing they deny that Christ has any personal
being without men. Thus speaks the same Author page 18. And again page 69.
Christ in person, remot in a Body of Flesh, and not in Men, is not Scripture
Language; but added. But it is needless to adduce more passages to show the
detestableness of this Seck, enough being said already to discover it. I shall
only add the words of a Leading Quaker related by Hicks Quak: Appeal: Ans. page
12. who being asked what he thought of Christ Jesus born at Bethlehem, and
dying at Jerusalem? answered, Jesus Christ at Jerusalem a Type, a Figure, a
shadow that is passed away; what have you to do with Christ at Jerusalem; have
done with him. From all this it is evident, that according to the Quakers,
there is not such a thing now in being, as Christ Jesus that died at
Jerusalem. And as they deny Christ the Son of God, so they arrogat to
themselves by a most Diabolical Sacrilege, whatsoever the Holy Ghost in the
Scriptures has appropriated to Christ Jesus; of which Lucifer-like aspiring
take a taste, Josiah Coal an eminent Quaker, thus writes to Geo: Fox, Dear
Geo: Fox
who art the Father of many Nations, whose life has reached through us thy
Children, even to the Isles afar off, unto the begetting of many to a lively
hope, for which generations to come shall call thee blessed, whose being, and
habitation is in the power of the highest, in which thou rules, and Governs in
Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is Established in peace, and the increase
thereof without end:

Date 21. day of the 12 Month 1658.

See Tyr: detected page 19.

CHAP. VI. Of Perfection.
ALthough we have already given several instances of the damnable Doctrine of
the Quakers, together with their miserable defense thereof: We shall
notwithstanding for the more abundant evicting hereof, trace the Footsteps of
one of their chief Authors Robert Barclay, in his Vindication of one or two of
their chief principles.

The first of which shall be that of Perfection*

The Doctrine of the Quakers in this point, is, In whom this pure and holy
birth is fully brought forth, the Body of death, and sin, comes to be
crucified, and removed, and their hearts united, and subjected to the truth, so
as not to obey any Suggestions, or Temptations of the evil one, to be free from
actual sinning, and Transgressing of the Law of God, and in that respect,
perfect, Yet does this perfection still admit of a growth. And there remains
always in some part a possibility of sinning; where the mind does not most
diligently, and watchfully attend unto the Lord.

These are the words of his eight These; And afterward he says, that, there
may be a State in this Life, in which a Man cannot sin, it is so natural unto
him to do Righteousness.

Let us in the next place consider how he vindicateth this Doctrine, which is
our main purpose. Having vind: Sect: 9. Spent a while in accusing his
Adversary as guilty of railing, and in rejecting his own Brethrens books; such
as Saul's errand to Damascus. In which they maintain themselves to be equal with
God. Which is also asserted by Hubberthorn against Sherl: page 30. I say,
rejecting these, or denying that they have said them (for he still insinuates
that Hicks only said these things, although it be evinced by particular
citation of book and page, where they are;) In the next place he gives away
the cause wholly, by saying, that he pleads for no more than Mr. Brown says
N 6. viz. That by perfection in this life, is understood a change in the whole
man, so that he yields impartial obedience to all the Commands of God, though
in a small degree, yet that he may seem to say somewhat, he enquireth, How this
Doctrine is reconciled with that of daily breaking the Commands in thought,
word, and deed? In answer to which question, it is enough to enquire how he
evinceth them to be contradictory: Seeing he may know if he will, that the Law
of the Lord requires a perfection of degrees, as well as parts, and that it is
a disconformity to the Law of God, and consequently a sin, to be deficient in
the one, as well as in the other. And whereas he enquireth; if to break Gods
Commands daily, in thought, word, and deed, be the way to grow in grace? To put
off the Old Man, and on the New. He but only uses his old Custom. viz.
maliciously to calumniate. For who said such a thing? Or from what point of our
Doctrine will he prove this? We shall attend his proofs of it. Which until we
hear, we cannot but in reason Judge that he delights in malicious lies. For
though we say according to the Scripture, that even the regenerate carry about
a body of death with them until death, which defiles all their actions: Yet
where did any of the reformed teach, that to endeavor to break Gods Commands
is the way to grow in grace, as this Man insinuates they do? What kind of
light is this he has, that teaches him such a faculty of lying?

He goes on saying, but he adds that this perfection, rendereth gospel
commands useless, but are the Commands useless, if men obey them? But certainly
He that is above the breach of the Law, as the Quakers say, many may be, has no
more use of the Law, or need of it to learn any thing from it, in order to the
obedience thereof. And where is his vain subter^uge now? But that he may yet.
further contradict himself and his Brethren; He says, He has shown in his
Apology, that all have* need to repent, and pray for forgiveness. For if some
be equal with God, above the breach of the Commands, want a body of death: The
most that they have to do, is to give thanks, and not to pray, or repent. For I
think he will not say, that they pray, or repent which are in heaven. These
duties presupponing sorrow, of which they are incapable, And far less (
Horresco referens) these that are equals with God.

In opposition to his Adversary showing that this Doctrine tends to the
fomenting of pride, and security he says, but where freedom from sin is,
where can Pride and Security have place? Ans. This answer had been as fit to
the Apostles Question Romans 3, 27, as to this Argument. For he inferred that
boasting might follow upon Justification by works. It might then have been as
well replied? If a man be perfectly Just, and so without sin, how can he incur
the fault of boasting? 2. How will he show, but this Doctrine of his does bring
many under a mistake, as if they were secure from sinning, when indeed they are
not? Whereas he says, that according to our Doctrine denying the perfection
of degrees in this Life, the wicked Villains do less make useless Gods
Commands than others, because they afford more matter, to exercise Repentance,
and prayer for forgiveness of God: We only refer him to Rom: 3.8. where he may
have the like Objection with a fit Answer. And here he promises always to cry
down the Ordinances of Christ Jesus. And why? Because, says he, they must be
made useful in breaking the Commands, in thought, word, and deed. His reason is
a Calumny, if it have sense at all. What Ordinance teaches, which we
maintain, that it is ones duty daily to break the Commands of God, that the
Ordinances may be the more use^^l to us? If this be not of the same nature with
Cavil wiped off by the Apostle Rom 3. then certainly two, and three, are not
five. But such malice the Church must resolve to be the Butt of, so long as she
is militant.

He goes on, to remove this Absurdity from their Doctrine of Perfection viz.
that then none that are regenerat, could sin at all, but would be beyond the
possibility of it. Which inference is very clear, for the ground which they
give for their Doctrine is Ioh. 3.9. He that is born of God, does not commit
sin. Which place they abuse, taking it without restriction; not attending to
the context, speaking of a Tread and Custom of sin, and of a commission of it
from Malice, like the devil, and the wicked, his Children. Which absurdity,
that he may evite: He assures, that a man is not regene* rat, and born again
at once, or at one instant of time. His ground of which we shall now examine.
And it is those two places of Scripture, viz. Phil. 1.6. He which has begun a
good work etc. Gal. 5.7. Ye did run well, etc. Now these Scriptures say nothing
for him. For the Philippians were Saints in Christ Jesus, when this Epistle was
writ, V 1. Now I think, none can deny that such are born of God. For the other
Place it says as little for him, except for it he would infer the Saints
falling away, which is false.

Next that the new Birth of Regeneration, as such does not admit of degrees,
but that every one of the Children of God are really converted, or born again;
so that of the Children of ^rath, they become the Children of God, at one time,
or Instant is clear. For as soon as a man has true Faith, he becomes a Child
of God. But that all that belongs to the Essence of true Faith is infus^d in
the Soul at once, (although some legal work in order to it necessarily preceed)
I think none will deny. And the manifold Examples in Scripture, showing that
men in a most short time, were made to turn from Satan to God, prove it. I
would fain know if the Thief on the Cross, and Jailor were not born again? And
if they were not perfectly born again? But to speak of any imperfection in his
new Birth as such, that is to say, that one may be brought from Nature to
Grace, and yet but half born again, or not fully born again; Because he has
not attained unto the full measure of Grace which is attainable, is no less
absurd than to say, that one is not ^ully born, because he is but a little
Child. Now this Absurdity is not a little removed, because what ever they can
say, the like reason holds for the one, as well as for the other. These to
whom the Apostle writes, were perfectly born of God, and yet there were some
little Children among them; 1 Ioh. 2.12. Now they were perfectly born; Because
they had the Seed of God, or the Unction chap 2.27. which is all one with the
Seed. Now the abiding of the Seed, is given as a reason of the perfection of
the New Birth, so that they cannot sin. Ergo: If little Children; as well as
Fathers, had this unction, or Seed abiding in them, they had this New Birth in
the highest perfection pleaded for by Quakers. 3 The Apostle, 1 Ioh 3.9.
speaks without distinction, (Whosoever etc.) and so takes away the elusion
of our Adversaries.

Next, he thinks here to free himself of Pelagianism, of which he was proved
to be guilty, by saying he always denied that men might keep the Commands by
the power of nature, which groundless shi^t is overthrown above. chap 2. He
al^ledgeth also, that because the Fathers say, That none by the strength of
Grace did live all their days without sin; and the perfection ascribed to some
in Scripture, was not from nature, but from grace, therefore they thought men
might be free from sin by Grace. What miserable manking and clipping is this?
Is it not added in the very following words immediately? That none attained that
measure of holiness in this life, that he could live any long time without sin,
and that this perfection was not full, and absolute, but which might increase,
and was mixed with evil deeds, so was a perfection of parts only, not of
degrees. These are the very words of the Antithesis of the Orthodox, in
opposition to the Pelagians. Vos. Hist. Pel. Par. Prim: These, 1. page 146. Now I
would desire any to show me, what this Doctrine differs from that which the
reformed Churches hold? Let the Reader see Mr. Broun himself page 333, N 12, 13,
where he may see this matter handled at large. I add these words of Orosius
Apol. Cont: Pel: I do not undertake, I presume not, I dare not say that I shall
be without sin, (...) long as I shall be in this Corruption, which we have. And
again, The man that can be without sin is Christ. He says here, that what his
Adversary adds of the Fathers arguments against Pelagians, and Socinians It
is not his work to meddle with, or to heed what these Sects say. But it is not
best to do so. For in so doing, he should fight against himself. For they must
divide him from himself* that divide him either from a Pelagian, or a Socinian.
I was about to admonish the Reader, to read especially this fourteenth chapter
of Mr. Broun's Book: But I need not, seeing he grants all we plead for, by
saying on the matter, he does not care though he be proved a Pelagian, and a
Socinian. And whereas he says, he considers the matter as proposed in
Scripture. The only way to know the truth of this, is to examine his Doctrine,
which we have done in part. And through the Lords assistance, shall yet further
do it. We value not his Recriminations, which he has here, but names none,
since nothing that he can say can be of weight against us: As these Charges of
Pelagianism, and Socinianism are against him, except he bring the fathers as
much fighting against the Doctrine of the reformed churches, and the reformed
Churches against their Doctrine; as these fight against him, and his Brethren.

Again he comes to the Vindication of his Arguments, which are answered by his
Adversary page 337 N, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. And for urging of the first,
which was, That this Doctrine is against the wisdom of God, he only insinuates
that there are means given to the people of God, whereby they may be free from
all sin, if they use them well. This I say he insinuates, for here he mumbleth
as one in a confused haste: But this is with as great facility denied, as any
thing he has hitherto said; For we assert, that it is the will of God, that
perfect freedom from sin, be a property of the Church Triumphant only. And for
probation of our assertion, it is enough to challenge him to give any example
of one, thus freed from sin in the world, except Christ Jesus, who never had
it, but by imputation. To me his following words are nonsense. He would fain
insist over his Adversary, because he says page 339. N 19. That the heart,
and the renewed part of the man being for God and God only, and directly
against Satan, and all his ways, doings, and designs, there is no formal
service performed unto Satan, Saying, That then there is some material service
performed to the devil. But this objection militateth as much against the
Apostle, saying, Romans 7, That with his flesh he served the Law of sin. Which I
think the Quakers will hardly distinguish from the Law of Satan* 2. If this
instance do any thing, it will overdo. For it tends to prove that no Action
of any that have gotten says, though in the least degree, can be at all
tainted with sin. We mean their gracious Actions: He is angry because his
Adversary says; that it is the will of God, that his people be under a warfare
so long as they are here, saying, But (...) it the will of God, that they
always be overcome^ Seeing if their Actions still be stained with sin, (...)
that they may be called service to Satan, they cannot but be said to be
overcome. Ans. They are not always overcome. Because sometimes the man as
Spiritual, prevails against himself as carnal. And always overcomes at
length, and at the end of the War, though oftentimes foiled in particular
Battles. The none consideration of which distinction, is the ground of this
Cavil, his following words stand, and fall with this Doctrine of Original sin,
and universal Grace, according to his own confession, we shall therefore pass
them.

Page 123* He repeateth his Argument, which is that our Doctrine is injurious
to the Sacrifice of Christ. But he forgets to show how. Only he says in
opposition to his Adversary, saying, that the Guilt of sin by by this
Sacrifice, is taken away: And also he takes away the stain thereof piece and
piece, till in end he give full Victory. They refer that to another Life. The
Question is concerning this.

Ans. If he were minded to make a Difference betwixt Heaven, and Earth, he had
not made a Question about full Victory in this life. 2. How profane a Heart
must he have, that counts all the seize of a Child of God in this Life,
as good as nothing: For notwithstanding of them all, he will still have the
Sacrifice of Christ to be useless, except a man in this Life, become as sinless
as an Angel. He was concerned to have proved this, otherwise not belied the
World, by giving out that he had fully answered his Adversary. But especially
he lies here, in that he says he has fully answered his eight Chapter. In
which of all places, he most failed. Of which I shall give the Reader a touch in
my Appendix. And may be more fully seen by these who compare the Books
themselves. He will not be content, that his Adversary says, that the godly,
and the wicked differ; In that the one sins with full Purpose of Heart, and
the other, viz. the godly mourns over, and repents of his sin, and
shortcomings, but says, seeing he supposes the godly to remain in sin, all
their lifetime the similitude remains. Ans. And is it so? that there is no
difference in sinning, between him that sins through Malice, and him that
sins through Infirmity, let him prove this. For until he do it, we account
it an abominable Assertion. For the Scripture makes a clear difference,
between the shortcomings of the godly, and wicked departing from God. And is it
no difference, that the one repents, and the other not?

Next he mentions another of his Apologetick Arguments viz. that our Doctrine
in this Point, makes the Ministry useless. But in stead of urging, what his
Adversary answered, which was, that upon this very head the Necessity of a
Ministry appears. 2. That it cannot be proved, that this ultimat end of the
Ministry mentioned Ephesians. 4, 13. is attained here, and 3. That there is a
Perfection of Parts and another of Degrees. I say in stead of urging of all
this, he only says, "but the Question is, whether, or not that perfection is
attainable here? Ans. He ought to urge his Argument: And not propone Questions,
seeing he knows well enough that his Adversary, as always, so here denies
that a sinless perfection is attainable in this life. Now let him prove this
from the place, and he may be considered. But in stead of this, for as short as
his Book is, he must make a Digression to tell us, that though Christ was
sinlesse, yet he admitted of grouth, which is nothing to the purpose, seeing
Christ is not said to grow in the Love of God, and such moral Perfections,
about which the Question is; but only in that kind of Knowledge, the pura
nescientia, or want of which, is no sin, or culpable Ignorance.

Next he says it will not follow from Col. 4.12 and 1 These. 3, 12. that it is
impossible that men should be free of sin here, by the Grace of God. These were
the Places, from which he deduced an Argument, for sinless perfection in his
Apology. And now being answered, he thinks it enough for urging of them, to bid
us prove the contrary, from the same places. Judge Reader, if this man be not
pithy. And yet he has all the pith, that Socinus, and Crellius had, from whom
he learned the Argument.

His following Quibles are already answered. Only I must take notice that in
this page 129. he enquireth, How these can be said, to have renounced the Works
of darkness, who have need to be washed from their daily Defilements? Ans. Let
him read the 12, and 13. of Zechariah, and there he may find that these two are
consistent. And as for his (how is) seeing he will not see from the Scripture,
they ought to have no other Answer. And whereas he venteth his Malice here in
special, against the Presbyterians, we expect no other thing at his hand. For
we know though Q^^kers, and Jesuits have an inveterat Hatred against all
Protestants: Yet in a special Manner their hate burns against Presbyterians,
knowing that these are furthest off from the Church of Rome.

Some others of his Apologetick Arguments he mentions, in the following page,
but does not so much, as attempt to urge them.

Next the Examples of Enoch, and Noah, he also ^entioneth, and again takes his
old Shift viz. the Defendents part; ^aying, how can we prove tha^ they were
never without sin? whileas affirmanti incumbit probatio. He does not deny but
they had once sin. Now, seeing he asserteth that at another time they were free
of it altogether, he ought to prove it: And that by another Argument, than
saying If they had not been altogether free of sin, they would not have been
called perfect. Seeing that perfection is variously taken in Scripture, and not
only for being free of sin, as himself confessed above; seeing he did not
contradict what his Adversary said, about the Diversity of the Signification of
the Word.

He comes in the next place to remove our Arguments. The first of them is
drawn from 1 John 2.8. If we say we have no sin etc. and here he says first,
that this will no more prove, that the Apostle John himself sinned daily, than
what is said James 3.9.10. can be affirmed of the Apostle James himself. Ans.
There is no parity. For James speaks of gross outbreakings, from which the
L^rds People are ordinarily kept. But here the Apostle speaks simply of the
Nature of sin. 2. Certain it is, that the Apostle John, even in his best frame,
had sinful Actions, and his own Errors. Which none will deny that reads Rev.
19.10, 11, and 22, 8, 9. and I think no Quaker will deny that John was
perfectly born again if any ever was. Now let them quible what they will, these
two Texts are enough to refu^e them. He alleges next, that his Adversary only
proves from this place, that men may sin in the present time, not that they do
really and actually sin in the present time. Which is false. For he from the
Context fully refuteth the Socinian Cavil, see among other places; v. 9. he
den^eth here that the Seed of sin, makes its Subject sinful. But we know no
Seed of Sin, but that which is really Sin, neither does the Scripture make any
Mention of it. But this Doctrine is all one with the popish Doctrine of
Concupiscence mutato nomine.

He alleges page 126. That it will not follow from Eccles. 7.20. That men sin
daily, or that all their Actions are imperfect through sinning. But he
forgets to apply that Law to himself, which he would impose upon others. For
though the Text speaks absolutely, without exception: yet he will not give a
Reason of a Restriction. And here again he talks of his absolute
Regeneration. But to as little purpose as before. He leaves the Consideration
of the Hebrew Text, which he thought made for him, to the Reader, therefore I
considered it, and found it in the Indicative mood. And consequently nothing
for him.

He comes next to vindicate the meaning of the Socinians and Quakers of Romans
7, 17, which is, that the Apostle there speaks of another, in his own person.
But he passes all his Adversaries Reasons of our Meaning, with one blunt
scoff, saying he gives us a Preachment. Which effrontedness I Judge can
hardly be parallelled. Next he says, except he prove that Paul was a Carnal
man; in respect of sinning at that time, he says nothing. But his Adversary
has done it, from this present Text already, so that he durst not so much as
present one of his Reasons, to his Reader, though never so manked, and clipped
(as his Custom is) but thought it safest, to pass by them whole sale: Otherwise
perhaps some of the Vulgar Quakers, who deluded by this Emissary of the
Jesuits, might have seen how absurd their Rabbis are in explication of the
Scripture, and so looked about them; before they had been further involved. 2.
All this effronted, and false dealing will not do the turn; For the Reason why
they reject such a plain meaning of the words, and admit such a strange
figurative meaning. The reason I say, moving them to this, is because they
think the Apostle Paul was above sinning, and that they may have him to be an
Example of sinless perfection, but this helps him not a whit, For the Apostle
John, was one of the chief Apostles, as well as Paul, and yet his sinning in
his choicest Frame, and under the greatest outlettings of Grace, is so
manifest, that all the Sophistry of Satan has not yet invented a Shift, for
the Elusion thereof. The like may be said of Peter. Gal. 2. and many others
which we pass.

Next he comes to answer Mr. Browns Argument which is this.

If we find no instances in Scripture of such Persons, as were so perfect, as
that they did not sin, then to imagine such a Perfection, is but a groundless
fancy, and dream.

But the Former is true.

The Consequence he denies. And consequently he denies that we ought to walk
according to the guidance of the Scripture. And where is his holding by the
Scriptures now, which we lately heard of? Let Quakers therefore no more cheat
the World, with saying, that they walk according to the Scriptures, while with
open face they assert, that they ought not to be a guide to us, or that we
ought to believe points of Faith not contained there. 2. He says that the
Argument concludes not in the Terms of the Question. But the Conclusion is,
that such a Perfection, as the Quakers maintain, is but a fancy, and a Dream.
And if he will admit this, we are agreed. And if he will not, he must deny some
of the proposition^. Neither let him object to me, that this is not the
Argument; which he answered unto (for the Argument was proponed three different
ways, the first of which he choosed to answer unto,) For either it is it, or
another; if it be it, it is well: the same Argument then is now urged, if it be
not it, then let him confess he skipt over, that which did cut this point of
Quakerism in the jugular Vein.

CHAP. VII. Of the Quakers Doctrine, of Silent Worship, and of the Sacraments.
THis Author, in the 12 Section of his Vindication, of which the first part is
opposed to Mr. Broun's 22 Chapter of Silent waiting, makes a none such
clamor, as if he were without parallel traduced. We shall therefore in the
first place consider the chief of these things, which he calls Calumnies and
Perversions. Whereof the first is, That he would have us to understand that
Christ's Resurrection was never till now, whereas (says he) I only spoke with
reference to the time since the Apostasy. Ans. 1. Any may judge by his 11
Proposition, or yet by his chapter annexed thereto, if this be a Calumny; for
whatever he there says, may be as well applied, to Heathnish, as Popish
superstition, especially if the Quakers salvation of Heathens be considered. 2.
He is unhappy in removing his pretended Calumny: For the Apostasy was working
in the Apostles time, and consequently he says nothing. 3. Make the best of
it ye will, this is but only what Munser, or John of Leyden said, that they
might obscure these burning and shining Lights, the reformers, and mar the
work in their hand. 4. Their direct opposition to the Orthodox primitive
Christians, in the most weighty points of Religion; such as the Doctrine of the
Trinity, Free Grace, the Sacraments, and the like sufficiently demonstrats,
that they esteem none before themselves, except Arrius, or Pelagius, to have
been at all in the way of God. And therefore that hitherto there has been no
spiritual resurrection. His second Calumny so called, viz. that Quakers plead
only for Enthusiasms, and abstract from means, we have above evinced to be a
truth, in the first and second Chapters. Moreover, he here denies, that
studying of Sermons from the Scripture, which implies reading, prayer, and
Meditations, and the like exercise to be means appointed by God. And thus he
only confirms what he even now denied, viz that the Quakers plead only for
Enthusiasms, and abstract from means. His third Calumny, viz. that the Quakers
Spiritual life is nothing but Nature* w^ proved above Cap. 2. to be a truth,
where we showed that all the Quakers grace and light is nothing but the small
remainders of the once bright shining Image of God in man. His fourth Calumny
is his own, and not his Adversaries: For his Adversary only inquireth, If this
Life be common at all times to them? Hence he infers, that he supposes it
to be so, the contrary of which, for any thing I can learn, he supposes, as
his Query page 414. insinuates, His 5 Calumny. as to what truth it has,
depends upon the controversy of perfection, to which he refers his
Reader, and I do the like to my survey of his Vindication. His next nominal
Calumny is, that his Adversary supposes it to be their Doctrine, that there is
no setting about prayers, or other duties, without a previous motion of the
Spirit. Now of all things, I wonder most, that he calls this a Calumny, seeing
this very thing is asserted by himself, in his eleventh proposition: How he
will reconcile himself with himself I know not well. Yet sure his following
words are so far from mending the matter that they make it worse, which are,
That they speak not of a previous motion in order of time, but in order of
nature; Neither his proposition, nor any part of his Doctrine, for any thing
can be learned, insinuate^h any such thing. 2. This motion must so far preceed
the setting about duty, as that the persons perception of the motion must be
interjacent, according to them. For they teach that before duty, we must not
only be acted by the Spirit, but know that we are acted: Ergo the motion must
be previous in order of time. And yet the man is so fraughted with a desire of
altercation, that he must say some what, though he have not much advantage by
it: otherwise he had not challenged his Adversary, as a Calumniator, while by
the same very expression taxed by himself, he is forced to a distinction,
unheard of heretofore as I think in this matter; and in reality a real
contradiction of his own Principles. And again he alleges he is wronged,
because his Antagonist infers from his words, in his eleventh Proposition;
That according to him Gospel Worship puts away all external Actions. But he
needs not grudge at this, for their practice helps us to expone their
words. Some other things he has which he calls Calumnies. One thing he
takes very ill, and that is, that his Antagonist page 418. compares the
Quakers to the old Pythonicks, because of the strange and unusual motions among
them, Antic fits, and strange Pranks. I always compared them in such fits to
the Cumean Cybil, as she is described by Virgil in his 6 Eneid. To this he
retorts the extraordinary working of the Spirit of God, mentioned in the
fulfilling of the Scripture, called the Stwarton sickness: challenging us to
assign a difference, between this and the strange influence of the Quakers
spirit upon them, which we can with great facility do; for beside that these
out-lettings of the Spirit of God, made them to cleave more closly to the
Scriptures, as the only Rule, and Star, to guide them through the sea of this
world, to the safe port of their eternal rest. And endeared more and more unto
the Ministers of Christ Jesus, his word, and Sacraments, we mean that which the
Quakers call Water Baptism, and the Communion of the Lords Body, in Bread and
Wine, as sure pledges of the Love of Christ* commanded by him to be used until
his coming to Judgment, which are openly contemned and vilified by the Quakers;
We say beside this, these outlett^ngs were far from leading them into such
strange and unheard of fits, as the Quakers are put into: of which I could
instance a Legion of sure Examples, see a late piece written by a new English
Minister Mr. Increase Meather. See also Paget's Heresiography, where he
brings among other strange Pranks of theirs, to which they were moved by the
Spirit, One Susanna Parsons a zealous Quaker, attempting to raise one of their
number, who had murdered himself, from the dead, but in vain. And this i^
attested by all the Magistrates of a considerable City in England, viz. Worster
Anno 1659. See also a little piece called Foot out of snare, of the strange and
antic influences of this their Spirit on one John Toldervei. What shall we say
of James Naylor, who following the Light of this Spirit, did arrogat to himself
divine honor at Bristol. Now though they say, he recanted this again, it is
all one matter: For this Antiscriptural Spirit, which is their principal Rule,
can no doubt change it self, as it sees occasion: And having too much bewrayed
it self with the grossness of its Delusion, can easily turn it self to a more
subtle way of imposture. So that we may in a word say, that the difference
between the workings of the Spirit of God, on his people mentioned in Scripture
and these of the father of lies, and deceits on the Pythonicks or Cybills, was
no more palpable, than the difference between the working upon these mentioned
by him, and that upon the Quakers. He says moreover, that the story of
Gilpin, who as Paget shows us, was mad through Quakerism, is refuted long
ago. But forgets to tell by whom or where. Next he comes to wipe off the
absurdity of their silent waiting, that this their abstracting of their mind
from all thoughts, so that the soul does not at all act upon any kind of
Object. Which posture they say prepares them for the Spirits motion. And this
is the result of their asserting, that a man ought to do nothing of the
Service, or Worship of God, except they know that they are moved thereto by the
Spirit. Now such an inturning (for he counts it a great wrong in his
Adversary to call it introversion) is not possible unto a man, except he be
sleeping, as the experience of the generality of men witnesses, who still
perceive their Souls acting upon some Object, either good, or evil, except they
be sleeping, or in an ecstasy* And so this is a direct following of the
Heathens, who went and sleeped at the Temples, or Groves of their gods, that
they might have conference with them in dreams. But they used to take
sheepskins and ly upon, as Virg. in his 7 Book, speaking of Latinus, which if
the Quakers do, or not, I am uncertain. Now in his defense of this page: 147
being challenged as guilty of this absurdity by his Antagonist, among other
words, he has these viz. If he would understand it of the old man, the man of
sin, that is corrupted, we will say with the Apostle, that it ought to be
crucified, and die. And again he says, that albeit in one sense, they are
said to die, yet they more truly live, and exist, citing Gal. 2, 20. And this
is the substance of what he says, on this point. To which I answer, it is
well that at length, they forsake their prime Opinion, or Characteristical
note. Hitherto he with his brethren, were defending the relinquishing of all
thoughts whatsoever, in order to the Spirits Motion, and our setting about of
duty, now he only defends the leaving of Carnal thoughts. But he does not
consider, that this Cheat will easily be perceived: For there is a time to be
presupposed, in which the Spirit is not moving: For I hope he moves when, and
where he lists. Now I say at this time, as man cannot Act, yea or think
warrantably, of the things of God, according to them: Because the Spirit is the
principal Rule to them, therefore whatever is not done by this inward Command,
is not of Faith, and consequently sin. All which they plead for. Therefore
before this motion come, a man may not exercise his mind concerning religious
ma^ters and thoughts, ^o endeavor to love, fear, and walk with God, now is
this only to relinquish carnal thoughts, or the thoughts of carnal things* Or
was the Apostles living, or Christ in him by the life of Mortification, and
Faith a mere abstracting from all Exercise of the faculties of the Soul. This I
think none will say, exercising reason: And yet this he must say, if he speak
according to his Principles, otherwise they will be necessi^^te to let their
reasonings against all worship, to which we are premoved by a sensible
Enthusiasm, or Inspiration of the Spirit, fall to the ground, which is the
substance of Skeen's Queries, of which he boasts.

2. We come to the Vindication of some Arguments, which by him are called
Nibling quibles.

The first is, If there be times appointed by God, then according to them the
Spirit is limited. To which he answers, that they limit times of worship so
as not to exclude other times. But this answer presupposes, that every duty
does not prerequire immediate Inspiration, which is false according to them, as
George Keith endeavors to prove in his book of Immed: Rev: and to defend in
his disput with Aberdeen Students. 2. Either these times appointed by them
which recur weekly, are appointed by God, or not: If they be not, then how dare
they keep them, as a thing inviolable? Seeing the Lord determines the time, as
well as the nature of the worship to his people. And Jeroboam 1 Kings 13. Is
condemned for appointing an Anniversary day, not appointed by God, as well as
for changing the Religion. Ergo they limit the Spirit in appointing a day,
perpetually recurring, or else they have a previous motion, in order to the
appointing of every meeting; which he does not assert, or grant. Here he
says, he follows Calvin, in denying the Sabbaths morality, from whom, as
also the generality of Protestants we differ in this matter. But that he may
see his mis^ake herein, and that we neither differ from Calvin in his more
deliberat thoughts, nor from the generality of Protestants: He may ready
learned Crawfords Apologetical Exercitation for the morality of the Sabbath
day, Cap. 2. And there beside both the Fathers, and generality of Protestants,
he may find that Calvin himself, in his Commentary on the Gen: written 27 years
after the Institutions, says the same that we do. Let him see also most
Learned Torretin on this head, who at large vindicateth Calvin from this
Imputation. Next he says, That none can be fitter for the Worship of God,
than such as make silence, and in turning of the mind necessary to their entry
to Worship. And thus he thinks he has answered his Adversaries Argument page
413, against their Worship, drawn from the Quakers want of preparation. But if
this in turning were an abstracting from worldly things only, and looking unto
God, and considering our own sinful state and frame, and the necessity of
holiness, in order to approaching unto God, he would say well: But seeing in the
same page, and with the same breath he reasons against this also,
ridiculously saying, that then there should be a progressus in infinitum, he
only confirms that which we have proved before, viz. That the Quakers silent
waiting is a mere Ecstasy, or all one with sleeping: And contradicts what he
said even now above. Here he alleges that the Apostles, if they had pleased,
might have written more Books of Scripture, than they wrote: and seeing they wrote
them not I doubt not but the Apostles, if this be true* may be taxed of neglect
of their Duty. For I think he will not deny but these Books had bee^ very
useful, and that the Apostles were obliged to lay out themselves for the
Churches good, (...) much as they could. The Scriptures brought i^ his Apology
for this silent waiting, he forgettet^ to press, therefore his Adversary
answers to (...) inference from them, must stand till he find tim^ to
reinsta^re his Arguments. He refers us to George Keith his way cast up,
insinuating, that he is the man can prove this Silent waiting. But he will just
prove it, as he has done, as soon as any judges his Book worthy of an answer:
Otherwise might he not have borrowed some of his Brothers Arguments, to refute
his Adversaries Answers; as well as throughout the whole of his Books be a
debtor to Pelagius, Bellarmin, Socinus, Ostorodius, Volkellius, and the like,
rather than said stark naught. Here he grants that Peter and Paul had a
natural man, in which the Devil might work, and a Spiritual man, which can
resist, and so contradicts his Doctrine of Perfection, or at least his
explication of the 7 of the Romans for if this be true, there is no ground for
explaining that place of another then the Apostle himself.

His following words are arhapsodie or railing, in which he all along accuses
his adversary, calling him, and his Brethren Priests (subintellige, of Baal,
for so the Quakers speak) greedy Merchants of Babylon, persecuters, with more
of such stuff. Next he grants, that ceasing to do evil is not without all
action of the Mind; E. when the Quakers think not at all, nor exercise the
faculties of their soul, and consequently have no action of the mind, which is
their silent waiting, they never cease to do evil. And it is like there be too
much truth in this.

Because his adversary says page 424. That watching is not a turning inward,
but a looking outward also. Then says he men shut up in a Dungeon could not
watch Spiritually, the repeating of which is more than the refuting. For well
he knew that his adversary understood by looking outwardly, minding of God, and
our distance from him, and the like. Whereas what the Quakers mean by watching,
and waiting, we heard above. Mr. Brown out of Doctor Stillingfleet of the
Phanaticism of the Church of Rome, and out of the Sermons of one Taulerus a
Fantastic Monk, applauded notwithstanding by Bellarmin, and others of the
chief Papists from page 429, to the end of that Chapter, evinceth, that the
Quakers in this point, not only in substance, but for the most part in
expressions, agree exactly with the wildest dottages of Popery. To which he
answers that his adversary misseth his Aim; For he cannot prove, says he,
that the chief preachers amongst the Quakers ever heard of Taulerus. Ans. yea
on the contrary he gains his design, for thus it is evinced that there is a
great sibness betwixt their genious's, which he confirms the more, while he
grants the truth of the bulk of what Taulerus says.

Section II. Of Baptism.
The contempt the Quakers vent against the Sacraments is so well known, that it
will be superfluous to tell the Reader in the entry, that they deny them. See
his 12. Proposition, and his Apology thereto annexed. Vindication page 162 He
comes to urge one of his Apologetick arguments against these Sacraments in
general, viz. That the many controversies among Christians about them, prove
them to be a real pharisie. To which when his adversary replyeth that if this
argument hold, it will overthrow all the parts of the Christian Religion. He
answers that he should not have used this argument except he had other
weighty ones. And then he cries out upon his adversary, as showing a malicious
genious. Judge, Reader, if he had reason so to cry out, and yet no better is
the ground of his complaints through the whole of this Treatise. But to the
main purpose, Julian, or Porphyry might as well have used this instance, as he;
for they thought they had weighty Arguments against the Christian Religion. And
he does but merely think, that he has weighty arguments against the
Sacraments, as in the Sequel shall appear. However in the mean time we may
observe that this argument, as the most part of the rest, is borrowed from the
Pagans. For this very Argument drawn from the division of Christians, they
improved what they could to overthrow Christianity. From them the Papists
borrowed it, wherewith to impugn the Protestants. And lastly the Quakers from
them, and has placed it where it was again at the first, to be a battering
piece against Christianity in general. So it has gone from hand to hand in
Circulo.

Next he comes to vindi^at another argument borrowed from the Papists, in
their pleadings for traditions against the Scriptures, viz. that the word
(Sacrament) is not to be found in Scripture, (take heed to the consequence,
Reader,) E. The thing is not in them. Is not this valid? But this Argument in
its very defense, he is forced to let go, while he says, he denies not the
thing truly imported by the Trinity. Very well then he can say no more of the
Sacraments. For the thing signified is in the Scriptures, and the words (Sign,
or Seal) by which (though he denied) we very ordinarily express that which we
mean by (Sacraments) is very frequent in Scripture. And yet before he want
something to say, he will cavil; though he grant all we plead for before the
close, as here. Page 163 He comes to vindicate his meaning of some places of
Scripture, brought in his Apology wherewith to overthrow Baptism, And first
Ephesians. 4.5. where he takes notice that his Adversary Page 469, says that the
Scripture no where says, there is but one only Baptism. To which he replyeth,
that it will as well prove, that there is but one only Baptism, as there is one
only God. Ans: First true it is, that this Phrase (one only Baptism) is not
found in Scripture. 2. The one cannot be so well proved as the other. For these
(ones) must be exponed, according to the subject matter, seeing it is beyond
debate, that it cannot be proved from this place, that there is but one only
Faith, or no kinds thereof but one. The Phrase therefore (One Baptism) will no
more prove, that there are not diverse kinds thereof, than the phrase (one
Faith) can do it in respect of diverse kinds of Faith. If he think otherwise he
ought to prove it, seeing he is the opponent. Next he says That his adversary
understands the extraordinary gifts of Tongues, and the like by Baptism of
the Holy Ghost, and of fire. And hence says he, concludes, that this Baptism
is ceased. Ans. This is most true, which to prove, let him compare Act. 1.5.
with Chap. 2. For he cannot deny, that the Apostles had the Spirit of God
before this promise, which is together with its fulfilling, chap. 2. an
explication of the like phrase in Matthew, 3.11. For the clearing of which I
assert, that John's Baptism, was no figure of the New Testament Baptism, in
opposition to Papists and Quakers, who say it was only a figure of the New
Testament Baptism. Otherwise if the sign, which John could, only administrat,
be opposed to the thing signified, we may understand the Baptism, with the Holy
Ghost, and with the fire spoken of Matthew. 3. of Sanctification and
Mortification.

Next he says, It is a lie that the Quakers would have none to be baptized,
with the Spirit, but such as have extraordinary Gifts. But do they not still
boast of their Revelations, and inspirations, comparing themselves to the
Apostles, calling themselves perfect? and I think these are extraordinary
things. And as for others beside them, they call them only carnal, and say,
they are in darkness, these are the most modest of their Expressions, and yet
enough to prove the thing denied. When his Antagonist tells him in Opposition
to his saying, that if this Water Baptism were to be accounted a true Baptism,
then there should be two Baptisms, contrary to Ephesians. 4.5. I say when he tells
him, that it might as well be said, that there were two Circumcisions under the
Old Testament, one in the heart, another in the flesh; he grants the
Consequence, and challenges his Adversary of Levity in using such an Argument.
Well then with as little absurdity, we grant his Consequence: viz. That in some
sense there are two Baptisms in the Church, though in another Sense, there be
but one; viz. considered complexly of the Sign, it is understood in the place
in hand; and indeed one might as well have reasoned to press Unity among the
Jews, that there was but one Circumcision, as the Apostle does from the one
Baptism. And for any thing I know, the Word Circumcision is not used in the
plural Number in the Scriptures. And if he say, that it is spoken of as twofold
Romans 2.28, 29, I answer: so is Baptism spoken of. 1 Pet. 3.21.

Another Reason of his Antagonist, against his meaning of this place, is, that
he may as well conclude from this place, that there is but one Faith, as that
there is but one Baptism. And yet there are diverse kinds of Faith mentioned in
Scripture, as sometimes, for the Doctrine of Faith Gal. 1.23. And for the
outward Profession of Faith. 1 Timothy 1.19. The Faith of Miracles, or the like.
To which he answers, that all these are included in the one Faith here spoken
of. And to say that Baptism with water is included in that one Baptism is a
begging of the Question. Ans. It is no more a begging of the Question, than
that all these kinds of Faith are included in this one Faith. If he think
otherwise, let him prove it. But he thinks it rather fit to shift, and give
naked assertions. For what Reason is there why the Baptism with water is not
included in this one Baptism, more than that these other kinds of Faith, are
not included? He may show this if he please, for this is that which is
incumbent to him to prove: That Baptism with Water is not included, as well as
these various Kinds of Faith. 2. How will he prove that the Faith of Miracles
is included in this one Faith? I do believe this will trouble him. And when he
has done these two, then he may bring up his Achillean Argument, viz. that such
as were baptized with water were not baptized; Therefore baptism with water is
not the baptism of Christ. Which Sophism might have been as well made against
Circumcision as Baptism, as we have but even now shown. He is angry at his
Antagonist for telling him, that he has stolen his Arguments from Socinians,
saying, he never read three lines of him. Answer, neither did ever I hear one
line in Socinus his own Book, yet I have heard an hundred of Socinus his
Arguments. He miserably bewrays his genious: For if he without reading of
their Writings, still fall upon the Socinian Arguments, then how near of kin
must he and they be. But this he still does, as the whole Series of his
Adversaries Book declares, still citing the Book, and page of the Socinian
Writings, where his Arguments are to be found. Which he dare not deny, whereas
he should vindicat page 164. his Doctrine built upon 1 Pet. 3.21. he says
mere nothing. But only that his Adversary gives mere Assertions. But he does
not attempt to impugn them. And is this urging, and Vindication of his
Arguments. How desperate must his Cause be! When he leaves the very place, upon
which they found the Abrogation of Baptism, without attempting to prove his own
meaning of it. Next I say that whatever I can build upon this place, against
Baptism with Water, the same Argument might have still holden against
Circumcision in the flesh: seeing still it was true, that he is not a Jew, that
is one outwardly, and that that is not Circumcision, which is outward in the
flesh, but that he is a Jew that is one inwardly, and that is Circumcision that
is of the Heart, and Spirit, and not of the Letter etc. Romans 2.28, 29. In a
word whatever they shall say against Baptism with Water, from this place of
Peter, there is still as much to be said against Circumcision with hands, even
during the Law, flowing from the perpetual Truth of this place of Paul to the
Rom: But I think themselves will not say, it militates any thing against
Circumcision made with hands, during the Law. Ergo they ought to conclude
nothing from this place of Peter against Baptism with Water. Here he says
that his Adversaries answer to this Argument from this place of Peter. and Gal.
3: 27. Col. 2* 12, is built upon the Supposition, that Water Baptism goes to
the making up of Christ's Baptism. And then says, he will expect his proof of
his exposition of these places, is not that fair arguing, Reader, to frame an
Argument from a place of Scripture, and when the Defendent denies such a thing
follows from this Scripture, to tell him he has lost the Cause, unless that
he prove that it will not follow? But seeing he is the impugner in this place,
if he had not intended to expose himself, and his party to scorn, he had
certainly at least attempted to prove his own Expositions of these places, and
urged his two Arguments, which in his Apology were in modo and figura. But this
heat of dispute was soon allayed; For so has his Antagonist combated with him,
that he essayeth not to reinforce them. See page 473.479. How seared must these
Men's Consciences be! when they endeavor to put a cheat upon the World in so
weighty a business. 2. It Is most groundless to say, that there is any petitio
principij here, as the Quaker insinuates.

Next he comes to reply to his adversaries 9. Number: Where he had evinced that
John's Baptism was not a figure of Christ's. And passing the marrow of what he
had said, he only compendizeth his Apology, saying, that John's Baptism was a
washing with Water, and that the Apostle ascribes the putting on Christ to the
Baptism of Christ, as washing with water Typifieth or signifies the washing of
regeneration, so does John's Baptism that of Christ. But all this was obviat
before, while his adversary answered his Argument, wherewith he intended to
prove his third proposition, denying, that the Baptism of Christ is only the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, and with fire: asserting also, and that upon good
grounds, that the Baptism with water is Christ's Baptism instituted by Him, see
the Forecited Numb.

Next I say that John's Baptism, as being institute by Christ, and comprehending
the thing signified, is not only Baptism with water, but Christ's whole true
Baptism, and so this quibling is groundless.

Neither is that which follows any solider, where he says because his
adversary denies, ( he must increase, but I must decrease) to be meaned of the
abolition of John's Baptism, that then if this be meaned of their persons, John
grew more decrepit, and Christ more tall, Spectatum admissi risum teneatis? Was
there not another member of the disjunction? I answer therefore to this
miserable cavil, that the meaning of the place is, that the person of Christ
was to grow more and more in honor, and glory, so that within a little the
fame, and repute of John was to be eclipsed through the brightness and
splendor of Christ.

Next he says, that though John had a command for baptism, it will not follow
that it was no legal rite. Ans. It will well follow, for all the legal Rites,
such as held forth Christ, and his benefits by way of Type, to the whole
Church, which each Member was to practice, were either institute by Moses, or
before him. The design of which was that the people might see Christ, though
darkly as in a Glass, until the time of his coming, therefore this could not
be a legal Rite, which was commanded directly at the coming of the Messiah, and
at his very appearance, preaching to the world, when there could be no use of
legal Rites, but these which were within a little to be abolished. 2. All the
Legal Rites are abrogat in the New Testament, but no where is the command given
to John recalled, and his Baptism abrogat: Otherwise let him show me the place
of Scripture, (But not 1 Pet. 3.21. which they ordinarily use.) Either
immediately given by God, or the Apostles contrary approved practice equivalent
to a Command. 3. That the Baptism of John was a Gospel Ordinance is clear from
Mat. 11.12, 13. Where it is said, that the Law and the Prophets prophesied
until Ioh. To which place, I know they ordinarily answer, that (until) does
not exclude John But this is refuted abundantly by the former verse. For in the
time of the Law the Kingdom of Heaven cannot be said to suffer violence, and
yet it suffered Violence in the days of John. And certain it is that this
particle, if it be not taken exclusively here, can be so taken no where else in
Scripture, as the collation of this with other places will evince. 4. No legal
thing, person, or Rite was prophesied of in the Old Testament, but John was
clearly prophesied of, as a sweet Gospel Minister* E. There is no reason to
Judge, that John was a Legal Minister, or had Legal commands.

Next he comes to vindicate what he deduced from 1 Cor. 1.17. Where he only
seeks to shift, neglecting wholly what his adversary says, see Page 476.
N. 12.

The first of these shiftings are, That because his Antagonist says, why did
Paul baptize, if he had not a Commission? He answers, that this a quarrelling
with the Apostle. What strange disingenuitie is this? To say, he quarrelleth
with the Apostle, when he only quarrelled with the Quakers exposition. And upon
the supposed truth of this inferred this absurdity, that the Apostle did that
which he ought not to do, which being false, his exposition cannot be true.
Thus a Man might say still, when one inferred an absurdity from his exposition
of a place of Scripture, that he were fixing absurdities upon the Spirit of
God. For he knows that we expone Paul's words (that he was not sent ^o
baptize) for the less principal part of his errand, according to Hos: 6.6.
Matthew: 9. Ier: 2.23. and many other places, even though there be no explicative
clause following, as he alleges is in Hos. 6.6. providing that there be no
absurdity following upon this gloss. And beside this, there are good reasons
why we should so expone the phrase here. For first the Apostle insinuates
clearly, that all these Corinthians were Baptized, without reproving them for
it. Whereas he still reproves the Gentiles for using of, and tenaciously
sticking to Jewish Rites, or any man that imposed them upon them, either by
example, or doctrine, as the body of the Epistle to the Gal. does declare. 2.
he does not say, that his Fellow-Apostles were not sent to baptize, but names
himself alone. 3. He still did administrat this Sacrament to the Gentiles, upon
their embracing of Christianity, as his recorded practice does declare, which
Mr. Brown has showed, but the Quaker most disingenuously passes over; let him
not therefore object, that to expone the like phrase, where the thing is said
not to be, for to be less principal would make wild work: Seeing we give
sufficient reasons for our explication of this place, and do not plead for the
phrase to be still so exponed, but only where the Nature of the subject matter
will permit it.

3. He comes page 166. to answer our argument from Matthew: 28, 19. And first he
denies that the Apostles while Christ was with them, baptized with Christ's
warrant; and says, he will wait his adversaries proof of it. Ans: He has
done it* already from John 3.26 and, 4, 3. Of which places the Quaker durst not
adventure to take notice. We shall therefore wait what he says the next time
against them. 2. He says the Apostle did eat the passover with Christ's
warrant, yet it follows not that we ought to do it. Ans. There is no paritie
between these two practices; will he say that ever the eating of the passover
was imposed upon the Gentiles as they did Baptism, as a necessary consequent
of their embracing of Christianity, as the whole Tenor of the Acts of the
Apostles declares? 2. The Passover was a Legal Custom introduced many hundreds
of Years before, whereas* Baptism was but in its very rise and beginning.

2. He says, that though it be joined with Discipline, as Circumcision was
joined with it among the Jews, it will no more follow that Baptism, is to be
continued, then that Circumcision is to be continued. Ans: that the Baptism
here spoken of, is to be continued, I think himself will not deny. We speak now
of the institution of an ordinance given to the Christian Church. Therefore
this his consequence of Circumcision is vain, and without the least appearance
of Reason.

Lastly this Reason is wholly nonsense, for none can perceive what it
levelleth at.

3. He denies that the Apostles constant practice can declare, that Baptism
with water is the meaning of the Command. For, says he, the practice and
testimony of the Apostle Paul declares this to be false. Ans: 1. That this
which he says of the Apostle is false, we have proved above. 2. All things
practiced by the Apostle must be reduced to three sorts, either commanded,
permitted, or simply sinful. This last I think they will not say their practice
of Baptism was, neither do they say it, but only that it was an indifferent
Jewish Ri^e, permitted for the time, as Circumcision, or the like. But this is
false. For either such Rites were not at all imposed on the Gentiles, Or if
they were, they were after abrogated. As for example, abstinence from blood,
and things strangled, enjoined Act 15. This I say was again abrogat 1 Cor: 10.
and in the Epistles to the Gal. and Tim. (2.) That it is not an indifferent
Jewish Rite, clearly appears from this, that the reason why they impose
Jewish Rites upon any Christian, whether Jew or Gentile, was to bear with the
Jews for a time, and to condescend to their weakness. But the condition of
baptism, was still their embracing of Christ; and the ground of it, their
receiving of them into the Church. In a word Condescension to the Jews
weakness, is in Scripture ever holden forth to be the ground of the imposition
of Legal Rites upon Christians. So that there is mention made of this ground
for every particular Rite imposed; but this condescension is never said to be
the ground of imposing Baptism, but a quite other ground given, which we named
already. 3. If this had been a thing only permitted for a time, and to be
abrogat afterward, then either the Apostles unrepealed practice, which they
exercised toward all Christians indifferently, and that as such were not
sufficient to walk by: Or else this was abrogat afterward, but the last they
cannot show from Scripture? Therefore it is false, and the first absurd. From
all which it follows, that this was a Commanded practice. And I desire any
man of Reason, to Judge whether all the Apostles perpetual unrepealed practice,
or these men's naked assertions, be the best Commentary on this place. 4. He
denies that the word Baptism, as we expone it, is taken in its proper
signification, and says, that it is not necessary to take it as we do, for
Baptism with water, in so many places, as it must be taken for baptism with the
spirit. Ans. This a mere assertion. In opposition to which I say, that he shall
not be able to give one place of Scripture, where this word is undoubtedly
taken in their sense; but I shall give him two, where the word is taken in the
sense, which here we plead for, and that undoubtedly. And so there is a double
improprietie in the Quakers exp^sition of the word, first against the
Grammatical, and 2. the Scriptural propriety. We expect therefore according to
his own Postulatum, that he will give some more weighty reasons the next time
of this explication.

Next I reason thus. To Baptize with the Spirit is not in all the Scripture
applied to Men; Therefore it is not safe without very solid reasons, to expone
it so here.

Again, all that they understand by this Spiritual Baptism, is sufficiently
expressed in the context. Er. There is no necessity to flee to this strange
exposition.

Lastly This exposition is the product of the brain of Diabolick Socinus, as
its first Author; which I think will make it be suspected; and (seeing it wants
all ground) abhorred of all the Lovers of Christ Jesus, seeing this arch-enemy
of his invented all the shifts and sophistry, the Devil and he could, to
destroy both the Godhead of Christ, and all his Ordinances. His following
words are answered above.

Next as for what he says in opposition to the 17. Numb. of this chap. in his
168 page it is so miserable, that I only desire the Reader to compare these two
places together. Whereas he insinuates in this page, that Peter Commanded
expressly the Gentiles to be circumcised, which he builds upon Gal. 2, 12. is
most false. For the reason why Paul reproved him, was his dissimulation
mentioned in that chapter, and no express Command, if he will give us Leave to
expone Scripture by Scripture. He says, as if Mr. Brown had denied it, that
Josephus writ before the 200 Year of Christ. Whereas he says, that the first
which wrote the Jewish Alcoran, or Misanioth, with a tendencie to destroy
Christianity, was Rabi Iehuda Hakkadosh, about the 200 year of Christ. As now
the Quakers do.

SECTION II. Concerning the Lords Supper.
IT is most notour, that as the Quakers deny Baptism, so they deny the Lords
Supper. See his 13 proposition, with his Apology annexed thereto, where he
makes this only to be a Legal Institution.

It will be needless for me to take Notice of what he says page 170. viz. That
his Adversary page 489, makes a Preaching to the Devil, whereas he only
infers from their Doctrine of Universal Salvation to every Creature, that
they may preach to the Devil according to their own Principles. Hence we may
learn how impudent these men are! Just as if because Robert Barclay had
challenged a man of murder; he that is challenged, should conclude that Robert
Barclay called himself a Murderer. As false, though not so ridiculous, is that,
of which he challenges one Preaching near Lawther. viz. that he prayed to the
Devil. But he dare not name the man who did it, neither these who heard it;
Therefore let him bear the just censure of a Calumniator (to say no more) until
he name the man, and prove it.

When he comes to the matter it self, he is as weak, as before he was wicked.
For in stead of pressing his Argument against the Lords Supper, viz. That if
there were a relation between the Body, and Blood of Christ, and the Bread, and
Wine in the Sacrament, then it would either flow from the nature of the thing,
or the Command. And while his Adversary denies, that an institution, and
promise is all one with a Command. All his probation is his mere assertion,
that they are in all respects one, neglecting the reason that his Adversary
gave for his denial. But why should I take notice of such a shameful
Vindication, wanting the very show and appearance of reason. To the rest of his
11 paragraph, in which by many weighty Arguments, this duty is proved from 1
Cor. 11. he says only, that he speaks not to the purpose, without so much
as attempting to wipe off his reasons.

He comes to answer his 12 number, and first says, that the Blessing, and
Eating, spoken of Mat: 14, 19. will as much prove a Sacrament, as these places
of the Gospel, and the Epistle to the Corinthians ordinarily brought, can do
it. But this Adversary never inferred any thing of this kind, from simple
blessing: But from other things consi^ered with blessing, such as, This is my
Body, This is my Blood, and the unrepealed Command and In^titution 1 Cor. 11,
and the like. In Opposition to which, he scarcely gives so much as a shift,
and far less any solid reason. But we must excuse him, seeing he does as well as
he can. His next words are a mere Compend of what he said against our meaning
of 1 Cor: 11. in his Apology, without so much as attempting to answer his
Adversaries 14. Number: to which I referr the Reader. He says indeed, which is
as good as nothing that the Institution of the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. was a
Permission; and therefore the practice thereof was not will worship. But upon
the same account he may elude any Command in Scripture. For that there was a
Command for this practice, he grants; and that the Apostle corrects the
abuse of this practice, he grants also, without so much as mentioning its
indifferency. Neither can he show in all the Scripture, where this Command was
abrogat, or the practice prohibited, as other things indifferent were. What
Titanian boldness must this then be, to say this was by mere Permission!

In Opposition to his 16 Number: where his Adversary shows the disparity,
between Christ's teaching his Apostles Humility, by his Example of washing their
feet, and his Command and Institution of this Ordinance, he says mere
nothing, but calls him a Pope.

In Opposition to Number 17. he says he should prove from Scripture, how they
are safe in practicing the one part (ridiculously calling the whole Duty one
part) and not the other (meaning the occasional Circumstances of time, and
place, and the number of twelve, and the like, which he as foolishly calls
another part of the Institution) But his Adversary shows from many places of
Scripture in the forecited Number: such as Act: 26: 7. 1 Cor. 11, 18. and 20. That
these Circumstances are not to be observed, but left indifferent. But this man
still intends to cheat his Reader, by passing over the Marrow of what his
Adversary says.

What he says in Opposition to N: 18, Is a mere denial that Act 2, 42, is
meaned of the Lords Supper, without so much as the least attempt, to answer his
reasons, or to Vindicat what he himself said in his Apology, in opposition to
our meaning of this place, Neither is he more happy in answering his 19 Number:
where he proved that in Act. 20.7. Is understood public and Sacramental
Eating. For he, according to his Custom, slighteth his reason; as the Comparer
may see (what he says in opposition to the follwing number* is of the same
Nature. viz. mere Assertions, false Suppositions, such as, that the Corinthians
were superstitious, in that they at all practiced this Duty of the Lords
Supper. Yet one thing I will take notice of, viz. how he vindicateth his Answer
given to that argument, drawn from 1 Cor. 11, 26. Ye show forth the Lords death
till he come. Which is, That by Christ's coming, is understood his inward,
Spiritual coming. Which answer his Adversary so happily impugneth, that he on
the matter says nothing, except ye will call this something, viz. That Babes
in Christ may have these indulged unto them: But his Answer still cutteth off
Babes with the rest, seeing to them Christ is come in the Spirit already. But it
is needless at all to Impugn this distinction, its own groundlesness
sufficiently does it.

He comes next to answer his 21 and 22 Number: and there he asserteth, That that
which the Christians were enjoined to Observe, Act, 15, 29. was no part of the
Ceremonial Law, but an Apostolic Command and thinks that whatever can plead
for the abrogation of this Injunction, will also plead for the abrogation of
the Lords Supper. But takes no notice, that his Antagonist showed that there
is no little Vanity, and impiety in his adducing Romans 14.17. Col. 2.16. To
prove this; and therefore he shamefully passes over what he says on these
places, and so gives up this his Socinian Cause. For he that is a Socinian in
this point, he does not deny, he says, That this Command seeing it was given
after the out-pouring of the Spirit, has as much of a Gospel Institution, as
any thing commanded before by Christ can have. Ans. Well then I see, we will be
no more troubled with quaking preachers, seeing this Command Act. 15. according
to himself is repealed, and yet has as much of a Gospel Institution, as
preaching has Matthew. 10. and certainly it will as well follow from Col. 2.20.
that preaching of the Gospel is abrogat, and not allowed now by Christ, as from
v 16, and Romans 14, 17. that the Lords Supper is now abrogat, and not allowed by
Christ. Now, let both old and new Socinians (I mean the Quakers) try to
infringe this if they can. And I shall still infer the one upon as good ground,
as they can do the other. Which Consideration, and Parity of places destroys
this Socinian Conceit, say what they will in its defense.

AN APPENDIX. IN which the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, and in special of
the Reverend assembly at Westminster, in their Confession of Faith, Chap. 3.
deduced from the Ninth chap: to the Romans defended, and the Text Vindicated
from the Corrupt Glosses and Depravations of William Parker, and his pretended
examination of the Westminster Confession, which Robert Barclay has made his
own by referring us thereunto, as sufficient solutions of all our arguments for
our Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, deduced from that place.
AMongst the many and damnable Errors which the Quakers have raised out of
their Graves, that of their denying Eternal Election, or at best making it
wholly conditional, uncertain, and depending upon the will of the Creature,
so that notwithstanding the Decree of God to the contrary, it might so have
fallen out, that none should have been saved, is not the least: In which they
conspire with the grossest of Pelagians, but the downright and most palpable
contrariety of this their Doctrine of the holy Scriptures, which they sometimes
would fain seem to follow, has made the more knowing among them to conceal so
far as they are able, their thoughts anent the Doctrine of Election; Thus dealt
Robert Barclay, who in all his Theses and Apology, tho in his account an entire
System of Religion, never delivers his mind thereanent. And Vindic. Sect. 6.
In defense of this non-such Omission, he says only, that all do at times
Confess, that it is not safe, nor proper too curiously to inquire into the
Decrees of God, which he prooflesly alleges his adversary to have done: and
that it is only needful to say, God calls every Man every where to Repent,
and be saved through Faith in Jesus Christ: Neither does he any where directly
Impugn our Doctrine of Election; And yet he feircely falls upon our Doctrine
of Reprobation, and thus declares to the World his self-repugnancy, seeing none
can be ignorant, that our Doctrine of Reciprobation is Reprocally and
inseparably linked to that of Election. Moreover he thus publishes his Mind
concerning Election, although he by all Means endeavors to conceal it; for
whoever denies Reprobation, by an Infallible Consequence downright denies
Election: And thus, Nill he, will he, we have his mind positively anent
Election, and also Confession intimated, that his Judgment about Election
cannot abide to be tried by the Scripture Bench. And yet I think few will say,
That his Doctrine of positive and dounright denial of Reprobation is much
better founded; seeing he with a Pythagorical silence, passes over all his
Adversaries arguments, proving all our Doctrine there anent. chap. 7. number:
10.11. These Arguments I say, about twenty in Number, he does nor so much as
mention, and far less attempt a Solution thereof, although he knew well enough,
that except these be untyed, the whole frame of Quakerism is entirely
dissolved. But in stead of Resolution of his adversaries arguments, as he does
all along, he gives the World a mere Contract of his Apology, under the
cheating Title of a Vindication. But when his adversary says, That the Quaker
can no more Impugn our Doctrine, than he can Impugn what the Apostle says,
Romans 9, 19. The Quaker Sect. 6. page 67. answers two things; 1. That this is
all one, as if a Quaker should say, confute all the Scripture which contain our
Doctrine, and therefore dispute no more, until Thou first do that. But the Man
is good, where there is little to do: But if he had not intended to play the
shifter, he had condescended upon some particular place, as his adversary did,
otherwise he no less declares his own fear than Darius did, when he objected
to his pursuing Enemy, That he could not be subdued, because of the ^pacious
Countries, through which it behoved Him to follow him. 2. He refers his
Antagonist to the Examination of the Westminster Confession, chap: 3. Where
says he, he may have his misapprehensions corrected. But How comes it to pass
that the Quaker has taken no notice of many Authors, as Twiss, Rutherford,
Dickson, to whom his Adversary in this very point did refer him. 2. But his
care is not very great of Commutative Justice.

Notwithstanding of which, Ex abundanti we will make a particular and impartial
inquiry into all that he brings against the meaning of the Reformed Churches
upon that place. The Author is an Enthusiastical Arminian, called William
Parker who is the Man I believe the Quaker understands; for beside him I know
no other particular examinator of this Confession.

Now because our Quaker places so firm confidence in this Author, that he
thought a simple reference unto him sufficiently does his bussiness. I had a
great desire to know what he could say against our meaning of this place: Which
place appeared to me to hold forth our Doctrine, as clearly as the sun-light:
Having therefore made diligent search, at length I found the book, in which
Chap: 3. He undertaketh a particular discussion of all the Arguments brought
from this place, for our Doctrine concerning Election and Reprobation, which
how he has done, comes now to be weighed. And 1. From Verse. 6. He frames to
himself an Objection,

that because it is said, that they are not all Israel, that are of Israel,
therefore it seems, that all are not elected; To which he answers, that the
Apostle intimat^, that the Carnal Israel, or all that are come of Jacob,
surnamed Israel, are not the Israel, to whom the promises of Salvation are
absolutely and finally made, tho in general the conditional promises belong to
all Israel, as the Apostle shows verse. 4. That we may not be misunderstood,
know, that among others, there are seven promises made to the overcomers, Rev.
2 and 3: Chap. and such as persevere in the Christian Race, unto the end, or to
the death and burial of sin.

Now these and the like promises belong unto the Elect, that are chosen out of
the furnace of affliction. Isa. 48.10. Which with Paul have fought the good
fight of Faith. 2 Timothy: 4: 7, 8: And so may fully expect the reward, because
God is faithful that has promised it. Heb: 6, 12: and 10: 36. James 1.12.

I Reply, this commentary (I shall not say a comment) is founded upon some
Scriptures violently detorted; for none of them does in the least insinuat,
that these of whom they speak were chosen to grace only, and not to glory
(which groundless distinction was invented of old by the Pelagians, and
condemned and refuted by the Orthodox, as is evident in the Epistles of
Prosper, and Hilarious Arelatensis) and tends to the overthrow of the Covenant
of Redemption, and the promises of God the Father to Christ, viz. that he
should see his seed, and the travel of his soul. Isa. 53.10, 11. and many such
like, for if this Doctrine were true, it might so fall out, that none should
come to Glory; for according to it, the gift of perseverance is bestowed upon
none, and so the Apostle's persuasion, that None could separate him from the
Love of God, Rom: 8.35. Should have been vain and groundless. And the promise
to cause the Israel of God to keep his Statutes and his Judgments, to do them,
Ext 36, 27. Should be mere words of deceit; these and six hundred beside of
such absurd blasphemies are unseparably linked to this Doctrine. As for the
Scriptures cited by him, they hold forth a Character of such a^ shall be saved,
viz. That they do through grace overcome, love the Lord Jesus, exercise
Patience, Faith* and the like graces; but they do not at all hold forth, that
these graces, and perseverance therein are in Man's own power, so that he may
reject or refuse them, according to the inclinations of his own will, and that
God does not make Men irresistibly, yet sweetly of unwilling to become willing.
All which this Neo- Pelagian through the Violence of torture makes these
Scriptures to speak, but the verse it self does sufficiently refute this
exposition; for according to it, the word or promises of God, might be without
any effect, seeing it might fall out, that tho all were elected, none might be
saved. Now seeing this Exposition cannot Stand, the other, which this Arminian
would fain reject, of its own accord follows, viz. That not all, and every one
is from all Eternity elected, and chosen to Salvation, as the whole Scope and
series of this Chapter does demonstrate, as we shall evince, while we reply in
particular to the Answers he makes to the objections, which he frames from this
place.

2. He goes on thus, Rom: 9.7. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham,
are they all Children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called. Where the Apostle
alludeth to Gen 17.18, 19, 20, 21. It may seem then, that only Isaac and not
Ismael was chosen. Ans. Isaac was chosen alone to be the representative seed of
God, being a Type, first of Christ, in whom God has made his Covenant. 2. He
being a seed born by Sarah, represents Faith out of the promises, rather then
by the Strength of Nature: So is a Figure of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham,
which are begotten or born by virtue of the promises. For so the Apostle
explains himself v. 8. That is, they which are the Children of the Flesh (of
whom Ismael carried the Type) These are not the Children of God, but the
Children of promise are counted for the Seed: As for Ismael, who was begotten
by the Strength of Nature, and according to the Flesh of Hagar, which
represents the the Law, Gal. 4.21, 31: He figured forth these which should be
saved, not by the grace of the promises, but by the works of the Law, a people,
with whom God has not erected His Covenant, that they should be saved in that
way, but tho Ismael carried the Figure of such, it was without any prejudice to
his Eternal Election or Salvation: For Abraham praying thus for him, Gen:
17.18. O that Ismael might live before Thee, or in thy presence. v: 20 As for
Ismael, I have heard thee. His being such a Type, was no more prejudicial to
Him, then that Moses and Aaron were debarred entrance into Canaan (They therein
being a Figure of those, that should be shut out of Gods Kingdom for unbelief)
without any hazard to their own Salvation, as has been said before.

In order to our Reply to this and the following Objections, we premit. 1. That
this and the following Verses of this Chapter, are brought in by the Apostle,
as Arguments, to prove his Proposition laid down, v. 6. viz. That all are not
Israel, that are of Israel, therefore whatever flows from these Verses, as
their immediate Consequents, is the meaning of the sixth Verse. 2. That the
convincing clearness of this place has forced all to acknowledge, that the
Apostle is here speaking of Predestination of men, in order to their eternal
estate, and not as to the things of this Life only, as Bellarmin de Great et
Lib. Arb. L. 2. C. 15. Stapleton Ant, page 526. And among the modern Lutherans,
Hunnius upon the place in hand, who confesses that the Apostle digresseth into
the large field of Predestination. Yea Arminius himself, in his Analysis of
this Chapter, dares not deny it, tho he fain would. Having premised these
things, we come to his Answer, The Substance of which is* That Ismael was not
himself rejected of God, but only a Type of these that are not the Children of
God, which we shall refute, by evincing these two Things. 1. That tho Ismael be
considered here as a Type only, this place gives good ground for the Doctrine
of our Confession of Faith, against which he here fights. 2. That Ismael
himself was not elected. As for the first of these Propositions, it is evident;
For otherwise there should be no Correspondence betwixt the Type and the
Antitype, and so a Type should not be a Type. I prove it: If Ismael was
excluded from being counted the Seed of Abraham, only by the mere good pleasure
and absolute Dispensation of God, and not conditionally, so that Ismael himself
could have caused it to come to pass, that he should have been counted the
Legittimate Heir and Lawful begotten Son of Abraham, of whom the Church and
Christ according to the Flesh was to Spring, then there are some passed by in
the Eternal Decree of God, and that absolutely, to whom God from all Eternity
determined to give no Saving Grace, but punish them for their sins; But the
Former is true, yea and so true, that ( I am sure) none acknowledging the
Scriptures will deny it. The Major is no less clear, except (as we said before)
any shall be so absurd, as to deny a Correspondency or Analogy betwixt Type and
Antitype, and so deny a Type to be a Type, for in this Ismael was a Type, in
that he was not reckoned to be the Seed of Abraham, and a Child of the Flesh,
not a Child of Promise, all which came to pass by the absolute Dispensation of
God, and not conditionally, so that Ismael might have brought to pass, that he
should have been the Legittimate Heir and Seed of Abraham, and born by Virtue
of a special Promise: Neither on the other hand was the Election of Isaac unto
these Privileges, from which Ismael was excluded, conditional, but by the
absolute Dispensation of God: For I think none will say, that Isaac could have
hindered himself to be born by Virtue of a special promise, and so counted the
only Son, as we see he is called Genesis 22. 2. Therefore, if there be any
Correspondence betwixt Type and Antitype, the Lord from all Eternity did pass
by some, that is, decreed that he would not give them Grace, but permit them to
remain Children of the Flesh, whom he did not give unto Christ Jesus, to be his
Seed by Virtue of the Promises of the Covenant of Redemption.

We come now to the second Proposition viz. That Ismael himself was not
Elected, This by any thing we can learn from Scripture, is most evident. For 1.
He was by Gods own Command thrust out of the Church, Genesis 21.12. And that upon
the Account of his persecuting the Heir of Promise, and the Church and Image of
God in him. Genesis 21.9. Gal. 4.29. Now in Scripture we find no mention made of
his Repentance, or Readmission into the Church: Hence there is no Ground of
Charity concerning his Salvation. 2. We find nothing that Ismael exercised all
his Life, except Robbery and Bloodshed, as appears from Genesis 16.12. and 20 v.
Which Lessons the Saracens his Posterity have exactly learned from him. As for
Genesis 17.18, 20. It speaks of nothing less than the Salvation of Ismael: for as
it appears from verses 19.20. compared together, the Lord clearly intimates,
that he will neither establish his Covenant with himself, nor with his Seed,
and clearly asserts, that the things in which he heard Abraham for his son
Ismael, was only these pertaining to this Life: From all which it is clear,
that Ismael lived and died without Grace, or special Favor of God, and
therefore was no Elect Vessel; for I believe that none will deny, that the
making out by Scripture, that Ismael lived without the Special Favor of God,
will abundantly clear this place from all the mist, whereby our Adversaries
endeavor to darken it; That which he says of Moses and Aaron, their being
Types of these who were to be excluded from Gods spiritual rest, who
notwithstanding were godly themselves, is so far from saying any thing to the
Purpose, that I am certain he considered not what he was saying: For who did
ever infer simply, because he was a Type of those that were passed by in Gods
Eternal Decree, therefore he was passed by in it himself, we make no such
Inference, as may be seen from what we have already said. I might here take
notice of many other things, such as his forming the Objection, so that he
dissimulates no small part of the strength thereof, not at all taking notice of
the Analogy between the Type and Antitype, he knew to be urged not a little by
our Divines, notwithstanding that he himself asserreth Ismael to be a Type, and
so considered in this place, 2. I might take notice, that he clearly intimates,
that there is now a possibility of Salvation by the Works of the Law and
Strength of Nature. If it be Replied, that he qualifieth what he says by the
following words, viz. that God has not made a Covenant that men should be
saved this way. We return, That if his Principles stand, these words and the
former must of Necessity complete a Contradiction, for all these that were to
be born (to use his own Words) by Virtue of the Promises, Isaac represented
them, but Ismael represented not these, but others; now seeing these represented
by Ismael, might be saved, as well as these represented by Isaac, according to
the Principles of the Universalists, it inevitably follows, that they must be
saved by the Works of the Law.

His next Objection he gives in these Words together with his answer, is Romans
9.10, 11.

It is said there is a Purpose of God, according to Election, not of Works, but
of him that calls.

Ans. Although Election there seems to import nothing but Gods Grace, as the
Explanation following (not of Works, but of him that calls) will in some sort
evict, yet we grant there is a Purpose of God, both according to Election of
Persons and Things, and that either General or Special, as has been by us
already often acknowledged, and the Eternal Election of Persons in Mankind now
fallen, whether General or Particular is out of Grace, and not by their own
Works, wrought by the Strength of Nature, howbeit in that Special or Particular
Election arising out of the special Foreknowledge of God; Works of Grace and
perseverance therein are looked upon as Means and the way to Life, yea as a
Condition, and a Motive both in that and the final Election of the Saints,
which we call the Election out of the Furnace, Rev. 3.4. Thou have a few Names
in Sardis, which have not defiled their Garments, and they shall walk with me in
white, Rev. 3, 8. Behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can
shut it, for thou have a little Strength, and have kept my Word, and not denied
my Name. Read more at large, Rev. 7.13, 14, 16, 17.

Reply, This answer, tho I will not say the best, is the rarest that any man
could have readily lighted on: for to assert the cause of Election to be Grace,
and yet to be some stages behind good works, as he does here, while he
acknowledges Election to be of works, not wrought by the strength of Nature,
as saying somewhat more, then when he granted Election to be of Grace, is
certainly so absurd, that one can invent nothing more absurd, tho he bend his
wit to the very purpose, for then it were all one to say, that works done by
the strength of Nature are the cause of Election, and Grace is the cause of
Election: or Election is of Grace, and Election is of works, done by the
strength of Nature were Equipollent. 2. That Election is Grace, or rather to
speak with the Apostle, Rom 11.5* of Grace, is most certain, but he takes again
his Confession, and soon repents that he has spoken the Truth, while he makes
Election to be of Works, tho not wrought by the strength of Nature, and makes
these to be Motives moving God to Elect some rather than others, quite contrary
to the Apostle, Romans 11.6. who makes a clear Opposition betwixt Grace, and
Works, of whatsoever kind in the point of Election. But 3ly. He is yet more
blasphemous and absurd, in that while the Apostle tells us, that by these
words, but of him that calls, work; in general, or without limitation are
excluded, he will in spite of him, force this very same Phrase to include
Works. But 4ly. That the Apostle here excludes all kind of Works from being
the cause of Election, is clear from the Connection of the Words with what
goes before and follows; for these words ( that the purpose of God etc.)
cite the consequent of the Apostolic En^hymem, of which the words going before
in this verse, and the following is the Antecedent: which two propositions the
particle (that) coupleth, obtaining the place of the Particle therefore; But
this Antecedent, or the Apostle by it most carefully excludes all kind of
Works, from being the cause of Gods preferring Jacob to Esau, Therefore no kind
of Works can be the cause, why God elected some, while he rejected others. Now
it is to be observed, that even giving, and not granting, Jacob and Esau to be
considered here only as Types, that this our conclusion will well follow, seeing
without respect to their future Works, it was determined, That the younger
should have the Inheritance, Lordship and Dominion, and the elder contrary to
the custom of Humane Laws, only for the good pleasure of God, was to be
excluded from them. Now we say, seeing there must be an Analogy betwixt Type and
Antitype, of necessity some must be appointed to the heavenly Canaan, and
Spiritual Dominion, without consideration of their doing good, as the cause
moving God to this Election: And some must be excluded from this Spiritual
Canaan, Inheritance, and Dominion, without the consideration of their evil
deeds, as the cause moving thereunto; If any should say, tho the Children had
done neither good nor evil, yet the Lord foreseeing the good deeds of the one,
and the evil of the other, did so and so decree concerning them, they can say
nothing more absurd, and antiscriptural; For 1. then there can be nothing made
of these words, (neither having yet done good or evil) neither can any reason
be showed, why they were here cast in by the Apostle. But 2. and more
particularly, these words of necessity exclude some kind of works from being
the cause of Election or Rejection; Ergo they exclude works of whatsoever kind,
seeing they exclude without limitation, the doing of good or evil, and so render
that distinction of Works, done by the strength of Nature, and by the help of
Grace, of which he here talks, altogether groundless; yea according to this
distinction of his, one might say, that such good works are here only excluded,
which tho good as to the substance of the Action, yet are accompanied with no
kind of sincerity and singlness, but are intended directly for a sinful end:
But good works accompanied with any kind of sincerity, and having no sinful end
directly intended, tho they be notwithstanding wrought only by the strength of
Nature, are not excluded; I say, according to his distinction, this might be
said. For the Text affords a like ground for both; which assertion he that
denies, is bound to give a ground for the one, more than for the other, from
the Text. 3ly: The Apostles conclusion drawn from this Text, which is, as has
been showed, his Antecedent, excluding works without limitation, from being the
cause of Election, convinces all these of contradicting the Scriptures, who
will notwithstanding pertinaciously assert, that only some kind of works is
excluded. And now from what is said, this his distinction of special and
general, that is, certain and uncertain Election falls to the ground; For if
the cause thereof be not works, but the grace and good-pleasure of God, then no
part of Election can be uncertain, except (Obstupeo, surgunt que comae, vox
faucibus haeret) they make the good pleasure of God, that is, God himself
changeable; and then all Election shall be uncertain, and so this distinction
shall fall to the ground however. Behold, Reader, the blasphemy and absurdity,
into which these universalists run themselves; For Election, which is the cause
of good works, they make to be the Effect of good works, and so something which
is eternal, to be the Effect of that which is in time, destroying all kind of
order (This Argument Augustine uses against their Doctrine. D^. Predest. Sanct.
C. 16) and proclaim real changes in the Father of lights, in whom is no
variableness or shadow of turning; But why should we tarry so long in refuting
one, in whom is not to be perceived the least shadow of reason, for what he
says, as the Reader may perceive. As for the Scriptures brought by him here,
we have nothing to say, but only deny, that they make any thing for his vagrant
Election, seeing he does not essay to infer any thing in its behalf from them,
contented himself barely to act them, which when we have diligently considered,
we cannot find the least appearance of their Doctrine to flow from them; we
shall therefore pass on to his ensuing Objection and answer.

Romans 9.10, 11, 12. For the Children not being yet born, it was said, That the
elder shall serve the younger, where Jacob and Esau were disposed before they
were born.

Ans. 1. It is granted, that all men may be so, yea are so both for their
temporal estates here, and eternal condition hereafter, but in a most wise and
just way.

2: We have showed before that the Apostle relating to Genesis 25.23. does not
speak of the persons of Jacob and Esau, but of their seeds, The Nations of the
Edomites, and the people of Israel.

3. It is not their eternal state that is there spoken of, but their Rank and
Place in this World. Now as it is lawful for the Lord to make some Governors
and Superiors, and others Inferiors or Subjects; So it was not any injustice
in him, to make the Seed of Jacob the greater and superior Kingdom: For even
the Edomites were appointed to a good and comfortable condition.

4 The Apostle makes this disposal of them before hand, to prove that Jacob or
Israel 's preferment was of mere Grace, and so the Argument was apt for this
Discourse, and in that book where he asserts Gods grace against our own Natural
Works and Merits.

Lastly, there is in this Subordination of Esau to Jacob a Spiritual Document,
showing, that the Natural or Earthly Man must be subject to the Spiritual and
heavenly Man, for Edom signifies Earthly.

Reply, It is well that after ^o long struggling for a desperate Cause, he
conceds all at length: For if God has disposed of the Eternal Estate of every
one, universal Election is a bottomless Fiction, except his Patrons affirm,
That either all obtain Eternal Life, or else that matters fall out otherwise
than God has disposed, and determined concerning them. 2ly. Whatever he has
said relating to Genesis 25.23. For his Opinion before, we refuted it before,
except he mean some other place beside this, which he handles this present
Text. viz. Romans 9. 3ly. That their Eternal Estates are there spoken of is
clear, seeing the Apostle without the least shadow of ambiguity, speaks of the
Children themselves, and that the Election of the one, and the Rejection of the
other, was antecedent to their doing good or evil. And that this is spoken of
the Children themselves in some respect, he himself here asserteth: Then I say,
If this be true, their Eternal State must be here spoken of, seeing the Lord
loved the Person of Jacob, and hated the Person of Esau, before they were born,
or had done either good or evil: And that this Assertion may the more evidently
appear ( viz. That God loved the Person of Jacob, and hated the Person of Esau,
even before they were born, I shall more particularly vindicat Mal. 1.2.3. from
his depravations, which follow in his next Objection, and Answer thereto: The
first of which is, That this place Mal. 1.2, 3. cited here by the Apostle v.
13. to confirm that which he had said concerning Jacob and Esau in the former
verses, is not to be understood of their Persons, but of their Seeds. For then
this place of Malachi should be adduced by the Apostle to no purpose, seeing he
is here speaking of the Person of Jacob and Esau, which to say, is both
blasphemous and absurd. Moreover, the Prophet Malachi clearly intimats, That he
is speaking of the Persons of Jacob and Esau, at least rhat he is not speaking
of their Seeds, so as to exclude their Persons, Was not Esau Jacob's brother?
which Phrase must be understood in the first place of Jacob and Esau
themselves* and secondly of their Seeds: Neither is the reason of this Arminian
of any weight, drawn from the words of the 3 verse, And has laid his Mountain
waste, to prove his point, yea, the very contrary follows from the words. Thus
I have hated Esau, Therefore, I have laid his Mountain waste, for the Vastation
of the Idumean Mountains is mentioned as the effect of divine hatred against
the Person of Esau, extending it self in a secondary manner to his Posterity:
Even as the love of God to Jacob did extend it self to his Posterity, as is
clear from Deuteronomy. 10.15. with many other places of Scripture. Where it is
evident, that the love of God did principally and chiefly terminat upon the
person of Jacob, and secondarly on his Seed and offspring. Furthermore, our
exposition is clear from the very words of the Text it self: For the good
Condition or Freedom from Devastat^on, in which then the Jews were, is holden
forth by the Prophet, to be an Effect of the Love of God to Jacob, extending it
self to his posterity, even as the Destruction of the Edomites was an Effect of
his hatred of God to Esau. In a word, the good Condition of the Israelites has
the same kind of Relation to the love of God toward Jacob, which the
Devastation of Edom has to the hatred of God toward Esau: But that the good
Condition of the Children of Israel, was the Effect of the free love of God to
Jacob, the Prophet there clearly intimates, and as we said before, many other
places assert; Therefore the Devastation of Edom, was the Effect of the hatred
of God to Esau, extending it selt to his wicked Posterity: He says moreover,
That the cause why God hated Esau's Posterity at that time, is declared in the
4 v. In these words, We are impoverished, but will return etc. In which words,
says he, Their Incorrigible wickedness is declared. Reply, That Edom was an
incorrigible wicked people is true, but nothing to his purpose: For in this
their Resolution, considered in it self, of which Resolution alone the Prophet
speaks, and in reposing themselves in their own Lands, there can no
wickedness be showed. Hence we conclude with Junius, that noble Interpreter of
Scripture, on the words, That in this 4 v. is contained a Decument, that God is
about to confirm Israel, now brought back from Captivity, to defend the Land,
and to magnify himself in all things; but on the other hand, that he was about
to deprive the Idumeans, whom he had Reprob^t, of all power to return or
rebuild their Common wealth, tho they had endeavored to do it. Add to all this
the body of Orthodox writers, both Ancient and Modern, approving our meaning of
this place, we shall name two; But as Gylippus was to the Lacaedemonians, they
me accounted in stare omnium: The one is Hierom among the Ancients, upon the
place, who says, He does not only say, I loved Jacob before he was born, but
also I hated Esau before he was brought forth; But I also have reserved my love
and hatred for their Posterity. The other is Luther, De servo Arbitrio, Cap,
161* who says It is not therefore the temerity of the Idumeans which is
reproved, but the ingratitude of the Children of Israel, who see not what God
bestows upon them, and of what he depriveth their Brethren, the Idumites, for
no other cause, but because he loved the one, and hated the other. In which
place Luther largely demonstrats, that the Prophet here speaks of these things
which he did to Israel and Edom, as the Effect of his eternal love and hatred,
in opposition to Erasmus, who by special Command of the Pope, did undertake the
defense of the Pelagian Doctrine, in his Diatribe de Libero Arbitrio. Add to
all these the History of Jacob and Esau, as a good Commentary on both places,
now in hand, which declares that Esau was a profane Person Heb 12.16. and
elsewhere, and that Jacob got grace, and so was saved, which is more than a
demonstration, that the Lord determined from all Eternity, to save the one, and
pass by the other, which is the thing we plead for; That which he says in the
fourth place is true, but nothing to his purpose. Seeing the Question is,
whether or not the Apostle in this place handles the matter of Eternal
Election and Reprobation: In the fifth place, he takes the place of the old
Libertins, who denied that any godly man ought to be subject to any Magistrate,
tho never so just, if he want true Grace; by reason of which Doctrines huge
Confusions were raised in Germany, as also by Venner, who with his Accomplices
began to raise great Tumults in England, while he minded to make this Doctrine
of our Author practicable.

He goes on to deprave the 14. and 15. verses; The substance of what he says,
we shall faithfully deliver in so far as he militats against our Confession.
Having inferred from these verses by way of an Objection to himself, That it
seems there are some to whom God will not show mercy. He answers, That the
Apostle pre-occupies an Objection, which some might make out of the Continuance
of Gods Mercy, still to the Children of Israel, but withdrawn from Edom, as
before; What shall we say, is there unrighteousness with God? Next that Exodus
33, 19. here cited by the Apostle, speaks not of Gods first Grace, which he
gives to all alike, but of the second which he continues to these that walk
humbly, and answerably to the first, as Moses had done. To which I reply. 1.
That he makes his Objection, pre-occupied by the Apostle, to be no Objection:
For from the Lords continuance of his Mercy upon the Humble-walking under it,
and his withdrawing the same from Esau, upon the abuse thereof, none could
infer with any color of reason, That there is unrighteousness with God, seeing
the abuse of good things deserves the Depravation thereof: And so according to
him, the Apostle was triffling all the while. Again any that runs not into
willful prejudice, may see that the Apostles objection has more apparent
Strength in the judgment of Humane Reason, by far than our Author makes it to
have; for it is an inference drawn from what the Apostle had said in the former
verse, of the absolute rejection of some, while others were Elected, which
Doctrine carnal reason, as it does yet, knew too well how to wrest; And from
this Doctrine according to carnal Reason no little absurdity seemed to follow:
Wherefore the Apostle appeals from its Tribunal to that of the Scriptures, yea
even to such a Text as speaks of the absolute Dominion of God over the
Creature. Yea the most absolute imaginable. Now if the objection had been such
an one; as this Arminian professes it, there had been no necessity of the
Apostles betaking himself to this place of Scripture. 2. What he talks here
of his twofold grace, stands and falls with what he said of his twofold
Election, which distinction we have already rejected; for this Distinction of
Grace in first and second, it is groundless, for it is not in the least
insinuated in this Text, viz. Exodus: 33: 19. That Moses had gotten in the
beginning from God some kind of Grace, which had not the Divine power of God
coming along therewith, causing Moses irresistibly, yet sweetly walk in Gods
Statutes. But leaving him to use well, or abuse the grace gotten. Now he must
prove this from the Text, if he would conclude any thing from it; moreover, If
Moses speak only of a second grace here, which a first must in Faith and humble
walking necessarily preceed, then this Text holds forth the Dominion of God to
be no more absolute over his Creatures, than that of a Magistrate toward his
well or ill deserving subjects, whom he ought to reward or punish, according to
their desert, and not to whom he will only: And so this Text shall destroy it
self. Lastly, if the exposition of this universalist were sound, then the
Apostles Conclusion, which he gathers in the next verse should not follow,
but rather the quite contrary thereof. For if God give a first grace to all,
and that so sufficient, that it lies only in Man's will to come, or not to come
unto God, and that Man has power either to will or nill, at pleasure, either
to turn, or not to turn to God: and yet notwithstanding, some come, and some
come not, then all that makes the one to differ from the other, is certainly of
him that wills. The Answer of our Antagonist to this 16. verse is rare viz.
Tho our Salvation be mere of Mercy, yet Man can both will and run in some sort,
as this Scripture imports; because he could have said nothing less to to the
purpose: For the Argument which may be framed from this verse, and it is not of
him that wills, Ergo Election, or the purpose of God, (one of which words
must of necessity be supplied from verse 11. Otherwise the Apostles words would
want a cohesion, and the verb (...) which of necessity must be understood here,
shall want a Noun) is not an effect of the will of Man, or of his good works
moving God thereunto. Now this Argument is not touched by the answer, as is of
it self apparent: He therefore here delivers up the cause, and endeavors
to cheat his Reader. 2. This place imports no more a power in all men to will,
or run in the way of Gods Commandments, than these words in Ezekiel. 36.22, 32.
Not for your sake, and leave in all Men a power to merit at the hand of God. He
goes on to comment upon the 17. and 18. verses. And 1. He desires us, To note
that here the Lord does not say, for this purpose I have created thee, but
raised thee up or brought thee upon the Stage. But this is the vainest of
evasions, for none but an Athiest can deny, that God from all Eternity did
decree to raise up Pharaoh for that same end, for which in time he raised him
up: and consequently, that he decreed to create him for the same end, otherwise
God failed of his first end, and was forced to betake himself to the next best:
Which to affirm is to make God a Man, and so to profess atheism with open face;
yea this Doctrine brings the wisdom of God below that of a Man, seeing
according to it the omniscient God, did creat Pharaoh for an end, which he knew
he was never to obtain. But 2. That Pharaoh was not only brought on the Stage,
but also created to the end, that God might manifest His Power and Justice in
His Destruction, is clear from Pro* 16.4. Where it is said, that God made,
wrought, formed, or created, for all these will the word Pagnal bear, all
things for Himself, yea even the wicked, the Spirit of God holding forth, that
this is a Paradox, unto the day of evil. 2. He says, That Pharaoh was known
unto the Lord to be a proud and obstinate Rebel, as is evident, Exodus: 8.2. But
what he would hence infer is not evident, except that Pharaoh's ill disposed
will was unconquerable by the grace and power of the omnipotent God: To repeat
which Conclusion is more than to refute it. That which he says in the third
place, viz. That God showed Pharaoh the danger of disobedience before he sent
his Plagues upon Him: As also his fourth observation, viz. that he makes him of
unwilling willing to let his People go, is mere nothing: For himself here on
the matter grants, That from Gods Exalting Pharaoh to the Throne of the
Kingdom, He was destinat to destruction, and his day of grace gone, otherwise
his first note upon this Text is nonsense: Therefore it follows, That all the
warnings antecedent to the Plagues are not Declarations of the mind of God to
save Pharaoh: And that his causing of him to let the people go, was no infusion
of grace in him. His 5. note viz* That God did not harden Pharaohs heart, by
infusing any hardness into it, but rather used means to soften it, and bend his
heart to obedience, we embrace withal our heart, as to the first part; for the
second part thereof, it is ambiguous; For if we understand these words of a
real design in God to soften the heart of Pharaoh by these means, it is false,
seeing God himself declares, Exodus: 4.21. Even before these were used toward
Pharaoh, that he had no such intent, but the contrary thereof. He says 6ly.
That the Lord destroyed him not, until his heart biased and wilfully
revolted from that inclination of letting Israel go, to which the Lord had
brought and wrought him: So that the Lords pleasure in hardening, must out of
this example be understood of such as are first or last refractory against his
grace and gracious requiring Motions. Reply, upon as good a ground he might
assert, that Dives in hell had such inclinations and workings of grace,
together with power to use them aright, if he had pleased, which if he had
improved aright, he might have passed through the impenetrable gulf, to the
place where Lazarus was. For Dives, Luke 16.27, 28. Had an inclination and a
vehement desire, that his five Brethren might shun the place of torment, in
which he was: And surely this inclination and desire was as good in it self as
Pharaohs, of letting Israel go; and surely the Motive that prompted Pharaoh to
yield to the peoples departure, was not a whit better than the motive of this
desire in Dives, for both were acted by the fear of punishment: Hence let the
Universalists be ashamed of their first grace, seeing it is common to these in
Hell as well as to these in the World. 2. If this his Doctrine (viz. that
Pharaoh and every Man else had a sufficient Measure of Grace given them, and
power to use it well or ill at pleasure, according to the good or ill
improvement of which, they might have been saved or damned) be true, and this
Arminians exposition of Exodus: 9.16. Here cited by the Apostle be to be
received, then the Apostles Conclusion verse, 16. is a mere Non sequitur; for
according to his exposition, the Lord should not have mercy on whom he will,
and harden whom he will, but these only who will, or desire to have Mercy, or
to be hardened; seeing this Universalistick Doctrine makes the main and Chief
difference, betwixt these that are actually saved, and not saved, to flow from
the will of Man, which they say has a power to receive or reject Grace, and so
to be mollified, or hardened absolutely, at pleasure; now I say, to say this,
and yet to assert that God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and hardneth
whom he will, is no less ridiculouslie contradictorie, than if one should say
that such a judge had absolute power over such a guilty City, to save alive or
put to Death all the Citizens at pleasure, and yet in the mean while that there
were such and such Conditions proposed to this City, which they could embrace
or respect as they listed, upon the performance of which Conditions, this judge
could not, nor might not put to death any, nor save the rejectors thereof.

He goes on to comment upon the 9. verse. Why does he yet find fault? Who has
resisted his will! Thus, it seems then that his will in condemning the wicked
is irresistible. Answer, the will of God is manifold. First voluntas Signi,
that which he would have done by Men, and that may be resisted or dissobeyed. 2
ly. Voluntas Beneplaciti, that which he is pleased to effect, and that either
absolutely, to be done by himself alone, or with others, which cannot be
withstood; or conditionally in case the Creature act his part, this Conditional
will may also be repugned; So that wicked Men can not excuse themselves by the
irresistibilitie of the first or last mentioned will of Gods irrevocable
decree, at length past upon the obstinat and incorrigible sinner, which like
his powerful and efficacious will, is inexpugnable: But it is the obdured Man's
refractory and inflexible will, that has now made this will or decree of God
so peremptory against him. So that God has just cause to fault and blame the
Man that perishes, but not e Contra.

Reply in the framing of his Objection, he should have inferred that it seems
that the Will of God, in passing by some, while he from all Eternity elected
others to Glory, and of hardening them in time, is irresistible, or
unchangeable, for of these two the Apostle here speaks: But let us come to his
Answer, in which we may observe, that this distinction of voluntas Beneplaciti,
in absolute and conditionat, is a mere fiction, as appears even by the
Testimony of Arminius himself, who in his Book against Perkins, acknowledges
that voluntas beneplaciti is without limitation effi^acious. But 2dly this
Distinction of voluntas Beneplaciti in absolute and conditionat, makes God as
changeable as a man; for if the Lord have a real Will and Intention, that such
and such things be done by some men, in order to obtaining such and such
Privileges, v. g. Eternal Life, then there can be nothing imagined, able to
hinder the bringing to pass of this desire, but two things, viz. either the
want of Power, or a real Change in the Will of God; but both those are equally
absurd: neither let any say here, that this will of God is only conditionat in
respect of the ends only, and not of the Means and Conditions thereof: For
whosoever wills any thing, he wills and desires all the Means and
Conditions, in order to its bringing to pass, and will give a Being to all
those Conditions, if it be in his Power, which Power none dare derogat from
God. 3dly. This Objection, as this Arminian propones it, is no Objection, for
in Substance it is this, If the Lord has proposed such Conditions, as men can
perform and so obtain Salvation, and yet obstinatly refuse them, so that at
length the Lord after their rejection thereof, decrees their Eternal Ruin,
then he has no Reason to find fault with Man, but the Blame thereof lies upon
himself. Now I say to propose the O^jection thus, is to render the Apostle
ridiculous, for there is no more appearance of Reason here, than a Subject
should have to grumble and repine, when he is punished by his Prince, for
denying Obedience to him, which to have performed was in his Power. 4ly* If the
Objection had been of no more seeming strength, than this Arminian or Pelagian
(for all is one) alleges it to be, the Apostle had easily found out another
Answer, than that which he does in the following Verses, where he stops the
Mouth of the Objecter with the absolute Power of God over the Creature, showing
that the Creature has no more Reason to complain that God decreed, to pass by
some, and condemn them for their Iniquity, than the clay of the same lump has
to complain of the Potters Unjustice, because he did not destinat it for as
honorable an use, as another part of the same Mass. In short, if the Objection
could be so framed, as that there could be an Answer thereto found out, suiting
the Genius of Humane Reason (which is the Scope of our Author here, and all the
rest of his Brethren) then there should be an indissolvable, and more than
Gordian knot cast to any that were persuaded of the Divinity of the Scriptures,
for considering the Apostles Answer in the following Verse, they should have
but too much Ground, to suspect most vehemently, that the Apostle was not
assisted with the Divine Spirit, who betook himself for Sanctuary to the
absolute Power of God, in the case wherein he, or any man else might have
sweetly satisfied Reason, and not thus stopped its mouth, by imposing as it were
an imperious silence, and left it far less quieted, than they found it; That
which he commenteth upon v. 20 is not a whit les^ vain than the rest: the
Substance of which is, that the Apostle in this v. stops the Mouth of these,
who complained, that God created them with Liberty of will, and so with power
of falling, to which says he, it is answered, that this Faculty might be
improved to the Salvation of the Creature, as well as to the glory of Gods
grace.

To which we Reply, that no such Interpretation can be gathered from the Text,
for the Objection proposed in the former v, does not in the least intend, from
the Liberty of Man's Will, to do Good or Evil, to conclude that Man is not
guilty, but rather God. But from the Immutability and Irresistibility of Gods
Will and Decree of passing by and rejecting some, (as he did with Esau) the
Objecter endeavors to free Man from Guilt, and fix it upon God, neither is
he a whit happier in taking up of the Apostles Answer; for the Apostle does not
flee to the Liberty of Man's will, that he may draw his Answer hence, but the
absolute Dominion of God over the Creature, and that (...) an one as he has,
who possesses wood, Iron, Clay, or such Materials, and is wilful to make
various Kinds of Instruments, which may serve either for honorable or
dishonorable uses; but these Materials that are appointed by the Owner and
Artist thereof, cannot be said to be wronged by him, or to have any Ground of
Complaint, and that by Reason of the absolute Power, that the Owner and Artist
has over them; even as any of Mankind that from all Eternity are passed by and
rejected of God, and destinat to Destruction for Gods own Glory, as it is said
Prove. 16.4. have no Reason to complain. Now in this Analogy lies the Strength
of the Apostles answer, which who ever denies shall never be able to find the
Sense of this Text. Hence it appears (whether ignorantly or maliciously, I know
not) that this Arminian has come short of uptaking either Objection or Answer:
But most of all absurd is what he says, in his Commentary (rather
depravation) of the 21 v. viz. That as the Potter makes no Vessels of set
Purpose to be broken, tho he makes some for dishonorable uses: So the Lord
makes none of the Sons of men of Purpose to be destroyed, tho he makes some
Superiors and Inferiors in the Church and Commonwealth; I say this is most
of all absurd, for it is as clear as if written with a Sunbeam, that the
Apostle is here speaking nothing of high and low Degrees in Church or State,
but of these who perish, and these who are saved Eternally; according to this
Explication, every one that is in low Degree should be a Vessel of Wrath,
fitted for Destruction: Seeing none can deny, that this is all one with a Vessel
of Dishonor: as also every one that is in high Degree in Church or State
should be a Vessel of Mercy, aforetime prepared unto Glory, and one of Gods
called Ones, as the Apostle was, (whose calling I think was effectual, and so
certainly a Saint) such a mark of Believers and Unbelievers was never heard
before.

To Corroborat what he says on this Verse he gives us his notes on Jer. 18.3,
4, 5. among which one is, that the Lord expostulates with Israel for not
suffering him to mould them a new. To which we answer, that it will no more
follow from this place, that the Heart of corrupt man is stronger in resisting
than the Power of God, and that God cannot make men of unwilling to become
willing, which is the meaning of our Adversaries Words, than real ignorance of
what was to come, may be concluded to be in God from Isa. 5.4. and 59.16. Other
notes he has upon this place, such as, That the Lord forms men a new by Force
or Violence, but works with them as free Agents, serving for nothing except to
declare this Authors maliciousness; for he here insmuates, that the Reformed
Churches judge, that God deals with a sinner in his Conversion, as if he were a
Stone or a Bruit, the contrair of which appears from their Confessions, and
in special in the Confession, which he here impugneth. Chapter 10.1.

He goes on to comment upon the 22 verse where he says, That it is not so much
as employed, that these Vessels of wrath, spoken of in this verse, by the
Apostle, were fitted by the Lord to Destruction. Yea says he, the contrary is
imported, where the Apostle says, That (...) endures them with much long
suffering; For if God created them, or designed them of purpose to Destruction,
things had succeeded according to his hearts desire.

In Reply to these Cavils we find no difficulty; for God may be as well said to
fit men to Destruction, as he is said to harden some. verse 18. For I think
none will deny, but hardening is a fitting to Destruction. 2. I think none dare
deny, that even while God was hardening Pharaohs heart, he was exercising his
long suffering patience, in permitting him to fulfill his course of sin.
Augustine de Civit. Dei Lib. 16. says. God of the same Mass, condemned through
Original sin, did as a Potter make one to honor, and another to dishonor: Our
Author says moreover, That it is not said, they were created but fitted for
Destruction (...) Reply, Although our Adversary loves always to pass over the
Connection of the verses of this Chapter, as indeed he has good reason to do,
he notwithstanding may permit us to consider it: In which we shall find, that
men may be said to be fitted to wrath, even as some part of the lump of clay is
fitted by the Potter, for Vessels of Dishonor: But it is appointed for this
dishonorable use as soon as it is appointed to be vessels: But so it is, That
the Lord so orders of men as the Potter of his Clay, as the Apostle here
shows. It is clear therefore, That by this word Fitted, must be understood
among other things, Appointed or Decreed.

He goes on to Comment on the 23 verse, where among some other things, which
he has not to the Purpose that he intends, he asserts, That this preparing
of the Vessels of Glory, is not attributed to Gods Eternal Decree. And in this
he is but like himself, who, as we have heard above denies on the matter, that
there is any Decree of God concerning the Salvation or Damnation of men in
particular before death: Although at another time, as we have also heard, he
sticks not to contradict this; But that this preparation is Attributed to the
Decree of God, is clear, not only from the Scope of the Apostle, and the
Energie of the word (...) but also from no few other Scriptures, such as Ephesians.
1. 4, 5, 6, 7.

A length to shut up this Discourse, Let the Reader Observe with me. 1. That
tho men bring full Wain-loads of Arguments, in appearance like Goli^h's Sword,
from the Armorie of corrupt Reason whereby to overthrow the genuine meaning of
this place, they are not to be regarded, neither on this account are we to be
moved or shaken, as touching the behalf of this place. For in so far as we are
shaken from it through the force of these Reasons, We yield to these great
Adversaries of Christ Jesus, the Socinians, that grand Principle of all
Orthodox Christians viz. that Reason as well as the rest of the Scriptures
Rivals, ought to strike fail, and yield preheminency thereto, as being the
entire and ultimat Rule of the Faith and Manner^ of a Christian. This I have
good reason to note here; For there be many that though they cannot but
perceive this Text to be, without the highest violenting and detorting thereof,
utterly incapable of any other sense, than what the Reformed, and in especial
our Reverend Westminister Assembly, give upon it still, notwithstanding
allege, that on the account of their most powerful Reasons to the contrary,
This our meaning is not to be received, seek another where we will. 2. That if
there be a Doctrine in all the Holy Scriptures, out of the r^^ch of, and far
above the Line of Humane Reason, contrary to Corrupt Reason, and in its Estimat
repugnant to all Reason (as certainly there is) then no man will deny, but that
this Doctrine of Eternal Election, and Reprobation, is one of the chief o^ such
Doctrines, as having for its Object, that which i^ no less Impervestigable than
Eternity, no less unfathomable than Immensity, no less Incomprehensible, than
he whose very name is Wonderful, and so wonderful that none can know it, even
God himself, according to his Eternal actings and workings, 3ly. That this
place of Scripture, is one of the chief Seats of the Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation: Hence we most rationally infer, that in agitation of this great
Controversy; If any Scriptures be brought, which seemingly (for none do it
really) speak contrary to this Text, Light is to be brought from this place,
for expounding and clearing up the meaning of these seemingly repugnant
Scriptures, (...) rather, that e contra, these should be made (...) Standard
and Guide in exposition of this.

FINIS.

