A LETTER to a Friend, Containing some QUAERIES about the New Commission for
making Alterations in the Liturgy, Canons, etc. of the Church of England.
SIR,
IN Your last you seem much concerned about the New Commission, and desire my
Opinion of it: I am very unfit to resolve your Doubts in this matter, having
many of my own; which I shall reduce into some Quaeries, hoping that you may
have opportunity of consulting with some of the Commissioners, who may be able
to give you a more satisfactory Answer than I can.

First, Concerning the Nature of these intended Alterations.

Q. I. Whether there be any Necessity of such Alterations in the Liturgy, or as
some say of it; (Whatever may be pretended as to Canons and Ecclesiastical
Courts:) if there be any, for the Satisfaction of the Members of our Church,
who generally believe there is none, why is not this Necessity made appear, and
the reasons to the contrary confuted? If there be none, enquire whether it be
for the Reputation and Establishment of the Church, or for the increase of
Reverence and Devotion in the People to be so frequently meditating unnecessary
Alterations.

Q. II. If these Alterations be not pretended to be necessary, enquire what the
fitness and expediency of them is? Whether they are intended for the sake of
the Church, or, for the satisfaction of Dissenters, or to serve both these ends
together?

1. If for the sake of the Church, should it not be first enquired whether the
Church desire it, and what Alterations she desires? Ought she not to be
consulted in such matters as are intended for her advantage? Should not the
Convocation then have first met and considered, whether any Alterations at this
time were expedient, before the Commissioners had troubled themselves to make
such Alterations, and become bound in honor to defend them? Or is it for the
Peace and Unity and Edification of the Church, for some few assuming men to
alter the Established Worship, to make it comply with their own private
conceits, or to serve their own private ends?

2. If for the sake of the Church, why should any thing be altered which has
the general Approbation of the true Members of the Church? Why should such
Ceremonies be taken away, or which is much worse, left indifferent, which they
approved as useful to the external Decency and solemnity of Worship? Why should
such Prayers and forms of Worship be altered, which they find such great helps
to Devotion, that they desire no material change, and believe they cannot be
altered for the better by any mere humane Compositions.

3. If it be for the sake of the Church, will our Commissioners keep their eye
upon the Primitive pattern which was the original Rule of our Reformation? If
they can alter our Worship and Discipline into a nearer and more exact
Conformity to the ancient Primitive and Apostolic Churches; this I grant would
be for the advantage of the Church; but ask them, whether it will be for the
advantage of the Church to change the ancient Rules and Forms of Worship for
some new Modern Inventions? How shall we justify our selves against the charge
of Novelty and Innovation, if we reform away all the remains and characters of
a Primitive and Apostolic Church.

2. If these Alterations be intended for the satisfaction of Dissenters, and to
Unite them in the Communion of our Church.

Q. I. Do they know what will satisfy Dissenters? Whether they find any
greater inclinations in them now to return to our Communion, then they have
formerly had? or whether after the fruitless trials by the Commissioners at the
Savoy in 61. and at the L. K. Bridgman's, where some of these Gentlemen were
concerned, it be expedient to make a new and more dangerous experiment.

2. Whether it be possible in the nature of the thing, to give such
satisfaction to Dissenters as shall restore them to the Communion of the Church
without destroying the fundamental Constitution of the Church of England? As
for instance,

Can any alterations in our Collects and Prayers (while we retain a Form)
satisfy those who declare against all forms of Prayer as a quenching of the
Spirit? and then it is not altering the Liturgy, but taking it away, that must
satisfy Dissenters.

And not to multiply Quaeries, will the dissenting Preachers, who have been
Ordained by Schismatical Presbyters, submit to Episcopal Ordinations? or if
they will not, will the People come into the Church without their Preachers? or
if the Commissioners should think fit to admit them as Presbyters of the Church
without a Solemn Ordination, is it not a subversion of the Constitution, not
only of the Church of England, but of the Catholic Church? and are they sure
that the Members of the Church of England will own such Presbyters?

3. Inquire you whether it be reasonable at this time to make such alterations
in our Worship in favor of Dissenters, without reasonable assurance of gaining
them to our Communion? and whether the temper and practices of our Dissenters
at this time give any such assurance? especially if the story of Northampton be
true, that like Novatianus of old, they oblige their Communicants to vow or
swear upon the Sacrament that they will never return to the Communion of the
Church of England, which is said also to be a general practice.

After this I suppose it will be needless to say, that these alterations can be
intended both for the advantage of the Church and satisfaction of Dissenters,
since from what has been said it seems impracticable to make such Alterations
as shall satisfy Dissenters, and not give just scandal to the Members of our
Church, and therefore here you are to inquire,

I. Whether they ought not to have as tender a regard to the Members of our own
Church, as to Dissenters? As for instance: if many of our Communion will be
offended to see others receive the Lord's Supper sitting, and it may be through
the weakness of humane nature may Forsake our Communion for it, whether it be
reasonable to drive these Men from our Communion out of mere hope to gain worse
men in the room of them?

II. Ask if such alterations should make a Schism in the Church, would it not
prove of more fatal consequence than this Present Schism?

Second, Some Queries concerning the Commission and Commissioners.

Q* I. Whether since the K. himself, besides his Solemn Oath at his Coronation,
has so often declared his resolution to maintain the Church of England as by
Law established, it be not more probable some of these Commissioners have
procured this Commission from the K. to make such alterations, then that it
proceeded from the K.'s own inclination?

II. Whether the known Character of some of the Leading men in this Commission
be not reason enough to suspect the event? Whether men who conformed with
difficulty themselves, or upon Principles which Wise men foresaw would destroy
the Church in time, who have a Latitude to conform to a Church de facto, which
has power on its side, and to conceal their own inclinations till it is time to
show them, are not likely to do the Church of England a good turn when
opportunity serves, and which perhaps they imagine now they have?

III. Whether when the House of Commons addressed to the King for a
Convocation, it was not to prevent such a Commission as this? which was then
moved in the House of Lords by an eminent Person in this Commission, and a
zealous promoter of it.

IV. Whether there was any such have of altering the best constituted Church in
the World (which honorable title some of these Commissioners in a good mood
have in their Writings bestowed upon the Church of England) that they could not
expect the calling of a Convocation, but must have these alterations ready
prepared for them by Commissioners?

V. Whether the effect of this will not be to check all freedom of debate in
the Convocation, when these alterations shall be proposed to them as the
judgment of the Commissioners, who will themselves be Men of the greatest
Authority in the Convocation? and who will be so hardy as to oppose what the
Commissioners have done? and thus (as it may prove) our Church may be changed
and altered and transformed by Nine men, who may have tenderness and moderation
enough to part with any thing but their Church-preferments: And what an
imposition would this be thought on the Two Houses of Parliament, were as many
Persons of as great Authority and Interest, and who had the disposal of State
preferments in their hands, commissionated to prepare all Bills for their
approbation?

VI. It should be Inquired whether the Convocation, when it meets, will have
Authority to offer any new alterations, or to do any thing but approve what is
so offered? For the Convocation can go no farther than the King gives them
authority, and that is expressed in the Commission only to approve.

VII. If the Convocation have any authority, it should be considered of what
dangerous consequence it may be, should the Convocation dissent from the
Commissioners? And whether to prevent this, it may not occasion as much
closeting for the choice of Convocation men, as was lately practiced to pack a
House of Commons?

Third, Some Queries concerning the fitness of the time for such alterations.

Q I. Can it be thought a convenient time for such alterations as these, when
the A. B. the Metropolitan of all England, and the head of the Convocation, and
several other Bishops (not to mention those of the inferior Clergy) who are as
eminent for a prudent and well tempered zeal for the Church of England, as for
their constant loyalty, are now under suspension? Will not some be apt to
question the Ecclesiastical Authority of such proceedings, when the Convocation
is without its proper head, and deprived of the advice and counsel of so many
principal members of it? Will not others be apt to suspect, that this time is
chose on purpose, because the A. B. and those other Bishops are now suspended,
whose presence and authority in the Convocation they were afraid of, as sure
and fast friends to the Church? And if they are afraid of those reverend
Persons who had before declared their readiness (in their Address to K. I.
against their publishing his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience) to come to
such a temper with reference to Dissenters, as shall be thought fit by a
Parliament and Convocation, it is very suspicious that they intend something
very unreasonable, which they feared would not pass a free Convocation, when
those reverend and judicious Prelates were present.

Q. II. Can it be thought a proper season to make any alterations in a well
constituted and established Church, when the passions of men are in such a
vehement fermentation? when there are such struglings between the different
parties in religion, and such different interests of State to serve by them?
Can we expect such fair dealing, such sedate and unbiassed councels, as (if
ever) are necessary to alter or new-lay the foundations of a Church? The reigns
of Constantius and Valens will satisfy any man what may be expected from
Councels and Convocations, when reasons of State must govern, and the late
example of Scotland gives us no great reason to expect much better.

Q. III. Is it a proper time to make alterations, and unsettle the foundations
of the Church, when there are so many powerful Enemies, who watch an
opportunity to pull it down? I think it is not prudent, when a City is besieged
to make a breach in the Walls, though it be to mend them: The Church of England
will stand firm if we let it alone, but under a pretense of mending it, it will
be an easy matter, when its strength and interest is divided, to raze its
foundations.

For a Conclusion, Sir, what the Parliament will think of this affair, I will
not pretend to guess, but I shall only add, that upon the whole matter there
seems to be great reason to have a jealous eye upon this Commission, and I hope
the friends of the Church of England, in both Houses of Parliament, will be
upon their guard; especially it behooves the Clergy to be very careful what
Members they choose for the Convocation, which is not now as formerly a matter
of mere Ceremony and Form, since the present and future Safety of the Church
depends on it, and it is seldom seen that there are any considerable
Innovations in the Church, but have a proportionable influence on the State.

I am, Sir, Yours.

FINIS.

