Time made no furrows in the face you see
He died young: yet few did more then he,
He spent himself for God: and now is blesst
After hard labor; with Eternal Rest.


Invisibles, Realities, Demonstrated in the HOLY LIFE AND Triumphant Death OF
Mr. JOHN JANEWAY, Fellow of Kings Collegde in CAMBRIDGE.

By JAMES JANEWAY Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be sold at the Bible and three
Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, and at the Bible on London Bridge
under the Gate. 1674.

Christian Reader,
THE Love of Christ in his holy ones, and the great usefulness of such History,
command me to take it as a pleasing office to commend this real description of
a Saint, to thy serious perusal and imitation. The good acceptance and success
of the late published Life and Death of Mr. Joseph Alleine, the more
encourages me to serve thee in this. As to the credit of the Narrative, let it
be enough to tell thee, that his worthy Brother Mr. James Janeway (intimately
acquainted with his most secret life) is the writer of it (I have no hand in it
my self) And if thou live in or near London, where he is now well known. I will
not be beholden to thee to believe it; especially, if you also know the other
most credible attestors. I know that many such Histories show more what the
writer could say, than what the Person was or did: But here both He and his
Relations, and those whom he lived with, were all so near us, and are many of
them yet so intimately known to me, and others, that there is no place for
doubting left us.

I confess such instances are very sad to my thoughts, while I am desiring the
welfare of mankind on earth. To hear of the death of an Infant, who might have
proved we know not what; or of an useless person, or of an aged Christian, who
has profitably run out the course of nature, is nothing so sad to me, as to
hear of the removal of such excellent young men, when they are prepared for
their work, and just beginning it! But God is infinitely Wise, and Just, and
more Merciful too than we can be. He knows what he does and why; and is
accountable to none about the measure of his benefits, nor the reasons of his
various disposals. But the great Judgments which since his death have befallen
these Kingdomss do partly tell us that it is no wonder, if such men were taken
from the evil to come, of whom the world has so notoriously declared it self
unworthy. It is fitter for such lights to shine in Heaven, than to be put under
a bushel here on earth.

And for himself, he has run long enough who has touched the prize: He has
sailed long enough who is come safe to the harbor: And he has lived long
enough, who is readiest to die? Though I wonder at the lengthning of my own
life, which has been threatened by God and Man these thirty three years or
more, yet, alas, how much less have I lived than this man did, who am yet far
short of his heavenly preparations? I am ashamed to read that any thing of mine
was a help to his seize, and to find that at almost sixty years of age, I
am much below what he was raised to at twenty three. O that God would give my
frozen age, such warm reflections from these his remains, that (according to my
need) I may receive more from him that is dead, than ever he did from me alive!
If his own Reverend Father received so much from him, why may not I also have
some quickening even by the dead, through the fruits of the spirit left behind
him, and the same spirits quickening influx upon me? And may I but so Die, how
harmless, how welcome will Death be?

We think it great pity, that he lived to preach but two Sermons in the world!
That same poor ignorant dull Congregation, had not been instructed and awakened
by his Doctrine; and his spiritual servour had not by dispersed writings,
enflamed the souls of thousands with the same Heavenly Love and Zeal. But who
knows yet but that this one Narrative of his Holy exemplary Life and Death,
may do as much as more numerous or Voluminous writings? The many Volumes of
holy Lives, of ancient Docters, Martyrs, and later Divines, Philosophers and
others in Germany, England and other Lands, have done much good, and are still
very useful, and a pleasant and profittable recreation, (O how much better than
play-Books and Romances)? But experience tells us, that God still pours forth
as large measures of his spirit, as heretofore he did. If holy Augustines life,
after so much pollution, and holy Hieroms life, qui fatetur se non fuisse
virginem, were so laudible and examplary; O how much praise do I owe to God,
for his grace upon his Servants, who am yet acquainted with so great a number
of holy laborious faithful ministers, who I have great reason to believe, not
only to have all their lives been free from all gross heinous sins, but also to
have laid out their zeal, their time, their labors, so sincerely and
self-denyingly for God, and the good of souls, as that I cannot but hope that,
if those who are against their Preaching of the Gospel, were but as well
acquainted with them as I am, they would be their friend and forward to promote
their work.

I know one Temptation the Reader is like to meet with, to hinder his profiting
by this example: Even to think that Mr. Alleine and Mr. Janeway by Overdoing
did but cut short their own Lives; and that their excessive lobours in
meditation, prayer and other duties did deprive the Church of the benefit of
much more, which they might have lived to do: and therefore that such examples
are not to be imitated, but stand as warnings to us, not to over do and destroy
our bodies as they did. To which I answer, 1. I am one my self, that wish both
of them had done somewhot less, in that part of duty which hurt the body, and
overmatched their strength. And I am not persuading you, that every man must
needs Preach as often as Mr. Allen, or study and meditate as long as Mr. Janeway
and he did: Men have their various capacities and oportunities, and works. 2.
But yet I dare not charge either of them with sin, because I know not their
particular motives. 3. And perhaps their lives had been as short if they had
done less; as are the lives of many hundred Students, who favor themselves
more than any wise men would wish. And it was Gods mercy that they who had but
a short life to live, should do more than any that live to the period of
natures course. And Methusalems life and theirs is equalled now. Whom have you
known that by longer living, has got more holy readiness to die? 4. But I
beseech you distinguish well, between that part of their work, which was really
like to overthrow their natures, and the rest which had no such tendency; and
do not make the avoiding of the former a pretense, against your imitating of
the latter. It is not studying, meditating, praying, preaching, according to
the measures of natures strength, that much shortnerh life. I think that
Learned man wrote not foolishly, who maintains that studies tend to long
life? For my own part I was seeble before I was a hard Student: And studies
have been a constant pleasure to me; And let any man judge whether constant
pleasure tend to shorten any man's life? Indeed, that which destroys the
health of Students is, 1. The sedentariness of their lives, 2. And want of
temperance or due care of their diet, 3. And want of sufficient cheerfulness,
4. And taking colds. Could Students but more imitate the labouring-man, and
take just hours and opportunities for bodily labor (not playful walks and
exercises, that never warm and purge the blood,) and did they eat and drink
wisely, and live joyfully, and avoid colds, they might bestow the rest of their
time in the hardest studies, with little hurt; (except here and there a
melanchly or diseased man.) I doubt not but such narratives as this, will tempt
many a slothful sensual Scholar, to indulge his sensuality as the wiser way;
but at a dying hour he will find the difference. O what a comfort then is the
review of a Holy, Heavenly well-spent life!

I have often thought what the Reason is that among the Papists, if the lives of
their Saints be described in the highest strain, or their books have even
unreasonable pretensions of devotion, even to the laying by of our
understandings, or to a kind of Deification, (like Barbansons, Benedictus, de
Benedictis, and diverse others) it does not offend men, but the vulger
themselves do glory in the sancity of them. Whereas if with us a man rise
higher in holiness, and in devote contemplation, yea or action, than others, he
is presently the great eyesore and obloquy of the world, I mean of the envious
and ungodly part, which is too great. But the reason I perceive is, that among
the Papists, to be a Religious man is to be a Perfectest who does more than is
commanded him or is neccesary to salvation; and so the people being taught that
they may be saved without being such themselves, their spleen is not stirred up
against them, as the troubles of their Consciences peace; but they are
intressed in their honor, and being the honor of their way and Church: But
with us men are taught that they must be Religious themselves in sincerity if
ever they will be saved, and that without Holiness none shall see God, and that
they are not sincere if they desire not to be perfect: And so they that will
not be godly themselves, do think that the lives of the godly do condemn them.

I write not this to cast any disgrace on the true History of any holy men's
lives: Nor shall it ever be my employment to reproach or hide Gods Graces in
any, nor to make men believe that they are worse than they are. Whoever revile
me for it, I will magnify and love that of God which appears in any of his
servants, of any sect or party whatsover. When I read such writings as old
Gerson, Guil. Parisinesies, and diverse others, and such as Jos. Accosta and
some other Jesuits, and such lives as Nerius's and Mr. de Reuti's, etc. I
cannot but think that they had the spirit of God, and the more do I hate all
those mischievous engines, additions and singularities, which divide so many
Christians in the world, who have the same Spirit, and will not suffer us to
hold the unity of the spirit in the bond of of peace. O unhappy pretended
Wisdom, and Oxthodoxness in the holding of our several opinions, is the
knowledge that puffs up, and has bred the pernicious tympanite of the
Church, when it is Charity that edifieth it; And the more men glory in their
dogmatical knowledge, to the contempt and hurt of such as differ from them, the
less they know as they ought to know. And if any man have knowledge enough to
kindle in his soul the Love of God, the same is known and loved of God, and
then he will prove that wise man indeed, at death and to Eternity, 1 Cor. 8. 1,
2, 3.

Reader, Learn by this History to place thy Religion in love and praise, and a
heavenly life. Learn to keep such communion with God, and to find such
employment with thy heart by meditation, as thy strength, and opertunity, and
other duties will allow thee: (for I urge thee to no more) Learn hence to
thirst after the good of souls, and to fill up thy hours with fruitful duty!
And O that we could here learn the hardest lesson, to get above the love of
life, and to overcome the fears of death, and to long to see the glory of
Christ, and triumphantly to pass by Joy to Joy. O blessed world of holy
spirits! whose nature, and work, and happiness is Love: not Love of
Carnal-self, and Interest, and Parties, which here makes those seek our
destruction most, who have the highest esteem of our knowledge and sincerity
(as thinking our dissent will most effectually cross their partial Interest:)
But the Love of God in Himself and in his Saints, checked by no sin; hindered by
no distance, darkness, deadness or disaffection: diverted by no carnal worldly
baits; tempted by no persecutions or afflictions; damped by no fears of death,
nor of any decaies or cessation through Eternity. To teach me better how to
live and die, in Faith, Hope ane Love, is that for which I read this narrarive;
and that thou may learn the same is the end of my commending it to thee! The
Lord teach it effectual to thee and me. Amen.

RICHARD BAXTER.
August 28. 1672.
To the Relations of Mr. James Janeway, and the Survivors of his Associates in
Kings College in Cambridge.
Beloved Friends,
MY own mean esteem of the single weight of that Testimony expected from me
concerning my dear Brother on the account of my intimacy with him in Kings
College (the known me. morable passages of whose exemplary life and death are
now happily compiled and published for your special perusal) moves me to call
in a twofold recommendation thereof from you to those that knew him not, who
being confirmed in the truth of this Narrative, may thereby be won to believe,
admire and emulate the signal grace of God in him.

1. That remembering so much thereof your selves, and what opportnity I had of
knowing the certainty of all: you would assure those who may enquire of you;
That the impartial compiler has kept within the bounds of truth and sobriety
in prosecution of his honest aims, to advance the glory of Gods rich mercy to
this chosen vessel, and by reviving what remains he could collect of this
burning as well as shining light (alas how soon extinct!) to awaken and
quicken the formal professors, if he may not induce the profane scoffers of
this age, to a more serious study and improvement of those invisible Realities,
the clear evidence and powerful influence whereof, our good friend did so
abundantly experience. The truth is, the Transcriber (though best accomplished,
and most inwardly acquainted with what, might conduce thereto) does and could
not but fall short of declaring the transcendent excelencies of this sublime
soul and precious Saint, which till toward his end, when his heart was too full
to hold in what could be uttered) were much concealed even to those who knew
him best, by reason of his great humility and modesty. These disposed him
rather to receive than communicate; except where he had no expectations of the
former, and either familiar intercourse engaged, or the apprehended exigency of
those his heart was drawn out to in Christian love and compassion, constrained
to the latter. Yet many of those precious streams that did flow from him we
must lament the loss of, through default of careful rececivers or faithful
retainers. He was of clear intellectuals and a large heart both for craving and
comprehending what was worthy his persuit: which being happily improved by his
education, and timely seasoned with a spiritual savor of Gospel mysteries (for
obtaining of which he had then with others, choice advantages) was a great help
to his proficiency in acquaintance with the vital exercises and soul satisfying
enjoyment of the divine life, above not only his equals, but seniors and
instructors. He was much dissatisfied with himself under any decays or
abatements, till he could (if not alone, by imploring the assistance of
Christian friends) recover what he sometime had had such sweet experience of.
And not content with any seize, was still pressing on to what his
prospect in the promises, encouraged by his happy praelibations, assured him
was attainable. He was to this end a cheerful embracer and diligent improver of
spiritual opportunities, exact in his Christian watch, much wrestling, (and
very prevalent) with God in prayer, and with himself in his solitudes, striving
to disentangle his heart from what might diveri his holy ambition, and to raise
it to the highest activity and capacity for glorifying and enjoying God in
Christ, for the excellency of the knowledge of whom he accounted all inferior
seize but loss. What he had tasted and seen, he was grieved to see others
neglect, desirous to bring others to experience, by earnest commending them to
God, designing with himself, and contriving with his spiritual confidence what
might conduce thereto.

He had a true sympathy with those that were bound with him Heavenward. Their
pressures and conflicts, were his burdens: His prayers and counsels, their
ready assistants: their refreshments, his revivings: and their spiritual
proficiency, his joy.

He was a secret and compassionate mourner; as in general for the worlds*
degeneracy, pretended Christians unthankfulness for the Gospel, the hazards run
by innumerable precious souls; so especially for the dreadful apostacies of
some; the then threatening decay amd growing formality of others: sometime
seemingly forward; which brought him nigher to God, and more inflamed his holy
zeal. But this chiefly was carried out to advance the power of Religion in the
family and persons he was peculiarly related to: apprehending there to lie his
best opportunities as well as strongest obligations. And his success was very
encouraging.

This is part of what I knew of him in Cambridge, who refer you for farther
reviewing your remembrance to the narrative. But both his spiritual receipts
and expenses were much increased the two last years of his life, when I had not
opportunity of personal converse with him: And by reason of our distance (and
at that time ignorance of his weak condition) I was not so happy as to share in
the privilege of those who had the conveniencie of receiving his last and
sweetest breath. Though I soon after had the account (while things were fresh
in their memories, and warm on their hearts) from the eye and ear witnesses,
that some of them have now been induced to make more public. But next and
chiefly,

2. I entreat you to recommend the truth of this narrative, by your faithful
adhering to, and diligent promoting of what some of you learned from him, and
others professed with him. That by imitating his good example, and improving
his experiences with your longer opportunities, you may be such proficients in
Christianity, as shining like lights your selves to hold forth the word of life
for convincing the incredulous: That the mysteries of regeneration, a life of
faith in Christ, the fruitful emprovement of union and communion with him to a
prospicuous conformity to him, crucifixion to the world by his cross, and a
conversation with him in Heaven while on earth (therein proposed, herein
exemplified) be no figments, but great realities; no slight matters, but of
greatest consequence: not such singularities, but that others according to
their measure, taking the like course, may be experimentally acquainted with
the surpassing sweetness of an interest therein. And the rather am I bold to
entreat this of you, because I was privy to his souls concern, for the
concernments of your souls. How passionatly he desired to see Christ formed in
you, and rejoiced at any evidence thereof. How earnestly he would pray for you
all; and especially for those he had more occasion to deal with, or cause to be
jealous of. How affected he was with your dangers and snares. And what a desire
he had you might outstrip himself, who could not take up his rest on this side
Heaven. The good Lord help every one of us to show the same diligence to the
full assureance of hope to the end, that we may not be slothful, but followers
of them who by faith and patience inherit the promises.

I have one farther request, that you would pursue by your most earnest
supplications the design of publishing this narrative, that God would make it
prosperous to the pious ends therein proposed, and for which I hope in his
providence it is reserved now for public view. Especially that it may provoke
to holy emulation; not only those who were more peculiarly endeared to our
precious Friend by natural or spiritual bonds; (And that if any of these be
fallen from their first love, they may be excited to repent, do their first
works, and strengthen the things that remain; lest having begun in the spirit,
they wretchedly end in the flesh, and draw back to perdition) but also, some at
least of them that sueceed in the Chambers and Studies, which sometime were
sanctified with the word and prayer, by those that singly and jointly (as
Bhamber fellows and Colleagues) earnestly implored the divine benediction on
those two royal foundations he was member of: That the God of the spirits of
all flesh would make them fruitful nurseries of such as might be eminent
instruments of Gods glory here, and turning many to righteousness, might shine
as the stars for ever and ever. Wherein you may expect the hearty concurrence of

Your real Friend, Samuel Borfet.

The Testimony of Mr. Marmaduke Tennant sometimes Minister of Tharfield in
Hartfordshire, an intimate acquaintance of Mr. John Janeways, and one that was
a constant visitor of him in his sickness, and an eye and ear witness of the
most substantial things in this ensuing Narrative.
Christian Reader,
I Can assure thee from my own knowledge, that this Mr. John Janeway was an
excellent person, in respect of his natural parts, acquired gifts, and divine
graces, wherewith his heavenly Father adorned him (considering his age) even
far above the ordinary rate of the best sort of Scholars and Christians: All
which he exceedingly improved for the good of others (especially in his near
Relations) both in health and sickness, even to the last hour of his life. And
when the immediate forerunners of death was upon him, he so acted faith and
composedly, (without the least show of humane frailty) as if with bodily eyes
he saw the holy Angels standing before him, ready to receive and carry his
precious soul into his Fathers glory. Verily he was most lovely in his life,
and yet more lovely at his death, the like I never beheld neither before nor
since. And I doubt not but the serious consideration of this narrative of his
life and death, will (through Gods blessing) beget a zealous imitation of this
Saint indeed, in every good Christian which reads the same; which that it may
do, is the hearty prayer of thy friend in the Lord Jesus,

Marmaduke Tennant, Minister of the Gospel.

Christian Reader,
WHen I seriously consider how much Atheism, and impiety abounds; and see how
sensual delights are pursued, and Religion in its power is rejected, as a dull
sad and unpleasant thing; when I see zeal decried as unnecessary, and few
acting in the things of God, as if they were indeed matters of the highest
consequence, reality and substance, the greatest profit, and sweetest pleasure:
I could not but do what in me lies to rectify these dismal mistakes, and
justify wisdom from the imputation of folly: and demonstrate even to sense the
transcendent excellency and reality of Invisibles. The prosecution of which
design I could not more effectnally manage, than by the presenting this ensuing
narrative to the world. As for the truth of it, if the solemn testimony of
several Ministers (which were eye and ear witnesses of the most substantial
things here presented) may be credited; here thou have three of them. As for my
self I think I had as great an advantage to acquaint my self with the secret
practices of this precious Saint, as any one could well have; besides my
dearest intimacy, and special observation and perusal of his papers, I had a
long account from his own mouth upon his deathbed of his secret and constant
practice and his experiences. And let me tell you, the half is not told you.
For the treachery of my memory has not a little injured thee and him. Had this
work been done exactly, I am persuaded it might have been so singular use to
the world. In some places I could not justly word it in his phrase; but I
assure thee thou have the matter and substance. The weakness of the Relator is
no small disadvantage to the subject; but I might a little excuse this, by
telling thee that I think that none living had the same opportunity in all
things to do this work as I had. I might also tell you that some Reverend,
Learned and Holy men, whose authority and request I could not deny, put me upon
it. And I was not altogether without some hopes of drawing some, to the love
and liking of Religion, that had not only been strangers to the life and power
of it, but it may be had entertained deep prejudices against it. And of
quickening of others that had lost their former vigor; and encouraging some
that were too ready to go on heavily and disponding. If I may succeed in this,
I shall adore the goodness of God, and praise him with the strength of my soul,
That I may be snbservient to the Lord in promoting the true intrest of
Religion: I beg thy fervant and constant prayers; and that every one that
reads may imitate and experience all, and so be filled with grace and peace,
is the prayer of yours in his dearest Lord,

James Janeway.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. AN account of him from his Childhood to the seventeenth year of his
Age. page 1. Chap. 2. Of his Conversion, with visible proofs thereof. p. 6.
Chap. 3. His Carriage when Fellow of the College, at twenty years of Age. p.
16. Chap. 4. His particular addresses to his brethren, for their souls good,
and the success thereof. p. 21. Chap. 5. His great love to, and frequency in
the duty of prayers: with rmarkable success. p. 24. Chap. 6. His care of his
Mother, and other Relations after his Fathers death. p. 29. Chap. 7. His return
to Kings College after his Fathers death. His holy projects for Christ and
Souls. p. 37. Chap. 8. His departure from the College, to live in Dr. Cox's
Family p. 38. Chap. 9. His retire into the Country; and his first sickness. p.
39. Chap. 10. His Exhortations to some of his friends. p. 43. Chap. 11. His
Temptations from Satan. p. 45. Chap. 12. Ministers not to carry on low designs.
p. 60. Chap. 13. His Love and Compassion to Souls. p. 67. Chap. 14. His trouble
at the barrenness of Christians. p. 71. Chap. 15. Two Letters to Cement
Differences, and cause Love among Christians. p. 74. Chap. 16. An account of
the latter part of his Life. p. 91. Chap. 17. His last Sickness and Death. p.
98.
IF the Chapters appear not to be well divided, nor their contents well
collected, let the Reader know, that a friend of Mr. Janeway's, not himself
made the division of them.

T. P.

Invisible Realities, demonstrated in the Holy Life and Triumphant Death of
Master John Janeway, sometimes Fellow of Kings-Colledge, Cambridge.
CHAP. I.
An Account of him from his Childhood to the seventeenth year of his Age.
MR. John Janeway was born Anno 1633. October. 27. of Religious Parents, in
Lylly, in the County of Hertford. He soon gave his Parents the hope of much
comfort, and the symptoms of something more than ordinary quickly appeared in
him, fo that some which saw this Child much feared that, his life would be but
short, others hoped that God had some rare piece of work to do by or for this
Child before he died; he showed that neither of them were much mistaken in
their conjecture concerning him. He soon out-ran his superiors for age in
learning. And it was thought by no incompetent Judges that for pregnacy of wit,
solidity of judgment, the vastness of his intellectuals, and the greatness of
his memory, that he had no superiors, few equals considering his age and
education.

He was initiated in the Latin tongue by his own Father; afterward he was
brought up for some time at Paul's School in London, where he made a
considerable proficiencie in Latin and Greek under the care of Mr. Langly When
he was about eleven years old he took a great fancy to Arithmetic and the
Hebrew tongue.

About this time his Parents removing into a little Village called Aspoden, had
the opportunity of having this their Son instructed, by a learned neighbor who
was pleased to count it a pleasant diversion, to read Mathematics to him,
being then about twelve years old; and he made such progress in those profound
studies; that he read Oughthred with understanding, before he was thirteen
years old. A person of quality, hearing of the admirable proficiency of this
Boy, sent for him up to London, and kept him with him for some time, to Read
Mathematics to him; that which made him the more to be admired was, that he
did what he did with the greatest facility. He had no small skill in Music,
and other concomitants of Mathematics.

In the year 1646. he was chosen by that Learned Gentleman, Mr. Rous, the
Provost of Eton College one of the foundation of that Shool being examined by
provost and posiers in the Hebrew tongue, which was thought was beyond
president. Where he gave no unsuitable returns to the high expectations that
were conceived of him.

After a little continuance at Eton he obtained leave of his Master to go to
Oxford to perfect himself in the study of Mathematics, where being owned by
that great Scholar Dr. Ward, one of the Professors of the University, he
attained to a strange exactness in that study, nothing being within the reach
of a man, but he would undertake and grasp. That great Doctor gave him great
help and encouragement, and looked upon him as one of the wonders of his age,
loved him dearly, and could for some time after his death scarce mention his
name without tears. When he had spent about a quarter of a year with Dr. Ward
at Oxford, he was commanded to return again to Eton, where he soon gave proof
of his great improvement of his time while he was absent; by making an
Almanac, and calculating of the Eclipses for many years before hand; so that
by this time he had many eyes upon him as the glory of the School. That which
put an accent upon his real worth was that he did not discover the least
affectation or self-conceit, neither did any discernable pride attend these
excelencies. So that every one took more notice of his parts than himself.

At about seventeen years old he was chosen to Kings College in Camebridge, at
which time the Electioners did even contend for the patronage of this Scholar.
He was chosed first that year, and an elder brother of his in the sixth place;
but he was very willing to change places with his elder brother; letting him
have the first, and thankfully accepting of the sixth place.

Besides his great learning, and many other ornaments of nature, his deportment
was so sweet and lovely, his demeanor so courteous and obliging, even when he
seemed unconverted, that he must be vile with a witness that did not love him.
Yea many of them which had little kindness for morality, much less for grace;
could not but speak well of him. His great wisdom and learning did even command
respect, where they did not find it: he had an excellent power over his
passions, and was in a great measure free from the vices which usually attend
such an age and place.

But all this while it is to be feared, that he understood little of the worth
of Christ, and his own soul; he studied indeed the heavens, and knew the motion
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, but that was his highest; he thought yet but
little of God, which made all these things, he pried but little into the
motions of his own heart; he did not as yet much busy himself, in the serious
observation of the wandering of his spirit; the Creature had not yet led him to
the Creator; but he was still too ready to take up with mere speculation; but
God, who from all eternity, had chosen him to be one of those, who should shine
as the Sun in the Firmament for ever in glory; did when he was about eighteen
years old, shine in upon his soul with power; and did convince him what a poor
thing it was to know so much of the heavens and, never come there. And that the
greatest knowledge in the world without Christ, was but an empty dry business.
He now thought Mr. Bolten had some reason on his side, when he said; Give me
the most magnificent glorious worldling, that ever trod upon earthly mould,
richly crowned with all the Ornaments and excellencies of nature, art, policy,
preferment, or what heart can wish besides; yet without the life of grace, to
animate and ennoble them; he were to the eye of heavenly wisdom, but as a
rotten carcass, stuck over with flowers; magnified dung, gilded rottenness,
golden damnation. He began now to be of Anaxagoras's mind, that his work upon
earth, it was to study Heaven and to get thither, and that except a man might
be admitted to greater preferment than this world can bestow upon her
favorites, it were scarce worth while to be born.

CHAP. II.
Of his Conversion, with visible proofs thereof.
THE great work of Conversion, it was not carried on upon his soul, in that
dreadful manner that it is upon some, that God intends to communicate much to,
and make great use of; but the Lord was pleased, sweetly to unlock his heart,
by the exemplary life, and Heavenly and powerful discourse, of a young man in
the College, whose heart God had inflamed with love to his soul, he quickly
made an attempt upon this hopeful young man, and the spirit of God did set home
his counsels with such power, that they proved effectual, for his awakening;
being accompanied with the Preaching of these two famous worthies, Dr. Hill,
and Dr. Arrowsmith, together with the reading several parts of Mr. Baxters
Saints Everlasting Rest.

Now a mighty alteration might easily be descerned in him, he quickly looks
quite like another man. He is now so much taken up with things above the Moon
and Stars, that he had little leisure to think of these things, only as they
pointed higher. He began now not to taste so much sweetness in those kind of
studies, which he did so greedily employ himself in formerly. He now began to
pity them which were curious in their inquiries after every thing but that
which is most needful to be known, Christ and Themselves, and that which
sometimes was his gain, he now counted loss for Christ, yea doubtless he
esteemed all things but as dung and dross in comparison of Christ, and desired
to know nothing but Christ and him crucified. Not that he looked upon humane
learning as useless: but when fixed below Christ, and not improved for Christ;
he looked upon wisdom as folly, and learning as madness, and that which would
make one more like the Devil, more fit for his service, and put a greater
accent upon their misery in another world.

Mr. Janeway now begins to cast about how he might best improve what he did
already know, and turn all his studies into the right chanel; grace did not
take him off from, but made him more diligent and spiritual in his study. And
now Christ was at the end and bottom of every thing; how did he plot and
contrive how he might most express his love and thankfulness to him who had
brought him out of darkness into his mavelous light; to this end he sent up
and down packets of divine letters, in which he did discourse so substantially
and experimentally of the great things of God, that it would not at all have
unbecome some gray head to have owned what he did write.

He was not in a little like young Elihu, whose words he used to excuse his
freedom with persons of years, whose souls he did dearly pity. He said days
should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom, but there is a spirit
in a man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding; I am
full of matter, the spirit within me, constrains me, behold my belly is as
wine which has no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottles, I will speak
that I may be refreshed, etc. O then how sweet was the favor of his graces! He
could not but speak the things which he had seen and heard, and even invite all
the world to taste and see how good the Lord was.

He began first with his Relations, begging and wooing of them to think of
their precious and immortal souls, and to lay in speedy provisions for a
deathbed, and eternity. O with what compassion did he plead the cause of
Christ with their souls! what Pathetical expressions did he use, what vehement
expostulations, how frequent, how particular in his applications, to them? O
with what gravity and majesty would he speak of the mysteries of the Gospel!

Read what his language was (when he was between eighteen and nineteen years
old) in a Letter to an ancient Minister that he stood related to, who at that
time walked very heavily.

His Letter.
Reverend Sir,
THere are two things, the want of which, I have had xperience of in your
Family, though not in every degree; yet in that intenseness of degree wherein
they ought to be; which are the real power of Godliness and Religion; and then
that which is the fruit of the former, that cheerfulness, delight, spiritual
joy and serenety of mind which is to be had in Religion and no where else; and
that not in Religion in its weakest degrees, but in a real vigor, power and
life, and in a more close constant walking with God; from a tender sense of the
worth of souls, especially those of your family; and knowing the duty which my
relation to it does lay upon me, and having confidence of their will acceptance
of it; I have undertaken to open my thoughts unto them.

In most Families in England I fear there is neither the form nor the power of
Godliness, where there is no fear of God, no regard of him, no acting under him
or in reference to him. These are in my opinion twice dead, nay not so much as
having the dead carcass of Religion: objects of pity they are, and O how few
are there that spend one passionate thought upon them.

Others there are who some way or other, it may be from tradition from good
Parents, it may be from knowing the fashion of those in their rank; it may be
from the frequent inculcating of good instructions from Christian Friends, or
Godly Ministers; or some struggling eruptions of Conscience; have gotten the
outward husk or shell of Religion; without any kernel, or solidity at all: and
this generation does usually trust to this their Religion; that it will bring
them to a place like a sleeping place in Heaven, or keep them out of Hell;
though they live without God in the World. These are poor creatures too; making
haste to their own destruction, and know it not, yea thinking that they are in
a fair way for Heaven. O that there were never a Family to which we are related
which gave too sad cause of fear, that it were in such a case, or near such a
case as this is. A third sort of people there are (and but few of these
neither) which have the reality of Religion; but yet in much weakness,
coldness, faintnefs, dimness and intermission; like Nilus's brood above half
mud still; beginning to have some life in their head, a little in their heart,
but the feet of their affections and actions have little or no motion. And
where shall we find a Christian that is got any higher than this, yea that does
in good earnest strive to get any higher! Now there are higher seize to
be reached after; there is a having our conversation in Heaven while we are
upon Earth, neither does this consist in some weak disconrses about God, Heaven
and the things of Religion, it consists not in the mere praying twice a day,
and in keeping the Sabbath in an usual manner* in its order, it consists not in
a few thoughts of Religious objects comeing into the mind in a common way and
as easily got as lost. But true Religion raises the soul to longings,
hungrings and thirstings not without some enjoyments. Religion in power is to
act for God with strength, vigor, earnestness, intenseness, delight,
cheerfulness, serenety and calmness of mind. The fruits of the spirit are joy
in the Holy Ghost and Peace: fear, disquiet and terrors are usually the
introduction to a better state, but they are not of the essentials of Religion;
yea the contrary frame of spirit is to be striven for. To speak yet more
plainly and to tell you, Honored Sir, what fears and jealousies are, with
reverence to your self, and tender affection to all your family, I fear that
you your self are subject to too many desponding melancholy thoughts. The
causes whereof give me leave with submission to guess at. The first I think may
be your reflecting on your entering upon the ministry without that reverence,
care, holy zeal for God, love to Christ and compassion to souls, which is
required of every one that undertakes that holy office; it may be there was
rather a respect to your own living in the world than of living to God in the
world, be it thus, be it not as bad, or be it worse; the remedy is the same.
These have a wondering power in them, which will be felt to be grievous, when
felt as they are in themselves, but continual sorrow and sad thoughts do keep
this wound open too long, and are not available to the having of it cured.
Wounds indeed must be first opened that they may be cleansed, they must be
opened, that their filth may be discovered in reference to a purging and
healing; but no longer than the balm of Gilead is to be applied, that they may
be healed. And when Christ is made use of aright he leaves joy and comfort,
yet a constant humility of spirit is no way inconsistent with this peace of God.

A second cause of your heaviness may be a sense of the state of the people
which God has committed to you, and indeed who can but mourn over people in
such a condition, objects of pity they are, and the more because they pity not
themselves. I have often wrestled with God that he would direct you in what is
your duty concerning them, which I persuade my self is your earnest request.
Now if after your serious examining of your self what your Conscience does
conclude to be your duty, you do it, and see you do it; you are then to rest
upon God for his effectual working. Let not any think to be nore merciful than
God, for wherein he does, he goes beyond his bounds: and this is no more cause
of heaviness to you than the opposition that the Apostles found at any time
was, who notwithstanding rejoiced in tribulation. Another cause of heaviness
may be what divisions are between your self and some of your Relations. O that
a spirit of meekness and wisdom might remove all cause of sorrow for that. But
were the power of Godliness more in hearts and Families, all the causes of such
trouble would soon be removed, there would be less that would deserve
reprehension, and there would be a fittedness of spirit to give and bear
reproof; to give in meekness and tenderness, and to bear in humility, patience
and thankfulness. Some cares and thoughts you may have concerning your Family
when you are gone. But let Faith and former experience teach you to drive away
all such thoughts. Your constitution and solitaryness may also be some cause of
melancholy; but there is a duty which if it were exercised would dispel all;
which is heavenly meditation, and contemplation of the things which true
Christian Religion tends to. If we did but walk closely with God one hour in a
day in this duty, O what influence would it have into the whole day besides,
and duly performed into the whole life. This duty with the usefulness, manner
and direction, etc. I knew in seem measure before, but had it more pressed upon
me by Mr. Baxters Saints Everlasting Rest, that can scarce be overvalued, for
which I have cause for ever to bless God. As for your dear Wife, I fear the
cares and troubles of the world take off her mind too much from walking with
God so closely as she ought to do, and from that earnest endeavor after higher
degrees of grace. I commend therefore to her all this excellent Duty of
Meditation; It is a bitter sweet Duty, bitter to corrupt nature, but sweet to
the Regenerate part, if performed. I entreat her and your self, yea I charge it
upon you with humility and tenderness, that God have at least half an hour
allowed him in a day for this exercise: O this most precious Soul-raising,
Soul-ravishing, Soul-perfecting duty! Take this from your dear Friend, as spoke
with reverence, and real love, and faithfulness. My fear and jealousy left I
should speak in vain, makes me say again; I, or God by me, does charge this
upon you.

One more direction let me give, that none in your family satisfy themselves
in family prayer. But let every one twice a day, if it may be possible, draw
near to God in secret duty. Here secret wants may be laid open; here great
mercies may be begged with great earnestness; here what wanderings and coldness
was in family-duty may be repented of and mended. This is the way to get
seriousness, reality, sincerity, cheerfulness in Religion: and thus the joy of
the Lord may be your strength. Let those which know their duty do it; if any
think it not a necessary duty, let them fear lest they lose the most excellent
help for a holy, useful, joyful life under the assistance of Gods Spirit,
whilst they neglect that which they think unnecessary. Take some of these
directions from sincere affection, some from my own experience, and all from a
real and compassionate desire of your joy and comfort: The Lord teach you in
this, and in the rest. I entreat you never to rest laboring till you have
attained to true spiritual joy, and peace in the Lord. The God of Peace give
you his direction, and the foretasts of his comforts in this life, and
perfection in eternal life, in the enjoying of infinite holiness, purity, and
excellency through Christ. Thus praying, I rest --


In another Letter to a Reverend Friend that had the care of many Children, he
thus advises.

Sir;
YOUR Charge is great upon a Temporal Account, but greater upon a Spiritual;
many Souls being committed to your charge: Out of an earnest desire of the good
of Souls, and your own joy and peace, I importunately request, that you would
have a great care of your children, and be often dropping in some wholesome
admonitions; and this I humbly, with submission to your judgment in it, commend
to you; not to admonish them always altogether, but likewise privately one by
one, not letting the rest know of it. Wherein you may please to press upon them
their natural corruption, their necessity of Regeneration, the Excellency of
Christ, and how unspeakably lovely it is to see young ones setting out for
Heaven. This way I think may do most good, having had experience of it my self
in some small measure; God grant that all may work for the edifying of those
which are committed to you. I leave you under the protection of him that has
loved us, and given himself for us. --


Thus you see how he seemed swallowed up with the affairs of another world.

CHAP. III.
His Carriage, when Fellow of the College, at twenty years of Age.
WHen he was about twenty years old, he was made Fellow of the College, which
did not a little advance those noble projects which he had in his head for the
promoting of the interest of the Lord Christ. Then how sweetly would he
insinuate into the young ones, desiring to carry as many of them as possibly he
could along with him to Heaven: Many attempts he made upon some of the same
house, that he might season them with Grace, and animate and encourage those
which were looking toward Heaven. And as for his own Relations, never was
there a more compassionate and tenderhearted Brother. How many pathetical
Letters did he send to them? and how did he follow them with prayers and tears
that they might prove successful! how frequently would he address himself to
them in private! and how ready to improve providence and visits that he might
set them home upon them? How excellent would he set forth the beauty of Christ!
He earnestly would persuade them to inquire into the state of their souls. How
would he endeavor to bring them off from sandy foundations, and resting upon
their own righteousness! In a word, he was scarce content to go to Heaven
without, and through mercy he was very successful among his own Relations, and
the whole family soon savoured of his spirit; how were the Children put upon
getting choice Scripture and their Catechisms, and engaged in secret prayer and
meditation. Father, Mother, Brethren, Sisters, Boarders were the better for his
excellent example and holy exhortations. He was a good Nurse if not a spiritual
Father to his natural Father, as you may read afterward; and some of his
Brethren have cause to bless God for ever, that ever they saw his face, and
heard his words, and observed his conversation, which had so much of loveliness
and beauty in it, that it could not but commend Religion to any that did take
notice of it. He could speak in St. Paul's words, brethren, my hearts desire,
and prayer to God for you all is, that you may be saved.

Read what his heart was in these following lines.

Distance of place cannot at all lessen that natural Bond whereby we are
conjoined in blood, neither ought to lessen that of love. Nay, where true love
is it cannot; for love toward you I can only say this, that I feel it better
than I can express it; as it is wont to be with all affections: but love felt,
and not expressed, is little worth: I therefore desire to make my love manifest
in the best way I can. Let us look upon one another not as Brethren only, but
as Members of the same Body whereof Christ is the Head. Happy day will that be
wherein the Lord will discover that Union; let us therefore breathe and hunger
after this, so that our closest knot may meet in Christ: if we are in Christ,
and Christ in us, then we shall be one with one another. This I know, you
cannot complain for want of instruction, God has not been to us a dry
Wilderness, or a barren heath; you have had Line upon Line, and Precept upon
Precept; he has planted you by the Rivers of Water; it is the Lord alone
indeed who makes fruitful, but yet we are not to stand still, and do nothing.
There is a Crown worth seeking for; seek therefore, and that earnestly. O seek
by continual prayer, keep your soul in a praying frame; this is a great and
necessary duty, nay, a high and precious privilege. If thou can say nothing,
come and lay thy self in an humble manner before the Lord. You may believe me,
for I have through mercy experienced what I say. There is more sweetness to be
got in one glimpse of Gods love, than in all that the world can afford. O do
but try; O taste and see how good the Lord is. Get into a corner, and throw
your self down before the Lord, and beg of God to make you sensible of your
lost undone state by nature, and of the excellency and necessity of Christ.
Say, Lord, give me a broken heart, soften, melt me: Any thing in the world, so
I may be but enabled to value Christ, and be persuaded to accept of him, as he
is tendered in the Gospel. O that I may be delivered from the wrath to come; O a
blessing for me, even for me, and resolve not to be content till the Lord have
in some measure answered you. O my bowels yern toward you, my heart works: O
that you did but know with what affection I write now to you, and what prayers
and tears have been mingled with these lines! The Lord set these things home,
and give you an heart to apply them to your self; the Lord bless all the means
that you enjoy, for his blessing is all in all. Give me leave to deal plainly,
and to come yet a little closer to you, for I love your soul so well, that I
cannot bear the thoughts of the loss of it. Know this, that there is such a
thing as the New birth, and except a man be born again, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven; Gods favor is not to be recovered without it. This New
birth has its Foundation laid in a sense of sin, and a godly sorrow for it,
and a heart set against it; without this there can be no Salvation. Look well
about you, and see into your self, and thou will see that thou art at Hells
mouth without this first step, and nothing but Free Grace, and pure Mercy is
between you and the state of the Devils. The Lord deliver us from a secure
careless heart! Here you see a natural man's condition; How dare thou then lie
down in security? O look about for your Souls sake. What shall I say, what
shall I do to awaken your poor Soul! I say again, without repentance there is
no remission; and repentance it self may lose its labor if it be not in the
right manner. Then tears, and groans, and prayers will not do without Christ;
most when they are convinced of sin, and are under fears of Hell, run to duty,
and reform something; and thus the wound is healed, and by this thousands fall
short of Heaven. For if we be not brought off from our selves, and our
righteousness, as well as our sins, we are never like to be saved. We must see
an absolute need of a Christ, and give our selves up to him, and count all but
dung and dross in comparison of Christ's righteousness. Look therefore for mercy
only in Christ, for his sake rely upon Gods mercy. The terms of the Gospel are
repent and believe, gracious terms! Mercy for fetching, nay mercy for desiring,
nay for nothing but receiving. Do thou desire mercy and grace, I know thou
do; even this is the gift of God to desire, hunger after Christ; let desires
put you upon endeavor, the work it self is sweet; yea, repentance and mourning
it self has more sweetness in it, than all the Worlds comforts. Upon
repentance and believing comes Justification, after this Sanctification, by the
Spirit dwelling in us. By this we come to be the Children of God, to be made
partakers of the Divine Nature, to lead new lives, to have a suitableness to
God. It Is unworthy of a Christian to have such a narrow spirit, as not to act
for Christ with all ones heart, and soul, and strength, and might. Be not
ashamed of Christ, be not afraid of the frowns and jeers of the wicked. Be sure
to keep a Conscience void of offense, and yield by no means to any known sin;
be much in prayer, in secret prayer, and in reading the Scriptures: Therein are
laid up the glorious Mysteries which are hid from many eyes. My greatest desire
is, that God would work his own great work in you. I desire to see you not as
formerly, but that the Lord would make me an instrument of your Souls good, for
which I greatly long.

CHAP. IV.
His Particular Addresses to his Brethren, for their Souls good, and the
success thereof.
HE wrote many Letters of this nature, and desired oftentimes to be visiting
his Brethren, that he might particularly address himself to them, and see what
became of his Letters, Prayers, and Tears; and he was very watchful over them,
ready to reprove and convince them of sin, and ready to encourage any
beginnings of a good work in them. To instance in a particular or two.

One time perceiving one of his Brothers asleep at Prayer in the Family, he
presently took occasion to show him what a high contempt it was of God, what a
little sense such a man must have of his own danger, what dreadful hypocrisy,
what a Miracle of Patience that he was not awakened in flames. After he had
been a while affectionately pleading with him, it pleased the Lord to strike in
with some power, and to melt and soften his Brothers heart when he was about
eleven years old; so that it was to be hoped, that then the Lord began savingly
to work upon the heart of that Child: For from that time forward a considerable
alteration might be discerned in him. When he perceived it, he was not a little
pleased. This put him upon carrying on the work, that Conviction might not wear
off till it ended in Conversion. To this end he wrote to him, to put him in
mind of what God had done for his Soul, begging of him not to rest satisfied
till he knew what a through change and effectual calling meant. I hope, said he,
that God has a good work to do in you, for you, and by you; yea, I hope he
has already begun it. But O take not up with some beginnings, faint desires,
lazy seekings; O remember your former tears; one may weep a little for sin, and
yet go to Hell for sin; many that are under some such work, shake of the sense
of sin, murder their Convictions, and return again to folly. O! take heed! if
any draw back, the Lord will take no pleasure in them; but I hope better things
of you.

He would also observe how his Brethren carried it after Duty, whether they
seemed to run presently to the World with greediness, as if Duty were a task,
or whether there seemed to be an abiding impression of God, and the things of
God, upon them.

His vehement love and compassion to Souls may be further judged of by these
following expressions, which he used to one of his Relations. After he had been
speaking how infinitely it was below a Christian to pursue with greediness the
things which will be but as gravel in the teeth, if we mind not the rich
provision which is in our Fathers House. O what folly is it to trifle in the
things of God! but I hope better things of you; did I not hope, why should I
not mourn in secret for you, as one cast out among the dead? O what should I do
for you, but pour out my Soul like water, and give my God no rest till he
should graciously visit you with his Salvation; till he cast you down, and
raise you up; till he wound you, and heal you again.

Thus, what with his holy example, warm and wise exhortations, prayers, tears,
and secret groans, somewhat of the beauty of Religion was to be seen in the
Family where he lived.

CHAP. V.
His great love to, and frequency in the duty of Prayers: with remarkable
success.
HE was mighty in Prayer, and his spirit was oftentimes so transported in it,
that he forgot the weakness of his own body, and of others spirits: Indeed the
acquaintance that he had with God was so sweet, and his converse with him so
frequent, that when he was engaged in duty, he scarce knew how to leave that
which was so delightful and suited to his spirit. His constant course for some
years was this: He prayed at least three times a day in secret, sometimes seven
times; twice a day in the Family, or College: And he found the sweetness of it
beyond imagination, and enjoyed wonderful Communion with God, and tasted much
of the pleasantness of a Heavenly Life: And he could say by experience, that
the ways of wisdom were ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace. He knew
what it was to wrestle with God, and was come to that pass, that he could
scarce come off his knees without his Fathers blessing. He was used to converse
with God with a holy familiarity as a Friend, and would upon all occasions run
to him for advice, and had many strange and immediate Answers of Prayer. One of
which I think it not altogether impertinent to give the World an account of.

His Honored Father, Mr. William Janeway, Minister of Kelshall in
Hartfordshire, being sick, and being under somewhat dark apprehensions as to
the state of his Soul, he would often say to his Son John: O Son! this passing
upon Eternity is a great thing, this dying is a solemn business, and enough to
make any ones heart ache that has not his Pardon sealed, and his Evidences for
Heaven clear. And truly Son, I am under no small fears, as to my own estate,
for another world. O that God would clear his love! O that I could say
cheerfully I can die, and upon good grounds be able to look Death in the face,
and venture upon Eternity with well-grounded peace and comfort!

His sweet and dutiful Son made a suitable reply at present; but seeing his
dear Father continuing under despondings of spirit (though no Christians that
knew him but had a high esteem of him for his uprightness) he got by himself,
and spent some time in wrestling with God upon his Fathers account, earnestly
begging of God, that he would fill him with joy unspeakable in believing, and
that he would speedily give him some token for good, that he might joyfully and
honorably leave this world to go to a better. After he was risen from his
knees, he came down to his sick Father, and asked him how he felt himself. His
Father made no answer for some time, but wept exceedingly (a passion that he
was not subject to) and continued for some considerable time in an
extraordinary passion of weeping, so that he was not able to speak. But at last
having recovered himself, with unspeakable joy he burst out into such
expressions as these: O Son! now it is come, it is come, it is come. I bless
God I can die: The Spirit of God has witnessed with my spirit, that I am his
Child: Now I can look up to God as my dear Father, and Christ as my Redeemer; I
can now say this is my Friend, and this is my Beloved. My heart is full, it is
brim full, I can hold no more: I know now what that sentence means, the Peace
of God which passes understanding; I know now what that white stone is wherein
a new name is written, which none know but they which have it. And that fit of
weeping which you saw me in, was a fit of over-powring love and joy, so great,
that I could not for my heart contain my self; neither can I express what
glorious discoveries God has made of himself unto me: And had that joy been
greater, I question whether I could have born it, and whether it would not have
separated soul and body. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name that has pardoned all my sins, and sealed the pardon. He
has healed my wounds, and caused the bones which he had broken to rejoice. O
help me to bless the Lord! he has put a new Song into my mouth: O bless the
Lord for his infinite goodness and rich mercy! O now I can die! it is nothing,
I bless God I can die: I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. You may
well think that his Sons heart was not a little refreshed to hear such words,
and see such a sight, and to meet the Messenger that he had sent to Heaven
returned back again so speedily. He counted himself a sharer with his Father in
this mercy, and it was upon a double account welcome, as it did so wonderfully
satisfy his Father, and as it was so immediate and clear an Answer of his own
prayers, as if God had from Heaven said unto him, thy tears and prayers are
heard for thy Father: thou have like a Prince prevailed with God; thou have got
the blessing; thy fervent prayers have been effectual; go down and see else.

Upon this, this precious young man broke forth into praises, and even into
another ecstasy of joy, that God should deal so familiarly with him; and the
Father and Son together were so full of joy, light, life, love and praise, that
there was a little Heaven in the place. He could not then but express himself
in this manner: O blessed, and for ever blessed be God for his infinite grace!
O who would not pray unto God! verily he is a God that hears prayers, and
that my soul knows right well! And then he told his joyful Father how much he
was affected with his former despondings, and what he had been praying for just
before with all the earnestness he could for his soul, and how the Lord had
immediately answered him. His Father hearing this, and perceiving that his
former comforts came in in a way of prayer, and his own child's prayer too, was
the more refreshed, and was the more confirmed that it was from the Spirit of
God, and no delusion. And immediately, his Son standing by, he fell into
another fit of triumphing joy, his weak body being almost ready to sink under
that great weight of Glory that did shine in so powerfully upon his Soul. He
could then say, now let thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
thy Salvation. He could now walk through the valley of the shadow of death, and
fear no evil. O how sweet a thing is it to have ones interest in Christ
cleared, how comfortable to have our calling and election made sure! How lovely
is the sight of a smiling Jesus when one is dying! How refreshing is it, when
heart, and flesh, and all are failing, to have God for the strength of our
heart and our portion for ever! O did the foolish unexperienced world but know
what these things mean, did they but understand what it is to be solaced with
the believing views of Glory, to have their senses spiritually exercised, could
they but taste and see how good the Lord is, it would soon cause them to
disrelish their low and brutish pleasures, and look upon all worldly joys as
infinitely short of one glimpse of Gods love! After this, his Reverent Father
had a sweet calm upon his spirits, and went in the strength of that provision,
that rich Grace laid in, till he came within the Gates of the New Jerusalem:
having all his Graces greatly improved, and showed so much humility, love to,
and admiring of God, contempt of the World, such prizing of Christ, such
patienee as few Christians arrive to, especially his Faith, by which with
extraordinary confidence he cast his Widow and eleven Fatherless Children upon
the care of that God who had fed them with this Manna in his Wilderness state:
The benefit of which Faith all his Children (none of which were in his
lifetime provided for) have since to admiration experienced. And it is scarce
to be imagined how helpful this his precious Son John Janeway was to his Father
by his heavenly discourse, humble advice, and prayers. After a four months
conflict with a gainful Consumption, and Hectic Fever, his Honored Father
sweetly slept in Jesus.

CHAP. VI.
His care of Mother, and other Relations, after his Fathers death.
AFter the death of his Father, he did what he could to supply his absence,
doing the part of Husband, Son, Brother: so that he was no small comfort to his
poor Mother in her disconsolate state, and all the rest of his Relations that
had any sense of God upon their spirits. To one of which he thus addressed
himself upon the death of a sweet Child.

Daily observations, and every man's experience, gives sufficient testimony to
it, that afflictions of what kind soever, by how much the seldomer they are,
the more grievous they seem. We have of a long time sailed in the Rivers of
Blessings which God has plentifully poured forth among us; now if we come
where the Waves of affliction do but a little more than ordinarily arise, we
begin to have our souls almost carried down with fears and griefs; yea, the
natural man, if not counter-powred by the Spirit of God, will be ready to
entertain murmuring and repining thoughts against God himself. Whereas, if all
our life had been a Pilgrimage full of sorrows and afflictions (as we deserved)
and had but rarely been intermingled with comforts, we should have been more
fitted to bear afflictions. Thus it is naturally: but we ought to counter-work
against the stream of nature by a new principle wrought in us; and whatsoever
Nature does err in, Grace is to rectify: And they upon whom Grace is bestowed,
ought to set Grace on work. For wherefore is Grace bestowed, unless that it
should act in us: It has pleased the Lord to make a breach in your Family.
There where the knot is fast tied, when it is disunited, the change becomes
greater, and the grief is the more enlarged. So that herein you who are most
moved, are most to be excused and comforted: The strength of a Mothers
affections I believe none but Mothers know, and greatest affections, when they
are disturbed, breed the greatest grief: But when afflictions come upon us,
what will be our duty? Shall we then give our selves up to be carried away with
the grieving passions? Shall we, because of one affliction, cause our souls to
walk in sadness all our days, and drive away all the light of comfort from our
eyes, by causing our souls to be obscured under the shades of melancholy? Shall
we quarrel with our Maker, and call the wise Righteous Judge to our Bar? Does
he not punish us less than we deserve? Is there not Mercy and Truth in all his
Dispensations? Shall we by continual sorrow add affliction to affliction, and
so become our own Tormentors? Are we not rather under afflictions, to see if
any way we may find a glimpse of Gods love shining in toward us, and so to
raise up our souls nearer God? Is there not enough in God, and the Holy
Scriptures, to bear up our spirits under any afflictions, let them be never so
great? What do you say to that word, Who is there among you that fears the
Lord, and that obeys the voice of his servant that walks in darkness, and
sees no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself upon
his God? Though all earthly comforts were fled away, and though you could see
no light from any of these things below; yet if you look upward to God in
Christ, there there is comfort to be found, there is light to be espied; yea, a
great and glorious light; which if we can rightly discern, it would put out the
light of all lower comforts, and cause them to be vilely accounted of. But
alas! alas! those heavenly comforts, though they are in themselves so precious,
and if really and sensibly felt, able to raise a man's Soul from Earth, yea from
Hell, to the foretaste of Heaven it self; yet for want of a spiritual sense,
they are by most of the world undervalued, slighted, and thought to be but
fancies. Nay, let me speak freely, Christians themselves, and those that we
have cause to hope are men of another world, and truly born again, yet for want
of a spiritual quickness in this spiritual sight and sense, these comforts are
too lowly and meanly esteemed of.

It is a spiritual sense that inableth a Christian to behold a glorious luster
and beauty in Invisibles, and raises the Soul up to the Gate of Heaven it
self; and when he is there, how can he choose but look down with a holy
slighting and contempt upon the sweetest of all Earthly enjoyments? How can he
choose but think all Creature Comforts but small, compared with one look of love
from Christ? This heavenly comfort was that which David did so much desire:
Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, was the language of his
soul, and when this was come, how was his heart enlarged? Thou have put joy and
gladness in my heart more than in the time when their Corn and Wine increased.
He then that in afflictions would find comfort must strive to see spiritual
comforts, to be the greatest, even that comfort which is from God, in the face
of Jesus Christ; this, this will be a cordial, this will be as marrow and
fatness to the soul. They that have interest in Christ, what need they be moved
and discomfited with any worldly trouble? Is not Christ better than ten
children? is not his loving kindness better than life? Is not all the world a
shadow, compared with one quarter of an hours enjoyment of him, even on this
side of Glory in some of his own Ordinances? O therefore strive to get your
interest in this comfort secured, and then all is well. He that has Christ,
has all things. If God be reconciled to you through him, then he will withhold
no good thing from you.

We poor foolish creatures do scarce know what is good for our selves, but it is
no small encouragement to the people of God that Wisdom it self takes care of
them, and one that loves them better than they love themselves, looks after
them: And he has given his promise for it, that all shall work together for
their good. And what better foundation of comfort can there be in the whole
world than this! Why may you not then say with the Psasmist, Why art thou cast
down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God. Let not
your soul sink under afflictions, for what reason have you to be discomfited
under them? Can you gather from thence that the Lord does not love you? No
surely, but rather the contrary, for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and
scourges every Son whom he receives: What Son is he whom the Father
chasteneth not? Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble
knees.

Let this serve as a remedy against excessive grief. Get your love to God
increased, which if you do, the love of all other things will wax cold. And if
you have given God your heart, you will give him leave to take what he will
that is yours, and what he has you will judge rather well kept than lost.

Remember that Scripture, and let it have its due impression upon your spirit;
He that loves Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, yea or Children more than
me, is not worthy of me. O labor to have your affections therefore more raised
up to him who is most worthy of them, let him have the uppermost and greatest
room in your heart, and let your love to all other things be placed in
subjection to your love of God, be ruled by it, and directed to it. Be our
earthly afflictions never so great, yet let this love to God poise our Souls so
that they may not be overweighed with grief on the one side, or stupidness on
the other side. Again let our souls be awed by that glorious power and
omnipotency of God, who is able to do any thing, and who will do whatsoever
pleases him both in Heaven and in Earth; at whose word and for whose Glory all
things that are were made. And what are we poor creatures that we should dare
to entertain any hard thought of this God! It Is dangerous contending with God!
Let us learn that great lesson of resigning up our selves and all we have to
God; let us put our selves as instruments into the hands of the Lord to do what
he pleases with us, and let us remember that it was our promise and covenant
with God to yield our selves up to him, and to be wholly at his disposal. The
Soul is then in a sweet frame when it can cordially say, It is the Lord, let
him do what seems good in his eyes. Not my will, but thine be done. Again,
let us know that though we cannot always see into the reasonableness of the
ways of God, (for his ways are often in the thick Cloud, and our weak Eyes
cannot look into those depths in which he walks) yet all the ways of God are
just, holy and good. Let us therefore have a care of so much as moving, much
more of entertaining any unworthy thoughts against God. But let us submit
willingly to the yoke which he is pleased to lay upon us, lest he break us with
his terrible judgments. And now it has seemed good to God to lay this stroke
upon you, I pray labor rightly to improve it, and let this trial prepare you
for greater. And seeing the uncertainty of all worldy things, endeavor with
all your might to get your heart above them; and I beseech the Lord, who is the
great Physician of Souls, and knows how to apply a Salve to every Sore of his,
to comfort you with his spiritual comforts, that he would favorably shine upon
you, and receive you into a nearer union and communion with himself. Into his
hands I commit you, with him I leave you, praying that he would make up all in
himself.

He was an excellent Example to his younger brethren; and his wise
instructions, and holy practices, did not a little influence them. He was a
prudent Counselor, and an assistant that could not well be spared to his
eldest Brother; who was not a little sensible of that personal worth that was
in his younger Brother; whom he would prefer before himself, as one whom he
judged, God had honored with far greater parts, graces, and experiences, than
himself. The younger also, did as humbly and heartily respect and honor him;
as, a serious Christian, a Minister, and his elder Brother, who had obliged him
with more than ordinary kindness!

When he was but young, yet he began to be taken notice of by ancient
Ministers, and Christians; though his modesty was so great, that his huge parts
were not a little obscured thereby; and his vast worth was so ballasted with
humility, that he made no great noise in the world, and most were ignorant of
his singular worth. A wise man that was intimately acquainted with him, would
say of him that he was like deep waters, that were most still; a man of hidden
excellency. There were few that knew, how close he walked with God, and at what
a high rate he lived, and how great a trade he drove for the riches of that
other world: All which he labored, as much as might be, to conceal.

CHAP. VII.
His return to Kings College after his Fathers Death. His holy projects for
Christ and Souls.
WHen his Father was dead, he returned again to Kings College, and was a
member of a secret Cabal, which began to carry on notable projects for Christ
and souls, and to plot how they might best improve their gifts and graces so as
that they might be most serviceable to God and their generation. Their custom
was frequently to meet together, to pray and to communicate studies and
experiences, and to handle some question of Divinity, or, in some Scholastic
way, to exercise the gifts which God had given them. Some of this company did
degenerate, but others lived to let the world understand, that, what they did
was from a vital principal: Amongst whom, this young man was none of the least:
who had a design upon some of the juniors to engage them if possible before
they were ensnared by wicked company, when they came fresh from School. After
some time, most of his dear companions were transplanted either into Gentlemen's
families or Livings; and this Mr. Janeway, being one of the youngest, was, for
a while, left alone in the College. But he wanting the comfortable diversion
of suitable godly society, fixed so intensely upon his studies, that he soon
gave such a wound to his Bodily-constitution that it could never be thoroughly
healed.

CHAP. VIII.
His departure from the College, to live in Dr. Cox's Family.
AFter a while, Dr. Cox wanting a Tutor for his Son in his house sent to the
Provost of the College, to make choi^e of a man of true worth for him: In
answer to whose request, the Provost was pleased to send Mr. Janeway, who did
neither shame him that preferred him, nor disappointed the expectations of him
that entertained him: but, by his diligence, profound learning, and success in
his undertakeing, did not a little oblig^ the relations of his Pupil. But his
pains were so great, and his body so weak, that it could not long bear up under
such work; so that he was forced to ask leave of the Doctor, to try whether the
change of the Air might not contribute somewhat to the mending the temper of
his Body, which now began sensibly to decay.

Whilst he was in that family, his carriage was so sweet and obliging, and his
conversation so spiritual; that it did not a little endear his presence to
them: so that I question not but some of that Family will carry a sweet
remembrance of him along with them to their Graves, and I often heard him owning
the goodness of God to him, in the benefit that he got by the graces and
experiences of some Christians, in, and relating to that Family, whose tender
love to him he did gratefully resent upon his Deathbed.

CHAP. IX.
His Retire into the Country; and His first Sickness.
HE now leaves the Doctors house, and retires himself into the Country, to his
Mother and eldest Brother; who did not spare to use their utmost diligence and
tenderness to recruit the decays of nature: but hard study, frequent and
earnest prayers, and long, and intense meditations, had so ruinated this frail
Tabernacle, that it could not be fully repaired: yet, by Gods blessing upon
care, and art, it was under-propped for some time.

Whilst he was in this declining condition, in which he could have little hopes
of life; he was so far from being affrighted, that he received the sentence of
death in himself with great joy; and wrote to his dearest relations, to dispose
them to a patient compliance with such a dispensation, as might separate him
and them for a while: And to wean their affections from him, he solemnly
professed, that as for himself, he was ashamed to desire and pray for life. O,
says he, Is there any thing here, more desirable than the enjoyment of Christ?
Can I expect any thing below, comparable to that blessed Vision! O, that Crown!
that Rest which remains for the people of God! and (blessed be God) I can say,
I know it is mine. I know that when this Tabernacle of Clay shall be dissolved,
that I have a house, not made with hands; and therefore I groan, not to be
uncloathed, but to be clothed upon with Christ. To me to live is Christ, and
to die is gain.

I can now, through infinite Mercy, speak in the Apostles Language, [I have
fought the good fight, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown incorruptible
that fades not away.]

When he perceived one of his nearest Relations distressed at the apprehensions
of his Death; he charged him, not to pray for his Life, except it were purely
with a respect to the Glory of God. I wish (said he) I beg you, to keep your
minds in a submissive frame to the will of God concerning me. The Lord take you
nearer to himself, that you may walk with Him; to Whom if I go before, I hope
you will follow after. Yet after this, he was through mercy finely recovered,
and his friends were not without some hopes of his living to be eminently
instrumental for Gods glory, in his generation.

After he was recovered in some measure, he fell again to his former practice
of engaging deeply in the secret and great duties of Religion, which he
constantly practiced (except when God discharged him by sickness:) secret
prayer, at least three times a day sometimes seven times, yeamore; besides
family, and Colledge-duties, which were before hinted, he set a part an hour
every day for set and solemn meditation; which duty he found unspeakably to
improve his graces, and to make no small addition to his comforts: His time for
that duty was most commonly in the evening, when he usually walked into the
field, if the weather would permit; if not, he retired into the Church, or any
empty solitary room. Where (observing his constant practice, that, if possible,
I might be acquainted with the reason of his retiredness) I once hid my self
that I might take the more exact notice of the intercourse, that, I judged, was
kept up between him and God. But, O what a spectacle did I see! Surely, a man
walking with God, conversing intimately with his Maker, and maintaining a holy
familiarity with the great Jehovah. Me-thought, I saw one talking with God;
me-thoughts, I saw a spiritual Merchant in an heavenly Exchange, driving a rich
trade for the treasures of the other world. O what a glorious sight it was!
Methinks, I see him still; how sweetly, did his face shine! O, with what a
lovely countenance did he walk up and down, his lips going; his body often
reaching up, as if he would have taken his flight into Heaven! His looks,
smiles, and every motion spoke him to be upon the very Confines of Glory. O,
had one but known what he was then feeding on! Sure, he had meat to eat which
the world knew not of! Did we but know how welcome God made him when he brought
him into his banqueting house! That which one might easily perceive his heart
to be most fixed upon, was, The infinite love of God in Christ, to the poor
lost Sons and Daughters of Adam. What else meant his high expressions? What
else did his own words to a dear friend signify, but an extraordinary sense of
the freeness, fullness, and duration of that love? To use his own words, God
(says he) holds mine eyes most upon his Goodness, his unmeasurable-Goodness,
and the Promises which are most sure, and firm in Christ. His love to us is
greater, surer, fuller than ours to our selves. For when we loved our selves so
as to destroy our selves, he loved us so as to save us.

CHAP. X.
His Exhortations to some of his friends.
ANd that he might engage others in more ardent affections to God, he put words
into their mouths; Let us then (says he) behold Him, till our hearts desire,
till our very souls are drawn out after him, till we are brought to
acquaintance, intimacy, delight in him! O that he would love me! O that I might
love him! O blessed are they that know him, and are known of him! It is good
for me, to draw near to God. A day in his Court is better than a thousand
elsewhere; My soul longs, yea faints for the Courts of the Lord, my heart
and my flesh cries out for the living God. Oh that I were received into
converse with him, that I might hear his voice and see his countenance! For,
His voice is sweet and his countenance is comely! Oh that I might communicate my
self to God, and that he would give himself to me! O that I might love him!
That I were sick of love, that I might die in love! That I might lose my self
in his love, as a small drop in the unfathomable depth of his love! That I
might dwell in his eternal love! O (says he to a dear friend under some fears
as to his state) stand still and wonder, behold his love and admire; now, if
never yet, consider what thou can discover in this precious Jesus. Can thou
not see so much till thou can see no more, not because of its shortness, but
because of thy darkness?

Here Is a Sea: fling thy self into it, and thou shall be compassed with the
height, and depth, and breadth, and length of love, and be filled with all the
fullness of God. Is not this enough! What would thou have more? Fling away
all besides God, God is Portion enough, and the only proper portion of the
Soul. Have thou not tasted, have thou not known, that his love is better than
wine? Have thou not smelt the savor of his precious ointments, for which the
virgins love him? This, this is he who is altogether lovely. And, while I
write, my heart does burn, my soul is on fire, I am sick of love.

Dear soul, come near and look upon his face, and see whether thou can choose
but love him. Fall upon him, embrace him, give him thy dearest choicest love:
all is too little for him; let says and love kiss him: You shall be no more
bold than welcome. Fix thine eyes again and again upon Him, and look upon His
lovely sweet and royal face; till thou art taken with this beautiful person,
who has not his fellow upon the earth, his equal among the Angels. Come near,
still contemplate his excellency, review each part, and thou will find him to
be made up of love; wind thy affections about him; bind thy soul to him, with
the cords of love. Thus shall thou find a new life to animate thy soul; thou
shall then feel a new warmth to melt thy heart; a divine fire to burn up
corruption, and to break forth into a flame of heavenly love; Dwell in this
love, and thou shall dwell in God, and God in thee. But now, methinks, I see
you almost all in tears because thou feel not such workings of love toward
God. Weep on still; for, Love has tears as well as grief: and tears of love
shall be kept in his bottle, as well as they; yea, they shall be as precious
jewels, and as an excellent ornament. Have thou felt such meltings of
loving-grief? Know, that they are no other than the streams of Christ's love
flowing to you, and through you and from you to Him again. And thus is Christ
delighted in beholding of his own beauties, in his Spouses eye.

I have prayed for a blessing for you, and on these related to you, and if they
prove of any power by the spirit of God to you, it will be matter of joy and
praise, by your dear friend, John Janeway.

CHAP. XI.
His Temptations from Satan.
THus, you have a taste of his Spirit, and may perceive, what it was that he had
his heart most set upon; and what kept his graces in such vigor and activity;
and how desirous he was that others should be sharers with him in this mercy:
Yet, for all this, he had his gloomy days, and the Sun was sometimes overcast,
his sweets were sometimes imbittered with dreadful, and horrid temptations. The
Devil shot his poisonous arrows at him; yet, through the Captain of his
salvation, he came more than a conqueror, out of the field. He was, with Paul,
many times lifted up into the third Heavens, and saw and heard things
unutterable: but, lest he should be exalted above measure, there was a
Messenger of Satan sent to buffet him.

It would make a Christians heart even ache to hear and read what strange
temptations this gracious soul was exercised with. But he was well armed for
such a conflict, having on the shield of faith whereby he quenched the fiery
darts of that Wicked-One: yet, this fight cost him the sweating of his very
body for agonies of spirit; and tears and strong cries to Heaven, for fresh
help. As for himself, he was wont to take an arrow out of Gods quiver, and
discharge it by faith and prayer, for the discomfiture of his violent enemy,
who at last was sain to fly.

These temptations and conflicts with Satan did not a little help him
afterward in his dealing with one that was sorely afflicted with temptations
of the like nature. And because I judge it of singular use to tempted-ones, and
find very many of late to be exercised in this kind, I shall insert a Letter of
his suitable to all Christians in the like case.

A Letter of Mr. John Janeway.
Dear Friend,
YOur Letters are bitter in the mouth, but sweet in the belly; they contain
matter of joy, under a dismal aspect: they are good news, brought by a
messenger in mourning: I had rather hear of that which is matter of substantial
real joy, though mixed with many sighs, and interrupted with many groans and
sobs; than of that laughter, in the midst of which the heart is sad.

You say that you are troubled with blasphemous thoughts: so then, though they
are blasphemous, yet they are your trouble; and thoughts they are too, and that
neither sent for, nor welcome; and so are not assented to in your mind. What
then shall we think of them? If they were of your own production, your heart
would be delighted in its own issue: but you do nothing less. Sure then, they
are the injections of that wicked one, who is the accuser of the brethren, and
the disturber of the peace of the people of God. But, does Satan use to employ
those weapons but against those that he is in some fear of losing? He is not
wont to assault and fight against his surest friends, in this manner. Those
that he has fast in his own possession, he leads on, as softlyand quietly as
he can; fearing lest such disturbance should make them look about them, and so
they should awake, and see their danger. But as for those, that have, in some
measure, escaped his snares; he follows them hard, with all the discouragements
he can. Surely, these things can be no other but a bitter relish of those
things which you know to be bitter after that you have tasted the honey and the
honeycomb; after you have seen, how good the Lord is. What then shall I call
these motions of your mind? They are the souls loathing the morsels which Satan
would have it to swallow down: yea, they are the souls striving with Satan,
whilst he would ravish the Spouse of Jesus: And let the enemy of all goodness
know, that he shall e're long pay dearly for such attempts. But you will say,
If these horrible thoughts be not your sin, yet they are your trouble and
misery, and you desire to be freed from them; and the most loyal and loving
Spouse, had rather be delivered from those assaults; But you will ask; How
shall I get free from them? First, See that you possess your soul in patience;
and know this, that God has an overruling hand in all this: and wait upon
him; for he can, and will bring forth good out of all this seeming evil. At
present, you are in the dark and see no light: yet, Trust in the Lord, and stay
your self upon your God. Can Christ forget the purchase of his own blood, the
price of his soul, those whom he has so intimately indeared to himself? Can a
mother forget her sucking child? Yet, God cannot forget his. God has loving
and gracious intents in all this, and his bowels yearn toward his. Yes, our
Savior suffers with us, through his ardent love by sympathy, as well as he
has suffered for us. But, for your being berid of these thoughts, you know who
has all power in his hand who does employ this power in a way of love toward
his. This power is made yours through the prayer of faith: but, for your own
work, do this.

First, Let not such thoughts have any time of abode in your mind; but turn
them out, with all the loathing and abhorrence you can; but, not with so much
trouble and disturbance of mind, as, I believe, you do. For, by this the Devil
is pleased, and he makes you your own Tormentor.

Secondly, always then divert your thoughts to some good thing, and let those
very injections be constantly the occasion of your more spiritual meditation.
Think the quite contrary, or fall a praying with earnestness: and the Devil
will be weary if he find his designs thus broken, and that those sparks of Hell
(which he struck into the soul, to kindle and inflame corruption) do put warmth
into grace, and set Faith and Prayer a working, when he perceives, that, what
he intended as water to cool your love to God, proves like oil to make it flame
the more vehemently he will be discouraged. Thus resist him, and he will flee
from you.

Thirdly, Consider that this is no new thing: For, we are not in this ignorant
of Satan's wiles, that, if any soul has escaped out of the chains of darkness,
if he will have Heaven he shall have it with as much trouble, as the Devil can
lay on; and if he and his had their wills, no good man should have one
peaceable hour: But, blessed be God for his everlasting and unchangeable love
to his that the Devil cannot pluck us out of those Almighty arms, with which he
does embrace his dear children.

Dear heart, my prayer for thee, is, that God would give thee the peaceable
fruit of righteousness, after all thy afflictions; and that thou may come out
of these trials, refined and purified and more fit for thy Masters use; having
this the end of all, to purge away thy dross, and take away thy sin.

Thus hoping that, as the length, God will turn thy mourning into joy, thy
trouble into triumph, and all thy sorrows into a sure and stable peace; I leave
you with Him, and rest,

Yours in our dear Lord, John Janeway.


He was much afraid of any decays in grace, of apostasy, yea, of flatness of
spirit, either in himself or others: and if he suspected any thing of this
nature in his nearest relations, he would do what he could possibly, to recover
them out of the snares of Satan, and to quicken them to higher and more noble
vigorous spiritual acts of religion. He labored to maintain a constant
tenderness and sensibility upon his heart, and to take notice of the least
departure of his soul from God, or Gods absenting of Himself from the soul,
(which was an expression that was much in his mouth). He had a godly jealousy
over his brother: One of which, was awakened by his serious and particular
application of himself to him, when he was about eleven years old: But he knew,
that Conviction and Conversion are two things, and that many are somewhat
affected by a warm exhortation, who quickly wear off those impressions, and
return to their former trifling with God, and neglect of their souls.
Wherefore, he desired to carry on the work that he had some hopes was well
begun: he labored to build sure, and build up; that he might be rooted and
grounded in the faith steadfast and unmovable always abounding in the work of
the Lord. Wherefore he followed him, not only with private warnings, and
frequent patheticall counsels and directions; but with letters, one of which
spoke in this language.

Another of his Letters, of Private warning and Pathetical Counsel.
YOU live in a place where strict and close walking with God, has few or no
examples, and most are apt to be (...) their company; and Gods own children are
too apt to forget their first love: our hearts are apt to be careless* and to
neglect our watch; we are ready to grow formal in duty or less spiritual, and
then, it may be, less frequent: and Conscience is put off with some poor
excuse: and thus Religion withers, and one that seemed once a zealot may come
to be Laodicean; and some that looked once as if they were eminent saints, may
fall to just nothing. It Is too common, to have a name to be alive and yet to be
dead: Read this, and tremble lest it should be your case. When we are lazy and
asleep, our adversary is awake: when we are sloathful and negligent, then he is
diligent. I consider your age, I know where you dwell, I am not unacquainted
with your temptations. Wherefore, I cannot but be afraid of you, lest, by both
inward and outward fire, the bush be singed: Though, if God be in it, it cannot
be burnt up.

Give me leave to be in some measure fearful of you, and jealous over you, and
to mind you of what you know already. Principles of civility will be but as
broken reeds, to stay our souls upon; without those higher principles, which
are planted in the soul, by the working of the spirit of God. O, remember what
meltings sometimes you have had: remember, how solicitously you did inquire
after Christ, how earnestly you seemed to ask the way to Zion with your face
thitherward. Oh, take heed of losing those impressions you once had, take not
up with a slight work. True conversion is a great thing, and another kind of
business, than most of the world take it to be. O therefore, be not satisfied
with some convictions, taking them for conversion; much less, with resting in a
formal lifeless profession.

There is such a thing as being almost a Christian; nay, as drawing back unto
perdition: and some, that are not far from the kingdom of Heaven, may never
come there. Beware lest you lose the reward; the promise is made to him that
holds fast, and holds out, unto the end and overcomes.

Labor to forget what is behind, and to press forward toward things that are
before. He that is contented with just grace enough to get to Heaven and escape
Hell, and desires no more; may be sure, he has none at all: and is far from
being made partaker of the divine nature. Labor to know what it is, To
converse with God; strive to do every thing as in His presence; design Him in
all; act, as one that stands within sight of the Grave and Eternity. I say
again, do what you do, as if you were sure God stood by and looked upon you,
and exactly observed and recorded every thought word and action; and you may
very well suppose that, which cannot be otherwise.

Let Us awake, and fall to our work in good earnest: Heaven or Hell are before
us, and death behind us. What do we mean to sleep! dullness in Gods service is
very uncomfortable, and at the best will cost us dear: and, to be contented
with such a frame, is a certain symptom of a hypocrite. O, How will such
tremble, when God shall call them to give an account of their stewardship; and
tell them, They may no longer be stewards. Should they fall sick, and the
Devil, and Conscience fall upon them, what inconceivable perplexity would they
then be in!

O, live more upon invisibles and let the thoughts of their excellency put life
into your performances. You must be contented to be laughed at for preciseness
and singularity. A Christians walking is not with men but with God; and, he
has great cause to suspect his love to God, who does not delight more in
conversing with God and being conformed to Him than in conversing with the
world, and being conformed to it.

How can the love of God dwell in that man, who lives without God in the
world? without both continual vvalking with him in his whole conversation, and
those more peculiar visits of him in prayer, meditation, spiritual
ejaculations, and other duties of Religion; and the workings of faith, love,
holy desires, delight, joy and spiritual sorrow in them! Think not, that our
vvalking with God cannot consist with vvorldly business: yes, but Religion
makes us spiritual in common actions, and there is not any action in a man's
life, in which a man is not to labor to make it a religious act, by a looking
to the Rule in it, and eying of Gods glory; and thus, he may be said to walk
with God. To this we must endeavor to rise, and never be content, till we
reach to it, and if this seem tedious (as to degenerate nature it will) we
must know that we have so much of enmity against God still remaining, and are
under depravation and darkness and know not our true happiness: Such a soul is
sick and it has lost its taste, which does not perceive an incomparable
sweetness in vvalking with God, without whom all things else under Heaven are
gall and bitterness, and to be little valued by very true Christian.

But, We are all apt even at the worst, to say, that we prefer God above all
things; But we must know that we have very deceitful hearts: And those who,
being enlightened, know for what high ends they should act, and what a fearful
condition even a hazard in our case, is; these I say, will not believe their
own hearts without diligent search and good grounds.

Rest not in any condition in which your security is not founded upon that sure
bottom, the Lord Jesus Christ. Labor to attain to this, to love God for
himself, and to have your heart naturalized and suited to spiritual things. O
for a heart to rejoice and work righteousness! O, that we could do the will of
God, with more activity, delight and constancy! If we did know more of God, we
should love him more; and then God would still reveal more of Himself to us,
and then we should see more and more cause to love him, and wonder that we love
him no more. O this this, is our happiness, To have a fuller sight of God, to
be wrapped up, and filled with the love of Christ; O, let my soul for ever be
thus employed! Lord, whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none in
earth, that I can desire in comparison of Thee.


You hear what kind of language he spoke; and you may easily perceive what it
was that swallowed up his heart, and where his delight, treasure, and life was.
O, How much do most of us, who go for Christians, fall short of these things:
and, How vast a distance between his experience, and ours; and, what reason
have we, to read these lines with blushing, and to blot the paper with tears?
and to lay aside this book a while, and to fall upon our faces before the Lord,
and bemoan the cursed unsuitableness of our hearts unto God; and to bewail,
that we do so little understand what this walking with God, and living by faith
means! O, at what a rate do some Christians live! and how low, flat and dull,
are others. His love to Christ, and souls, made him very desirous to spend, and
be spent in the work of the Ministry, accordingly, he did comply with the first
loud and clear Call to preach the everlasting Gospel; and, though he was but
about two and twenty years old, yet he came to that work like one that
understood what kind of employment, Preaching was. He was a workman that needed
not to be ashamed, that was thoroughly furnished for every good word and work;
one that was able to answer gainsayers, one in whom the Word of God dwelt
richly; one full of the spirit and power; one, that hated sin with a perfect
hatred, and loved holiness with all his soul; in whom Religion in its beauty
did shine: one, that knew the terrors of the Lord, and knew how to beseech
sinners, in Christ's stead, to be reconciled unto God: One that was a Son of
thunder, and a Son of consolation: In a word, I may speak that of him which
Paul spoke of Timothy, that, I know none like-minded, that did naturally care
for souls. And, had he lived to have preached often, O what use might such a
man have been of, in his generation! one, in whom learning and holiness did as
it were strive which should excel. He never preached publicly but twice, and
then he came to it as if he had been used to that work forty years; delivering
the Word of God with that power and Majesty, with that tenderness and
compassion, with that readiness and freedom, that it made his hearers almost
amazed: He was led into the Mystery of the Gospel, and he spoke nothing to
others but what was the language of his heart, and the fruit of great
experience, and which one might easily perceive had no small impression first
upon his own spirit.

His first and last Sermons they were upon Communion and intimate converse with
God, out of Job 22. 21. A subject that few Christians under Heaven were better
able to manage than himself, and that scarce any could handle so feelingly as
he; for, he did for some considerable time maintain such an intimate
familiarity with God, that he seemed to converse with Him, as one friend does
converse with another. This text he made some entrance into, whilst he was
here: but, the perfecting of his acquaintance with God was a work fitter for
another world.

He was one that kept an exact watch over his thoughts, words and actions, and
made a review of all that passed him, at least once a day, in a solemn manner.
He kept a Diary, in which he did write down every evening what the frame of his
spirit had been all the day long, especially in every duty. He took notice what
incomes and profit he received, in his spiritual traffic; what returns from
that far-country, what answers of prayer, what deadness and flatness, and what
observable providence did present themselves, and the substance of what he had
been doing; and any wanderings of thoughts, inordinancy in any passion; which,
though the world could not discern he could. It cannot be conceived by them
which do not practice the same, to what a good account did this return! This,
made him to retain a grateful remembrance of mercy, and to live in a constant
admiring and adoring of divine goodness; this, brought him to a very intimate
acquaintance with his own heart; this, kept his spirit low and fitted him for
freer communications from God; this, made him more lively and active; this,
helped him to walk humbly with God, this made him speak more affectionately and
experimentally to others of the things of God: and, in a word, this left a
sweet calm upon his spirits, because he every night made even his accounts, and
if his sheets should prove his widing-sheet, it had been all one: for, he could
say his work was done, so that death could not surprise him.

Could this book [of his experiences, and register of his actions] have been
read, it might have contributed much to the completing of this discourse, and
the quickening of some, and the comforting of others. But these things being
written in characters, the world has lost that jewel.

He studied the Scriptures much, and they were sweeter to him than his food;
and he had an excellent faculty in opening the mind of God in dark places.

In the latter part of his life he seemed quite swallowed up with the thoughts
of Christ, Heaven, and eternity, and the nearer he came to this the more swift
his motion was to it, and the more unmixed his designs for it; and he would
much persuade others to an universal free respect to the glory of God, in all
things; and making Religion ones business, and not to mind these great things
by the by.

CHAP. XII.
Ministers are not to carry on low designs.
HE was not a little concerned about Ministers; that, above all men, They
should take heed, lest they carried on poor low designs, instead of
wholly-eying of the interest of God, and souls. He judged, that, to take up
Preaching as a trade, was altogether inconsistent with the high spirit of a
true Gospel-Minister: He desired, that those which seemed to be devoted to the
Ministry, would be such, first, heartily to devote their All to God, and then
that they should endeavor to have a dear love to immortal souls.

He was very ready to debase himself; and humbly to acknowledge, what he found
amiss in himself, and labored to amend himself and others. This, says he, I
must seriously confess, that I must needs reproach my self for deficiency in a
Christian spiritual remembrance of you (speaking to a dear friend); and for a
decay in a quick tender touch, as of other things, so of what relates to your
self in the spirituality of it. Not that I think not of you or of God; but,
that my thoughts of you, and spiritual things, are not so frequent, savoury and
affectionate, as they ought to be.

By this reflection you may easily perceive that I see further in duty than I
do in practice. The truth of it is, I grudge that thoughts and affections
should run out any whither freely, but to God. And what I now desire for my
self, I desire for you likewise, that God would sweeten the fountain, our
natures I mean, that every drop flowing from thence may savor of something of
God within. Thoughts are precious, affections are more precious, the best that
we are worth; and, when they flow in a wrong chanel, all Go^s precious
dispensations toward us are lost; all that God has spent upon us, is lost,
and spent in vanity. I speak this, out of a dear respect to your soul, and Gods
honor* whom, I am loath, should be a loser by his kindnesses. I know, you have
many objects, upon which you may be too apt to let out your dear affections. I
say again my jealousy, is lest (there being so many channels, wherein they may
run) God lose his due. I desire therefore, in humility and tenderness, that
this may be as a hint to you from the spirit of God, to look inwards to the
frame and disposition of your soul, and to make trial thereof, by the natural
outgoings of your affections; and then, expostulate the case with your own
soul. If Christ have my warmest love, why is it thus with me? If God have my
heart, why am I so thoughtful about the world? If I indeed love him best, How
comes it to pass, that I find more strong delightful constant acting of my
affections toward my Relations, my self, or any worldly thing than, I do after
him? O, the depth of the hearts deceitfulness!

Dear and Honored Friend, trust not a surmisal, trust not to a slight view of
your heart, or the first apprehensions you may have of your self; but, go down
into the secrets of your heart, try and fear, fear and try. An Evidence is
abundantly more worth than all the trouble that you can be at, in the acquiring
of it: And the trouble, that there is good ground for, in an unevidenced state;
is far greater than that which may seem to be in searching for it. Yea, to an
awakened soul, what is the trouble in clearing its evidences, but their sense
or fear of their not being clear, and of the deceitfulness of their hearts. The
reality of that evil, which tender souls so dread, does lie in its full
weight, (though not felt), upon the drousie ungroundedly secure sinner.

I speak in love; give me leave, to remember you of some touches that you had
formerly upon your spirit under the means of grace; remember, how much you were
sometimes affected under Preaching. Did you never say, that these sermons upon
hardness of heart, softened yours? Inquire I pray, whether those convictions
which were then upon your heart, are not worn off, by the encumbrances of the
world: If, upon inquity, you find that they are, it is high time for you to look
about you, and repent, and not only to do your first works, but to strive to
outgo them.

I have with grief, taken a review of the frame of my own spirit, when I
was at your house; and I have no small sense of the distemper of my soul,
whereby I was betrayed to too great an indifference in the things of God:
and, finding by sad experience, that I was more apt (amongst those carnal
comforts and affairs) to lose that relish, and savor of divine things that I
was wont to have; and those delightful appearances of God which I was
through rich grace, acquainted with, while I was more sequestered from the world
and earthly delights [not, but that I find my heart at the best, under the
highest advantages of closest communion too unwilling to endeavor after, and
maintain that gracious sense and acknowledgement of God which I would fain
obtain unto]: I say, observing mine own experiences, and knowing that your
heart was something akin to mine, fearing lest multiplicity of business, should
expose you also, to the same hazard; Christian compassion could not but put me
upon arming of you against those temptations, to which your occasions make you
subject.

The desire of my soul for you is, that you may travel safely through a
dangerous wilderness, to a blessed Canaan; that you may quit your self like a
Christian in the opposing and conquering all your enemies; and, at last, come
triumphing out of the field, and that you may behave your self like a Pilgrim
and stranger in a far Country, who are looking for a City that has
foundations; and that we may meet together with joy at our Fathers house, and
sit down with him in eternal glory. O that word glory is so weighty, if we did
believe it, that it would make the greatest diligence we can use to secure it
seem light. O that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory! O for more
faith! Lord, increase our faith and then there would be no thing wanting to
make us put forth the utmost strength of our soul, and to improve every moment
of time, to catch hold of all advantages and to make use of all means possible
for the attainment of such glorious ends.

But, O these unbelieving hearts! let us join our complaints and let us all
break forth into bitter lamentations over them. May not we with as good reason,
as that distressed Father over his possessed Child, bring our hearts into the
presence of our Savior, and cry out with tears, and say that it is these
unbelieving hearts, which sometimes cast us into the fire, and sometimes into
the water: yea, worse, every time we forsake God, and prefer any thing before
him, we part with life for death, with Heaven for Hell.

Give me leave to come yet a little nearer to you: What an advantage would a
full persuasion of the truth and excellency of Gospel discoveries, bring to
your soul, if you would but seriously, and with all your strength, drive on
true spiritual designs. O, how easily might you then go under all your burdens.
If your care for the things of this world were but rightly subordinate to the
things of eternity how cheerfully might you go on with your business! If you
sought first the Kingdom of Heaven and the righteousness thereof: then all
other things would be added (so far as they are necessary or good for you),

Let me therefore at this time put you upon that duty of raising your mind from
Earth to Heaven, from the Creature to the Creator, from the World to God.
Indeed, it is a matter of no small difficulty, to discover that disorder that
is in our souls, when we are solicitous about temporary objects and
employments: But, there are but few surer discoveries of it, than insensibility
and not complaining of it. For, when the soul is indeed raised to spiritual
objects, and to understand clearly its eternal interest; when it does in good
earnest, take God for its portion, and prefer him above all, then it will
quickly be sensible of the souls outgoings after other objects, and even grudge
that any time should be taken up in the pursuit of the creature, and that any
below God should be followed with earnest pleasure and constancy. It would have
God have the best, and it would do nothing else but love, serve and enjoy God.
For my own part I cannot but wonder that God will give us leave to love him. O
blessed goodness, O infinite condescension! Those that believingly seek him he
is not ashamed to be called their God. I am sensible in some measure of your
burdens, and indeed that must needs be a burden that keeps the soul from
pursuing its chiefest good. My prayers for you are that you may have such
teachings from God as may make you understand how far heavenly things are more
precious than earthly, and that you may with all your might seek, mind and love
that which has most of true excellency in it, which has the only ground of
real comfort here and of eternal happiness hereafter.

CHAP. XIII.
His Love and Compassion to Souls.
HE was full of pity and compassion to souls, and yet greatly grieved and
ashamed that he did no more to express his sense of the worth of souls and that
his bowels did no more sensibly yern over them, who he had just cause to fear,
were in a Christless state. Though there were few of his Kindred and Relations,
nay of his neighbors and acquaintance but he did make a personal application
to, either by letters or conference: Yet for all this, who more ready to cry
out of want of love to souls, and unprofitableness to others in his generation,
that he was no more full of compassion, and that he made no better improvement
of all the visits that he made; in which, we should not make carnal pleasure
and recreation our end; but the imparting and receiving of some spiritual gift.
This made him, after a considerable absence from a dear friend, to groan out
these complaints. God by his providence has off brought us together; but, to
how little purpose, God and our Consciences know. As for my part, I may justly
bewail my barreness. Oh, that I should be of so little use where I come! Oh,
that my tongue and heart should be still so unfruitful! I am ready to hope
sometimes, that, if it should please God in his providence to bring us again
together, we may be more profitable one to another.

And this indeed makes me more desirous of coming to you again, than any thing
else. That I may do some good among you. Oh, how few study to advance the
interest of Christ and the benefit of one another souls in their visits, as
they should and might do! I am not able, at present, to order my affairs so as
to come comfortably over to you, but I hope, e're long, the Lord will give me
leave to see you, and be refreshed by you, I desire to supply my absence by
this sure token of my remembrance of you, and also that I might have an
opportunity for that which we ought to eye most in the enjoyment of one
another society. But I have found, that partly because of the narrowness of my
heart, not being enlarged to bring forth into act what I have greatly desired,
partly because of the malice of the Enemy of our souls, who endeavors all that
possible he can, to lay stumbling blocks in our way to real union and nearer
acquaintance with God and Christian communion: from these, and other causes, it
is, that I have been too little beneficial to you for mercy.

It may be, I may write that with freedom, which in presence I should not have
spoken. I shall take occasion from your desire of my presence with you to look
higher to the desires of our souls to be in conjunction and communion with the
highest good, who fills up all relations to our souls; who is our Father, our
Husband, our Friend, our God; yea our all in all. But, when I say, He is all in
all; I mean more than that which we count all; For every one does confess, that
it is God alone, that does bless all other things to us, and that it is not out
of the nature of those things that we enjoy, that they are blessings; but it is
God, which makes them comforts to us. And thus God is to be acknowledged All in
all common enjoyment!

But, besides this, God is something to the soul, which he is by himself and
not in the mediation of the creatures, where God is as a portion, and lived
upon as our true happiness; He is, not only the complement of other things, but
He himself is the souls sufficiency. I am a little obscure, I desire to be
plainer, I mean, that through the dispensation of the Gospel, God is to be
lived upon, delighted in, and chosen before all, for, for this very end, has
Christ appeared, that he might make God approachable by man, and that we who
are a far off, may be mad nigh.

There is a nearness to God which we are not only allowed but called to in the
loving dispensations of the Gospel, so that now we are not to be strangers any
longer, but friends; we are to have fellowship and communion with God. Why do
not our hearts even leap for joy, why do not our souls triumph in these
discoveries of love? Even because, we know not the greatness of our
privileges, the highness of our calling, the excellency of our advancement,
the blessedness of this life, the sweetness of these employments, the
satisfaction of these enjoyments, the comfort of this heavenly life, the
delights of this communion with God. We know not the things which belong to our
peace: and thus when God calls us to that which he sent his Son for, when
Christ offers us, that which cost him so dear; we with the greatest
unworthiness, the vilest ingratitude, refuse, slight and contemn it. What think
we! does it not go even to the heart of Christ; and (to speak after the manner
of men) does it not grieve him to the soul to behold his greatest love scorned,
and the end of his agony to be more vilely accounted of than the basest of our
lusts?

Let us therefore according to that high calling wherewith we are called, enter
into a more intimate acquaintance with God, and as we find our souls acting
naturally toward those things, which are naturally dear to us; so let us
strive to highten our spiritual affections.

We are very apt to look upon duties as burdens rather than privileges and
seasons of enjoying the greatest refreshments; but these apprehensions are very
low and earthly. O that we could at length set our selves to live a spiritual
life, to walk with God, and out of a new nature, to savor and relish those
things which are above! Could we but really, intensely, believingly desire that
which is real happiness, and the Heaven of Heaven, union and communion with
God; these desires would bring in some comfort.

As for me, you must give me allowance to get my affections more emptied into
God; though it be with a diminution of love to you; and blessed will that day
be, when all love will be fully swallowed up into God. But spiritual love does
not destroy natural affections, or relative obligations, but perfect and
rectify them; and so I may, giving up my self to God be still yours.

CHAP. XIV.
His trouble at the Barrenness of Christians.
HE was not a little troubled at the barrenness of Christians in their
discourse, and their not improving their society for the quickening and warming
of their hearts; the expense of precious time unaccountably, the ill management
of visits, and the impertinency of their talk, he often reflected upon with a
holy indignation. It vexed him to the soul, to see what prizes sometimes, were
put into the hands of Christians and how little skill and will they had to
improve them, for the building up one another in the most holy faith: and that
they who should be encouraging of one another in the way to Zion, communicating
of experiences, and talking of their Country, and of the glory of that Kingdom
which the Saints are heirs of, could satisfy themselves with empty common vain
stuff; as if Christ, Heaven and Eternity were not things of as great worth as
any thing else, that usually sounds in the ears and comes from the lips of
professors. That the folly of common discourse among Christians might appear
more, and that he might discover how little such language did become those that
profess themselves Israelites, and that say, they are Jews; he once sat down
silent and took out his pen and ink, and wrote down in shorthand the discourses
that passed for some time together, amongst those which pretended to more than
common understanding in the things of God: and after a while he took his paper
and read it to them, and asked them whether such talk was such as they would be
willing God should record. This he did, that he might shame them out of that
usual unobserved and unlamented unprofitable communication and fruitless
squandring away that inestimable Jewel, Opportunity. Oh, to spend an hour or
two together, and to hear scarce a word for Christ or that speaks peoples
hearts in love with holiness; Is not this writing a brave rational divine
discourse? Fie fie. Where Is our love to God and souls all this while, where is
our sense of the pretiousness of time, of the greatness of our account? Should
we talk thus, if we believed that we should hear of this again at the day of
judgment? And do we not know that we must give an account of every idle word?
Is this like those that understand the language of Canaan? Did Saints in former
times use their tongues to no better purpose? Would Enoch, David, or Paul, have
talked thus! Is this the sweetest communion of Saints upon earth! How shall we
do to spend eternity in speaking the praises of God, if we cannot find matter
for an hours discourse.

Does not this speak aloud our hearts to be very empty of grace, and that we
have little sense of those spiritual and eternal concerns upon us?

As the barrenness and empty converse of Christians was a sin that he greatly
bewailed, so the want of love amongst Christians, and their divisions, did cost
him many tears and groans; and he did what he could to heal all the breaches
that he could, by his tender prudent and Christian advice and counsel; and if
prayers, tears and entreaties and counsels would prevail and cement
differences, they should not long be open. Nay if his letters would signify
any thing to make an amicable and Christian correspondencie, it should not be
wanting. And because, the wounds of division are yet bleeding, I shall insert
two healing Letters of his, which speak what spirit he was of: Which take as
follows.

CHAP. XV.
Two Letters to Cement differences, and cause Love among Christians.
IT cannot be expected that wounds should be healed till their cause is
removed; that which moves me to write to you at present, and puts me upon
intentions of writing again, is, That I may do my utmost, by mouth and pen, for
the removal of that which is the cause of the inward grief and trouble of my
soul, and, I am persuaded, of others also as well as mine, viz. those
divisions, that I could not but observe to be between your self and another
Christian friend. I hope, after my asking counsel not only of my own heart, but
of God also; he has directed me to that which may be to his own glory, and the
good of your soul; and not only for the removing of grief, but the rejoicing of
the hearts of them upon whom former divisions had any effect.

I therefore desire you to entertain these following lines, as the issues of
deep affection to your soul, and the honor of Religion: and I beseech you read
them, not only as from me who desire your good with the strength of my soul,
but as from God himself of whose love your good improvement will be a token.
That that end which I propose to my self, I cannot but persuade my self, you
your self design, commend and desire; which is, Christian charity and that
sweet meek Gospel spirit, which is so highly and frequently commended by our
Savior to the practice of his Disciples. O that, where there has been any
breaches, there might be the nearer union; and that ye might be joined together
in the same spirit, might keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

And for this end that you would remove all old hindrances: watch continually
lest you give, and be careful not to take occasion of offense. The necessity,
usefulness, sweetness of true spiritual love appears by the word of Gods
frequent urging of it, by the sense of Christians, the uncomfortableness and
deformity of the contrary. Now, that you may in an unintermitted constancy
enjoy peace within and without and rejoice my soul; I desire you to join your
own endeavors with the consideration of those things which I shall now and
hereafter send to you.

First, Consider that it is a Christians duty to go out of himself, to lay down
his own ends and interests, and wholly to take upon him Gods cause; to do all
for God, and to act as under God, to be Gods instruments in our souls and
bodies which are Gods: Thus did God create man for His own glory, and not that
man should seek himself. And when man fell, he fell out of God into himself;
out of that divine order and composure of mind in which God had made him, into
confusion; from a love of God, into a corrupt self-love and self-seeking. Now
if we do but descend into our souls, and observe the actings, intents and
contrivances of them, we cannot but observe how confusedly and abominably all
work together for the pampering, pleasing and advancing of self. We are not to
think that if we do not presently discover this in our selves, that it is not
so with us: For, in some degree it is in every one, even in the truly
regenerate; as far as they have the relics of corruption in them, so far they
have in their souls this self-love. Now this disorder in our minds whereby they
are taken off from their right ends is that very natural corruption and
depravedness which we received from Adam, and it is, and, to a spiritual sense,
ought to be, worse than Hell it self; in as much as the cause does eminently
contain all and more evil than the effect.

This is the spiritual death, whereby we are dead in sin, the fruit of the
first curse, Thou shall die the death. The souls life in this world, is its
being in God and living to God, and enjoyment of God; and the souls eternal
life will be, so to know God as to be formed into his likeness, and to be
received into a full participation of, and communion with God. The souls death
here, is its being fallen off from God, and its being carried into its self;
and its eternal death will be, an utter separation from him.

Now mankind being thus fallen from God, Christ is sent for this very end, to
bring man back again to God; and then man is brought unto God, when he is
brought out of that state of self-love into that state whereby he gives up
himself wholly to God. Thus the soul being quickened by the spirit of God,
leaves off living to its self, which was its death; and lives to God, which is
its life. Here comes in the great duty of denying of our selves for Christ's
sake; which indeed were no duty, if there were nothing in us contrary to God.

This then is our duty not to seek our own things, before the things of God; to
lay Gods glory as the foundation of all our actions, and if there be any thing
in us contrary to that, to give it no leave to stand in competition with God.

Now, were this deeply rooted in our hearts, how would contention, anger, wrath
and heart-burning and all things of this nature cease? Such influence would the
taking Gods part against self have, into the quiet and peace of men, that it
cannot be without it.

We see, how wisely God has ordered things, that the very act of man's being
off from God, should be the cause of confusion, war and misery: and what can be
more just and equal than this, that God, who is the author of our being, should
be the end of our being? O then, that once our minds were again reduced to this
frame, To live wholly to God! O that we were wrought into a through prejudice
against self which stands between us and true peace! I beg of you to spare some
time from the world, and retire into privacie, where you may apply this to your
own soul.

My prayer to God for you, out of the strong yearnings of my soul toward you
is, that he would make this effectual to its intended end, for the inward peace
of your soul, for your comfortable walking with God, in this life, and that
condition wherein the wisdom of God has placed you. I writ these lines with
the strength of affection; I feel fear, grief, compassion, working strongly. O
pity me in the midst of all these, whilst I cannot call to remembrance the
cause of these without a flood of tears. Fulfill therefore my joy in being of
one mind: yea, if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort in love,
if any-fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of mercy; fulfill ye my joy, and
be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind, Phil.
2. 1, 2. I leave you to the love and mercy of God, and to the working of his
spirit, which alone is able to put life and power into these words. Which that
he would do, is the earnest request and servent prayer of yours,

John Janeway.


Now upon a faithful perusal of this Letter, it pleased the Lord to give a meek
and more complying spirit, and in a great measure it wrought its intended
effect. The noble design of this sweet peacemaker, took so far as to produce
an ingenious acknowledgement, and sorrowful bewailing of the want of that
self-denial, humility, meekness, and love, which does so much become our sacred
profession. Upon the hearing of this good news, how strangely was this good man
transported! Upon the receipt of a letter from the former friend, which gave no
small satisfaction and hopes that his former endeavors were not in vain. And,
that he might drive the nail to the head, he speedily backs his for former
Letter with a second; which speaks these words.

Dear Friend,
MY soul is enlarged toward you and my affections work within me; and yet give
me leave now to lay aside those weak flames of natural affection, and to kindle
my soul with divine love. Here there is no fear of running out too far while
all is in Christ, and for Christ. O that now I could let out the strength of my
soul, not as to your self but as to God! O that my heart were more enlarged,
that it may be comprehensive of a more full true Christian love! God is
altogether lovely, and to be loved for himself, and we are so far dark,
ignorant and blind, as we do not see and account him most amiable. O let me
have such discoveries of his excellency, that my heart may pant, thirst and
break for its earnest longings after the richest participations of him; that I
may for ever be swallowed up of his love! O that I may love him a thousand
times more than I do! That I may rejoice in him, and take the sweetest
complacencie, and delight in him alone; and that I could let out my affections
most, where I see any thing of himself, any beams of the image of his holiness,
and that bears the impression of his spirit. Had you visited me from the
dead, could my affections have moved more strongly, or my rejoycings have been
greater than they were at the receipt of those lines which I had from you,
wherein so much of Christ in you, and the goodness of Christ to me did appear.
Fulfill my joy in the Lord, refresh my bowels, and let not my rejoicing be in
vain. If it has pleased the Lord to make the imperfect and weak endeavors of
his unworthy servant, any way subservient to his own glory in you, it is that
which I account my self unworthy of, and desire to receive it from him as a
manifestation of the riches of his free goodness to my self; knowing my self to
be unworthy to be his instrument in the meanest service, much more in so great
a one as this is. Hoping and persuading my self of the effectual work of my
former letter, I am encouraged to write again both because of my promise, and
your expectation and the weighty nature of the subject that I was then upon,
which was Love. True Christian love, which is a thing so comely, so beautiful
and sweet, and of such weighty power in all actions to make them divine and
excellent, that there is no labor lost in endeavoring to get more of it, even
in those in whom it most abounds. The Apostle, 1 These. 4. 9, 10. Though he
knew that they were taught of God to love one another, and that they did it
toward all the Brethren, yet, even them he beseeched to abound more and more
in that grace of love. The former principal out of which this love does arise,
(as I informed you in my former Letter) was the putting off our own interests
and putting on Gods. Now I shall proceed in minding you of another Christian
duty, which is effectual to the knitting us together in a firm operative love,
and that is this; That a Christian is to walk as one that is a member of Christ
Jesus. Into what near and close Union are those that are given him by the
Father received* How has the Holy Ghost chosen out all the nearest natural
relations to express and shadow out the closeness of that spiritual relation
that is between Christ and his! Christ is our King and we his People, he is our
Master and we are his Servants, he is our Shepherd and we the Sheep of his
Pasture, he is our friend and we his, he is our Husband and we are his Spouse;
he is the Vine we the Branches, he our Head and we are his Members; he is in us
and we in him, he is our Life. This duty will have influence upon our
affections these ways.

First, As Christ is our Head and we are his Members, so he has an absolute
command over us. And where this relation is real, obedience to the commands of
Christ is sweet and without constraint and force; now this is Christ's command
that we should love one another; by this says he shall all men know you are my
Disciples if you love one another. Those relations into which Christ, receives
his, speak and hold forth a willing cheerful full submission to the commands of
Christ, and what duty is there in all the Gospel which is more frequently and
earnestly pressed than this. A new commandment give I unto you that you love
one another as I have loved you, so love one another. So full is the whole
Scripture of obligations, both upon Conscience and Ingenuity to this duty, that
the whole stream of it seems to run into this chanel of Love. But Christ's
command is such an obligation as one that has any spiritual sense to feel the
strength of it, cannot break. It is Christ has commanded, and shall not we
obey? Shall not the love of Christ constrain us? Shall we be so unkind to him
who has been so kind to us, as to stand it out with him in so equal a command?
Shall not the sweetness of Christ overcome us; that seeing his love was so
great, as not to spare his life for us, yea, and suffer more for us I believe
than we think he did, nay, I may say than we can conceive he did, and that
which commends his love to us is, that he should do and suffer so much for us,
that of his creatures we were become his Enemies? Why should we not then
cheerfully submit to him in this one command, love one another? Does not the
very word Love carry in it at the first hearing abundance of alluring violence?
This is Christ's yoke, and here we may well say, his yoke is easy and his
burden is light. What is there in a life of divine love that we need be afraid
of? What is there is this command that is grievous? How can this yoke be
uneasLy? What reason to be loath to take it on? But such is the base degeneracy
and unreasonableness of corrupted nature, that when any thing comes in
competition with self-love, then all bonds must be broken, all yoaks must be
cast off, and nothing will then keep us in, but we must and will take our own
part though never so bad. And our own part in the heart of passion must seem
best, though it be contrary to infinite Righteousness, which is God himself. O
that we could once learn to lay aside this natural prejudice, which we have
against whatsoever does thwart our humors, though it be never so just, holy
and rational. O that we could look more narrowly, and search more exactly into
our selves with a spiritual Eye, and then we could not but see that which
would make us loath our selves, and to become abominable in our own Eyes, and
rather take any part than our own, we should see so much deceitfulness in our
selves, as that we should think our case bad though it seem never so good to
our natural self, till we apply it to the rule. Rule, nature would have none
but it self; and though in our better composure of mind, we may receive some
other rule; yet in our passions we cannot spare time to go to any other rule,
but we take that which is next to hand, and self will be sure to be that. But
we must, if we will be true Christians, learn to deny self, and wholy to
submit our selves to the Command of Christ, as our only Rule. O, let the power
of Christ's love, and command, make us obedient to this command of love.

Secondly, If we are to walk as Members of Christ, who is our Head; this has
influence upon our affections to oblige us to love one another, as, from the
command which the Head has over the Members, so, from the conformity that is
to be in the Members to the Head. The Head and the Members are not of two
several Natures; But, the same nature passes from the Head through all the
Members: Now, if we be ingrafted into Christ, we must become of the same
nature with him; let us be followers of Christ as dear Children, and walk in
love, as Christ also has loved us. Paul bids us to be followers of himself, as
he was follower of Christ; Christ then is to be our great pattern: He commands
us to learn of him, for he was meek. For us to think to attain unto a perfect
conformity to him, is in vain; but, as much as our natures are capable of we
are to strive for it. Christ's love to us, has breadth, and length, and depth,
and height, which passes knowledge. Greater love has no man than this, that
a man should lay down his life for his friend, but herein Christ commended his
love to us, in that while we were enemies, Christ died for us. Behold what
manner of love is this, that Christ has bestowed on us! Hereby perceive we
the love of God (that is Christ) because he laid down his life for us, 1 John
3. 16. His inference is there the same with mine, and that in a higher degree;
we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren. If Life, then sin; then
passion and wrath; then a base proud self-pleasing and contradicting humor.
Do we see any Loveliness or Beauty in Christ Jesus? Is there no excellency in
his sweetness pity, and patience? Is not his loving kindness amiable? And would
not something like this in us, be desirable? Had he more reason to love us than
we have to love one another? O, let our souls be overcome with the thoughts of
this love of Christ: Let our hearts be kindled and blown up into a flame of
Love, by it. O, when shall this dear, precious, pure, eternal love of His,
overpower our souls? When shall it have its proper effect upon us, to make us
to desire earnestly to be like our beloved! When shall we put on his beauty! O
how lovely should we then look! Let us put off that deformity that is upon our
Souls, which makes us so unlike to Christ; yea, which makes us loathsome in his
Eyes, Pride, Passions, Worldliness, are those Soul-deformities, which keep
Christ at such a distance from us, and which hinder his more sweet frequent and
intimate converse with us.

It is only that of Himself which Christ sees in us, which he delights in.
For, in Him is the perfection of all Beauty and excellency, and whatsoever
loveliness is in any thing else, comes from him, is like him, and leads to him.
Would we know, how much we are beloved of him, let us see how much we are like
him; for, He cannot but love that which is like himself, and if we would be
like him, we must put on love, for God is love, and he that dwells in love
dwells in God and god in him, 1 John 4. 16.

Thirdly, If we ought to walk toward one another as members of the same body,
whereof Christ is the Head, what can speak a closer union than commembership?
No man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. But we
do not feel the power of this oneness, as we ought to do. We are many; and
where there is division, there will be dissension; that we may therefore, be
more one, let us be more in putting off our self, and going into Christ. Here,
let us look into the loathsomness of our natures, whilst off from God; which
is the cause of all this confusion, and if we cannot see its deformity in its
self, let us see it in reflection in its bitter effects; and when we see our
own deformity, we shall see less cause to love our selves, and more cause to
love others. Let us look upon our oneness in Christ, and see if we can thence
become one in affections. Christ says, I and the children which thou have
given me; we have one spiritual Father, we are brethren; let us love as
brethren. The cause of this union is our being made partakers of Christ's
nature, and baptized into the same spirit with him: and, if we have at any time
experienced the more lively and full incomes of this spirit of Christ, how did
it set the heart on fire! The soul is then too narrow to contain its own
affections; how dearly then could we look upon a Saint! How did pride and wrath
vanish and melt down into meekness, humility and love! Did we never experience
what this means? Then, let the remembrance of the sweetness of it, renew it
in us. O, a life of spiritual love is a life indeed, a Heaven upon earth! This
is a good rule; when we find our selves in a spiritual temper, let us examine
our selves then, and inquire how we like such a frame: Let us remember the
Voice of the spirit in us, and labor to have our judgment and affections
always after, so balanced.

Fourthly, Are we members of Christ, we do not say, we do not love Christ.
If we do indeed love Christ, let us love him vvherever we find Him. Christ is
in all those, that are His. Let us fear offending Christ in his, for what is
done to them, He will take as done to himself. It will be said in that great
Day, In as much as ye did it unto these, ye did it unto me. Let us think what
we will of it at present, the world will find this true to their cost. And
if we act as in Christ, we shall find our selves as much concerned for him as
for our selves, and more too. Oh the wrongs that are done to him, we shall
reckon done to us. If we are Christ's, Christ's interest will be ours, and his
injuries ours. If we are Christ's, we will be as fearful of offending of any
of his, as of vvronging of our selves. Christ himself is above the reach of our
wrongs, to be touched by them in himself; but, in his Members he suffers to
this very day. If then Christ and we are one, and Christ and all his are one;
let us love Christ in his, let us rejoice in Christ in his members, let us
endeavor to requite Christ in his members: let us fear grieving the spirit of
Christ, in grieving the spirits of any of his dear ones. Wound not Christ in
wounding the heart of his beloved. O the pretiousness, pleasure and profit of
this love, I beg of God to give you a full enjoyment of that sweetness and the
joyful fruits of it, the Lord refresh you with a quick and constant sense and
sight of his eternal love toward your soul; to which the assurance of true
Christian love by the effectual work of the Comforter, may bring you. By this
we know, that we are passed from Death to Life, because we love the
Brethren. If it shall please the Lord to give me leave to see you again, I
shall come with strong expectations, and earnest desires of seeing a sweet
alteration for the better in you, in your deportment, and carriage toward one
that did deserve better at your hands. And what an effect hopes of this nature
frustrated, will produce; I beseech you to judge. I pray God fill you with
peace and joy. My hand is weary with vvriting, but my mind still runs forth
in desires and prayers for you. I hope the Lord will take away all cause of
vvriting any more of this subject unto you. Your Letter gave me hopes of a good
beginning: I beseech the Lord to carry on what he has begun to the glory of
his goodness, that I may at every sight of you, see more of the image of Christ
in you, and more of the power and beauty of this grace of love, and that I may
find you drawn nearer to Heaven, and see you with Christ in Heaven when time
shall be no more. I leave you in the Arms of Love.

John Janeway.


By all this you may easily perceive what spirit acted him, and how much he was
troubled for any divisions amongst the people of God. Indeed, he was of so
loving, and lovely a disposition, that he even commanded the affections of most
that knew him; and so humble he was, that he was ashamed to be loved for his
own sake.

I can never forget a strange expression, that I have heard from him, concerning
one that had a very ardent love for him. I know this (says he) that I love no
love but what is purely for Christ's sake, would Christ might have all the love,
He alone deserves it: for my part, I am afraid and ashamed of the love and
respects of Christians. He saw so much pride, peevishness and division amongst
Professors, that it did not a little vex his righteous Soul, and made him think
long, to be in a sweeter Air, where there should be nothing but union, joy and
love. He could not endure to hear Christians speak reproachfully one of
another, because they were of different judgments and persuasions. There where
he saw most holiness, humility and love, there he let out most of his
affections. And he was of that holy man's mind, that it were pity that the very
name of division were not buried; and that the time would come, that we might
all dearly pay for our unbrotherly nay unchristian Animosities.

CHAP. XVI.
An account of the latter part of his Life.
FOR the latter part of his Life; he lived liked a man that was quite weary of
the world, and that looked upon himself as a stranger here, and that lived in
the constant sight of a better world. He plainly declared himself but a Pilgrim
that looked for a better Country, a City that had foundations, whose builder
and maker was God. His habit, his language, his deportment, all spoke him one
of another world. His meditations were so intense, long and frequent, that they
ripened him apace for Heaven; but, somewhat weakened his body. Few Christians
attain to such a holy contempt of the world, and to such clear believing,
joyful, constant apprehensions of the transcendent glories of the unseen world.

He made it his whole business to keep up sensible communion with God, and to
grow into a humble familiarity with God, and to maintain it. And if by reason
of company or any necessary diversions, this was in any measure interrupted; he
would complain, like one out of his element, till his spirit was recovered into
a delightful more unmixed free intercourse with God. He was never so well
satisfied, as when he was more immediately engaged in what brought him nearer
to God; and by this he enjoyed those comforts frequently, which other
Christians rarely meet with. His graces and experiences, toward his end grew to
astonishment. His faith got up to a full assurance; his desires into a kind of
enjoyment and delight. He was often brought into the banqueting house, and there
Christ's Banner over him was love; and he sat down under his shadow with great
delight, and his Fruit was pleasant unto his taste. His Eyes beheld the King in
his Beauty, and while he sat at his Table, his spicknard did spend forth its
pleasant smell: he had frequent visions of Glory, and this John lay in the
bosom of his Master, and was sure a very beloved Disciple, and highly favored.
His Lord often called him up to the Mount to him, and let him see his excellent
Glory, O the sweet foretasts that he had of those pleasures that are at the
right Hand of God. How often was he feasted with the feast of fat things those
wines on the lees well refined; and sometimes he was like a Giant refresht with
new wine, rejoicing to run the race that was set before him, whether of doing
or of suffering. He was even sick of love and he could say to the poor
unexperienced World, O taste and see! and to Christians come and I well tell you
what God has done for my Soul. O what do Christians mean that they do no more
labor to get their senses spiritually exercised? O, why do they not make
Religion the very business of their lives? O, why is the Soul, Christ and Glory
thus despised? Is there nothing in communion with God? Are all those comforts
of Christians, that follow hard after him, worth nothing? Is it not worth the
while to make ones calling and Election sure. O, why do men and women jest, and
dally in the great matters of Eternity? Little do people think, what they
slight, when they are seldom and formal in secret duties, and when they neglect
that great duty of Meditation, which I have through rich mercy, found so sweet
and refreshing: O, what do Christians mean, that they keep at such a distance
from Christ? Did they but know the thousandth part of that sweetness that is in
him, they could not choose but follow him hard; they would run and not be
weary, and walk and not be faint.

He could sensibly and experimentally, commend the ways of God to the poor
unexperienced world, and say, His ways are pleasantness; and justify wisdom
and say, her paths were peace. He could take off those aspersions which the
Devil, and the atheistical frantic sots, do cast upon Godliness in the power
of it. Here is one that could challenge all the Atheists in the world to
dispute; here is one could bring sensible demonstrations to prove a deity, and
the reality and excellency of invisibles; which these ignorant fools and mad
men, make the subject of their scorn: Here is one that would not change
delights with the greatest epicures living, and vie pleasure with all the
sensual rich gallants of the world. Which of them all could in the midst of
their jollity say, This is the pleasure, that shall last for ever? Which of
them can say, among their Cups and Whores, I can now look Death in the Face,
and, this very Moment I can be content, yea glad, to leave these delights, as
knowing, I shall enjoy better. And this he could do, when he fared deliciously
in spiritual banquets every day: He could, upon better reason than he did, say,
Soul, thou have goods laid up for many years; He knew full well, that what he
did here enjoy, was but a little to what he should have shortly. In his
presence there is fullness of joy; at his right hand there are pleasures for
evermore. Where is the Belshazzar, that would not quake in the midst of his
Cups, whilst he is quaffing and carouzing in bowls of the richest Wine, if he
should see a hand upon the Wall, writing bitter things against him; telling him
that his joys are at an end, and that this night his soul must be required of
him; that now, he must come away, and give an account of all his ungodly
pleasures, before the mighty God. Where is the sinner, that could be contented
to hear the Lord roaring out of Zion, whilst he is roaring in the Tavern?
Which of them would be glad to hear the trumpet sound, and to hear that voice,
Arise you dead and come to judgment? Which of them would rejoice to see the
Mountains quaking, the Elements melting with fervent heat, and the Earth
consumed with flames; and the Lord Christ whom they despised, coming in the
clouds with Millions of his Saints and Angels, to be avenged upon those that
knew not God and obeyed not his Gospel. Is not that a blessed state, when a man
can lift up his head with joy, when others tremble with fear, and sink with
sorrow? And this was the condition of this holy young man. In the midst of all
worldly comforts he longed for death: and the thought of the day of Judgment,
made all his enjoyments sweeter. O, how did he long for the coming of Christ!
Whilst some have been discoursing by him of that great and terrible day of the
Lord, he would smile, and humbly express his delight in the forethought of that
approaching hour.

I remember, once there was a great talk that one had foretold that Doomsday
should be upon such a day: although he blamed their daring folly, that would
pretend to know that which was hid from the Angels themselves, and that the
Devil could not acquaint them with; yet granting their supposition to be true,
what then said he? What if the day of Judgmennt were come, as it will most
certainly come shortly? If I were sure, the day of Judgment were to begin
within an hour, I should be glad with all my heart. If at this very instant, I
should hear such thunderings, and see such lightnings, as Israel did at Mount
Sinai; I am persuaded, my very heart would leap for joy. But this I am
confident of, through infinite mercy, that the very meditation of that day has
even ravished my soul, and the thought of the certainty and nearness of it, is
more refreshing to me than the comforts of the whole world. Surely, nothing can
more revive my Spirits, than to behold the blessed Jesus; the joy, life, and
beauty of my soul. Would it not more rejoice me, than Joseph's wagons did old
Jacob? I lately dreamed that the day of Judgment was come: Methought, I heard
terrible cracks of thunder, and saw dreadful lightnings; the foundations of the
earth did shake, and the Heavens were roled together as a garment; yea, all
things visible were in a flame; methought, I saw the graves opened, and the
earth and Sea giving up their dead; methought, I saw millions of Angels, and
Christ coming in the clouds. Methought, I beheld the ancient of days sitting
upon his Throne, and all other Thrones cast down: Methought, I beheld him whose
Garments were white as Snow, and the hair of his head like pure Wool: His
Throne was like the firely flame, and his wheels as burning fire; a firey
stream issued and came forth from him; thousands of thousands ministered unto
him; and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; and the Judgment was
set and the books were opened. O, but with what an ecstasy of joy was I
surprised! Methought, it was the most heart-raising, and soul-ravishing sight,
that ever my eyes beheld: and then I cried out, I have waited for thy
salvation, O God; and so I mounted into the Air, to meet my Lord in the Clouds.

This I record, only to show, how far he was from being daunted at the thoughts
of death or Judgment: and to let other Christians know, what is attainable in
this life; and what folly it is, for us to take up with so little, when our
Lord is pleased to make such noble provisions for us, and by a wise and
diligent improvement of those means which God has offered us, we may have an
entrance administered to us abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

O how comfortable, how honorable, and how profitable is this state! These are
your men that quit themselves like Christians This is true gallantry, noble
manhood, real valor! This was the condition of Mr. Janeway for about three
years before he died; I will not deny but that he had some clouds; but, he
usually walked in a sweet, even, humble serenity of spirit, and his refreshing
joys were more considerable than his dispondings; and though he daily
questioned many actions; yet, did not question his state, but had his heart
fixed upon that rock that neither waves nor winds could shake. His senses were
still so spiritually exercised, as that he could look up to Heaven as his
Country and Inheritance, and to God as his Father, and to Christ as his
Redeemer; and (that which is scarce to be heard of) he counted it the highest
act of patience to be willing to die, and a very great pitch of self-denial to
be contented to be in this world, and to dwell on this side a full and eternal
enjoyment of that royal glorious One whom his soul was so much in love with. In
a word, he had the most earnest desires to be dissolved and to be with Christ
that I ever saw, read, or heard of, since the Apostles times.

CHAP. XVII.
His last Sickness, and Death.
AND now the time draws nigh, wherein his longings shall be satisfied; he is
called to his last work; and truly, his deportment in it, was honorable; his
carriage so eminently gracious, so meek, patient, fruitful, joyful and
thankful, that it made all his friends stand and wonder as being abundantly
above their experience and reading; and those Christians that saw him, could
not but admire God in him, and look upon him as one of the most singular
instances of rich grace, and even bless God that their eyes ever saw, or their
ears ever heard, such things; and had such a sensible demonstration of the
reality of invisibles.

He falls into a deep Consumption.
His body is now shaken again, and he falls into a deep Consumption; but, this
messenger of God did not in the least damp him. Spitting of blood, was no
ghastly thing to one that had his eye upon the blood of Jesus; faint sweats did
not daunt him that had always such reviving cordials at hand. It Is matter of
joy to him, that he was now in some hopes of having his earnest desires
satisfied.

After he had been a while sick, a sudden dimness seized upon his eyes; by and
by his sight quite failed; and there was such a visible alteration in him, that
he and others judged these things to be the symptoms of death approaching. But
when he was thus taken, he was not in the least surprised; but was lifted up
with joy to think, what a life he was going to, looking upon death it self as
one of his Fathers servants, and his friend that was sent as a messenger to
conduct him safely to his glorious palace.

When he felt his body ready to faint, he called to his Mother and said, Dear
Mother I am dying, but I beseech you be not troubled; for, I am through mercy,
quite above the fears of death, it is no great matter, I have nothing troubles
me but the apprehensions of your grief. I am going to Him, whom I love above
life.

But it pleased the Lord to raise him again a little out of this fainting fit,
for his master had yet more work for him to do before he must receive his
wages. Although his outward man decayed apace, yet he is renewed in the inward
man day by day: His graces were never more active, and his experiences were
never greater. When one would have thought, he should have been taken up with
his distemper, and that it had been enough for him to grapple with his pains,
then he quite forgets his weakness; and is so swallowed up of the life to come,
that he had scarce leisure to think of his sickness.

For several weeks together, I never heard the least word that savoured of any
complaint or weariness under the hand of God; except, his eager desire to be
with Christ, be counted complaining, and his haste to be in Heaven be called
impatience. Now Is the time when one might have seen Heaven and the Glory of
anothee world realized to sense. His faith grew exceedingly and his love was
proportionable, and his joys were equal to both.

O the rare seize! The high and divine expressions, that dropped from his
mouth! I have not words to express what a strange, triumphant, angelical frame,
he was in, for some considerable time together. It was a very Heaven upon
earth, to see and hear a man admiring God at such a rate, as I never heard any,
nor ever expect to hear or see more, till I come to Heaven. Those that did not
see cannot well conceive, what a sweet frame he was in, for at least six weeks
before he died. His soul was almost always filled with those joys unspeakable
and full of glory. How often would he cry out; O, that I could but let you know
what I now feel! O, that I could show you what I see: O, that I could express
the thousandth part of that sweetness that I now find in Christ! You would all
then think it well worth the while to make it your business to be religious. O
my dear friends, we little think what a Christ is worth upon a deathbed. I
would not for a world, nay for millions of worlds, be now without a Christ and
a pardon. I would not for a world be to live any longer: the very thoughts of a
possibility of recovery, makes me even tremble.

When one came to visit him, and told him, that he hoped it might please God to
raise him again, and that he had seen many a weaker man restored to health, and
that lived many a good year after: And do you think to please me (said he) by
such discourse as this? No, Friend, you are much mistaken in me, if you think
that the thoughts of life, and health, and the world, are pleasing to me. The
world has quite lost its excellency in my judgment. O how poor and
contemptible a thing is it in all its glory, compared with the glory of that
invisible world which I now live in the sight of! And as for life, Christ is my
life, health and strength; and I know, I shall have another kind of life, when
I leave this. I tell you it would incomparably more please me, if you should
say to me, [You are no man of this world; you cannot possibly hold out long;
before to morrow you will be in eternity]. I till you I do so long to be with
Christ, that I could be contented to be cut apeices, and to be put to the most
exquisite torments, so I might but die, and be with Christ. O, how sweet is
Jesus! Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Death do thy worst! Death has lost his
terribleness. Death it is nothing. I say, Death is nothing (through grace) to
me. I can as easily die as shut my eyes, or turn my head and sleep: I long to
be with Christ; I long to die; that was still his note.

His Mother and Brethen standing by him he said; Dear Mother, I beseech you as
earnestly as ever I desired any thing of you in my life, that you would
cheerfully give me up to Christ; I beseech you, do not hinder me, now I am
going to rest and glory. I am afraid of your prayers, lest they pull one way
and mine another.

And then turning to his Brethren he spoke thus to them, I charge you all, do
not pray for my life any more: you do me wrong, if you do! O that glory, the
unspeakable glory that I behold. My heart is full, my heart is full. Christ
smiles, and I cannot chose but smile: can you find in your heart, to stop me
who am now going to the complete and eternal enjoyment of Christ? Would you
keep me from my Crown? The arms of my blessed Savior are open to embrace me;
the Angels stand ready to carry my soul into his bosom. O, did you but see what
I see: you would all cry out with me, how long, dear Lord, come Lord Jesus come
quickly! O, why are his Chariot-wheels so long a coming!

And all this while he lay like a triumphing conqueror, smiling and rejoicing
in spirit.

There was never a day toward his end but (as weak as he was) he did some
special piece of service in, for his great Master. Yea, almost every hour did
produce fresh wonders.

A Reverend, Judicious and holy Minister came often to visit him, and
discoursed with him of the excellency of Christ, and the glory of the invisible
world. Sir, said he, I feel something of it; my heart is as full as it can hold
in this lower state; I can hold no more here. O that I could but let you know
what I feel!

This holy Minister praying with him his soul was ravished with the abundant
incomes of light, life and love; so that he could scarce bear it, nor the
thought of staying any longer in the world, but longed to be in such a
condition, wherein he should have yet more grace and more comfort, and be
better able to bear that weight of glory; some manifestations whereof did even
almost sink his weak body, and had he not been sustained by a great power, his
very joys would have overwhelmed him; and whilst he was in these ecstasies of
joy and love, he was wont to cry out,

Who am I Lord, who am I, that thou should be mindful of me! Why me Lord, why
me, and pass by thousands and look upon such a wretch as me, O, what shall I
say unto thee, O thou preserver of men? O, why me Lord, why me? O blessed, and
for ever blessed, be free grace! How is it, Lord, that thou should manifest
thy self unto me, and not unto others, even so Father, because it seems good
in thy eyes, Thou will have mercy because thou will have mercy. And if thou will look upon such a poor worm who can hinder! Who would not love thee! O
blessed Father! O how sweet and gracious have thou been unto me? O, that he
should have me in his thoughts of love, before the foundations of the world.

And thus he went on, admiring and adoring of God, in a more high and heavenly
manner than I can clothe with words. Suppose what you can on this side Heaven,
and I am persuaded you might have seen it in him. He was wonderfully taken with
the goodness of God to him in sending that aged experienced Minister to help
him in his last great work upon earth. Who am I, said he, that God should send
to me a messenger one among a thousand (meaning that Minister who had been
praying with him with tears of joy).

Though he was toward his end, most commonly ^n a triumphant joyful frame;
yet, sometimes even then he had some small intermissions, in which he would cry
out, Hold out faith and (...); et a little while, and your work is, done. And
when he found not his heart wound up to the highest pitch of thankfulness,
admiration and Love; he would with great sorrow bemoan himself, and cry out in
this Language,

And what is the matter now, O my soul, what vvilt thou, can thou thus
unworthily slight this admirable and astonishing condescension of God to thee?
Seems it a small matter, that the great Jehovah should deal thus familiarly
with his Worm; and will thou pass this over, as a common mercy? What meanest
thou, O my soul, that thou do not constantly adore and praise this rare,
strong, and unspeakable Love! Is it true, O my soul, does God deal familiarly
with man, and are his humble, zealous, and constant love, praise, and service
too good for God? Why art not thou O my soul, swallowed up every moment with
this free unparalleled everlasting Love.

And then he breaks out again into another triumphant Ecstasy of praise and
joy; and expressed a little of that which was unexpressible in some such words
as these,

Stand astonished ye Heavens, and wonder O ye Angels, at this infinite grace!
Was ever any under Heaven more beholding to free grace than I? Does God use to
do thus, with his creatures? Admire him for over and ever, O ye redeemed ones!
O those joys, the taste of which I have! Those everlasting joys, which are at
his right hand for evermore! Eternity, Eternity it self, is too short to praise
this God in. O bless the Lord with me, come let us shout for joy and boast in
the God of our Salvation. O, help me to praise the Lord for his mercy indureth
for ever!

One of his brethren (that had formerly been wrought upon by his holy
exhortations and example) praying with him, and seeing of him, (as he
apprehended) near his Dissolution, desired, that the Lord would be pleased to
continue those astonishing and soul supporting comforts to the last moment of
his breath, and that he might go from one Heaven to another, from grace and joy
imperfect, to perfect grace and glory; and when his work was done here, give
him, if it were his will, the most easy and triumphant passage to rest; and
that he might have an abundant entrance administered into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

At the end of the Duty he burst out into a wonderful Passion of joy. (Sure
that was joy unspeakable and full of glory!) O what an Amen did he speak, Amen,
Amen, Amen, Hallelujah.

It would have made any Christians heart to leap, to have seen and heard, what
some saw and heard, at that time; and I question not, but that it will somewhat
affect them to hear and read it; though it be scarce possible to speak the half
of what was admirable in him: for, it being so much beyond president, it did
even astonish and amaze those of us that were about him, that our relation must
fall hugely short of what was real.

I verily believe that it exceeds the highest Rhetoric, to set out to the
life, what this heavenly creature did then deliver. I say again, I want words
to speak, and so did he; for, he saw things unutterable: But yet, so much he
spoke as justly drew the admiration of all that saw him; and I heard an old
experienced Christian and Minister say it again and again, That He never saw,
nor read, nor heard the like: Neither could we ever expect to see the glories
of Heaven more demonstrated to sense, in this World. He talked as if he had
been in the third Heavens, and broke out into such words as these,

O, He is come! He is come! O how sweet! How glorious is the blessed Jesus! How
shall I do to speak the thousandth part of his praises! O for words, to set out
a little of that excellency! But it is unexpressible! O how excellent,
glorious, and lovely is the precious Jesus! He is sweet, He is altogether
lovely! And now I am sick of Love, he has ravished my soul with his beauty! I
shall die sick of Love.

O my friends stand by and wonder, come look upon a dying man, and wonder; I
cannot my self but stand and wonder! Was there ever a greater kindness, was
there ever sensibler manifestations of rich Grace! O, why me, Lord, why me!
Sure this is akin to Heaven, and if I were never to enjoy any more than this;
it were well worth all the torments that men and Devils could invent; to come
through yea even a Hell to such transcendent joys as these. If this be dying,
dying is sweet: Let no true Christian ever be afraid of dying. O Death is sweet
to me. This Bed is soft. Christ's Arms and Kisses, his Smiles and Visits, sure
they would turn Hell into Heaven. O that you did but see and feel what I do!
Come and behold a dying man more cheerful than you ever saw any healthful man
in the midst of his sweetest enjoyments? O Sirs, Worldly pleasures are pitiful
poor sorry things, compared with one glimps of this glory, which shines in so
strongly into my Soul! O why should any of you be so sad, when I am so glad?
This, this is the hour that I have waited for!

About eight and forty hours before his Death, his eyes were dim, and his sight
much failed; his Jaws shook and trembled, and his Feet were cold, and all the
symtoms of Death were upon him, and his extreme parts were already almost dead
and senseless, and yet, even then, his joys were (if possible) greater still:
He had so many fits of joy unspeakable, that he seemed to be in one continued
act of Seraphick Love, and praise. He spoke like one that was just entering into
the gates of the new Jerusalem: the greatest part of him was now in Heaven; not
a word dropped from his mouth but it breathed Christ and Heaven. O what
incouments did he give to them which did stand by, to follow hard after God,
and to follow Christ in a humble, believing, zealous course of life, and adding
one degree of grace to another, and using all diligence to make their Calling
and Ele^^ion sure; and that then, they also should find, that they should have
a glorious passage into a blessed Eternity.

But most of his work was Praise, a hundred times admiring of the bottomless
love of God to him* O, why me, Lord, why me! And then he would give
instructions to them that (...) to see him. He was scarce ever silent, because
the Love of Christ and Souls, did constrain him. There was so much work done
for Christ in his last hours, that I am ready to think, he did as much in an
hour as some do in a year.

Every particular person had a faithful affectionate warning. And that good
Minister, that was so much with him, used this as an argument to persuade him
to be vvilling to live a little longer, and to be patient to tarry Gods
leisure; sure God has something for thee to do that is yet undone; some word
of exhortation to some poor soul, that you have forgot.

The truth of it is, he was so filled with the love of Christ, that he could
scarce bear absence from Him a moment. He knew that he should be capable of
bearing of greater Glory above, than he could hear. It was the Judgment of some
that were with him, that his heart was not only habitual, but actually set on
God all the day long; and nothing of humane frailty, that could be thought a
sin, did appear for some time; except it were his passionate desire to die,
and difficulty to bring himself to be vvilling to stay below Heaven.

He was wont every evening to take his leave of his friends, hoping not to see
them, till the morning of the Resurrection; and he desired that they would be
sure to make sure of a comfortable meeting at our Fathers house, in that other
World.

I cannot relate the twentieth part of that which deserved to be written in
letters of Gold. And one that was one of the weakest, said, that he did
verily believe, that if we had been exact in our taking his sentences, and
observing his daily experiences, he could not imagine, a Book could be
published of greater use to the World, next the Bible it self.

One rare passage I cannot omit, which was this, that when Ministers or
Christians came to him, he would beg of them, to spend all the time that they
had with him in Praise. O help me to praise God, I have now nothing else to do
from this time to Eternity, but to praise and love God. I have what my soul
desires upon Earth, I cannot tell what to pray for but what I have graciously
given in. The wants that are capable of supplying in this World, are supplied.
I want but one thing, and that is, Aspeedy life to Heaven. I expect no more
here, I cannot desire more, I cannot hear more. O praise, praise, praise that
infinite boundless love that has, to a wonder, looked upon my soul, and done
more for me than thousands of his dear children. O bless the Lord, O my soul,
and all that is within me bless his holy name. O help me, help me, O my
friends, to praise and admire him that has done such astonishing wonders for
my soul; he has pardoned all my sins, he has filled me with his goodness; he
has given me grace and glory, and no good thing has he withheld from me.

Come, help me with praises, all is too little: come, help me, O ye glorious and
mighty Angels, who are so well skilled in this heavenly work of praise. Praise
him, all ye creatures upon the Earth, let every thing that has being, help me
to praise him. Hallelujah, Hallelujah, Hallelujah: Praise is now my work, and I
shall be engaged in this sweet employment for ever. Bring the Bible, turn to
David's Psalms, and let us sing a Psalm of praise; Come let us lift up our voice
in the praise of the most high, I will sing with you as long as my breath does
last; and when I have none, I shall do it better.

And then turning to some of his friends that were weeping, he desired them,
rather to rejoice than weep upon his account. It may justly seem a wonder, how
he could speak so much as he did, when he was so weak; but the joy of the Lord
did strengthen him.

In his sickness, the scriptures that he took much delight in, were the
fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth of John. The fifty fourth of
Isay was very refreshing also to him; he would repeat that word [with
everlasting mercies will I gather] with abundance of joy.

He commended the study of the Promises to Believers, and desired that they
would be sure to make good their claim to them, and then they might come to the
Wells of Consolation, and drink thereof, their fill.

According to his desire most of the time that was spent with him, was spent in
Praise; and he would still be calling out, More Praise still. O, help me to
praise him: I have now nothing else to do; I have done with Prayer, and all
other Ordinances; I have almost done conversing with mortals. I shall presently
be beholding Christ hinself, that dyed for me, and loved me, and washed me in
his Blood.

I shall before a few hours are over, be in Eternity singing the Song of Moses,
and the Song of the Lamb. I shall presently stand upon Mount Zion, with an
innumerable company of Angels, and the Spirits of the just made perfect, and
Jesus the mediator of the New Covenant, I shall hear the voice of much people,
and be one amongst them, which shall say Hallelujah, Salvation* Glory, Honor,
and power unto the Lord our God; and again, we shall say Hallelujah. And yet a
very little while, and I shall sing unto the Lamb, a Song of Praise, saying,
Worthy art thou to receive Praise who were slain, and have redeemed us to God
by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and
have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we shall reign with thee for
ever and ever.

Methinks I stand, as it were, with one foot in Heaven, and the other upon
Earth; methinks, I here the melody of Heaven, and by Faith, I see the Angels
waiting to carry my Soul to the bosom of Jesus, and I shall be for ever with
the Lord in Glory. And who can choose but rejoice in all this.

In several times, he spoke in this Language, and repeated many of these words
often, over, and over again, with far greater affection, than can be well
worded. And I solemnly profess, that what is here written, is no Hyperbole, and
that the twentieth part of what was observable in him is not Recorded, and
though we cannot word it exactly as he did, yet you have the substance, and many
things in his own words with little or no variation.

The day before his Death, he looked somewhat earnestly upon his Brother James,
who stood by him very sad; of whom he Judged that he was putting up some
Ejaculations to God upon his account, I thank thee, dear Brother for thy love,
said he, thou art now praying for me, and I know thou love me dearly: but
Christ loves me ten thousand times more than thou do; Come, and Kiss me,
dear Brother, before I Die; And so with his cold dying Lips, he Kissed him, and
said, I shall go before, and I hope thou shall follow after to Glory.

Though he was almost always praising God, and exhorting them that were about
him to mind their everlasting concerns, and secure an interest in Christ; and
though he slept but very little for some nights; yet he was not in the least
impaired in his intellectuals, but his actions were all decent, and becoming a
man; and his Discourse to a spiritual understanding, highly rational, solid,
divine. And so he continued to the last minute of his breath.

A few hours before his Death, he called all his relations and Brethren
together; that he might give them one solemn Warning more, and bless them, and
Pray for them, as his Breath and Strength would give him leave. Which he did
with abundance of authority, affection, and spirituallity: which take briefly
as it follows.

First, He thanked his dear Mother, for her tender love to him, and desired
that she might be in travail to see Christ formed in the souls of the rest of
her Children, and see of the travail of her soul, and meet them with joy in
that great day.

Then, He charged all his Brethren and Sisters in general, as they would answer
it before God, that they should carry it dutiful to their dear Mother. As for
his eldest Brother William, (at whose house he lay sick) his prayer was, that
he might be swallowed up of Christ, and Love to souls; and be more and more
exemplary in his life, and successful in his Ministry, and finish his course
with joy.

His next Brothers name was Andrew, a Citizen of London, who was with him and
saw him in this triumphing state; but (his necessary business calling him away)
he could not then be by; yet, he was not forgot, but he was thus blessed, The
God of Heaven remember my poor Brother at London! The Lord make him truly rich
in giving him the Pearl of great price, and make him a Fellow-Citizen with the
Saints, and of the Household of God; the Lord deliver him from the sins of
that City, may the world be kept out of his heart, and Christ dwell there. O
that he may be as his name is, a strong man, and that I may meet him with Joy.

Then he called his next Brother, whose name was James (whom he hoped God had
made him a spiritual Father to) to whom he thus addressed himself; Brother
James, I hope the Lord has given thee a goodly heritage, the lines are fallen
to thee in pleasant places; the Lord is thy portion. I hope the Lord has
showed thee the worth of a Christ: Hold on dear Brother; Christ, Heaven and
Glory, are worth striving for: The Lord give thee more abundance of his grace.

Then, His next Brother Abraham was called; to whom he spoke to this purpose,
The blessing of the God of Abraham rest upon thee, the Lord make thee a Father
of many spiritual Children.

His fifth Brother, was Joseph, whom he blessed in this manner, Let him bless
thee, O Joseph, that blessed him that was separated from his Brothren. O that
his everlasting Arms may take hold on thee! It is enough, if yet thou may
live in his sight. My heart has been working toward thee, poor Joseph; and I
am not without hopes, that the Arms of the Almighty will mbrace thee. The God
of thy Father, bless thee with the blessings of Heaven above.

The next, was his Sister Mary, to whom he spoke thus, Poor Sister Mary, thy
body is weak and thy days will be filled with bitterness; thy name is Marah,
the Lord sweeten all with his Grace and Peace, and give thee health in thy
Soul. Be patient, and make sure of Christ, and all is well.

Then, His other Sister, whose name was Sarah, was called; whom he thus
blessed, Sister Sarah, thy body is strong, and healthful; O that thy Soul may
be so too! The Lord make thee first a wise Virgin, and then a Mother in Israel;
a pattren of Modesty, Humility, and Holiness.

Then another Brother, Jacob was called; whom he blessed after this manner, The
Lord make thee an Israelite indeed in whom there in no guile! O that thou may
learn to wrestle with God, and like a Prince, may prevail, and not go without
the blessing!

Then he prayed for his youngest Brother Benjamin, who was then but an Infant;
Poor little Benjamin, O that the Father of the Fatherless, would take care of
thee poor Child, that thou, which never saw thy Father upon Earth, may
see him with joy in Heaven; the Lord be thy Father, and Portion; may thou
prove the Son of thy Mothers right Hand, and the joy of her Age!

O that none of us all, may be found amongst the unconverted in the day of
Judgment! O that every one of us may appear (with our Honored Father, and dear
Mother) before Christ with joy that they may say Lord here are we, and the
Children which thou have graciously given us. O that we may live to God here,
and live with him hereafter.

And now, my dear Mother, Brethren, and Sisters, Farewell; I leave you for a
while, and I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified,

And now, dear Lord, my work is done, I have finished my Course, I have fought
the good Fight, and henceforth there remains for me a Crown of Righteousness!
Now come dear Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Then that Godly Minister came to give him his last visit, and to do the office
of an inferior Angel, to help to convey this blessed soul to Glory who was now
even upon Mount Pisga, and had a full sight of that goodly Land at a little
distance. When this Minister spoke to him, his heart was in a mighty flame of
Love and Joy, which drew tears of Joy from that precious Minister, being almost
amazed to hear a man just a dying, talk as if he had been with Jesus, and came
from the immediate presence of God; `O the smiles that were then in his Face,
and the unspeakable Joy that was in his Heart; one might have read Grace, and
Glory, in such a man's Countenance. O the praise, the triumphant praises, that
he put up! And every one must speak praise about him, or else they did make
some jar in his Harmony.

And indeed most did, as well as they could help him in praise. So that I never
heard, nor knew more praises given to God in one Room, than in his Chamber.

A little before he died, in the Prayer, or rather Praises, he was so wrapped
up with admiration and joy, that he could scarce forbear shouting for joy. In
the conclusion of the Duty, with abundance of Faith, and fervency, he said
aloud, Amen, Amen!

And now his desires shall soon be satisfied. He sees Death coming apace to do
his office, his jaws are loosened more and more, and quiver greatly; his Hands
and Feet are as cold as clay, and a cold sweat is upon him: but, O how glad was
he when he felt his Spirit just agoing! Never was Death more welcome to any
mortal, I think. Though the pangs of Death where strong: yet, that
far-more-exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory, made him endure those bitter
pains, with much patience and courage. In the extremity of his pains, he
desired his eldest Brother to lay him a little lower, and to take away one
Pillow from him, that he might die with the more ease; His Brother replied,
that he durst not for a world, do any thing that might hasten his Death a
moment. Then he was well satisfied, and did sweetly resign himself up wholy
to Gods disposal; and after a few minutes, with a sudden motion gathering up
all his strength, he gave himself a little turn on one side; and in the
twinkling of an eye, departed to the Lord, sleeping in Jesus.

And now blessed soul, thy longings are satisfied, and thou see and feel a
thousand times more than thou did upon Earth, and yet thou can bear it
with delight, thou art now vvelcomed to thy Fathers house by Christ, the
beloved of thy Soul; now thou have heard him say, Come, thou blessed of my
Father, and, Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of
the Lord, and vvear that Crown which was prepared for thee, before the
foundation of the World.

O that all the Relations which thou have left behind thee, may live thy Life,
and die thy Death, and live with Christ, and thee, for ever and ever. Amen,
Amen.

He Dyed June 1657. Aged 23./24. and was Buried in Kelshall Church, in
Hartfordshire.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
SERMONS on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Colossians, by Mr. J.
Daille, translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwin's, and Dr. John
Owens Epistles Recommendatory. An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Matthew. 4.
and Peter's Sermon to Cornelius; and circumspect walking. By Dr. Tho. Tailor. A
practical Exposition on the 3d Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul to
the Corinthians, with the Godly man's choice, on Psalm 4. v. 6, 7, 8. by Anthony
Burgess. Christianographia, or a description of the multitudes and sundry sorts
of Christians in the world not subject to the Pope, by Ephesians. Pagit. Dr. Donns 4
to Sermons, being his 3 Volumes. Pareus Exposition on the Revelations. Choice
and practical Expositions on 4 select Psalms: viz. The fourth Psalm in eight
Sermons. The forty second Psalm in ten Sermons. The fifty first Psalm in twenty
Sermons. The sixty third Psalm in seven Sermons.
Forty six Sermons npon the whole eighth Chapter of the Epistle of the Apostle
Paul to the Romans. Both by Tho. Horton, D. D. late Minister of Saint Hellens.
An Analytical Exposition of Genesis, and of twenty three Chapters of Exodus, by
George Hughes, D. D.
Books 4to.
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinnock,
M. A. An Antidote against Quakerism, by Steph. Scandret. An Exposition on the
five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations thereupon, by William
Greenhil. The Gospel Covenant opened, by Pet. Bulkley. Gods holy-Mind touching
matters moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments: Also, an Exposition on the
Lords Prayer, by Edward Eston, B. D. The Fiery-Jesuit, or an
Historical-Collection of the rise, increase, doctrines and deeds of the
Jesuits, exposed to view for the sake of, London. Horologiographia optica;
Dyaling, universal and particular, speculative and practical; together with a
description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method, by Sylvanus Morgan. Regimen
sanitatis salemi, or the Regiment of Health; containing directions and
instructions for the guide and government of man's life. A seasonable Apology
for Religion, by Matthew Pool. Separation no Schism, in answer to a Sermon
preached before the Lord Mayor, by J. S. The practical Divinity of the Papist
discovered to be destructive to true Religion, and Men's souls, by J. Clarkson
An Exercitation on a question in Divinity, and Case of Conscience, viz. Whether
it be lawful for any person to act contrary to the opinion of his own
Conscience, formed from arguments that to him appears very probable, though not
necessary or demonstrative. The Creatures goodness as they came out of Gods
hand, and the good-mans mercy to the bruit-creatures, in two Sermons, by Tho.
Hodges, B. D* Certain considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity amongst
Protestants. Mediocria, or the most plain and natural apprehensions which the
Scripture offers, concerning the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion: of
Election, Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel* and Perfection. The
Saints triumph over the last enemy, in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. James
Janeway, by Nath. Vincent. The vanity of man in his best estate, in a discourse
on Psalm 39. 5. at the Funeral of the Lady Susanna Keate, by Richard Kidder, M.
A. The Morning-Lecture against Popery, or the principal errors of the Church of
Rome detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture, preached by several Ministers
of the Gospel in or near London. Four useful discourses: (1) The art of
improving a full and prosperous condition for the glory of God; being an
appendix to the art of Contentment in three Sermons, on Philip. 4. 12. (2)
Christian submission, on 1 Samuel 3. 18. (3) Christ a Christians life and death
is gain, on Philip. 1. 21. (4) The Gospel of peace sent to the sons of peace,
in six Sermons, on Luke 10. 5, 6. by Jeremiah Barroughs. Dr. Wilds Letter of
Thanks and Poems. A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands. The Saints
privilege by dying, by Mr. Scot. The new World; or new-reformed Church, by
Doctor Homes. The Virtuous Daughter, a Funeral-Sermon, by Mr. Brian. The
Miracle of Miracles, or Christ in our Nature: by Dr. Rich. Sibbs. The unity and
essence of the Catholic Church-visible, by Mr. Hudson. Dr. Prideaux' s
Fasciculus controversiarum Theologicum. Brightman on Revelations, Canticles and
Daniel. Seamans-Companion. Canaans Calamity. The intercourse of Divine Love
between Christ and the Church, or the particular Believing soul: in several
Lectures on the whole second Chap. of Cant. by John Collins, D. D.
Large 8vo.
Heart-Treasure: or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian with Soul-enriching-treasure of truths, graces, experiences,
and comforts. The sure mercies of David; or a second part of Heart-treasure.
Heaven or Hell here in a Good or Bad Conscience, by Nath. Vincent.
Closet-prayer a Christians duty; all three by O. H^yword. A practical discourse
of Prayer; wherein is handled the nature and duty of Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet. Of
quenching the Spirit; the evil of it, in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered; by Theophilus Polwheile. The re-building of London
encouraged and improved in everal meditations: by Samuel Rolls. The sure way to
Salvation; or a Treatise of the Saints mystical Union with Christ; by Richard
Stedman. M. A. Sober Singularity, by the same Author. Heaven taken by Storm.
The mischief of sin: both by Tho. Watson. The Child's Delight; together with an
English Grammar. Reading and Spelling made easy; both by Tho. Lie. Aesop's
Fables, with morals thereupon in English-Verse. The Young-mans Instructor, and
the Old-mans Remembrancer; being an Explanation of the Assemblies Catechism.
Captives bound in Chains, made free by Christ their Surety; both by Tho.
Doolittle. Eighteen Sermons preached upon several Texts of Scripture, by
William Whitaker. The Saints care for Church Communion; declared in sundry
Sermons, preached at St. James Dukes-place, by Zech. Crofton. The life and
death of Edmund Stanton D. D. To which is added a Treatise of
Christian-conference; and a Dialogue between a Minister and a Stranger. Sin the
Plague of plagues, or sinful sin the worst of Evils; by Ralph Venning. M. A.
Cases of Conscience practically resolved; by J. Norman. The faithfulness of God
considered and cleared in the great Events of his Word; or a second part of the
fulfilling of the Scripture. The immortality of the Soul explained and proved
by Scripture and Reason; to which is added Faiths-triumph over the fears of
death; by Tho. Wadsworth. A Treatise of the incomparableness of God, in his
Being, Attributes, Works, and Word; by George Swinnock, M. A. A discourse of
the original, etc. of the Cossacks. The generation of Seekers; or the right
manner of the Saints addresses to the throne of Grace, with an Exposition on
the Lords-Prayer. The administration of Cardinal Ximones. A discourse of
Family-instruction, by Owen Stockton; with directions for those that have
suffered by the Fire. An Essay to facilltate the Education of Youth, by
bringing down the rudiments of Grammar to the sense of seeing, which ought to
be improved by Syncresis; by M. Lewis of Totenham. An Artificial Vestibulum;
wherein the sense of Janua Linguarum is contained, compiled into plain and
short sentences in English, for the great case of Masters, and Expeditious
progress of Scholars, by M. Lewis. Speculum Sherlockianum, ot a Looking glass,
in which the admirers of Mr. Sherlock, may behold the man, as to his Acuracy,
Judgment, Orthodoxy. A discourse of Sins of Omission; wherein is discovered
their Nature, Causes, and Cure; by George Swinnock. Mr. Baxter's Reformed
Pastor. His Majesty's Propriety in the British Seas vindicated. Quakerism no
Christianity; or a through-Quaker no Christian, proved by their Principles, and
confirmed by Scripture; by J. Faldo. Differences about Water Baptism no bar to
Communion; by Jo. Bunian. The Dutch-dispensatory; showing the virtues,
qualities and properties of Simples; the virtue and use of Compounds; whereto
is added the Complete Herbalist. Judge Dodaridge's laws of Nobility and Peerage.
Dinglys Spiritual Fast. Solitude improved by Divine Meditation; by Matthew.
Ranew. A Murderer punished and pardoned, or Tho. Savage his life and death;
with his Funeral sermon.
Small 8vo.
A defense against the fear of death; by Zach. Crofton. Gods Sovereignty
displayed; by William Gearing. The godly man's Ark, or a City of Refuge in the
day of his distress, in five Sermons; with Mrs. Moors evidences for Heaven: by
Edmund Calamy. The Almost-Christian discovered, or the false-Professor tried
and cast, by M. Mead. The true bounds of Christian-freedom: or a discourse
showing the extent and restraints of Christian-liberty, by S. Bolton., D. D.
The sinfulness of Sin and fullness of Christ, in two Sermons; by Will. Bridge. A
Plea for the godly, or the Righteous man's Excellency. The holy Eucharist, or
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. A Treatise of Self-denial. All three by Tho.
Watson. The life and death of Tho. Wilson of Maidstone in Kent. The life and
death of Doctor Samuel Winter. A Covert from the Storm, or the fearful
encouraged in the day of Trouble. Worthy-walking pressed upon all that have
heard the Call of the Gospel. The Spirit of Prayer. All three by Nath. Vincent.
The inseparable union between Christ and a Believer, by Tho. Peck. A discourse
of Excuses; setting forth the variety and vanity of them: the sin and misery
brought in by them, by John Sheffield. Invisible reality, demonstrated in the
holy life and triumphant death of Mr. J. Janeway. The Saints encouragement to
diligence in Christ's service: both by Mr. James Janeway. A discourse concerning
the Education of Children. Convivium Coeleste; a plain and familiar discourse
concerning the Lords Supper; both by R. Kidder. The Saints perseverance
asserted in its Positive-ground against Mr. Ives, by Tho. Danson. A
Wedding-ring fit for the Finger; by Will. Secker. The Young-mans Call and Duty;
by Nich. Lockyer. An Explanation of the shorter-Catechism of the Assembly of
Divines; by Tho. Lie. The Child's Delight with Pictures; by Tho. Lie. The life
and death of Tho Hall. A Plea for the Non-Conformists, tending to vindicate
them from Schism, by a Doctor in Divinity. The flat opposition of Poperty to
Scripture; by J. N. Chaplain to a Person of Honor. The Weavers Pocketbook, or
Weaving spiritualized by J. C. D. D. Two disputations of Original-sin; by
Richard Baxter. The History of Moderation. The welcome Cominunicant. The ready
way to prevent sin; by William Bagshaw. The Little-peace-maker, discovering
foolish Pride, the Makebate. Philadelphia; or a Treatise of Brotherly-love; by
Mr. Gearing. Reformation or Ruin, being certain Sermons on Levit. 26. 23, 24.
by Tho. Hotchkis. The Riches of Grace displayed; to which is added the
privilege of Passive Obedience; and 52 proposals in order to help on
Heart-humiliation; by Will. Bagshaw. The parable of the great Supper opened in
17 Sermons, by Jo. Crump. A present for Teeming-women, by J. Oliver.
Nonconformity without Controversy; by Benj. Baxter. The Christians daily
Monitor; by Josh. Church. A Treatise of Closet-prayer; by Richard Mayo. The
Religious Family; by Philip Lamb. A sober inquiry, or Christ's Reign with Saints
a thousand years. A discourse of the prodigious Abstinence of Martha Tailor. A
Memento to young and old; by John Maynard. The privilege of the Saints on Earth
above those in Heaven; by William Hook. Index biblicus multijugus, or a Table
of the holy Scripture; wherein each of its Books, Chapters, and particular
matters are distinguished and Epitomized. The day of Grace, with the conversion
of a Sinner; by Nath. Vencent. The Greek Testament in 8 vo. An easy and useful
Grammar for the learning of the French tongue, by Mr. Gosthead, Gentleman. Mr.
Raworths work and reward of a Christian. The Miners Monitor, or advice to those
that are employed about the Mines. A Protestant Catechism for little Children.
A Scripture Catechism; by Samuel Petto. A Catechism according to the Church of
England. Grotius Catechism. Brief of the Bibles-History. The Fountain sealed;
by Dr. Sibbs. Nero* Tragidea. Cottons None but Christ. Cornelianum dolium. The
Christians earnest longing for Christ's appearing, preached at the Funeral of
Mr. Noah Webb; by Dan. Burgess. Wilsons Catechism. Elenchus motuum nuperorum in
Anglia. Cocains Poems. Poor Robins Jests. Croftons Foelix Scelus; or
Prospering-prophaneness provoking holy conference; by Zech. Crofton. Gramaticus
Analyticus, by the same Author. Alexanders advice to his Son. Artificial
Embelishments. H. Excellency of Christ set forth. Gods Sovereignty displayed;
by Mr. William Gearing.
In small 12 s.
The duty of Parents toward their Children. A little Book for little Children.
A method and instruction for the Art of divine Meditation. All three by Tho.
White. The considerations of Drexelius on Eternity. The shadow of the Tree of
Life, by M. M. The Psalms of David newly translated: more plain, smooth and
agreeable to the Text than any heretofore. The Prisoners Prayers. Mr. Henry
Lakin's Life of Faith. Awakening Call to Sinners. Crumbs of Comfort, or the
Lord Bacons Prayers. FINIS.


