A SERMON Preached before the KING AT NEW MARKET, October 11. 1674. By HENRY
JAMES, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, And Fellow of Queen's College in
Cambridge.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.

London, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be Sold by M. Pit at the Angel
against the Little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.

St. LUKE 1.74, 75. -- Might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before Him all the days of our life.


WHoever he be that considers himself, and that seriously reflects upon his own
frame and constitution, or those excellent purposes he seems by God and Nature
fitted for, can neither conclude himself the Author of his own Being, or
designed to live only to himself, without any regard at all to a Superior.

The perpetual Obligations he lies under for being made man, and that common
protection of Life whereby he is supported, the Mercies of Health and Liberty,
and the reasonable expectation of Happiness hereafter, must needs mind him of a
Duty owing to the Benign Parent of all things, to the Comfort and Stay of our
Lives, our God and Savior.

For Creatures being nothing else but Emanations from God, that overflowing
Fountain of Goodness, as all of them, in their several ranks owe both their
beings and their dependances to Him, so it is their Nature to act always to His
Glory that made them; every Plant and Stone, the Beasts of the Field, and the
Fowls of the Air, the Fishes of the Sea, and the more glorious Bodies of the
Firmament, prosecute the Design of their Maker, and serve Him to their power:
Reasonable therefore it is that Man, who is Superior to them all, (who is
ordained to a better end, and vouchsafed suitable abilities for its
attainment,) should serve his God, not as the meaner parts of the Creation, in
a Mechanical, necessary way, but with freedom and liberty, with reason and
understanding, in holiness and Righteousness before Him all the days of his
life.

From these words, without considering them as part of the Prophecy of
Zacharias, or upon what account spoken, or to what they refer, Genesis 22.16.
I propound to discourse very plainly upon these two Particulars.

I. What the serving of God in general does suppose. II. Consider that Service
with reference to such qualifications as the Text mentions, (1.) without fear,
(2.) before him, (3.) all the days of our life.

I. As for the serving of God, it does suppose in the first place:

Such a firm persuasion of the Being of the true God, and such a belief of that
manifestation which He has made of Himself, and of His Will to Mankind, as will
produce in us an habitual sense of His Goodness, Justice, and Providence in the
management of human affairs: This of it self cannot so strictly be called His
Service, as the foundation of it, and of all Religion; for Religion being
nothing else, but that, by which we come to the attainment of Happiness, and
the Happiness of Man, consisting in the Favor of God, if there be no belief
that this God is, then no hopes of enjoying His Favor; if no hopes of enjoying
His Favor, then no pretense to Happiness; if no pretense to Happiness, it is in
vain to use any means for the attainment of what we cannot reasonably persuade
our selves ever will be, that is, it is in vain to be Religious; therefore says
the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.6.
He that comes unto God, must first believe that He is; and then, that He is a
Rewarder of all those that diligently seek Him; Heb. 22.29. and 1.3.
as also, that He is a consuming fire; and further, that he upholds all things
by the Word of His Power.

By believing that He is, we are naturally carried on to some service and
worship; by believing that He is good to us, will increase our love to Him, and
this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments; by believing that He is
just, will make us tremble at His terrors, and fear to offend Him; by
believing that He governs the World, will possess us always with a sense of His
overruling Power in our immediate Concerns: And so have this twofold good
effect.

1. It will confirm us in a submission to the Divine Will in all accidents what
ever, because the very consideration that Infinite Wisdom, and Infinite
Goodness (both which Providence supposes) are engaged in the disposal of
things, is of it self Argument sufficient with wise and humble Men, to allay
all their sollicitudes, and to rest very much pleased with God's Dispensations
toward them, though they may be contrary to what they could have wished to
themselves.

2. It will likewise encourage our addresses to the Throne of Grace, because
the belief of Providence supersedes the uncomfortable consequences, which
necessarily arise from an opinion that the World is governed either by Fate, or
giddy Chance; supposing there be any real difference betwixt them, which some
perhaps not so well skilled in Philosophy have imagined.

For, whether the one or the other be said to govern, to put up any petitions
would be equally unreasonable; if our tears or cries could alter the course of
Destiny, or make Fate flexible, Fate would not be it self.

Or if the same tears could determine accidental Causes to necessary or certain
Effects, there would neither be any proportion betwixt them and their Cause, or
indeed any Effects in themselves fortuitous, because determinable, that is,
there would be no Chance at all; which is against the Hypothesis.

So that the persuasion of God's presiding over His Creatures being the
reasonable ground of our Prayers, and this, together with the love and fear of
Him (from whence flow the most forcible arguments to a good life) depending
upon a belief that He is, it seems to follow, that such a belief is one
Instance of, or at least the first step to His Service.

II. Serving God supposes a serious exercise of Devotion, and a confcienscious
discharge of all those Offices, which are comprehended under the name of
Worship.

This is that which all Nations, People, and Languages, in some manner or
other, have pretended to; for since there are none so barbarous, but what own
the being of a God, since the universal consent of all Mankind to this purpose,
proves the Notion to be congenite with us, the consequence is very plain and
obvious, that therofore some worship, and some expressions of homage ought to
be paid unto Him.

Neither can it easily be made appear, that either the one, or the other, have
ever been denied, unless by some few Sciolists, and pretenders to a greater
sagacity in the knowledge of all things than others, who to raise themselves an
esteem of wisdom and understanding above their fellows, have adventured the
questioning of them both, to the betraying of their wit, modesty, and the
desplicableness of (what such men chiefly value themselves upon) their own
natural parts.

So that the acknowledgment of a God being as universal as the Race of Mankind,
there is a necessity that that of Worship should be of the same extent; for
whoever owned that Being worthy to be called a God, to whom he thought not
himself obliged to pay all that adoration and honor, which the very conception
of such a Being imports he should.

Nay, that variety of Religions which appears in the World, though it proves
that Men have different opinions concerning the Nature of God; yet it strongly
concludes likewise, both, that some Religion is true, as also that Worship,
without which there can be no Religion, is part of that Service which all
contend in the main is due to Him.

As for Christians, who have had the benefit of Revelation, they cannot well be
ignorant what particulars of Worship, as to the matter of it, are required of
them.

Prayer, and the several parts of it, Praises and Songs of Thanks, and a due
reception of the blessed Sacraments, are in the language of the Church
peculiarly styled God's Service; and who ever lives in the wilful omission of
any of these, does sacrilegiously defraud God of His due, and deprive himself
of what would prove in its consequence his greatest advantage.

The use of them being not only the best signification we can make of our
regard to Heaven, but also the most immediate means to that Glory which all in
the General aim at.

For God being the God of Order and Decency, as he has designed all his
Creatures to a perfection suitable to their natures, so has it pleased His
Wisdom to appoint several ways whereby they may arrive at it.

Now Salvation, or Happiness, or Eternal Life, or by what other Name soever it
be called, being the End of Rational Creatures, and therefore being that
wherein their perfection does consist, and by Christ has appointed our poor
Services, a bended Knee, and a broken Heart, Prayers and Supplications issuing
forth from a pure and humble Spirit, and a worthy participation of the Holy
Mysteries, to be as passages and channels, whereby another manner of Spirit,
than what by Nature we have, is conveyed into us; by these as Instruments we
are regenerated, sanctified, and justified.

By these our Faith is confirmed, we grow strong in the power of God, and are
enabled to live answerable to our great and heavenly Calling; by these we
become qualified to partake of the benefit of the expiation made for the Sins
of the World, that is, of being for ever happy.

The use therefore of these means, which does so much advance to the Glory of
God, (as nothing does it more than the Salvation of Sinners,) and which He
Himself has required of us, must needs be concluded an essential part of His
Service.

III. Serving God, supposes our being holy, and unblameable in our
conversation; this is the sum and intent of both the former, for no Man is
obliged to believe in the true God, or to love and fear Him, but that such a
belief, and such affections should influence his practice; no Man is bound to
use the means of Religion, but as such means are most effectual to the
remission of sins, the perfecting of our Natures, and the bringing forth much
fruit, whereby God is glorified.

This seems to be the principal Design of God's enduing Man at first with a
capacity of knowing and doing things excellent, and of revealing His Will to
him.

God gave Man a perfect understanding, an upright will, and a Law to walk by,
with many motives to persuade him to Obedience, that by obeying, he might
preserve himself pure and undefiled in his first innocence: It is true, besides
those moral Duties, to which the Jews, as well as others, were antecedently, to
any positive Law, obliged, there were several Commands of another nature given
that People, which seemed weak, and not at all perfective of human Nature; but
these, how beggarly soever they were, were types and shadows of things heavenly
and spiritual, and therefore the resting in the bare performance of these,
without living up to what they signified, was frequently by God Himself
upbraided to his own People.

Further yet, this was the intent of God's sending His Son into the World: Tit.
2.14.
He gave Himself for us, says the Apostle, that He might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works:
And therefore I cannot but take notice of an Opinion, which in its effects must
needs be destructive to the Maintainers of it, namely, that they who live in
the observance of the means of Religion, do by that, fulfill all righteousness;
and that to pray, fast, or receive the Supper of the Lord, is to discharge the
whole of their Duty.

Indeed these are so far good, in as much as God has commanded them, and so
were the Jewish Sacrifices; but God commanded them not merely for themselves,
but as instruments and helps, whereby we might be better Men.

By the frequent and conscientious use of these, we receive unvaluable
Blessings, as a greater power to subdue our corruptions, and to perfect
holiness in the fight of God.

But these are not Meekness, Humility, Charity, Patience; these are not
Chastity, Sobriety, Temperance; these are not visiting the Fatherless and Widow
in their Affliction, and keeping our selves unspotted from the World.

So that the Consequence is not, nor ever will be true, I fast, I pray, I
commemorate my Savior's Death, therefore I am to all intents and purposes a
good Christian; unless it can be proved, which it never can, that this was the
chief intent of Christ's appearance in the flesh.

These are good signs it is confessed, that we have a due sense of Religion,
and of our Duty, but this is not a being renewed in the spirit of our minds,
this is not putting on the new man, for that is created after God in
righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians. 4.24.


For, Besides what the Scripture says to this purpose, that we may hold the
truth in unrighteousness; that we may eat and drink the Body and Blood of
Christ, and yet do it to our own damnation; that we may fast and pray, and yet
be condemned for Hypocrites.

Can common sense tell any one, that God in his Wisdom should make such
strange provisions for the Salvation of Man, be so expensive of His Son's
Blood, permit Him to endure all the wounds and afflictions of the Cross, to no
other intent and purpose, but that Men might be enduc'd, by that superabundancy
of His love, to give their assent to such or such a Proposition, delivered as
true upon Divine Testimony, that is, to believe:

Or to eat a little Bread, or drink a little Wine, or repeat a few Prayers at
some certain seasons.

This is so very fond, that not only Christianity, but Paganism it self
condemns it; for this is the voice of Heathens, that nothing but being
conformed to the Will of the Gods they worshipped, can properly be called their
Service, or qualify them for that Hapiness which each particular Sect of Men
have fancied to themselves; nothing but living up to that Religion they
profess, whether it be true or false, can be pleasing to the Deity, or procure
them that state wherein they imagined Happiness to consist.

And this is the last and most comprehensive Instance of our Serving God, viz.
our being holy and righteous: And thus I come to the second General, which is,
to consider the Serving God with such qualifications as are mentioned in the
Text; and the first is,

Without fear: Which words do immediately refer to our being delivered out of
the hand of our enemies, and imply our being safe and secure from the danger of
such as would hinder us in our Duty toward God and Man.

For it is not to be imagined, that to fear and worship the same God are
inconsistent, or that this expression should justify us in disregarding His
Judgments, or slighting His Terrors, which the Apostles themselves made use of
to persuade Men, Heb. 12.28.
for we know we ought to serve Him with reverence and godly fear; and that the
fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom; and that our salvation is to be
wrought out with fear and trembling.

But what I would urge from this passage is, That that Fear of God which arises
from our framing to our selves unworthy conceptions of Him, as a Being more
revengeful than good, is a Parent of no less extravagant Opinions, than
monstrous Practices in Religion, and therefore will very much prejudice the
acceptance of our Services.

There are two extremes that are of very dangerous consequence to the Christian
Church, and they are either too much Religion, or too little; by too much, I
mean not living too well, (for this Age of all other has little reason to
complain of that,) but as it is circumstantiated by the Superstitious; by too
little, as it is exposed and derided by the Profane. Now he that attributes
the rise of both these, to that Fear of God which proceeds from His being
thought more cruel than merciful, seems not much to err.

For Superstition being a looking upon things as necessary to be done in the
Worship of God, which in reality are not, or a continual adoration of God in an
undue manner, can have no other reason, (unless that it be by design to please
or awe the People with trifles,) than the Fancies of Melancholic Men, who
apprehending the Deity they worship scarcely ever satisfied with their best
performances, forsake a sober, manly, and well tempered Devotion, and choose
rather to address themselves to Him with over many affected expressions of
submission, as believing them absolutely necessary to His Service, and that
nothing besides circumstances and fawning, can propritiate their cruel God.

But further, Fear has been the occasion of too little Religion in others, that
is, it has betrayed many by degrees, and insensibly into Infidelity and
downright Atheism.

For if the fear of any thing be the apprehension of some evil, that may befall
me from that thing, what is more natural, than for those who cannot discern so
much excellency and goodness in the Object of their Worship, as to love him,
not only to avoid his presence, but to wish evil to him, or indeed to desire
there were no such thing in the World?

This undue Fear, keeps some, who are conscious of their iniquities, so much in
doubt of His Mercy, that they never dare adventure upon repentance, but
proceeding to harden themselves in impiety 'till their Consciences become
almost dead, they find it the easiest way both to justify their actions, and
ease the tortures of their Minds, by denying first their own Immortality, then
the Lord that bought them, afterward, with face sufficient, but without the
least show of argument, publicly maintaining, that God and the Devil, Yirtue
and Vice, Rewards and Punishments, are words signifying nothing, invented
merely to affright some, to curb and check the insolency of others, and to keep
all in obedience to the Government they live under.

Thus making Religion no other than a wellcontriv'd piece of Policy, and God
only as a bare Notion, by the maintenance whereof amongst the Vulgar, the
Intrigues of State, and the Temporal Designs of Princes may be the better
served,

So that it is not always Generousness of Spirit, but sometimes Fear, that makes
Men rash; and it is not so much Valor, as Cowardice, that leads them to Atheism.

These ill Consequents therefore of Fear alone, are an argument that we never
fear God aright, but when we love Him too; to complete His Worship, Fear and
Love must go hand in hand, our Love will carry us into the Bosom of our
Creator, make us feel and taste how good and gracious the Lord is, whilst our
Fear will chastise the extravagencies of Love, and teach us to keep an awful
distance from so incomparable a Majesty.

To pretend to Love without Fear, is to be presumptuous; and to Fear without
Love, is to expose our selves to the forementioned inconveniences, and in
effect to make the God we worship, none other than the Devil.

II. Another Qualification is, that our holiness and righteousness be before
God, that is, that we might both in the acts of Devotion, and in the whole
course of our Lives, behave our selves, as if we believed our thoughts and
actions were exposed to the view of an Almighty Eye.

And this excludes all partial obedience, and all hypocrisy.

1. It excludes all partial obedience, it implies an universal regard to all
his Laws, to little as well as great Commands, for obedience is as soon
discerned in small as in great matters, and the smaller the Command the greater
the Sin in not observing it, the easiness of the Command always enhansing the
guilt of the neglect: Now it is the excellency of that Rule we ought to walk by,
that it is many degrees above all the Precepts of a good Life, which were ever
before made known to Man; it not only curbs the outward act, but lays a
restraint upon our very thoughts, and the secretest retirements of our Souls;
and therefore that righteousness which is not exact to this Rule, cannot be
said to be before God, who judges our actions good, or otherwise, as they come
up to, or decline from it.

So that they take their measures amiss, who, if they can preserve, themselves
from Sins of the deepest dye, from gross and notorious pollutions, which would
expose them to the contempt and chastisement of the World, think they may
innocently enough despise Dignities, condemn those in Authority, feed their
impure fancies upon dirty and beastly Objects, as if the same God that had
commnaded us to obey for Conscience sake, had not forbidden us to speak evil of
the Ruler of the People; or as if the same God that had warned us against
Adultery, had not forbad us likewise to look upon a Woman to lust after her; or
as if He that had prohibited us Perjury, had not charged us not to Swear at
all; or as if the same Spirit that had said, Be not filled with Wine, wherein
is excess, had not enjoined us to be pure, temperate, and sober. Chapter 2. v. 10.
St. James tells us, that he that offends in one point is guilty of all, that
is, he obeys none as he ought; for he that in obedience to one Command, regards
the Glory of God, the Love of Virtue, and his own Happiness, will do so to all,
in as much as they all proceed from the same Infinite Reason, are all enacted
by the same Divine Authority, are all confirmed by equally Holy Sanction; so
that righteousness being uniform, and all of a make, implies an earnest Prayer
and an Hearty Endeavor, that God's whole Will be done by us on Earth, as it is
by those Blessed Spirits that serve Him in Heaven.

2. Righteousness before Him excludes all hypocrisy: He whose Religion sinks
no deeper than his skin, does but personate the Religious Man, complement God,
and deceive himself into his own perpetual ruin. Were our future Sentence to be
pronounced by Men, Righteousness before them might suffice; but if there be a
God, as I desire no other argument that there is one, than the Testimony within
every ones own Breast, judgment will be given, not according to what a Man
seems to be, but to what he really is. By hypocrisy we are exposed to the
greatest dangers, we run the hazard of all the woes that are denounced against
it by our Savior, we expose the best Institution in the World to disgrace and
infamy, we become the scandal of all that have any real sense of goodness, who
judge of our opinions by our practice, and of our Religion by the Life we lead.
Now who in reason can think, that Man deserves to be called holy or righteous,
who brings a disrepute upon that Gospel, his obedience only to which can give
him title to those worthy names.

However, if any thing can be said in behalf of pretending to be what we are
not, it must be this: that in those, who either by Dignity, Place, or Order,
are concerned in the Conduct and Government of a Multitude, it is far more
tolerable, than living in a professed defiance of God and Goodness; for since
the Example of such, is almost of equal force, with the Populacy, as a Law;
since what they do, and not what they command, is Most regarded; a show of
Piety in them that are really wicked, may have a good effect upon others, and a
pretense of Goodness, make may good, though the Persons that pretend it become
Castaways.

This is no Plea for Hypocrisy, but for good Examples, and being they are not
inconsistent, for a Man may be righteous before Men, who is not so before God,
the least of the evils is more tolerable, and the evil is to be measured not
from the mischief the Hypocrite brings upon himself by being so, but from the
bad influence, that a bad Example in Persons of Eminence would have upon a
multitude.

But since it is almost as difficult to pretend goodness, as to be really good,
since it is well nigh as hard to conceal our hypocrysie, as to be upright and
sincere, it is upon many accounts far more eligible to be righteous before God,
than Men, but especially, because righteousness before Him, which excludes all
hypocrisy, prevents all those Mischiefs, to which hypocrisy makes us liable.

3. The last qualification is, that our righteousness be consistent to it self,
regular, and without intermission; not that we are required to be always
humbling our selves in pure acts of Devotion and Worship, (as some have very
vainly imagined, to the neglect of their own necessary affairs, and sometimes
to the prejudice of others, to whom they stand in duty bound) or that we were
constantly to have our ultimate end in our thoughts, so that every Man, in all
his actions, must then whilst he is acting thing upon Happiness; but the
Service of God consisting, as has been said, (1.) in a belief that He is, etc.
it is necessary that we always have an habitual sense of Him, and His Goodness,
and live in a dependence on Him, though our thoughts are not actually fixed upon
Him: And (2.) as it implies Worship and Adoration, it is requisite that we omit
nothing of our necessary, Devotions, but that we pray continually, and that we
pray without ceasing, which imports thus much at least, that we never fail to
offer up unto God our Morning and Evening Sacrifices of Prayer and
Thanksgiving, or neglect the Breaking of Bread, or the Assembly of the Saints,
as the custom of some is: But (3.) as it signifies holiness in our Lives and
Conversations, in this sense we are always to do good, and never faint; which
is highly reasonable, and necessary upon many accounts; I instance only in two,
which are very obvious:


First, Such is the nature of Happiness, that a small part of our Lives will
scarcely be sufficient to fit us for the enjoyment of it; for since to be happy
in one word is to be like God, and to be like Him is to be holy, as He is holy,
and Holiness supposing our Corruptions subdued, and our Passions and Affections
brought under the Command of Reason and Religion, which whether it can be done
at a minutes, or an hours or a days warning, I will not stand to prove, but
appeal to all those, who have at any time experienced, what a task it is, to
overcome such ill Customs, as the natural Constitutions and Tempers of their
Bodies, the prevailing Examples of others, and the fashion of a loose Age, may
well be presumed to have subjected them to.

It is true, with God nothing is impossible, neither dare we limit His Mercy to
poor Sinners, but if we may judge by what we find revealed (as there is no
better way of judging) touching the Conditions whereby a better Life is
attainable, nothing less than a Miracle can preserve those, who have served
their Lusts all the days of their Life, and whom the Lord at His coming finds
so doing.

For at the last gasp, to have our minds perfectly changed, to have infused
into them Faith, Hope, Charity, an unfeigned Love to God and our Brethren, to
Goodness and Virtue, etc. is a Doctrine which is very comfortable, but was
never the Design of Christ to propagate, any otherwise than barely possible,
and that by one Instance only, to prevent Despair.

And yet, what are not wicked Men ready to catch at, to buoy themselves up in
their own ways?

Some there are of all sorts of Christians, who had rather renounce their own
Reason, misunderstand their own Principles, and abuse the Church they are of,
than want a pretense to Heaven.

Those of the Church of Rome, please themselves with the thoughts of
Absolution, before their Death. Others, who pretend to be Reformists, imagine,
that by Faith Christ's Righteousness shall be accounted theirs, though they
have none at all of their own.

As if the Church of Rome (I don't say any private Person or Casuist thereof)
believed Absolution signified any thing, without such a preparation for it, as
is employed at least by a hearty detestation of all Sin, hope of pardon through
the Mercy of God, and a concurrence with the motions of His Spirit to the works
of Righteousness: Or, as if ours had any where declared, that a dead Faith,
that is, a Faith without motion and operation, that is, a Faith without Works,
were effectual to any Man's eternal Happiness.

If any ignorant or malicious Romanist, to gain Proselytes, shall teach the one
to be the Doctrine of their Church, he affirms her Doctrine to be contrary to
what is truly Ancient and Catholic, nay he contradicts the very Determination
of the Council of Trent it self. Or, Can. de Coutr it.
if any froward Zealot shall publish the other, as held by the Church of
England, he is not of Us, neither has he judgment or sense enough to understand
Us, or the express words of St. James. Chapter 2.17, 24.


For thus far I hope both Churches, and all Christians agree, however we fall
out about other matters, that to raise Men to a conformity with the Divine
Nature, by inward and true piety and holiness, was the main intent of our
Savior; and that nothing can so effectually bring us to that temper, and
consequently to the Joys of Heaven, as a conscientious compliance in every
thing with the will of God.

So that to persevere in sin, 'till we come to dye, upon presumption, that the
forementioned Doctrines are the Doctrines of our respective Churches, or
supposing they were so, that they will then be our Security, is to impose upon
our own Souls, and betray our selves into that misery, which neither Absolution
without Repentance, nor Faith without good Works, can free us from.

2. It is necessary that we be righteous all the days of our life, because the
Reward is promised only to those that persevere: Ezekiel. 18.
when the righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, all the righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, in
his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in
them shall be dye.

What ever worthy habits any Man has at any time had, or what ever virtuous
Inclinations, they are all destroyed by their contrary Vices; for as good
habits are increased and strengthened in us, by our concurring with the Grace
of God, in producing many good actions, so do they decay and fail, by our
ceasing to do well; and if Death finds us with a greater propensity to Vice
than Virtue, all our former righteousness will stand us but in little stead, in
as much as it is not, and our present wickedness prevailing, will be sufficient
to condemn us.

Therefore are we so earnestly advised, to be steadfast, unmovable, and always
to abound in the Work of the Lord, because the Works only of them that do so
shall follow them into a better World.

God in Justice is obliged to give to every man according to his Deeds, not
according to their Opinions or Fancies: To them that are contentious, Romans 2.6,
etc.
and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteosness, indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish upon every Soul that does evil; but glory, honor, and
peace to every man that works good, and to them alone who by patient
continuance in well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, eternal
life; the reasonable expectation whereof, upon this, and no other ground, may
be of some force to engage all considerate Men in the Service of God all the
days of their life.

But one word more, and I have done. If Eternal Life be the Lot of the
Righteous in General; if those whom Providence has placed in a lower Sphere,
the meanest Peasant, and most despicable Lazarus; nay, if so inconsiderable a
Creature as he that speaks, be capable of the Enjoyments signified by those
words; how vastly unconceivable shall be the portion of God's immediate
Vicegerents, especially of those, who through good reports and evil reports, in
perils at home and in perils abroad, in perils by Sea and in perils by Land, in
perils by Strangers and in perils by their own Contrymen, have
notwithstanding still maintained the Cause of Religion, earnestly contended for
the Faith once delivered to the Saints; and all, that they might by their care
and perseverance, turn the hearts of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just,
and to their power, make ready a People prepared for the Lord.

They that turn many unto righteousness, says the Prophet Daniel, shall be as
the Stars for ever more: And, if the Instruments of Men's Conversion, if they
who by their example and advice have served the Interest of Souls, shall be as
the lesser Stars, certainly Christian Monarchs, in whose hands under God those
Instruments are, and to whom all the blessed Effects of the Ministration of the
Gospel under their protection, (if they themselves are good) shall be
accounted, shall shine as the larger Luminaries, with a more abundant luster
and glory.

Blessed Princes! who have this Testimony within themselves, that they have
secured unto God the things that are Gods, and have faithfully discharged the
Trust reposed in them, for their Peoples eternal as well as temporal advantage;
for beside the Reward which will be given to them in common with other good
Servants, proportionable to the improvement made of their several Talents, the
attendance of an Heavenly Train, and the Acclamations and Euge's of the most
Judicious, that is, of Happy Souls, (how much or little so ever they may add to
the beginnings of future felicity,) will not be wanting.

For why may we not reasonably presume, that when good Kings come to dye, as
dye they must, and fall like other Men, Millions of the Spirits of their own
just Subjects made perfect, and the Angels of God shall wait their departure
hence, and wing their Great Souls with triumph into the Celestial Habitations;
there presenting them to the Holy and Undivided Trinity, that they may be
incorporated into the Number of Saints, be Crowned with Diadems of Immortality,
and receive an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for those who are kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation.

Oh; that this may be the Portion of all Christian Kings, Princes, and
Governors, and especially of Him, for whom our Souls desire to bless God; that
this may be the Portion of all that study to enlarge the Empire of the Holy
Jesus in Truth and goodness, that Protect His Church, that Defend His Faith;
and that this may be the Portion of all the World that live in obedience to
that Faith, and make Conscience of Serving God in Holiness and Righteousness
before Him all the days of their Life. Amen.

FINIS.

