JAMES the Second, By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
TO ALL and Singular Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, and their
Officials, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and all other Spiritual Persons: And also
to all Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables,
Churchwardens, Chappelwardens, Headboroughs, Collectors for the Poor, and their
Overseers: And also to all Officers of Cities, Boroughs, and Towns Corporate,
and to all other Our Officers, Ministers and Subjects whatsoever they be, as
well within Liberties as without, to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
WHEREAS by Our Letters Patents, bearing date the fifth day of March, in the
second year of Our Reign, We were pleased to signify Our Royal Pleasure, to
all Our loving Subjects, on the behalf of the distressed French Protestants, in
these words following; viz.

WHEREAS it is the highest Prerogative, and most desirable Advantage of Kings
and Sovereign Princes, to have it in Their Power and Will to do Acts of
Public Clemency and Beneficence; And since nothing makes Them more to resemble
the Great God of Heaven, from whom only They derive Their Authority, than to
imitate the Devine Goodness in the Works of Universal Mercy and Compassion:
We being informed, that great Numbers of French Protestants have lately taken
Refuge in this, and Our other Kingdoms, whereof diverse being Persons of good
Birth and Quality, having formerly lived in Plenty and Prosperity, are now
reduced to extreme Wants and Necessities; And many others that are bred up and
well skilled in useful Crafts and Mysteries, are, by reason of their present
Poverties and Distresses, utterly disabled, as yet, to exercise the same,
either for the Support of themselves and their Families, or for the public
Benefit of this Our Kingdom: We have thought Our Selves obliged by the Laws of
Christian Charity, and common Bonds of Humanity, to take their deplorable
Condition into Our tender Care and Princely Compassion. And to this end We
have resolved to receive into Our Gracious Protection as many of them as shall
live in entire Conformity and orderly Submission to Our Government. And besides
other Testimonies of Our Royal Pity and Bounty toward them, We have
condescended to Grant them these Our Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of
England, to License and Authorize them to Ask and Receive the Alms and
Charitable Contributions of all Our loving Subjects within Our Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed. Which Letters
Patents so given and granted, were to continue in force one whole year from the
date thereof, and no longer.

AND whereas since the expiration of the Term of the said Letters Patents, We
have been informed, that although all the several Sums of Money which were
Collected by Virtue thereof, have been faithfully expended and applied to the
Uses and Purposes within that Brief specified, and by that means a very
considerable Number of those French Protestants have been put into a Condition
of exercising the Arts and Mysteries they were skilled in, or otherwise
providing for themselves and Families, without being any longer burthensom to
any: Yet nevertheless a great many others, who are altogether incapable of
getting their own Livelihood, are still under pressing Necessities, and as yet
remain utterly unprovided for, (the Public Stock of Charity upon which they
subsisted now failing.) And not only so, but, as We are informed, great
Numbers of distressed French Protestants have, since that time, come over into
this Our Kingdom, and do still daily come over, so that, without the
continuance of Our Royal Grace and Compassion, and the further Supplies and
Charitable Contributions of Our loving Subjects, a great many of those
miserable People must inevitably perish.

UPON these Considerations, and for the setting an Example to all Our Subjects
of Kindness and Humanity to all Persons in Distress and Affliction, of what
Persuasion soever, We have condescended to renew, and now again to grant, Our
Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, to all these distressed
French Protestants, without any distinction, in as full and ample manner as We
did before; being very desirous that they should not only find all kind
Reception here, but also that Benevolence and Charity which We doubt not all
Our loving Subjects will, in a bountiful manner, contribute toward their
present Relief and Comfort in this their Affliction.

KNOW YE THEREFORE, That of Our Especial Grace and Princely Compassion, We
have Given and Granted, and by these Our Letters Patents under Our Great Seal
of England, do Give and Grant unto the said distressed Protestants, and to
their Agents, who shall be lawfully Authorized on their behalf, full Power,
License and Authority, to Ask, Gather, Receive and Take (according to the Rules
specified in these Presents) the Alms and Charitable Benevolence of all Our
loving Subjects, not only Householders, but Servants, Strangers and Others,
within all and every the Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns Corporate,
Privileged Places, Parishes, Chapelries, Towns, Villages, Hamlets, and all
other places whatsoever in Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town
of Berwick upon Tweed.

WHEREFORE We Require and Command all and singular the Archbishops and Bishops
of all the Provinces and Diocesses within Our Kingdom of England, and Dominion
of Wales, (unto whose Paternal Care and Inspection We chiefly recommend the
pursuit of these Our Letters Patents,) That they, and every of them, do give a
particular Recommendation and Command to all the Parsons, Vicars and Curates of
all and every the Parishes, and other places, as well within Liberties as
without, within their respective Diocesses, for the Advancement of this so
pious and Charitable a Work. And the said Parsons, Vicars and Curates, upon
the first Lord's Day, or second at farthest, after that the true Copies of these
Our Letters Patents shall be delivered to them, shall deliverately and
affectionately publish and declare the Tenor of the same to all Our said loving
Subjects; and earnestly persuade, exhort and stir them up, to contribute freely
and cheerfully toward the Relief of these distressed Christians, by such
Motives and Inducements only as in these Our Letters Patents are contained. And
the Churchwardens are also hereby required upon the VVeek-days next following
the said Lord's Day, to go from house to house, to Ask and Receive from all the
Parishioners, as well Masters, Mistresses and Servants, as others in their
Families, their Christian and Charitable Contributions, and to take the Names
in VVriting of all such as shall Contribute thereunto, and the Sum or Sums by
them respectively given. And after such Collection made, they are, in the
presence of the respective Inhabitants, on the next Lord's Day following, to
subscribe the whole Sums upon the said Briefs, under their hands, and also to
enter them into Books of Accounts, for the said Parishes and Chapelries
respectively, and the Places where, and the Times when, such Sums were
Collected: And they are also to deliver the same to the said Parsons, Vicars
and Curates respectively, and the said Parsons, Vicars and Curates are to send
the said Moneys, together with the said Briefs, unto their respective
Archdeacons: Or if the Parish be exempt, to the Archdeacon within the compass
of whose Archdeaconry the said Parish lies; And the said several Archdeacons
into the Chamber of Our city of London, as herein after is declared and
directed. And for the better performance of this so pious and charitable a
Work, the said Parsons, Vicars and Curates respectively are required (where
conveniently they may) to accompany the Churchwardens in Asking and Receiving
the Contributions, or procure some other of the chief of the Inhabitants in the
said Parishes respectively to do the same.

AND Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby, for the better
Advancement of these Our pious Intentions, Will, Require and Command the
Bishops, and all other Dignitaries of the Church, That they make their
Contributions distinctly to be returned in the several Provinces to the
respective Archbishops of the same. And also that all Our loving Subjects of
this Kingdom, of what Dignity, Degree or Quality soever, may manifest their
Zeal in so good a Work, We do Recommend it to all Heads and Governors of
Colleges and Halls in both Our Universities, and also to the Judges and
Officers of all and every Our respective Courts at Westminster, and the
Professors of the Law, both Common and Civil, and to all Students of the
several Inns of Court and Chancery, by their several Bodies and Societies, That
they, and every of them, will Contribute their free and charitable Benevolence
herein.

AND LASTLY, Our Will and Pleasure is, That the Churchwardens of every Parish,
where these Our Letters Patents shall be read, do Collect the Charity of each
Parishioner in manner aforesaid, and do pay the same within ten days unto the
Parson, Vicar or Curate of their respective Parishes; which said Parson, Vicar
or Curate, shall, within ten days next after the Receipt of the said Money,
make return thereof, together with the printed Briefs, to his respective
Archdeacon as aforesaid: And where there is no Incumbent, the Collector or
Collectors shall pay the said Money to the respective Archdeacon: And that the
Archdeacons of the several Archdeaconries do likewise return the said
Collections within twenty days next following into the Chamber of Our City of
London: From whence We do hereby Authorize, Nominate and Appoint the most
Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Centerbury, the Lord High
Chancellor of England, the Lord President of Our Council, the Lord Privy Seal,
the Duke of Ormond, the Duke of Beaufort, the Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of
Huntington, the Earl of Peterborough, the Earl of Bridgwater, the Earl of
Craven, the Earl of Berkley, the Earl of Nottingham, the Earl of Middleton, the
Lord Vicount Fauconberge, the Right Reverend Fathers in God the Bishop of
Durham, the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop of Ely, the Bishop of Gloucester,
the Bishop of Rochester, and the Bishop of Peterborough; the Lord Preston, the
Lord Dartmouth, the Lord Godolphin, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Lord
Chief Justice Wright, the Lord Chief Justice Herbert, the Lord Chief Baron
Atkyns, Sir Job Charleton, Our Attorney General, and Our Solicitor General,
the Lord Mayor of London for the time being, Sir William Turner, Sir William
Prichard, Sir Robert Geffery, Sir John Holt, Sir William Gostling, Sir Peter
Vandeput, Sir John Mathews, Sir John Tate Recorder, Sir Jonathan Raymond, Sir
Thomas Kensey, Sir William Ashurst, Sir John Bauden, Sir John Isles, Sir
Bartholomew Shore, Sir Basil Firebrace, Sir John Parsons, Sir Thomas Fitch,
John Jeffreys Esquire Charles Duncombe Esquire Alderman Kiffin, Alderman St. Amand, the
Dean of St. Paul's, the Dean of Canterbury, the Dean of Norwich, the Dean of
Peterborough, the Dean of Windsor, the Dean of Worcester, the Dean of St.
Asaph, Dr. Jeffreys, Dr. Tenison, Dr. Sherlock, Dr. Scott, Dr. Dove, Dr. Cave,
Dr. Horden, Sir Thomas Exton, Dr. Raines, Dr. Edisbury, Samuel Pepys, William
Bridgman, and William Blaithwaite Esquires, and Thomas Firman Gent. and they,
or any five or more of them, are to dispose and distribute the Money which
shall be Collected by Virtue hereof, in such manner as may best answer those
Ends for which these Letters Patents were intended. AND We do hereby Direct
and Command, That the said several Archdeacons shall and do make Returns unto
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, of what Sums they have received, at the time
when they shall pay the same into the Chamber of Our City of London: And that
their respective Accounts be stated in Words at length, and not in Figures
only, and subscribed with their own hands; Any Law, Statute, Act, Ordinance or
Provision heretofore made to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.
IN WITNESS whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents, and
to continue for one whole Year from the Date hereof, and no longer. WITNESS Our
Self at Westminster, the One and thirtieth day of January, in the third Year of
Our Reign.

FALL.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
In the Savoy: Printed by THOMAS NEWCOMB, One of His MAJESTY'S Printers. 1687/8.


