THE QUAKERS SUBTERFUGE or EVASION Over-turned. In the Vindication of the late
NARRATIVE, Concerning the memorable Hand of God against a Quaker, and his
Family, in the County of LINCOLN. WHEREIN The Unchristianlike Dealings of the
Quakers in their late Book, Entitled, The Anabaptists Lying Wonder detected,
With an Admonition to all Christians to beware of their Delusions: With some
Antiqueries to John Whitehead, about his pretense to the Ministry, and the
state of the Quakers Congregations.

Eccles. 4. 4. Again, I considered all travel, and every right work; that for
this a Man is envied of his Neighbor. London, Printed for Francis Smith at the
Elephant and Castle without Temple Bar. 1672.

To the Judicious READER.
WHen I consented to the Publication of the Narrative, of that remarkable
Reproof from the Lord, against the Spirit of Error, which moved Richardson
against the way of Righteousness, and to attempt the propagation of the
Principles of the Quakers, by denouncing a Curse upon me in the name of the
Lord, only because of that testimony, which upon just occasion I was ready to
bear against their Errors; I could hardly imagine, that any man should doubt of
the truth of it, being so fully evidenced in the presence of so many witnesses,
by the party himself that was most eminently concerned in it. And what Man of
Reason will believe, that any Man should voluntarily accuse himself to be a
false Prophet, without some powerful conviction. And why should any Man
complain of the Hand of the Lord being upon him, and his, in judgment, when
there is no such thing. And what could Richard Anderson propose to himself, in
bringing his wife three or four miles purposely, that God might be entreated to
remove his stroke from her, and her children, if indeed there had be no cause?
Or, why should they both declare, they were disquieted with restless pain, and
their child with sores, etc. and that upon his so profaning the Name of the
Lord, if all was well with them? Surely in vain do Men go about to outface a
thing so manifest.

It is remarkable, that in all the Quakers say, they take no notice of Richard
Andersons iniquity, in taking on him that office of a false Prophet, but rather
seem to favor his doings in that behalf, by suggesting, as if the judgment by
him pronounced, was upon me to this day, ( see their Lying Wonder, p. 7) though
it is neither witnessed by any, nor confessed by me (as, Blessed be God, there
is no cause) and yet they will in no wise believe any judgment fell on Richard
Anderson or his family, though so much verified! Surely, should half so much
have been testified of the accomplishment of Richard Andersons prophecy on me
or mine, as has been on the contrary, the truth thereof had been out of
dispute with them ere this day.

Seeing then, that it cannot be denied, but Richard Anderson was led by the
Spirit of Falsehood, and prophesied falsely in the Name of the Lord; it is far
more reasonable to believe, that the Lord did rebuke his folly, upon the
evidence offered, then to believe he did escape unpunished under such iniquity,
without, and against evidence, notwithstanding all the shifts of the Quakers to
help him.

Wherefore Reader, perufe (if thou please) what I have here offered to
observation, With much further confirmation of the Narrative. And believe me in
this (for it is truth) that I have not in all that I have said, wronged my
Conscience, nor designed any evil against the persons of the Quakers, but only
to make discovery (so far as this providence might tend to it) of the false
ways they have chosen, that so they might escape from thence, and be saved.

Nor do I hereby proclaim my own glory (as they suggest) and we know (for all
their noise) that it is lawful for the servants of the Lord to report what God
does by them, Acts 15. 12. And yet I do not pretend to work Miracles; for the
truth is, it was not expected by me, that God should after that manner rebuke
the vanity of the false Prophet, who came to pronounce me a Leper. But seeing
it has pleased him to do it thus beyond my expectation, I know I sin not in
declaring it: I have more cause to think I should have sinned in concealing it.
And for the removal of the affliction, it was an answer of the Prayer of the
Congregation, and not of mine only.

Indeed for Printing I had no resolution, till moved by such as heard of the
business, knowing my own incapacity, for a work of that nature, and (as I said
I was not without fears of the consequence: But this I willingly put upon the
account of my infirmities, not being conscious of any Hypocrisy in the
business, though boldly charged by the Quakers in that kind; but they have a
faculty to accuse beyond their ability to prove. I commit all that which
concerns the matter, to his wise disposing, that knows our hearts, and will
render to every one as his work shall be.

Thine in the Love of the Truth, Ralph James.

THE QUAKERS Subterfuge overturned, etc.
ALthough the Truth of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ was long ago
confirmed by diverse Signs and Wonders, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost; and
therefore stands not in any need of further confirmation: Yet the Hand of God
is not tied, but that he may yet (even this way) still his Adversaries, by
stretching forth his Hand against them, as in former days, if so it pleases
him, and especially against such presumptuous ones, as take upon them to
denounce Curses in his Sacred Name, against his own Servants (a practice too
frequent with the Quakers) and thereby to rebuke the vanity of such false
Prophets, is but the accomplishment of his own Word, Genesis 27. 29. Psalm. 119. 21.

Now, how far forth the Lord has this way showed himself in the Controversy,
depending between the Baptized Churches, and the People called Quakers,
touching the Authority of the holy Scriptures to try the spirits of Men, or (to
express it more fully, the Authority of the Holy Ghost, as he speaks in the
Scriptures, to try and judge the spirits of Men, which they term the Spirit of
God) under what pretense soever they come forth into the World to promote any
design of Religion, and particularly the Spirit of the Quakers, is the Matter
which now falls under consideration, according to a certain Narrative (lately
given forth) of some remarkable Passages of Gods Providence, against the
dictates of the Quakers spirit: Which Narrative I will here insert (because
this Book may come where the first did not) and vindicate the same against the
vain Cavils and Reproach cast upon it by the Quakers in their Book Entitled,
The Anabaptists Lying Wonder; to which, I now address my self by making good
these ensuing particulars.

1. That the Matter reported in the Narrative, is no Lying Wonder, as it is
untruly and immodestly represented in their Title Page. 2. That Richard
Anderson was a Quaker in Principles, and did own the Quakers above all People,
and was acted by the same spirit, and had frequent conversation with them
touching their Principles. 3. That he and his family was afflicted, as is said
in the Narrative. 4. That he and his, were delivered from affliction, as
reported in the Narrative. 5. That the Evidences brought by the Quakers to
invalidate the Narrative, are either forged, or unworthily abused. 6. That the
Baptists and Independants used no juggling, touching any thing relating to the
Narrative. 7. A recital of sundry abusive Expressions and Passages scattered
throughout the Quakers Pamphlet. 8. An Exhortation or Admonition to all
Christians, to beware of the Delusions of the People called Quakers. 9. Some
Antiqueries to John Whitehead, the Author of the Postscript. And first,
1. That the Matter reported in the Narrative, is no Lying Wonder, etc. is thus
showed, Because it is neither false in it self, nor brought to maintain any
Falsehood, nor to oppose any Truth, and consequently cannot be a Lying Wonder,
since these are the particulars of which, in part, or in whole, all Lying
Wonders do consist.

Now what this Matter was in it self, shall appear in the probation of the
Third and fourth particulars; and, that it was not brought to maintain
falsehood, or oppose any truth, is thus evinced, viz. Because it was brought to
vindicate the just Authority of Gods holy Scriptures and Ordinances; and only
to oppose the spirit of falsehood, which led Richard Anderson into the sin of a
false prophet, as appears by reading the Narrative it self. The Narrative:
RIchard Anderson of Panton, about Ten miles from Lincoln, came to our Meeting
at Northwillingham, to hear the Gospel Preached; who when he had been a hearer
for some time, was convinced, and said, He did believe the Baptism in Water was
an Ordinance of God, and that both Men and Women ought to be baptized in Water,
as taking Jesus Christ for our Leader and Example; so he went away for that
time: But before he came again, he met with the People called Quakers, who told
him, (as himself confessed) That he must not look upon these outward
Ordinances, for they were low, [ But the Way of Life above to the Wise, Prove.
15. 24. Note also, That the Ordinances of Christ, as well as the Authority of
the Scripture, is opposed by the false prophet, and consequently defended by
the fulfilling his prophecy upon himself and family,] but that now he must
mind the Light within, and be guided by it, and not by the Scriptures, for they
were a dead Letter. To which Light, he gave such heed, that when he came to our
Meeting again, he much contended against the Baptism of Water, and said, That
now they were to be baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit, and not with
Water; for the Spirit was to try the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures to try
the Spirit. In answer to which, I said, That I believed that the Scriptures
were to try the Spirits, and not the Spirits to try the Scriptures (Meaning as
before is said, That the holy Spirit, as he speaks in the Scripture, is to
try and judge the spirits of Men, and particularly the Quakers spirit, which
they call the Light within) he seemingly made Light of it, and said, That now
we must mind the Light within. In answer to which, I said I was afraid that the
Quakers were deceived, and guided by a spirit of delusion; and, that it was my
judgment, That all the Sons and Daughters of Men ought to be guided by the
Scriptures, as being the Oracles of God, and the rule for us to walk by; and he
for the Light within, to be the rule for the Sons and Daughters of Men to be
guided by. But as for every particular of our discourse, it is out of my
remembrance; so he went away for that time. And the Light which the Quakers did
tell him (as he said, he must be guided by, commanded him within a short time
after, so that he came very early one Morning to my House and inquired for me;
so I went to him, and he told me, That he was commanded of God to come and
reprove me for speaking against the People of God (as he said) called Quakers,
and to exhort me to turn to the Light within, [ Here he speaks the very
language and spirit of the Quakers,] or else he was (as he said) to pronounce a
judgment against me. I told him, That I thought him to be a false prophet, and
possessed with a spirit of delusion; then he said, He was commanded of God to
pronounce me a Leper, from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot. In
answer to these words, I said to him, Through the goodness of God, I am not
discouraged at what thou say; but do believe thou art a false prophet, and
possessed with a spirit of delusion; and that I am not to take any notice of
what thou say: But I do desire, withal my heart, that the Lord would be
pleased to let thee see thy evil, and the error of thy way, that thou may
report and confess thy error, that the Name of God may be honored, his ways and
appointments exalted, and so his people may be better established, and
confirmed in his ways and appointments. So we parted, and he went a little way
from me, but returned again, and said unto me. Thou say, that I am a false
prophet, deceived, and possessed with a spirit of delusion; but it will be
known by me or mine, or thee, Whether I be a true prophet, or false one; and so
he went home. But within a short time after he came home, the Lord was pleased
to smite one of his children (as he said) spotted all over, himself and wife,
and his other children were taken with a restless pain in their bodies also; so
that he was forced (as he said) to come again and confess he was deceived, and
that he was a false prophet, and the same judgment [ Lo here is the true
interpretation of the judgment intended by the false prophet, and not that
which the Quakers fictitiously give out in their Lying Wonder, p. 7.] he had
pronounced against me, was fallen upon one of his children, and that himself and
wife, and other children were taken with a restless pain in their bodies: And
he said, That he and his wife did believe, that if I would pray to God for
them, they might all be restored again to their former healths. In answer to
his words, I told him I could not at present give an him answer, but if he and
his wife would please to meet me at Donnington, where I am to be by promise,
the next Lords day, it may please God that your desire may be answered. He
being very sad at that time, I fell a speaking to him, and asking him some
questions about the Light within, which the Quakers bad him mind, and be guided
by: And he told me, That that Light many times would, when he had sat down to
eat his meat, and had drawn his knife to cut it, have commanded him to put it
up again; and so (he said) he had done several times, and gone without his
meat: And that Light also (as he said) persuaded him to fast, and told him,
That he should cure the sick. In obedience to which persuasion, he did fast,
and came to our Town of Northwillingham, to the house of one John Lamin, whose
child was then sick and weak; and he told me, he went to cure that child, but
that Light and persuasion did deceive him, for he now saw he could not cure the
sick. So according to my promise, I went to Donnington, and he and his wife met
me there amongst our Friends, and did both confess what is here before
mentioned, who also desired our Prayers to God for them, and so I with the
Congregation there met together, did seek unto God for the removing that
distemper and affliction, which he there with his wife confessed, that they and
their children were under: And the Lord was mercifully pleased to hear our poor
Prayers for them, and to restore them all to their former health again, which
he himself confessed when he came to our Meeting afterward; to the praise of
God alone, for ever be it spoken. This Relation is true witness my hand.

Ralph James of Northwillingham in the County of Lincoln.



As it is hence evident, this act of Gods Providence was not brought to
maintain any falsehood, so neither to oppose any Truth of God, but only to
oppose the falsehood of that spirit which moved the deluded Quaker Richard
Anderson to prophecy falsely in the Name of the Lord; and though the evil he
pronounced against me, fell on himself, and that so sensibly, as to convince
him of his folly; yet notwithstanding this, the Quakers in their Lying Wonder,
will needs insinuate the fulfilling of that vain prophecy upon me, as if their
prophet meant it not of outward diseases -- And that for ought appears, they
say ( in effect) That I am as Leperous as Miriam was to this day. After this
manner they may shift off the most manifest eviction of their falsehood, and so
delude their unweary Readers: But surely, he that uttered the vain prophecy
against me, must in reason know his own meaning better then another. And since
he was convict by the Hand of Heaven, in smiting him with bodily diseases, and
by sparing me in that kind, I shall take this Authors interpretation to be
impertinent, and as false as the prophecy it self. [ A false prophecy as he
designed it against me, a true prophecy against himself and the Quakers.] Thus
it appears, what befell Richard Anderson the Quaker, was no Lying Wonder; and
therefore the Title of the Quakers Book is not true.

2. That Richard Anderson was a Quaker in Principles, and owned that People
above all others, and was acted by their spirit; Is palpable enough from what
is said in the Narrative. First, In that he contributes his testimony to that
which they call the Light within, at as high a rate, as the most of that way,
which (if they have any principles at all) is the cheis of their Principles;
for he advances it above the holy Scriptures, and prefers its dictates in
opposition to the Ordinances of Christ. Secondly, In that he took upon him to
appear as a Prophet for the Quakers, condemning such as opposed them, and
proclaiming them to be the People of God. Thirdly, By his acting after the
manner of diverse Quakers in these days, going on unsent errands, only moved by
the conceits of their own hearts, which they call the Light in them. But since
the Quakers in their Lying Wonder, do so boldly deny that he was a Quaker, here
therefore what is attested in that case [ June 17. 1672] since the publication
of the Quakers Lying Wonder, in the presence of credible Witnesses hereafter
named, who (as they write,) Having a desire to be fully satisfied concerning
that which passed between Ralph James and Richard Anderson, and having seen the
Narrative and the Lying Wonder, it was demanded of Richard Anderson, Whether he
ever heard the Quakers? He answered, Yes, he heard them at Lincoln, within the
Prison, about the space of an hour [ And it is known by sad experience, that
many in as little time, as that is, have been so levened with their Principles,
as they have not been cleansed from the corruption thereof to the day of their
death.]

And being further showed, that the Quakers in their Lying Wonder, do say, That
he had no further acquaintance or knowledge of their Principles then, by the
hearing them a quarter of an hour. Richard Anderson affirmed, That before he
was at the Meeting at Lincoln; and after also, He had discourse with the People
called Quakers forty times, touching their Principles, Saying moreover, That
after he had been with the Quakers, he went to the Meeting at Northwillingham
many times, to contend against the Baptists, more then for any thing else.

Moreover he declared (without any inquiry,) That the reason why he went to
pronounce Richard James a Leper, arose from the consideration of a passage,
Numb. 12. And that he looked upon the People called Quakers, to be as eminently
owned of God, as Moses; so he was persuaded, God would send the same judgment
on Ralph James for contending against the Quakers, as he sent on Mirriam, for
contending with Moses. All this Relation is attested by Christopher Foster,
William Skin, John Walesby, Robert Trigg, and Richard Horton.

July 21. 1672. This last passage the said Richard Anderson did again relate
almost word for word, in the presence of Christopher Foster aforesaid, and
three strangers which came out of Oxfordshire, to have satisfaction concerning
the Narrative; at which time also, being asked by these strangers concerning
the truth of the Narrative, he said, As to the substance of it, it was all
truth, and that he would own it before any Man. This is subscribed by William
Greenwood John Stutchbury John Grammar The Oxfordshire strangers. and by
Christopher Foster, as ear Witnesses.

The same general testimony of the truth of all the Narrative, for the
substance of it, he the said Richard Anderson did deliver at another time, a
few days before the last mentioned, in the presence of Christopher Foster, John
Walesby, William Skin, Robert Trigg, Richard Horton.


Thus it appears, That Richard Anderson was a Quaker, etc. Nor can we have a
better testimony, then a Man's own confession in this case; for he must needs
know his own opinions better then another Man: Nor is it possible for us to
prove, what conversation (in all respects) he had with them, because remote
from him, and not concerned in the Quakers Congregations. And whether a Man's
own confession for matter of opinion, being attended with those demonstrations
of the Matters of Fact hereby observed, be not a cogent proof to satisfy
indifferent Men, I must leave the sober Reader to judge for his own
satisfaction.

3. That he the said Richard Anderson, and his family, was afflicted by the
Hand of God upon him, as is said in the Narrative.

Here the Quakers make a very strange outcry against me for evidence, as if
Richard Anderson, and his wives testimony, were nothing in this case? Surely,
since the World was, there could never be a more cogent evidence against any
Man (ordinarily) then himself; and its a Maxim, Where there is open confession,
there needs no evidence. And one would think the Father and Mother of a Family,
knows best the state of their Children; and let the serious Reader consider,
how unreasonable it would have been for me, to doubt of the truth of what
Richard Anderson and his wife, both testified of their own pains, and of the
sores of their child, etc. and that with great sorrow of heart, especially
seeing him come the second time, and bring his wife with him three or four
miles (a person not wont to come to our Assemblies) to attest, and request the
same things, which he himself did; and since I had no ground to doubt, I had no
necessity to go (being not requested, nor any way related to any one of them,
in point of Religion) yet had I foreseen this peevishness in the incredulous
Quakers, I might perhaps have deprived them of this their foolish advantage.
But what shall I say, did our Blessed Savior go to visit all, ( Matthew. 8. 13.)
for whose health he prayed, I trow not. Neither did Paul, that chosen vessel,
Acts 19. 12. visit all whom he was instrumental to heal; for this they sent to
him, and so had from his body again, their Aprons and Kercheifs, and by Faith
received healing, yet we read not of his going to the places of their abode. [
But what am I! O Lord, I confess unto thee, I am not worthy to be mentioned
here; nor was I an instrument of good to the afflicted, any more then the rest
of thy servants met together to make their Prayers unto thee.]

But now let us hear what Richard Anderson himself has testified before many
witnesses in this case, since the publishing of the Narrative, and the Quakers
Lying Wonder. June 10. 1672. The witnesses hereafter named write thus. We asked
him (meaning Richard Anderson) when he had told us, that he did pronounce the
judgment of Leprosy against Ralph James, Whether he himself had not a child
presently after that, was Leprous; and he said, he had a child then that did
break out into sores; and he did also acknowledge, that he went to Ralph James
to desire his Prayers for the reparation of himself and his family. Witness
Robert Wright, William Leesing, William Skin, George Hall. Robert Hollingworth.


And for the Eye and Ear-witnesses which the Quakers call for, upon the
occasion of that passage in the Title Page of the Narrative, and the wonderment
they make that no Neighbor or Kinsman can be brought to testify their
knowledge of this judgment. To this I answer, first, That there are of the
Neighborhood that say, They do remember about the time to which the Narrative
has Relation (which is about nine years since) the said Richard Andersons
family was afflicted, but being unwilling to have their names brought in
question, and there being no necessity for it, because we have that which is
above the evidence of a Neighbor, even the testimony of the Parents concerning
themselves, and their own children. I shall therefore forbear to mention their
names. Secondly, For the Title Page of the Narrative, I say, it was not of my
composing, and yet even that passage (or any like to it) is not without truth
(being heartily interpreted) for there was as much evidenced both to the Eye
and Ear of the Witnesses, in respect of the affliction of the Parents of the
family, as was subject to such observation, viz. A sorrowful countenance, their
complaint, and humble confession.

4. That Richard Anderson and his family were delivered from their afflictions,
as it is declared in the Narrative. Although the Quakers are pleased in their
Lying Wonder to deny this, and do bear their unmindful Readers in hand, as if
none of the Witnesses to the Narrative, do evidence any thing in this case; yet
several of them do clearly attest the whole Relation in the Narrative to be
true; one Branch whereof is this, -- The Lord was mercifully pleased to hear
our poor prayers for them, and to restore them all to their former health
again; which he himself ( that is, Richard Anderson) confessed when he came to
our Meeting afterward. True it is, they did not see the child, nor perhaps the
Woman after their recovery; yet they saw the Father of the family, whose
testimony for himself, and for his family in this case, is considerable,
notwithstanding all the cavillations in the Quakers Lying Wonder. Hear also
what he the said Richard Anderson has testified since the publication of the
Narrative, etc. June 10. 1672.

Richard Anderson being asked in the presence of diverse persons, whether he did
not go to Ralph James and desire his Prayers to God for him and his Family? He
answered, Yes, he did so, and that Ralph James did appoint him and his wife, to
meet him at Donnington, where prayer was put up to God for them by the
Congregation there met together.

And being asked, if he thought any person could be sadder for the loss of any
relation or dear friend, then he was at that time when the hand of the Lord was
upon him; he answered, no, for he was sad enough. In answer to this question,
whether he did not come the next Lords day, after the Congregation at
Donnington had prayed for them; and there confess, that he and his family was
all recovered, and in health again. He answered, Yes, he did so; and said
moreover, That what he said then, he would own it at any time, for he could not
deny it.

Witness to the first Part.
Robert Wright, William Leesing, Robert Hollingworth, William Skin, George
Hall.
Witness to the second Part.
Christopher Foster. William Skin.
5. That the evidences brought by the Quakers to invalidate the Narrative, are
either abused, or by them most unworthily forged. For although they pretend a
testimony from Richard Anderson, that he was no Quaker, yet does he not say so,
in all that which they say he subscribed, only this is said, That he was but
at one Meeting, read but one of their Books; and yet it is proved before, That
he had discourse with the Quakers forty times about their Principles, both
before and after he was at the Meeting at Lincoln. What therefore no Quaker?
Surely some have become their Proselytes, by as little acquaintance with them,
as this amounts to. I could tell them of one (and that a Man of no small
eminency) who only went down a yard with one of their Teachers, and came up
again a Quaker, without hearing any other Preaching or Reading any Book at all,
and so remained to the day of his death. Again, they pretend, that he the said
Richard Anderson has subscribed, That he and his family was clear from any
Leprosy or distemper, but they offer no evidence at all of that subscription;
but let us hear what Richard Anderson says now, to their pretended
subscription. The Lying Wonder being read in Page 5. to Richard Anderson,
touching that Relation which is said to be subscribed by him, June 15. 1672.
the said Richard Anderson did affirm, That they (to wit, the Quakers) did write
a Paper, and desired him to set his hand to it; but he said he neither knew
what was in the Paper, nor what he set his hand unto.

And whereas they pretend one Katherine Hall (an Alewife in Panton) to be an
evidence; hear what she has said. Being asked concerning this Matter, she
said, I know not what they had written, which they desired Richard Anderson to
set his hand to, and they desired to know my name, but I would not tell it
them; then they said they would learn it of some in the Town; and they being
thus importunate with me, I told them my name. Witness Christopher Foster.
William Skin.


July 21. 1672. The said Katherine Hall being asked at another time, by the
persons hereafter named, Whether she had set her hand to a Paper written by the
Quakers, concerning the Narrative of Ralph James; to this she answered, No, she
did not set her hand to any Paper; but they desired her name to a Paper, but
she would not give it them. Then they desired to know her name, and she refused
to tell them her name. Hereupon they said, if she would not tell her name, they
would learn it in the Town. She answered, I am not ashamed of my name, and so
she told it them.

Being asked, Whether she lived in Panton when that passage fell out between
Ralph James and Richard Anderson, she said, No, it is thirteen years since I
went away from Panton, and it is but five since I came hither again; and for
that matter between those men, she knew nothing of it.

Witness William Greenwood, John Grammar, John Stutchbury, Christopher Foster.


Hence it appears, what Conscience those Men make of these their doings; and
how falsely they pretend this poor Alewives subscription, who it seems,
perceiving their designs, was unwilling so much, as to tell them her name. And
here it shall not be amiss to note, that they are very busy to get more
evidence to their false cause; and what Conscience they use in that respect,
may be discerned from this Relation following.

July 21. 1672. Katherine Hall aforesaid, being asked, If there had not been
some Men with Richard Anderson lately (for it was reported the Quakers had been
with him) she said, Yes, there was six Men came to talk with him, who were
Quakers, and they called for much Ale, and brought it into the Street, bad the
People drink what they would; and if they would have more, they should have it.
[ Probably to move the people to be friend them with the more liberal
testimonies.] And hereupon it was reported by one of the Quakers, to the
forenamed Christopher Foster, That Richard Anderson had denied all that
formerly he had said, meaning it of his owning the Narrative: Wherefore
Christopher Foster, with others, ( This Christopher Foster is a person of good
repute, living in the Town of Binbrooke in Lincolnshire) spoke to Richard
Anderson, and asked him of the Narrative, Whether he owned it to be true or
not, and he said, As to the substance of it, it is all truth, and that he would
own it before any Man. Attested by William Greenwood, John Grammar, John
Stutchbury, Christopher Foster.


6. The Baptists and Independants free from any juggling in giving forth the
Narrative; Nor does the Quakers in their Lying Wonder, make the least evidence
appear, that can be termed an evidence in this case. They say (and only say)
that Richard Anderson is a Member of the Independent and Baptist people, and
yet it appears not, that he ever heard the Independants at all; and it is
certain, he was never Baptized, and so not a Member of any Baptized Church in
Lincolnshire; nor are the Independants concerned for ought that appears; in the
publication of the Narrative, there are only two or three places where they
are mentioned, but no way as Confederates with the Baptists, only Peter Stacy
is brought in as an evidence, that Richard Anderson owned the Relation given by
Ralph James, to be true. True it is, they were jointly concerned in a dispute
against the Quakers, but it was not at all about this controversy; nor can
their being named in I. Greens Letter, make them Jugglers, since there he only
complains, that the Quakers abused them both as Liers, when yet there was
nothing that appeared on the Independants part. Only Mr Morley had given a
Relation of the Matter, to some of his friends in London. But what is this to
the Independants? What evil has he done in this Matter? that he should have
this odious Brand of a Juggler claped on his back; and as if this were too
gentle an Epithet they give him, the black mark of Horrid Li^r, and yet it
appears not, that he has said any thing at all (in a manner.) However, nothing
that is blameworthy in this Matter at all. And though the Anabaptist is
charged with the same crimes, yet most unjustly, as has already been evinced.
And very unjust is that which is said in the Quakers Lying Wonder, page 1. That
this story was found upon inquiry, made of Ralph James and Richard Anderson, to
be a feigned imagination six years ago; then which, nothing can be more untruly
spoken; for I have constantly affirmed, what now I have declared in the
Narrative, and see no cause to this day to recall it.

If the Independants in New England be no further culpable of the fault charged
on them, then those our Neighbors in this case, the Quakers are very injurious
in what they have reported, Page 10. of this their Lying Wonder. And thus have
we seen an end of this pretended Juggle.

7. A particular recital of sundry abusive expressions, scattered throughout
the Quakers Lying Wonder. It is a true saying, That evil words, corrupt good
manners; and therefore must needs be more corrupting in Matters of Religion.
Now in this Liberty of ill speaking, many Professors have been justly reproved;
and this generation of Men called Quakers, do seem to exceed others in this
miscarriage. I might fill much Paper, should I recapitulate what of this kind I
have met with from them, it shall suffice therefore, that we view how this
small Book of theirs is furnished; that by a taste from thence, we may know the
Fountain whence they draw that which they so freely fill out to others. Let us
hear them speak.

1. They call their Book, The Anabaptists Lying Wonder, which is a title as far
from modesty, as it is from truth. 2. They call the Baptists and Independants,
Iugglers, and Horrid Liers, and that without cause, as is showed. 3. They
scornfully call Ralph James, an Anabaptist Preacher, a Testing Preacher; a
Lying Herald to proclaim his own vain glory. They charge him with horrid
Hypocrisy, Deceit, and a Romance. 4. They represent the Baptists and
Independants, as Makers and Worshippers of Images. 5. They term the Narrative a
Brat crying in our Streets, a Fragment of Deceit, Cruelty, Malice, and
Hypocrisy; and the methods of its Writing, they term Irksom. 6. They
scornfully term the Narrative, a new vampt story, hereby deriding J. Green by
his Calling, for that he is a Shoemaker. 7. They tauntingly call J. Green, a
zealous London- Brother, and charge him with envious desires. 8. They charge
Ralph James to be uncharitable beyond measure, because he visited not Richard
Andersons family, though he was not desired. This shows what measure the
Quakers give to those whom they love not, in their representment of them to the
World, and whiles they tax Ralph James for want of Charity, they bewray their
own barrenness of that grace. 9. They deride the Baptists and Independants,
saying, They buoy one another up; and term them an Hipocritical Generation. 10.
They term the Relater, and Evidencs of the Narrative, Imposters, whose evidence
(they say) centers in the same pitch of folly and falsity. 11. They scornfully
call F. Baldock, one of the Sacrificers for the Leper, because he is a witness
that the Church at Donnington, prayed for Richard Anderson and his family. 12.
They represent J. Green as a Fool and a Knave, by his own handiwork; thereby
deriding him for calling the judgment which befell Richard Anderson, the Lords
handiwork. 13. They charge their opposites to be guilty of horrid deceit, and
term them an Hipocritical Fraternity, because the time when that judgment which
befell Richard Anderson for his presumptuous undertaking, was not set down. But
sure this is the way to make the very Apostles, etc. Hipocrites too; for though
many of those things which God did by them, be set down, and that long after
they were done too, yet the time is seldom mentioned. And what would it have
signified, if the time had been precisely set down (for that the business was
more ancient, then of yesterday, was sufficiently intimated in the Letters
Printed) seeing the Men concerned, are both living, the places of their abode
known, and easy to be found by any that would know further concerning that
matter. 14. But its not sufficient that they deride men, but they deride the
way of the Lord (and therein God himself (Mal. 3. 13, 14.) also: As every
discerning Reader may perceive, by reading Page 4. of their Lying Wonder, where
having occasion to mention Baptism the Ordinance of God, they add this
Parenthesis (that is, Dipping in Water) and before that, another thus, (that
is, Dipped,) thereby to mislead their inconsiderate Readers, as if the Ordinance
of Baptism were only a Dipping in Water; whereas every Dipping in Water may
not be called The Ordinance of God, having nothing of that divine
signification, of Christ's dying for sin; and rising again for our
justification, and our dying to sin; and rising to a new life; as the Sacred
Ordinance of God has, I mean, the Baptism of Repentance for Remission of Sins,
wherein the Washing or Dipping in the Element Water, in the Sacred Name of the
Father, Son, and holy Spirit, is to be observed according to Christ's
Commission, Matthew. 28. 19. And the Apostles Injunction, Acts 2.38 and 10. 47,
48. And Christ's own practice, Matthew. 3. 16. John 3. 22. and 4. 1, 2.
8. An Exhortation to all Christians to beware of the delusions of the people
called Quakers. Nor can I do less (having this occasion put into my hand) then
to admonish and exhort all Christians to look well to their goings; for, let us
know assuredly, that the days are perilous, because the time is come, wherein
that doctrine which is according to Godliness (even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ) and, that form of sound words delivered to the Churches by the holy
Apostles; that form of Doctrine once obeyed from the Heart; that Faith once
delivered to the Saints; is now in every place turned from, or lightly
regarded, by many pretending to the high Calling of Christianity; and they are
therefore, and shall be more and more turned into Fables, according as is
foreshewn in the Word of Truth.

Wherefore seeing we know these things before, Let us beware, least at any time
we be led away with the Errors of these days, and fall from that stedfastness
in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship; to which, through the grace of God, we
have attained.

And above all, Let us beware of those; who either directly or indirectly, deny
the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ, whiles they believe not his
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, and second coming according to the
Scriptures: But in stead of those necessary points of the Christian Faith,
labor to refer (by obscure ways, and a fair show of words) all these things, to
the work of mortification, and what they (pretend) to experience in themselves.

Labor therefore to distinguish between the work of Christ in redeeming Man,
and the Work of his Spirit and Word, in sanctifying his people. Hold fast the
first by Faith, and labor to live in the latter by blessed experience: Waiting
for the Redemption of your Bodies, in the glorious Resurrection of the Just;
according to the working, whereby our Lord Jesus is able to subdue all things
to himself.

And be not deceived by any means, by the empty boasts of some in those days,
as if they had already obtained to the Resurrection of the Dead, saying, That
they even now do witness mortality to be swallowed up of life, with diverse
other such great swelling words of vanity. But ever remember, that Paul in his
greatest seize, wherein he heard things too high to be uttered to the
Churches; yet had he not then no, nor to this day, attained to the Resurrection
of the Dead, but labored, if by any means he might attain it.

And follow not those who indirectly (or by consequence) deny Jesus Christ, I
mean those that deny his Commandments; for, as one has well said, Such as deny
those things which Christ has ordained to declare and keep in memory, his
coming in the flesh, his dying, rising, ascension, and second coming, do (at
the best, unawares) by consequence deny him to be come in the Flesh. By these
things which are ordained to declare Christ come in the flesh, etc. I mean all
Gospel Institutions; for whether it be Preaching, and Praying, according to the
Word, Sacred Baptism, or the Table of the Lord, etc. they serve to this end
specially, to hold forth Christ, and him crucified, to come again and receive
his servants into his Everlasting Kingdom.

And thus the holy Gospel being duly observed in all its parts, with a constant
waiting for the Son of God from Heaven, even Jesus who was raised from the
dead, you shall be found unto praise and honor, for keeping the Ordinances,
here, as they were delivered to the Churches, and to the glory of God
hereafter; for if any Man will serve Christ, him will the Father honor.

9. Antiqueries to John Whitehead, Author of the Postscript annexed to the
Lying Wonder.

In the Postscript, I note three things.

1. John Whitehead calls himself a Laborer in the Gospel. 2. He calls the
Quakers, The People of God. 3. It is said Richard Anderson was not joined to,
or owned by the People called Quakers.
Upon these particulars I Quere.

1. Whether he be fitly called a Laborer in the Gospel, who holds that the
Gospel was never Preached in England, till George Fox preached it? (Not yet
forty years ago.) And whether thou did not assert this? And being admonished of
the consequence of that saying, viz. That then the Gospel preached by Fox,
could not be the Gospel of Christ, because Christ's Gospel was preached in
England many hundreds of years before Fox was born, Whether thou did not still
persist in thy assertion with this emendation, That the Gospel was not preached
in England, as it is preached by the People of God called Quakers, till George
Fox preached it? And whether this do not make the Matter worse? And is it not
hence evident? That thou Laborest not in the Gospel of Christ, but the Gospel
of George Fox, which being no Gospel, it follows thou art no Laborer in the
Gospel. 2. Whether he that holds that nothing which was Mortal, was called
Christ, does not thereby deny the death of Christ? And whether thy conscience
do not tell thee, thou asserted this; and being showed the sequel of thy words,
( viz. That then Christ died not,) and an offer made by thy opposite, to recall
that saying, if thou thought thou wast mistaken? whether then did not thou
refuse to recall it; and chose rather to persist in thy error. And whether he
that holds this dangerous position, can truly Preach the dying of the Lord
Jesus for sin? And how then can he Preach the Gospel. 3. Whether he that shall
assert. That Christ has no Body of Flesh, beside his Church, can Preach truly
the Resurrection, Ascension, and second coming of the Body of our Lord Christ,
according to Scripture. And whether thou did not assert this before many
witnesses! and if thou still art of the same opinion, how can thou truly
Labor in the Gospel? 4. Whether by the words ( People of God) thou means the
Church of Christ, in visible Profession of the Gospel, according to the pattern
of the Churches in the Apostles days? 5. Whether the people called Quakers, are
gathered, constituted, and governed, in a Church capacity, according to the
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, Matthew. 28.19. Acts 2. 38. to 43. and 10.
47,48. and 8. 12, 13,14, 15,16,17. Heb. 6.12. Ephesians. 4.4,
5,6,11,12,13,14,15,16. Tit. 1.5. Acts 14. 23. Phil. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 6. If
not, (as doubtless not) then show by what authority, and when that first order
of gathering, constituting, and governing the Churches of Christ was abrogated;
and another way instituted instead thereof? 7. Whether it be not sufficient for
any to judge him to be a Quaker, that having conversed with them, receives
their doctrine, opposes the Truths by them opposed, and upon the same
pretenses; and owned not only their doctrine, but their persons as the only
people of God, acts by their spirit, and prophesies or preaches in their
behalf, and has frequent conversation with them? (And whether the Quakers have
any constant and visible order, to receive Members into their Congregations?
and if they have, then show what it is?) And whether Richard Anderson had not
all these ( demonstrable) characters; and therefore justly said to be a Quaker?
A Postscript of the Light within.
BEcause every Truth ought to have its just estimation, and the design of the
precedent Discourse, being not to oppose any Light which God has ordained for
Man's direction, Whether that which is common to all (ordinarily) at all times,
by some called the Light within, or that which has been manifested at sundry
times, and diverse manners. It shall not be inexpedient here to propose a few
things: And first, 1. It is certain (and not denied by the Baptized Churches)
that God Almighty has endowed mankind with a Principle of Light,
Understanding, or Judgment, to lead him to the consideration and observation of
things good and honest among themselves, and to contemplate the divine goodness
it self from the consideration of his wonderful Works, and to render to him the
honor of his Mercies, etc. For as there is a certain relation between the
Creator, and a Rational Creature, even thence arises a necessity of obedience
on the Creatures part. Whereupon it behooveth, that he know him, and in
general, what is his Will, whom he is to serve: And this is the great work of
the Law written in the Heart of Man, Romans 2. 2. But it is in the Liberty of the
Creator to give further, what particular discoveries of himself, and of his
will he pleases, beyond the extent of this common principle of Light. And this
he did to Adam, in forbidding by a Positive Law the Fruit of one Tree, which
without that prohibition had brought no inconvenience to eat thereof, seeing it
was good for Food; and therefore not sin, as some do vainly interpret this
place. 3. That there is in the Godhead the distinction of Father, Son, and
Spirit; and that Man's salvation must depend on the death of the Son; that he,
to that end, should be born of a Woman (even the Blessed Virgin, Mary by Name)
that he should rise from Death, and ascend the Heavens, come to raise the dead,
and judge the World; are things wholly beyond the reach of the common principle
of Light in Man, and only known by particular Revelation from the Omnificient
God, who revealed these things to the Prophets, confirmed them by his Son, and
has witnessed the same by the Apostles. 4. That the Economy, Order, or
Government of the Church, should vary, viz. Be of one form in the old World; of
another from Abraham till Christ; of a third, from Christ to the end of the
World; is that, of which the common principle of Light in Man, fails to give
any ac^ount: Only the Wisdom and Pleasure of the Creator, is the ground and
cause of this alteration; to which, the Light of Man's understanding must be
subordinate. 5. That Abraham must cut off the foreskin, and his posterity
observe the same for a Law, under pain of being cut off from the People of God,
is no way perceivable by the principle of Light in Man, but may seem to be
repugnant to it. 6. That the Savior of the World should come to be Baptized of
John in Jordan, and that it should become all his Disciples to follow him in
that act of Obedience: That Israel must commemorate their deliverance out of
Egypt by the Paschal observation; and Christians their deliverance from Sin and
Satan, by the Bread and Cup at the Lords Table, etc. Is that which the
principle of Light in Man does not dictate, but he only, who without control,
might require Abraham to offer his own Son for a Sacrifice, required these
things, and must be obeyed, when, and in what he requires. 7. The sum of all,
is this, The general principle of Understanding, Light, or Judgment in Man, is
capable of improvements, and it is only improved, by how much it is
subordinate to the Will of God, as well in the lesser, as in the greater things
of his appointment. And therefore the Quakers undeniably opposing themselves
against many things required by the Positive Laws, and made known by the
Revelation of the Almighty, concerning Man's redemption; and the Order of the
Church of Christ, are not obedient to, nor sincere favorers of the Light
within, but are under the guidance of the Spirit of Darkness and Error, in such
their opposition.


Reader,
WHereas it is said both in Word and in Print, That I John Green of Southwark,
deny the Truth of the Narrative given forth by Ralph James touching the
Leprosy. These may certify all whom it does concern, that I do believe the
said Narrative to be a Truth, and do appeal to the Conscience of several
Quakers; Whether I did not, both by Word and Writing, acknowledge the same to
their faces, though by some of them pressed to deny it; and now they have
contrary to their promise published my name in Print. This Testimony is true,
witness my hand

John Green.
21 Sept. 1672.
Attested in the presence of these Witnesses,

William Vridge, Timothy Morloy, John Smith, Peter S^ager, all living in
Southwark.

Errata. Page 11. Line 7. for Richard read Ralph.

FINIS.

