May it please Your Most Sacred Majesty,
SEriously to Consider my great Zeal and Love that I have always had for his
late Majesty and Kingdoms, and my Fervent Constancy to the Church of England,
is not unknown to your Majesty, as it may appear by many Fastings that I cannot
number, tho some particular ones I can, as Fourteen Days and Nights, and
Thirteen Days and Nights, and three times Twelve Days and Nights, and Nine Days
and Nights, and went to Windsor on Foot; and Seven Days and Nights, and Five
Days and a Half; and as for Four, Three, and Two Days and Nights I cannot
number them: And all my Fastings, the Almighty bears me Record, they were
sincerely performed without the Relish or Taste of any thing in this World: And
moreover I have had many Children, and have Nursed them all my self, and I have
had Three and Four Children Young and no Maid, and none to help me neither in
Sickness or Health, and yet I have found Opportunity to come to White Hall; and
God knows the care and pains I have taken for these Twenty Years, and yet for
all this through the great Love I bear to your Sacred Majesty and Kingdoms,
because I know you are a Gracious Prince, and I long for your eternal and
present Happiness and your Kingdoms too: Therefore I presume a Proposal that
may Convince your Majesty, and Settle your Kingdoms, and fill all your Subjects
full of Joy, if your Majesty would be graciously pleased to yield to my
Proposal; for your Majesty knows that the Church of Rome says, She is the True
Church, and therefore she has the power of Miracles, and I say she is not the
True Church, and has not the Power of Miracles, but what she has done has
been by a false Power to delude Kings and Princes, and deceive others, which I
can plainly demonstrate it, if your Majesty so pleases to favor me, as to
grant me my Proposal which I shall propose, which undoubtedly will manifest the
True Church, and your Majesty knows it was the Glory of Solomon to give
Judgment between the Two Harlots in restoring the Living Child to its own
Mother; this was such a piece of Justice, that all Men admired the Wisdom of
God in Solomon, and if it was so much Glory and Wisdom in Solomon in giving
Judgment between Two Harlots; how much more Glorious will it be for your
Majesty to be as an Angel to give Judgment between these Two Churches? for the
one says I am the True Church, and the other says, I am the True Church, and
the Church of Rome says to the Church of England, She is no True Church but She
is a Heretic and Damn*d, and so is all that Protects her, and therefore she
says, All is mine, and I will have them dead or alive; for you say, I may be
Saved, and I tell you, That you are Damn*d: it is true, you say so, but I am
never the more Damned for your saying so, and you not surer of your Salvation
for my not Judging of you, but I show my Christian Charity toward you, in not
Condemning of you, and I dare do no other, because Christ has forbid me; for
it is my whole delight to submit to his Will; therefore I am the Mother, and
the Children are mine. I must needs confess that you are more pleasanter and
delightfuller than I am, for you know not what a Mothers care is, but delights
your self in all the pleasant Things of this World, and Corrupts my Children,
by encouraging them to do all those Things that their Nature most inclines to;
but I being a True Mother, I can give no Grains of Allowance contrary to the
Word of God; for it is all my Care that they should always walk obediently to
that Rule, and that they may not only be Happy in this World, but eternally
Happy in the World to come; therefore I will Apply my self to the King of
Heaven, that he would Vouchsafe to deliver my Children from thy Corruptions;
and moreover I will make Applications to the King on Earth, and I question not,
but I shall have True Justice done me, and when God has restored me my Children
from thy Delusions, for their Honor I Will die, that they may live, that all may
know that I am a True Mother. Therefore I most humbly beseech your Majesty to
end this Controversy, and I humbly beg the Favor that I may undertake for the
Church of England, and my Proposal is this, That I would be sbut into a Room
with any Roman Catholic that is sincere, and that there should be but one Key
to the Lock, and your Majesty to keep the Key, and I will be searched, that I
carry not any thing with me, and go in Fasting, and remain so either Seven Days
and Nights, or Nine Days and Nights, or as many as your Majesty shall think
fit, and I look that whoever undertakes it with me, should do the same
sincerely, for I hate Deceit; but if it be a Man, I beseech your Majesty to let
some Body be with me Day and Night, to prevent Scandal; and who can doubt but
Nature is strong in them, and they will have Assistance by the 'Prayers of
their Fathers, who can Work Miracles, but all must know, that Nature is weak in
me by my often Fasting, for I am Fasting now, and bath been ever since Friday,
except Sunday Night, and now' till Tuesday Night; and therefore what I do must
be by a strong Faith, and the Assistance of the Almighty. Oh that it would but
please God that this may be proved, for it will justify all my Fastings; to be
true and right, and this will Convince the World that I have obtained Favor of
the Almighty, for it is for his Glory, that his Anointed may be a King of
Righteousness, Truth and Justice, and Peace may flourish in your days. and
after a Long and Prosperous Reign your Majesty may be Crowned with an Immortal
Crown of Glory, which the Lord grant, is the Prayer of

Your Poor Supplicant, Subject, and Souls Well wisher, ELINOR JAMES


