TA KANNKOY:

THE Tragedies of Sin CONTEMPLATED, IN The Ruin of the ANGELS, The Fall of
MAN, The Destruction of the Old WORLD, The Confusion of BABEL, The
Conflagration of SODOM, etc.


HUMBLY Recommended to the present Age, for the Designed Ends of Caution and
Terror.

TOGETHER WITH REMARQUES On the LIFE of the Great ABRAHAM.

By STEPH. JAY, Rector of Chinner in the County of OXON.

Now all these things happened to them for Example; and they are written for
our Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come. 1 Cor. 10.11. LONDON,
Printed by J. Astwood for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey, 1689.

O Earth Earth Earth Hear the Word of the L^^^
Son of man give ym warning


Lo I come to do thy will o god


depiction of (presumably) Stephen Jay in conversation with God inset depiction
of the ruin of the angels inset depiction of the fall of man inset depiction
of the destruction of the old world inset depiction of the confusion of Babel
inset depiction of the conflagration of Sodom



TO THE SACRED HANDS OF THE King and Queen's Most Excellent MAJESTY'S.
Dread Sovereigns,
IF Angels wrapped in Direful Chains,
And Princes doomed to servile Pains;
If a Creation lost in Waves,
And Cities sunk in Fiery Graves,
Be Treasons worth Your Royal Eye
To Glance upon, and cause to Dye,
Then Seal the Warrant, or Command
The Tyrant to Depart the Land:
For ( Sin's Dominion Feeble grown)
God will Confirm and Fix Your Own.
So Incessantly Prays, Your MAJESTY'S Most Obedient Subject and Servant, Steph.
Jay.

TO THE READER.
I Am not insensible that it is every days fashion with the Wantonists of the
Age, to make Court to New Papers, (as to Fresh Ladies) with fair and specious
Pretensions of Love, but in truth very foul and dishonorable Projects of Lust,
and only to crop from them (the Virgin Fruit) whatever is delicious and
complacential in them: These have learned to Fornicate with Books too, and by a
subtle Alchymy can Elixirate the whole Substance into a few drops, which
themselves lasciviously swallow, while they are content to leave the Corpse unto
others.

Thus have I seen the many Admirers of those indeed very beautiful The
Gentleman and Ladies Calling.
Pieces of Art, (so curiously drawn by the Divine Pencil of that Incomparable
Author unknown) Kiss their fair Hands with so devout Adoration and Court-like
Address, as one would have sworn them their most entire and absolute Captives:
And which might have given their joyful Parent the most unquestionable
Assurance in the prosperous Success of his pious Fraud, who by the soft Wreaths
of his charming Eloquence had so Innocently plotted to Marry them to Happiness,
and knit them (unmoveably) to their Savior: When (alas!) after the Rape their
Sacrilegious Fingers had once made on the Flowers of his Oratory, their
Unnatural Heats (like those of Amnon) have soon cooled into the basest slights
and disdain; Nay, very Choler and Passion against the grave Overtures of any
Contract with Heaven, the only justifiable Design of the Congress: Ah no, they
have little Appetite to the Matrimony-Noose; they nibble at the Golden Bait,
and yet as politickly escape the Hook, can love Books (as Mistresses) for an
Hour, but to go to Church with them is least in their Thoughts.

And it is evident, this Lasciviousness of the Fancy may Vie Prosperity with any
the rankest Debaucheries of the Times; Men's Brains growing as Wanton as their
Blood; and should the Infection scatter so successfully as hitherto, will
shortly perk up, and with that Aerie Lady at Rome, from the Plea of
Universality, call a Council, and Vote her self Honest and Authentic; and then
we shall wear the Feathers in our Heads, as already the other Levities of
France on our Backs. There is this only Rescue of Hope left us, that that other
Claim of Antiquity may probably fail her, and happily help to secure us: This
being but a Modern Deity, a Goddess newly come up, and the Mushroom Product of
the present Age, a Madness of but Yesterday: Our Fore-fath^rs being well enough
satisfied to be Tolled into Heaven by the Plain-song of bare Declaration, when
all the Notes of the Church Choristry are too dull to Chime us in thither.

But what is most deplorable, and for ever to be lamented (if possible) in
Tears of Blood, is the dire Effect of this Luxury of the Ear; for scattering
its spurious Seed, it has generated the Cursed Issue of a montrous Neglect and
scornful Contempt of the Div^^^ Revelations; while our Gallants of both Sexes
buff at and quarrel with the Style of the Scriptures (as some heretofore the
Epistle of St. James) to be too Flat and insipid, too Homespun and Rustic, and
hence they treat them accordingly with as little Respect as a Withered Wife,
bolt them out of Doors, (and no wonder when Cassandra is gotten in) or lock
them up out of sight, not (as the Spaniard) from Love or Jealousy, but these
from Satiety and Loathing. The sacred Oracles (as some Noble-mens Servants) are
left to Board-Wages, and allowed the freedom of shifting for themselves, while
their Masters feast at a more Luscious Ordinary. Nay worse, they grow ashamed
of them, and blush when but found in their Company. It Is matter for Apology, to
be surprised in the guilt of passing a short Visit on them. They laugh at their
Clownish Expression, and wonder not that Joseph's Mistress failed of her
Amors, when she courted her Favorite in no better Language than Come Lie with
me. Thus (alas!) the very Waters of Life to these squeamish Stomachs are grown
brackish and disgustful, as those of Marah, they cannot sip them (as some not
their Coffee) without Lace.

What the Romish Cabals have so long (by the joint Combination of Cunning and
Villainy) been Plotting to effect, viz. The Clasping up our Bibles; whose hopes
failing, these in commiseration to the desperate Design, are more luckily
contriving with more effectual Aids, and stand ready with the Free Will
Offering of these inestimable Jewels, (which they have torn off already from
their Ears) to gratify that Priest, who has his Fires ready to cast them
into, and out of which shall arise a God for them more perfectly Calfish than
Aaron's. So near are we approaching thy Banks, O Tyber!

But should a Check come from the Mount, and their Idol chance to be stamped
into Powder, they have danced so long about it, that to continue the Frolic,
they would as readily Drink its Confusion, and Spice their Boles with a Deity.
But Heaven deliver us from such as have no more Veneration for a God, than to
lodge him in their Gutts and the Bogg-house.

And may England never taste the bitter Draught that so mortally gripped the
Bowels of Israel, from that Provocation which God could never be persuaded to
forget: Yea, tho Moses proffered to expiate it by the Blood of his Soul, (as
some think) but could not be accepted. And tho Justice brake its Fast but on
Three Thousand of them, yet was it Thirsty still, and never satisfied 'till it
had Glutted it self with the Blood of them all, when afterward their Carkases
fell, and lay in the Wilderness as Dung.

But of how much sorer Punishment suppose ye shall they be thought worthy, who
tread under foot the Holy Testament of the Son of God, and counting the Blood
of the Covenant but a mean and unholy thing, shall do this despite to the
Spirit of Grace.

But (Blessed God!) pity the Blind, and Pardon the Blasphemy of those miserable
Creatures, who tax Infinite and Incomprehensible Wisdom of Weakness and Defect,
in not clothing the Imperial Ordinances in such proper Dress as should best
set off their Beauty and Luster; and therefore run Whoring after the vain
Ebullitions of humane Brains, in Slight of the Divinity and Glory that every
where sparkles through the Sacred Leaves of these Heavenly Volumes, and which are
so far from the least failure in the Majesty of their Mien, that it is That
alone has smitten away their Eyes, and now they idly Prate against the Sun
whose powerful Darts have struck them blind, and left them senseless. And
surely the Voice of the Lord is powerful, the Voice of the Lord is full of
Majesty: And the Thunder that rattleth from the God of Glory through the Air of
but Three Chapters in Job, and but One or Two in Isaiah, has sent away in a
Fright the loudest Hyperbole's (as the Winds into their Caverns) to hide their
Heads in shame and silence; and who sees not that the whole Vatican of all
Created Wit shuts up it self in Despair, and sneaks away perfectly baffled by
them?

But it pitieth me to hear of any Son of Levi furthering the Conspiracy, who is
commanded to execute the Revenge, and to sheath the Sword of his fiercest Rage
in the very Bowels of this Lust. It Is insufferable to bring the Trayteress into
the very Pulpit, there to draw the Ark of God with Philistine Heifers; yet
there are, who (strongly infected with this Gnostick Humor) blow up the
Bladder of this Hypocondriack Vanity with most strenuous Sides and Lungs; but
(to judge Charitably) in an enforced Conformity to the proud Humor of the Age,
they Sing the Lord's Song in a strange Language, while by the too ravishing
Notes of their quavering Throats they faintly languish away the whole strength
of their Errand, and cause it all to dye into Air and Nothing, feeding their
Auditors with a flash of Wind, and giving them Music instead of Meat.

Though Nero was so Ambitious to be reputed the best Fiddler in Rome, yet it is
below the glory of a Prince to speak Romance. Laws are delivered in the gravest
Expressions; God spoke these Words, and said, is Oratory enough to Preface the
Divine Mandates, and enforce the World to obey them.

Who sees not how strangely Profaneness has encroached upon us, since we have
fancied the Men of this Generation so easy and good Natured, to be thus
readily Complemented out of their very Right Hands, when yet we see them keep
their Purses so close, and part from their Lusts and Money with the like
Torment. Though the Galathians Eyes were once at Paul's Service, yet our People
have Wit enough to keep theirs in their Heads.

Nay, it is observable too, how well it pleases some of these Gentlemen to meet
their Idea's at Church; and he that with the finest hand can Anatomize their
Lusts before them, shall be Prophet to them, while themselves (with the Monster
that ripped up his Mother) make a curious Inspection into the very Bowels of
them, and repeat them again by endearing Contemplation. As that famous Usurer
that so generously rewarded the Homilies that sunk his Extortions to the pit of
Hell, out of hopes that while they frighted others into some Reformation,
himself might continue them with the advantage of a better Trade.

The Spirit of the World which maintained so firm Possession in the Hearts of
Ezekiel's Hearers, had more Wit than to be played out by the sweet Minstrelsey
of his pleasant Lays; and sure we have less hope (whose Lyres are not strung
by Heaven) that the Devil of Atheism that snugs so securely in the innermost
lodges of Men's Souls, and with the Serpent twists himself about their whole
Hearts, will be exorcis'd by the loudest Adjurations of any Son of Scaeva, who
shall idly call on the Name without the Spirit or Power of the Holy Jesus;
and how far such have prospered in the attempt, I must leave to the discretion
of too sad and sensible Experience. But still methinks it is pity the Fiend
should so peaceably Nestle there, while the effectual Charms of ever powerful
Naked Truth would work more successfully to unloose and unkennel him. Very.
Rams-Horns when blown by the Breath of Faith shall Raze the Foundations, which
all the Engines of Nature must ever despair to shake or pull down.

Thus by an Ominous Chemistry we are Calcining all the very substance of our
Religion into Dust and Fancy, and nothing less than a Miracle of Mercy can
deliver us from the ill Effects of the same Humor in that Egyptian Dame, who
in a tottering Pinnace, (light as her Brains and Body) driven with Purple Sails
and Silver Oars, and attended with infinite Consorts of Music, did thus
lasciviously deliver her self up into the fatal Dalliances of the Roman
Usurper, and God knows how little Ballast of Solidity is left to secure us,
while we are whiffling away the Honor and Happiness of being once esteemed the
most Sober and Excellent Nation in the World: When now the Massey Gold of our
former Reputation and Virtue is beaten into Leaf, and (with the hopes of being
better) is all taking flight into Air.

It Is not from the abundance, but want of (that Holy Oil that once perfumed
Aaron's Beard) the true Unction, that would Consecrate even us into Kings and
Priests unto God, (if we had it) that this Levity (like a Dangerous Defluxion)
is passed down from our Heads upon the Skirts of our Garments.

A giddy Brain has created in us a frothy Spirit, hung all within with Vanity,
the very Soul wantonizing in her darkest Cells, and then hating so close a
Confinement, makes haste to break Prison, and open those Windows which expose
her Meretricious Wares to public View and Plague; and to draw a more universal
Trade and Custom, the very Case (whence this Rareeshow stares out with her
Whorish and bewitching Lights) must be Glazed and Guilt.

O Dinah, Dinah! (the too clear Mirror of our Unfortunate Age) my Soul bleeds
for thee, the only Daughter of so great a Prince, the Delight of his Eyes and
Joy of his Life! what a wound did thou open in the Bosom of so dear a Parent!
What killing Sorrows did thy perhaps innocent and undesigning, tho most
Tragical Curiosity, in gazing after such Prospects as these, heap on his woeful
aching Heart! but what dreadful effects to thy self! the irrecoverable Loss of
thine Honor and his Peace together.

And thou England, the very Darling of Heaven, who have been wrapped in the
distinguishing Coat of thy Father's Love, to the Envy and Sorrow of thy
treacherous Brethren, who have been Trucking with Ishmaelites to sell thee into
Egypt, and dipping thy Coat already in Blood, to represent thee as devoured,
when themselves are the only Beasts that would do it; (and Joseph is too truly
torn in pieces by the Divisions and Animosities of their fomenting.) But let
not Himself conspire in the Treason, nor break the Heart of his Father by
sealing the Articles of his own Slavery. He will find a Lady in Egypt that will
strip him again, and rent not his Coat only, but very Flesh off; her Irons will
enter into his Soul, if he consent not to her lewd Fornications. Egyptian Flesh
was ever fatal to the Israel that doated on it. And it is impossible that Dinah
should consent to the Rape, that yields her no pleasure at all; and tho
afterward compounded into a Contract, even that will add still to her
Torments, when anon it is written in the Blood of the Ravisher, and instead of
an Husband she Wed a Corpse: Should they deal with our Sister as with an Harlot?

Nothing can betray us to Her Sorrows but Sin, nothing secure us but Obedience
and keeping close under the Wings of a Father: We shall find (by the dreadful
Examples) what rueful Effects Extravagancy and a wandering from God into Vanity
and Folly has brought upon the World, even from its Creation. Sin ever has
been, ever will be the great Apollyon of our Peace and Safety, whose Tragedies
I have adventured (by too rude a draught) to expose to thy View, with the same
design as once Anthony held forth the bloody Gown of the brave Caesar, (all
mangled and full of holes by the Daggers of his Murderers) on purpose to
provoke the People to Revenge. In which undertaking, if Defects too many be
discovered by the severe and censorious Reader, he will be more courteous sure
than to wound me too, while he kindly remembers the shaking of my Hand with the
very Fear and Apprehension of so bold an Attempt.

But come Reader, let us lay aside Words and be wise. Religion (with Joash) is
left alone in the Temple, and none pitieth that solitary Princess; sure 'twill
be our* Advantage to unite to her Coronation, and unanimously Guard her while
the Crown is putting on, and we see her re-invested in all her Regalities. Let
Profaneness and Superstition (with Athalia) rend their Clothes and Throats too,
crying, Treason! Treason! (the Treason is all against Hell,) and let no
Englishman be startled at the Plot: Nay, let every one come under the Guilt of
it, not one Nonconformist to the Dominion of Grace; but should any stand off,
let us leave them to the Tyranny of their own Athalia, while we ever cry with
all Judah, (triumphing with Joy for the Restoration of the true Worship,)

God Save the King, God Save the King.
THE Angels Tragedy,
To my Reverend Brethren, the Messengers of Christ to the Churches;
Metaphorical Angels, and spiritual Men, do I humbly offer this Tragedy: May not
one of them make the Defection, or suffer the Eclypse of these unhappy
Apostates; but ever shining in the luster of their own Graces, may emit those
Beams of Divine Light and Life as will irradiate and quicken the dead and
benighted Souls of Men, that when God shall remove them from the lower
Firmament to fix them above, they may altogether make up a glorious
Constellation in Heaven, and shine there as Stars for ever and ever.

2 PET. 2.4. If God spared not the Angels, etc.


IT IS by slow and trembling Steps that I pass toward the Territories of the
Miserable, thence to take a distant Prospect of the tremendous Executions made
by Divine Justice upon so great a Part of the once glorious Spirits, now
hanging up alive in the Chains of fierce Wrath, and reserved unto the further
Judgment of the great Day.

Methinks it is Pity that Sin has so fair a Pretense to the glory of High
Birth: We cannot deny it the Honor of a Noble Extraction, when we see it
unluckily Issuing from the Heart of an Angel: For neither were those Sons of
God at their first Creation blessed in such an absolute Degree of Stability and
Perfection, as should ever secure them from all possibility of falling into the
Sorrows of so unnatural a Production.

But if already my Plough make a Baulk in this Tragic Field, and my Pen
blunders to decipher this Serpent's Root from whence sprung up the Monster, my
Reader may well remit it to me, when the great St. Austin throws it off with a
Non Deus sunt: They were not God, but Created in a Mutable and not Impeccable
Estate; He charges his Angels with Folly: But if Folly has a Lodging in the
Bosoms of those who each Minute Behold the face of mine heavenly Father, wonder
not if (at this distance) it be graduated into perfect Distraction, and the
Atheistical Fools of the Earth say in their Hearts, There is no God, because
they see none; when they are not vouchsafed the dreadful Kindness of Diabolical
Conviction, but are sentenced to the ruinous effects of an impudent Obduration,
without the Mercy of a scrupulous Conscience, which in time might Torment them
into a prudent Recantation.

How the Holy Court was Alarmed at the breaking out of this Viper, (as of some
Flying Dragon that would have stung them all to Death) and what dreadful havoc
was wrought in a Moment, and how very many Thousands perished by its Venomous
Sting, e're the most expeditious Orders could be issued out for the clearing
the sound from the infected: And what Decree passed forth for their everlasting
Exile thence, into the lowest Abyss of Darkness and Confusion, is so far from
being News now adays, that Heaven and Earth rings with the Tragedy.

And happy had it been for the Younger Sons of God, that this degenerous Brood
had been ever closely confined within the limits of their own sooty Walls, and
not permitted by their ranging about, to have had the Liberty of making their
pernicious How d'ye's into the Paradise of Joy, where the Kindness of their
Maker had so blessedly placed them together in Pleasure and Peace.

Very vainly does prying Curiosity make enquiry after the Quality of the Sin
that wrought this Ruin, since perhaps Holy Writ is so obscure and reserved,
with design to dictate a more prudent Caution against all; since whatsoever it
were that slew an Angel, the very least of all may crush a Worm.

Yet to gratify a little the Inquisitive Humor; know, that the very Learned
are divided and strangely differ in their Opinions about it: Some ^aying the
Ruin to the Charge of Envy, from their foreknowledge of God's determination in
Promoting the Humane Nature into the ineffable Honor of Union with the
Godhead, in neglect of their own; so Zanchy and others. Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertullian and Chrysostom think it to be Luxury, from Genesis 6.1. But surely
Spirits need no Mistresses. Others allege the Breach of a Positive Command
and Law imposed upon them; and the Rabbis will have it of some Service to Man,
which the proud Angel refusing was therefore cast down, an Opinion a little
hard to be entertained; it is apparent their Fall preceded the Creation of Man.
Aquinas, St. Austin, and the whole Current of Writers close with the Holy
Ghost, in affixing the Guilt upon Pride; and methinks she is plainly enough too
guilty of this Murder; [1 Timothy 3.6.] Nay, the very Care and necessary Caution
of every Good Father of the Church, in not laying too hasty Hands on light and
frothy Persons, nor exalting them into the weighty Ministrations of the Altar,
(since such may be tempted to swell into too high Conceits of themselves from
the Dignity of their excellent Office, and so become Poisoned by the Devil's
Draught, whom Pride had so strangely stupefied into a forgetfulness of
themselves, and puffed them into a Rebellion against their great Maker who had
assigned to them their proper Functions, (and to the Prince of them so glorious
one) had they had but Grace to have kept (...), their Noble State and
Principality, and not left their Station or Habitation, (as Jude says v. 6.) I
say their Care and Vigilance, must evidence for me that Pride is not slandered
in the least by the Charge; (and I shall stand the Trial if she sue me upon the
Scandal) for we cannot ^^e ignorant neither how some eminent Fathers have
expounded that of Isaiah 14.12. How art thou fallen, O Lucifer! son of the
Morning, etc. I will exalt my Throne above the Stars: I will be like the most
High; to represent the Sin and Fall of the Proud King of Babylon by the Pride
and Destruction of Lucifer.

E're we pass further, let us make a few Turns in the Chamber of Contemplation,
and take a survey of the lamentable Ruin of an Angel, (of thousands of them)
that this execrable Sin has so traitorously dragged into irrecoverable Misery
and Woe.

The Angelical Nature was doubtless the very Cream and Flower of the beautiful
Creation of God: These Spirits are the glittering Courtiers of the King of
Glory, clad in the very Livery of their Maker; the Garnish and Ornament of his
Palace; Heaven it self but bare Walls (as it were) and unfurnished without
them, clothed with all such inexpressible Excellencies and Power, that surely
they want no strength to shake the very Foundations of the Earth, and to make
the Pillars thereof to tremble: 'Twas but One of them that in a Night sent an
hundred fourscore and five thousand of such Worms as we with pleasure into Dust
and their first Nothing: And another with a Breath only will blow up more
Myriads out of it again. And yet no sooner had Sin, [that (...),] that scum and
Excrement of filth, the very Elixir of all Poisons, cast its envenoming Shadows
upon the fair Faces of these Glorious Suns, but they presently unloose from
their several Orbs, dying into an Eternal Eclypse, and drop down into Darkness
and Horror, stripped for ever from their Native Eminences and Holiness, (the
loveliness that once beautified their Natures) Metamorphosed into the most
affrightful Image of all the most abstracted Deformity and Vileness
expressible; deprived for ever of those Eternal Felicities to which they were
Created, and are now become the very Sources and Fountains of all imaginable
Lewdness and Mischief, which they are increasing still, by pouring out the
whole Flood of their killing Streams to engulph us also in an everlasting
Ruin. God in great Kindness to us has discovered their now destructive
Properties, and shown us the danger we are in, while an whole Host of spiritual
Wickednesses are round about us, as so many roaring Lions ready to devour us,
and are our avowed Adversaries, Accusers, Murderers and Destroyers, incessantly
tempting us into the Rebellion with them, which they very well know will in the
end lay us in the same Dungeon of Darkness with all the Chains of divine
Indignation upon us that themselves are so dreadfully galled with: All which is
no idle Fiction framed on the Forge of a Melancholy, fanciful or Romantic
Brain, but a Verity as Infallibly Sealed by the Spirit of Truth to us, as any
other the Holy Oracles have with the clearest Perspicuity conveyed to our
Knowledge. And though too slightly regarded, yet witnessed to be, as Just on
themselves, so fatal to us, (if we keep not the strictest Guard, and Invest our
selves with the whole Armor of God) by One of their own Original Order and
Degree; (Now for ever secured from the like Dangers of confederating Treasons,
and Established into an Estate of entire and sinless Perfection,) from the
profound Sense and grave consideration that himself had of it. While therefore
he proclaims from Heaven the deplorable Woes to us (the poor Inhabitants of the
Earth and Sea) from the ruinating Consequences of their Power and Presence here
below, Revel. 12.12.

And it is matter of Astonishment to consider, how few are awakened by the Trump
of that Angel, unto any, the least Reflection on the Mischiefs and Miseries
effected in all Ages by the bloody Contrivances of these Apostate Spirits, who
have prevailed to the overturning not of Mighty Empires and Kingdoms only, but
of once the most flourishing Churches in the World, now overwhelmed with the
black Cloud of Pagan and Mohammedan Darkness and Death, where Divine Light and
Truth sent forth (then alas!) their sparkling Beams and Splendor; pouring in
their mortal Dregs both of Atheism and Error, which deface the whole Beauty,
and enervate the whole Strength of Original Piety and Religion; which they know
well enough will dissolve the Covenant of Heaven, and give up to the Judgment
not of a Desertion only, but Divorce. Who but these foment Divisions and
Schisms and Animosities between Men, by pussing up some (and those of the
meanest Capacity) into boundless and immodest Conceits of their own greater
Wisdom and Parts, and hateful disdain and Contempt of others, more worthy than
themselves? Who so Industriously blow up the Coals of all Dissension and
Discord between the most seemingly happy and united Fraternities, and invent
the Aspersions of Ignominy and Reproach that are six'd on each other? who but
these whisper into the Ears and Hearts of Princes those needless Jealousies and
Fears that cool them in their Kindness to their best Subjects, (whom they look
on as the secret underminers of the Peace and Government, the very Plagues and
Pests of the Age they live in, who are yet the very Pillars of the Throne) as
if there were no consistency between God's Empire and their own? Who but these
stir up Kings to ruin themselves by unnecessary Wars, and their poor Subjects
by unnecessary Sins? Who but these beat up the Drums of Sedition and Rebellion
against the best Princes, the very gracious Fathers of their People? Who
petrifies the Hearts of Tyrants against their poor Subjects into the bloodiest
Executions of their Wrath and Cruelty, not only grinding their Faces by cruel
Oppression and Impoverishment, but sheathing the Sword of Persecution in the
very bowels of Innocence, on no other account but this, that they refuse to
attend them into Hell? Who but these have raised up all the Assassinations and
Massacres upon the Body of the Church, not only by Heathenish and Pagan
Instruments, but have sent their thousands and ten thousands into Death by the
less merciful hands of those who (Drunk with Blood) have yet the blasphemous
Impudence to call themselves by the Name of Jesus? Who but these had the Brow
to move the Court of Heaven for the subversion of the whole College of the
Apostles at once, and with an equal Insolence to endeavor the utter evacuating
the whole Project of our Eternal Redemption by tempting the great Author of it
to cast himself upon sinful and unwarrantable Means of Preservation, and
directly tending to his Ruin; and when that would not take, consult together
more effectually to work their Ends by the cursed Treachery of his own Servant.
In a word, these are they that have wrought all the late Storms and Tempests in
the World; it is they have wrought all the Devastations that Turkish and
Gallican Tyranny have executed for them: The unnatural Wars in our own Bowels,
the horrid Massacres of the Church in France and Ireland, the deplorable Fewds
among our selves; these have kindled our Fires, burnt up our Cities, enflamed
our Spirits, contrived the Plots of our Ruin, and are yet at work very briskly
to bring them to Perfection.

And all this from the Inveterate Hatred they bear to God and Man, roaring as
Lions to devour, twisting themselves as Serpents to deceive; by all subtle
ways and wiles beyond all imagination, by secret and invisible Engines and
Artifices, profound Stratagems and Devices, making use of all sorts of Means
and Instruments, as well by real Friends as professed Enemies, to the very Wife
of thy Bosom; nay, to the dividing thy self, and making a Party for themselves
in thy Heart.

And yet we snore in our security, and dally in an insensibleness of any
danger, while yet these mighty Enemies are round about; they fill the Air we
breath in, and hover over our Heads, and are prying into all our most retired
Actions, and are Witnesses to all our Villainies, to give Evidence against us in
the last Day. Nay, they mingle themselves with our very Affections and
Passions, and fly-blow our very Prayers, and Devotions, and Charities,
endeavoring to render tham all fruitless and unprofitable to us, and
unacceptable to God. In short, instead of wishing well to us, assisting us in
our Work, rejoicing in our Conversion, and ministering to our Comfort (the
service of the good Angels) these repine at our Welfare, hinder our Repentance,
Lull us along in our Security, terrify our Spirits, imbitter our Lives, enrage
our Enemies, enstrange our Friends, disease our Bodies, and betray our Souls:
For all which, and infinite other unmentioned Calamities and Disasters from
them, whom may we justly Curse and execrate (as the Original cause of all,) but
Sin, which by its malignant Influences, and wicked Enchantments, from being
amiable Creatures of the sweetest Inclinations and Affections, has transformed
them into real Furies and Devils against us?

Come hither, Reader, and with that Roman Soldier, envy me the Honor of
preparing the Funerals of the great Pompy alone, but bring with thee all the
Luminaries of thy Soul; gather all the straggling forces of thine utmost reason
and considering Faculties (and all too little) to ruminate as thou ought on
this rueful Spectacle. David once bitterly Mourned at the Bier of one Prince of
Israel, Slain by the Treachery of an insolent Traitor: But who has slain all
these? Heaps upon heaps, once glorious Princes of Heaven. O see what a
slaughter sin has made upon them! And then consider the weight of that
Argument presented to thee by Peter and Jude. If God spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down into Hell, and delivered them into Chains of
darkness to be reserved unto Judgment; How will he spare thee? They were
Angels, Infinitely above thee in the Dignity of their Nature and Creation; yet
Greatness was no Argument for Mercy. They were a Multitude in the confederacy,
yet neither did the Number of the Offenders move pity in the least, but one and
all, Thousands of them to Hell without Mercy; yet it was the first Offense too,
they sinned but once, (and some think but in Thought,) and Justice seized upon
them to Execution, and God dealt not with them as with thee and me (Reader) on
whom he has long waited, even while we have been multiplying provocations, and
stirring up his wrath to destroy us, yet still has he waited to be gracious to
us. And methinks 'twere pity to make a God wait in vain upon us, to lose all
the Expenses of his Patience and Expectation from us. We would do well to think
on it, and the force of the Apostles most Pathetick Argument; Despisest Thou
the riches of his Goodness, and Patience, and Longsuffering! Thou that art but
a poor Worm, a Clod of the Earth, and no Angel, a Creature of Yesterday, and
who art crushed before the Moth, and whose Foundation is in the Dust; Despisest
thou? And who art thou that should despise a God? And to despise him too? To
entertain low and unbecoming thoughts of Him, that could Nod thee into Hell,
and send thee to accompany Devils in Torments! Not so much as to have an Eye
toward him, or to spend a Look upon him, or to concern thy Thoughts about him,
think him unworthy of thy Notice or Observation, and yet a God, and such a
one on whom Angels and blessed Spirits Gaze with unspeakable Admiration and
Delight, not to have the least sense of him! -- No neither whilst he is flowing
out to thee in the sweetest of his Communications, that of his Goodness, to
despise Goodness, and that Goodness not to others, but thy self, (thy self
Reader) to despise a God who has been so long good to thee! The very Fountain
of all the good Mercies thou have enjoyed, and herein good, as not to punish
thee for the abuse of those Mercies, but is still waiting! Now if thy reason be
not drenched into a perfect Bruitishness, be thine own Judge, whether such
Goodness should not lead thee to Repentance. A mercy he never vouchsafed to the
Angels, never waited to see whether they would return or no, but for the first
Sin delivers them to Justice, lays them in Chains and reserves them to
destruction, while yet he is still Courting thee to come in and submit:
Declares himself unwilling to ruin thee; makes Oath of it, That he has no
delight in thy Blood, but infinitely rather that thou should return and
Live; and thou may believe him, Reader, thou have his very Heart in that
Protestation. Well, it is not unworthy thy most serious Reflection to fix a
while on Gods Severity toward these Angels, who are now under Chains of wrath
(and thou art walking presumptuously on the snares of Death too) but should thy
feet stumble on the dark Mountains (as they will) and the fall of thy Body
shall burst out thy Bowels, and dash out thy Breath: Its possible Reader, thou
may find thy miserable Soul fettered in the same Chains that Haughtiness and
Insolence has betrayed them into, though now thou will not harken unto the
Rattling of theirs, for the noise of thy Chariot, and the Ruffling of thy Pride.

But pause a little, thou most exalted Dust, and view thy self in the Glass of
these now wretched Infernal Spirits: Do thou value thy self upon thine high
Birth, and does the Noblest Blood enrich thy Veins? Why these were the
Firstborn of God, of the eldest Family, and but one Degree subordinate to the
blessed Trinity, and never took their Rise from Clay, but were all Spirits and
Glorious, yet has Pride destroyed them. Do thou look Bigg on thy fellow
Servants, and from thine high Station and Preferments in the Courts of Princes,
swellest into a forgetfulness of thy mean Original? Why, proud Ashes, these
were the Illustrious Courtiers of the King of Glory; and Attendants on the
Majesty of Heaven, -- Yet Pride has slain them. Art thou Commissioned from thy
Master into Power, and delegated unto Executions from Royal Authority? Why*
these even in their low Estate are Powers still, and can (if Licensed) make the
Earth to tremble; are the Princes of the Air, and keep their Court in thine own
Heart too, and though stripped of their Holiness, yet are Commissioned often unto
frequent and fearful Executions (and God deliver us from their Tyranny!) yet
they are but Hell Hounds still, and their Pride has undone them.

Do thou Glory in thine Attendants and long Train, the Set of Liveries that
encompass thy Chariot, and the many Slaves thou have at thy Service? Know
(Seigniour) that Beelzebub has his Legions too, and in a more perfect
subjection and conformity than thine, he has them all at his perfect beck and
absolute Service, his Subjects are no Rebels against him, but go and come at
the least Nod of his pleasure, and yet this great Prince has his Chains on
him, and Pride has made him a Prisoner of Wrath.

And (might I be so bold) I would humbly Address me to the Man of Art and
Science, whose Soul dwells in the Sun, while others look out through the dark
Dormants of a glimmering Light, and walk in the Cloister of Obscurity and
Ignorance. The Giant that is Head and Shoulders above Others in all the
Dimensions of profound Parts, subtle Brain, most exquisite Learning and
Acquisitions: Thou know already, that this Society of the Dark Order, were
once All Light and Intelligences themselves; and now in the state of their
Degeneracy are yet Masters of universal Knowledge, not only Magical and
Phylosophical, but Theological too, and can give the Explanation of the most
abstruse Mysteries: And from their natural Sagacity, long Experience,
Astrological Conclusions, and extraordinary Revelations, can Pierce into Future
Events, and have often uttered their Prophecies and foretold things that have
happened: While Thou suckest in knowledge by Drops; They Roll in the whole
Ocean of it, and yet alas, all this Light is but perfect Darkness, and a Torch
that leads them to Hell, and but to a clearer Discovery of their own Misery and
Sorrow; is void of all Comfort and Peace, and strikes nothing but Terror and
Confusion into them, being imbittered with Envy and obstinate Malice against
God and all Idea's of Goodness. To thy Knees therefore, to thy Knees get thee
(most mighty Rabbie:) O for the sparks of Seraphick Love to fall down on and
inflame thy Frigid Affections, and to Sanctify all thine Aerie and
Unprofitable Notions, into the Heat and Life of Charity, Consolation and Joy in
God.

Nor must I forget my fine Lady, while the Glass is in the Room: Ladies love
Glasses, and spend too much time in gazing upon them; come Madam, lend us here
your Eyes a little, here are Angels attend you: -- Nay do not startle, Lady,
they can do you no Mischief (if you do your self none.) It Is but a Coachful or
two from the Dark Region, that are come to pass a short Visit this Evening with
you; They have brought you some Patterns of the Newest Fashion with them, and
think you may need them. Your pale Cheeks want a little Enlightening too, and
these have excellent Fucus to sell, can furnish your Ladyship with the most
bewitching Colors, and can inspire you into the rarest knowledge of Tempering
and Laying; and for Patches there are none like those they Cut, and will leave
you Directions how to stick them so, as (if you please) they shall never fall
off more: They are Blacks themselves, and love to promote the Honor of their
Country Complexion. They are sent by their great Prince with a Message of an
How-d'ye to you, and know you are at leisure enough to receive them; and in
truth they have little else to do, but to be Tutors to young Ladies. Themselves
were Scholars to Madam Pride, who has instructed them into all the Figures and
Arts of most perfect Dresses. They love Gawdry, and were once most absolute
Beauties themselves; they are indeed a little Tawny now from the Torrid Zone
wherein they Breath, but if you please, can Transform themselves into a Lighter
shape, and then will appear less frightful to you. -- Come, let us see whether
you can vie Beauty with them. Bring out all your Merceries covered over by the
strutting Embosses of spangling Gold, till nothing appear but the Massy
Embroideries sparkling Luster. Send for your Tire-women, let them Curle up your
dangling Locks into the most bewitching twines, then lodge the rosy Blush on
your lilly Cheeks, and Lips: Let a glorious Air and Mien dwell on every
Feature, no Motion or Posture of your whole Body, but what may strike Wonder
and Ecstasy. Come, pass on now by Majestic Paces to the Chamber of Presence,
where these goodly Creatures attend you. Ah! is this all the Shine you can
make? See how they dazzle you into perfect Deformity and Contempt! And yet they
can show you variety of Exchanges every hour, and have often done it when they
have pleased to appear in Masquerade. And can You find in your Heart to be
Devils too, dressed up in all your Gaieties with no other design than to Tempt
and Destroy, to Bewitch others and your selves into the Ruins of the Damned?
What think ye, is it not pity such Creatures as these should be scorched with
everlasting Heats, clothed all in Gowns of Flame, who were once Attired by a
Divine hand, into such Amiable Perfections as Expression fails to tell you how
brightly they shined in their Celestial Robes, and yet Pride has Divested them
of all, undressed them into Shame and eternal Sorrow; Yes, Madam, Pride has
done it, their Golden Tresses like Medusa's Head, are turned to Snakes and
hiss, yet cannot fright you.

And thou Pursy Man of Wealth, that have Enclosed thy self in Cedar, and
mounted thy Towering Soul high as thy proud Structures, and with that haughty
Monarch art ravished in Admiration of the Pile of thy Glory: Will thou not
vouchsafe one Glance from thy Turrets upon these Spirits, and remember in what
State they once lived? In a City built and furnished as Richly as Infinite
Power and Wisdom could contrive and expend for its Glory. The very Gates of
Pearl and the Streets of pure Gold: An House made with no other Hands than what
a God has. Yet from all that Height and Magnificence, Pride has tumbled them
down into a Tophet whose Chambers are deep and large too, but whose Fire burns,
and is enkindled by the Breath of an incensed God into a streaming Flame for
ever. And are you sure (Sir) that your Walls are strong enough to secure you
from the like Tragedy? 'Twill be a dreadful Change to pass out from your
Stately Palace into a scorching Hell.

But what must we pity Devils then? No, but our selves rather, who in a
dreadful Fearlesness are merrily passing on to the same Misery, and sure they
Merit little Pity from us, who lay so many Trails of Ruin for us, to drag us
into the Sorrows themselves endure; and would but Mock and deride us if in
Torments with them. Nor have I the Charity of Origin, to believe that all the
Flames in which they Suffer, will ever prevail to Purge out the Malignity of
their Poisonous Natures, nor refine them into Purity. Truth it self has
averred, that their Fire shall never, never be quenched, (and if it were not
so, he would have told us.) No, Reader, no, Pride has done their work for them
to the purpose, and thoroughly fixed them the open avowed Irreconcilable
Enemies of God and all Goodness; yet still methinks, to see these Great and
Mighty Princes footing it as Servants upon Earth, or wandering in the Air with
the Shackles of Vengeance at their Heels, for these Principalities (with the
Fingers and Toes of their Native Royalties cut off) to be banished into the
place of Dogs, to pick Scraps from under the Table, and to swallow the Bones of
Eternal Affliction, with no other Drink than the Poison of Dragons, and the
Dregs of the Wrath of the Almighty, cannot be in the sense of all but a sad and
deplorable Spectacle: And though we cannot so Pathetically commiserate their
Degradation and Sorrows, yet are we more senceless and hardened than they, if
when after God has hung them up before the Sun, in the Fetters of his fiercest
Anger, and made them the lasting Monuments of his fiery Indignation to all
Generations; If I say while we Gaze on Them, we do not Compassionate our selves
and fortify our Spirits by all imaginable Care against the Mischiefs of Sin
(that of Pride especially) which has brought all these Plagues and Judgments
upon them.

Buoys of dire Vengeance chained here,
To raise up Universal Fear;
To Quash the Mountains, and melt down
The Pride of each Terrestrial Crown:
Rattle your Fetters into the Ears
Of a Deaf World that laughs at Fears.
(While yet You Tremble) These Secure
(As if as Innocent, as Pure
As once were you) themselves Immure.
Methinks an Hierarchy in Hell
Might sink the Tumor, tho it swell:
If not, the Baffle will soon appear
All on Themselves (not Me) when There.
Adam's Tragedy,
Brethren in the Common Nature, (however distinguished by Accidents of Life.)
The Progeny of the first Adam, subjected by Him to Sin and Death: Redeemed from
all by the Blood of a Savior: (Were there in you an Heart agreeable to that
Grace) Do not Baffle the Project of the Trinity to save you; nor Frantickly
Tear off the Plaster designed to Heal you: Heaven is no place for unsanctified
Flesh, stand to the Trial if you dare: The Judge is at the door, that will more
sensibly convince you, who has sent you word beforehand, That without
Holiness no man shall see God. Have out of the Rotten House of your first
Father, and while Vengeance pursues you, you are Mad indeed, if you fly not to
the City of Refuge.

1 COR. XV. 22. In Adam all dye.


SIN having made this havoc above, and glutted it self with Angels Blood; let
us now pass on to take a view of the direful Desolations it has wrought below;
'Twill fight neither against Small nor Great, but only against Kings; for
having already destroyed these Spiritual Princes, it still pursues the High
Game, and now lets fly at the first and Greatest on Earth.

When the Eternal Word spoke things into Being that had no Pre-existence, and
commanded admirable Order and Form to start up out of Confusion and Chaos; He
not only gave a Naked Life to his Creatures, but clothed them with
unexpressible Beauty and Ornament; each Creature richly garnished in his
Natural Dress that was meet and proper to it: But to Man (the Lord of all) did
he reserve a double Suit; He designs him the Epitomy of the whole Creation, and
to participate of both Natures: His Better Part (the Soul) he Enamels with the
sparkling Beams of his own Divinity, and Clothes it in no other than his own
Livery, and Creates it a Spirit like himself, Glorious in Holiness. This
inestimable Jewel he wrapped up in a Casket (the Body) very curiously and
wonderfully wrought, to become a Chariot for the Noble Soul to move in: And
this very Case he fashioned into such excellent Symmetry of Parts and
Perfection, as should show in each Lineament and Proportion, the unparalleled
Wisdom and Power of its Maker; and was so far from needing a Mantle to cover
Defects, as Nakedness it self was its best Ornament, and Innocence its Natural
Robe. God himself delighting to see him in no other Vesture, and himself not
blushing to appear before his great Creator in it. All the Creatures did their
Homage to him in no other Dress, when they presented themselves so humbly to
take Name, which He, as their God on Earth, gave Wisely and Suitably to their
Natures. The Loss of a Rib was so far from being any Blemish to his Person,
that he soon finds it again wrought up into the Perfection of a Delicate Lady,
as Beautiful and Entire as Himself: And being but himself divided, renders him
still more completely Perfect. And thus the Lord of the Creation receives his
Stately Bride from the immediate Hands of his God, and is Bessed in the
Fruition of a Princess Congenial to his Nature and Honor: When in a Paradise
of unspeakable Pleasures, did this High and Happy Pair deliciously enjoy
themselves and their Maker, with all the Reciprocations of the Dearest Love and
Joy.

Now to Consummate this Happiness, the Perpetuity of all is kindly offered
them, on the Easy Condition of a Thankful Obedience: (Alas!) It Is but the Rent
of a Pepper-corn for so vast a Revenue. The Great Landlord will reserve to
Himself a Propriety but in one Plant, which by no means he must Encroach on,
under the Penalty of certain Death: while the Fruition of all the Rest shall be
Sealed to him by Another, which is Hallowed into a Sacrament for immutable
Confirmation to him. He humbly Bows, and is content to live no longer, than
while he pays the Tribute of so Reasonable Service.

But the banished Crew, who roved up and down in the Air and Earth, (now
perfectly stripped of all the Glories of their happy Creation, and of all Hopes
of any possible Re-investiture into Divine Favor,) and ready to burst with
Rage and Malice, when they find that God had raised up to himself Children from
the Dust of the Earth, that paid him a greater Honor than they, and were now
become the Blessed Heirs of his Grace, and the Mercies themselves had so justly
Forfeited, began to Conspire the Means of recking their Revenges against both,
between whom there appeared so seemingly Irrefragable Union of Friendship.

And is there no way (think the Infernal Wretches) to deface this so goodly
Fabric, so Accurately set up and brought to so lovely Perfection? No means to
cool this Fervor of Fondness and Affection betwixt these new Confederates?
What, cannot a Council of Devils break this Tripple League? Were not we our
selves in as fair Probability of standing unmoveably in his Favor, yet are now
broken off? And does all our Misery serve us to no purpose at all, nor instruct
us into Methods of Revenge? Sure the Expedient is at hand already, and can we
act by any better Engine than what has unscrewed our selves from his Heart?
Can we work by any more proper Tool than Pride that has ruined us all? She that
has been so Politic to out-wit Spirits, cannot want her Arts to cast a fair
Mist before the Eyes of the Children of the Worm, while she blows her Venomous
Breath upon them. And is that newly start-up Lady so stiff and strait-lac'd,
that no dainty cringing Address may prevail to warp her to the Impressions of
Pride? So Coy and Reserved that no Insinuations can bow her to the Suggestions
of a greater Happiness than yet she enjoys? Why she is but a Woman, made of a
Rib, and Bent already to give Life to our hopes: Cannot Pride smooth her up to
the tickling Conceits of an higher Empire, and display the Felicities of a
Goddess to her? Intimate that her Maker is jealous already of his Supremacy,
and providently to secure it, has Fettered them up by a Law from the only
means of both their Promotions: But if they will, may be Gods themselves as
well as He. Let her view the enclosed Tree, and judge whether its Fruit have
not Charms which none but Weakness and Folly would refrain from; and bears Meat
not proper only for Gods, but whose very Digestion would produce Immortality.
They may (but) taste themselves into Deity. And then for an Assistant, has she
not the Serpent (a subtle Creature) to Organize the Errand and speak by, that
knows so curiously to Curl himself into Welcome and Audience, and by a thousand
Cringes will wriggle himself into Acceptance.

And thou Pride, we conjure thee to dart thy Mortal Sting, (whose griping Pains
still stick in our Hearts) strike it into every part of their Souls: While we
our selves will Assist thee in the Project, and make them know we will not
Smart alone under the Frowns of an Angry God, but shall let them see how just
it is, they should bear a share with us in the bitter Fruits of Rebellion and
Folly.

It Is no news to the Reader, that this execrable Plot was crowned with its
wished for Success, and how Pride played her part in the Tragedy so much to the
Life, that all the Pit of Hell paid her the Honor of the Clap and the Hum.

Love and Life lie Bleeding together: The Divinity disappears and retreats into
Heaven, to Solace it self in it self, since all the Sparks of it here below are
fully extinct, and Darkness covers again all the Earth. The very Devils prosper
in their Ruinous Plots, and if infinite Wisdom be not able to temper good
Physic from this Venom, the Foundations of the World must dissolve into
Nothing, the Creation drop into its first Confusion, to Bury the Sinners in its
Ruins.

No sooner had Miserable Man shut his Ear from his Maker, and opened it to the
Viper and Lust, but the first visible Effect of his Folly was Shame (which
never since has broken off its Attendance on Sin) for Pride having rent off
the Garment of their Native Simplicity and Innocence which fenced them from
every Danger, the Angry Winds begin to revenge their Creator's Quarrel, and
boldly assault their shivering Joints: They feel already the Cold Effects of
their Weakness, and their very Souls Blush to see how Succorless and Naked they
had left themselves. Modesty Suggests the Necessity of a Covering, and
themselves can think of no better than the complicated Branches of a Tree; not
of the Laurel wreathed into Crowns of Victory (alas! here was all Defeat) but
of the poor Fig Platted into the inglorious Shrouds of Shame. Unhappy Adam!
Had thou wisely refrained from the Fruit, thou had never needed the Leaves.
Thus (Reader) those who slighted the Protection of the God of Nature, became
Debtors to a contemptible Vegetable, and are obliged to a Leaf to Periwig their
Baldness and Poverty. But Alas! Leaves had but little Wear or Warmth, they soon
Wither and Rot, whose very dropping from their Loins, (dead and Sapless because
separate from their Root) seem to take Voice, and loudly upbraid the Weakness
of those that wore them, and the Impossibility of Life to such who were now
broken off from the Fountain of it. Blessed God! To what Covert shall he betake
himself that flies from thee? They multiply Sorrows that hasten after another
God. How unpitied are the Rags of the Prodigal, who left the Rich Wardrobe of
his Fathers Treasures, to Cloth himself with Confusion! Fig Leaves Adieu!
Wither and dye,
I Have other Leaves to dress me by:
A Tree whose Leaves do ever thrive,
And which alone dead Souls Revive;
One who has Cursed both Leaves and Wood
For not affording any Good;
Kindly consulting General Weal,
Left those behind that Nations Heal;
Whose Virtue wisely understood,
Are found both Medicine and Food:
Then turn them, Reader, over and over,
Adam's lost Glory they will restore.


Cold and Shame are but the beginning of Man's Sorrows: If his Members shake
with the gentle Gales of Paradise, how will his Heart tremble at the Whirlwind
of his Offended Makers Voice! Shame is the Firstborn of Sin; and Fear takes it
by the Heel as a Twin of the same Birth: He Fears and Flies, but in vain from
him that is every where: And he that first seeks a Covering for his Shame, is
now seeking another for his Sin, and would gladly Pin his Fig Leaves on his
Makers Back, whom he Blasphemously Impeaches as the Sinner, for his kindness in
giving him a Wife. I tremble to see how low he falls, who has once lost his
hold of Grace: O let everlasting Arms be underneath me! Since such is the
Villainy of Nature, that it would Condemn a God to save it self! But what is
more Stupendous yet, The God is content it should be so, and that a Cross be
framed of the Fatal Tree for Himself to Hang on, that while his Eye should be
fixed on the Prodigy, (when yet the Sun shut his) his Heart (with the Veil of
the Temple) might be Rent into a Thousand Shivers; which when laid on the
Altar, should become a Sacrifice too (persum'd by his own) that shall serve to
expiate his Guilt: For a broken and a contrite Heart, O God, thou will not
despise. Sure the Sense of so Astonishing Love, would Melt him into Repentance
and a Flood of Tears; but if not, he deserved to dye for ever.

Paradise is no longer a Place for Rebels, who have forfeited their Right to
the Tree of Life: Away to the Plantations with them; Hard Labor and Sweat will
humble them into more Sober thoughts of themselves, than thus to Aspire after
Deity. How hardly is the Glass of Prosperity holden by a steadfast hand without
Breaking! but how Afflicting is the remembrance of an Happiness lost by our
Folly! And I doubt not but every step that poor Adam trod out of his delicious
Garden, was made upon Thorns, that ran up into his very Heart to make it Bleed.
And I humbly beg my Reader, upon the bare Knees of my Soul, that he would Bathe
his Heart in the River of the first Sinners melting Sorrows for the loss of an
Earthly Paradise: Since the Time may come, that he Himself may Weep the like
unprofitable Drops under the Forfeiture of an Eternal Heaven (for the sake of a
few Momentary and Perishing Lusts) where a Sea of them will little avail him in
a place of Torment. And I do assure him, That the Caution swims to him in a
Flood of my own at the writing of it, and could be content (if it might benefit
him more) that it were Printed with the Blood of my Heart. But how Faint and
Senseless are my Hopes, when I see the Rock of Obduration so far from yielding
these precious Waters at the Strokes of the Prophets, that the Impenetrable
Adamant was no wise dissolvable by the Tears or Blood of a weeping God.

The Naked Offenders must in pity be Clothed, and their very Garments are part
of their Punishment. They shall do Penance in Hair-Cloth. Those whom Pride had
blown up into the Conceit of being Gods, shall sneak up and down in Skins of
Beasts: Sure the Skins of those Brutes (however Tanned) were but a Rugged Shift
for the tender Body of the Mother of all Living.

See, Reader, see, the First and Greatest Princes of the Earth, (ever ever
Kingdoms or Empires were bounded out, and divided among Crowned Heads, see
these) that held the Scepter of the Universe, thus Treacherously betrayed by
Sin, into so vile an Estate of Dishonor. They are wrapped up in Leathern Suits,
which doubtless they put on and off with infinite Shame and Sorrow, in
Reflection upon the loss of their Glorious Robes. The wily Serpent had told
them indeed, that their Eyes should be opened, and 'twas true enough, but to
what? To the Sight of their unspeakable Misery and Woe, that lending so easy
an Ear to the Impostures of that Grand Deceiver, they saw themselves Gulled out
of all their Original Happiness and Bliss. Thus Adam that was Created in
Honor, but understood not his own Felicity in the Favor and Fellowship of his
God, fell as in a Moment from it, and became like the Beasts that perish,
walking up and down in his Shaggy Suit, which (with the Hairy Baptist) was ever
Preaching Repentance and Mortification to him. It may be true, what is written
of Peter, that every Crowing of the Cock, was a new Peal that alarmed him to
fresh Sorrows; but sure each Glance of Adam's Eye upon his Beastial Coat, made
him go forth and weep bitterly.

Thus Sin has brought forth Shame, and Shame a Necessity of Garments; to be
proud therefore of Garments, what is it but to be proud of our Shame? nay, to
Glory in our Sin, that has brought that Shame and Necessity upon us. And this
minds me of Tertullian, contemplating Adam in his Skins: Lo (says he) Homo
Pellitus Orbi, quasi Metallo datur. Man, the Lord of the whole World, is sent
out of Paradise in a Leathern Jerkin to work as a Slave in the Mines. That Garb
very well suiting the Spade and the Mattock, and his Wife allowed no other
Dress, her Soft Skin covered with a Pelt only, at the very mention of which,
her delicate Daughters fall a shrugging and are uneasy, but mightily Mortified
for the Misery she has brought upon them; when, (Good Souls) they do Penance
with her in Rolls of the finest Linen, and the softest folds of Satin and
Silk.

This was an Wound to Man indeed, but Heaven it self must Smart: 'Twas not so
strange an Indignity to those who had made themselves as Beasts, to be thus
lapp'd up in their Skins: But for God himself to be fetched out of Paradise,
and made to walk up and down in a Skin upon Earth, for Deity to put on a Skin
too: This is the insufferable Fruit of their Folly, (but the incomparable
Evidence of his Love.) Nay, and while these might walk warm and secure in
theirs, He (Alas!) cannot keep his own Whole upon his Back, but is all over
Rent and Torn from the crown of his Head (where the Thorns pierce it) to the
sole of the Foot, (where the Nails) when Agonies from Wrath above, Whips and
Spears from Rage below, dips him all into Blood, his Skin becoming as Joseph's
Coat, which he carries back (with all the Breaches and Rents upon it) to show
the very Angels whom he might thank for all this.

But to teach us the Lesson of Humility and due Moderation in our Habit, you
may Note, how little value the great God puts upon the Body (on which he has
stamped the Character of Vile) while he presently wraps it in a Cover of Skins,
and thinks it fine enough when it answers the ends of Security from Nakedness
and Cold, when yet his Wisdom took nigh four Thousand years ever he finished
the Garment that should guard the Soul from the more dangerous Attacks of Sin
and Death.

All Peace, all Quiet, no Murmurs here, no Pleas for Gaudy Clothes or Changes
of Attire; they humbly offer their Guilty Shoulders to the rugged Hide, in meek
Submission to the good Pleasure of their great Creator. Those who are unworthy
of Life, may not stand on Terms of Vanity. Surely very meek and resigned is
humble Guilt; nor did ever broken Heart quarrel at the Rents of its own making.
Lord if it be Thou, let me come to thee, though in a Fisher-mans Coat.

But was Cold and Blushing, the only Effects of the Consult of Hell against
poor Man? This all the depth of their Plot? Ah no! for if Pride had been so
Modest or Merciful to have stripped him only (with the Egyptian Strumpet) of the
spoils of the Upper Garment, (the treacherous Flesh,) had it bruised the Case
only, or plucked up the stakes of the moveable Tabernacle and buried it all in
it is Orignial Dust, the Tyrrany still had been easy and supportable, while the
Jewel within had made an escape with all the Treasures of her Excellencies
whole and untouched; had she been so kind to have left some memorable Marks of
her Cruelty on the exterior Perfectious of his Beauty, the whole Creation
would have called a Parliament, and humbly have offered their Loyal Subsidies
to their great Sovereign: Each Bard and Beast would have been proud to wrap him
in their Down and Furrs, each Blossom and Flower would have sewed Themselves
together to have made them Summer-suits, as Shem and Japhet they would have hid
their Faces, while they had reverently mantled the defects of their Lord. But O
Cruelty never to be forgotten, never to be mentioned without horror! The Robe
of Immortality is not only rent off from the stately Pavilion of the Body, but
the bloody Tyrant kills the Porter at the Door, with design to make way to the
rifling the Richer Closets within. As Lightning, it values not the Sheath so it
can but melt down the Steel of the Interior Power and Strength, and trembles
not to adventure into the presence Chamber of the great Queen, whom all Pale
and even Dead with fear, he invades with insufferable Insolence, flying in her
Sacred Face, and with unmerciful Hands tearing out those glorious Lights that
lately sparkled Joy into the Heart of her Maker, and in a moment Devests her of
all those Royalties which made even a God to dote upon her: And then (to
perfect the sorrow) the Sorcerer forces into her weak and bloodless hand a
Circean Cup of Magical Poisons (tempered together by his own mischievous
Fingers) which she unhappy Princess too greedily swallows (as what she thought
might quickly Period her sorrows) but (Destruction on him) would you know the
execrable effects of that fatal Draught? The poor Soul (instead of expiring)
falls into a perfect Frenzy, when immediately you might have seen her throwing
her unfortunate Self into the Cursed Arms of the cruel Deflowrer, and in
Posture; of most Lascivious Courtship, Kissing the very hands that had made the
Rape upon, her Sacred Person, and with a Fondness as Strange as Unparalled,
Sacrifices all her Powers to the Lusts of her Mortal Enemy. Have you not seen
some poor Distract, rolling in Straw, with her Hair dishevil'd, in Rags all
torn, winding her Face into infinite forms? Now casting out Melancholy smiles,
and those followed by pitiful Sighs, which as soon are exchanged into loud
Laughter, and that, dying into a plodding Silence, while she knits her Straws
into a thousand knots, and tearing them again into pieces with fury; Glad of
every Feather to play with, and adoring the smallest Sunbeam with ridiculous
Ceremonies; till the noise of her Keeper startles her into trembling, whom she
fears and flatters at once, as glad of his coming, yet afraid of his stay: In
short, most perfectly insensible of her own Sorrows, and equally incapable of
removing them, she renders her self a willing Prisoner to her own Affliction,
and imagins her very Dungeon a Palace?

This (alas) is too imperfect a Pourtraicture of this Princesses Lunacy, in
whom the Complacencies of her first Affections (so pure and ravishing) are all
drowned in the flote of new senceless Passions, who in the loss of ineffable
Felicities of divine Amors, and the dearest Embraces of a God, distractedly
falls in Love with Feathers, and Straws, and Shadows, and every thing, and is
unhappily betrayed to Court her very Torments and Plagues. My people have
changed their glory for that which does not profit, Jer. 2.11.

Now to make the Tragedy yet more complete, each Scene of it is Acted in the
very Presence of her great Lord, who had but placed himself behind the Tapistry
for trial of her Fidelity and Love, where he makes this Lamentable Discovery of
her treacherous Disloyalty, and sees her thus miserably surpised.

The whole Court above, expected nothing less than Ten thousand Deaths to have
been darted into her false and ungrateful Heart, and looked each minute for her
Sentence into everlasting Tortures: When (O unfathomable Goodness) instead of
Punishment and Death, her dearest Lord commiserates the poor frantic, and
Summoning a Council of the profoundest Wisdom (where Love sat President) he
graciously consults the most effectual Means for the rendering her to her self
again, and applying the most proper Remedies of removing (at least abating) the
Distemper, and doubts not but her more sensible Reflections on his Kindness and
Pity, will endear her again to a more careful and faithful Obedience and Duty,
when in the right use and improvement of her Reason, she shall prudently
animadvert on the tenderness of his Heart, and the Royalty of his Care and
Provisions for her.

While the Debate was hotly carried on by the whole Trinity, see One of
themselves -- But here Reader, Expression fails me, and never yet were Words
found out (never shall be) to delineate that unutterable Goodness, which God
himself so highly commended, and the very Angels stand astonished at, and for
which Thousands of thousands, and Ten thousand times Ten thousand of the
Heavenly Quire pour upon his glorious Head infinite Blessings and Hallelujahs
for Ever and Ever, and the Soul that joins not in that Eulogy, let him be
Anathema Maranatha, Accursed till Himself comes to pronounce him so to all
Eternity.) This glorious One not only intercedes for her Pardon, but undertakes
the Cure, and so passionately pursues the Request, that he generously offers to
wash away the stain of her disloyalty with the dearest Blood of his Heart. But
because he had yet None (for he was God too) he would draw some from his
Patient, and artificially temper it into a Body for himself, which his Divinity
shall Consecrate into so spotless a Purity, and immaculate Perfection, as
should highly ennoble his Blood, and make it so Meritorious and Rich, that when
it should come to be poured out from his precious Veins, will abundantly
satisfy the expectations of Justice, and serve to be a full Propitiation for
the whole Offense, (for he took it on purpose to Bleed it out again, to finish
the Project of his Love, and her perfect Redemption and Safety.) And thus was
Himself contented to die for her, and at the dear Price of his own Life to
purchase her wholly to himself, while he expects she will devote her self
wholly to his absolute Service and Honor, and ever pay him the grateful
Returns of her Heart for so unconceivable Kindness and Love: While he will
Operate by such other Methods, as (he fears not) shall accomplish her entire
Restoration, and render her again an Object of Beauty, to the holy Eyes of her
Maker, by the Loveliness that he himself will put upon her. Though yet he finds
from too visible Symptoms that the Diffusion of the Venom through every part,
(and which had so sadly corrupted her Seminals) would greatly endanger her
Posterity, to whom the Disease would be certainly communicated with her Nature;
(And alas! the experience of some Thousands of Years have given too clear a
Testimony of that dismal Truth,) yet she might comfort her Self in this, That
his Care should constantly attend them too, he will ever be ready to administer
to Them also; and to all but such whose outrageous Madness would leave them
utterly incapable of his healing Prescriptions; and whose Infection would work
to so high a Pitch, as to cause them desperately to slight the Remedies that
his Wisdom and Goodness had prepared for them.

No Bounds, no Rampires could hinder the Floodgates of mine Eyes from flowing
out into the deepest Streams at the hearing the Account of this rueful
Massacre. All the World destroyed at one blow in their Great Representative!
Not a Birth but what should add a Rebel against Heaven, and a Subject to Sin!
That Is a Triumph with a Witness, that insults over the Ruin of the whole Race:
It Was but a Left Wing of the Angels that Pride had unhappily cut off, but here
the whole Progeny of Adam lie mortally bleeding to Death; and not one escapes
to tell the sad Story of their own Defeat: Nay God Himself wounded in the Rout;
Necessitated to take the Field, and fall in it too, be Buried in the Common
Grave, and had there seen Corruption, had not his Divinity relieved him.

Come, Reader, let us conferr a while: There is a passage lately dropped from
that Great Physician, who upon view of his Patients corrupted Blood, seemed to
shake his Head, and pity her whole Progeny. It would be worth a little pains to
search out the Truth, and make some Experiment in our selves: (Sure he meant
not that Bedlam, her first Production who so barbarously killed his Brother in
the Field where the Mad Blood boiled up so hotly within him, and the poor
Innocent fell by his Bloody hands from no provocation at all, but loving him
who had wrought so good a Cure upon him, and was growing up toward perfect
Recovery; No, no,) It Is the whole Posterity; and our selves are surely
included: Come let us try out the matter. Have thou never felt her Mad Blood
frolicking in thine own Veins, and the Distemper gotten up into thy Head too?
How often have the Felicities of a Deity been presented by Pride upon the Stage
of thy Fancy? And how brave it would be to drink thy fill of Nectar with the
Gods? Have thou never walked with thy Trident as Neptune, and commanded the Sea
to own thy Authority? How many Rags of thy Poverty has Imagination dipped into
Purple, and hung them up as the Ensigns of thy Royality? How many Staves have
thou gilded into Scepters, and holden them forth to thy Subjects to kiss? What
was in the Brain of that Emperor, that set him awork to out-thunder Jupipiter?
And what are the dreadful Claps of thine Oaths and Blasphemies but desperate
Charges upon God Himself, which none but a perfect Frantic would adventure at?
What account can thou give of thy Time and Life which is lent thee but a
Moment for Eternity, when that Eternity will be short enough to curse thine own
Madness in trifling away Time? Art thou fooling still with Feathers and Straws,
and idly knitting Knots in the Grot of thy Misery, when (with thy unhappy
Father) thou art thrust out of Paradise, and have no Acquaintance in that Holy
Court where once he was so perfect a Favorite, and (which shows thee wholly
distracted) thou desire none? Have thou seen other Light than what has
darkly glimmered through the Windows of thy Melancholy Cell? or other
Excellencies than what have Dazzled thine Eyes in the Glories of Life? Art thou
priding thy Self in the very Shackles of thy Mournful Captivity, and never
knew a greater Liberty? Alas! thou art locked up in Bedlam still, and Rovest
about in thy Fancy, when as the true Light, and Life, and Freedom, are as far
as Heaven from thee? What makes thee judge of the earnest Pursuits of a few
here and there after an Invisible Happiness, to be perfect Weakness and breach
of Discretion; and have wondered they should look after another Heaven than that
thou enjoyest already on Earth? How have thou preferred a Persian Devotion that
is happy in a Visible God, that shines upon his Votaries every day! A perfect
Stranger to that Faith that is the Evidence of things not seen: Alas Man! as a
dangerous Frantic thou art close shut up in the Dungeon of Unbelief; where thy
Brain works upon a thousand Chimera's, which evaporate all into Air and Nothing!

Come, let us lay these things to Heart: Is it nothing to thee, that the same
Pride which first infected Beelzebub the Prince of flies, has Blown upon thy
Great Mother, and from her have issued those Swarms, which overrun her whole
Posterity? From this Serpent has come forth a Cockatrice, whose fruit is a
fiery flying Serpent in thine own Bosom. These Cockatrice Eggs hatch every day
in thine Heart, and break out into ten thousand Vipers there: Do not thou
feel them passing in and out as Wasps out of an Hive; and ready to sting thee
to Death? Thy Savior has forewarned thee of the killing danger of them, that
are all bred in the Heart, Mat. 15.18. Out of the heart proceed, etc. They have
eaten into thy very Nature, and like Sampson's Bees, made their Nest in thy
very Carcass; and because they yield a sweetness, thou love to have it so:
Unhappy Creature! not knowing with Jonathan, that the Curse is gone out, and
it is present Death but to dip the top of thy Rod and taste of this Honey, 1 Samuel 14.43.

Yes Man, it is thine Heart is the Cage of the Unclean birds, That the very Stye
of these filthy Swine, That the Habitation of these Evil Spirits: We pity the
poor Creature that had a Legion within him at once, but have thou any less?
These are they that Metamorphise some into Dogs, some into Swine, others into
Vipers, the Jews into Serpents, Herod into a Fox, Nero into a Lion, Judas into
a Devil, and thy Self into all. These have been the Elames that have burned
into perpetual Desolations, turning the whole Earth into a Field of Blood and
ruinous heaps: When the Son of God appeared from Heaven with design to assuage
and allay their Fury, they took Courage and made Head against him, and never
ceased till they sent him back to complain what an Hell he found upon Earth.

Indeed these Canaanites are left in the Land, to Vex and Trouble the very
Israel of God (and he sees it best it should be so) for Causes well known to
himself; but to grow so Audacious, so far from fearing any Writ of Ejection to
get them out, that the very Blind and Lame of them (as those in the Fort of
Zion) so impudently boast their security, that they laugh at the Spear of the
fiercest Opposition.

These Swarms like the Egyptian Frogs so violently invade us, that as Guests
(of their own bidding) they make themselves welcome, and will feed on nothing
but the very best in the house, Crawling up and down through every Room of our
Souls, and cry you no Mercy, while they creep up with you into the very
Bedchamber to take a Lodging with you there.

'Twere some Happiness still, would they forbear the Chapel, and withdraw to
give us leave to deplore our Captived condition, and to Petition for Succors
from Heaven; but alas! they rush themselves into the Divine Presence too (as
Satan came once with the Sons of God,) and never fail being at our right hands
to resist all the Motions we present for our freedom; like Jannes and Jambres,
by their cursed Enchantments, they would (if possible) invalidate and frustrate
the Embassies of our Souls to the King of Glory, by the distracting Hisses of
their Raising.

Who is ignorant that they watch all imagiginable Advantages to destroy us, and
close in with Satan in all the Contrivances of our Ruin? Nay, the united
Legions of those Dark Powers were inconsiderable and despiseable without them;
who must consult to bribe a Snake again to tell us Stories of the Gaieties of a
Godhead and an Apple, while themselves are forced to attend at a distance, for
the uncertain Issue of the Plot: Whereas now their business is already done to
their hands; and it is but conveying their Tickets by any Scout to the
Confederates within, to intimate their Pleasure and Design: When it is the very
Sport and Recreation of these Traitors to bewitch us into a tame and easy
Surrendry of the Cittadels of our Safety and Strength, unto the cruel Mercy of
Devils.

And God knows this is so frequent a Treachery in the World, that it has lost
its Observation and Wonder, since it is become but a piece of Honor and Good
Nature to commiserate the Fiends, and in Civility to give them our Company into
Torment, while they by the Noise of Huzza's and Jollities so deafen our Ears
from the Cries of the tormented Conscience or Reason, that we are content to be
Sacrificed in a Frolic with them, and scorn to present any cheaper
satisfaction for their Music, than the noble Offerings of a Soul unto Molock;
while yet the Agonies of a God, and Tears of Blood streaming from his very
heart, have not the least Interest or Influence at all to restrain us from that
mad Sally into Eternal Flames.

Something might be pleaded for Moses and Paul, who in passion of Zeal to the
Bliss of their People, so Generously made tender of themselves to be Victims of
their Peace: And brave Cur^ius got a Reputation by galloping into the Gulf to
appease the angry Deity that raged in his City. Cleopatra's Asp gave her some
Pleasure in Death; but to curvet into unquenchable Burnings from the base Sting
of a Tarantula, and to perish ingloriously for no good or End, but to add
Triumph to Hell, and to get the unenvied honor of being preferred into the
Society of the Miserable, is such a Rage of Frenzy from the corrupted Blood
that an Eternity will never heal.

Nor is this so Strange or Astonishing, since we see every day how arrogantly
Madness it self does Ape Innocence in its greatest Perfection, and (with the
Demoniack among the Tombs) stalks about as insensible of any Shame or Danger,
as ever did Adam in Paradise: Nay is more proud of his Cast of Devils than He
that wore upon him the whole Livery of Graces.

Yet might this be soon remitted to it, were the mischief but only to it self,
when (alas) there is a Ferocity too, that flies in the Face of, and thunders
out Death against every Wight that is not as perfectly Frantic as it self.
Hypocrisy with all her Disguises must not think to escape the Assault, for it
falls upon the bones of the very Jews, that dare call on the Name of Jesus: And
Common Civility has good Luck, if (with David's Messengers) it be sent home
but halfshaved, and with bare Buttocks.

But one poor torn Leaf of a Single Psalter dropped from the Bosom of any Real
Votary to Heaven dispatches him into the Hellish Inquisition of its Fury; where
Piety is wracked (by insufferable Torments) into a forced Confession of the
Guilt of that Heresy which God himself calls Glorious Truth; and the Flames
(whose proper Office is to feed on the ungodly) are preternaturally made to
devour the Innocent: Pride her self (through the excess of Rage forgetting her
State) humbles her self into the meanest Services of the Kitchen to make the
Fire, and kindle those Faggots which (when she has done her worst) destroy but
the Prison, and gives liberty to the impassible Soul to ascend as in a
Triumphal Chariot to Heaven.

O Corruption! where are the limits of thy Tyranny! Give at least Liberty to
the small Numbers of Heaven to Pray for their Enemies, and the Recovery of
those thou have smitten into so perfect a Blindness and Obscurity, that in the
very loss of their Eyes (with the Sodomites) they grope about still to
perpetrate their Villainy, and are feeling out Subjects for their Malice and
Lust, to vent their Spleen and abominable Filth on.

But if blind Zeal to the Glory of an Idol prevail to such a degree of Madness,
as to make the Worshippers gash themselves, and lance out their own Blood in
whole Streams, why should we think it so strange, if to gratify Devils and
their own senceless Passions they roll and wallow in the Gore of others? So
little regret had that Fratricide (whom Hell set on its first Work) for what he
had done, that were the poor Innocent alive again, he protests to God himself,
that he would not undertake to be his Keeper.

And if the Streams which History show us to have been shed by the same
Tyranny, from the Blood of righteous Abel to the Murders of this Generation,
might be suffered to run in one Channel, they would doubtless swell into a
mighty Ocean, wherein the Devils (with the Swine, who with their bloody Tusks
have haunch'd it out) will inevitably one day perish for ever.

Stand here (Reader) on the shore of this Red Sea, and take a View of the
Wracks that Sin has made by its blustering Tempests: Would thou have
thought that all these Storms and Winds could have arisen from that little
Cloud no bigger than a Man's Hand? Yes alas, from but a Man's Hand (reaching
forth after the fatal Fruit) has all this Mischief issued, and will ever
increase into greater Destructions, 'till at last it shall be sent to its own
place, where (even then) it will devour it self to Eternity.

A Predamnation in the Breast!
A Raging Wound that gives no Rest!
And that calm Peace that once so blessed
The happy Parents, fled and gone,
To usher in a Legion
Of Deaths and Curses! yet no Sense?
No Sigh? no Tear? no Cries commence?
(As if all perfect Innocence.)
Presumption! thou greatest Curse
On poor fallen Man! the fatal Nurse
Of Plagues and Ruin! Heavens Rod!
Depart, and call a Dying God
To scourge thee hence, and bring a Flood
Of Tears commixed with his Blood,
To wash the bleeding Wound, and heal
The Ulcers of the general Weal;
That all thy Demoniacks may
Put on their Clothes and pass away.
THE TRAGEDY OF THE Old World,
With the Prostration due from a little Shrub of the Valleys to the stately
Cedars of Lebanon that flourish on the Mountains* of Honor, do I humbly bow
with this Tragedy in my Hand, leaving it at their Feet, and would they
vouchsafe to advance it to their Eye, they shall soon discern that Men of their
own high Rank and Order, promoted and hastened the Ruin of the First World. So
influential are the Examples of great Ones, that they dragg the whole Universe
after them. May your Honorable Coronets never dash against the Bald Pates of
the Vile and Ignoble on the Waters of Ruin: Nor your Bodies be Interred in the
common Grave of a general Desolation, which will be easily prevented by your
furnishing those Temples with the Ornaments of Immortality: This will give you
the Glory of being the Saviors of the present World; and the mighty Shields
that protect it from the Attaques of Justice and Wrath.

2 PET. II. 5. If God spared not the Old World, etc.


SIN having thus triumphed in the Ruin of the Angels, and torn off the Crowns
from the Heads of the first Princes of the World, leaving that Infection in
their Blood that corrupts the whole Progeny, had little else to do but to hang
up the Trophies of its Chivalry, while the whole Creation lies shackled under
the Mournful Bonds of its Tyranny: The unhappy Captives chained to its Chariot
Wheels, are dragged into Slavery and Death. Alas! they never tasted the sweets
of their Parents Freedom and Innocence, and are now content to Guild their
Fetters, and mistake their Rattling for Music. The Tyrant takes care to make
them easy and wide, they shall have Liberty enough to frolic and sport
themselves (with Leviathan) in the large Ocean of its bewitching Empire, and as
Prisoners at large may run the Rounds of all unrestrained Pleasure and Ease,
fetching (with Satan) their large Circuits too and fro, through the whole
Paradise of Complacencies and Delights.

By such killing Methods as these the Bondage is confirmed, and the Prince of
the Air is so fortunate to find all his easy Laws very naturally obeyed; while
the poor Subjects grow fond of the Polity, and abjuring the Rights of the
invisible Kingdom, they swear Allegiance as the hearty Vassals of the present
Power, and protest against all Pretense of Homage demanded by another Lord;
they grow Hot for the usurped Title, and will venture Life and Blood for the
present Interest; they will perish rather than return, and vote themselves to
perpetual Exile from true Happiness. And it is strange to find with what Zeal
and Passion they labor to give the most cordial Demonstration of their
Voluntary Subjection and Loyalty: With Caesar's Soldier they kill themselves
to bleed out the Mortal Evidences of their Love. In short, all its Interests
are so strongly riveted into their very Constitutions and Nature, that
Obedience runs with their Blood, through every Vein of their Hearts. Thus are
they per^ectly miserable, and themselves love to have it so; they wear out a
Life in paying the constant Tributes of a Devoted Affection to the Tyrant that
destroys them, and were it possible would spend an Eternity in the same
Service, and are sorry only that Death puts too hasty a Period to their dutiful
Resolutions: They could be proud to yield Immortal Necks to the pleasing Yoke,
and with an equal submission Kiss the Box that brings the fatal Warrant for
their own Execution, and as readily give their Throats to the strangling Cord
whenever the good pleasure of their Sovereign shall do them the Honor to
command them to dye.

Thus has the subtle Serpent (too successfully) laid the Foundation of an
Universal Monarchy, and projects to extend its Empire (with Jesus himself) from
Sea to Se^, and from the River to the ends of the Earth; and which is yet more
deplorable, of this Kingdom there is like to be no End, the Dominton endures
throughout all generations, and will vigorously flourish 'till Time shall be no
more: And no wonder when his Throne is established in the very Bosoms of his
Slaves, who reverently bow to the Idol, and yield an unquestionable Conformity
to all his Mandates. Now David look to thine own House; the whole World is
departed, and are listed under the Banner of thine Enemy, who swells under the
proud Title, not of a Prince only, but a God. In vain does Heaven menace
Revenge against those that fancy themselves in security, and are hardened to
the same Opposition against all the Proffers of Grace and Dreads of Power. The
Difference is blown to the height of a perfect Enmity and a loathing, and
Omnipotence must set it self to work again, either a New Creation, or a total
Destruction.

The Apostasy growing thus Daring and General, yet to show that Mercy can
triumph against Judgment, Divine Grace breaks into the Territories of Hell, and
powerfully rescues a small Colony of the seduced Traitors to a reluctant sense
of their envassalled Estate, and impatient sighing after their lost Liberty.
Grace can dissolve the strongest Enchantments that bewitch the Heart, and
unfetter the Affections from the woeful Chains of Sin and Death.

These rear up Altars to God, and with their Sacrifices send up strong Cries to
Heaven for Pardon and Mercy, the rest betake themselves to Lust and
Libertinism, and are enflamed with the Idols of their own Hearts: Yet no sooner
did the first Penitent presume to decline the defection, and publicly to make
an Offering of his Heart with his Oblation to his true Lord, but his own
Brother becomes his Executioner, he himself is sent a second Sacrifice to
Heaven for his happy desertion of the Cursed Interest.

If all the Obligations of Nature, and the nearest Relation; if sweetness of
Humor and endearing Disposition; if Fear of a God, and dread of Vengeance
could have had the least Influence on the Conscience of that bloody Fratricide;
we had not been startled with the amazing News of so early a Martyrdom. But if
God shall own him from Heaven by the Flames of Acceptance, he may not escape
on Earth from the strokes of Persecution: Poor Abel falls the Victim of God's
Love, his own Piety, the Divel's Malice and his Brother's Cruelty. -- This
unna^ural Murder was a sure Prognostic of the Old World's Tragedy, since if
Sin commence to so high a pitch in its Infancy and swadling-cloaths, what
Exploits may we think will it Atchieve in ^ts riper Years, when grown into
Giant.

There is nothing has occasioned more fatal Events to the World than Quarrels
of Religion, while every one pretends to the Truth, and none will confess his
Error; but in the case of these different Worshippers God himself had taken the
Chair, and signalized the True from the False, by clear Demonstration from
Heaven; yet is Error so far from Conforming it self, and Acquiescing in the
Infallible Decision, that instead of submitting to the Holy Decree, it flies to
Arms, and Smites through the Loins of Truth it self, whose Innocence God is
obliged to clear up and defend.

The Fountains are broken up, and the Waters appear already, (which in time
shall swell into a mighty Deluge to overwhelm the whole Posterity of the
Murderer:) The miserable Parents are drowned in a Flood of Tears, which are
hardly dried up on the discovery of that happy Spot of Earth, which God
substitutes to fill up the Vacancy of the Holy Martyr: So easily can he baffle
the Plots of Hell, in polishing up a new Pillar of Righteousness to support his
tottering Church. 'Twas the brave Seth, that started into Life, with the very
Lineaments of his Brothers Piety and Goodness upon him; and which afterward
Survive, and Illustriously Shine in the incomparable Enoch, the very Glory and
Flower of the Old World; whose Records (though drawn with a sparing Hand and
very hasty Pencil, yet) shall the Memory of this Saints mighty Nam^ and
Excellencies be surely Immortalized, (for though others did Virtuously, yet he
exceeded them all.) And the Blessed Penman could no^ justly pass from Him
(whose History would ha^ furnished a Volume) when yet he Posts from others with
the short Dash of a long Life and a late Death only; (as if Eight or Nine
hundred years were too little time to ripen them up to any Memorable
Perfection) but here he stops to transmit the Memoirs of the Great Enoch's
unparalleled Life and miraculous Translation, to all Posterities for evermore.

For if the Treasure of a Pious Education into the Knowledge and Faith of the
Messiah; If the mighty Effluxes of the Blessed Spirit Hallowing that Knowledge
into an unreserved Dedication of his Heart and Life unto God; If an irradiated
Mind, a resigned Will, and right ordered Affections; If Hatred and Abhorrency
of Sin, a valiant Opposition of others Impiety, and a blessed Walking and
Communion with the Holy Trinity, be Furniture enough to Adorn and Dress up a
Saint; surely all these unitedly met and concentred in Him. No wonder then,
that some whose Eyes are dazzled in the Brightness of his Holiness, mistake him
for an Angel Incarnate, but others more modestly the Friend and Familiar of
God. View him enriched with a Prophetical Spirit, and the Eye of his Soul
divinely illuminated to foresee (at the many Thousand years distance) the
Glorious Procession of the blessed Jesus, with the Myriads of his Holy Ones,
passing down from Heaven to keep the Great Assizes of the General Judgment, and
to execute Vengeance upon all the Ungodly of both Worlds, whose Blasphemous and
Ungodly Speeches, whose Profanenesses and Ungodly Practices his Chaste Soul so
heartily abominated, and so passionately lamented, and against which the
flaming Zeal of his Heart issued forth in so constant Menaces of the Wrath and
Judgment that That Fearful Day would bring upon them.

That his Prophetic Soul foresaw the Deluge, is not to be questioned, since
his very Son was a Pillar on whose Name that Judgment was very legibly
Inscribed: And in Truth, an easier Augury might Prophecy the Overflowing of
Wrath, as but the Natural Effect of the Inundation of Sin, which in His days
(by the unhappy Commixture of the Two Families) had spread its contagious
Streams over all the World. History tells us, that it was his Custom to
Congregate the People, in order to the deprecating so direful an Execution: And
to assure them, that the World was of no longer Duration than the Life of his
Son; and that whenever he died, the Bloody Blow will come upon them, which
answerably happened (for though some say, that the Flood came not till six
years after Methuselah's Death, yet others averr more truly, in the very same
year; and others again but seven days: God it seems giving in that Week also,
to the hundred years allowed for Repentance, but not a day longer; when now
after the Decease of this Good Patriarch, they might (according to his Fathers
Prediction) expect the Judgment to fall upon them every hour.

Doubtless the Holiness of Enoch (as the very shining of the Sun is a Torment
to Sore Eyes) had contracted upon him the General Odium of the Wicked, but
while he labored under this Burden, and the Danger of their Persecutions, the
Almighty God mounts him up into the Securities of his own Bosom. 'Twas not fit
indeed, that the Phoenix of the whole Creation should be liable to the Gunshot
of its Malice: To prevent which, (and lest they should offer Indignity to his
Sacred Dust after Death,) the very Qualities of his Body, by a sudden and
admirable Change, are rendered connatural with those of his Soul: He is all
Spiritual, and made a fit Inhabitant for the Celestial Kingdom, whose
Translation has caused a World of different Opinions; many voting him to be
still Alive, but cannot agree where to find or where to fix him; whether on
Earth or Air, in Adam's Paradise or Gods. They tell us he feeds on Angels Food,
and his very Clothes are preserved from wearing, (as theirs in the Wilderness,)
leading a Life of perpetual Contemplation and Joy in God, and is reserved with
Elias to the Service of the Confusion of Antichrist in the last times: But
enough of this.

While the Eye of the Soul is Watchful to keep it self fixed and Intent on the
Beauty of Holiness, that is Ten thousand times enough to complete up a perfect
Happiness to Angels and Men; Inferior Suitors may despair to Lure away the
Affections that are infinitely delighted in that Ravishing Object, yet no
sooner is it averted from the Fountain of Complacencies, but an Army of
Temptations break in upon it, and offer their several Contributions to patch up
a Satisfaction that is only to be found in God. Thus the Unconstant Family of
Seth (Blessed and secure in their Virgin Love, while they persevered in
Fidelity to their first Amors;) Now alas! (grown weary and tired with a
Spiritual Husband,) employ their Traitorous Senses to cater anew after fresh
Provisions, which must fill up the Vacuities of their Squeamish Appetites, when
lean Kids are dressed up into Venison, and serve well enough to delude the
undiscerning Stomach. Thus their First Father exchanged a God for a Wife of
Dust, and mistook an Apple for a Deity. And these degenerous Sons of God
(unworthy of that high Relation) while they gaze on the Beauty of the Daughters
of Men, are bewitched to write the Bill of their own Divorce from their Chaster
Nuptials, to Marry themselves to everlasting Ruin.

The Ties of Friendship that long Acquaintance and Familiarity have contracted
between Men, have been often so Sacred and Strong, that the Violation of them
have occasioned great Commotion of Heart; and can we think that these Gentlemen
could so cheerfully pass from the purer Flames of Divine Love into the Embraces
of Vanity, without some Check and Allay to the Fury of their hot Desires?

There is something within that is ever clamouring for the true Interest, and
fails not to flash in Hell into the guilty Heart, that makes its Sallies into
the Idolatrous Bed.

What Communion has Light with Darkness? Come, call the Sexton, and Toll the
Bell, the Church is sick of a fatal Love, and Languisheth under a killing
Disease, that throws her into Meretricious Arms to Generate a Spurious Brood,
whom God will disown for ever.

Is there no Balm in Gilead? No cooling Cordial Julip to assuage the Flames of
this scorching Distemper, that is like to burn to a total Devastation? Have
Ruby Cheeks and Rolling Eyes those Sorceries in them to Enchant the whole Army
of the Living God to desert their General and leave him, with one poor single
Attendant ( thee only Noah have I found Faithful) to Levy Forces where he can,
while they Treacherously Bandy to fly to the Enemy, and are marching apace with
trolling Drums and flying Colors to crouch with their Universal Ensigns, and
to lay them at the Feet of Pride and her cursed Women.

O Treacherous Beauty! the Gift of God, but the Plague of Men, the Friend of
Devils, that have furnished Hell, and art ever laying on Fuel to the
unquenchable Fire, which ten thousand Rivers of Oil will never be able to
extinguish; were it lawful for me to inveigh against thee, how could I pour out
whole Vials of Execrations upon thee, while I see the Damning Effects of thy
destructive Charms, by which thou transformest Souls into Swine!

Had the Gallants grounded their Courtships on any Pious or Charitable Regard,
or consideration had to the desperate and perishing Estate of their Eternal
Part (though wrapped up in never so beautiful Skin) or had had the least hopes of
endearing these Ladies to the Interests of Religion, and to espouse them to God
with themselves, the Project had been Innocent and Commendable enough, and
Heaven would not have forbid the Banes: But when Gratifying the Eye, and
Indulging the Senses was the utmost Ambition, where Desertion of Himself, and
Adhesion to Idols, was the certain Consequent: This it was that grieved him to
the Heart, and sets him on Councils of Revenge.

The Fatalities of the Bed are a Subject so trite, and so very far from being
Merchantable News, (at this end of the World) that in despair of a Trade, they
Cry themselves in every Street and Lane, the vast Folio's of Ruin arising from
unsuitable Mixtures, are every where but wast Paper, not answering the Charge
of Binding, so that I repine to spend a Sheet upon them, lest I meet it again
in every Shop. But sure it is a Tragical Story to find the Lovely Face of Modest
Piety bespotted with the Patches of Natures Deformity (Snow and Black Ashes
pil'd up in a^ Heap) while She as a Cunning Artist (ever favoring her own
Interest) takes care to Anneal the Posterity with the Transcendency of her own
Tincture, and in short time produces a Generation of Leopards, all Speckled and
Motley (like Jacob's Sheep.) Behold the fair Morning of a Gracious Profession,
soon shaded into the Dusk of a declining Indifferency, which in a Moment is
dipped into the thick Darkness of a general Apostasy (...) and that, swelling
into monstrous Impudence and Gygantick Ferocity; Gods Heritage becoming to him
not only as a speckled Bird, but a loathsome Blackamore, he is startled (at the
sight of it) into a Resolution of taking out the Rods from the Troughs, and
Scourging the Ring-streaks out of the World.

The Disease (like the Death that pursued it) being thus Epidimical, the Law of
Arms allows the Renegadoes no title to the kindness of a Decimation, where
there were none left to be the Instruments of Execution (unless they be
employed to dispatch one another) therefore Heaven was forced to undertake the
Work it self, and the Rebels have the Honor of dying by the Hands of a Great
God.

But least the Horror of so vast a Destruction might cause Trembling in the
Breasts of future Ages, who hearing the Extremity of his Justice, might be
Affrighted from the Service of so severe a Master, who while he could say
little of their Goodness, through the long Series of Ten Generations, yet has
his Wisdom left Commentaries large enough, as of his own most gracious
Indulgencies and Patience, so a full account of those Aggravations which must
justify him for ever from the least Imputations of Injustice or Rigor.

For while the whole Fountain of their Souls were so Poisoned, that it was
impossible for any Good to issue from them, while the Leprosy seizing on every
Part, left not a Poor Angle Unputrified, whence the least Hope of a Recovery
might be grounded, God might indeed forbear them if he pleased, (and glad
should they be to be spared to their Lusts) but they are so Remote from any
Reformation, that they purpose None; it is least in their Thoughts, while every
Imagination of their Heart is Evil, and that continually. So Studious and
Intent upon their Works of Wickedness, and driving on the Trade of Hell, that
they laugh at the motion of keeping one poor Holiday to God, so that his Aim in
the Creation was perfectly frustrate; for while he made all for his Glory, they
detain all from him, nay turn all against him, and maintain the War with his
own Weapons. 'Twas time to correct the Insolence of such, whom Rebellion and a
perfect Contempt of God had blown up to so prodigious a degree of Profaneness.

Infirmities and Indiscretion may lead us through blindness and Inadvertency
(as Elisha the Syrians) into the very Streets of Danger and Death, while still,
by the Intercession of our good Prophet we may be mercifully dealt with, and
dismissed in Peace: But his Life must go for the Life of him, that shall suffer
the Benhadad of a final Impenitency and Obduration to escape, whom God has
appointed to utter destruction.

In vain does Wickedness, swelling into the huge dimensions of Gigantick Power
and Tyranny, promise it self Impunity from the grapples of Justice, since its
own Monstrosity, like that of Goliath, renders it but the fairer Mark for the
sling of Divine Vengeance to hit, as 'twas but recreation to it, to hale the
great Og from his Bed of Iron into another of Flames.

And perhaps this is Noted on purpose, that there were Giants in the Earth, to
let us see that (though their Audacities hastened the speedier Wrath, yet) they
fell but as others, and perished in the same kind of Death with the smallest
Infant, the Depths covering them, and their weight but sinking them the sooner,
as Lead to the bottom.

And what Hopes has any Guilty Flesh to please it self in the Dream of
security, since here we see Beauty and Strength, fair Women, and fierce Giants,
walking hand in hand together into the Chambers of Death?

And although indeed the general Corruption (running into the common-shoar of
filth) swelled it up to a necessity of being washed away by so direful
Inundation, yet has God marked as with a Black cole the foreheads of those,
whose mighty provocations, made his Heart to ache so, and were no other but the
very Flowers and Heads of the People; to speak plainly, the very Nobility and
Gentry of both the Families of Seth and Cain, mighty Men, and Men of Renown.

So usual has it been for Divine Mercy to pity the sottishnesses of the Rude
and Illiterate (unhappy in the want of those advantages of Education and
Learning, which might have resin'd them into the Ingenuities of a generous and
reasonable Service) that he has sometimes spared the greatest Cities upon the
account of the very Bruits that were in them; but still remember, it was then
too, when the Princes sat in Sackcloth, and Fasted with them.

God knows, the Authority and Port of Greatness, strikes so great an Awe into
the Spirits of the Beasts of the people, and has so great an influence upon
them, that they dare not be so unmannerly to be more Devout than their Masters,
and out of fear to spoil the Frolic, merrily venture a Damnation with them.
Thus the Blasph^mies of the Parlour pass out with the Dishes into the Hall, and
are kept on the Coals for the Servants, to swallow with as great a pleasure and
sweetness, as the Meat which was sauc'd with them before. It Is a wonder to me,
that Dives should forget his Livery-men in the Prayer that he makes unto
Abraham.

But anon when the Cataracts of Heaven fly open, and Judgment appears upon
all, Then shall the miserable Wretches know, that as they had the confidence to
Sin with their Masters, so shall they have the unenvied Honor of Suffering
with them.

Mighty Men, and Men of Renown! Come then ye Mighty, and evidence the Bravery
of your great Souls; God is resolved to try the mettle of your Courage. Great
Dangers do but edge the noble Steel; the mighty Alexander once Triumphed in the
Encounter of an Enemy that Peer'd his Spirit. Show us now how bravely ye can
Bridle the Clouds, and fetter up the insulting Waves that dare be so insolent
to invade your Presence, and trip up your Heels. How often have you boasted of
your Valor in your Cups! and breathed out Thunder from your Nostrils against
Heaven! How often have you rent the terrible Majesty by the frightful claps of
your Oaths, and the dire flashes of your profaner Tongues and Wits! What do
your Spirits sink now at the Appearance of a Shower? Blessed God! wherefore are
these so Renowned, whose Souls are weaker than Water, that are thus dismayed at
the insurrection of so common an Element? Were these Mighty Men, Valiant for
thy Truth upon Earth, and did they take thy part, and Side with thee against
the flood of Impiety that then overflowed the World? Were they Knights of the
holy Order, who fought thy Battles, and sacrificed their Blood to thy glorious
Interest? Why then is their Name perished, and we have not the Legends of their
Chivalry? But if they were famous for Wickedness, Men Mighty to Oppress, and
Renowned for Profaneness, Is it so glorious a thing to Brave a God, and
Challenge the Omnipotent Arm to a Combat? Is the contempt of a Deity the
Foundation of this great Coloss? I plainly find that none shall be losers by
thee; Thou will give Atheism it felf the due Encomium of its Daring Spirit,
that has Courage enough to fly in the Face of thine infinite Justice and
Power. Mighty Men, and Men of Renown! but I fear this is to their little
Comfort, when these mighty Worms are washed away in the more mighty Waters, and
turned all into Slime and Dirt; and thy Sword prides it self to be Bathed in
their Blood, while it executes thy pleasure in the devouring such Mighty
Enemies. Men of Renown! God deliver me from the Vanity of a swelling Title,
which will little Ease me when in Hell.

But would thou, that I give a more distinct Account, and produce a
Catalogue of those particular Sins, that put the Almighty upon such Resolutions
of a total defacing the Beauty and Furniture of the whole Earth? Sure they were
^o Punie Ones, no Peccadillo's, that could prevail to pour down so great a
Ruin. Verily they are with thee, Reader, already, in the Streets where ^hou
live; Nay, they are in thee, Closseted up ^n the Bosom thou bear about
thee, at least ^n semine. Take head therefore they break not out, and force
down a shower of Wrath upon thee. And though Moses has given us but the small
draught of them, and seems but lightly to touch them, yet such were they as
never could be forgotten, and are indelibly Engraven upon the Heart of God; so
written in Heaven, as it were with a Sunbeam, that the blessed Jesus, Two
thousand years after, brought them down to display them before us; not for
Imitation, and to teach us new Arts of Debauchery, but for utter detestation,
and to Arm us against the Riots that so perfectly destroy them. Though still he
fears the new World (in the heat of Blood) will be so mad to degenerate into
the very same again; for if Gluttony and Drunkenness, Lust and Obscenity,
Forgetfulness of God, and Mocking at his Ministers, Scoffing at our Noah's,
while they are Fanatically building the Ark against a Flood that will never
come: If Oppression of the poor by the mighty Giants, Unmercifulness and
Cruelty, Contempt of the Patience and Longsuffering of Heaven; if all these and
a World more, as Blasphemies and Oaths, etc. which I have not named, Ushered in
by Pride, (the Midwife of all Plagues both to Angel^ and Men) be not enough to
justify the righteous Proceedings of God against them, and to verisie the
Prophecy of our Savior against our selves, let us wait till the next Deluge of
Judgment overwhelm us, and then we shall feel how just a God he is to Sinners.

Sin was born with a Sword in its hand, and has been a Murderer from the
beginning; when a Child, it slew the World in Adam, and all his Posterity by
little and little, one after another* ^ut now grown to full Age it makes
nothing (with Sampson) to pull down the very Pillars of ^he House, to destroy
Worlds, and to make but ^ne blow of them all.

Original Sin is favorable and kind, it gives Letters of License for Life, if
it be once satisfied, ^f at all, it suffices; but open Profaneness eggs ^n
Justice to take out Execution without any Pa^ience, like the unmerciful
Servant, it takes all ^y the Throat, and sends to Prison without pity.

Yet God who sometmies cries out of the Bur^hen, as if unable to sustain it any
longer, does ^ere engage his Patience, yet to bear up resolute^y under the Load
of all this Mass of Provoca^ions; to let us see what Infiniteness can do, and
that he delighted as little in their Blood, as he ^id in their Sin.

He very well knew, that as slender satisfaction would be made at the end of
that Term, as pre^ently could be, yet because he foresaw that he had ^ime
enough to pay himself in the next World; ^e valued not the casting in of
Six-score years and ^ore, which was little to him with whom a Thousand are but
as one day.

To live for Sin is little Comfort, yet to live or Punishment is surely less;
the giving this Term ^as a Mercy from God, but the abuse of it was (...) Misery
to themselves; he that lives and must ^ffer at last, were better die soon and
suffer the ^ss; God indeed lent it for Repentance, but they im^roved it for
Sin, and repented of nothing but ^at they had so short a time to Sin in, when
^od knew they had a long one to suffer in.

Come Watchman, What of the Night? What of the Night? Why the Fair and long
Summers day of the Old Worlds Goodness and Pleasures too, is come to an End;
it is perfect Midnight with them; Night, all Night, ever Night, such a Night as
shall never see Morning more; Themselves Dark, all Dark, ever Dark, therefore
Darkness above is hurled into Darkness below; Sin to Sin here, Hell to Hell
there; Carnal Wickednesses, to Spiritual Wickednesses, to Eternal Wickednesses:
What should Light do with Darkness, all Light with all Darkness, ever Light
with ever Darkness? O see the fuel of the devouring Flames! Rottenness, all
Rottenness, ever Rottenness, irrecoverable Rottenness, no sound part in them;
Stubble, dry Stubble, fully dry, ready for Burning. Vessels of Wrath, vessels
endured with much Patience, with Long-suffering, with much Long-suffering, and
now fitted to Destruction. What could Mercy do more then wait, till of Good
they became Evil, of partly Good perfectly Evil, and eternally Evil, resolved
to be so, and yet after this to wait on still, to wait for Six-score years; to
wait upon a Wilderness till it become a Garden, upon dead Sticks till they
Blossom and Bear, upon degenerate Plants till they should bring forth good
Fruit, is to little purpose or end; This Evil was from Themselves, Wherefore
should the Lord wait any longer?

Art thou gotten into the Ark (Reader) are all things ready? Is the door fast
shut down? See, Darkness is over all the Earth, (the Darkness of Sin) and
Darkness has covered the Heavens (the Darkness of Judgment.) The Firmament has
put on her Mourning Suit, and with Tamerlain erected the Black Flag of despair.
Clouds and Darkness, and thick Darkness, and an horrible Tempest is round
about; the End, the End is come upon thee. O ungodly World, behold it is come
upon thee! see it hastening from the Four corners of Heaven. Now will God Judge
thee according to thy ways, and will recompense upon thee all thine
Abominations, his Eye will not spare thee, neither will he have pity. Death,
Ruin, Judgment, Hell, and Confusion to all Eternity. Ah I will ease me of mine
Adversar^es -- Mercy is gone, clean gone, gone for ever; Compassion fails for
evermore. Now look to your selves, Profaneness and Atheism; if you have any
Courage show it now, keep up your huffing Spirit, Snort against Heaven and
Goodness, bear up ^riskly like your selves, don't degenerate from your ^onted
Bravery. Lord, Gentlemen, Why do ^e tremble? What do you mean to turn Color?
Why so ghastly in the Countenance? Why such (...) shivering and Ague in the
Joints? Why so down (...) the Mouth? Why not a word now? Ladies, What are you
so startled at? Why so undressed ^o day? Why your Hair so dishevil'd? Where ^re
the Enchanting Curles that Captived so many ^oor Lovers in them? Where the
stately Brow, and the sparkling Eye that struck your Admirers ^ead? Go, get ye
to your Glasses, and view your ^omplexions now. Come, come, clear up, there is
(...) such Fear, be not so Affrighted; it is but a hunder shower, 'twill over
again, go get Ready: ^h no! what Noise, what Bustle, what Roar^g, what
Shreeking, what Yelling, what Faint^g, what Bleating, what Bellowing is here!
^en, Women, Children, Sheep, Oxen, Wolves, Dogs, all howling together in an
hideous Outcry and the Waters out-roaring them all! Oh, oh, oh, oh, the Worlds
at an End! Our Wickedness has overtaken us, and Judgment is come upon us, it is
come, undone, undone, undone for ever! You are in the very right of it Gallants
you are in the very right, it is come indeed, never were you in the right
before: Now cry to your Gods to save you, if they can. Did not the Old Man
forewarn you of this many a time Why did ye not take warning, and build Boa^
too? Is he such a Fool for securing himself? How often has he told you of your
Villainies and Whor^doms, your Ranting and Tearing, your Haugh^ness and Hussing,
and to what a fearful end (...) would bring you? See how he rides securely
yo^der against all the dreads of Death that are com^ upon You; now your sport
is at an end, farewe^ Giants and Ladies; Adieu for Evermore.

Now here (Alas!) I am at a Loss: Ca^ any one Rationally expect, that Invention
an^ the Issues of one Man's Brain, can be Witt^ enough to delineate the Face of
an Univers^ Confusion? I have seen, indeed, some Fanci^^ Sculptures, pretending
to satisfy the Eye in the dreadful Prospect of some Climbing up to the Tops of
the Tallest Trees, while others are haste^ing to the loftiest Mountains; and
some (mo^ Brutishly) Mounting on Beasts to outride t^ Destruction that makes
but an easy Gulp of t^ Horse and his Rider; every Family yelling in t^
uppermost Rooms of their more Dwarfish House not one but who betakes himself to
groundl^ and impossible Refuges. Let me present (...) Reader with a Table of
the General Security, that Fettered up the Drowsy World into Fatal Slumbers;
not the least Fear or Dream of an Approaching Tragedy, but what had been
laughed out of Life by the Atheists of the Age, that admired the Frenzy of the
Fanatic Ark: Each City, County, Town, Village and Hamlet, as Secure and
Thoughtless, as our Selves at this day: Every Family busily driving on the
daily Trade of Rebellion against Heaven, and thinking as little of any Change,
as those that are past it in the Grave.

The Ruling Part, not content to impose the Iron Mace of Authority on the
Shoulders of the Subjects, to make them Cringe by a gentle Touch, but fiercely
lift it up to fetch a more killing stroke on the tender Head, with design to
break and make it Bleed, while the poor helpless Patients have no Appeal but to
their own Passions, which vent themselves in bitter Curses under all the Smart
and Sores of that fearless Tyranny.

The Gentry, (terminating their Delights in a perishing Portion, and Marrying
their Souls to the Clod, as if God himself were pleased with the Match) are
exalted above the Cares of Life that Oppress the Hearts of the Needy, and the
Fears of Want that afflict them: They Club together with those of their Order,
where they talk of nothing but Hoisting their Rents, and Grinding the Faces of
their miserable Tenants; unless for exchange of Discourse they Sally out into
Stories of their own Debauchery, and ever and anon Jibing at the Melancholy
Noah, whose Head (they think) is troubled with the Vapors, while he Builds
himself into perfect Poverty: Let him go on (say they,) Experience at last may
make him Wise, when we shall have time enough to Ridicule his unparalled
Folly.

The Merchants and Traffacking Companies distracting themselves in the Crowd of
their Foreign Concerns, are in earnest Expectation of those happy Returns that
(they think) cannot fail to Enrich them: The Poor Mechanics Sweating as hotly
in the hasty Pursuit of their meaner Accrewments, and promising themselves a
Brisker Trade in the ensuing Years. The Laborious Villagers Manuring their
Acres in the confident Hopes of Perpetual Harvests (which alas, they will never
Reap) and all without the least Eye or dependence on the Blessing of Heaven to
Ripen them. Imaginations forged in every Brain of an endless Prosperity, which
they take care to make sure to those Heirs which are never likely to Inherit
it. Courtships are made with as Flagrant Pretenses of Love to Young Ladies, (as
now) in hopes of Establishing the Families into future Successions of Honor
and Estate, when alas they are rouzed from the Bed of Fondness and Delight,
when nothing remains but the Poor Complacency of Dying in each others Arms.
Projects are contrived to Assign Children to this and that Employ, that in
greatest Probability may make them Happy. The Toiling Hirelings are flattering
themselves with the hopes of deliverance (into better Services) from the
wearisome Tasks they at present Groan under. The very Beasts are fattening up
to the Yoke and Shambles, when alas they shall never approach to either.

For the Women, (the Sources of this Plague) their Provocations were so many
and Great, that my Pen in despair to number them up, takes the wisest course to
let them alone, while their Minds are wholly Immersed in Vanity, they make up
too great a Part of the Tragedy, and I leave them to Skreak together at the
approach of their Ruins.

O learn hence what the destructive end of Sin is, that has brought so
Tremendous a Perdition on all the World: And if such were the Havoc by the
Inundation of Water, what will the Streams of Brimstone in Hell do, and what
the Flames of the last Conflagration? How terrible is God in his Executions
upon Sinners, how Scorching his Justice and Vengeance: Upon the Wicked He shall
rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest: This shall be the
portion of their Cup: Put them in fear, O Lord, that the Nations may know
themselves to be but Men!

They are gone, Reader, and as of all things else that are past, there is
nothing remains of so Tragical a Story, but the bare remembrance of it, that
has so weak an Influence upon the Spirits of Men at so remote a distance of
time, that it has lost its operating Virtue and Power, and retains not the
least Efficacy to deterr us from the Sin for which they perished. If when the
Earth opening her mouth to swallow up Corah and all his Confederating Rebels,
the surviving Thousands of Israel gave a Screek only, and returned the very
next day to the same Murmurs for which They died: Nay, if the very Children of
Noah had so little sense of it, that while himself lived, his own Eyes were so
unhappy to see them so early revolting into the very Provocations and
Idolatries that brought the Flood first upon the World; How should we hope that
our Selves, (upon whom the Ends of the present One are come, and which is grown
Old in Wickedness, and Ripe for a second Destruction) should be affrighted out
of our long riveted Lusts from any Reflection of our Minds on so Antiquated a
Tragedy. Yet has God Enrolled the Execution in the perpetual Records, and sent
down his Son to take out a Copy of it, and commanded him to Post it into his
own Journal to give it a new and a fresher Life, not without hope that it might
Rouse us a little from our fatal Slumbers, while the Noise and Horror of the
mighty Waters should sound in our Ears: Yet doubted it still, while he
Prophesies that Himself should find us at his Second Coming plunged into as
deep Perpetrations as They, and locked up under as perfect Insensibility of our
Approaching Ruin, from which nothing could awaken us but the surprising
Trumpet of an Archangel, alarming us to Judgment and the Everlasting Doom: For
as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the day of the Son of
Man: They did ea^, they drank, they married Wives, they were given in Marriage,
until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and the Flood came and destroyed
them all.

But what is become of Prides Kingdom now? When (with the Great Darius) she is
slown and has left all the Rich Plunder of her stately and Golden Tents to the
Spoil of the Conqueror: Alas, she has no pity for so many slaughtered
Carcasses; thrown over into the Ocean of Ruin! Nor is it so much her Care to
Protect, as to Betray her unhappy Subjects: She delights not so much in their
Safety as Destruction; she Dresses them up only for Sacrifice, and they have
the Pleasure to dye in their Holiday. Clothes: She Combs their Heads, and
Shaves their Beards, and Smooths up their rivelled Cheeks, to expire, (with
Octavius) and lays them asleep on gentle Pillows: She Courts them (with Jael)
to come in to her, and hides them from the Danger of others; but then the Nail
and the Hammer is in her own Hand, which Pins them fast to the Earth: With
Alexander she hunts out more Worlds for them to Conquer, and with the desperate
Pharaoh leads them into the very Bowels of the Sea: See how she drives them
into Corners; first out of Heaven, then out of Paradise, and now out of the
World: She is the Devils Spirit, employed to furnish Inhabitants for the lower
Region to an eternal Slavery. Behold where she Perks on the Prow of Noah's
Ship, where she Splits her very sides with Laughter, at the Glorious Present
she has made to Lucifer! What a World of Furniture has she boarded away at
once for his Spacious Palace! How will his stately Rooms be hung with the
Tapistries of Prides Tragedies! What Horrid Stories will they represent of her
Cruel Tyrannies! And here she waits to drop her Cockatrices Eggs, which she
knows will Hatch themselves within the very Ark into another Brood for her. She
thinks not her Case so desperate yet, as not to hope she has a Friend in the
very Council of Eight. One that has Courage enough to own her Principles, and
doubts not in a little time to grow up into Power and Strength enough,
advantageously to declare for her Interest.

Men of Renown Dashed out of Breath!
Gigantick Huffs, yet Pumped to Death!
O Baffling Heaven! Mighty Mountains,
Tumbled into swelling Fountains,
Lie sprawling there, (Trophies of strength
Divine) whose Massy Weight and Length
Makes Justice smile! A Righteous God
Reducing all to Dust and Clod:
Chaos and Carcasses, O Sin!
How Dismal have thy Ruins bin?
Tremble ye mighty Gods of Earth,
Here God's as Great as you want Breath.
O for an Ark of Safety now!
Come in, come in, and Lowly Bow.
The Impiety of Cham.
THE proud Waters that had received their Commission from the King of Heaven to
Fight his Battle, and revenge his Quarrel against the universal Apostasy, (with
more Faithfulness than Saul who in pity spared the delicate Agag, and the best
of the Cattle for Sacrifice) undertaking the General Massacre, without Mercy,
(Proud of an opportunity to Muster up all their strength, and by this
Execution, to Chronicle the Eternal Victory over all their oposite Elements)
poured out all their Forces with such a Torrent of Fury and Rage, that soon did
the poor baffled Flames Sacrifice themselves for fear, and lie all Martyred in
their own Ashes: Not a Spark left in the whole World, but what must be fetched
from Heaven to warm Noah's Altar. The Air (guilty of the Treason too, for
yielding Breath to such a Rebellious crew) is all smothered to Death within the
Concaves of the Spiring World. But the poor Earth for the Guilt of bearing this
unhappy Burden, and Feasting them with all her Luxurious Prodigalities (with
Caesar) muffles her Face in her Mantle, and patiently receives the Wounds of
her own folly, while the insulting Enemy (not content to ride upon her Back
only) tramples her under his Feet, and is trod into Mire and Dirt. Whose cruel
Tyrannies when the All-gracious God perceived, and now that these insolent
Waves, helped forward the Affliction of his poor little Church in the Ark,
(crowded among Brutes and very uneasy) commands them to go back, It is enough,
stay now your hand. But while they hardly retire, and with too slow a pace, a
mighty Wind is sent forth to sound the Retreat, and enforce them to a speedier
conformity; that so the Creator might conferr a New World on those his
favorites, who had alone been so Loyal and Faithful to him in the Old.

The Commission is Executed, and the good Prophet hopes that this Wind has
blown him some good, while the obedient Surges post so fast away to their
Quarters, and that neither Wind nor Water had done him hitherto the least
prejudice in their several Marches.

How submissively does he wait till he receives the glad Tidings of the
Recession of the Enemy, which is confirmed to him by his winged Ambassador
under seal (with the Signature of an Olive Branch.) And that Patience might
have its perfect work; he still attends and dares not set a Foot on the Earth
without receiving orders from Heaven.

But now, behold this poor despised Preacher of the Old World, comes ashore
from his dark Cabin, and lands the great Monarch of the Universe (a Type of
the greater Savior) the Prophet, Priest, and King over all the Earth: whose
first work is to build an Altar, whereon he Sacrifices his very Soul in Praises
and Thanksgivings to God, the Perfume of which was so sweet in his Nostrils,
that it brought down a blessing not on Himself only, but on all the Earth to
all Generations; for while Seed-time and Harvest, Summer and Winter, Day and
Night continue unto us, we cannot be unmindful of holy Noah's Sacrifice, which
was so pleasing to God, that to him was sealed the Confirmation of them all to
us.

Yet could not all the Floods of Wrath extinguish the rage of that Venom which
his Impious Son Cham translated from the Old World into the New, and had lodged
in his Heart (all this while) like a close Traitor in the very Bosom of the
Church: A Contagion which will spread it self to that Latitude, as in a few
years shall overrun the Earth again. This was the cursed Stock out of which
shall sprout those venomous Branches, which shall dilate themselves into a
prodigious Plantation for the increase of Wickedness.

He was a fellow of so vile a Spirit, that you might have found all the
Rudenesses of the past World concentred in him. And while he wants other
opportunities to manifest the Villainies of his Heart, he blushes not to act
them against his own Father; so devoyd was he of that common Grace and reverend
Respect, which every Pagan Conscience pays to the Maintenance of the Honor of
Sovereignty; so insensible was he of that Duty, which as a Natural Tribute is
due to so great a Prince, and so good a Parent; that he is not afraid of the
Vengeance of Heaven, while he belches out the Crudities of his rotten Lungs,
upon his venerable Face, by open Derision and profane Contempt of that
glorious Person, (now a Prisoner in the surprising Snares of his own Vines,
whose uncivil Twiggs had caught him by the Heels, and ruffled off his Mantle
from him in the fall.) Unhappy Prince! to give so vile a Miscreant occasion of
so Rebellious an Affront to thy Majesty. But most worthily Accursed Wretch,
that were so far from casting the Veil of Duty and Charity over that naked
Bosom, wherein lodged an Heart, so lately, by the Righteous Judge of Heaven,
pronounced to be the very Best and most Sincere in all the World: That here I
find thee taking up the perfect Postures of a Madman, extending thy widened
Throat into loud Exclamations of Laughter and Derision, to the insufferable
dishonor of that mournful Object. Nor can thou be satisfied in ridiculing
thine own Father, in the presence of the All-seeing God and his Angels, but
must maliciously summon all the World to do it too; how righteously therefore
were thou and thy whole Posterity, bound up in the strong Chains of an Eternal
Curse!

The Infirmities of our Fathers (either Civil or Natural) should be so far from
causing us to draw a wry Mouth, that they must be ever the subject of our aching
Hearts; Since the Fathers eating sour Grapes, do but cause the Childrens Teeth
to be set on Edge. And who is Ignorant that Noah's Wine did but exhilerate his
Spirit into a more cheerful pronouncing the dreadful Imprecation upon that Son,
whom the doom of Heaven had before decreed to be blasted. Sure I am, those
Israelites had forfeited their own Heads before ever God gave way to Satan to
Tempt David to Poll them; and Absalom's hot Brain did but naturally generate
those long Locks which Divine Justice twisted into an Halter to hang him with,
for the short Cut of his Curtailed Obedience to so good a Father.

It Is but Turkish Impiety, to reck our Revenges against the Plagues of Heaven
that Sin has procured, upon the very Bodies of our Kings. It Is remarkable,
that most of the Rebellions which Sacred Writ has acquainted us with, were
raised against the best Princes, and the very Intimates of God, whose Interest
for divine Assistance was so apparent, that 'twas a Miracle, Passion should so
besott men into the fatal Effects that pursued them all: Since Corah's Grave
was so affrightfull, as might well allay the rage of that Spirit to this day.

Tho Zimri slew his Master (that was but a Sott) yet a Jezabel could observe,
that he suffered the Plagues of a Regicide, and the Pleasure of a Weeks Reign
was soon expired in the Flames of his expeditious Ruin, when despair of Safety
from the Prosecutors of that Treason reduced him to that woeful Exigency of
Offering up himself (a most unacceptable Holocaust) in the Fire of his own
Kindling.

It Is the Kindness of God to all Subjects in acquainting them, that the Hearts
of Kings are in his own hand; directing them by that discovery into the safest
Methods of Redress against any the wildest Exorbitances of Tyranny: Since it is
but their Addressing unto himself who is able to turn them (as the
Water-streams) to flow into as great Currents of Favor and Kindness toward
us, as ever they have ebbed in the diminution of any Rights or Liberties from
us. If their own Prayers can redress their Conditions, 'twere but Madness to
fly upon the Faces of Princes (whose Wrath is as the roaring of Lions) when
speedier succor may be drawn by humbling themselves into the Arms of a
gracious God; Who for the Oppression of the poor, and for the sighing of the
Needy, will surely arise to set them in safety from every one that puffs at
them.

Be it ever remembered, That God has secured the Prerogative of Honor to all
our Superiors, with the same Care as he has provided for the Lives of other
Men; to show us, That it is as dangerous to withdraw our Allegiance from them,
as to act Murder upon others: And that their Sovereignty is as safely guarded
as our own Beings.

And Oh! that the Brightness of those Eyes that sparkle Terror into the Hearts
of the Wicked, and scatters them as the Clouds before the Sun, may reflect so
great a Light into all the Paths of Princes, that their Royal Feet may never
slip into Noah's Noose, nor any of those more vulgar Weaknesses which give
Opportunity for Chamish Impiety to set light by that Majesty which God has
made the very Image of his Own.

And let Undutiful Children take care, that the Stones of Absalom's Heap (which
Travelers say are still increased by very Jews and Turks passing by it, in
detestation of that unnatural Act) be not brought hence by Divine Justice, to
beat out the Brains of those whom the Horror of so notorious an Example can
little affright into better Obedience! the Punishment of this Crime being so
seldom Prorogued to the General Assize, as Vengeance hardly takes a Nap before
Execution be done to the full. When a wretched Son was once laying violent
Hands on his Aged Father, and kicking him out of doors; Now hold thy Hands,
(said the Old Man) for 'twas but hitherto that I served thy Grandfather in the
very same Manner.

And it is observable, that the Curse is entailed expressly upon Canaan for the
Sin that was committed by his Father, to let us see how so great a Profaneness
is seldom expiated but by the Blood of Generations: And God's withholding his
Grace only from Children, is Slip enough to strangle them with the same Halter
their Fathers hung in.

This is that Canaan whose Name gave Denomination to the Fruitful-land, and
whose Sin made it yet but a Wilderness to his whole Posterity; since the
Blessing of Exuberance is but a Curse to those to whom common Mercy is but a
constant Judgment; and God did but send them beforehand as a Company of
Slaves, to build those Houses, and plant those Vineyards which should cheer the
Hearts of the more obedient Children of Shem; to whose use God sealed the Lease
of their Ejectment, and delivered it to Abraham (so weary was he of such
Tenants) four hundred Years before it was Executed, while in the mean time a
People should be born that should serve the Lord, and Pay him the Quit-Rent of
Praise for so pleasant Habitation.

And what! Is not this another Tragedy, when the Sword of God strikes inwardly,
and executes its Massacres upon all the invisible Faculties; kills them
spiritually, and spares the poor Corpse to the Curse of Slavery, not to Men
only, but Lusts and Hell; leaving them so perfectly Dead from performing the
Functions of the true Life, that they are absolutely senceless of any other end
than that of Luxury; wherefore they are continued in the World, 'till running
up and down for a while (like Swine with the fatal Knife sticking in their
Throats) they faint away and bleed themselves into Eternal Death, as Vessels of
Wrath fitted for Destruction.

Canaan Adieu! (the unhappy Son of so profane a Father) who has entailed upon
thee and thine so direful Execration, that I see some of thy Cursed Offspring
hypocritically crouching with their moldy Bread and clouted Shoes, to beg a
miserable Life from the flourishing Family of thy more dutiful Uncle, and none
other is granted them but such as is worse tha^ Death it self, when, rather
than perish, they are content to become the contemptible Skullion of their
Kitchen, the Prophesied Judgment i^ actually verified, Cursed be Canaan, a
servant o^ servants shall he be.

Babel's Tragedy,
To the City of God (if any on Earth be) the Incomparable London, (Instructed
and Edified on Everlasting Foundations into all the Dimensions of Saving
Knowledge, Faith, Love, Truth and holy Experience, by the Care, Skill and
Industry of Her Spiritual Builders) do I humbly Dedicate this Tragedy.
Beseeching God that neither the Clattering of Tongues, nor the Division of
Hearts may ever procure Her the Baffle of Babel: But that she may be a City at
Unity in it Self; her Affections as uniform and Compact as her Habitations,
ever remembering that she is not Secure, till God himself lay her Topstone in
Heaven, and Finish her up to Perfection.

GENESIS XI. 4. Go to, let us Build, etc.


BUT come Reader, Let us pass from Golgotha, (the Charnel-house of Dead Bones
and Skulls,) while we divert our selves a (...)

The Tragedy of SODOM, etc.
Grand Paw; she mightily dislikes their whining Minims, she must have them Note
it to the Ela of etc. And as their Speech, so their very Looks do please her as
little, they know not how to charge their Countenances to dart a Terror, nor
how to Swell and look bigg; nor with one Frown (shot from the furious Brow)
send away the Impudent Creditor that dares take the boldness to Dunn for his
own. In all these Reformations she promises her utmost skill to assist them.

Now for the manner of their Eating; this above all has given her the greatest
Affliction: As if God had still left them under the Curse of Temperance, and
given them nothing but Herbs and Sallads to feed on: She verily thinks their
Fields and Meadows did not present their Liberal Issues to a more silly and
dull-brain'd People in the World. What, had they not learned the sacred Science
of Eating Well? Unskilful yet in the Lectures of Cookery and Sauces? Nor how to
Exercise the Trained-Bands of Dishes and Platters? She hates to see them
gnawing upon those tougher Bits, which tormented them into the Fret of a
tedious Digestion: Had their Women no Alimbecks to bless them into the
Felicities of the Quintessence? Had they never dissolved an Ox into a Mess of
Jelly? And what were so many Flocks given them, but to Elixirate all into
Broth, whose subtle virtue they should find frolicking in their capering Veins?

And as to Drinks; she fears the Vicinity of their Streams had but bewitched
them into the Judgment of too frequent Draughts from them: Or if they were
arrived at the knack of improving them a little, by a small Infusion of the
Spirits of their Acres with them, this she believes is their extremest
Happiness, when now she was come to acquaint them, That the Jolly Grape was
proud to shed his Blood in their Service, and offers himself to be pressed to
Death, to give them a greater Pleasure in Life. Why was the Experienced Noah so
careful to prune up his Vines, but that he might leave behind him the Honor of
bequeathing so great a Blessing to the World? But if hitherto that Nectar had
been enviously detained from them, by the Policy or Power of their Princes, and
made a Monopoly to their own Palats, she will take care to break the Damm, and
make it run down into every Corner of their Streets.

But then they must promise her to enjoy that Happiness in the proper Season,
which would double its Pleasures to them, and that is by Night; they would
never arrive to any great Proficiency in the Noble Practice of Drinking
Al-a-mode, till they muffled up day in their Curtains, and Lighted up Night
with their Tapers. 'Twas a Glorious Adventure to baffle the Orders of. Nature,
and to begin to Chime up their Consorts of Music and Dancing, when the drowsy
World lay fettered in the Charms of a breathing Death, and themselves alone
Alive unto Jollity and Mirth: They could never think to mount the high Flight
of Pleasure indeed, till they had tamed Nature by Watching, (as Hawks are
fitted for the Game); she fears they will slight her Advice as to this, since
she never observed a People more chained to their Beds, taking care with the
Sibarites to kill their Cocks, in order to secure their Naps in the Morning.

There are many other things she would gladly see redressed, but she is willing
for the present to dismiss them, on condition they will evidence a fair Respect
to her Counsels for the future. It Is true, there was one thing more she would
be glad to whisper in their Ears (faining here a Politic backwardness to
discover it, yet such as she knew would but whet their desires into longing
expectation to know it, which they fancy too, above all the rest, would help to
complete up their happiness) but she desires to be excused for the present,
till she see to what Measure of Obedience they would pass in a dutiful
Conformity to her Dictates, given out at this Meeting: And besides, she fears
the disobliging of their Wives, (whose company she expected too, and who might
equally need her Instruction) since what she had further to impart, might be
expounded at least Misprision of Treason against the Female Interest, and
whenever she reveals it, it must be under the sacred Seal of Secrecy.

They depart with all the Expressions of Joy and Satisfaction in her admired
Condescension and obliging Nature, and assure her, that nothing shall be
wanting on their part to Honor her Directions by a ready Obsequiousness and
Respect, and all in an Ecstasy of Ravishing Delight, they lowly take their
leave and pass away.

Memory, that is ever a faithful Treasurer, to lock up every thing that casts
but the least shadow of a promising Happiness, failed not these Citizens to
make a very punctual Repetition of all the Branches of this goodly Oration, to
the greedy Ears of their attentive Wives, whom they soon raise into equal
Raptures with themselves, in the Imagination of the prescribed Felicity; till
anon, unfortunately One of them (more Vxorious than the rest, and who wanting
the prudence of Retention, would make but an ill Privy Counselor) chanced to
blurt out that last clause so imperfectly delivered, and broken off Abruptly,
which seemed to grate upon them a little too nearly. This takes Fire, and from
a little Spark in the Bosom of One (too hot to hold there long) spreads into a
Flame over all the City. A Convention of the Sex is holden to debate of the
matter, each one vents her private Conceptions, which blow up the rest into a
greater Fire. The fury of Jealousy incenses them, and they cast about how to
prevent an Evil that seemed to bear so ill a Face and Omen toward them. They
universally Vote a Conspiracy hatching, and resolve to stand off, and bid
defiance to their Enemy. What knew they, but she might bring up some new Laws
of Divorce, and endeavor to prefer her own Drabbs of Honor into their Beds.
For their parts their Spirits were as high as her Own, and they scorn to crouch
for Advice or Directions from her. They needed none of her Imperious
Impositions, and were Bred sufficiently already into all the Decorums of State.
What can she add more to them, than what they enjoyed already? Could she teach
them other Fashions than what themselves had invented? They had not studied the
Arts of Dressing so long, to be corrected now by a Stranger. The World was
mistaken in them, if they were not Notorious already. They thought she had come
to Town to have improved her self rather by them, and added to her happiness in
their Company, than thus mischievously to Plot against them. Besides, 'twas
rudely done of her, not to give them the Priority of the Invitation. They like
not she should be so great with their Husbands.

The Empress was of too sensible a Spirit to pass by the Affront, without the
just Revenge payable to it. She will make them know that she has not so low a
Soul to put up such an Affront to her Honor, so tamely as they imagine; And is
very glad that themselves give the first Occasion of the Breach, they shall
quickly feel the effects of their stubborn Folly and Rebellion.

If the Spirit of Purity has drawn a Curtain over that Obscene Advice, that
once was whispered by the Cursed Sorcerer into Balak's Ears, and has modestly
hinted the time only, when the wicked Counsel was given, which proved so fatal
to the poor Children of Abraham: Marvel not, Reader, if my Pen blush to
describe the unnatural Revenge which the Sorceress dictated to the Men of
Sodom, whose hot pursuit of her pernicious Orders, was the Torch that lighted
the Flames of their Ruin, and stamped upon them the black Character of
Exceedingly Wicked. It Is enough if thou know that God gave them up to the most
villainous Exorbitancies, and the fury of unnatural and unaccountable Lusts; to
Charge an Incubus, and Ravish Pluto, while Nature it self recoils at the
Horror of so Infernal a Courtship.

Pride checkles at the happy success of her Project, and finds her Disciples so
tractable, that she resolves to raise an Academy in the City, to train up Youth
to Succession: Her self will sit in the Chair, and Read daily Lectures of
Debauchery and the blackest Arts, and those so Public, that none shall pretend
the want of Opportunity to pass into the greatest Proficiencies in them. She
designs them all for Epidemical Profit, and therefore shall be performed in
open School. She celebrates Impudence as a glorious Virtue, and to be found
Blushing is present Expulsion, (though few were found in Sodom of that Maidenly
Complexion.) Epicurus has but stolen his principles from her: She assures
them that the Soul dies with the Body, and there is nothing better than to Eat
and Drink. They must contemplate nothing but Sensuality and the Palate,
protesting to them how great a God the Belly was; and that nothing would
satisfy this Deity better, than when they made much of themselves. The more
they Offer to him, the sooner should they experience the Blessing, to whose
Sacrifices their Fields and Herds yielded them so cheap an Assistance, that
they would be the ungratefullest Persons living, should they not load his
Altars with their frequent Victims.

This Doctrine sounded so sweetly in their Ears, and was suited so fitly to
their natural Constitutions, that you might have seen the Furniture of their
stately Plains taken off and devoted to the Voratious Gulf of Gluttony. Each
Park and Forest send in their liberal Contributions; the Luscious Venison is
immured in Pales of Paste: The stately Taurus dressed up with Gilded Horns and
Flowery Garlands, presenting himself in Sacrifice to the great Colon. Beasts
lie mangled on every Stall, and more Shambles ordered to be presently built; a
general slaughter is proclaimed. The innocent Inhabitants of the Air cannot
fly in peace for them, and the Scaley Nations are made to swim in Ponds of
Butter. Dishes march in Battle Array, and Jolly Boles go Round, while Gomorrah
Smoaks too, and the Five Cities are all but one Kitchen. Hogsheads bleed, and
the Conduits run with the Blood of Noah's Vintage. Music and Songs, Good Cheer
and Wine, and Wine, and Songs, and Music, and Good Cheer; an Health, and an
Health, and Ten thousand Healths to her who had made Sodom happy, and brought a
perpetual Holy Day with her: Teaching them the true end and use of Life, and
merrily to pass their Time away. When before her Arrival, their days were spent
in carking Cares, and solicitous Thoughts for the World, which basely Captived
them in the Chains of a sordid Bondage, and made them very Slaves to their own
degenerous Humors, from all which she had so happily freed them, and opened
the Gates of that grateful Liberty, that makes every Mortal so Happy^ Pride,
Fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idlenes^ was in her.

The poor Women finding how the Game ra^ began to relent, and think it folly to
stand ou^ any longer. They fall in with the Humor o^ the Time, and see Coyness
and Stiffness grow^ quite out of Fashion. They found themselves losers already
by an unprofitable Haughtiness which (if they persisted in) might in a little
time, render their whole Sex but needless and immodish, since there was no
standing against her who swayed all the Town. They are willing therefore to
yield a little and out of Policy to be more tractable, since very necessity
drove them to it. They think upon Terms of Accommodation with the Empress, who
they hope is not so Implacable by Nature, but may be by some means appeased
again, while themselves will give her those fair Demonstrations of future
Conformity, which may work her to better Apprehensions of them. To this end
they let loose all the Reins of Modesty and Chastity, (by which they think)
they had been Restrained too long already, to run in a full career the Race of
all Licenciousness and Lust: Virtue grows a very Burden and hateful to them.
Pleasure the only brave Goddess they Adore, in whose Service they are so
superstitious and severe, that they devote their whole Time and Studies to
approve themselves her most Bigoted Votaries. The snares of Temptation are
weaved by every Hand, they dress themselves up into all the Advantages of Love,
and have Exchange of Complexions that suit with the several Fancies of every
new Admirer. That day is lost that is not blessed with fresh Assignations of to
Morrows Joys, and they awake to nothing but renewed Acts of Yesterdays
Frolicks. They take care not to appear too frequently in the same Garb,
Ridiculing those of meaner Fortune whose Abilities supply them not to the same
Variety of Dress. They look with scorn on those that Retire themselves to the
Inner Rooms with the Torment of keeping at Home, who have not the Invitation to
Gallant it abroad, or be blessed with the Courtships of a secret Love. They are
Mad that Nature had not lodged upon them the most killing Charms of Lust, which
they strive to supply by Artificial Means, and the bewitching Arts of Language
and Wit. They -- But alas! My very Ink blushes to pass any further, and the
humor of our Age needs little Instruction into courses they Imitate already so
much to the Life.

When the great Ninive was ripe for Judgment, God sent them a Prophet to give
them notice of their approaching Ruin (and g^ve them Forty days to consider of
the Message;) the Breath of whose Mouth blew them All to the Ground in the
deepest Agonies of Terror and Sorrow. Proclamations issue out for a General
Fast, and the whole Court (for Example to the People) are wrapped in Sackcloth,
and the Ashes on their Heads, very happily prevented the whole City from being
turned all into Cinders. When God himself drew Arguments of Pity from their
present Penance, the Tears of the Children and the very Looing of the Cattle,
turns his Heart, and prevails to revoke the Decree. But such was the fearful
Defection of Sodom, that the Inhabitants there were more Brutish than the
Beasts; so Pampered and Shining, so ready and fit for the Slaughter, that he
resolves now by an Immutable Decree, to Offer up an Holocaust of them all, to
the honor of his Justice, and the Eternal Memorial of the Sacrifice: so Great
and Exceeding were their Provocations, that he will not deal with them a^ with
other Sinners, and summon them severally to Judgment, as they are taken and
Arrested by Death: But a Commission of Oyer and Terminer shall be sealed for
their immediate Trial and Execution: Giving all the World notice by their
Pre-damnation, what themselves must expect for the same Guilts at the General
Conflagration.

And now Sodom, the last Scene of thy Tragedy is just upon Acting, and the
merry Banquet of thy Luxury is hastening to an End: Wrath and Destruction bring
in the Voider, Tables and Guests are hurried away together. Thou have enjoyed a
long and pleasant Day to Act the Comedy of thy Mirth, but now it is dying into
an Eternal Night. The Play is over, and the Music is ended. 'Twas all but a
Frolic, and Frolicks are grown so Natural and Customary to thee, that even in
Death thou can not leave them, thou will Act one more, and thy Last, upon the
very Ladder, and that shall shut up all for ever.

The Executioners of Justice drawing near to the Gates, the Genteel Lot (who
had learned from his Uncle the generous Duty of Hospitality and Kindness)
perceiving them entering, was there sitting, ready to offer them a free and
courteous Invitation to his House, (little thinking they brought with them the
Writ for the Burning it and the whole City together.) He is Cordial in his
Civility, that no pretense of excuse shall prevail upon him to be denied. He
knew the Streets of Sodom were too dangerous for Strangers to lodge in, when
the strongest Bolts could hardly secure them from the Insolences of the Place.
In their passage from the Gate to his House, the Fair Guests are observed by
every Eye to be Persons of lovely and delicate Presence (as Angels ever delight
to bind themselves up in handsome Covers) such Beauties as these must not think
to depart the Town (where Pride and Luxury kept a Court) without paying Homage
to their abominable Orders: The Word is given by the Pimping Officers, about
all the City, and scarcely had these Strangers (unknown) received the
Courtesies of the House, and Lot's unhappy Wife dressed the last Supper before
she condensed into Salt; but their Lodging is beset with the General Assembly
of the Rioters: Old and Young, all the People from every quarter (as well such
as Age had rendered Impotent, as those whom yet Time had not maturated into
Sufficiency) demanding out the very Harbingers of their Death, (as if the pure
Spirits had assumed Bodies to become the base Succubusses of their Lust;)
giving them by this too clear an Evidence, that the loud Cry of their Villainies
had not made a false Alarm to Heaven, and that the bitter Clusters of this
unnatural Vine of Sodom, were fully Ripe, and ready to be pressed into the Fats
of Eternal Vengeance.

There is yet hope when the poor Slave of Concupiscence veils his Guilty Head,
and Muffles himself up, while he slily creeps through the back Door into the
Brothel of Impurity, trembling in every Joint, lest discovery be made of his
shameful Adventure to his eternal Ignominy and Reproach. But for Lust to beat
up the Drum, and make her Proclamations till the Roll of her Levies swell into
so formidable a Bigness, as shall create in her a proud Confidence of beating
down all the possible resistance that Virtue and Modesty can Rally against her:
It Is high time then for the Hierarchy of Heaven to fly to their Arms; and alas!
a small Powder-charge, shot into the Eyes of the Rebels, shall secure them well
enough for the present, till on the morrow the Ammunition arrive, that shall
dispatch them all at a Blow.

The Sun made have from the Antipodes that Night, and was gotten up very early
into the visible Horizon, to appear in Triumph over Sodom's Tragedy. Many fair
Courses had he made, while his glittering Eyes in a full Prospect had been
steddily fixed on their profligate Actions, and blushed (when themselves could
not) at their abominable Impudencies, repining to yield them Light to so many
Deeds of Darkness. But this Morning he appears to bid them Adieu for ever, and
ever He or They return to Bed again, they shall find themselves scorched in
more sensible Heats than His: However he would be kind still, to visit their
Ruins in his passage, which done, he wrapped himself up in a Cloud, and gives
notice to the Ministers below, that the dreadful Hour was come, and Heaven was
ready to give fire.

How little apprehensive the Town was, of a Storm of Brimstone and Flakes of
Fire ready to consume them, we may judge by last Nights Attack, made with such
Vigor and Force upon the Angels. They hold up their Courage to the last
Moment, and Magnanimously pass down into Everlasting Burnings. To little
purpose did Lot make his Harangue to his Sons in Law, who repay his Kindness
with Jears and Mocks, and believe him as little as the Old World did Noah, when
he Prophesied to them of a Deluge: Or as the Men of this Generation do those
who talk to them of a Day of Judgment; they therefore Meritoriously reap the
Fruits of their Incredulity and Contempt of Admonition, and leave us the true
Prospective to discover which is the most condemning Sin: Even Unbelief.

And surely there is a Faith in the World, Lazy and Idle, that makes as little
haste to escape the General Ruin, as Lot did out of Sodom, who though himself
believes, and persuades others to secure their Safety, yet is not very
Expeditious to further his own; and appears to be saved rather by the mere
Mercy of God, and the Power of Abraham's Intercession, than its own care. Very
happy are we in a better Advocate, who delivers us from the Drowsiness of our
own Faith, and keeps us by his own power to Salvation.

The Pleasures of Sodom that brought him hither, detains him here, and though
the Angels hasten and urge him to dispatch by the affrighting Arguments of
Destruction with the Sinners, yet he lingers still, till they pluck him as a
Brand out of the fire. It Is not our own Free Will, but Gods Free Grace that
preventeth our Ruin. We should ever be attentive to the Angel of the Covenant,
who is always crying out to us, Arise, and depart, for here is not your Rest.
Make haste least ye be consumed in the Iniquity of the World.

Lot and his Wife and two Daughters are brought without the City, and commanded
to escape for their Lives, and look not behind them; but Eight Persons out of
the whole Old World, and but Four are preserved out of Sodom: Follow not a
Multitude to do evil. To walk with God, is a securing Grace, though none but
thy self do it. To walk with the World is sure Destruction, though Millions
together do it: Peter knew what he said, when he advised Men to Save themselves.

And now in the very Moment, to let us see that Mercy can Triumph over
Judgment; He that would have saved all for Tens sake, will yet save One of the
Cities for Ones sake. Zoar shall escape at the Entreaty of a Lot. 'Twas Sodom
that had driven the Wholesale Trade of Abominations, and was the Head Quarters
of Pride. (This was unpardonable, that Pride was in her.) Zoar dealt but by
Retail, and Pedled in her Merchandises of Fornication. Hither the Old Man
flies, as to a City of Refuge from the Storm. God has his Rella's still, for
his hidden ones till the Indignation be over-past: Well might they afford him
Lodgings there, whose Prayers prevented all their going to Bed in Hell.

I perceive there is a Time when Complements and Courtship will be quite out of
Fashion. Lot has not an Hand or an Arm for his Wife, when his own whole Body
is in danger; he presses forward and shifts for himself, leaving her to Trudge
after as she could; 'twere well if so many were not over-courtly together,
handing one another into Death. The hour is coming when the Dearest Relations
shall be all swallowed up in that nearest Interest of Self-preservation.

Lot's Wife was a Native of Sodom; her Body was out of, but her Affections were
in it still. So little does God value the Carcass service of Hypocrites, that
he will make them the more lasting Monuments of his Wrath: While she disobeys
the Command, and her Eyes turn back to look after her Heart, her whole Body is
Petrified, and the Eyes of the whole World commanded to look upon her, now
become a standing Pillar, that yet has a Voice, and loudly preaches the
Dangers of Disobedience, Ingratidude and Backsliding; and least Time should
wear ou^ the Memorial of so strange a Prodigy, the Son of God comes from Heaven
to proclaim it afresh, and sets up a Buoy to prevent our Splitting upon the
Rock against which that unhappy Creature broke her self: And whenever thy
deceitful Heart starts back from God, Terrify it with three words, (as three
Darts shot by Joab into Absalom's Heart, to end that Rebellion against so great
a King and Father;) Remember Lots Wife. God had sent his Angel to deliver her
out of the Flame; that Angel had given her fair warning by no means to Look
back: Zoar was but a little way, whither she had Orders to escape: She had the
company of her Husband and Children with her, yet she alone (insensible of
these Mercies) despises them all and will Sin, and she alone that Sins does
Suffer. No Means nor Mercies can prevail with the Obstinate and Wilful; while
others believe to the saving of the Soul, They draw back to Perdition, and turn
from the Holy Commandment delivered unto them: Whose end therefore is
Destruction.

Naked and Bare passes Lot out of Sodom, leaving all his Riches and Goods
behind him as Fuel to the Flames. His Life only is given to him for a Prey, to
let Him see how little he had advantaged himself by an Intermixture with the
Wicked, and to teach us how low and mean our Gains will be in this Evil World,
when at the last we shall carry nothing out of it but a Shroud to lap the Poor
Carcass in: And very happy shall we be, if in the loss of every thing else, we
make our escape with a Soul to God washed from the Pollutions that are in the
World through Lust, by the precious Blood of Jesus.

Art thou gotten up, Reader, and with Abraham early viewing the dismal
Obsequies upon the Hill of Contemplation: Look out yonder, and see how Wrath
and Justice are burying the filthy Cities into their fiery Graves, in a
miserable new and unheard of Manner: Here is no Earth to Earth, Dust to Dust;
Alas! they had acted as Devils, and overturned all the Laws of Humane Nature:
Therefore, as Infernal Spirits shall receive their Interrment, Fire to Fire,
Flame to Flame, Burning to Burning, in sure and certain Desperation of any
other Resurrection than to everlasting Damnation from Jesus Christ, who shall
raise their vile bodies to make them yet more vile, according to his mighty
Power, whereby he subdues all things to himself.

Come, lend thine Ears a while, to the sad Screeks and Yellings of the
miserable Wretches thorough every Street in Sodom, and the same answered by
those of Gomorrah; and Admah and Zeboim Ecchoing to both: Lord! into what
Confusion has Pride and her Idle, Gluttonous, Drunken, Beastly, Filthy,
Unnatural Counsels betrayed them! When there was but one dead in the several
Families of Egypt, what an Outcry and Noise, what a fearful Distraction was
there at Midnight! what a Tossing and Tumbling to hasten away Israel, when
there was no other Fright, but of one quietly Dead in his Bed in each House!
But here the Lord thundered in the Heavens, the most high gave his voice,
Hailstones and Coals of Fire; he sent out his Arrows and scattered them, he
shot out his Thunderbolts and discomfited him. Their cursed Eyes behold the
Shower of Fire and Brimstone falling down on them all, whole Flakes and Rolls
of Fire first burning down their Houses, to make the more haste to seize on
their more combustible Carcasses, which had been so long baking in the Oven of
their flaming Lusts, into a perfect Crust of Obduration and Sencelesness, they
were become now fit for nothing but the Fire: The Plague is proportionably
suited to the Sin; they flame in Lust; God flames in Wrath; and because their
Heats were Unnatural, so shall these also, and the aspiring Element shall act
Retrogade, and descend to consume them: They Universally Suffer as they
Universally Sin: Old and Young environ the House, Old and Young are environed
in their own: The young Vrchins of Villainy are put into the Fry, to prevent the
cursed Succession of their Breed: Their Fruit is rooted out of the Earth, and
their Seed from among the Children of Men. O tremendous Spectacle! to see them
altogether, Houses and Bodies of Men, Women and Children, Cattle, and
whatsoever was found within their Bounds, all roaring together in one Raging
Furnace heated seven times, and blown up by the furious Breath of an incensed
God, whose Smoke passed up in thick and black Clouds and Pillars, darkening the
very Air, and benighting Heaven it self. Upon what Hill were thou gotten, thou
most accursed Sorceress, Piping and Dancing with Nero to the Flames of thine
own kindling, while it is Sport and Recreation to thee to see them all burning
in a Flame together? Where will be the end of thy bloody Tragedies?

Sixteen times in Holy Record has God lighted up the Fire of Sodom, to
affright (if possible) the whole World from the Execrable Provocations that
enkindled them. His Holy Spirit has held up the Tapers in whose Light we see
them in Hell, as if our very Eyes beheld them there. They are Suffering the
Vengeance of eternal fire, and their Damnation set forth for a fearful Example
to those that hereafter should live ungodly. But Alas! Man's Wickedness has
made Gods Examples as void and uneffectual as his Counsels. To find Sodoms
Vices surviving among the poor Heathen, is horrible, but to see them translated
into the Church of God, is Insufferable; whose Eyes runs not down with Tears to
hear of the Daughters of Sion exceeding the Daughters of Sodom in Pride and
Wantonness. But to find the Brothel-houses (erected for the very Trade of
Sodomy) so impudently out-facing the Temple of God; This might call for Tears
of Blood. And I could wish History had failed of Truth, when it tells us of a
Dispensation granted to the Family of a Cardinal for the same Villainy, with a
Fiat ut petitur. ('It Is a strange Power that can rake up Vices out of Hell, to
bring them up and make them in Fashion again upon Earth.) It were well too that
others dispensed not with themselves in Practices as Vicious as theirs in
Sodom. God grant they be not found in our own Streets, and the Daughters of
England as Idly passing away their precious Time and Souls together, as those
that so long ago were sent into Torment for the same Sin. What were the
Incentives that enkindled the Flames upon our own Houses, and reduced them all
into Ashes? Would Men think there is a Sin (lurking in their own Bosoms) which
far exceeds the Sin of Sodom, and which will one day meet with Judgment more
Scorching and Intolerable; it is but believing the Oracle of Truth, who has
convincingly forewarned us of the dangerous Consequences of that Fatal Contempt
of his Person and Gospel, that every where Reigns, and whose Plagues are
legible enough in Capernaum's Woe, that are sentenced by the Judge himself to
an hotter place in Torments than the Sodomites; and surely very deservedly too,
it being nothing less than the Trampling under foot the Blood of a God, and
doing despite to the Spirit of Grace. This is That Condemnation which will
double Their Sorrows upon our Own Heads: And our Unbelief shall not make the
Word of God of none effect. Let us Repent, and prepare for his second Coming,
who once for ever has cautioned us by Them, not to be surprised in the like
Security: Since in the very day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all.

Heaven showers down Hell on Guilty Wights,
Vile (as were those Infernal Spirits)
Flaming in Lusts unnatural,
Ripe for Destruction, down they fall
To their own Places, Scorched there
In Everlasting Heats, when here
The dreaful Judgment Awes us not;
Ah me, the Tragedies of Sin forgot!
Nor Waves, nor Fires of Vengeance can
Melt the Hard and Obdurate Man;
Yet what, nor Flames can do, nor Flood,
May easily be wrought by Blood.
Come Lord (the Work's thine own) and save
A perishing World from the Grave!
FINIS.
ERRATA in the Life of Abraham.
Page 31. l. 11. r. Luster, p. 35. l. 1. r. rigor, p. 66. l. 6. for other
Sacrifices, r. their Sacrifice, p. 78. l. 7. for their r. thine, p. 86. l. 4.
r. charges, p. 215. l. 26. r. she was, p. 183. l. ult. r. refreshed into, p.
192. l. 22. dele that before possibly, p. 221. l. 5. Chap. 12. Contents, after
Marriage add and Abraham's Death, p. 232. l. ult. r. inoffensive Ceremonies. p.
70. l. 7. for Now r. No.

Remarques ON THE LIFE Of the GREAT Abraham, THE FATHER of the Faithful, AND
THE FRIEND of GOD.

By S. JAY, Rector of Chinner in the County of Oxon.

Isaiah 51. v. 2. Look unto Abraham your Father.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey, over
against the Compter. 1689.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARVM.
My Lord,
THat I presume to devote these Papers to your great Name, when so perfect a
Stranger to your Person, may savor a little of Rudeness and Irreverence: Yet
your Lordship very well knows, that a more refined Acquaintance is attainable
with Spirits at a distance, where the divine Idea's of the great Soul have
Drawn themselves out to the very Life in the visible Characters of their own
Excellency, which have not failed to dragg after them (as into an easy and
pleasing Captivity) the entire Affections and absolute Obedience of others, as
the natural Fruit of their Victory. Thus we pay Homage to the very Saints in
Heaven, and to all Meritorious and Eminent Persons on Earth, dignifying our
selves by frequent and familiar Converses with them, though perhaps exalted
into mighty Stations, far above the low Sphere of our meanness and humble
Estate.

It Is this Prospect, My Lord, made into the sublimer Forms of your spiritual
Part, that has fixed me your perfect Captive, and given birth to this bold
Intrusion. (But if sometimes the inferiou^ Dependants on the Court Ensure
themselves of a gracious Reception, when th^^ come charged but with a Message
from the Sovereign to you, I am certain you will not shut your Gates against me
when I come laden with Expresses from Heaven, and recommended too by the Father
of the Faithful, and the very Friend of God.) And tho it be little to your
Lordship to hear of any New Pretender, yet it is Complacency enough to me, when
I make the World know how much I honor you for your Self; and with what
Pleasure and Satisfaction I received the good News of the Presidency of that
Church to be lodged in your Lordship, where my Ancestors with my unworthy self
for four Generations successively paid the Tribute of Reverence to its Mitre,
now Priding ^t self in so rich an Head as yours; un^ess perchance it be
deprived of that Fe^icity by the Ambition of another, which ^ay emulate its
Honor, and think it no ^obbery to succeed in the same Happi^ess.

May your Lordship long live, the true Heir of Abraham's eximious Faith and
Piety, the pleasing Object of your Princes Favor, the Peoples Love, and the
Desire of all the Churches: so Prays

Your Lordships Most Obsequious Servant, Steph. Jay.

REMARQUES ON THE LIFE Of the GREAT Abraham.
CHAP. I.
Abraham's first Call from Idolatry to the Knowledge of the true God. The
Encouragements God gives him to follow him. His Obedience to the Call, in
leaving his Country. He takes his Father and Family with him. Their Arrival
and Stay in Haran: Their Business there. Terah his Father dies in Haran.

I Shall not reflect on this great Prince as a rough Stone lying unhewn in the
Quarry of the Earth, but as a sparkling Diamond polished by the Divine hand,
and made fit to be set in the Bosom of a God.

The Chaldeans (if any) were famous and expert in Astrology; Abraham's ambition
aspired no higher than to get an acquaintance with the Heavens, whose Power and
Influences he thought had a great hand in governing the World; he terminates
his desires in the Zenith of these pleasing Studies, being yet a perfect
Stranger Writers differ about Abraham's Idolatry, some averring that he was
never guilty, though God seems to humble his Children with the consideration
that their first Father had sinned, which A Lapide confesses to be meant, not
of Adam only, but Abraham: And that of Joshua can hardly be answered, Cap. 24.
v. 3. Philo positively concludes him so, before the Divine Call.

Neque eos audire possum qui cum magno conatu Abrahamum ab ^oc scelere
vindicare nescio quibus argutiis student, quasi non tan^^ illustrior sit Dei
Gratia qua illum est complexus quanto ipse suit sceleratior, Masius. In
juventute Idololatra erat. Tyrinus.
to the Omnipotent Power that had fixed those Luminaries in their several Orbs.

Though the Book of the Creature discovers an infinite treasure of Wisdom and
Power, and clearly convince of a God; yet is not the Eye so kind a Tutor to the
Heart, as to impose its speculations with so great Authority or Success, to
work any powerful Impression upon it; but rather taking up with the senses by
the way, it finds so pleasing Entertainment there, that Man minds nothing more
than what he sees; and the glory of the invisible God becomes perfectly lost in
the dazzle and crowd of his visible Creatures.

The Mind of this Great Man was wholly immersed in them, he admires no Deity
but that of his Country, 'till by a Miracle of Mercy the Clouds of his Natural
Darkness are dispelled by an extraordinary light of Divine Revelation, that
makes Day in his Soul. Illumination from the Father of lights is so bright and
influential upon the Faculties, as fully secure from the danger of Delusion.
There is not only light but Assurance attending all the manifestations of God
to the Mind. Abraham was no Fanatic, to be led by false Fires from his dearest
Interests: From this time the flames of VR burn darkly in his Eye, he loathes to
sacrifice any longer to the Fire, when himself is enkindled by a diviner Spark.
Tradition tells us, (how true I know not) that being now turned from their
Religion, his Contrymen in rage, threw him into the Fire, for refusing to
own their god; but by miraculous escape he baffled the impotent Deity, and
discovered to its Votaries a greater, that had bridled up his natural fury from
singeing one Hair of his Head.

This poor Element had the good fortune to be promoted to Honor, from the
gross mistake of some, who had either heard or seen it fall from Heaven to
consume the Sacrifices of the true Church; these pass home, and Vote it into
Chaldaei and Persae cum vidissent Olim, igne caelitus delapso Patriarcharum
sacrificia consumi, putarunt esse Deum.
Godship, perhaps on less improbable Error, than others since, who contrary to
all reason have promoted Meal to the same Worship, and Deifie Bread instead of
a Savior. Indeed the true God has since fallen from Heaven in immaterial Fire
on those holy Tapers, who being first illuminated themselves, were to pass over
all the World to enkindle others, baptizing them into Refinedness and Purity.
These Flames feed on nothing but Corruption and Ignorance, they burn invisibly,
and this was the holy Fire which now God himself had kindled on the Alter of
Abraham's Heart.

See from what mighty grounds of Reason and Truth, our kind Mother the Church
has faithfully instructed us into the Necessity of God's preventing Grace,
which puts an effectual stop to the course of Sin, even while with Saul we are
posting on in a full career toward Death and Ruin. Artic. 10.

Divine Wisdom knows with what Heifer Man's Heart is best plowed, it is a
selfish thing, and plods on little else but its own Interests. God pitying his
Infirmities, gratifies his weakness, and falls in with him upon the terms that
he sees best please him: He knew this would make good Music in the Ears of
Abraham, I will bless thee, and I will make thee great. Man will not serve God
for naught, though he owes all that he has and is to Him for his Being.
Abraham, though pretty well stricken in Years, was yet but a Child in
Experience of spiritual Grace, therefore God dandles him on the Knee, and
allures him with the tickling Arguments of a Great Name and Estate. We arrive
to the Knowledge of Him by degrees, and from a taste of his Goodness in the
Creatures, are afterward brought to live upon Himself in the greatest
abundance or want of them. He knows by what Methods to train us up to
perfection. Abraham was no vulgar Person, he stood already under very
considerable Circumstances in the World: But he that had much should yet have
more, and he that held his Estate but by the uncertain Tenure of general
Providence, shall now have his Copy enlarged to hold all in Fee-simple, from a
special donation of Grace. God will hereafter add Sauce to his Meat, and
sweeten all his Messes with the Honey of Canaan. It Is a small thing to be
Great, if we hold that Greatness from our selves, and derive it not from the
great God; who can make even Death it self (that would else unstrip us into
nothing) to be the Porter to convey the Robes of a finite Honor into the next
World with us, where himself will overlay them with the Embroideries of an
Infinite Glory.

But Abraham lived among his own People in all the delights of Security and
Peace, therefore God forestalls his Objection of Danger, and offers him
Articles Mira Dei benignitas, quod tam familiariter paciscitur cum Abrahamo,
haec enim solennis est foederum inter Reges and alios formula, ut communes
habeant Amicos and Hosts. Vatabl.
of Alliance, wherein he makes over to him the whole Militia of Heaven for a
Lifeguard; (which we shall shortly find him making use of, when he charged the
Camp of the four Kings as Lightning, and routed them,) these were to be
commanded by his Faith at any time, and that not for himself only, but his
Allies too: Abraham should have the Aid of a God to lend at his pleasure to his
Friends, I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee. In
what desperate Estate then are the Enemies of the Church, with all their
Confederates of Hell, who unite together unto certain Ruin, and band
themselvess unto Death: Thus shall it be done unto Abraham whom God delights
to Honor.

Though Reputation, Riches, and Long life be all that humane Nature can well wish
for, (that Ignorantly closes her desires in the supposed felicity of them;) yet
Abraham whose Soul should relish a greater Sweetness in God, would not think
himself sufficiently happy, unless to all these, there be superadded a blessing
of that quality, which might secure to him the lasting fruition of that
Spiritual pleasure. We bitterly part from Creature Joys, but who that is Wise
would want a God? Temporal things grow Thredbare in the wearing, and wither as
Flowers in our Hands; they abate of their Fragrancy, and put us to the Blush
for our too great confidence in them. We are obliged to others for our Honor,
and Melt away our Treasures to purchase the Air of their Mouths. Life wastes
away its self, and grows ungrateful with long keeping. If Abraham will be truly
happy, he must have something more than these. There were Princes already in
the World that glittered in all the Grandeurs of State; it were a poor thing if
a God should put off his Favorite with the fading Flowers of a Crown: No, an
Honor shall be contrived for him, brighter than the Sun, which shall display
its Beams as far as He, and shed his influences over all the Universe, to make
it a fruitful Seminary for Heaven. For in thee Abraham, shall all the Families
of the Earth be blessed: As if God had said,

There shall arise a Glorious Person into the World, completed (by a Mystical
Union of my own Divine Nature and Essence with thy Humane Seed) into a perfect
God-man; who shall be the Prince of Peace, Righteousness, and Salvation to thy
self, and to all the Children of thy Faith, Obedience and Love, over all the
World, and through all Ages of it; who shall bless God for Abraham, but much more
for that Glorious Son, who shall deliver them from all their Enemies,
(Spiritual especially) and shall bless them in turning them away from all their
iniquities, drawing them from the cursed estate of Nature and Sin into the free
and fearless Service and Fruition of Me their God for ever.

In the former Promises God had affixed to him the Felicities of the Earth; but
in this he Marries him to Himself, and gives him a Propriety in that blessing
that is derived from the glorious Emanations of his very Essence. Indeed
nothing but God himself can make up a perfect Happiness to the Soul. The Spirit
of Man is an everlasting Substance, which therefore can be blessed in nothing
but an Everlasting God. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? The Creatures are
nothing without God, but God is every thing without the Creature. 'Twas but the
common Sluice of his Bounty that he had hitherto opened to Abraham, here he
shows him his very Heart, running out in full Streams of Love and Grace toward
him, which hereafter shall break out and divide themselves into all the parts
of the Earth, to refresh and rejoice the Souls of all the Children of his
Faith. Now has Heaven opened a Second time, to ensure the Seed of the Woman
that must break the Serpents Head. God Munites Abraham not against the Dangers
of the World and Men only, but against Hell and Devils.

Since the Joys of Faith are Unspeakable, and have something of the Nature of
those in Fruition, very Glorious. I despair to express the mighty Passions of
Abraham's Joy. He is all ravished into Ecstasy, and feels, tastes, hears,
thinks, rejoices in nothing but God. Something like this, every true Christian
experiences at the First appearance and breaking out of Divine Light, when God
first opens the Eyes to behold the Wonders of his Love, and shines in upon the
Spirit in the bright Beams of his Grace; the Soul passes out of Darkness into
Mavelous Light: Which affects it more than all the variety of Objects did Him
at the first opening of his Eyes by Jesus. This is the Music and Dancing at
the Prodigal's meeting with his Father. Abraham's Faith pierces through some
Thousands of years, and sees already the promised Savior clothed in his
Flesh, walking up and down amongst his Children, inviting them to come and take
share of that Bliss their happy Father enjoyed in Heaven: Now is he perfectly
at the disposal of God, and is content to be any thing or nothing, at the good
pleasure of his Will.

Though Natural Engagements stick fast to us, and our Hearts be close Locked up in
them, and very impatiently suffer a Divulsion, yet such are the commanding
Charms of a Divine Beauty beating upon the Soul, that they easily Dissolve the
Enchantments by which the Affections are bewitched to the Creatures, and
procure not an Enstrangement only but a Cordial Divorcement from them, when
reflecting (with an Holy Indignation) on those Dishonorable Prostitutions,
(whilst Ignorant or Forgetful of her self) the debased Soul had bowed down to
those shameful Embraces.

Chaldea was now no longer a place for a Federate of Heaven: What agreement
has the Temple of God with Idols? He easily parts from his Country, who had
first parted from himself. God having taken Abraham into his Bosom, had those
Secrets to disclose to him, which he could not so heedfully attend to in his
Fathers House, and therefore will draw him to a more proper Place, where he may
with greater advantage and convenience give him the demonstration of his
Kindness. Come my Beloved, let us go into the Fields, let us lodge in the
Villages, there will I give thee my Loves. Noise and Hurries distract the
Powers of the Soul, which when United are all too little for a God to enjoy.
It Is in the Night that he gives his Songs, when we are wrapped up in Rest and
silence. God is best enjoyed by Sedateness and close Composure of the
Affections. Jesus himself went into the Mountain to Pray, and in his last
Agonies separated from his dearest Disciples. God having picked out this One
friend, 'twas fit he should have him wholly to himself, and resolves to admit
no Competitor in his Affections. He was wholly for Abraham, and Abraham must be
wholly for Him; God cannot be held in a divided Heart: It Is the Single Eye that
penetrates deepest into his Love, he that squints upon any thing else, sees Him
not at all. God was all in Abraham's Eyes, and therefore finding nothing in his
Country wherefore he should desire it any longer, he cheerfully passes out of
it with a joyful Heart, and has not the least Reluctance within him to check
the Delights of his glorious Progress.

Behold him giving the necessary Orders to his Family, to get ready for a
Journey whence they are never likely to return. When once we go forth after
God, there is no drawing back but to Loss and Perdition. Sarah is so far from
Countermanding her Husband, that she disfurnishes her Closet with nimble Hands.
His Nephew Lot resolves to partake of his Unkles Fortunes, but old Terah (to
whom his Son Abraham had communicated the Divine Mandate) seems as forward as
the best; his Aged Joints are invigorated with new Strength, and is the First
of all the Company in a readiness to be gone, which God takes so kindly from
him, that the Honor of the whole Expedition is devolved upon him in Holy Writ;
and Abraham is led forth by his Father out of Vr, Genesis 11.21. They pass lightly
away, and care not to spend time in entertaining the Dilatory Complements of
the Town at their departure, to whom they could give no great Account of their
Progress, since themselves knew not wither they were going. Blind Obedience is
commendable enough where God himself is the Guide. He securely Travels that
has Light and Truth for his Conduct. Divine Presence is a sure Passport
against every danger. It Is a fair Flower in the Crown of Abraham's Faith, That
He went out, not knowing whither he went. With what pleasure did the Almighty
God look down on this Glorious Procession, which is ordered all at his special
direction! Every Step we make in his ways is delightful to him.

Note here the true Nature of Saving Faith, that willingly departs from the
World and Self at the naked Call of God, to follow him on the Foot of his
Conduct, whether up to the Mountains of Prosperity and Honor, or down to the
Valley of Meanness and Contempt. It moves and is moved at the Motion of the
Cloud of his Presence that directs it, and fears not to lose its way, while it
is guarded by and keeps close to infallible Truth through every Stage, till at
length it arrives at the happy place of its Eternal Fixation and Rest.

It Is but one Abram that God calls out of Chaldea, to pass away with his Train
from thence, where all the rest tarry behind to be destroyed in their own
Idolatrous Fires. Lord, are there but few that shall be Saved? The whole World
^ies still in Wickedness, and will not awake to the Call of Heaven: Some stir a
little, and open an Eye, but heavy with Sleep, shut it down again unto fatal
Slumber: Others sullenly lie still, while the Call is repeated, and willingly
wear the Adders Ears. Some get out of Bed and Dress for the Journey, they make
to the Door and show themselves in their Traveling Posture, ^hen their
Neighbors enquiring whither they ^re hastening, and themselves not able to
give an ^ccount, are easily laughed out of the design, and ^on consent to stay
at home. Others more re^lutely Cross themselves, and Vow to stand to ^l
Adventures, they go abroad and Sail away, but they Tack about at the first
Storm, and make for Land, glad at their Hearts to set foot again on their
Native Shore; therefore the Fearful and Unbelieving lead the Van of the Damned
Crew. It Is only the brave ^^am and the Heirs of his great Soul, that dare cut
out their way to Canaan through the Gigantick Mountains of difficulties and
danger, and can hew the Sons of Anak in pieces, to level the Road for their
more pleasant Passage.

By gentle and easy Processions these holy Pilgrims arrive at last with safety
at Haran: Where God intending that this noble Plant of Righteousness should
appear somewhat like himself in the Kingdom of Canaan, and not as a low
contemptible Shrub, gives him here for a while a Rooting time, that he might
grow up into all the Dimensions of a Stately Cedar. Here therefore the Womb of
the Divine Promise begins to swell, and be prol^^ick; Abraham already feels its
productive Virtue, and soon experiences what a^ advantageous Change he had made
of his God^ who seems to call the Creatures together, an^ commands them to give
their Attendance upon him as another Lord of the Creation, next and immediately
under himself. It Is God that directs the Flight of Riches and Honor, they an^
moved by him to take Wing, and to pass away from such as abuse them, and
themselves by them; so they are ordered to fly to others tha^ know how to give
them more generous Entertainment. The Treasures of Charran sigh for ^ lodging
in Abraham's Coffers, and confederat^ together to revolt from their Idolatrous
Masters to offer their Service to the true Heir; yea, the Inhabitants are Proud
to present them as a grateful Acknowledgment of the sense they had of that
Honor he had done them in blessing their City with his Presence. And surely
had Abraham drained their Exchequer by an Offering of their whole Town-stock to
him, yet should they have little cause to repine, since God himself has made
ample Payment, with all the Arrears of Interest to their Successors there, by
giving up the Superstitious Locum nunc honorant Saraceni quod ab Abrahamo fuit
^noratus eoque precandi causa accedunt ait Benjamin. Grot.
Saracens to the Vanity of exposing themselves to the expense of a long
Pilgrimage (in whole Troops together) to this City, there to pour out their
Devotions in the very place which they thought the Sacred Presence of Abraham
and Sarah had Hallowed all into Chapel, and out of which they fancy to be
heard with greater expedition and success. Whatever they gained by their
Prayers, the City is no loser by the Votaries, and doubtless found it their
Interest, concernedly to maintain them in their Error, and to flatter them
sufficiently in the continuance of that Zeal that was ^o profitable to them.

While his Servants Generate and Multiply in his Family, Abraham and Sarah are
no less employed in a work of a more blessed Increase. They ^ho were as yet
unsuccesseful in the Act of Natural Generation, were not unprosperous in the
Regeneration of Souls unto God. They erect a Divinity School, and daily
Lectures are kept up in it. In this happy Employment they pass away their time
in Haran, and make it their business to Sow the Seed of Divine Truth into many
a Charronites Heart. It Is very confidently delivered by their Learned
Posterity, that not only Abraham was a diligent instructor of the Men, but his
Tenent Hebraei Abram viros, Saram mulieres, in Dei cul^ instituisse, atque ita
eos Deo procreasse. Fagius.
Lady also undertook it as her Province to woe those of her Sex to embrace the
Worship of the true God, whom she presented (as the happy Issue of her Soul,
and knew yet no other Travel) to her Abraham, to be admitted into the Communion
of the Church in his House, and adopted into all the Privileges of his
Spiritual Daughters. Wonder not then, that their Train is increased, and these
Children of their Faith have Zeal and Strength enough to leave all their
interest in Haran to wait on their holy Parents into Canaan.

All these had God given him in Exchange for a Father whom he here thinks fit
to take to himself. The good Old Terah, who had followed him hitherto, falls
here; whose Funeral he Solemnizes with a becoming Gravity and Sadness, and
withdraws himself to Weep in Secret, lest by yielding too much to Passion, he
betrays the Honor of his Faith and Religion. Grief (tho^ Natural) is some
kind of Debasement of the Soul, forgetting her self, in stooping to every petty
Cross, in the Nonage of her Infant Esta^ but growing up to the knowledge of her
Princely Birth, she draws that holy Sweetness from her high Relation to God, as
soon makes her clear up again, to fortify her self against all the weaknesses
that dissolve her. 'Twere Treason against Abraham's dutiful Piety to dispute
his conscientious Care in confirming his Father in all the comforts of the
Promised Seed, that should one day spring from his Blood, for the perfection of
his Happiness in the future World. God that knew Abraham's Faithfulness in the
teaching of his Children and Household, might well trust him in the discharge of
his Duty to his dearest Parent: Who by the same Arguments that he prevailed
with him to forsake his Country, might be easily wrought to forget and abjure
any Confidence in the vain Idols he had served there. Happy Terah in such a
Son, who became the Parent of his Fathers better Life, and the blessed
Instrument of his Eternal Salvation. Complements of Seniority are vainly
insisted on in the greater concern of Endless Happiness: Nor do we find the Old
Man peevishly pushing away his Son from him, with the Phlegmatic Objections of
the Novelty of his Religion, or angerly pleading for the Antiquity of his own:
It Is well if by any means, and at last we arrive at the Saving Knowledge.
Methinks I see him humbly bowing his hoary Head to the God who vouchsafed to
Catechize him by the Lips of his own Child. He gratefully Embraces the Promise,
Dies in the Hopes and Apprehensions of it, and is wafted by a shorter cut into
the Heavenly Canaan; Abraham commends his Spirit into the Hands and Mercy of
the Father of it by humble Supplications, and did so well improve the Lesson of
his Parents Mortality, as never to forget in his greatest Height and Strength,
that he himself was Dust. Your Fathers where are They? The Children of the
Bedchamber cannot Mourn, so long as the Bridegroom is with them. Abraham's holy
Heart was so full of God, that he has little room left for Sorrow. Yet does
not Religion teach us Stoicism, (for Jeus Wept) but excellently directs us to
Regulate and Moderate our Natural Passions, which little prevail when Divine
Joy prepossesses the Soul: How hardly then are Tears wrung out? Therefore Grief
and Pain have no place in Heaven, where the Spirit is swallowed up in its
Masters Joy.

CHAP. II.
Abraham removes out of Haran into Canaan. God welcomes him into the Land that
he had promised to show him: Which is sealed to his Children by Promise. He
returns thanks, and sets up the true Religion there. A Famine arises, and he is
forced to remove into Egypt; where he denies his Wife through fear. She is taken
from him by the King, whom God plagues for the Rape. They are dismissed, and
return again into Canaan.

THe days of Mourning for his Father being expired, view we now the great
Patriarch dislodging again in a suitable Magnificence and State. Every Motion
of the Ark of God is Remarkable. Great Princes tread with Majesty. Nor was
there a greater upon Earth than Abraham, who was every day growing up to be the
Mighty Pillar on which God would build his Church, that must stand for ever.

'Twas in the Seventy fifth Year of his Age that he passed out of Haran, not
without the special Order of God, who now without further delay leads him down
by the hand into Canaan: This was that good Land which he had promised to show
him. God never disappoints our hopes that are grounded on his own Word. His
Eyes doubtless are greatly surprised with the pleasing Prospects of that goodly
Country. Heaven will be infinitely better than what we are able to conceive of
it here below; when we shall see it with our Eyes, we shall confess that half
of its glory was not conveyed to our Ears. Abraham travels on, 'till he arrives
at the pleasant Plains of Moreh, adorned with a delightful Grove of stately
Oaks; here he has the honor of another Visit from Heaven; God welcomes him
into Canaan. So far is he from tiring our Faith, that he loves to refresh it
with the sweet repasts of his gracious Presence; he will not give ground of
suspirion by too tedious absence from his Abraham, that he had drawn him out of
his Country to his loss. God is every where present to the eyes of our Faith,
but sometimes more sensibly to the joy and rejoicing of our Heart: I will
manifest my self to him: A Mercy that the Stranger intermedleth not with. God
never comes empty handed to his Servants, but brings that with him that shall
make up his Entertainment and Welcome; he knows that Man has nothing worthy of
Himself, and therefore expects nothing from him but an open and thankful Hand
and Heart to receive his Kindness: Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
Were our Faith so great and large as to comprehend the vast extensions of his
Bounty, we might fetch down Heaven into our bosoms: It Is our weakness and
incapacity that puts him on feeding us (as Infants) with such scanty drops of
his Fullness: Our barren Hearts might otherwise break out into thousands and ten
thousands of ravishing Pleasures and Joys, which the narrowness of our spirits
do now most unhappily deprive us of.

Thus full fraught with Blessings appears God unto Abraham, and brings down
with him a Conveyance of all the Kingdoms of Canaan to him and his Heirs for
ever. Indeed the Tenants were not to be thrown out of Possession presently, but
the Estate should be as certain to him as if It were already in hand: The poor
Slaves that had it, were to be spared for some time, 'till they had dressed it
up into a mere delightful Habitation for his Children. They had forfeited their
Copies already into his hands, and he might dispose of them at his own
pleasure; yet will he be so gracious as not too rigorously or hastily to make
his Entry, 'till he try whether they would submit themselves; and if not, he
will yet wait for his Goodness sake, and so should Abraham for the Promise
sake: And though they would pay him but little Acknowledgment as their great
Landlord, yet should his Posterity fill their Exchequers with the Arrears, and
bring such Writs of Ejectment with them as should very feasibly root them out
of their Estates and Lives together.

The wickedest Men have a civil Right to all they enjoy, from the Title of
general Providence; and though themselves weaken it by their unsufferable
Provocations, and sin themselves out of doors, yet it is not for Man to take
the Forfeiture without Orders from above. Those who violate the Proprieties of
others on the bare pretense of a greater Interest in God, and break open their
Houses without a Warrant from Heaven, may chance at the Assizes to be found
guilty of that Riot which will shame and confound the pretenders for ever.
Since God has confirmed the Grant in Heaven, and sent it down to be proclaimed
by the Mouth of a very Beast; Am not I thine Ass? To teach us, that they who
dispute it, are greater Brutes than he.

But what Man must not, God may do; He is the Judge who puts down one to set
up another in his stead. The Most High rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and
gives them to whomsoever he will, yet never by unrighteous Sentence; for he
tempereth his Justice with so much Lenity and Patience, that he shameth
Offenders into a blushing Confession of their own Guilt and Madness, and
leaves it to themselves to consider, how little he has contributed to their
Ruin.

The Inheritance is Promised, but where is the Heir? Where, but lying Dormant
in the Womb of the same Promise. Abraham must wait for both; He that believes
does not make haste. God works every thing by the leisurely degrees of his
Wisdom and Will. He that made all things to start up out of nothing at the
first, could have easily healed the defect of Sarah's Womb, and made her a
present Mother of Generations; whereas yet must she wait five and twenty Years
longer for one Son: But God ever acts according to the wise Purposes of his own
Council, and what is Man that he should Anticipate the Decrees of the Almighty?
Let Abraham live a while upon the Naked Promise, which is therefore so often
repeated to him again and again, that he might feed afresh upon the Sweets of
its Assurance, and every time he looked up to Heaven and saw the Stars, or
down on the Earth to behold the little Dusts thereof, or passing to the Sea
might view the sands, should from all these be put in mind of the Goodness of
his God, who had secured him a Posterity as innumerable as these, and all to
proceed from a barren Womb, the Work of that God only that calls those things
that (yet) be not, as if they were.

We are shut up in unfruitful Nature and Unbelief, and nothing can open us unto
God but Himself: could we believe aright with Abraham, from our very Sterility
and Nothingness would start up such a Progeny of Graces and Comforts, which an
Eternity should never see extinct.

Abraham bows, and believes, and bows again, and can never enough admire the
infiniteness of the Love of his God to him: He raises up Altars, and sends up
his thankful Heart in the smoke of his Sacrifices: Every place where he passes
is perfumed with his Incense, and God smells the sweet savor of it from above.
Great is the correspondency of the grateful Heart with Heaven. Seven times a
day do I praise thee.

But does Abraham remember where he is? Is not his Zeal above his Discretion?
The Canaanite was yet in the Land, and what makes him thus bold to invade the
Country, and bring in a Religion with him so perfectly different from all
theirs? He finds them a fierce and cruel People, inflaming themselves with
their Idols. It Is strange he did not smother his own in a politic Concealment,
and more prudently have consulted his security: No, but with a Courage and
Undauntedness, great as his Heart, he dares own the Truth, and the God of it,
in the Faces of them all. He charges the Devil in his own Quarters, and sets up
an Ark, before which he knew all the Dagons of the Country must one day fall.
Fearlesness and Courage for God is the natural fruit of a lively Faith.
Confession must be open and valorous: He that is ashamed of me, of him will I
be ashamed. Abraham knew the God with whom he was in League, was sufficiently
able to defend him. What are the combined Policies and Forces of Men, that
cannot move a Joint any further than as commissionated by the first Mover, whom
Abraham had secured to himself! He that has a God to trust in, and fears what
Man can do against him, deservedly forfeits his Pretense and Hope in the
Almighty Protection. Flesh may recoil a little, but Faith stands its ground and
is safe. Having therefore the Grant of the whole Kingdoms so surely confirmed
to him from Heaven, he passes up and down the Country as their Prince, and
makes his Kingly Progress with a Breast devoid of all fear, which he leaves to
torment the bosoms of those who were perfectly Strangers to his God. Would we
keep Heaven in our Eye, and our Hopes clear and unblotted upon our Heart, we
might follow him with the same Gallantry of Spirit through all the Territories
of the Sons of the Giant, and pass from pleasure to pleasure. Faith is a prying
Grace, and narrowly surveys the Map of the celestial Canaan, to make discovery
of those joyful Mansions which our hope tells us are as secure to us, as if
already we were in possession, (through Grace) by the Virtue of the same
Covenant that God sealed to Abraham.

While this Great Prince is thus recreating himself in the variety of the
pleasurable Prospects of Canaan, he is surprised by a discovery of a Leanness
that appeared upon the face of the Fields, such as might well make way for
Jealousy to arise within him of its natural Fertility and Goodness. Alas! God
had locked up the Womb of Nature that was productive enough of it self: It was
He that called for a Famine, and brake the whole Staff of Bread: This fruitful
Land is made barren for the Wickedness of them that dwelt therein: Even Canaan
yields not her Increase, and Abraham must learn the Lesson, that Man lives not
by Bread alone. When God stops his Ear, and hears not the Heavens, they must
not hear the Earth, nor the Earth the Corn. In vain do Men Plant and Water,
where God withdraws the Blessing. Manna still falls from Heaven by the
immediate hand of his Providence. Substract but the Divine Influence, and the
whole Earth turns Desert; you may Plow the Rocks with the same hopes of
Increase. Men distractedly Sacrifice to their own Net and Dragg: All means are
subservient to the supreme Will of God, who although he ordinarily works by
them, and sometimes without them, yet not always with them, and then all means
are vain. We must endeavor because he has Commanded, and hope for a Blessing
because he has Promised; but if that fail, it is because we have sinned, and
sin too frequently stops up the common current of his Goodness, that it cannot
flow down upon us in such full streams of Bounty as it would: Your Iniquities,
O ye Canaanites, have turned away, and withholden good things from you. God
shoots his Evil Arrow of Famine into the heart of the Land, he is already
beginning to weaken their strength, and showing his Abraham by what variety of
Means he could beat down all their proud Confidence and Power: His Children
should have no impossible task to obtain Possession, since he has other
Weapons to spend upon them besides the Sword: He could famish them all into
Skeletons, and make them drop down before him as Dead Men. It is confidently
averred, that this Famine was sent only as another Trial (...) Egypt. The
Church is ever in Motion, as the Sun, darting out her quickening Beams and
Light. What is Life it self but a tossing too and fro, by alternate motions,
into variety of Objects and Events. Who would not think the Princes of the
Earth incomparably more happy than Abraham? who fixed in the Orbs of their
Majesty and Grandeur, had little else to do than to play with the Leviathan in
the wide Ocean of exchanged Pleasures, and to glide from Joy to Joy; while the
good Patriarch oppressed with Famine and Want, is forced to travel to seek his
Bread; and yet was he the only Golden Pot, which was brim-full with spiritual
Manna, while all They as poor Earthen Pitchers run over only with the deadly
Pottage of their own Seething, and at last are broken in pieces together, when
himself is lodged in the perpetual Ark. It Is ill judging of the Churches
Complexion while she is sullied in the smoke of the Afflicting Furnace. No Man
knows either Love or Hatred by all that is before him.

Abraham in his Progress to Egypt unhappily discovers an impending danger, and
as well as he could projects to divert it. The Egyptians were a luxurious and
lascivious People, and for ought he knew his Wife's beautiful Eyes may dart
those Arrows into their Hearts which might possibly at last retort upon his own
Head. He justly fears those that fear not God. Lust is outrageous, and limited
by no boundaries; it is a Devil that breaks all the Chains that pretend to
fetter it, and cares not through what Blood and Dangers it wades to its own
satisfaction. He is going down thither for Bread, and now is afraid to be
swallowed himself. Beauty is but dangerous luggage in the way of our
pilgrimage; for prevention of the danger, he contrives to strengthen the silver
Cord of his Life, by loosening the golden Bands of his Marriage. Sarah that had
consented long ago to become his Wife, must now write the Bill of her own
Divorce, and consent again to be his Sister; he Wooes her a second time to
disown him as an Husband, and the poor Lady must hide her Wedding Ring in her
Bosom, lest it Wedd her Lord to his Grave. Could Abraham have removed the
wrinkles that this fear has fixed on the fair Face of his beautiful Faith, and
plac^d them in the ^^rebead of his Sarah, it is probable the Egyptians might not
have had that Appetite to her, as that for her sake he should dread to be
killed, -- Lord, if thou had been here, my Father had not dyed. Why did not
Sarah take his Mantle from him, and smite asunder these Waters of Jealousy,
crying, Where is the Lord God of Abraham, who uses to part these Waves of
danger hither and thither, and cause them to fly before us to make a safe path
through them all to tread on? If a Qualm of Fear came over his Heart, she had
done but her Duty as a good Wife to have presented him with a Cordial, which
soon had recovered him into a Spirit again: In thee Abraham shall all the
families of the Earth be blessed. Must that Blessing blossom from thy Ashes?
Ho^ factum Abr^hae infirmitate non videtur carere. Ainsw.
But where i^ the Jewel that has no flaw, and the Faith that is void of all
fear? We must seek it in Heaven, where perfect Love casts it out. Famine had
driven him down hither, and fear surprises him here* We must forget that we are
in the World, if we promise our selves security from Troubles in it.

Abraham is not deceived in the Egyptians, that which he feared is come upon
him; no sooner is he entied into the Land, but every Mouth is chanting out the
Encemiums of the Beautiful Stranger. They gaze on her as on some Auspicious
Deity, that was arrived to scatter her Divine Influences over all the Kingdom.
The News hastily flies to Court; think with what little pleasure; the Queen and
all her Train of Ladies receive it* as the Rising of another Sun in their
Horizon, that will Eclipse them all into perfect Obscurity. The Solent Aulici
etiam lenocinio gratiam Regum quaerere. Grot.
Parasite Princes (despairing to Enjoy her themselves) jointly vote her to the
Honor of the Royal Bed: They vie with each other, who should Sing the
Panegyricks of her Praise, with greatest advantage into the Ears of the King,
whose Amorous Passions are soon blown up into Flame, by so pleasing Breath.
Nuncio's are dispatched to Abraham, who Solicit the suit in the Mighty Name of
Majesty. Imperial Mandates are too absolute to admit a denial, but least of all
in the Affairs of Love. Now must Abraham hazard the Chastity of his Wife for
the Security of his Head, and whence he might have expected the greatest
Protection, there he finds his great^st Danger. Yet, while himself owns her but
as a Sister, and denies her as a Wife, he Legitimates the Rape, and her own
silence makes it still the less Criminal. How great were the contests of Love
and Fear conflicting together in her Breast, is better imagined than expressed.
There are some Passions that Letters and Words are too weak to Decipher. But
what bright Ray is this that I discover gilding the Cloud, and Shining through all
the Storm into the Heart of the Great Abraham? Can we think that he so tamely
parts with his dearest Lady, to offer her up a Sacrifice to the Lust of a
Pagan, from a principle of base Cowardice? What meaner Spirit values a Life to
preserve his Honor, and will not rather suffer a Thousand deaths, than survive
a despicable Monument of Shame and Scorn? Jealousy is the rage of a Man, and
he will not spare in the day of Vengeance: and should not Sarah have kneeled,
and begged him to dispatch her out of Life with his own Hands, rather than thus
to Prostitute her Glory to an Eternal Ignominy that could never be wiped off?
Whence is it then, that they so easily separate, and she seems to pass from him
as if she hastened after another Lover in the Court of Egypt? Ah no! Abraham
had recovered himself into a b^tter temper of Mind, and stronger sense of his
safety, and delivers up his Deus pudicitiam tuam custodire potest, teque
illaesam conservare, confido enim in Deo meo quod hoc fieri non patietur. Ferus.
Wife to the King, with the same Confidence as afterward he offered up his Son
unto God, with a certain assurance of that Infinite Wisdom and Power, that
could find ways enough to prevent the Violation of his Sarah's Chastity. And
she her self doubtless had confirmed Him into all the Confidences of her
Fidelity, that the long Experience of her Goodness, Constancy, and earnest
Affections to so worthy a Lord could affix upon him. Well might she be ravished
from his Bosom into Pharaoh's House, but she doubted not God would provide her
an Innocent Lodging there, without being forced within his Curtains.

In Confidence therefore of Divine Protection, Abraham surrenders her up to the
Court. The Heart of her Husband does safely trust in her: Princes do every
thing in State, they pass with considerate Steps, even into the Bed of Love:
Motions of Majesty are Deliberate; it is below Kings to Violate or be Rough.
They are losers by Violence, while they know there is little pleasure in
constrained Embraces. Amnon loathes, and Bolts out the Lady that he had
Ravished. A little Patience ripens the Flower of their Desires, which
Precipitancy vainly Crops in the Bud; and we know Monarchs Woe by Proxy, which
yields great advantage to delay and excuse. And doubtless Sarah had Arts enough
to shift off too close Applications that were made by the Courtiers in the
behalf of their Master, or by Him for himself. Abraham is courted too, and
caressed with all the Complements of Endearment. Each Officer cringes to him,
as to the Rising Favorite, and a Growing Ally to the Crown; the King himself
treats him with that Courtesy as might most powerfully win him to his
Interest: He obliges him to favor his Suit by all possible demonstrations of
his Royal Bounty, which Abraham most gratefully returns to his Courtiers, to
whom (if we may believe Josephus) he became a Tutor, and taught them a Nobler
Science than the Art of Love, bringing them to Dote on the Beauty of the
Heavens, which far exceeded that of his Wife. And some of them (as Chrysostom
thinks) to the knowledge of that God who had fixed the Lusture upon them.

A Jewish Tradition makes us believe, that Sarah had a Tutelar Angel sent her
from God, to secure her from all the Assaults of this Tyrant, who, upon every
rising of his Lust and Hot desires, would strike him into so perfect an
Impotency as forced him to pass from her Chamber with the shame and vexation of
an Eunuch, laden only with the Spoils of his frustrated Hopes, instead of those
of her Honor, while her self stands Laughing (as her Children afterward) on
the Shore of security and freedom; when this Pharaoh, venturing to pursue her,
has the Heels of his eagerness tript up, and is sent to cool his Flames in a
Watery Bed.

'Twas indeed from a Power unconquerable as her Own, Steeled with a Spirit
wholly Divine, that she gloriously stood the Shock, and baffled all the
Attaques that were made upon her Virtue; till at last God pitying this Noble
Freewoman, in Bondage here under the Tyranny of this impious Prince, and
hearing from above the Sighings of the Prisoner, was resolved to knock off the
Shackles of her Captivity, with such an Hammer as shall make the Foundation of
her Prison to shake, and the Keepers thereof to Tremble. A Cloud of Indignation
Condenses over their Heads, and falls down in a shower of Plagues upon them.
The whole Court is under Horror, and Labors under Diseases and perfect
Confusion. The happy Pair are in Ease and Safety, while That is under
Consternation and Disorder. Some say, the Magicians are consulted, to enquire
into the Causes of the Wrath of Heaven; others, that Sarah her self is
re-examined from the Jealousy they harbored of her nearer Relation to
Abraham. Indeed she knew her self (as Jonah) the procuring cause of the Storm,
and that a little time might blow Her into Harbor and Safety. They all grow
Sick of the New Mistress, and would gladly send her packing for calm Weather
again; themselves wish her another Lover, and would gladly pay a Priest to
Marry her a Second time into Abraham's Bosom; and possibly they might save that
labor, for the Sister may be the Wife already. God had sent down from Heaven
an ample Certificate of the Marriage, which they might read but too plainly in
Characters of Judgment. Sarah (as some say) upon Examination confessess the
whole, and now (if at any time) had Abraham just ground to fear; but God had
secured him from the fright, for if they were thus Plagued for the guilt but of
an Unlawful desire to his Wife, what should they be, if they lay violent Hands
on her Husband.

There is a certain Divine Appearance of Majesty seated in the very
Countenances of the truly Godly, and shining there in so clear a Light, as
never fails to strike Terror into the Hearts of profane Men: A Spirit of Glory
resting upon them, that melts the Drossie Spirits of the wicked, who are made
to fall before it, and yield that due Veneration and Reverence as greatly tends
to their Honor, and happy Security from danger; so that the hand of Cruelty
wants an Heart to offer a rude Touch to Gods Anointed, or to do his Prophets
Harm. It was this Venerable Aspect sitting on the Brow of the Great Abraham,
from whose Eyes darted the Lightning that Pierced the Breast of this Egytian
King, and dissolved him from his Natural Ferocity, into so Meek and gentle a
Temper, that instead of the Thunder of Wrath we might have expected to have
ratled from his furious and incensed Spirit, we find nothing but the still
small Voice of a soft and weaker rebuke; Why said thou, She is my Sister? It
is God that turns the Hearts of Kings whither soever he will. Methinks I see
the Blood that under the first Temptation had passed from Abraham's Cheeks to
guard his Heart, and left him Pale with Fear, now returning all back again,
making him blush with Shame. Nor could he in Civility do less than wear the
same Livery with the King, whose Face is dipped into the same Scarlet, and
blusheth as deep as he, from the Conscience of so great an injury done by him
to the Lady of so Mighty a Personage as Abraham.

It Is strange this Fallacy had not wrought to greater Vengeance. Princes seldom
brook the Affronts made upon their Reputations or Affections. It Is but Sport
and Recreation to them to Revenge themselves, especially where there is not a
proportionable Strength for Defense, and where too, there is nothing but Nature
to check its Fury and Rage. But the Lord was there, and the whole Court was
under the Sores of his Wrath, who therefore Politickly consult rather the more
safe and generous way of heaping up Coals of Fire upon the Head of Her that had
enflamed their Brince, than by any injurious usage to provoke greater Flames on
themselves.

And the Monarch is content to pay well for his Liquorish Longing, who thinks
it Bargain good enough if he buy off his Guilt with the price of those liberal
Presents, which he sacrifices as Trespass-offerings to Abraham, which he hopes
will satisfy for the Sin of his Ignorance; after which received, he has
Audience of leave and free Liberty to depart, who passes from the Court with
his Lady in his hand, a Greater Man than when he came in. We must not forget
the Kings last kindness in giving severe Orders to the Guards for their entire
security, making it little less than Treason for any Subject to profane the
Shrine himself had so religiously adored. And surely all but need, while he
providently foresaw how the common People could easily expound their greatest
Insolences into good Service to their Prince, when they heaped them on those
only who had been the instrumental cause of so many plagues and mischiefs to
him, (as they think). Vulgar eyes (looking no higher than the bloody Effects of
the Judgment) are perfectly blind from any Penetration into the first procuring
Cause. Had Pharaoh's Heart bin as innocent as Sarah's Eyes, they had never felt
the vigor of Gods displeasure upon them.

The Church has bin ever indeed a Burdensome Stone to the Wicked, who making
all their force to heave and lift at it, have found not their Shins cracked
only, but their Heart Strings broken with the weight of it. Whosoever has
fallen on this Stone, has bin broken, but on whomsoever it has fallen, it
has ground him into powder. Abraham traveled into Canaan, because they gave
him so cold a welcome; behold a Famine on themselves, from thence he passed
into Egypt, where they plague him by the Rape of his Wife; behold a Disease on
themselves: See Haman hanging on the Gallows prepared by himself for Mordecai,
and an hundred fourscore and five thousand Carkases spread as Dung on the
Fields of Jerusalem, who threatened to make the Inhabitants eat their own: All
that burden themselves with this Stone, shall be cut in pieces, tho all the
People of the Earth be gathered together against it. Wherein they deal proudly,
God is above them.

Abraham doubtless had Impaired his Stock by the Famine of Canaan, and now he
abundantly recruits it in the Court of Egypt; he was afraid to lose his Life,
where now he augments his Estate. His Wifes Face had not bin more pleasant than
now profitable unto him: instead of being killed for Her sake, he lives and is
enriched by her. By what strange means does the Church sometimes thrive and
prosper! The good Father went down into Egypt but to receive the first Fruits
of those Spoils, which hereafter his Grandchildren shall lade themselves out
with, when in the like Affright the Egyptians consent to be robbed by them.

Behold we Him now retreating, replenished with Treasure and Joy, he leaves
nothing behind him but the Infelicity of his Diffidence in his God, and could
willingly part again with Pharaoh's Presents to have purchased off the
remembrance of his Weakness and Shame. The best Men are most sensible of their
least Failings, and are most deeply humbled under them, while fools make a mock
of Sin, and think to Jeer away their Consciences and Guilt together. God
certainly left him here to Trip, for our Instruction: And Abraham did that
which was right in the Eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing
that he commanded him all the days of his life; save only in the matter of his
Sister: Yet has he not wanted Advocates pleading so well for him, that in this
also he is made Innocent, and little fault found in him: to which may be added
this, That he receives no Reproof at all from Heaven. The best use we can make
of it, is to learn where to look for Perfection. I pity their vanity, who
pretend to have their Houses of Clay dressed up with the furniture of the next
World, when the Father of the Faithful has nothing to boast of but what he
receives from God.

By daily Regresses he now passes back into Canaan, where by this time the
Staff of Bread that broke under his hand, was increased into many Bands of
Plenty. He proceeds to the Confines of Bethel, which he had made Eminent by his
first Altar, there erected unto God; which he reverently repairs again to offer
up those Sacrifices of Thanksgiving, which in Clouds of Perfume shall give
public Testimony how much his grateful Heart was inflamed with a most lively
Resentment of Gods stupendous Goodness toward Him and his dearest Wife, in
their miraculous Deliverance from all the dangers of the Egyptian-Court: And he
is glad to do it in this place where God had answered him from Heaven already.
The very Spot where divine Appearances are made, is exceedingly delightful and
affecting. Alas, thine Altars, my King and my God? How then should we be
ravished with the remembrance of that happy place, where we shall one day
praise him for ever.

CAP. III.
The Dissension between Abraham's Hersdmen and Lot's. The ensuing separation.
God appears to comfort and confirm Abraham in the Promise of Canaan. Lot passes
to Jordan. A War arises. The Sodomites are vanquished; and the City ransackt.
Lot is tarried away Prisouer.

LOT the Son of Haran, the Brother of Abraham, had been the comfortable
Companion of his Travels from his first departure out of VR: Therefore had God
blessed him, and made him a great Sharer in the Mercies of the Covenant. He is
increased to that degree of Greatness in Wealth, and Substance with his Uncle,
that now their Cohabitation is rendered incompatible any longer. Lots Eyes could
not be so short-sighted, as not apparently to find, how Good it was for him to
be here; and how much he had profited by his dutiful respect to his Fathers
Brother, who had been more than a Father to him. He resented the Mercy, I hope,
with a better heart, than that Atheistical Gown-man, who since cried out,
Quantum nobis profuit haec Fabula de Christo! How much Wealth has this Story
of a Christ brought us! Poverty sometimes parts good Company, but here Riches.
And though themselves agreed together in all the Principles of Faith and
Religion, yet the very Cattle necessitate a Schism, and the only Quarrel is
between the Shepherds, who studied more the Bellies of the Sheep, than their
Masters happy Communion and Peace. It were well if the Pastors of the Christian
Flock had divided on no other Motives than Zeal for the good of the Sheep.
There are Herdsmen, who while they swagger for the Interest of the Flock,
engross the whole Pasture to themselves, and leave the poor Sheep to bite on
such hard Oarts which they cannot swallow nor digest; they lead them from the
green Pastures of infallible Truth, and the pleasant Waters of unspeakable
Comfort, to make them couch in the barren Wilderness of Uncertainties, and the
dry Heath of unprofitable Errors and Vanity.

The wise Abraham not minding to espouse the Fewds of his Servants, thinks fit
in time to prevent a growing Dissension in his Household; by a prudent giving
way to the present necessity, resolves rather to take leave of his Nephew, than
his Peace and quiet. He cannot tell into what Combustion these quarrelsome
Fellows might throw his Family; and therefore he Addresses his Kinsman with
such fair Proposals, as should quickly depress the Flame, and evidently show
him the true Nobleness of the Mind from whence they arise. The strongest
Christian, is ever the truest Gentleman, who is happy in a natural Facility and
sweet Condescension of Spirit, which on every occasion so becomingly passes
from him, to command a Power over the Affections of all that observe him. He
keeps the Gates of his Soul ever open as a passage for self to walk out at,
when a weaker Faith bolts it self in, and cannot so easily Sacrifice its
Interests to the Honor of Peace and Truth. Princes scorn to spend a thought on
the petty pretenses which meaner Subjects pursue with Heat and Passion. The
Great Abraham casts all the Rights of his Supremacy into the Arms of his Nephew
at once, with License to dispose of them at his own Pleasure, and generously
offers him to rest satisfied with the Refuse of the Country which himself
should not please to make choice of.

The Grum Lot, who should have lowly bowed to his Uncle, and by a Scarlet
Cheek, made sign how sensibly he resented that unusual Generosity of Abraham,
and very humbly begged his excuse; is so far from that, as he thinks it not
policy to return back the Complement, but rudely takes him at his Word, Nota
modestiam Abrahami, et parum Loti gratum animum, qu^d ei non reliquerit
Optionem. Estiu^s.
and all in an Hurry prepares to depart, having first chosen his own Apartments
on the fruitful Plains of Jordan.

How often are the unlovely knots of an ill disposition too visibly discovered
thorough all the varnish of a fair Profession: Yea Grace it self is not so
Victorious to make a thorough Conquest over all the Clowneries of Nature. Lot
was surely a Good Man; yet had his Goodness been more Conspicuous, had it been
so happy to have shined through the Attendant Luster of a greater Civility and
Gratitude to his Uncle, by whose means alone, and for whose sake he had grown
up into all his Dimensions of Wealth and Greatness.

Good Nature bears so near a Resemblance to Grace, as one must weep to think of
a lovely Titus his going to Hell; and Ill Nature is so like to Corruption, that
one must admire the Mercy that ever receives it to Heaven. Civility without
Grace, may temper up for a fine Gentleman; when Grace without Civility makes
but a crabbed Christian.

And certainly Lots undutifulness is written very legibly in the Characters of
his Punishment; for while he greedily gazes on the Pleasantness and Amenity of
the Cities of the Plain, and the Commodiousness of the Fields for his Flocks,
without Counter-ballancing in his mind the Inconveniences of a Neighborhood,
so very wicked and profane, he utterly betrays the sweet Comfort and Happiness
of his Life, electing himself into a perpetual succession of Sorrows and Woes.

Were it Lot's Case only that parted from Abraham, on the Account of Brutes, we
might easily pardon it to him, and pass from the place without a Tear, or
sympathizing much with the Sorrows of their Separation: But when we every day
find the greatest part of Mankind breaking off from the participation of the
Eternal Felicity of Abraham's Bosom, from no other Motives than the
Gratification of Beastial Appetites, and sensual Lusts, that destroy their
Peace and Souls together; this is a Sorrow that fetches Tears into the Eyes of
a God, who in a doleful sense of that Madness, cried out in fear of the small
remnant, Will you also go away?

Lot is no sooner departed from Abraham, but the loss is made up to him by
another Visit of God from Heaven. The seasonableness of Mercies make them
doubly sweet and welcome to us. Natural Affections work most sensibly in those
who are most Holy and Spiritual, when wicked men that are without them, are
perfectly Stocks and Stones: He could not but be very grievously afflicted with
the loss of Him that was so near and dear unto him, With whom he took sweet
Counsel, and who was one in all the Service of God with him. David bitterly
bemoans the failure of his Familiars: Lover and Friend have ^hou put, away far
from me, and mine Acquaintance into darkness. God considering his Affliction,
comes to extinguish it with the unspeakable Comfort of his own Gracious
Presence. How do all our earthly Sorrows post away as the Clouds of the
Morning, making Room for the rising Sun to break day in the Soul when he
appears. We do not find that God is in the least displeased at the separation.
The more of the Creature drops from us, the more entirely does He possess us:
Nor do we ever enjoy God fully, 'till our Affections be perfectly divorced from
every thing, to be all centred in himself. Lot's Absence has procured God's
Presence. Blessed is that Want that brings us to the Gain of a God, how great
soever it be. May I for ever be confined to the solitary Cell of an Anchorite,
were I sure to be happy in the fruition of the same Blessing. The Draughts of
Pleasure we swallow from the best Company, are imbittered from the
consideration that a little Time will discontinue it to us, and leave us only
the remembrance of a good that is past, and the bare hopes of a possibility to
renew it, of which we are yet uncertain too, since the quarrels of Attendants
may occasion an estrangement, and a thousand Accidents a perpetual separation:
It Is Heaven only can bless us with an everlasting Communion: God is Almighty to
complete up an Happiness to us in Himself, which all the World cannot give us.

Now will God discover to his Abraham the vast difference of his own happy
Condition from Lot's. Lot had lift up his eyes to behold the Plains of Jordan,
but not as his Own! How many are in the Church of God, that shall never enjoy
the Churches God! It Is Propriety makes the Prospect pleasant. Therefore shall
Abraham lift up his Eyes too, and look Eastward, Westward, Northward,
Southward, on all round about him, and behold all as his own. Lord, how
Extensive is thy Bounty to thy Servants! By the Perspective of his Faith must
he view it, at the distance of a few hundred years, all planted with his own
Children, who in Number should compare to the little Dusts of the Earth. God
again and again preaching to Abraham on the same Text, with those Enlargements
which greatly comfort his Heart, and giving new Eyes to discern that sweetness
in his precious Promises which he never before had observed. Is not this our
own Case? God has made us a Promise of Heaven, and repeats it over and over;
the squeamish World grows weary of it, as a Stale word, and hunt after New
Discoveries. But the true Seed find such variety of Pleasures in the good Old
Truth, that with their Father they feast upon it, and care not how often it
sounds in their Ears, since they taste how sweetly it refreshes their Souls.

See the Care and Kindness of God, who before he departs from his Abraham (like
a good Physician) leaves Orders with him to divert himself from his Melancholy,
by the pleasure of another Progress through the whole Land of Canaan, which he
doubted not might yield him those pleasing Prospects that would greatly affect
and delight him: Whose directions Abraham so obsequiously follows, that he
presently gives orders of Removal from Bethel where he now was. And after a
very delectable procession, at last it pleases him to make choice of the
fruitful Plains of Mamre in the Vicinity of Hebron, where we shall leave him
devoutly employed in the holy* Exercises of Prayer and Invocation of God, and
taking many a sweet Turn in the Grove of Oaks which here grew up together to
give him the Complacencies of their refreshing Shade, while we discourse to you
for a while of the less happy Affairs of Lot.

This unhappy happy Man, having taken his leave of his Uncle, travels Eastward
from him, and sixeth his Tent toward Sodom. The very first step we make from
the true Church, is dangerous, but the further Egressions are fatal. He
contents himself for a while with the innocent Delights of a separate State,
where on those pleasant Plains he had Leisure enough to reflect on the past
Felicities of his Life, under the Government of so wise and great a Relation,
and might well have been satisfied in the paring away those superfluities of
his Substance, which (as needless Excrescencies) had grown up to be injurious
Nusances to the weal of his Happiness, and had now endangered the very Vitals
of his Comfort and Joy: And doubtless with bitter Tears did he repent of his
Folly, when he found himself afterward plundered of his Estate and Liberty
together, by that unfortunate separation. So insensible are we of the
advantages of our present security, that reaching out to grasp after greater,
in a moment are deprived of all. By several Motions he approaches the Town, and
at last adventures within the Precincts, where his Fancy tickled with the
variety of Conveniences for Life it abounded in, he resolved at length to
pluck up the stakes of his moveable Tent, and to sleep under a more sixed Roof
in the City. Thus do we pass by various Gradations to the last Extremity of
Sin; (No Man accumulating to the shameful degree of being Master of that Art
from the first day of his Matriculation) so neither per saltum fall we down at
once into the deepest sloughs of its sorrows, but dabling at the first in the
little puddles, and with Children adventuring into the shallows, (and enduring
them well enough,) e're we are aware are caught away into the deep, where our
Feet sticking fast in the Mire, we become like Lot's Wife, unmovable Monuments
of Wrath.

The five Cities seem to be an Exception from this general Rule; for the first
account of their Character is so black and sulphurous, as very early
Prophesies, how probable it might be, that God would match a Judgment of the
same complexion with their sin; which as it appeared to baffle the Order of
Nature, that ripens every thing by Time, they like Mushrooms grow up to
perfection of Wickedness in a Night, and start up Graduates of the highest form
of Villainy. The Men of Sodom were wicked, and sinners before the Lord
exceedingly: They needed no Tutors to instill the Mysteries of Iniquity by
short Lectures, according to their weak Capacity, but themselves read them to
all the World, and are become the Gulf that streamed out its deadly Issues to
others: It Is no wonder then (standing in so ill circumstances with Heaven) that
we find them under a state of Bondage and Slavery, the proper infliction on
Rebels: God had given them up into the hands of Chederlao^er King of Elam, who
as he bore an hard Name, so surely had no very soft or easy Nature, but had
clapped an Iron Collar on their Necks, which while they endeavor to tear off,
hall gaul them the more, and eat the deeper in^o their Flesh. Twelve Years had
they patiently endured the Yoke of an heavy Imposition and Tribute; and while
they see no end of it, they believe there will be none, unless themselves cut
it off with the Sword of Rebellion: His Oppression makes them mad, and drives
them to Despair, which threw them into speedy Resolutions of hazarding their
Lives for their Liberty. Whom Divine Justice decrees to bring to ruin, those
it hardens to cast themselves into the very mouth of those Cannons that shall
batter them to pieces. God needs not to call in the Sword of an Enemy to
dispatch his Rebels, but can invert the Edge of their Own upon themselves,
making them to fall by their own Councils, and giving them over to that sottish
Gallantry which shall entitle them to the Honor of Chivalry in the Battle of
Self-execution.

The News of the Revolt of these Cities, fly with nimble Wings to the ears of
the Conqueror, whom they will not find so ready to bury the Honor and
Accrewments of his former Victories in a Cowardly Grave. He resolves to carve
his revenge in bloody Characters upon their Flesh. Dispatches are sent to the
Princes his Confederates, to get ready their Arms, who with all Expedition
incorporate themselves with his own, and all together, complete up a formidable
Army, which by hasty Marches soon make their Appearance on the Plains of
Jordan. This was no more than what the Revolting Kings might prudently foresee
and expect, and were accordingly obliged to prevent the mischief* They muster
up their Troops therefore, and prepare to make an obstinate defense, drawing up
in a full Body within sight of the Enemy, and Politickly taking Advantage of
the Ground, they make an Halt with design to draw them to the Pit-falls,
whereinto they think to Trepanne them. The Vale of Siddim was full of
Slime-Pits, the Inhabitants thereabouts, for their benefit and and supply in
building, had furnished themselves thence, with a sort of strong and clammy
Clay, that (well tempered) made excellent Mortar and Cement: they had dugg deep
in many places, and left the Mouths of the Pits open; the Enemy being
altogether ignorant of these, and themselves intending to keep them so, by
standing before them, when anon feigning a retreat, and the Enemy pursuing,
must (they think) inevitably in their unadvised eagerness, and heat, plunge
themselves into these Graves: This was the Politic Stratagem of the Sodomites;
but whether they may not prove their own a few hours will easily determine.
Both Armies stand in Battalia, ready to make the Onsett. The Numbers not very
unequal, with five Kings against four to head them. Now let us see what proof
ye will make of your Prowess, ye Magnanimous Sons of Sodom! Let us find with
what Bravery ye will stand against the Shock, and fight for the Liberties of
your Country, against the proud Invaders! But what is this we hear? Do you
begin to faint already? Throw down your Arms at the first Charge, without
scarce ever striking a blow? Are ye betaking your selves to your heels, without
bearing the least Brunt? Is this the measure of your Valor, who at home had
none of your Lust? O Sin, Sin, that meltest away the Courage of every guilty
Breast into Cowardly Terror and Trembling! Alas, these Effeminate Fellows had
Harnessed themselves with Aching Hearts for the Field, and enter here reeking
hot with the Steams of their Luxury: They were so accustomed to Fall upon men,
that one might have expected Prodigious Exploits from them; but in Truth, these
Gentlemen had rather buckle with their Enemies in a Corner, than here in the
open Camp, and would sooner have courted than fought them. They would kiss and
be Friends with all their hearts, if that would have served the turn: Bleeding
was not a work they much cared for, they had been trained up in other
Exercises; and had rather have met with whole Battalions of Oxen and Sheep well
Disciplined, marching up to their Tables, than the least File of these furious
Adversaries: Myriads of Ladies would not have daunted them, but they had little
Stomach to these, who were bent to quarrel and Fight in good Earnest. In short,
To secure Life they think it better to trust to their Feet than their Hands,
and all in Amazement they betake themselves to their Heels; but here the
Iniquity of those heels encompast them about, and into the Pit that they dugg
for others, are themselves fallen: Behold we the poor frighted wretches
stumbling into the Slime-Pits, nor shall they recover themselves out till the
Executioners come to dispatch them into deeper Pits than these: Here are they
tumbling together, and want only the hands that must give them a further push
into Hell.

Alas! how can the Feet stand which Sin and Judgment trips up? It is God that
sets our sea on the Rock, and enlarges our steps under us that we fall not. The
most solid Ground is but slippery footing, where Vengeance makes the pursuit;
how fitly were those Quagmires made to ensnare them, who at home were over head
and ears so fast stuck in the Boggs of Unnatural Ordures? This is the first
Knell of Sodoms Bell, which in a short Time we shall hear ringing out in a
doleful Note from Heaven. The Tidings of the Defeat comes posting to the Towns,
and by the few scattered Relicts of the Army which escaped, they might find
themselves undone, and must prepare for the dreadful effects of the Ruin.
There was left little Pillage in the Field, and the Enemy is resolved not to
return home empty, they fly upon them with open mouth, and bellow out nothing
but utter Devastation.

How shamefully do we wrap our selves up in the silken Folds of Security and
Ease, lulled along by cheating Dreams of a lasting Pleasure and quiet! when
alas, poor Lot who had but newly Immured himself within his pleasing Borough,
is already Ferritted out of it, and all his Provisions plundered away. Surely
very vainly does Man put Confidence in other Fixation than Heaven, where there
is no Sin to lie hacking at the Root, nor Enemy to fix a Rope to the Body of
our Peace to destroy it.

The insulting Conquerours Pile up the Spoils of the Cities in their Carriages,
and enforce the late Owners to help drive them. The Persons and Goods pass away
into a joint Captivity together. Amongst others, unhappy Lot bears now the just
Punishment of his Folly, and is at last convinced of the difference of Abraham's
Condition, from his own. He has enjoyed very few quiet hours since his first
arrival in Sodom. His Righteous Soul was vexed from day to day, with their
unlawful Deeds: Yet is he the unpitied Author of his own disquiet; since while
he is fretted there, he could never persuade himself to depart thence; and now
justly suffers for being found in the Devils Quarters. Those that consult their
Interest above their Religion, shall one day put their Gains in their Eyes. His
Cattle fed in the Plains with greater Peace than himself could do in the City,
but now he breaks up House perforce, and is made to go whither others drive
him. 'Twas well however for his Neighbors that they had a Lot with them, whose
Company perchance they little cared for at Home; Yet do the Wicked owe their
Lives and Liberties to the Righteous, whom they Hate and Persecute.

Unprofitable Fellowship Rases the skin, but Wicked Company, cuts the very
Throat of our Comfort and Peace: The former cause our Light to burn dimly, but
this extinguisheth it quite. Grace is a little spark that ever needs blowing
up, what should we do among those whose infectious breath would puff it out?
'Twas but a few Minutes Converse with Satan that Betrayed our first Parents (in
their full strength) to those fatal Compliances, that ruined themselves and us
all: How improbable is it then, thy Weakness should find Spirit enough to
oppose the Encounters of his cursed Instruments, (who with Joseph's Mistress,
have Brow enough to press upon thee from day to day, to yield up the Fort of
thine Innocence, into the deflouring Arms of that Guilt which will gripe thy
Conscience in perpetual Tortures.

Sampson Ran away with whole Gates, and slew Heaps upon Heaps while God was
with him, but when the tiresome Importunities of his Dalilah had melted him
into a tame discovery of his great strength, he is sent from her Lap into a
disgraceful Captivity, where a weaker Door suffices to secure him.

And had not Lots Soul been thoroughly Anneal'd with an holy Tincture from
above, and enriched with a Treasure locked up under the Protection of a Divine
Hand; the Attaques of Temptation in that Impious City had certainly stripped him
as naked of his Goodness, as now he was of his Goods. 'Twas preventing Mercy
alone that kept the fair Face of his Piety unsullied in that Brothel of
Impurity and Pollution: So Gracious is God (in the loss of Externals) to Guard
the unperishable Substance from the Violence and Rapine of Men or Devils. But
take heed, Reader, that thy Principles be so well incorporated into thine
Affections (e're ever thou Adventure into the Society of the Factors of Hell)
that neither the Chargos they make upon Religion it self, (or the Professors of
it) leave thee cold in thy Love or Zeal toward it, or unhinge the stedfastness
of thine own Heart to it. Never forget that the Seed sown on the Highway
became an easy Prey to the fowls of the Air. Heaven is too precious an
Inheritance to be either laughed or frighted out of it; and methinks it is a
little unreasonable, when all the Prayers and Tears of the Godly, cannot
prevail upon Wicked Men to leave their Sins, that the Mocks or Menaces of the
Wicked should have the least efficacy upon Good Men to lay aside their Hopes;
yet how naturally are we transformed into the Image of those we Converse with,
as the Complexion answers to the Clymate we live in! 'Twas on the Mount that
Moses's Face attracted a Luster with three days Communion with God: And thine
own might shine much brighter too, if instead of a fellowship with these
unfruitful Works of Darkness, thou would apply thy self (by frequent
Recesses) to inspect that Glass that would dart a Celestial Light into thee;
and the more thou gazest with Ecstasy and Admiration upon it, it would not fail
to change thee into the very Image of God, and pass thee insensibly from Glory
to Glory.

With heavy Hearts and empty Purses the poor Captives of the Cities are carried
away, pinioned together to prevent an Escape; while their merciless Drivers
goad them on, and ever and anon load them with stripes and taunts, where I must
leave them pitifully lamenting their present Condition, to give you some
account what Providence is working for their Rescue.

The Report of this Disaster is quickly conveyed to the great Abraham, who (in
the midst of the Calamities of the War in the Country) enjoyed a sweet and
calmy Peace at Mamre; he is little concerned with the quarrels of the Infidels,
when he knew that it was his God that dashed them together, while himself
subsisted safe and sound. Yet, (though he little pityed them) he receives the
News of his Nephew's Captivity, with a sympathy that ever dwells on the Hearts
of the truly Kind and Good. But there is a time when condolency and compassion
little serve to redress the Sufferings of our Friends; it was not the shaking
of his Head, or the rolling of his Bowels, nor his idle Wishes could redeem
poor Lot from Slavery and Ruin. Grief is a Duty, but more proper and natural
to Women, who can only bleed at their Eyes, and commiserate the Unhappy in
unprofitable Tears. Courage is the masculine Virtue: Who ever saw Brave Man
using his Handkerchief instead of his Sword? But Abraham was prudent and
cautious, and will not undertake a War without good Advice, he will have sure
grounds to justify the Attempt, and warrant the Success: He first therefore
Consults the Oracle of his Conscience, which was ever guided by his Prophetical
spirit, and on Enquiry finds that in this Case he may warrantably proceed. Had
not God given him a Title to the Kingdom, who had the only Right to dispose of
it? What though his Subjects did not acknowledge him, he was nevertheless the
Right Lord? and what were these Kings but Intruders upon him, and had no other
Title than what the Sword had given them? Abraham therefore though but a
Titular Prince, thought himself obliged in Duty to relieve them: He takes up
the Sword with the same Authority as Moses did afterward, when he slew the
Egyptian by the Virtue of the Divine Revelation made to him of his being the
future Deliverer of the poor enslaved People. And to this the Laws of Nature
added a Tie upon him to release his oppressed Kinsman, whom they unrighteously
had injured, and who was in no wise guilty of the Crime more justly imputable
to the rest. But above all, the sacred Obligations of Religion could in no wise
suffer him to see the little Church in Lot's Family led Captive, and subjected
to the Rage and Tyranny of Pagans. Abraham therefore sufficiently convinced of
the lawfulness of the War, resolves to proceed: And here we must present you
with the Picture of the Saint in his Armor.

CHAP. IV.
Abraham fights with the four Kings for the rescue of Lot. He gets the Victory,
and redeems the Prisoners. Melchisedeck at his return meets him on the way, and
presents him with Provisions for his Soldiers. His Transaction with the King
of Sodom.

REligion is so far from emasculating the spirits of its truest Votaries, that
it steels them all throughout with the hardest Courage: It banishes those fears
and seeds of Cowardice that in every danger stare others in the face, like
Caesar's Ghost appaling the Soul of Brutus: It Refines them from those vicious
Qualities that have debased many a stout Heart to truckle under the basest
Usurpations. Who would not have mourned to see the brave Sampson grinding in
the Mill, and made the subject of the Philistines scorn and laughter: It
redeems them from those salacious Lusts that enervate the Arteries of the Soul,
and take away the Heart, subjecting it to the mean Cringes of dependence on
every inferior Badge. It links them fast in an indissolvable Union with the
Omnipotent Power, which ever secures protection and safety. Hypocrisy may
brandish a Sword in the Air, and brag of its Valor against an Eutopian Enemy,
but the single Scout of a real One makes it drop it, and sets it on flying.
Profaneness may shut its Eyes, and harden it self against dreads of Death; it
may venture a Soul to get a Name, but with no other Bravery than the gallant
Horse who mocket^^^ fear, and is not affrighted; the quiver rattleth against
him, the glittering spear and the shield, yet is he not afraid: So This may
desperately run on the Pikes of Wrath, as insensible of danger, 'till rushing
into the Battle it meets its Death and despairs together.

No, it is the brave Abraham's Courage shall work Wonders, who with a spirit
washed from degenerating Lusts and Guilt (the fainty Diseases and very Agues of
the Mind, that sets it on shaking with terrible Apprehensions of shadows) armed
with Innocence and a good Cause, daring to look his God in the Face with the
same confidence and fearlesness as he does his own Heart: Who wears a Life to
no other end but his service, and is content to lay it down at any time for his
glory: Who has a Ticket of Assurance from a second Death in his Bosom. This is
the Righteous Hero that is bold as a Lion; and you shall hear presently what an
handful of such as these can gloriously perform against a puissant Army, whom
Success and Victory had blown up into Pride and Presumption.

The Discipline of War, with the various Arts and Polities of it, and all the
Exercises and feats of Militia, are a Lesson which David (who was a great
Soldier) professes himself to have learned from God, who is Generalissimo of
all the Hosts both of Heaven and Earth, and who is pleased to own the Title of
a Man of War. By no other Tutor was this great Prince instructed before him: It
was He that taught his hands to war, and his fingers to fight. He had first
trained him up in the mysterious faculties of Believing and Obeying: Now will
he Exercise him in the Martial Art of fighting, that his Abraham might be as
equally famous for his Valor as his Faith. And doubtless the inserting so full
an Account of this War, and the Catalogue of the Princes that managed it, so
accurately in the Holy Records, is due to the Care and great Kindness of God to
his Abraham, who will not have him lose the honor of his Chivalry and Prowess,
which shines so brightly in the Defeat of such mighty Enemies as they. All the
World shall know that they were no mean and contemptible Antagonists that his
great Federate had encountered with: And tho all the Troops of the five Princes
of Palestine were nothing in their hands, yet they must not imagine so lightly
to carry away the Garland, when once the great Abraham took up the Gauntlet in
the Quarrel: 'Twas Himself that raised up this Righteous Man from the East,
called him to his Foot, gave the Nations before him, and made him rule over
Kings, he gave them as dust to his Sword, and as driven stubble to his Bow.

All Knowledge is given for Communication: God had not dressed up this Great Man
into all the perfections of Nature and Grace, that he should find a Grave for
them in his own Bosom. No! as he disdains not to be his own Chaplain, and
thinks it no derogation from his Grandeur, to educate his Servants in the true
Knowledge and Worship of God, in order to make them good Men, so was it his
Care and Practice (no doubt from Divine Instinct) to train them up in the right
Exercise and Use of Arms, in order to make them good Soldiers. Quos.
instruxerat Art Bellica, and Lege Divina. Menochius.
The one would help on the other: Religion it self, in a great part of it,
being nothing else but a wise and expert Use of our spiritual Armor against
all the Enemies of our Peace, under the Guidance and Conduct of the great
Captain of our Salvation. They might learn by every Posture of their Bodies to
remember with what care they must stand on the Guard for their Souls. This
Trained Band was ever ready at the Call of their General; they never disputed
his Orders, but gave themselves up entirely to his Service and Command. They
were Catechis'd in his Family, to an awful sense of their Duty and Allegiance
to him, which was ever performed with that happy Ingredience of Love and
Cordial Affection toward him, as made it disputable, Whether the Servants were
the happier in such a Master, or the Master in such Servants.

Nor was his Interest confined within the Limits of his own Family and
Household, (though Numerous) but by the Magnetic Charms of his Virtue and sweet
Disposition, he had further Attracted the Affections of the Contiguous Princes,
and firmly joynted their Powers into the Body of his own, by the strong
Obligation of a solemn Confederacy and Alliance. Leagues among Princes have
been ever held sacred and inviolable as their Persons: And tho sometimes upon
weighty Reasons of State they chance to be dissolved and broken, yet have they
ever been found to be so necessary Props for the support of the Honor and
Security of Government, that even the mightiest Empires of the Earth have been
established by them. It being the peculiar Privilege of the King of Kings to
build his Universal Dominion upon absolute and independent Foundations, without
sending forth from Himself to call in the Aids of others. See here to what
degree of Majesty God had already promoted his Abraham, that the great Lords of
Canaan thought themselves blessed and secure in his Friendship; and hereafter
we shall find Kings themselves Courting him for the same Honor.

Aner, Eshcol and Mamre (his endeared Friends and Confederates) and whom some
think he had happily Converted to the true Religion and Service of his God,
hearing the ill Tidings of the sacking of the Cities, and of Abraham's Nephew
being led away Prisoner, think it their Duty to make tender of their Service,
having heard of his Resolutions to attempt a Redemption: They get ready
therefore their Auxiliary Forces, and (proud of the Employment) present
themselves and these, to his absolute Order and Government: Yet will not his
Posterity allow them the least share in the Honor of the Victory, but tell us,
that he appointed them only to guard the Ammunition, while himself with his
Domestics only gave the Charge.

Abraham intends to make no tedious Work of it, and therefore he lightly Arms
his Three Hundred, (and with them three Thousand more whom his Faith summons
from Heaven to fight invisibly for him) and leads them into the Field. Even the
meekest Moses can be Angry, and the gentle Abraham whose Nature was made up all
of candor and sweetness, now has his Neck clothed with Thunder, and his Eyes
sparkling out flames of Revenge. Love and Mercy are the natural Properties of
God himself, in the acting of these is all his delight, but Justice and
Execution are his strange Work, and he never does it, but when the Abuse and
Contempt of his Goodness and Mercy provokes him out of himself into Indignation
and Wrath.

Stratagems of War are so far from being unlawful, that God himself has often
directed and taught them. Abraham knew that though ^he Rules of Martial
Discipline are very severe, and the Cords that bind it straightened to a great
^egree of Stiffness, yet on occasion they are ^requently slackned, and never
yet were poor ^ouldiers (after hard Service, and Victory got^en) denied the
Liberty of Drinking their Ge^eral's Health in a chirping Bole. The Joy of
^uccess had blown up their Spirits to that ^eighth, that they were already half
Drunk with ^e excessive Conceit of their Conquest, and more than peradventure
he might find them taking such Draughts as would leave them little capable of
using their Arms toward Midnight.

On these hopes he projects to charge them in the Dark, and to render his
little Army the more formidable, he divides his Men into Parties, who have
Orders to make the Assault all at once in several sides of the Enemies Camp,
striking them into great Consternation by the conjectured probability of a
greater Force than indeed there was. The Confederates he leaves at a distance,
to come in if need be, as a fresh supply.

If Humane Brains thus wittily work in the pitching those Trayls of Ruin, in
which the Feet of their Enemies fail. not to stumble and dye, let a God alone
in the Weaving those Nets of Destruction, in which the Adversaries of himself
and his Church shall be inevitably entangled with that certainty, that all the
counter-workings of their own shallow Policies shall never serve them to make
an escape. Never dispute what Hell is, or in what manner its Flames can feed on
spiritual Bodies, since if there were no gn^wing Worm, nor devouring Fire
there, he can command New Armies of Tormen^^ to start up, which (as fresh
supplies) shall be successively pou^ed on the Vessels of Wrath, who in the
short Day of their Life in the World, neglected the Invitations of his Grace.

David observes that God often blows upon th^^ Councils of the Wicked, and
brings their Devices (...) none Effect: But Abraham was too dear to be left
to himself, or frustrated in any of his Honorable Designs: Yea, himself had
dictated the^ into his Head, and now cannot fail him in their putting in due
Execution. Marching on therefore, and hearing where the Enemy lay, he so orders
his Motion, as not to be discovered, till he might Shroud himself in the Mantle
of the Night, which he knew well would add a Terror to the fury of his Charge.
And thus when they little dreamt of an Enemy pursuing them, they are
unexpectedly Alarmed by his Army that encompassed them. The Disordered Kings
who had no Eyes to see their Enemies, and as little Hearts to oppose them, are
surprised into perfect Confusion. While Abraham's Sword is dipped in Gore, and
his Soldiers glutted with the Blood of their Enemies, Happy was He that could
Fight out his way, and So they could escape with their Lives, they value not
the Booty, but contentedly leave the plunder of the Field to the Assailants,
who were satisfied too with the Execution they had done, and had no further
Orders to pursue after those few that were fled.

The poor Sodomites are in Astonishment to find themselves rescued by friends
unknown, and are yet uncertain what Usage they may expect from them; Or whether
they had only Exchanged their Keepers. Till anon the kind General gives Orders
for the finding out Lot, who after search is brought with Joy enough into the
welcome presence of his Uncle. And sure after all these blusters in the World,
where we have been kept so long under fears and bondage, the coming of a
Redeemer will be Joyful to us, when he shall appear in Glory to knock off all
our Shackles, and present us with the Happiness of an Eternal Liberty.

E're we pass further, take a measure of the Stature of Abraham's Faith, and
how well he is flushed into Spiritual Confidence and Greatness of Mind, who not
many years since was discountenanced at the Power of one King, quiet and Jolly
in all the Pleasures of his Court, can now buckle valiantly with Three or Four
together, Attended by their Armies, and puffed up with Victories in the Field.
Graces ebb and flow in the Channel of the best Men's Hearts. Those
Ecclesiastical Princes who at their Lords Apprehension, betook themselves to
their Heels, and left him all alone, within a few Weeks had a new Soul, and
dared to Impeach his Murderers with the Guilt of his Blood to their Teeth. Who
when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, they Marvelled.

When all the Pomps of Glory, that have graced the Victorious Caesar's
Triumphs, are flown away with the Echo of the loud Acclamations wherewith the
Streets of that proud City were wont to Ring his Praise; when all the Flowers
made choice of by Pagan Wits, to Bedeck and Adorn the Crown of his Honor, are
all Withered and Gone; When the very Chariots of his State, at whose gilded
Wheels the Royal Captives were wont to be dragged, are long since Rotten and
Crumbled into Dust and Nothing; God himself has erected a Triumphal Arch to
the Immortal Memory of the Great Abraham's Victory, made of such Marble that
will never decay; whereon he has Engraven with Indelible Characters the
Memoires of this Achievement in the Eternal Chronicles, which give us the
Account, and Him the Glory of the Crowned Heads that came bowing to him on the
way as he returned From the Slaughter of the Kings, to Congratulate with him in
the Joy, and to pay him the Honors of his Victory. It Is observable with what
Majesty it is expressed; Returning from the slaughter of the Kings: As if
Abraham's Sword scorned any meaner Scabbard than the Breast of a King, and
'twas below him to Fight either with Small or Great, but only with Kings.
Whether he slew them all, or how many of them; Or whether the Execution fell
only upon their Troops, while Themselves made their escape in the Dark, is not
Recorded; but certain it is, he made a very bloody and fearful Slaughter upon
them, and such as utterly discouraged them to make any further Attempt upon
Canaan. They were given as Dust to his Sword, and as driven Stubble to his Bow:
Whom we shall leave therefore (as he) rotting as Dung upon the Earth, to wait
on the Conqueror homewards, and give you an Accout of those other Princes that
presented themselves very lowly to bend before him.

And first Melchisedeck, the King of Salem, and Priest of the most High God; (A
wonderful Person who here only sttarts up and makes his Appearance, as if he
had taken Life on purpose, and having performed this Service only, had now
perfected for ever the One Noble Act and End of his Being; could he but once
see the Face of the Favorite of God, he cheerfully goes home and Dies.) This
Great Prince and Priest comes, not attended only with Mules crouching under the
weight of his Royal Presents, made up of all sorts of Provisions (concisely
described by Hic Melchisedec milites Abrahami hospitaliter habuit, ^^ihil iis
ad victum de^sse passus, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Bread and Wine) which shall serve to refresh his weary Servants; (the same
Civility that afterward the brave Gileadite (Barzillai) paid to the Army of
David, in venerable Respect to their Master.) All this did Melchisedeck as a
King, but also is Himself Laden with a whole Cargo of Benedictions, which he
prodigally pours out, as a Priest, from his Sacred Breast upon the Head of the
Great Abraham, dropping upon him as a Silver Shower, and causing his tired
Spirits to revive and flourish again; As the tender Grass springing up out of
the Earth, by clear shinning after Rain.

Should I stop here to Wade into the Waters of Strife, and make a more
particular Enquiry who this Melchisedeck was, when the Sacred Wit has given no
other account than that He Was; and the best Authors, both Jewish and
Christian, give little satisfaction to their Readers; it might be long enough
er'e I return to the Patriarch, whom I desire more closely to follow. Some
contending to have him to be Sem the blessed Son of Noah, which others as hotly
deny. Others allege him to be Jesus Christ, and his Sect the Melchisedecian^
ass^runt esse non solum Virt^^em quanda^ sed esse Chrisio majorent. Aug. Here Is.
34.
Melchisedekians to be one Greater than he, because Christ is compared to
Melchisedeck in Scripture, not seeing that Melchisedeck rather is compared to
Him. Origines multiplici sermon disputans, illue tandem div^^tus est, ut cum
Angelum dicere^ Hier. Epst, ad Ev^g.
Origin will have him to be an Angel, because he is said to be without Father
or Mother, but that only, because not expressed in Scripture. The most Credible
follow the Letter of the Text, and go no further than Salem to find him out,
the Ruins of whose Palace there appearing long after; yet they differ again
about Salem, and some will have it that Salem which was afterward Jerusalem;
but Jerome denies it, and that it was another Salem near to Scythiopolis, which
is to this day called Salem, where the Palace of Melchisedeck is to be seen,
says he. So likewise they disser as to the Manner and Ceremony of the
presenting these Gifts; some say they were first Offered to God as
Peace Offerings, and then afterward distributed amongst the Soldiers. Others
say, they were never Offered to God in Sacrifice, but to Abraham only for a
Present, affirming the addition of the word (...) to be inserted in some
Copies, which clears the matter. Melchisedeck brought forth Bread and Wine to
Him (i. e. to Abraham). And we know that Priests make Frequent Visits without
Executing any Sacred Part of their Functions; 'twas work enough that he blessed
Abraham; Blessed be thou of the most High God. And though a part of his Present
had been offered up to God, and the rest divided between the Men; what is this
to the Roman Mass? If they will gather a Foundation for it hence, yet at least
let them be so Kind as Melchisedeck was, who had he brought into this Army an
Acceptable present of Wine, (and It Is Wine that chears the Heart of Man) and in
the sight of all the Soldiers, should have Drunk it up All Himself; he might
have Eaten up his Bread too, so little would they have Valued his Kindness,
unless he could have made them believe that the Wine was in the Bread, by an
unperceivable argument of Concomitancy. Yet no other than this is the Kindness
of the Romish Priest, who drinking up every drop of the Wine Himself, leaves
the poor Soldiers of Christ to faint. If they will needs draw their Sacrifice
from Melchisedeck, pray let them be as Kind and Just to the Command and
Institution of their Lord and Master, as He.

Abraham receives the Royal Priest with a devout Veneration due to the Person
of Him who bore so great a Character; 'Twas a Representative of his God whom he
therefore thinks himself obliged to Honor. He embraces Him as Such, and mixes
a Carriage full of Reverence and Sweetness toward him. His late Prosperity had
not in the last swelled him into Neglect or Forgetfulness of his Duty: Minds
that are truly Great, cannot act beneath themselves. He is surprised to find in
that Idolatrous Kingdom so great a Person, that owns the God He Professes to
Worship, and questionless promised to himself Happiness in the after Enjoyment
of so Divine Acquaintance (though we find not any further converse they
maintained). Abraham cannot receive so many rich Effusions of his Piety and
Bounty without finding a thankful Remuneration. Grateful Hearts are in Pain
till they ease themselves from the burden of those Obligations that others
Courtesy have heaped upon them. And now is he glad that the baffled Kings
haveleft him in some Capacity to make an Acknowledgment of his Gratitude both
to God and his Priest upon the Spot; And therefore he very humbly Devotes a
Tenth Part of all the Spoils he had taken. If Christians were all the true
Heirs of Abraham's Holy and Generous Heart, there had little needed those
multiplied Laws to constrain the People, and secure to the Priests their
Maintenance by Tithes. Melchisedeck having performed his Duty, receives without
scruple the Sacred Dues of his Office which the Patriark so cheerfully paid
him, and with all the Reciprocations of mutual Affection to each other, and
solemn Praises to God, he departs away to his Salem.

His Discession makes way to another Prince of a very far different Temper and
Spirit; It Is Piety makes the only Discrimination between Persons: All men have
not Faith. This is the sparkling Diamond that enriches the Crowns of Kings;
Where that is wanting, Honor is but a Jewel in a Swines Snout. If private Men
are illustrated by it (for since thou wast precious in mine Eyes, thou have
been Honorable,) what Glory might it add unto Monarchs! The King of Heaven
shines in the Majesty of his Holiness. Abraham knew well enough that the
Sodomitish King wore no such Pearl in his Crown, therefore he puts on a
Behavior toward him, agreeable to the Baseness of his Spirit: He had
dishonourably turned his back from the Kings that Himself had Charged and made
Havoc of. He cannot therefore think him worthy of that Reception that a
Gallant Prince might have merited from him. Men are to be treated by the Rules
of Discretion, according to the Nature of the Designs and Ends they have upon
us. Melchisedeck came to bless God for that Excellent Person whom his Goodness
had raised up to be an happy Instrument of delivering the Country from the
mischiefs of the War, and to bless Himself in the Sight and Acquaintance of
him. But this King is so far from any the least Resentment of the good
Providence and Means by which his Subjects were redeemed, that he looks down
with a plodding Eye, and projects how to make Abraham's Victory an Advantage to
himself. He appears here rather as a Merchant to Truck and Barter, than as a
gallant Prince to throw his grateful Soul into the Embraces of the Brave
Conqueror, with Ten thousand Thanks for so vast a blessing, as the Overthrow
of the Enemies by his Victorious Arms. He could not be Ignorant that by the
Laws of War, Abraham was indisputably entitled to whatsoever his Sword had Won
in the Field. Himself had lost all by his Cowardice, what Abraham had recovered
by his Courage; And yet has he the Confidence to Challenge a share in the
Benefit of his Noble Adventure. And mistaking the brave Patriarch for a Man of
as Sordid a Soul as Himself, thinks that he Bids him Fair in the proffer of the
Booty, provided he might have the Persons to himself. This is the main Errand
that brings the King of Sodom (as his own Ambassador) to the Camp of Abraham.

How perfectly Strangers are the Men of this World, to the Princely Greatness
of Mind that directs and ennobles all the Actions of the Righteous and the
Holy? Now shall this King of Sodom see the difference of a Star from a Clod,
and a Spirit enkindled by the true Celestial Fire, from his own, that glared in
the contemptible Light of a Glowworm.

Would he have Abraham to go One Mile with him in Courtesy, behold he will go
Two! Would he have his Coat from him, let him take his Cloak also! Does he make
suit to have the Persons? Let him take them, yea and the Goods also. the Spirit
of an Abraham can grant more, than The Sodomite has confidence to Crave. The
Noble Patriarch opens Heaven to him, and darts out a Beam of the Divine Nature,
that strikes him into perfect Ecstasy, there is no more Life in him, while he
beholds the Majesty of the great Soul of Abraham: His own Dunghill Gods shed no
such Insluences on their Votaries. He looks on him as on some Sacred Shrine
fallen from Heaven, and sent for him to Worship and be enriched by. So
impossible is it for the true Race of the Heavenly Progeny to degenerate from
the Royal Nature of their Mighty and Bountiful Father, who scatters Scepters
and Kingdoms, and freely gives Grace and Glory. Avaritious Minds in every
Lincament of their Actions, plainly betray their Sordid Extractions; and let
them wear the Philactaries of their profession never so broad, yet these
Figleaves dropping away, very visibly discovers the Shame of their Nakedness,
and want of those Holy Garments (that God himself wears, and) which should
Dress them up to Salvation. The long Robes of the Pharisees were too curtile
and thin to hide from the Holy Jesus their Hypocrisy and Covetousness: Nor is
there surely a greater Affront unto Heaven, than for these Sons of the Earth to
pretend themselves Married to the Daughters of God. I will confidently a verr
that the Covetous Soul has not the least Spark of the Sacred Fire in it. An
Earthly Saint is a Monster in the Church, with six Fingers and Toes on his
Hands and Feet, scraping and raking in the Muck-heaps of the Creation. Let not
such dare to say, We have Abraham to our Father, since of the very Stones of
the streets, God is every day polishing up brighter Children unto Abraham,
while themselves lie wallowing in the Dirt. Now, the brave Abraham heaps the
Goods of this World upon the Head of a Sodomite, whose very Heart was upon
them; and scorns to afford them a Lodging in his Thoughts. Let him cripple his
Shoulders with the burden of them; himself would keep his affections free.
Abraham piles up Earth upon Earth and buries him into the Dust. Should but a
little Mote of that Mould hang on his own Foot, he would shake it from him into
his Lap, and disdains to wear but a Buckle in his Shoe, that ever came out of
Sodom. He might have saved himself the trouble of this Journey; hence (long
before he asked) his Petition was granted and made sure to him by Oath, though
he knew it not: For no sooner had God given him the Victory (and with it a
Right to all that was found in the Field) but presently Abraham turns his Arms
upon Himself, and Fights to Conquer his own Temptations. He had not stirred a
Foot from the base Motive of a private Advantage. The World should see that he
Acted from principles particular to himself, and shall be abundantly convinced
that he had no dishonorable Aims. He knew well enough whither to Go, and from
whom to expect his Reward.

Thus is This Great Man sticking Pearls into the Crown of God, while he leaves
his own bare. It Is below any Child of Abraham to warm himself by the Sparks of
his own Kindling, when the Cause and Glory of Heaven catches cold. Abraham
lifts up his Hand to the most high God, to hang up all his Trophies in the
Celestial Court, and Knew not whither this might not be a Means to allure the
King of Sodom thither after them, when he should find a Person of such rare
Religion and Virtue, as could perfectly deny himself, and Abjure Profit, that
great Diana of the World. Weep my Soul, that thou see so few Heirs of Abraham
's Faith and Self-denial. The whole World hunting after Shadows which
themselves call Substance, and laboring under a greater Distraction than this
Sodomitish King, who craved only the Souls, and was content to forgo the
Goods; but these abjure their own Souls, so they may singer the Goods, and are
so far from letting pass their Pretense of Right to them, that they quarrel
even with God Himself, and venture the loss of an Eternity for them.

How often is it found, that Generous Minds suffer under the Injurious
Imputations of a too foolish Facility and Softness of Nature. They are deemed
but Weak Men that do not Stare and Stamp for their Interest, and hold what they
have gotten Stiffly. The King shall have but little cause to be Jealous of
Abraham's Discretion and Prudential Management of his Affairs. He shall not go
home and deride his too easy Temper, since not withstanding his Noble Grant of
the whole Booty to him, he does not thereby intend Injustice to others, by his
own kindness to Him. Proportions must be first made to his Three Amorite
Confederates, who had run the hazard of the War, and might reasonably expect to
enjoy a share in the Spoils; he therefore gratefully assigns to each of them
his Part, and thereby gave the King of Sodom to know that he was no stranger to
his Own Right in the Whole, and that, Not of His own, had he given him. As for
his Soldiers, they were all his Domestics, in perfect Resignation to his
Pleasure, whom he feared not to Mutiny for the Plunder of the Field, and he
knew well enough How to gratify them at home. Thus is Abraham Just and Wise,
as well as Generous, and Tempers his Courtesy with Prudence: And the design of
Abraham was evident, to clap a Padlock on this Kings Foul mouth. He shall not
Vaunt hereafter that Abraham was Enriched by his Loss. And has not God himself
contrived the Means of our Eternal Happiness in so wise a manner, that when by
Sin we had ruined our selves (with Sodom) he has provided a Redemption for us,
to which we have not contributed the least Finger of Help or Assistance; but
whether we will or No, the Praise of all must redound to the Glory of his
Grace, that no Man shall boast, and the Mouths of all be stopped for evermore.

Profane Hearts are ever ungrateful to God and Man, under the richest Mercies.
This Kindness of Abraham was little considered by this King his Nephew:
Videbimus Sodomitas, accepti beneficii fuisse immemores, d^m superbe and
cowum^li^^e Sanctum se Lot vexarunt. Calv. in (...). 14.
He returns laden with the Profits of the whole Expedition, while Abraham goes
Home as Light and Empty as ever he went out, and has only the naked Glory of
the famous Exploit. The Author of our Salvation bled not for himself; he was
happy from Eternity in the Bosom, and was the daily delight of his Father,
rejoicing always before him: When he passed forth to Encounter and Destroy the
Enemies of our Peace, what Got he but many Wounds upon himself, while we enjoy
the happy Fruits of his Love and Victory; yet alas, his Kindness is but little
regarded, and too many fall in League and Strike Hands with those that Smote
him. Unthankful Man!

CHAP. V.
God appears again unto Abraham laboring under some Trouble of Mind,
particularly That of the Want of an Heir. God chears him from the Assurance of
an Innumerable Posterity, and the whole Land of Canaan for them. Both which are
confirmed by an Irrefragable Covenant, etc.

A Braham having thus happily Carved out a Peace to the Country by his
Victorious Arms, has now time to sit down and enjoy himself and his God in
Quiet; this was the pleasing Element he naturally delighted to Breath in. The
rattling of Armor, and the Neighing of Horses, and Garments dipped in Blood, are
not so Affecting Objects to the Senses of Gods Children, who are taken up
rather with the sweet Whispers of his Love, and ravishing Songs of the Night.
There is all peace in Heaven, and universal Harmony of Concord, which Crowns
the Felicity of the Blessed. Abraham through all this Expedition, had demeaned
himself with so much Courage and Gallantry, that God, having first sent
Melchisedeck as his Ambassador, to Salute and Bless him in his Name by the way,
Now can refrain no longer from coming Himself to him, to bring him a gracious
Welcome home.

Whether Abraham's busy thoughts had been working upon the consequent Issues of
this War, and framing to himself some timorous Imaginations of a future danger,
in case these scattered Troops should rally again (and recruiting into greater
Numbers) might return all enflamed with the fury of Revenge upon him, as
Princes seldom lay down the Cudgels for one broken Head;) or whether (as others
think) that God having been so kind to him in the prospering his Arms, to the
desired Honor and Ends of Victory, might seem to put him off with a Temporal
Reward: (As it is not unusual for the Faithfullest Souls to be jealous of this
Worlds Prosperity, they cannot endure to think of being sent away with any
blessing short of Himself: There is none on Earth I can desire besides thee:)
Or whether he found the Princes of the Country, rather envious at, than
affected with, or thankful for the deliverance he had wrought them: Whether
this, or any of these; but surely we may discover even from God Himself, that
he Labored under some great Perturbation of Mind. When he saw it sit therefore
to revive his drooping Spirits by conveying his Consolations to him in the
Visions of the Night, and to pour in such a ^ulip of Joy, as shall quickly
restore him to his wonted Temper and perfect Serenity of Soul. Fear not
Abraham, I am thy Shield, and thine exceeding great Reward. See, I have already
given thee an Experience of my Power and Protection, that shall ever be
continued for thy future Preservation and Safety: I have covered thine Head
already in the day of Battle, and hid thee in the Hollow of mine Hand, from the
rage of thine Enemies. So will I ever be a Wall of Fire round about thee; they
shall but scorch themselves that approach to hurt thee. No weapon formed
against thee shall prosper; yea, though the whole Earth should gather themselves
together to injure thee. Do not dread the united strength of the Arm of Flesh;
thou have a God that will ever arise up for thy Defense. He that touches thee,
shall as prospero^sly hope to p^il out the Apple of mine Eye, and to defeat all
the Hosts of Heaven that shall ever be Armed as thy Lifeguard; so soon shall
thine Enemies prevail to baffle Omnipotent power and Strength, as to pull one
Hair from thine Head, much less to sheath a Sword in thy Heart: Wrap up
therefore thy self securely within the Folds of my Invincible Power, by an
unquestionable Confidence in my Watchfulness and Care that shall ever attend
thee, through all the most dangerous Accidents of thy Life: Fear not Abraham, for
I am thy S^ield. And whereas in this Affair of the King of Sodom, thou have
accquited thy self with so Noble Respect to mine Honor, and so full a
Dependence on my Power and Alsufficiency to enrich thee, so as thou have
despised the means of a Ditation by an Addition of those contemptible Spoils to
thine Estate: Know this for thine Encouragement and Joy, Thou shall be so far
from being a loser by so generous a preferring my Glory beyond thine own
Interests, that instead of them, I will give thee my Self; a God who have all
the Treasures of Earth and Sea at mine own Power to Dispose of, and if need
were, could command them all to meet in thine Exchequer to enrich thee: And who
am in my self so inexhaustible a Fountain of more Durable Riches and Honor,
than what are drawn from the poor Mines of the Earth, and with these will I
Ennoble thee for ever. Be not Jealous that I intend thee no further Honors
than what thou have Achieved from the Glory of thy Conquest; when mine Own
hand shall weave thee an Immarcessible Crown that shall sit fast on thy Head,
and never Wither or Die. And though the ungrateful Canaanites pay thee not the
Homage and honorable Acknowledgment of their own deliverance by thine Hand, or
maliciously Envy thee the Glory of it, yet shall thou have little cause to
complain: When I make over my self to thee, who am infinitely more than all
Things, and who could as easily make thee Lord of the Universe, as to bestow
these Kingdoms of Canaan upon thee; but that I reserve to thee a Portion in
mine own most glorious Essence, and thou shall not run to the Creatures for a
Recompense, for I (my self) will be thy Reward, and thou shall every day find
how Great, how exceeding great a Reward, thy God will be unto thee.

But, mighty Jehovah! have thou sitted the Shield of thy Protection to the Body
of thine Abraham only? Is the Promise made to him alone? And will thou leave
all the Heirs of his Faith and Spirit, naked and bare to the Cruelties of their
Enemies? Have thou but one Shield of Defense? shield us, even us also, O our
Father! Yea we know well that thou art a Sun and a Shield to all them that walk
uprightly, as Abraham. God has expanded the Buckler of his Protection (as the
Heavens) over all the Body of his dearest Church. Haypy art thou, O Israel, who
is like unto thee, O People saved by the Lord! the shield of thine Help, and
the sword of thine Excellency, thine Enemies shall be found Liars to thee, and
thou shall tread upon their high places. Come ye Angels (one of you is enough)
and smite the blasphemous Host into dead Corpses. Come ye Stars, and sight in
your Counses against the Tyrannous Sisera: Come ye mighty Waters and prepare
Graves, for the Obdurated Pharaoh and all his Army, within the vast gulf of
your own Bowels. Come forth ye poor Worms, and take your Repast on the Carcass
of the Mortal that would fancy himself to be a God. Come thou little Stone cut
out of the Mountain, that shall break in pieces all the Kingdoms of the Earth,
that oppose thee! Come near ye Nations, hear and bearken ye People, for the
indignation of the Lord is upon you, and his fury upon all your Armies; he has
utterly destroyed them, he has delivered them to the slaughter: For his sword
is bathed in Heaven, behold it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the People
of his Curse unto Judgment.

And come thou blessed Son of Abraham, the Invincible King of the Church. With
the Spiritual Sword of thy might, enter into the Confines of Hell; Invade the
Territories of the Infernal Powers; dash in pieces all the Gates of thine
Dominion; break their Iron Bars asunder, Jade away the Spoils of those cursed
Principalities, the Trophies of their Eternal Honor, Sin and Death. Make a
show of them openly, to all the World, expose them to the derision of Angels,
and Men, as the baffled Captives of thy Power! Fasten them to the Wheels of thy
Chariot; drag them after thee, when in the day of thy Triumph thou shall enter
into thy Kingdom, thence let them receive the dreadful Sentence of everlasting
Ignominy and Contempt.

Come hither Christian, and view thy self Secure as Infinite Power and the
Strength of a God can make thee: If thou will negligently hang up thy Shield to
the Walls, and walk naked through all the Quarters of thine Enemies, and promise
thy self safety in the midst of Devils, and Men almost as Bad as they, without
this Coat-Mail of the Divine Promise girt about thee, or but loosely put on;
what can be expected, but thy certain fall even by these baffled Straglers of
the routed Army, who lie lurking to make their Prey upon thee, and to lead thee
with themselves into the Eternal Prisons? To dye by a Noble and Victorious
hand, would yet be somewhat honorable, but for these disarmed Troops of Hell
to triumph in thy ruin, and fix thee in perpetual Chains of darkness (and this
only from thy carelessness and neglect of carrying thine Arms about thee, and
wearing the Shield of thy Defense,) this will be matter of indelible Shame and
Confusion.

This is that special piece of Spiritual Armor, that should thou be so vain
to leave the rest behind, yet of this art thou cautioned by no means to be
forgetful, but Above all to rake with thee the Shield of Faith* And what is
this but the close-buckling this Excellent Promise about thine Heart? Come my
Son, let not Mercy and Truth forsake thee, bind them about thy Neck, write them
upon the Table of thy Heart. That thou may ever retain this Glorious
Inscription in thy Eye: The Lord is my Shield and my Buckler, He is my defense;
the Holy one of Israel is my King. Whom then should I fear? of whom should I be
afraid? The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what Man can do unto me? The
Lord takes my part with them that help me, therefore shall I see my desire
upon them that hate me: The Captain of my Salvation has subdued all mine
Enemies under me; they are all fallen, and shall never be able to rise again:
And through hun that loves me, am I more than a Conqueror over them all! He has
redeemed me from the hand of mine Enemies, that I should serve him without
fear, etc. And this is the Mercy that he swore to our Father Abraham, that he
would grant us. He confirmed it to thee by an Oath, and will thou walk loosely
under it, and tamely yield thy self Prisoner to every base Assault? When thou
have listed thy self under his Colors, and entered into the Bonds of that
Sacrament, that obliges thee to stand valiantly against every Adversary of his
Glory; who once said to the Great Abraham, (and in him to thee too,) Fear not,
for I am thy Shield.

And this Shield is a Sun too, that will ripen all the fruits of his Bounty, by
which thy Table is spread. Thou shall not need Crouch to a Sodomite for a piece
of Bread: How deservedly did he wear the Leprosy of a Naaman upon his own
Skin, that could steal from the Presence of his great Master to post after an
Assyrian, for a little Silver and a few Changes of Raiment! It Is below the
Princes of the Blood to court the Skullions of the Kitchen for Scraps: These,
whose Spirits are feasted every day with Hidden Manna, need little question
their daily Provisions, which flow in upon them from the less Expensive Current
of Providence. Jacob may send into Egypt for Corn, but he shall send his own
full Bags to pay for it: And if David solicits a Nabal, for a part of his
Sheepsheer Cheer, 'twas but in order to the design of God to translate his
whole Estate upon him with his Wife. Abraham's Children have Milk and Honey in
their own Canaan; and if they had less, yet is their Dinner of Herbs better
than the stalled Ox of the Wicked. The very Gleanings of Ephraim are better
than the Vintage of Ali^zar: And he that sups with Herod may chance disgorge
his Stomach when he finds the Head of a Prophet brought up in a Charger for
second Course; even of that Prophet, who to avoid the dangers of their
poisonous Dishes, contents himself with the Locusts of the Wilderness. The
Great Elijah can trust his Master to Cater for him by the Ministry of Ravens,
and when that fails, is satisfied with the poor fare of a Widow, rather then to
Glut himself (with Jezebel's Chaplains) upon the Varieties of her providing.
His brave Successor, with all his College, are thankful to God for a Mess of
Pottage: And the patient Habakkuk can joyfully feed on a God alone; tho the
Fields and Herd: and Stalls should afford him not a Joint to supply his Table.
These with their Great Lord had Meat to eat which the World knew not. So had
the Children of the Captivity, who chose rather to make their Meals on Pulse
and Water, than to defile themselves with the princely Viands of the Royal
Board. The holy David fears to be choked with them: Let me not eat of their
daintie^. With an holy disdain have all the best Children of Abraham declined
the dangerous Accession of earthly Superfluities: Let the Swine of the World
(who offer to no other Deity but their Bellies) swill themselves till they
break again. All their fresh springs are in God. And though Esau said he had
enough, and wanted not Jacob's Presents; yet had he little enough who wanted
Jacob's God. Let the true Children of Abraham, learn to take out the lesson of
Generosity from him, and to wind up all their desire; in God, who (abstracted
from all Creatures) will very shortly be their only Portion, and themselves
shall be for ever filled with his fullness who fills all in all. Let them give
no occasion to any Sodomite of the Earth, to suspect that they worship a God
who is a Niggardly Rewarder of his Servants; and are therefore forced to sneak
to them for moldy bread, and clouted Shoes.

But sit down for a while, and consider, (Reader) what mean these Golden Words,
I am thy exceeding Great Reward: When all the Great Ones of the World have the
Plague of the Serpent upon them, and lick the dust of the Earth, and terminate
their desires in a Cursed Portion; to thee will I give my self for an Heritage!
And could thy shallow Apprehensions conceive what a God is in himself, or can
be, and do for his faithful Servants, thou might then reach the Dimensions
of that Blessing, which because they are so infinitely beyond all the strength
of thy Faculties to comprehend, therefore have I provided an Eternity for thee,
wherein I will enlarge those Powers of thy Soul to a sweet and ravishing
Contemplation of all my Perfections, and thine own exceeding Happiness in
having an Interest in them, when thou shall more perfectly see the Happiness of
that Enjoyment, and more fully know what infinite Wisdom, Power and Love can
effect, when they lay out themselves in Contrivances of all possible Felicity
and Blessedness, to all the Objects of my Favor and Grace: And if I design
this Happiness for thee to Eternity, thou can not fear that I should be
defective to thee in this life, but even now will crown all thy faithful
Services with Rewards and Encouragemeats due to them. Thy works of Faith and
Righteousness, shall be present Peace and Comfort, and the effects of that
Righteousness, quietness and Assurance for ever. And what is there, Reader,
that the utmost desire of thy Ambitious Heart can reach out to to covet after,
but what Abraham's God can as bountifully conferr upon thee, had thou the
least degree of his Faith to believe it? It is He that can make thee ride upon
the High places of the Earth, and open to thee all the rich Exchequers of his
Treasure, that thou shall not need Crouch to Kings. He can platt a Coronet of
Honor for thy Temples, and give thee a Name like unto the Name of the Great
Men of the Earth. Who promoted the poor Shepherd from waiting on those few
Sheep in the Wilderness, to become the glorious Head and Pastor of his People?
Who called the despicable Fishermen from their Boats and Nets, to be Spiritual
Princes in all the Earth, and set them as glittering Suns to shine for ever in
the Firmament of his Church? He can prepare a Table for thee even here in the
Desert, that shall bafflle all the Elixirs of the Field and the Vintage: Can
give thee a Taste of that Manna the Spirits of Angels are feasted with: Can
whisper Secrets into thine Ears, that shall drown thy heart with Joy
unspeakable and Glorious: Can light up such a Taper in thy Soul, that shall
pierce the Clouds, and give thee a Prospect of the Invisible Kingdom, and bless
thy Soul with Moses's Eyes: When all the World is tossed on the Billows of his
Wrath, can lodge thee in an Ark of perfect Security and Peace. Thou shall not
fear the fears of the Wicked, nor be distracted with their Amazements: Thy Soul
shall dwell in quiet within the Tabernacle of his Presence: If Heaven and Earth
should fall and mix together in one Chaos of Confusion, the Ruin should not
concern thee at all: Thy Foot is fixed on the unmovable Rock from all the
Dreads and Possibilities of falling: Everlasting Arms would be underneath, to
preserve thee from dashing thy self against the bruising Stones. When Time has
spun out the Silver Thread of thy Life on Earth, God will furnish thee with a
Clew that shall convey thee safely through all the Labyrinths of Death, into the
lightsome Palace of an everlasting Joy and Glory; where thou shall ever share
with his Chosen in endless Felicities, and wear on thy happy Head the Immortal
Crown of Life. God from his own most blessed Essence flowing out unto thee with
inexhaustible streams of ineffable Pleasure and Love, which drown all
apprehensions here to conceive, and must despair ever to know, before thou
come to enjoy them: Lo! this is the Reward and Heritage of the faithful
Children of that Abraham, whom God made the happy Object of his own delight,
his Friends Joy, his Enemies Envy, and the Wonder of all the World.

Cease then from inquiring what an exceeding Great Reward thy God will be to
those that serve him with Abraham's Heart: Nor ask with David, What shall be
done to the man that shall sight the Battles of God, against the Goliah's of
the World, and Sin; but buckle on thine Armor, and with Abraham and David act
Courageously; and in the Strength of thine Almighty Shield thou shall not fail
to be Victorious; the little Pebble of this single Promise, shot from the
strong Arm of thy Faith and Confidence, shall sink into the Forehead of all
thine Opposers, on whose Ruins thou shall build to thy self a Pillar and
Monument of Immortal Glory and Praise.

Thou will pardon me, Reader, this long digression from Abraham's Story, while
I have been laboring only to heave up thy dull heart and tired Spirits, to
that blessed place where himself is entered, and to give thee (in a smaller
draught) an imperfect Copy of those Glories, to which his Faith and Courage
have so happily preferred him. We shall find him presently making use of his
Shield, and trying what metal it is made of, not against a weak Combination of
Kings, but against God himself. Indeed the manner of his Attacque is somewhat
different, for there is no prevailing against God but by an humble use of his
own Weapons: Therefore having received the Ammunition, he immediately makes his
Assault, and so very luckily managed it, that it struck into the very Heart of
God, and thence fetched out the blood that was afterward tempered to make up
the Son which he fought for. When fury and Wrath can prevail nothing, Tears and
Prayers get the Victory. Have thou said, thou will be a Great Reward to me? to
what purpose will all that be, when I am hastening to my Grave, and cannot bear
with me thy Blessings into the next World, and I have no Heir to enjoy them
after me? -- Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go Childless? See how
Abraham strikes while the Iron is hot; and dexterously clinches the Nail of the
Promise, with the humble stroke of his Faith into the breast of God's
Faithfulness, which opens it Self to make way for it to stick in; and there it
abode for many years after, till Isaac came to draw it out. It Is observed (by
the Learned) that Abraham Domine Jehovah, illud patheticum est eoque, tanquam
singultiens usus est Abraham.
Sighed out this Request to God from the very bottom of his Heart, which no
wonder then had so good effect on the Heart of God. The weak Charge of the Lips
do little Execution, without strong Enforcement from the Breath of the Soul.
Omnipotence it self falls under the Push of a melted Soul. The Wind of
Affectionate Prayer, and Showers of true Repentance, turns the very Bowels of a
God within him, and puts him on Repenting too. Mary's Tears at Lazarus's Grave,
sets Jesus on Groaning, and then to Weeping as fast as She: Admire not to see
the Soul of her Brother discharged out of Heaven, when God could keep it there
no longer. The Spiritual Kingdom is very well pleased, to suffer under such
Violence. It may be Jacob afterward learned from his Grandfather this
Never-failing Art of Wrestling with Heaven, for in his buckling with the Angel,
though himself got a small blow (that put his Thigh out of joint,) yet had he
Strength enough still to hold him Prisoner till he got his Designs upon him,
and his Tears trickled down so fast, that there was no more Heart in his
Antagonist to deny him that Blessing that he so powerfully struggled for. As a
Prince he prevailed with God: But how? He wept and made Supplicacation unto
him. They were Jacob's Tears that melted the strength of that Blessed Prince of
Angels, who when he came into the World in our Nature, made use himself of no
other Arms.

But what are Sighs and Groans and Tears (were they all of Blood) for how
little are they regarded in the World? Since they make the poor Patients but
the more unpleasing Company to others who breath in the Egyptian Air, where no
such Showers fall, where no such Winds do blow? Yet Sighs for Sin differ from
other Breath, as the Sweet Perfumes of the Aromatic Mountains from the
Fuliginous Vapors of the dead Sea, or the Inspirations of Heaven from the
Noisome Belchings of Brutes: They are the Brisk Gales that scatter the Fogs of
Guilt, and securely waft us to Heaven. And though they are Inarticulate, and
pass away from us without a Coinage into Noise and Words, yet God knows their
Oratory well enough, and can spell them into so good Sense, that he puts his
own Imprimatur upon them, and shall be produced as Records of true Repentance,
though there be little else to plead for Mercy and Safety in the day of
Visitation, but the poor Evidence of a sew Hearty Groans under the killing
Tyrannies of Sin. When the Bottle of Tears shall appear at that time to plead
for us, then shall these Winds also pass out of their Treasury, to blow some
Refreshment on us: Both the one and the other Washed and Sweetened with the
Sacrifice of the Blood of Jesus, Ezekiel. 9.4.

God had already made to Abraham a General Promise of a Numerous Seed, and now
he Sighs to have that Promise more particularly expressed. Generals in Religion
leave the Affections Dull and Cold, and are but as the Embers upon the Hearth,
which more explicit Revelation blows up into Flames of Spiritual Heat and Joy.
All the rich Legacies of the New Testament do but meanly Affect us, till they
are translated into the Heart by the Finger of God. Then, O how I love thy Law!
'Twill never be well with us till we Pray and Sigh too, with Abraham, for a
more express Illumination and accomplishment of the Promise: I will write my
Law in their inward parts. General Promises satissie (well enough) a dead and
General Faith, all whose Hopes are on the Paper, but a Lively Faith is ever
Restless till they be transcribed thence, and engraven in legible Characters
within. The Law of his God is in his heart. That is the Fleshly Table upon
which it is fairly written. Salvation is secure to all whose Names are written
in the Book of Life; but it is a Lamp from the Sanctuary, (the Spirit of
Revelation) that must clear up the Evidence to the Soul of its own Name being
there inserted. Abraham's true Faith Sighs after more explicit Demonstration.
It Is a dreadful thing to leave the Concerns of Eternity under Fear and Doubts.
Give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. Abraham's Soul was
at stake, and longed till he were better secured of the promised Seed which
should make himself and all the Nations of the earth happy. He Pants Quodnam
donum oblectationi aut consolationi mihi erit, qu^^diu non video pr^missionem
tuam completam de semine meo ex quo Messiah est procreandus?
till he see that natural Root from whence the Blessed Branch of Righteousness
should in Gods good time be most happily derived. What could he beg less than
this? In vain would all other Blessings be heaped on his Head. But to pass down
into the Chambers of death Childless, and all the Memoirs of his Faith and
Obedience to be buried with him in the same Sepulcher: This is matter of Grief
to him, under all the Royal Largesses of Divine Bounty toward him. Progeny is
the natural desire of Man, whose Ambition is to see himself survive in others
springing from him; and Children are but the living Images of their deceased
Parents, who (so long as They live,) are not altogether dead. Besides Abraham
foresees his great Name might be interred in Oblivion, if God should not
inscribe it on a more lively Monument than his Steward Eliezer of Damascus was
like to make; who although he were a good Man, and by being adopted his Heir,
might be raised to bear some Figure and Resemblance of his State in the World;
yet (he sears) he would prove but a dark Representative of the Great Abraham's
Spirit, and no Express Image of his Masters Person: Too dark a Region for his
Illustrious Virtues to shine in.

The Sense of this Infelicity lay so heavy upon his troubled Spirits, that now
he sights for Life, and reduplicates his strokes. The Ro^k had not yet yielded
him one comfortable Drop, which in an instant shall gush out in Floods of
living Water; he renews the complaint, and piteously laments his condition. To
me have thou given no Seed. None yet appears, though thou tellest me of a
numberless One. I find no Accomplishment of thy Promise. God sometimes makes as
if he did not hear, and seems to shut his Ears, while yet his Heart is open. He
loves to put a Value on his own Mercies, which we so much the more esteem, as
they cost us dear in purchasing and waiting for. Blessings too cheaply gotten,
are too meanly prized. Abraham's Soul is in Travel for an Heir, he must not
hope to be delivered by one poor single Pang. In vain do we knock at Heavens
Gates, without watching there till Answer comes; and if that be delayed, our
Requests are to be enforced by new Arguments, and more pathetick workings of
Heart. And though our Prayers be answered before we cry, yet must we call again
and again for that Answer. And Jesus taught us a Parable to this end, that we
ought always to pray, and not to faint: Let Abraham hold out but one throw
more, and the Child shall come to the Birth. Christian! thou have been in long
Labor for a Savior, the next Groan may bring him from the Womb of Gods
Decree, and thine own Prayers into thy joyful Arms: will thou dye before thou
see thy Savior Born in thy Heart? Christ in thee, the hope of Glory.

Behold God this very Moment appearing to cancel all the Evidences of the
Strangers Pretensions, and breaking for ever the Heart of Eliezer's Hopes: See
the Seals of those despairing Conveyances, making over thine Estate and Soul to
the Forreigner, all lying on the Ground torn off, and himself sneaking away in
utter Desperation, at the first breaking out of the true Isaac. Go Father
Abraham, and teach all the World the profit of patient waiting at the Throne of
Grace, for by thine Importunity and Perseverance have thou prevailed with God.
Since the pains of thine Heart have turned even Gods within him, and caused his
very Bowels to roll, in the Sounding whereof thou hear the joyful Tidings of
a Son, which shall issue from those very Bowels that have stirred in so violent
Motions, against which his pity has no strength any longer to withstand thee;
and has all this while made but a feigned Resistance, while thou have been
showing a Trial of thy Skill, how well thou can manage thy Shield, and how
prosperously God himself may be attacked, when it shall please him to yield up
himself to be conquered by his Creature.

Abraham has been in Travel, and Behold a Troop comes. What a prolifick Grace
is Prayer, which brings forth Thousands and ten Thousands in our Streets; and
makes Parents of an Incomprehensible Seed. The Offspring of that Grace, are
all the Innumerable Productions of Eternity, which all the Arts of Arithmetic
must for ever despair to sum up. Can the Great God give any thing little? Has
Abraham wrought all this while but for one Son? Come all ye glittering Lamps of
Heaven, your mighty Creator sends you a Summons to make your Appearance here in
your clearest Shine, not the One thousand three hundred twenty five chief
Commanders, that seem to exceed the rest in Glory, but give your Orders to the
Minor Lights to make up all the Force, and with all your united Numbers make
some Figure to the Great Abraham of the infinite Issue that I will bless him
in, who from one Son shall multiply into Myriads, to bespangle the lower
Firmament of my Church. For so shall his Seed be.

God had employed him before, ^o the endless work of accounting the numbers of
the little Dust of the Earth. Now will he have him to enumerate the Stars of
Heaven with the like impossible Imposition. Some critically observe that by the
former, God pointed out the natural Seed of his Body, whose names should be
written in the Earth, and whose very Souls would cleave to the Dust. But by
these he decyphered to him, the Spiritual Prius promiserat semen tanquam
pulverein terrae, hic sicut stellas coeli, illud potuit fillos Naturales, hoc
Spirituales significare. Ainsworth.
Children of his Faith, all the World over, whose names are written in Heaven,
and who should shine as Stars for ever and ever. Great indeed is the difference
of these from the other; And Holy Records wi^ness, that Abraham, of the
innumerable Children of his Flesh, had but too few of his Spirit; Isaiah is so
bold to tell us, That by that time God had measured off, with the long Ell of
his Justice, almost the whole Piece to Destruction, for their unhappy Apostasy
from the Holy Practices of their Great Father, but a short Remnant was left,
that following his steps, arrived at last in the Heavenly Canaan with him.

From the lovely face of that Heaven, enameled with so many shining Stars,
which Abraham's Eyes beheld in the clearest night: Turn now thine own, Reader,
and gaze on another enriched with Lights, surmounting far all those, and of a
more eternal duration than they, illustrating the Great Abraham's name. It Is
his splendent Faith, attended on by all her Train of Graces, expatiating all
the Rooms of his Soul, by a ravishing Dilatation, to receive in all the Joys of
this so vast a Blessing, and giving it the most welcome Entertainment that her
little Powers are able in this narrow condition she is in. 'Twas mighty Faith
that brought him out of his Country, but what is this that passes him out of
himself, leaving all his Reason and Senses behind him, combating against all
the Impossibilities of Nature, when there was not the least ground to fix the
Foot of Belief on, but what was ready to sink under him; All hopes as tottering
as his reeling Body, and as dead as his Sarah's Womb; yet now to hope against
all Hope, and out of Death it self to believe out Life, and that with a Courage
as resolute and immovable, as admits not the least Allay of Fear or Doubt; but
to give Glory to God, by resigning himself up by a perfect dependence on the
Infallibility of the Promise, and full assurance of the Faithfulness and Power
of him that made it, without the least staggering thought: This is such a Faith
in the Perfection and Flower of it, that does render him so exceeding
acceptable in the Eyes of God, that he shall be henceforth confirmed in a
perfect Immunity from all the dangers of Sin and Death, which shall never
prevail eternally against him, and shall qualify him so completely for all ^he
Honors of Divine Friendship, that he shall ^e taken into the Bosom, and for
ever acknow^edged as the Faithful Friend of God. As he ^ath justified his Faith
by so noble Fruit as this, ^o will God Justify it too, by setting his Seal to
the Truth and Excellency of it, and Justifying Him the Subject of it, and
stamping on him the Mark and Honorable Character of a truly Religious and most
sincere Believer; Abraham believed in the Lord, and it was counted to him for
Righteousness.

Come hither, thou that art called a Christian, see the Criterion of thy future
Estate; Thou say thou believe, thou do well, do not the Devils also
Believe and Tremble? But have thou Abraham's Justifying Faith? Take a Survey of
the Weakness of thine, and the Vanity of thy Hopes for Heaven. Abraham
traveled out of all, and cheerfully gave up himself to be led by the Absolute
Will of his God, when thou lodgest still in the dark Entry of Nature, and
laughest at all the Invitations of his Grace: Thou mockest the Messengers of
God that are sent to call thee, and sticking still in the Creature and Self,
disputest his Authority to rule thee. Abraham feasted himself in the Joys of an
Invisible Savior, and made many a Sweet Banquet upon the Promise, while thou
art guzling on the draughts of Lust, and greedily sucking in the deadly Potions
of Sin, little remembering there is Death in the Pot, that Poisons thy Soul and
Hopes together. He rejoiced in the Children of his Faith, which should make up
a Church unto God, while they are all the Objects of thy Malicious Hate, who
bear the least shadow of his Image upon them. He bore up a Spirit against all
the Temptations of Life, and under all the Enticements of a Great and Rich
Estate, ever devoting the Cream and Elixir of his Thoughts and Heart unto God,
when thou lockest up thy Soul in a narrow Warehouse, and drownest all thy
Hopes in a shallow Stream. He dreaded not the formidable Powers of the World,
that had captived a Member of the Church, whilst thou (with Saul) art breathing
out Menaces and Slaughter, and shooting all thy Darts into the Heart of Christ:
He had strength to wrestle with God himself, and would not be beaten back
without a Blessing, when thy Spirit sinketh with the very thoughts of that
Power, whom thy wicked Life has made thine Enemy; He comes back laden with the
Riches of a Promise, which should make himself and all his true Children Happy,
when thy poor Heart is courting other Delights, and is a perfect Stranger to
the Pleasures of a Savior. Go Christian, get a better Faith, that may Justify
thy Person before God, since be sure such works as these can never Justify thy
Faith before Men.

Abraham thus assured of an infinite Posterity, grows now sollicitous and
thoughtful for them, he discovers the nature of those cares that Afflict the
Bosoms of every Godly Parent. He is fearful that his Children may deviate from
the steps of his own Uniform Obedience and Righteousness, nor wear the same
Livery of Grace that adorned his Loyal Spirit, and Hallowed all his Actions.
His first Care is to enjoy a Progeny, and his next, that they might enjoy God
and be Good. How rarely does this Holy Anxiety oppress the Minds of Men! How
would Abraham have swooned then, to have seen some of his Impious Children
sacrificing their Sons and Daughters unto Devils. The Angels themselves were
created subject to a possible Folly, and Multitudes of them fell by a dreadful
Apostasy; He had reason to fear that his Children, who were but Dust, might be
foolish too, and forgetful of the Rock of their Salvation, who might therefore
sell them into the hands of their Enemies, who would surely deprive them of
their Fruitful Canaan: Nor was this fear the least Flaw in the Jewel of his
Faith, but rather an Holy Ray that darted from it. It abates not at all of the
Perfections of God, that he is Jealous. The Church is his Spouse, he is Married
to her, and would have her Holy as Himself. If Abraham to the Promise of a
Seed, and an Inheritance for them, might have another to secure them in it, by
a Faith and Spirit like his own, which would entitle them to Divine Favor and
Protection, surely this would Terminate his Desires, and complete up all his
Happiness.

Abraham is content to go Issueless still, rather than be the miserable Parent
of Rebels against Heaven. The Arrows that are shot by wicked Children against
the Honor of God, pierce by the way through the hearts of their wounded
fathers, and make them bleed. God is so well pleased with the Workings of
Abraham's thoughts, and took it so kindly from him, that he had honored him by
so absolute Resignation of his Faith, on the bare word of his Promise, That
from hence forth he shall have little cause to question the Performance of all
his future Engagements, for now he resolves to confirm them all by stronger
Bars than those that Heaven and Earth are environed with. He is content to
enter into a Sacred Covenant with him, that shall oblige his Holiness, Honor
and Truth in such irrefragable Ties, that Abraham's Heirs may Sue him at their
pleasure upon the Violation of them, and shall have liberty to plead the Breach
of Articles against him in the Court of Honor, should he fail in any point of
Performance. Nor were they backward (as Vatablus tells us) for notwithstanding
themselves were so careless in keeping the Counter-conditions, that obliged
them to Obedience and Duty; And by their continual Violations, had evacuated
the whole Covenant, and wrenched off all the Seals, yet would they be so
Impudent, to reproach him with a Failure on his Part, and frequently twit him
with it, when their Treacheries had at any time provoked him to bring in an
Enemy upon them, or put them into Banishment and Sufferings: Recordare foederis
inter segment a initi. Remember the League made with Abraham our Father, when
the Heifer was cut in twain, and thou passedst through the parts thereof. There
was a Custom (as elsewhere, so) in Chaldaea (whereof therefore Abraham could
not be ignorant) That for confirming Covenants, these Ceremonies passed amongst
them; A Beast was killed and divided into two equal Parts, which Parts were
brought forth and laid at some distance over against each other, the Federates
passing between them, and solemnly imprecating on themselves the same Death and
Ruin, (so to be killed and cut in pieces as the Beast) if they should first
break the Covenant and Agreement made between them. The equal Division of the
Beast seeming to represent the Unity of Will in both Parties, and their mutual
satisfaction in the Conditions of the League. In Conformity to this Custom,
Abraham is ordered to get ready his Heifer, and with that, a Goat and a Ram,
all of three years Age; and to these a Turtle Dove and a young Pigeon, to
prepare and place them in order, against such time as the Lord would please to
come down to pass thorough them. In that the Beasts were multiplied, it
signified a surer Ratification of the Covenant. The Conditions on Gods part
were. That he would surely give unto Abraham for his Posterity the whole
Kingdoms of Canaan for a Possession. Abraham Conditions for his Children, That
they therefore should keep the Laws of the Lord, and walk in his ways, as
himself would give them Example. Gods Passing thorough the divided parts in the
Appearance of Fire and Smoke, and Abraham's walking through the midst of them,
confirmed the Covenant, and finished the Transaction. Now must this be unto
Abraham an infallible Assurance, God could not deny Himself, nor his Covenant.
He may cease disputing for the future, How shall I know that I shall inherit
it? There are Authors that make Critical Observations, first on the Age of the
Beasts, which were All to be three years Old, and signified that this Covenant
related only to the Carnal Posterity of Abraham (for there follows another for
his Spiritual, which was to endure for evermore) who should enjoy Canaan during
Three Remarkable Terminations of time. The first from Abraham himself to Moses;
The second, from Moses to David; The third, from David to Christ, when by their
bitter Usage and Cruelty toward Him, the whole Articles were torn to pieces,
and themselves sent packing out of their good Land, having no longer a Promise
of it.

The Miracle of Gods Condescension in binding Himself up to his Creatures, is a
Subject for Angels to pry into, and for Saints to praise him for ever: Yet is
not this all that Abraham shall be gratified in, there is still a farther
Honor God will confer on his Favorite: He shall be admitted into his own
Privy Council of Heaven, and the Arcana Imperii, the Mysteries of State that
are locked up in the secret Cabinet of his Bosom, shall be disclosed to him. He
shall here have a perfect Prospect into all the Occurrences of his Family for
many hundred years after, which first he shall discover in a Type, and then in
clearer words.

First, The Beasts and the Birds do more generally show him the different
Natures of his Children; some bearing brutish Affections, creeping upon the
Face of the Earth as Beasts; others Soaring in a more Spiritual Element, All
their aims aspiring after Heaven. Again more particularly, The very Heifer, a
Laborious Slave subjected to the Collar, shall Prophecy to him the Servitude
of his Children under the Egyptian Yoke, the very Age of her shall show him the
term of that Slavery for Three Generations together. But then the Turtle, a
Solitary Bird, that delights in the Desert, shall show him also their Removal
thence, and wandering in the Wilderness for Forty years. And the Pidgeon, a Fowl
that loves to be Housed, shall lead him to the sight of his Family fixedly
settled in the Cities of Canaan. The very Sleep he fell into, is Prognostic of
his last End; and the horror of Darkness that came upon him, Prophesied the
grievous Troubles and dismal Afflictions his Children would fall into, as
hardly should they discover any Light of hope for deliverance from them: God
having foreshewn all these future Events unto Abraham, expounds them afterward
in a plain Declaration of Words, wherein he is comforted against all the
Sorrows of his Posterity, by their certain Redemption from them, and his own
long Life ending in a Quiet and Blessed Death: The Ceremony being ended,
Abraham is confirmed for ever.

Observe here how the whole Scene of all contingent Emergencies befalling the
Creatures, and issuing upon Kingdoms, Families and Persons throughout all Ages
of Time, hang all up in One fair Table, Open and Naked in the Light of Gods
Omniscient Eye, unalterably fixed by his firm Decrees, and all unavoidable by
any Power or Wisdom of Men. How vainly then does Humane Weakness Plot to break
the Links of his Providence, which his own Mighty Arm has so undissolvably
chained together; That all the Combinations of Men or Devils do but weary
themselves while they Idly endeavor to break them.

Take also a View of the Road to the Heavenly Canaan; The Land is confirmed to
Abraham and his Heirs, with all the Assurances that a God can make him. Yet
ever they possess it, they must pass down into Egypt, and suffer a tedious
Affliction there, under the Tyranny and Oppression of a Cruel Pharaoh; and
thence into an Howling Wilderness, to live by Faith in the want of all things,
but what an immediate hand from Providence should reach out to them. Thus we
pass still from the Slaveries of the World, to the Inheritance in Glory, from
hard Labors to an Eternal Sabbath, from crying to God because of Oppression,
to rejoicing in God because of Exaltation; from a Valley of Tears to a Mountain
of Joy; from a State of Bondage to Everlasting Liberty: Through Flames of
Persecution, into Endless Delectation; from a Wearisome Pilgrimage, to an
Everlasting Rest. Patiently must we tread the Steps that all others have passed
before us. God himself had his Work before he Rested; The Blessed Jesus had
His, which he must bring to Perfection, ever ever he has Confidence to go to
his Father; I have finished the work thou have given me to do, and now I come
to thee. He walks first to the Cross, ever ever he receives the Crown, and
drinks of the brook in the way, ever his Glorious Head is Exalted. The Apostles
and Martyrs swim to Heaven thorough the Red Sea of their own Blood, and through
many Tribulations must we all enter into the Kingdom of God. Ridiculously do we
hope for an easier way, than which all the Holy Pilgrims have gone before us,
and God in his Wisdom has chalked out to us by his Eternal Decrees to walk in.
Let us Glance for a Moment on the People of these Kingdoms, at whose Doors God
has lately sealed Leases of Ejectment by his Irrevocable Oath unto Abraham;
They merrily pass their years away, they laugh at Fear, not a Melancholy
Thought dares approach their Hearts; They Correct the Insolency of those
Groundless Dreads that suggest but the least Jealousy of any future Danger.
Every day is an Holiday with them; They keep a perpetual Carnival, and distill
all the Luxurious Issues of their Country into Spirits, which serve them to
exhilerate their Own into Mirth and Jollity; They Sacrifice to their Idols in
profuse Libations, and pay them the liberal Tributes of their grateful
Affections under all the Peace and Prosperity they enjoy. While now the Fatal
Sentence had passed out from Heaven against them, and the Handwriting of Ruin
stuck on the Walls of every House in Canaan, and there shall rest till they
undermine themselves, and an heavy hand of Judgment gives Fire to those Trains
which shall surprizingly blow them up for ever. Take heed, Reader, the case be
not thine own: Sin is an Engineer in the Dark, that is ever contriving the
means of our utter Desolation. There is a Faux in thine own Bosom, with a Match
ready lighted to do Execution, while thou dreamest not in the least of a Danger
upon thee, and art all the while heaping up Wrath against the day of Wrath, and
Piling up those Faggots with thine own Hands, which shall shortly be enkindled
to burn thee out of all thine Earthly Comforts, and send thee yet into hotter
Flames than these. And whilst thou lie in the Lap of these Dalilah's, God
knows how soon the Philistines may be upon thee; And what know thou, but the
Decree may be gone forth against thee already, and thou have nothing that
secures thy Stay but the pure Patience of that God whom daily thou abusest,
that does yet wait, and Reprieves thee from the Writ of Execution. It Is well
known that Those in the Wilderness, in the midst of their security had an Oath
clapped upon them because of their Provocations, which they could never get off
'till their Carkases fell; they were so fettered by it that it was impossible
for them to get into Canaan: And yet had they a few sunshine Summers granted
them, (as these condemned Amorites,) they ran about a while with God's Curse
upon them, as the manacled Prisoners of his Wrath. To small ends of true
Comfort and Safety is it to be thrown upon a Couch of Ease and Pleasure, (wrapped
in soft and silken. Wreaths of Security and Peace) and there to slumber 'till
Death and Judgment dragg thee thence, and tumble thee down into a Bed of Flames
for ever.

CHAP. VI.
Abraham by Sarah's Persuasions goes in unto, Hagar, she conceives and grows
proud; being afflicted of her Mistress she flees into the Wilderness, where an
Angel meets her and turns her back. The Birth of Ishmael.

WHile Abraham walks on (in Confidence of this Covenant*) with full Vigor and
Strength of Soul, Sarah's Hopes decline with her Years, and comes limping after
him with a weary foot: The Promise of a Seed had been made to her Lord, but it
was not yet revealed by what Venture he should enjoy it, most probably from any
other than her own Barren one: And rather than this Tree. of Righteousness
should want Branches and Fruit, she is content that he Inoculate on a
Crab-stock: (No wonder then the Production prove but wild and sour,
participating more of the Juice of the degenerous Root than the sweeter Nature
of the true Plant;) but rather than to be no Mother, she is satisfied with
being one at second Hand, and is willing to rock her Maids Cradle; and
doubtless she had great Kindness for Hagar, who was most happy in such a
Mistress, that would gratify her faithful Service with that unusual Civility
of sending her Husband to Bed to her. This is not the ordinary manner of Women's
Kindness, who will part with every thing sooner than the Monopoly of their
Husbands Love. But Sarah's Case began to be desperate, who notwithstanding the
repeated Promises of Children made to her Abraham, was yet never the less
Barren than before; and it being never yet said that the Heir should be born of
her Body, she knew not but that God himself might inspire her to make the
Motion, and speak the good Word to her Lord for Hagar; therefore she contrives
to lend away a piece of his Heart to her Maid, and to admit her as the
secondary Object of his Affections, and should not much repent it, if she still
contain her self within her Limits, and pay her the dutiful Respect owing to so
kind a Mistress.

It Is disputed whether Abraham or Sarah, either or neither of them, sinned
against God in this Action. For Him it is argued, that he did it not from any
Motion of Lust, who notwithstanding his Wive's Barrenness, had never been
tempted to wander in his Affections from her, but humbly waited upon God to
effect his Promises by those means which himself had decreed to produce them,
and had never upbraided his dearest Wife of her Sterility, the only Impediment
to his Happiness in a Son. Nor was it contrary to the Custom of Nations, and
that as yet there was no Law expressed against Polygamy. Nor was he himself
first in the Motion, but was led to it by the Desire, Approbation, and Consent
of his Sarah. But above all, since God had told him that all the Nations of the
Earth should be blessed in his seed, he might possibly incurr the danger of
God's displeasure, if by any default of his own he should hinder the Salvation
of the World. The Promise being only to himself and not unto Sarah, of having
such Issue as might render it happy; he had now waited already Ten Years for
the Accomplishment of that Promise, and might possibly think himself obliged
from the Tradition so common, Si Mulier non pepereret intra december Annos,
tenetur ejus Maritus ad primam, secundam ducere Vxorem, -- If the Woman bear no
Child within ten Years, her Husband may take a second Wife to the first. These
are the Arguments commonly used for Abraham.

For Sarah it is pleaded, That she bore the Infelicity of her Barrenness with an
humble resignation, and not with that Impatiency as afterward did Rachel her
Granddaughter: And that she thought her self unworthy so great an Honor as to
be the Mother of the blessed Seed, and did not ill at all in consulting the
Means by which so great a Blessing might be derived to Mankind; she attempered
her self to the Divine Will, and will not envy that glory to her Handmaid. She
took it heavily that so great a Person as Abraham should be deprived of the
Blessing of Children, and that her own Incapacity should make void the Promises
of God. See my Lord Abraham, God has restrained unworthy me from Bearing, thou
vainly expectest Children from me; and I plainly perceive that God intends me
not the Honor of making thee a joyful Father, if he did, he has the Key of
the Womb, and might easily heal my Barrenness: but since it is not his good
pleasure, I humbly submit my self and cheerfully give way to another: It
matters not much whether I bear or no, but it concerns all the World that thou
have that seed which must make it haypy: The Child of my Maid will be Mine by
Law, and I shall embrace and Adopt it as my own. In this Glass we may visibly
perceive her Reveverence and Love to her Husband, and beyond that, her Pious
Care for all the World; and is blameable in nothing but what is common to all
her Sex, a little Impatience and overrunning the Decree of God, who is wise
enough to flush our callow Precipitancies, and Ripen them all to fly to his
Glory. And it may be a greater than Abraham or Sarah was here in the Council;
for we may well know how serviceable Hagar proves to the whole Church of God,
in lending not only an Hand to dress up an Allegory, but her Shoulder too, to
justle out the Old Covenant, which was so unwilling to give way to the New.

The Hebrews Hanc fuisse Pharaonis filiam dicunt Hebraei. Lyra.
to keep up the Honor of Abraham, and that he degraded not himself by entering
into the Chamber of Hagar, will needs have us to believe that she was of Royal
Extraction, and Daughter to the King of Egypt; they will not own him to have
entered into a meaner Bed than that of a Princess; but while they seek to keep
up the Reputation of their Father, they see not how foully they betray the ill
manners of their Mother, who after her Conception treated the Daughter of a
King so hardly. Be her Birth what it will, 'twas Honor enough to Hagar to be
second in Abraham's Affections, and for his sake to wear the Dignity in Holy
Records of being the Grandmother of twelve Princes.

Hagar's Spirits swell with her Belly, she nourishes the Embryo and a Tympany
together: The height of her Pride plainly demonstrates the lowness of her
Birth. Right Noble Blood sweetly streams in the happy Channel of its own rich
Veins, when the baser Gore, like Jordan, breaks all bounds, and overfloweth all
its Banks: There are no Reins can bridle up the Insolency of a proud Usurper.
He that manages well enough the little Pinnace of a smaller Fortune, grows
giddy when riding with a Top-Gallant. Hagar humble enough in the Closet, grows
Arrogant under her Preferment to the Bed of Sarah. Behold, she which dragged
two Kings at the Chariot Wheels of her Beauty, is here despised in the Eyes of
her own Maid. The Concubine of Abraham insults over his Lady. Pretenders to
Religion, who force a Kiss from Jesus, (with Judas) Sell his Person, and break
the Peace of his Family, when those that of a long time have lain in his Bosom
(with John) seek above every thing to preserve it. The young Jilts of an
Upstart Profession, have frequently rent the Church into those gaping Schisms
which an whole Council of Fathers have hardly been able to close up. This
Vnder-sucker from the first discovery of her budding out, waxes most
insufferably haughty in that sap which she had thiev'd from the Top branch.
It Is she that must make her Lord happy in that Fruit, which his Sarah had never
the Honor to bear him; Despexit eam tanquam a divino Promisso repudiatam. Lyra.
as if God himself had given her a Bill of Divorce from that Dignity and
Abraham's Bed together, to make sole room for her self, the Elect Mother of the
great Heir that was to come: She seems a Type of Diotrephes, who would shove
out the beloved Disciple, to get the Pre-eminence into his own hands over all
the Household of God. Ambition is a dangerous Pestilence in the sacred Building,
and eats through the very Rafters of it. This Bondwoman grows so intolerably
high, that common Prudence necessitates her humbling: Sarah is resolved to cut
her Comb, and break the Egg of this Cockatrice e're it be hatched into a
Serpent; if she hiss already, she may chance to bite hereafter. How does God
frequently blast those Councils that derive not direction from the Sanctuary!
Now is the goodly frame of Sarah's Project fallen upon her own Head, and ready
to break it, while she vainly contrived to build the House of Abraham with this
untempered Mortar: So infallibly will they be deceived who think to prefer the
Hagarine Humors of Nature into a Conjunction with Divine Grace, and put them
to Bed together in hopes of an eternal Issue: where instead of Generating an
Heir to Abraham, they fall to scratching each other, and nothing appears but a
mad Ishmael, that flies in the Face of every one, without any Favor to its own
Benefactors. Gold and Dirt make an ill Mixture, and but daubs the Fingers of
him that endeavors to temper them together. In short, Sarah perceives her
Folly, and too late repents her precipitant Counsels; who by calling up her
Maid to stand Cheek by Jole with her self, soon discovered the danger of being
overtopp'd in her own House, should she thus go on to raise her Heels so high,
and perk up so loftily as she began: She resolves therefore to put in her Bill
of Complaint, though she knew not the Issue of her Suit, since (she fears) the
Judge himself is a Party against her, and too openly favors her Adversary:
Yea, she is bold in her Declaration to Accuse him downright of an unjust
Compliance, and (should that fail) she doubts not to prove him guilty of too
great a Connivance at the Insolences of his Minion: And was really Jealous
that her New Sheets had feloniously drawn away all his old Affections from her
self. But should she find him no kind Chancellor, she resolves to Appeal unto
God Himself, who would surely look into the Merits of her Cause, and pass a
most equitable Sentence for her.

Abraham the sole Arbiter of this Difference (mindful of his Sarahs Fidelity to
him under all the Temptations of Pharaoh's Court) cannot now justifiably warp
from his Integrity to her for the sake of any Egyptian Slave, and is wise
enough to allay the heat of Sarah's fury, by giving her satisfactory Evidence
of the coldness of his Love to Hagar, which he could manifest in nothing more
clearly to her, than by calling her up to the Bench, and leaving her there to
pass her own Decree. Behold thy Maid is in thy hand, do to her as it pleases
thee: Very Prudent and Admirable Justice, since (who is ignorant) that from the
little Sparks of Contention, inkindled by Ambition and Jealoufie, on the Spirit
of Women, have too often issued those Fires which have burned to a dreadful
Conflagration. The Sword in their Lips have been snatched thence into the Hands
of their Husbands, and made bloody work in the Church of God. Abraham yields
the Concubine to be blown up, to prevent the running of the Flame any farther
in his Family; and (for ought we can find) Sarah spares for no Powder. How
happy and Righteous were we, if in this we could imitate our Father, and in the
bustling Broils between Flesh and Spirit, ever take part with the highborn
Soul, laboring under all the proud Tyrannies of her Insulting baser Enemy,
delivering her up to suffer the just penalties of her Insolence and Folly, who
must be dealt with as a Slave, and thoroughly humbled, least she make the whole
House too hot for us here, and at last lead us away Prisoners with her, and
both perish together. -- I keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection,
least I my self become a castaway.

But tho Paul was happy and successful in the Methods of his Discipline over
his Flesh; yet all the severity Sarah could make use of, did little work any
Change upon her Bondwoman, to reduce her within Bounds of her Duty. O the
Plague of an untameable Spirit, that baffles all the Arts of both Heaven and
Earth to humble it! Neither Frowns nor Smiles, neither Strokes nor Stroakings,
neither Judgments nor Mercies make the least impression upon this impenetrable
Rock, to melt into one drop of Reluctance, till Blood flowing from the holy
veins of a God-Man fall upon it, and dissolve the Adamant all into Water.

Hagar will Break sooner than Bow, and chooses rather to fly from, than bend
to her Mistress, she resolves to lie in none rather than a Truckle-Bed: So
grievous is it for Nature, to fall in the price of it self, that it preferrs
Annihilation when it cannot attain the Ends of its Ambition. Achitophels great
Spirit hates to survive the funerals of his Reputation, and suffers rather an
Halter, than dishonor: while Grace shrowds its own Worth, and blushingly veyls
its meritorious Virtues. Moses his Mask is still worn by those excellent Souls
that are ever on the Mount, when vain and empty Minds rage and grow angry with
the World for not Adoring the Shrine of their Nothingness. And what is Hagar
now broken off from her Mistress, but a poor sorry contemptible creature in
the Wilderness; while I see her sitting by the waterside, desolate and
comfortless, ruminating in her Mind all the past Transactions of her Life, and
very probably now brought most sensibly to bewayl that stubbornness and
ill nature that had thus reduced her to this Extremity? She seems too lively a
Shadow of those miserable Souls, whom their own wretchedness and Divine
Justice, has Excommunicated from the Church for ever, into a more fatal Lake,
where they have now Time enough (if an Eternity suffices) to commune with their
own Hearts, of all the unspeakable Kindnesses of a God toward them through the
whole Series of their Life, who all along courted them with the Varieties of
his good Providence, and yet further with all the Delicacies of his Ordinances,
allowing them the rich Privileges of his House and Table; under all which,
instead of an Humble and Reverend Demeanor in his Family, a Grateful and
Affectionate Sense of his Goodness, with a lowly Reflection on their own
Vuworthiness, they waxed Wanton and Proud, breaking all the bonds of Obedience
and Duty, fomenting Schisms and Divisions in the Church. Murmuring against
Moses and Aaron, bringing all things into so perfect Confusion, that the Earth
it self disdaining to bear them any longer, opened her Jaws to provide them a
Grave, where they have nothing else to do but bitterly to lament their
Distraction and Madness, in not timely considering the concerns of their Peace,
which now (alas) are hid from their Eyes.

Yet Hagars case is not thus desperate; she bore along with her that Pledge of
Heavens care and her Masters pity, as well might serve to cherish in her some
hope for commiseration and relief. She had not so long lived in Abraham's house
to gather no fragments of Religion, the very Rebels of the Family have yet
learned to howl in their Extremities for some help: In their affliction they
will seek me early. And it may be God had Allured her into this Wilderness, to
teach her the Lesson of Humiliation, which she could never take forth in the
day of her Prosperity; therefore is an Angel sent from Heaven to speak
comfortably to her. And her Repentance has procured to her the Honor of the
first Visit that ever Angel is yet noted to have made into the World: Or rather
the Prince of Angels sent himself, clothed with beams of brightness, and those
Celestial Qualities which make her own him to be, as indeed he was, the Lord
Jehovah, [ ver. 13.] The poor wretch was trudging home toward Egypt, with an
heavy Body and an heavier Mind, and was now resting her self by a Fountain of
Water (increased by a contribution from her Eyes, which she hardly stops to
clear up and look on so Illustrious a Comforter.) Natural Tears shed for self,
need but Gods presence to strike the Heart, and hallow them into Tears for Sin.
Hagar admires to hear her self so readily named, and in the same moment her
Faults detected; Where is the guiltless Name that God can speak to from Heaven?
If she were Sarahs Maid, what did she there? Had she her Mistresses passport
with her? When we fly from our Callings, we fly from God, whose Law commands
us to a fixed Station, and whose Providence watches over us in it, and whose
Correction reaches us in all our wanderings from it. We shall find little
reward at the Evening of Life, for sitting all the day Idle in the Marketplace
of the World. It Is a sad and unanswerable End of our Lives, to Eat and Drink
and rise up to Play. The Epilogue of that Comedy will be spoken in Hell.
Idleness is but One of Hagars crimes, Folly marches after, and Misery brings up
the Rear of both. Came thou from Abraham's Family, the happiest in all the
Earth, and made only unfortunate by thee? Can thou forsake the Household of
Faith, and be safe? Art thou Stealing away with the Fruit of thy Masters Loins,
to give it a Birth in Egyptian Air, and Robbing thine own Child of all the
Blessings that an Heir of Abraham may hope to Inherit? And whether will thou
go? to those again that sold thee out for a Slave? Can thou expect to render
thy condition any where better, than there from whence thou came? The
stubbornness of thy Heart, was the cause of the bitterness of thy Life. 'Twas
thine own Pride that justly incensed thy Mistress. Nor can thou look down on
thy swelling Womb without blushing at thine own Ingratitude. Return therefore
and pay her the Honor, her Merits, and thine own Duty requires from thee. All
the World will be but Bush and Brake to thee, a very barren Wilderness to the
Comforts of thy Masters House. Hagar (as once that Woman of Samaria) by a
discovery of her private Concerns, discerning the Blessed Angel to be more than
Man, does not Impiously pin her own Guilt on her Mistresses Sleeve, nor dares
to Impeach her in the least; show as too conscious of her own Crimes to conceal
them from him, that (she saw) very well knew them already. This Modesty and the
tacit Confession of her own Imprudence, fits her for Mercy, and sets her free
from further Rebukes.

But this glorious Messenger had another Errand: He came not from Heaven only
to return her back to her Mistress, however to Encourage her to it, he will be
so favorable to give her a Light into the dark Cells of her Womb, and discover
to her what lay concealed there. And as Abraham had a Vision into all the
Contingencies of his Family, so shall his Concubine be blessed above Women, in
the Knowledge of the Sex, Nature, Condition, and Fortunes of her yet unborn
Child. The Angel is Godfather indeed, and gives him a Name: A name that shall
live and flourish in the Mouths and Memories of a numerous and durable
Posterity, whose condition and manner of Life, (he Prophesies) shall be strange
and different from all the World. A generation of Men that shall delight to
Rove as a wild Ass in the Wilderness, to keep apart by themselves in the
Deserts of the Earth, Fierce, Cruel, and Warlike; such are the Saracens and
Arabians, and such is their Quality and kind of Life to this day.

Hagar devoutly returns the Glory of his grace unto God, who had beyond all
Expectation regarded her in Affliction by so glorious a Legate. The Beams of
whose Majesty were so kind to her, to leave her the Light of her Eyes, which
she admires was not lost by so dazzling an Object; and Baptizes the very Well
with its own Water, giving it an everlasting Name, that still bears the Memoire
of the Mercy of being Able to live after she had seen the Lord.

With a glad Heart, and full resolutions of better Conformity, she returns back
to her Lady, and doultless very humbly submits her self to her Grace; who
receives her in obedience to the order of Heaven, which seldom sends ill
Members to the Church after the Convictions of Conscience upon them: We are
never good in our Callings, till God meet and directs us. Onesimus was All
Hands for Philemon, when God had changed his Heart. Grace qualifieth us for
universal service to God and Men. Abraham (to whom doubless the transaction
with the Angel in the Wilderness, was very accurately repeated by Hagar)
provides like himself for the Birth of his Child; and has great hopes of the
Son that an Angel had already given Name to: Who when he came into the World
finds a Father that had already passed Eighty Six years on the Earth.

CHAP. VII.
The Covenant of Grace renewed and confirmed to Abraham, and the Spiritual
Heirs of his Faith for an Everlasting Testament, that neither Sin nor Death
shall ever be able to dissolve.

^TWas in that Chilly and Withered Age, when now Time had snowed upon him, and
he was ready to stumble upon the dark Mountains, and the Grave waited for him;
and his Hopes of Sarah's Body were as desperate and cold, as his own Blood and
Spirits; that the Lord made his Fifth Visit and Appearance to his beloved
Abraham. He is so far from casting him off in his Old Age, or for saking him
when his strength fails, that behold he comes with such Cordials in his Hand
as shall brisk up and invigorate his fainty Soul, and renew his strength as an
Eagle. He shall have new Eyes that shall pierce deeper into the Mystery of the
Godhead, and enable him to see more clearly. He shall have new Feet to Walk on
before his God more firmly (one would have thought he had come already (at this
Age) to the end of his Course, but now he must walk on still.) He shall have
new Ears, to hear Himself and his Lady called by other Names. He shall have new
and better Promises for his Faith and Hopes to build on more strongly. A new
Sacrament to establish and confirm those hopes more Infallibly: A Wife who
shall no more be called Barren: A new Heir that shall make him the Father of
Kings. A Family that shall bare a new Mark and Impress. And all these in the
very despair and evening of his Days, to let all the World see the Almighty
Power of Him, who from the beginning has wrought all things out of Nothing,
and can make things to start up and be, which do not yet Appear, to give Life
to our Hopes and Souls.

God thinks it but a small thing, that he had already confirmed to Abraham and
his Children, all the Kingdoms of Canaan for a Possession by his Oath. And though
he foresaw well enough that there would be but too many of them, whose
Affections would be incorporate into those fruitful Fields and Pastors, and all
their utmost desires centred in the exuberant Productions of them, yet had he
given ample Testimony of his kindness to Abraham, in making so rich and noble
Provision for the worst of his Family, whose Ingratitude to himself, and
Apostasy from their Great Fathers Faith and Principles, might perhaps in time
raise the Stomach of that very Land against them, which had gotten a custom of
Vomiting out her Inhabitants: Those whom she saw making so ill use of her
Bounty, as so surfeit on her Dainties, and abuse them to the dishonor of her
great Lord; for whom therefore having made Portions so perfectly connatural to
themselves, by that Covenant, He proceeds now to a discovery of a better
Inheritance than Canaan, and perfectly adequate too, to the more pure and
refined inclinations of those better Children of Abraham, on whom the very
Features of his brave Soul should survive and appear, and who should not idley
boast in the privilege of his Blood running in their Veins, when they bore not
the least shadow of his Faith and Goodness in their Hearts. For these express
Images of their Fathers Graces, He knows no better Heritage to confer upon
them, than his own most Blessed Self. He has portion enough that has a God:
-- Blessed is the People whose God is the Lord. Nothing less than He, can be a
proportionable Portion for the Spiritual Heirs of Abraham's Faith. Therefore to
let him see the unexpressible Riches of his Grace, and the high Contrivances of
his Heart, which was ever working into more and greater Manifestations of his
Love toward him, he passes from Heaven to break in pieces all the Bars of
Opposition and Despair; not only that little one of his Wife's Barrenness,
which obstructed all his hopes of an Heir, but also those mighty ones of Sin
and Hell, which hinder the World of the blessings of a Savior.

Now the better to Illustrate the Glory of that Grace, which he is ready to
Seal to his Dearest Abraham, He will lay the Foundation of it in a more
Conspicuous and Brighter Revelation of Himself to him, than ever yet he had the
Happiness to enjoy: By drawing the Curtain from the profound Abyss of the
Incomprehensible Deity, and flashing out a clearer Beam of his Majesty upon his
Understanding and Mind, in the further Light and Joy whereof, he shall
henceforth walk all the days of his Life, as in the Shine of a thousand Suns.
Knowledge is the foundation of Faith, and the greater Degrees of it, are the
enlarging the Field wherein the Contemplations of the Soul more unlimitedly
walk with sweeter Liberty, while Her desires stretch out themselves by the
utmost Extensions, after the Infinite Good they discover: And though they
despair to reach it here below ( for God is Great and we know him not, so great
that we cannot know him) yet it is no small delight to them to enjoy a
Pisgah-sight of that Glorious Canaan. God had already shown unto Abraham, what
he would be unto him under Metaphorical Expressions of Shield and Reward. But
he knows not yet distinctly enough, what he is in Himself, and he should be
infinitely happier in a more satisfactory discovery of his Nature, such as
might brighten his Judgment and Apprehensions. The greatest part of the Worlds
Religion is Samaritan, Men worship they know not what; but Abraham shall know
Him he worships, and shall be guided by the light of such an Attribute, that
shall open his Intellectuals into the Sense of the Divine Nature, and such a
One too, as shall be most naturally effectual to work up his other Faculties
into a cheerful and unreserved Resignation of his whole Person and Actions to
the Will of God; when he shall find that he has all those Infinite Perfections
in him, which complete and fill up the Blessedness of a God, without going out
of Himself to fetch in any Contributions to make him more Happy than he is
already. If therefore such a God would make over Himself to him, and give him
an Interest in that Allsufficiency which he himself both is and has, Abraham
should have little cause to complain of Defects in the Perfection of his
Felicity, since he has every thing (according to his Capacity) whatsoever an
All-sufficient God has, to make himself perfectly Happy: Let him stretch out
the Appetites of his Soul to the remotest expansions of Eternity, even thither
will this God follow him, to Supply and Perfect up all his desires.

This is the delicious Prospect that his Spiritual Eyes shall be Irradiated to
gaze on; far transcending all the outward Objects of a Transitory World, or the
Canaan in it that formerly he had commanded him to View. This is that Luscious
Banquet he prepares for Abraham's Faith and Affections to Feast on. And
methinks, Reader, thou have no reason to complain of Scarcity, when thou art
placed after him at the same Table, with an Addition of many more Viands which
his Great Son has brought from Heaven with him. The standing Dish that every
Son of Abraham is commanded to break his Fast on, is God Himself. And he is
enough without any other Sallads from Canaan. Yet has he strangely Improved
himself under the Gospel, where he has dressed and set out himself with all
the pleasing advantages to our Palats imaginable. And when all this is done,
how few are there found, that relish any Sweetness in him. Our Squeamish
Stomachs, with those nice Children of Abraham, Will none of him. Our Sick Souls
Loath this precious Manna. But art thou in Health, Reader, that thy Soul tastes
not a God? Does Onions and Garlic, Wind and Vanity please thee better; Go take
thy Repast with Ephraim, and see whether thou be not gripped at the last.
It Is himself indeed that must give us eyes to behold his own Beauties and holy
Senses, to relish his own Sweetness.

Do but observe with what Ecstasy of Passion the great Abraham's Soul was
seized at the first Breaking out of so transcendent a Mercy: He Bows himself to
the Earth with the same Prostration, as a poor Indigent would do that had
Scepters and Kingdoms Sealed up to him by a Royal Hand and Bounty. The former
Largesses of Canaan cost him but a few humble Cringes, but here he Sinks down
flat under the weight of this excessive Glory, the having a God secured to him
by Covenant. He lies Astonished on the Ground before him, struck down in
Amazement at the thought of so vast a Condescension of a God making over
Himself, with all the Glories of Heaven and Earth, to a contemptible Worm
extracted no higher than the poor Dust he lay on. When the frequent Sound of
the same miraculous Grace beating into the Ears of thee and me, Reader, has
not the least Energy upon our Hearts, nor has wrought any greater Concern upon
us, than if we had been hearing Lectures of Happiness in the Kingdom of the
Moon, and promising hopes of Promotion in Eutopia. Yet is God so pleased to see
Abraham thus Lowly, that taking him when he is Down, He Dubs him a Knight of
the Holy Order, and adds a Sacred Syllable more to his Name; who from the
single Honor of being the Great Father of the Thousands of Israel, shall be
now inaugurated the true Pope of the Universal Church of God, next and
immediately under his own Son. And Kings by more Natural Bonds than those of
Civility and Complement, shall truly call him Father, and be proud too to
derive their Royal Descent from the direct Line of his Blood. Thus is Abraham
placed in a Chair of State upon a Throne, with all the Scepters of the World
humbly lying at his Feet. His Humility has gotten him this Honor. Jecon^ah's
Wickedness shaved him into the despicable Cut of plain Coniah (as one unworthy
to fill up the Leaves of the Sacred Records with the full Syllables of his
Name:) But Abraham's Devotion must swell the Volume, and all Lips shall be Taxt
to pay a greater Tribute of Breath to his Title. It Is Critically observed that
the Hebrew Letter [He] that God interposed within Abraham's Name, is the
Principal of those Holy Letters which make up the Tetragrammaton, and is twice
made use of in the Ineffable Name of God; which was to mind him, that in this
Covenant, he did not as formerly, convey away his Blessings only; but now
should his Abraham communicate of his very Divinity. Startle not, Reader, it is
no more than what St. Peter investeth the whole Posterity and Church with, who
are Partakers of the Divine Nature of God.

Now because the best Women are a little Ambitious, and God knew how ill Sarah
would take it, should she not Participate in the same Dignity with her Lord,
Abraham with his own Hand shall deliver the Patent for a Ladyship, that from
the little Verge of her own Court shall extend it self, and Invest Her with a
Right of Precedence above all the Ladies of the World. As the Great Grandmother
of a Double Race of Kings, whose Sacred Diadems shall out-glitter all the
Crowns upon Earth. Let those of her Order remember that Sarah was a LADY of
Gods Immediate Creation, who though She be now Advanced to far greater Glory
than that, yet may they not forget the First of their Order, and ever think it
their Duty to give her Place in their Hearts.

To no more purpose do we bear the Sacred Name of God our Savior upon us, if
the Holy Nature of Jesus be not found within us, then did the Jews, the Carnal
Seed of the Spiritual Abraham, who by virtue of the Covenant, were named the
People of God, and called by his Name, by whose dishonorable Actions that Holy
Name of God was Blasphemed by the very Gentiles, and for which cause they that
bore his Name, now bear his Wrath, and are cut off from all the Prerogatives of
that Holy Calling. Take heed therefore, Christian, and Let every one that
names the Name of the Lord Jesus, depart from Iniquity.

And though the Privileges annexed to this Holy Name and Divine Nature, will
not be acknowledged to the Rightful Heirs of Abraham in this Foreign World,
where they are as Princes Incognito in a strange Country (their King himself
being but This Fellow in every impious Mouth, and they knew not whence he was)
yet has God given them the High Title of Sons and Daughters to Himself, (and
they shall be so, says the Lord Almighty:) Nay, a Name better than that, the
Mighty Heirs of God, and Joynt-Heirs with Christ, of the everlasting Kingdom,
where they shall be glorified together with Him who is even Gods Fellow, and
shall wear the immarcessible Crown; being every one of them Kings and Priests
unto God, they need little envy the swelling Titles of Exalted Ashes, whose
petty Honors will all in a Moment lie in the Dust, and be interred with
Themselves in the Dark Vault of an eternal Oblivion, when these are Enrolled in
the Registries of Everlastingness, and their blessed Names written by God
himself in the Book of Life. And how impossible is it for others that inherit
the Royalties of Abraham and Sarah, who Care not to derive them from the Great
Fountain of the true and ever-living Honor, will not present their Patents to
Heaven to be Confirmed there, but satisfy themselves with the bare Ecchoing
each others Titles, and bandying them from Lip to Lip, with such Ridiculous
Circumstances of Complement, as harden them against God himself, and makes all
the real Dignities of the great Abraham, very despicable in their Eyes; which
the Blessed Jesus perceived well enough when he pronounced the Incapacity of
such Men to participate of the True Honor which comes from God only, when
they satisfy themselves with receiving Honor one from Another. Would God that
all the Pagan Princes of the Earth would once remember to Dip their Robes in
the Blood of the Immaculate Lamb, and lay down their Crowns at the Sacred Feet
of the Holy Jesus, who would keep them no longer than till he had taken Measure
by them, how to fit their Royal Heads with Others more transparently Glorious,
against the time they shall come to wear them in his own Kingdom! And that all
the Inferior Shields of the Earth would Join themselves to the People of the
God of Abraham, who praise him for ever for all the Glories he has by this
Covenant secured to them in the endless Life.

And what else was the end of God in this Nobilitating Abraham and Sarah, by
drawing out their Titles into a more sweet and excellent Euphony, than only to
usher in and make way for the future Honors of a nearer Relation to Himself.
As Princes ordinarily clap Coronets on the Heads of those celebrated Beauties
whom they design to Advance and bring within their Curtains. So here the most
high God, in the drawing up the Covenants of Marriage between Himself and these
Holy Persons, is not unmindful to include the Article of an Honor
proportionable to the Dignity of the Match, and ever he Solemnize the Nuptials,
will affix a Majesty to their Names, which shall drown all the commemoration of
their Native Meanness, and mind them of the Royal Endowments they enjoy from
the Great Jointure which Enriches them with an unlimited Dowry both of Heaven
and Earth.

No wonder then that Abraham shrouds his Face with Shame and Blushing, in the
humble consciousness of his own Vileness, as thinking himself most unworthy the
Grace of being thus Promoted to the Glory of a Conjugal Union with an Almighty
Jehovah; and had his Posterity been as humble and sensible as himself was of
that exceeding Honor, they had never so treacherously run Whoring from so
great an Husband after Stocks and Stones, when Himself was ever so Faithful and
Constant to the Bonds of his Covenant, as it went against his very Heart to
write them a Bill of Divorce, (How shall I give thee up Ephraim?) but was ever
sending Messengers and Letters after them, to invite and persuade them to
remember themselves, and him to whom they were so strongly Allied and United,
beseeching them to return again to their first Husband: And though this was not
the common Custom of Men to receive again those Wives that had so often run
Away to play the Harlot with other Lovers, yet would Himself pardon all, and
entertain them again in Love and Peace: For I am married unto you, says the
Lord, Jer. 3.1. and 12. Will you take a View of the Marriage Covenants, and
observe, That though they be drawn up by God himself, yet to what Mighty
Advantage they Run on the Part of Abraham and his Heirs for ever?

First, I am God: And whatsoever I am in my Self, that will I be to thee; I
will be a God to thee.

Secondly, As I am God, I am Almighty, and Alsufficient, both for my self and
all my Creatures that shall close with me! I will make over the Fullness and
Alsufficiency of my Godhead to thee. There is nothing in it, (communicable to
the Creature) but what shall be secured to, and employed for Thee and Thine on
all occasions.

Thirdly, The very same Privilege shall be secure to all the Children of thy
Faith for evermore: I will be their God, and I do hereby firmly, and
unalterably Covenant with thee to be a God unto Thee and Them. To do and be
whatsoever a God can do and be to his People in Covenant with him.

Fourthly, I will confirm my part of these Covenants to thee and thy spiritual
Seed, by mine Oath which shall never be broken: And they shall be one day
further Ensured and Sealed in the Blood of my Son.

Now on the other side, what I require of thee Abraham, and all thy Seed that
shall enter into this Covenant after thee, is no more than (what every Woman
engages to her Husband) to be faithful and Loyal. I will be wholly to thee,
and thou shall be wholly to me. I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other
Gods but me: This is my Covenant therefore, thou shall Walk before me in
Vprightness, with a Perfect Heart, and a willing Mind. Thine Eye and Heart
shall be ever upon me, to admire thine own Happiness in all my Perfections:
Thou need not hunt after Creatures, with expectation of other Good than what
is secured to thee in my Self: Did thou know what a Portion thou have in a
God, thou would disdain to turn aside after Idols: Thou have mine
Alsufficiency made over to thee, out of which, as from an inexhaustible
Fountain, thou may draw out all thy Supplies. What need they run to Streams
that have a Command of the Springhead? Let thy Children be but Faithful and
Constant to me, and give themselves up by an adequate measure of Trust and
Confidence in my Truth and Covenant, relying wholly on my Wisdom and Goodness
in providing for them, and casting all their cares upon Me, they shall ever
reap the sweet Effects of that Recumbency, while they give me the Glory of
their Faith: I will never leave them, I will never forsake them, [(...),] I
will not, no, by no means I will not: While they keep up entire Affections
toward me, I will delight to do them good, with all my Heart, and with all my
Soul: But if they run Whoring from me, (for I am a Jealous God) I shall soon
discover the least Aberration of their unfaithful Hearts, and have Ways enough
(though Sharp and Thorny) to Hedge up their wandering Steps, and reduce them again
to their First Husband: But Integrity of Soul will be their greatest Glory, and
the higher their Affections shall arise by perfect Dependence upon me, the more
sweetly will all the streams of my Love and Goodness flow out upon them: I will
fill their Souls wit^ Joy and Peace in Believing: They shall taste Angels food,
and feast themselves with the Bread of Heaven: The very Marrow and Fatness of
my Bounty shall be their daily Repast: They shall not envy the Prosperities of
the Wicked, that are feeding themselves to an Eternal Slaughter: When the
ravishing sense of my Love alone shining in upon them, shall furnish out all
Varieties of ineffable Pleasures to them, they shall pity those that are
walking in the Shadows of Death, and See with none other but Brutish Eyes, when
the Beams of my Presence shall Gild all the Chambers of their Souls, and make a
continual Goshen there: When the World shall reproach and reject them, because
of their Fidelity to my Covenant, and they complain how much they suffer for
me; I will extend the Arms of my tender Mercies to receive them into mine own
Embraces and safety. And should some of them (as my Witnesses) be delivered up
to the Malice of their Enemies, and they Mercilesly kill them all the day long,
and lead them as Sheep to the slaughter; yet shall Death be so far from
separating them from my Love, that themselves shall be more than Conquerours
over all; while all the surviving of them may prepare their Eyes to see the
Vengeance, and their feet to be washed in the Blood of their Enemies. Is not
this laid up with me, and sealed among my Treasures? Treasures of Wrath which
shortly shall be poured on them, and fall down in whole Cataclismes of Judgment
on their Guilty Heads and Souls, who have eaten up my People as Bread.

The dread of Death must not tempt them to recede one Inch from their
Sincerity, since they have a God who is a Fountain of Life; and that little
little of it they breath out in the World, is not a Drop compared to the River
of Life they shall Swim in to Eternity: But that little (how little soever it
be) when Offered to my Glory, is so pleasing a Sacrifice, as cannot fail to
draw from mine Exchequer the singular Retributions of my Favor, on those happy
Souls, who so valorously surrender up their All to my Truth and Honor, in
assured Confidence of an happier Being in my Self. It Is the Triumph of my
Justice to render unto every Man according to his Work: As to their
Executioners the hotter Fires of my Wrath, and double Portions of my Plagues,
so more resplendant Crowns for the Loyal Heads of those who failed not to write
the Evidences of their Integrity and Love in the dearest Blood of their Hearts.
How preeious then in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints! Whose
Souls are so securely bound up in the Bundle of Life with the Lord their God,
that all their Enemies on Earth, that all the Devils in Hell cannot slacken the
Knots of that Union, by which they are fastened to Himself. Life is Theirs, to
fit them for, and Death is Theirs to bring them to his Glory, and blessed
Fruition of his Endless Love. And in nothing could God have manifested a
greater Love to his Abraham, than by prescribing a Duty so perfectly agreeable
to his own Holy Nature, which is Pure, Simple and Unmixt. He is what He is, and
cannot be any thing else than what he discovers Himself to be, the only True
and Faithful God, keeping Covenant and Mercy with them that love him and keep
his Commands: And it is Sincerity alone, Truth in the inward Parts, the Service
of a real and perfect Heart that he requires: He has showed thee, O Man! what
is good, and what does the Lord require of thee more, than to do justly, (as
Himself will) to love mercy, (as Himself does) and to walk humbly before him?
To be holy as he is holy, perfect as he is perfect; looking toward Him with
the simgle Eye of Fidelity and Love, and directing all thy Devotions to him
with Delight and Joy: Is he not thy Father, whom else should thou Reverence
and Love? Is he not thy God in Covenant with thee, whom else should thou
rejoice and delight in? No true Son of Abraham, who knows how Zecharies Soul
was ravished, when God after more than two Thousand years performed the mercy
promised; and in remembrance of his holy Covenant, which he swore to our
Forefather Abraham, sent his Great Heir into the World to confirm and seal it
with his Blood; will think it remote from the Story of Abraham's Life, if I
stop a little, and spend a Page or two in the opening the Bowels of this Mercy,
wherein his own Salvation is so nearly concerned, (and which have swelled up
the Volumes of so many of our Excellent Authors.) If the same Covenant were all
the Desire and all the Salvation of the Princely David, (with whom it was also
renewed) the Comfort whereof was the Joy and Rejoicing of his Heart, methinks
it might be some Refreshment here to every Heir of the same Promise.

A Brief Account of the Covenant of Grace.
KNow then, that by this Promise, I will be a God unto thee; Each Person of the
Holy Trinity is made over to them, to work personally and distinctly for them:
And true Believers have a real Propriety in each Person of the Blessed Godhead.
I will be thy God, says the Father here: And I will give my Son to them, [Vnto
us a Son is given] and I will pour out my Spirit upon them. Not a Communicable
Attribute of God, but what is made over, and put by this Covenant into the
possession of the Sons of Abraham to live on: Therefore David claims the
Strength of God as his own, and the Mercy of God as his own: Thou art the God
of my Strength, and the God of my Mercy. That Power and Mercy which thou have
secured to me for my Hope and Comfort, to make use of in all Extremities, and
against all Infirmities; and the whole Church claims the Benefit and Honor of
their Relation to God from no other Right. Doubtless thou art our Father. And I
will be a Father unto them, to act as a Father for them. So not any Merit or
Grace in Jesus the Son, but what is as certainly secured; whatsoever he was, or
did, or suffered, was all for their sake. The Fruit and Benefit of all most
certainly accrewable to Them. All the Operations of the Holy Spirit, sure and
certain to the Heirs of this Promise: They shall infallibly be convinced of
Sin, Converted to God, established in Grace, comforted in Affliction, and
prepared for Salvation. All the Decrees of Heaven run in their Favor, and all
Providence cooperate for their Eternal Good.

Jesus Himself is the Head of the Covenant, the first Federate, the
Cornerstone on whom is built the whole Fabric, the Contrivance whereof tho
secret and mysterious, transacted by Covenant between the Father and Himself:
Yet we find Eternal Life secured by Promise to every Believer before the
foundation of the World, on condition of such performances that Christ in
fullness of Time should appear in the World to perfect and accomplish: And some
of these Articles of the Covenant of Redemption, are expressly apparent to any
that carefully observe them in Isaiah 49. Jesus therefore is the first Elect,
but we Elected in him: He the first Called, and we Called by him. In Him is all
fullness dwelling, from which we receive Grace for Grace. He Commissionated,
sealed and sent, with the Offices of Prophet, Priest, and ^ing: Other Prophets
Commissioned under him, are sent to persuade and draw us into the Bonds of the
Covenant; these speak to the Ear, but He is the True Prophet, that effectually
works by speaking to the Heart. Him shall ye hear: I will allure her, I will
speak to her Heart, when I speak. See Margin Hosea 2.14. He draws us as he did
Abraham by Illumination, and giving us New Eyes to see God in the Beauty of his
Holiness, and the exceeding Riches of his Grace; Sin in its Sinfulness,
Deformity, Filthiness, and execrable Effects; Duty in the Reasonableness, Good,
and Profitableness of it; Our selves, as perfectly undone by Nature, and
further destroyed by Sin: All Creatures in their insufficiency, and weakness to
do us any good: All our Righteousness as filthy Rags, and nothing: Himself as
the only Refuge of Hope, and Salvation to be no where had but in him: He our
only Priest, sacrificing his own Body upon the Tree, and pouring out his own
Blood to expiate Sin, which the blood of Sacrifices could never take away, but
by this Offering Blotted out, removed to the distance of the East from the
West, buried in the depths of the Sea; Sought for but not found, forgotten and
remembered no more, freely and for ever pardoned; and the Handwriting that was
against us Cancelled, and nothing laid to our charge. It Is he makes an end of
Sin, and brings in Everlasting Righteousness, by which we are justified from
all things, and perfectly reconciled to God: He is our Peace, and since his
Return to Heaven, becomes our Advocate there, to plead the Merits of his own
Righteousness for the Justification and Acquitment of all the thankful Heirs of
Abraham: God hears Him always: His Blood speaks for us, and on that Account God
is but Just in Jorgiving our Sins, himself having paid the Ransom, and becoming
the great Propitiation. It Is from the prevalency of his Intercession, that he
is so Able to save all that come to him. Such an High Priest became us, our
Case desperate without Him: No satisfaction for the least sin possibly to be
made by our selves. Ten thousand Rivers of Oil, and the offering up the fruit
of our Bodies for the sin of our Souls, too mean a Sacrifice, and to no purpose
at all. Redemption cost more than so, and Man must let it alone for ever. The
poor carnal Sons of Abraham, going about to establish their own Righteousness,
could not make it stand, they too soon found It had no feet to subsist on. The
Galathians seeking to compound the Matter by an unnatural mixture of their own
with Christ's, were (by that attempt) in the Account of the Holy Ghost but Fools
and Bewitched. He alone the Lord our Righteousness.

Object. But how shall we be brought into it?

Ans. He is therefore a Great King, a Spiritual King, a King over Hearts; he
has Arguments to persuade us to lay down our Necks to his easy Yoke, and to
bear his lighter Burden: For he is a gentle Prince, and his Laws are not
Grievous or unsufferable; his Service is perfect Freedom. There is nothing
difficult to a willing Mind and a ready Heart, which himself is able to give; I
will give them a new Heart, and a new Spirit will I put within them; this (and
my own Spirit which also I will put in them) shall cause them to walk in my
Statutes and to keep my Judgments and do them, Ezekiel. 30.26. His Throne is
within, and all the Exercises of his holy Government transacted in the Court of
Conscience, where Himself sits Judge, (or the blessed Spirit his Vicar) over
every Thought of the Heart and Action of the Life. Not a vain Imagination but
is brought down and humbled; not an idle thought but what is captivated to the
obedience of Christ. It Is he that strikes the stony Rock, and the Waters gush
out; such a Rock was Peter, whom he smote but with a glance of his Eye, the Sun
dissolving the Ice, melted him all into Water; He went out and wept bitterly.
He sheddeth his Love into the Soul, and cold Mary is all in a Flame. He pours
in his Spirit of Joy, and Paul and Silas sing in the Stocks. He opens the
Prison doors, and the Shackles of Sin and Death fly off from the whole World,
lying in spiritual Captivity. He Prophesies over the dry Bones, and they come
together, take Life, rise up and follow him, as well through all Tribulations,
Sorrows, Sufferings from Men, Temptations, Buffetings, Persecutions raised by
the Devil, Fears, Disquietments, Dejections of their own Hearts, Infirmities,
Weaknesses, and Imperfections of their Duties; As Comforts, Encouragements,
Spiritual strength, present Sense of his Love, and secret Testimonies of his
Spirit, which is ever present with them, to Illuminate, Strengthen, Comfort,
Establish and Direct them; and therefore whosoever has not the Spirit of
Christ, is none of His. This holy King rules not immediately only by his
blessed Vicar above, but mediately also by his Subordinate Officers here below:
Whether (1.) Civil, whom His Subjects Obey, for his Sake and for Conscience
Sake, from a right Principle, (and not Brutishly,) in all their Lawful
Impositions agreeable to his Glory; they are ever Praying and Praising God for
them, yea though they be Persecuted by some of them. Or (2.) Ecclesiastic, whom
they Receive, Honor, Love and Obey as his Ambassadors, and such as are sent
by Him, to break to them the Bread of Life, whom they therefore follow, and
yield themselves up to their Lord, by a gracious Conformity to the holy
Doctrine brought them by his Ministers, and Adorning that Doctrine by a
suitable conversation in all things; Abounding in every good word and work, and
approving themselves the faithful Servants of God, in all the duties of both
Tables, having an equal Respect to all the Commandments of their Lord; and
approving themselves to Men by every Act of moral Righteousness and Daty: They
shall be at the last day approved by him, to be no Hypocrites, vain Pretenders,
proud and empty Professors, self-seeking Designers, or troublesome dividers of
his Church and People; but the True, Hearty, Sincere, Rooted, Living and
Fruitful Members of his Mystical Body, passing here the time of their
Sojourning in filial fear and love, and persevering in all Fidelity and
Constancy of Obedience to all the revealed Laws of their great King, as their
Fore-father Abraham did; they at last receive the end of their Faith, and
everlasting Salvation in Heaven, where with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the Heirs of their Covenant, they are blessed and happy, in and with God, and
the Lord Jesus for evermore.

Come Reader, have thou no Heart to accompany the blessed Communion of Saints
to this glorious Home? Why do thou then bear about thee the Seal of the same
Covenant, and art Crossed for the Holy Land, and have received the sacred Name
of Christ upon thee, and thou pretendest to be a Candidate for Heaven, and wilt
rage against any that will dare to sweep away the Cobweb of thine Hopes; when
alas, it hangs by a slender Thread, and the lightest hand breaks every Cord of
it away, and down it falls, and thy self with it into utter despair and Ruin.
See whether thine Anchor have better hold than theirs, whose Dooms the great
Heir himself pronounced. The Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out, Matt.
8.12. So little will it avail thee to walk for a while (alas! for a Moment) on
the Borders of the blessed Land, if thine own Infidelity and thy treacherous
Heart shut thee out at last. Either Rend off the Title, and wipe away the drops
of that holy Water (issuing from the Wounds of the Crucified Savior) wherewith
thou were once Baptized into that sacred Name, and renounce the hopes of that
glorious Profession; Or else be Faithful to thine Articles; and give thy self
wholly to him who has given himself to thee. Nothing less than the Hearty
devotion of thy whole Soul and Life unto God, can baer any reasonable
Proportion with his Royal Bounty, or give any convincing Demonstration of thy
Real Gratitude; less than this God will not Take, less than this thou can not
Offer. Every Imperfection, and falling short of this must be lamented with
bitter Tears, wherein the poor Heart swims back again to better Duty and
stricter Watchfulness, and the broken Bones are jointed in to greater strength
and Establishment, made fit to walk with a more direct and even Progress in the
holy Path, rejoicing in their own Integrity. But if instead of this, thou be
found wandering in the Wilderness of Error and Vanity, walking after the
imagination of thine evil Heart, according to the course of the ungodly World,
and not after God; know that thy Covenant is Sealed with melting Wax, and thou
thy self art holding it to the Flame, in the light whereof thou may read thy
despairs, and find thy self in no better condition than those Sons of Abraham
whose Unbelief and Obduration has canceled the whole Effects of it, and
walking up and down in the Earth as the Deplorable Monuments of divine
Indignation, with Antipathies as great as ever against the blessed Person and
Doctrine of the mighty Redeemer. Thou may indeed (as some of them) have a
goodly Portion and Heritage here below, Consolations suitable to thine own poor
carnal Heart, (and God will not break the first Articles of a plentiful Canaan
in the World, thy Belly shall be filled with hidden Treasures:) But remember
then that thy Tenure is but for Life, and an uncertain Lease which may expire
e're to Morrow comes, and the Morning Sun may find thee a Carkase; the Fearful
case of him in the Gospel, who went to Bed well, but awaked in Hell. God has
reserved no second Portion in the next World, but that of Fire and Brimstone.
The Heavens shall reveal thine Iniquity, and the Earth shall rise up against
thee, the Increase of thine House shall depart, and thy Goods shall flow away
in the day of his Wrath: There is the portion of a wicked Man from God, and the
Heritage appointed him by God. Away vain Man to thy Closet with David, and
consider the deplorable condition of These: Make have to the Sanctuary, and
there understand their latter end. It may be when thou see the Slipperiness
of their Steps, and how soon they are brought to a fearful end, thou will pour
out at least a sigh for a better Portion, and to enjoy a more lasting
Inheritance in God. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto
thy People; O visit me with thy Salvation, that I may see the good of thy
Chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with
thy Inheritance. A very Sorcerer can breath out his Groans for this Mercy, that
He might die the Death of the Righteous, and his last end be like his. It Is a
fearful Stupidity that terminates all thy desires in the Creature, and lays
thee as one Dead in the Grave of Insensibility, without natural affection to
thine own Soul, or the least Devotion for Abraham's God.

God having drawn the fair Indentures containing the Covenants between Himself
on one part, and Abraham and his faithful Children on the Other, will now have
them Confirmed by such irrefragable Obligations as shall make them sure and
unalterable for ever. They shall be first Sealed in the Blood of Abraham, and
hereafter in the Blood of his Great Heir; and himself will establish them with
a Solemn Oath, which you find Genesis 22.16. And every one of Abraham's Posterity
and Family, shall under pain of Death come in and Seal for himself, entering
into a Sacrament, to be True and Faithful to the Articles of the holy League.
They with their great Father, must wear the remembrance of so vast a
Privilege, not on their Hearts only, but their Flesh too. Abraham consenting
to this Covenant, and giving up himself unto God (who had now given himself
unto Abraham,) must evidence that Consent and yield up Possession, by suffering
a Part of Himself to be cut off, as a little Turfe taken off from the Field to
give Livery and Seizin of the whole to the Owner: And by this he shall be known
and distinguished to be holy Land, separated from all the huge Common of the
Earth, to be a peculiar Enclosure unto God: All the World besides Profane, and
left as wild Beasts to Graze on the Mountains, while himself and his Family is
marked up as a little flock for God himself to feed and take care of* His
Posterity grew so proud of this Privilege, that they little valued the Princes
of the World that bore not this Impression upon them. The Sechemitish Prince
must submit to Circumcision e're ever he Bed a Daughter of Abraham^^ And David
knew no reason why his little Body that was fortified with the Divint
Signature, might not Buckle with an Uncircumcised Philistine though never so
Strong. They grew so High, that at last they thought themselves secure against
God Himself, and hoped to baffle his very Justice. While they had Abraham to
their Father, the Baptist had enough to do to beat them off from so vain a
confidence, and to convince them how little it availed them to glory in
Immunities when they were false and unfaithful to them. 'Twas Death to them to
hear that sinners of the Gentiles should be admitted to the privileges
themselves enjoyed and despised; But their Great Father (who mistook not the
conditions of the Covenant, and kept close to them) was transported with the
Reasonableness of all the Articles on his own part, and the Glory of those on
Gods, with a brave Readiness of Mind that always corresponded with every
Dictate of the Divine Will, prepares himself to Bleed, and little felt the
smart in the Flesh that signalized to him the infinite Mercies of God to his
Soul. Not only his Spirit but his very Flesh is willing, and is glad that at
that Age he had any Blood to shed at the Command of God: He demurrs not in the
least, nor will sleep e're he yields the Fruits of a cheerful Compliance. There
is no such sincere Obedience^ as the present. It Is dangerous to consult Carnal
Reason, or call Flesh and Blood to Council, where its own Interests are like to
be curtailed. While the Impetus of Love and Zeal is upon him, will Abraham
sacrifice himself, and yield his Flesh to a Sacrament that shall sign and seal
to him security from all the dangers of its Lusts, and assure him that all the
Powers of Sin were perfectly baffled in that Obedience; and should be as truly
mortified as that Dead Skin cut off from his Body, and cast away.

The Great Man that had so full an Interest in the Affections of his Family,
was not at a Loss for Arguments to prevail with them to act a Duty so
exceedingly profitable to themselves, which he expounded to them in the several
parts of its Excellency, and further recommended by his alluring Example. In
vain do we impose on others a burden we shrink from our selves. He exacts not
any more from them, than what himself and his little Ishmael should do before
them: He was not to dwell in Abraham's House who would not close with him in
all the parts of his Worship. They had poured the Blood of many a Beast
together in Sacrifice, now they must bleed together themselves in their own
Persons. 'Twas but a superfluity they offered (...) a Free Will Offering to
God, representing to him the Devotion of all unto his Service. It were well if
we could cut off our Superfluities too, that are so like to undo us:
Circumcision is in fashion and a Mercy still, when by God himself effectually
made upon the Heart.

Of how vast a Consequence is the Piety of Princes, whose Actions, either Good
or Evil, draw the whole Universe with them, to attend them in the next World!
By the Example of their Goodness Men flock in whole shoals to the Service of
God, and by their Profaneness they fly as fast from it. Hapyy was the least
Skullion in the Family of Abraham, who partaking of the Ordinances of the true
Church, excelled all the Pagan Princes of the Earth, that were Strangers from
the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World: So much
better is it to be a Doorkeeper in the house of the Lord, than to live and
reign in the Tents of Wickedness: Let us therefore again take up David's
Petition, Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy
People; O visit me with thy salvation, for I have none in Heaven but thee, and
there is nothing in Earth that I desire in comparison of thee.

The Flesh is too traitorous a Friend to carry on long the Interests of the
Soul. The Circumcision made with hands on the Body, profited as little as the
Engravement afterward on the Tables of stone: God is forced to carry it
deeper, and to make a more effectual Incision upon the Inward Parts e're ever
the true Circumcision is effected. Our selves see that all the washing of the
Flesh prevails not to wrince away the Filth of the Spirit, 'till himself comes
to Baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, and makes the very Conscience to
answer readily to all the Will of God. The Holy Word evaporates into Air, and
has no place in us, 'till the Essential Word makes the penetration, and gives
it a Lodging in the Soul. And though inconsiderate Men little think it, they do
but swallow their own Damnation, 'till their Eyes discern the Lord's Body in
his own light; those that have Eat and Drunk in his Presence shall be turned
off at the last Day with a doleful Discedite, Depart from me for I know you
not. Prayer it self unless selvidg'd by Resolution ravels out into nothing; so
little trust is there to the best of external Privileges, where they are not
accompanied with the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. He is not a Jew
which is one outwardly: Circumcision is that of the Heart in the Spirit, and
not in the letter, whose praise is not of Men but God.

Though the Ordinances in themselves are ineffectual without God, yet being of
Divine Institution, they bind us to a constant and faithful waiting upon him in
the Use of them, for who knows when or how soon he may work by them? The
pretense of their invalidity give us no License to depart from them, or to lay
them by; since here we see utter Excision menaced against every Child of
Abraham that should not bleed by the Circumcising Knife. There are some
benefits which the most wicked Men enjoy together with the Holy in the outward
Communion of the Church, for which they shall pay their Homage, and yield a
subjection (such as it is, though hypocritical and involuntary) they shall sit
before him as his People do, and make some shows at least of a real Conformity
and Union with Him, though their Hearts run after Covetousness, and they are as
Traitorous as Judas, who yet had his Sop dipped in the same Dish with Jesus.

God who had hitherto feasted his Abraham with a Banquet of Promises, (which
only his Faith is to feed on all his Life long, and must depart the World in
Assurance of their Truth when his Eyes should be shut up in Death;) will yet
present him with one Dish which himself shall see, and all his Senses ravished
with the very taste of. Sweet Meats are kept for the last Course, and help to
digest all the rest the better. Judge Reader, with what Ears Abraham receives
the Tidings of an Heir from the Body of his dearest Sarah, who at once is made
a Lady and a Lady Mother: She shall have a Son that shall own and double that
Honor together. It Is Astonishing News, and Abraham's Feet can hold him no
longer, he embraces the Mercy of a Savior and a Son with a lowly Prostration:
Blessings multiply upon him as Duties are multiplied by him. No Man shall ever
lose by a munificent God. Adam parts with a Rib and behold a Wife; Abraham with
a superfluous Skin, and behold a Son. The Heart of Man cannot bear the Kisses
of Divine Love without dissolving into Joy, and Abraham's Soul is so full of it
now, that it forces a vent at his Mouth: He laughs out the excess of that
Comfort which seems so pleasingly to oppress him. And God himself is so
delighted to see his Abraham thus humbly and innocently Merry at the Thoughts
of Sarah's Breeding, that while the Name of Isaak lives, it shall never be
forgotten that Abraham laughed thus reverently in Faith; and as sometimes one
who finds that he has gratified his Company by telling a Story, which has
proved so acceptable and affecting beyond expectation, will repeat it again, in
Assurance of that Virtue in the repetition that will still keep up the Humor;
so God disdains not to make a Rehearsal of what he saw sounded so sweetly in
the Ears of his dearest Friend; Sarah thy Wife shall bear thee a Son: Indeed
she shall, v. 19. Tho thine Age of an Hundred, and hers of Ninety Years may
make it seem impossible to Nature, yet I have revealed to thee mine Almighty
Power, to give it an Evidence in this Grace. God is already teaching Abraham
the exercise of his Faith in his Alsufficiency; and he is no dull Scholar, but
presently takes out the Lesson, and is dandling Isaak in the Arms of his Faith,
before he is Conceived in the Womb of his Mother.

Could we Believe with Abraham's Faith, we should Rejoice with Abraham's Joy.
There is no true Pleasure but what is Spiritual, all the Worlds Huzzah's but as
the Noise of Thorns, which Crackle themselves into Nothing. Solomon commits the
Vanity to Bedlam, the proper place for the Franticks, that distractedly Laugh
while they are little sensible what Tears they shall Weep in Hell, Eccl. 2.2.
Can thou be Merry, Can thou Play,
Silly Soul, who Sinned to Day?
In Heaven, where there is no Sin, there is Fullness of Joy: In Hell where there
is nothing but Sin, there is nothing but Sorrow; but on Earth Men Sin, and
rejoice in it too, yet feel no Sorrow, and no wonder when they feel no Sin, as
the Distempered are sensible of no Madness. These are packed away by Abraham's
Great Heir, into their own Place, to see if they can be as Jolly there too; Woe
unto you, etc. The Merry Frolic of a short day, dying into an Everlasting
Night of Horror and Torment.

But for a greater Increase of Abraham's Joy, he receives not the News of a Son
only, but an Heir of the Covenant; He shall inherit the Blessings of Grace and
Glory. God intends Isaac for Heaven ever ever he had Life or Conception. Where
are those that quarrel at the comfortable Doctrine of Election, which God
himself Preaches to Abraham? Well might he Laugh again, for so good a Son
makes a glad Father: It Is well when Parents and Children go not two ways in
the dreadful Day. Isaac is sure of a place in his Fathers Bosom, in the
everlasting Kingdom. When the Seed of Free Grace is Sown into a good Field, it
never fails of a Crop; but where it falls in Barren Ground, expect nothing but
Weeds. Too many want the Ingenuity to make Grateful Returns for Spiritual
Mercies. Men are not only Evil because God is Good, but that very Goodness
makes them Worse; they tire his Patience, and adventure to make trial to what
length the Dimensions of his Long-suffering may be extended. But the brave
Abraham, under the foreknowledge of Gods Decree, is so far from slackening his
Duty in the careful Education of Isaac into Piety; that looking on him as an
Heir of Heaven, he was ever dressing him up in such Robes as he knew would be
worn, and could be never out of Fashion there: He endeavors to make him a
greater Proficient (if possible) than himself. And methinks Isaac's whole Life
was nothing else but a lively Comment on the distinguishing Mercy of God
toward him.

True Grace has that excellent Property to enlarge the Heart into an Universal
Concern for General Good, and wishes Epidemical Happiness to all. Some quarrel
at that charitable Supplication of the Church in the Litany, That it might
please thee to have Mercy upon all Men; Never remembering that God would have
All Men to be saved, and has Sworn, That he has no pleasure in the death of a
Sinner, but rather that they turn themselves and Live: If they will not, yet
shall they not want the Sacred and Hearty Prayers of the Church that they
might. Neither can God take it ill of any that wishes no more than himself
does; nor does Man know what Individual Person shall miscarry. Abraham had the
Grace of a Public Spirit, who doing what he could to further the Happiness of
each Servant in his Family, could not be without working of Heart for any Child
of his Bowels. And no wonder then that hearing of all the Mercies of the
Covenant transferred to Isaac, he seems to entertain some Jealous Apprehensions
of the future Estate of Ishmael, and falls on his Knees to entreat, that the
whole Shower of Divine Grace might not so fall on the One, but that some
sprinklings of his Favor may Sanctify the Other also. God forbid that any
thing descending from the Body of Abraham should fall short, or miscarry of the
Great Salvation. Therefore intending to give a Charge upon Heaven, he sharpens
the Point of his Arrow with an acute Passion, that it might with deeper
Penetration enter the Heart of God, and bring back thence a Blessing upon his
Child: O that Ishmael might live before thee! O that he may! Prayers shot from
our own, seldom miss the Bosom of God, when those that are sent at Random lose
their way and act no Execution. He desires not that God would break the Links
of that Golden Chain, to which his Decrees have fastened the Salvation of all;
or that Ishmael might be dispensed with from the Duties of the Covenant, to
which his Mercies are annexed: But O that Ishmael might live before thee! be
endued with those holy Principles of Grace and Spiritual Life, which might
enliven all his Affections, and Consecrate all his Actions to his Glory, and
might be such a one as himself, sincere and upright before him, through all the
whole course of his Pilgrimage in the World. 'Twere Rudeness indeed, to impose
upon God for Salvation to such a one that should make no Care or Conscience of
living before him. But O that Ishmael may Glorify thee here! It Is Holiness
that Abraham begs for his Son (he knows that God would not pass out of his
usual Road to save him in an extraordinary manner.) And what less could a
Father do, that was so well acquainted with the Happiness attendant on the
Faithful Discharge of every Duty and Service to God? Eyes that ^ierce into the
Glories of Eternity, and know they are attainable by Prayer, quickly get the
consent of the Knees to bend for them, while the Heart enflamed with all the
Ardencies of Passion and Zeal, makes its Pursuits after them. He knows not what
Salvation means, that makes but slow and heavy Motions toward it; Cold and
indifferent Petitions, teach but God to deny them. We are but in Jest for
Heaven, till God give us Eyes to see and know how great the Hope of his Calling
is, and how unsearchable the Riches of the Glorious Inheritance of the Saints
are: When the Light Shone from Heaven upon Paul, then Behold he prays; he had
made many a Pharisaical Prayer to little purpose, but now he prays Indeed.
Those are the best Intercessors at the Throne of Grace for others, that have
prevailed there already for Themselves. The Parent that has prayed down M^rcy
upon his own Soul, is most likely to speed for his Child. Abraham had so often
made his Attacks upon Heaven, that he knew how to Sling the Stone of his
Devotions to an Hand-breadth, that it could not miss. And indeed God had set
himself as his Mark, and given him to fair an Advantage against him, that it
was impossible for him not to Hit. I will be a God unto thee, to do all that a
God can do for thee, was such a Broadside as might well secure him from Despair
of Execution. Abraham pleads the Articles already, and it being the first Claim
since the Sealing of them, he left it to God himself to consider how little
Honor it would be to him to deny it. And Abraham does but humbly plead for
what God had granted him already, and his Faith might reverently draw out from
him. So amazing is the Privilege of the Covenant, that God seems to own, that
he has left himself without Power to withold from any Heir the reasonable
Requests of his Soul. Concerning the work of mine hands, command ye me. So
Omnipotent a Grace is humble Prayer: While they are yet speaking, I will
answer. See Abraham, thy Petition comes flying back already with Gods Fiat upon
it. As for Ishmael I have heard thee, behold I have blessed him. He is thine by
Nature, and shall be mine by Grace; He shall become a Nation, and the Great
Father of Twelve Princes, (but these degenerous, and all of them together not
comparable to One of the Kings Issuing from Isaac's Loins.) How sweet and
obliging is the present return of our Prayers! Arbaham is the Type of the Great
Intercessor. He sees the Travel of his Soul and is satisfied; The fervent
Prayer of this Righteous Man is effectual and prevailing. Hence our Divines
conclude the Salvation of Ishmael, (as Lyra, etc.) though his Posterity were
cut off from partaking of the Fatness of the Root and true Olive, and grew
naturally Wild and too Sour for Heaven; but for Ishmael himself I have heard
thee. What Faithful Son of Abraham bears not his Fathers Heart, yearning after
the same Blessing for the Children of his own Bowels, and can the Mother forget
her sucking Child, that she should not travel again in a second Birth, until
Christ be formed in him? Monica's Prayers and Tears brought forth an happy Son
to her self, and Glorious Father to the Church. We are not more bound to Feed
and Cloth, than to Intercede for them. To little purpose do Men Sweat and
Labor to provide and hoard up Estates for them, while they are unconcerned in
the One thing needful, the better part which shall never be taken from them.
Abraham knew what a Rich Portion an All-sufficient God was, without whose
Favor the whole World could not make up an Happiness to his Ishmael. Blessed
are those Children, whose Fathers have Abraham's Spirit and Interest in God,
and miserable are those Children who are not dutiful to such Parents, and
thankful for that Interest.

Behold a Felicity Great as this Life is capable of! A Favorite of Heaven
dressed up into all the Perfections of Blessedness, by the infinite Bounty of
God: The Treasures of Providence flowing in upon him in streams of Riches and
Wealth: Those attended by Honor and Greatness, and all crowned with a Gracious
Heart to improve them. His Soul brim full of Spiritual Comfort, not a Fear or
Doubt that clouds the Serenity of his Thoughts, ravished with the sweet Sense
of Divine Love, and Assurance of endless Happiness, as secure as the Word and
Oath of a God can make it. Blessed with One Son already growing up to be a
great Nation and Father of Princes, and with Another to come, who shall be
Greater than he; A Father of Kings, and the mighty Heir of the everlasting
Covenant: Not a Servant but who is graced with the Privileges of Divine
Favor, and bearing the Impress of Gods Love and Kindness upon him. Come all ye
Princes of the Earth, Light up all the Tapers of your Earthly Glory, Shine
forth in the brightest Beams of your Splendour, display all the Ensigns of your
Royalty, Muster up all the Armies of your Power and Force, Repeat all your
swelling Titles of Majesty and Dominion, Boast the whole Exchange of your
Pleasures and Delights: How infinitely short will ye come of this one Blessed
Friend of God! Yours only a very Gleam and Shadow of Happiness, His a true,
real and substantial one; Yours a Glory embittered with Cares, interrupted with
Tears, Tainted with Lusts, Laden with Guilts, Subjected to Loss and Dangers,
ending in Misery and Death: While His is a Crown without Thorns, Laughing at
Fears, Unpolluted with Filth, Impossible to be Forfeited, growing up into a
Celestial Glory, and shining as long as God himself in the brightness of
Eternity.

CHAP. VIII.
Abraham entertains the Angels that bring him and his Lady the News of Isaac's
Nativity. His Intercession for the five Cities, etc.

FUll Twenty and five years had Isaac lain in the Womb of the Divine Promise,
since first a Seed was secured unto Abraham. He must be a Miraculous Son whose
Parents had not all this while been Dead enough to make way for the Power of
God to appear in his Birth. When all subordinate means become wholly defective
and desperate, then is the proper season for Omnipotency to work. Through all
this Series of Years, had Abraham humbly waited in Faith and Patience, upon the
God that could not deceive him; and behold now his dim Eyes shall see the
Desire of his Soul. Thou may not tarry half so long for an Heaven, Reader, as
Abraham did for a Son, ever thine Eyes behold the Salvation of God; do but
Exercise the same Grace with the same Confidence (for faithful is he that has
promised) and verily thine expectation shall not fail. Some thousands of Years
did the Seed of Abraham and Isaac wait for the Accomplishment of the greater
Promise of that Heir, who at his coming should Bless all the World, when in the
very Gray Hairs of Time, and upon the Deathbed of their expiring Hopes, God
performed his promised Mercy to the Spiritual House of Israel. The carnal
Family was grown by that time so faint and short-sighted, that when he came and
made his Appearance to them, they could not discern, but fell a questioning
whether he were the very true Heir or no: They could not believe it to be Him,
they had no Eyes to behold his Glory; and besides, they were Jealous of his
Voice. Nor was he Gay enough to answer the Ends they expected from him. The
Roman Yoke had galled their Necks, and he seemed to be no great Deliverer, they
had no Work to do for a Spiritual Prince, nor liked they his Discourses of an
Invisible Kingdom, they loved This too well to fol^ow him beyond their present
Interests, which he appeared not much to Favor, and therefore ^nanimously Vote
him an Impostor, closing in with their own Tyrant against Him; They Indict Him
of Treason against Caesar, and pursued the Articles so hotly, that they never
left him till they saw Him Dead on the Cross; which God took so Grievously from
them, that he Smote them into so perfect Blindness and Distraction, that with
the Sodomites they are groping in the Dark, and looking for the Door that gives
Entrance into Heaven, but cannot find it to this day, and are yet ridiculously
waiting for Him, that sixteen hundred years ago, and more, had his happy
Nativity into the World. Miserable Men, they knew not the day of their
Visitation, and now it is hid from their Eyes.

To a fair length had Abraham Spun out the Thread of his Hopes, which now shall
be wound up in one Bottom of Fruition. He that was to come, shall come, and
tarry no longer: Patience is an inseparable Companion, from a lively Faith in
the Divine Promises. How surely shall the Decrees of God in due time be
delivered of the Blessings that are in them, to crown up all long Suffering
into Joy and Pleasure! Thus while this happy Man is sitting at the door of his
Tent, with a Soul full of Divine Contemplation and Comfort, Behold, Three
Persons, (in Appearance Men, in Reality Angels clothed in their Shapes) sent
from Heaven to his Sarah, with Orders to provide a Cradle for the little Great
Heir of Abraham's Hopes and Prayers, that now shortly shall make his welcome
Appearance into the World: He accosts them with a Majesty and Humility sweetly
mixed, and becoming well his Great Quality: They may not pass by him without
receiving some Royal Marks of his Courteous and Hospitable Soul: Generosity is
the Rich Enamel of Greatness, the very Life of it, without which it loses its
Essence. Abraham is the Copy of the truest Gentility, as of the strongest Faith
in the World, to let Princes know that Honor is not incompatible with Piety:
He had received his Education from the Court of Heaven, and accommodates his
demeanor perfectly to the Model prescribed him from above. He participates of
the Nature of Him who spreads the Table of his Bounty for all his Creatures to
sit at. He has nothing but what is at the Service of every one: These were
Strangers to him, yet shall not part away from his Royal Tent ever they become
his Guests. He Addresses to one who seems the chiefest of the Three, and (with
greater Earnest than others can crave it) beseeches them to give him the Honor
of their Company, and themselves the Refreshment of a short Repast. Behold
Abraham at home, watching Opportunities of doing Good, courting very Strangers
to receive his Entertainment, doubling the Invitation to clear it from the
Jealousy of a Complement, and afterward his Cheer to Free himself from the
ill Reputation of a Churl. They are Alien from Abraham's Spirit, who void their
Houses to avoid their Duties, and hide themselves from their own Flesh; or if
they keep home themselves, are yet from home to all others, and (what Job could
not) love to Eat their Morsel alone, who are sometimes Accursed to that degree
of Baseness and Cruelty to their own Bodies, that they starve Themselves to
save the Charges of Living; God has given them Wealth enough, but no Power or
Heart to eat thereof, they live by Contemplation on what they have, and never
adventure to pass into Fruition, this is a sore Judgment. Expedition heightens
the Civility, Abraham hasts to Sarah; Make ready quickly; and himself ran to
the Herd: His kindness must not hinder them in their Progress, Time is
precious, the whole Day was not designed for the Belly. Woe unto them that rise
early in the morning that they may follow strong Drink, that continue until
Night, till Wine inflame them.

The Master of the Feast, is yet ignorant of the Quality of his Guests. There
is no judging of inward worth by outward Appearance. Since a plain Vesture once
Shrouded the King of Glory from the Eyes of Men. Who many times before the
uniting of his Divinity with humane Flesh, was pleased in Old Time to assume
the Shape of Man, and pass Visits upon his dearest Servants. His delights were
with the Sons of Men. He was no less Person than the Son of God, for whom
Abraham was preparing, attended on by his Angels in the same form, tho (by
conjecture) somewhat inferior in Appearance of Habit. What a stately Embassy
was this to an Abraham! He is a Mighty Prince indeed, to whom the Kings Son is
deputed Legate: Isaac (as Jesus himself) has Angels to Prophecy his
Conception; and now is Abraham giving Order for the Annunciation Dinner to
those Guests as never had Stomach for any; but have Spiritual Food of their
own, more proper to their holy Natures, while this shall be digested all into
Air: Yet Nine Months hence shall Sarah find the Milk again in her own Breasts,
more genuinely to suckle her little Son. The Collation is taken for the greater
Pleasure under a Tree, which then was honored in lending her Shade to the Sun
himself, by an humble Dilatation of her Branches over his Glorious Head. And
Abraham waited in Person, to teach us that while we do our Duty to Men, at the
same instant we Act it to God himself, and do but honor him in showing Respect
to our fellow Creatures: Nor need we fear that we forget our selves, while we
intend it as Glory to him. So well did Abraham demean himself in this humble
Service, that the Holy Guest, to whom he performed it, disdained not an
Imitation of his Father, when he Took on himself the form of a Servant, and
came not to be ministered to, but to minister. The Head of Angels washing the
Feet of Men. The Lower we sink in Humility, the Higher shall we rebound in
Glory.

But where is Sarah? Where is she but where she should be, within her own
Apartment? Had the Guests been of her Sex, she had not failed to have waited on
them with the same Officiousness and Duty; but now is Observant enough in
confining her self to her own Province, giving an Example to all her Daughters,
of Modesty and Obedience to their own Husbands. Though she give them not her
whole Presence, yet she lends them an Ear; the Contiguity of her Tent to the
Tree gives her advantage of overhearing their Discourse; and while she
attentively listens, finds her self concerned in the Conference. Happy that
Soul who hearkening to the blessed Words of the same Jesus, while he speaks
not of us only, but to us in his Ordinances, and in us by his Spirit. I will
hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak Peace. Thus Sarah
hearkens, and hears Good News; yea, so good, that her Faith is at a loss to
believe it, and she imagines that these Men only Complement her Husband in
Discourse, which (they think) will be most Grateful to him; and therefore she
laughs at the Jest, confuting its Vanity by a kind of Retortion, which is often
made use of to a ridiculous Argument: The which, how closely soever she had
Compressed within the Concave of her Breast; yet could she not detain it from
the Ears of a God, to whom our darkest thoughts are equally discernable with
the loudest Exclamations. While she is weighing Omnipotence in the Scales of
her own Judgment, and fancying it too light to encounter with her own Weakness,
she renders her self justly liable to severe Censure. Wherefore did Sarah
laugh? is any thing too hard for God? The God who is able to raise up Children
to Abraham of stones, might surely be thought as able to do it by his own Wife,
how Hopeless or Incapable soever. The Reproof falling so heavy on Sarah, and
Abraham being ignorant of her Guilt, makes him begin to suspect that his Guests
were more than Men, and that they carried about them Omniscient Ears. Man knows
no more than what he draws from the outward Organ; but he that made the Ears,
needs none himself to convey Knowledge to him. Both Abraham and Sarah laugh at
the Tidings of a Son, yet is Sarah's laughing an Act perfectly different from
that of her Husbands; He laughing in Faith and Joy, she in Distrust and
Unbelief. God has Mercy on the Infirmities of his Servants, Sarah is reproved,
but not rejected; the Reproof strikes upon her Conscience, and makes her
afraid, That Fear casts her into a further Guilt. She denies that she laughed,
and is shamefully convinced of what she knew her self Conscious: Yet shall not
all this invalidate the Decree. God will have Mercy on whom he will, let Sarah
Laugh and deny it too; yet God will not deny himself: Sarah shall have a Son.

The Embassy thus happily concluded, the Legates depart, they have a Commission
to execute of a different Nature e're they return into Heaven. Abraham that he
might not be defective in the least part of his Duty, performs the last Act of
his Hospitality, and genteelly brings them on their way. He had kindly invited
them, liberally treated them, now he as Courteously dismisseth them: He Ran to
call them in at the first, and afterward Ran to the Herd for Provision for
them: He stood waiting upon them while they took it; yet still has he Feet to
travel with them. Thus Good Men never fail in doing their Duty: they go on from
Strength to Strength; They shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not
faint. Abraham's vigorous Heart adds Sinews to his feeble Joints. We should
never complain of tired Limbs, if we had but zealous Affections: Get but
Abraham's Company into thine Heart, thou will have Abraham's Heart in the same
Company: 'twas when Christ was not with them, that the three Disciples fell
Asleep.

At the steering of their Course toward Sodom, I doubt not but Abraham's Heart
began to Throbb: He was no Stranger to the Villainies of those Cities, and the
approach of such Inquisitors as these (he fears) will bode them little Good. A
less skilful Augury may serve to foretell the Destruction of Wickedness; yet is
he modestly Silent, and dares not enquire into the Mysteries of God. It Is ill
prying into the Estate of Others, till we find some sure ground of Security to
our selves. But Abraham is the Friend of God, and Communication of Secrets is
one of the Veins that conveys Life and Strength to the whole Body of
Friendship; it is not every one that is admitted into the Cabals of Princes.
Abraham is a Favorite, and fit to be one of the Privy Council of Heaven: God
that had honored him by a Revelation of the secrets of his Love to himself,
cannot keep from him the discovery of his Intentions of Wrath on the Wicked.
Abraham shall know that his God can be as Just as Good, and that few partak'd
of the special Privileges that himself was blessed in. It Is no small
Obligation that lies upon the Faithful, from the Knowledge of their differing
in Condition from the worst of Men, only by distinguishing Mercy. What are we
that thou should manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the World. Faith
grows up to a perfect Stature, by the Knowledge of every dispensation of God.
The Prophets enforce their Doctrines from the Examples of the fiercest
Executions of Vengeance. Pass ye unto Calneh, and see, etc. Abraham, who
hereafter should read Lectures upon Sodoms Flames, to affright his Children and
Family from Sodom's Lusts, shall first hear with his Ear, and afterward see
with his Eye the pernicious and dreadful Desolation that Sin had made upon
them, that with greater sense of those Calamities he might terrify others
against the Sins that procured them: God knowing how powerful Application so
Experienced a Preacher as Abraham, would surely make from such a Text. Shall I
hide from Abraham the thing which I do, etc. For I know him, that he will
Command his Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way
of the Lord, etc.

Behold the great Ordinance of Family-Instruction established by Divine
Institution. Abraham must execute both Offices of King and Priest. In vain is
Obedience exacted from such as know not their Duty: But in order to the means
of that Knowledge, Obedience is justly required, and Jurisdiction given by God
Himself to enforce it. I know Abraham, that he will Command his Children and
Servants, etc. If the Sword or the Word be too precarious, look for Confusion
and Ignorance to prevail over all. Abraham is invested with a perfect Power to
subject them to the Discipline of God: He was Sovereign over his Family, and
God is so far from Clipping his Authority, that he gives him the Broad Seal of
Heaven to confirm his Commission. He had Power of Life and Death within his own
House; they were not worthy to live, should they not learn the saving Knowledge
of the holy Commandments; to little purpose were they Circumcised in the Flesh,
if they be not enlightened into the Knowledge of that Sacrament, nor how far it
obliged them to Obedience and Duty. But I know Abraham that he will teach them,
etc. Even this Great Prince will not think it beneath him to Catechize the
meanest Herdsman in his Family: It Is the Work of God, an Abraham has an Heart
to it; it is a Glorious work, the Saving of Souls, and Abraham shall be rewarded
for it: It Is transmitting Piety to Posterity, and the Child unborn will praise
God for Abraham: It Is the advancing the Interest and Glory of God upon Earth,
which never fails to bring to Glory in Heaven.

See the decay of Religion, and weep tears of Blood: Where lives the Son of
Abraham, that improves his Authority in his Family for God, and the Souls he
has made (unless in a cold and perfunctory manner?) If an Impious casting off
the Thoughts and mention of God, unless in cursed Oaths, and fearful
Imprecations; if an utter banishing his Holy Worship and Service, as an
unfashionable disparaging thing: If the Training up Children into the low and
base Opinion of the strict Ways and Methods of Godliness, (such as their
Parents have sucked in before them:) If Servants must think it ill Manners to
serve their Maker better than their profane Masters, and must wear the Livery
of their Relation and Vices together: If instead of Praying, Catechizing, and
Holy Instruction, and Excellent Example, which ever flourished in the Great
Family of this mighty Prince, there be nothing but Profaneness, Atheism, and
all the Trades of Confusion, driven and carried on with a perfect Industry from
day to day; surely we must sadly conclude, that the Good Abraham has but few
Heirs to follow him in the same holy Path. God knew this faithful Servant to be
constant to his Glory and Interest; and all the World shall one day know that
such as these are very Traitors both to Him and their Own Happiness for ever.

'Twas because of this Fidelity that the Great Abraham was admitted into the
Secrets of his Judgment against Sodom: The clamor of whose Provocations would
suffer divine Justice to forbear them no longer. God could not be in Quiet for
them in Heaven; either they must cease to be thus wicked, or to have any
further Being in the World; He will ease himself of these Adversaries, they
shall no longer oppress his Patience, or abuse his Goodness. His Long-suffering
had run out to the utmost Extremity. He is now ready for vengeance, they ripe
for destruction. When the whole World shall be white unto the great Harvest,
Then shall the Sickle of Ruin cut it down: Yet shall not Execution be done
upon Sodom before all the Formalities of Judgment precede; Process and Enquiry
shall be made into the Merits of their Cause. The Judge of all the Earth will
do right. None shall perish but from the plain Evidence and Conviction of their
own Guilt. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy Judgments. Two Angels
are sent in Commission to make the Inquisition, we shall anon hear what the
Issue of that Trial will be.

Now is Abraham left with the Lord alone; and it is remarkable, that himself,
who had vouchsafed to Honor the Tabernacle of this holy Man with his gracious
Presence, disdains to bless the Infamous City with the same favor. God is far
from the ungodly; but he waits here still, to hearken to the Prayer of the
Righteous.

Abraham receives not the News of Sodom's destruction with any pleasure at all.
Gods Children (as himself) delight not in the death of the wicked, but rather
that they turn and live. It Is Fury and not Zeal, that on every affront calls
for Fire from Heaven to destroy. There is a City will know this one day, that
has made so many Massacres, and kindled so many Flames upon the Bodies of the
Saints. Abraham prepares to Plead as Fiercely as he had Fought for Sodom
before. How serviceable are the Favorites to the Enemies of God, who yet hate
and persecute them. Down he falls, and on the bare Knees of his very Soul
Beggs, That God would maintain the Honor of his own Justice, and that the
Righteous might not taste of the bitter Cup of the Wicked: And further, (If it
would please him) that the Wicked might live for the Righteous sake, and the
Righteous for their own. Though the Wicked will not suffer the Righteous to live
(for whose sake themselves live,) and with the Jews kill their Saviors, yet
are the Righteous of another Spirit, and would give their lives, that all Men
were as themselves, the innocent and blameless Sons of God in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation. It Is wonderful to find, how Abraham by the bare
Breath of his Prayers makes the Decree to shake: The lifting up of his Hands
prevails within a trifle, to make God let fall the Sword of Justice out of his
own. He reduces Him to the Terms of an easy and merciful Composition. To
bring him to fall from Fifty to Ten was a mighty Conquest. Who but an Abraham
could have made such tuggs at the Heart of God, that he makes it stand within a
small point to the Compass of Sodoms safety, which he verily believed his
strength had effected? But it is ill pleading for a bad Clyent in a worse Cause;
yet a gracious Grant treads on the Heels of every motion which so powerful an
Intercessour had made; and Abraham shall not say, that God had denied him one
request of his Lips. He that comes with Dust and Ashes in his Mouth, and those
humble Apologies for the Presumption of a poor Nothing Creature, on his Heart,
as He, can never fail of a good return from the Throne of Grace; and doubtless
God suffering himself to be unskrewed to so low a Pegg, does demonstrate the
mighty Victories of effectual Prayer, so that had there been any thing worthy
of Saving, Sodom had continued to this day. How happy are we, that have a
greater than Abraham to intercede for us, even the very Same to whom Abraham
pleaded for these Cities, is Himself become our powerful Advocate, and able to
save to the uttermost, when by the virtue of five Wounds he melts away wrath
from the whole World of his offending People, for whom he Prays.

What an universal Defection was made by these Wretches, when not Ten good Men
(taking in Lots Family with them) can be picked out of Five whole Cities, to
save them! What a Triumphant Court did Lucifer keep in the fair Plains of
Jordan, where all his Subjects are so well instructed into so perfect Obedience
to his Hellish Orders, that but One Nonconformist Family can be found in them
all. How hopeless and desperate was the Interest of Heaven there! Where Sin
prevails to boast of equal Numbers, it is very dismal; and amongst Ten Virgins,
for five o^ them to be found Foolish; and the Devil impudently dares to call
for the Poll from God. But here the Syrians of Hell are so numerous, that they
fill all the Country, and not Ten poor Kidds appear to be folded up into a
little flock for God.

The Disease being thus Epidemical and Outrageous, and the Tokens of Judgment
appearing so thick upon every bosom, Abraham gives over the Suit. When Grace it
self was weary of searching after Objects to conferr its Favors on, and could
find none, the wind of Prayer ceasing, a terrible storm must follow.

It Is worthy our Remark, how patiently God Attends to the Petitions of his
Abraham, waiting so long till every one was dispatched, and he had no more to
Present. Abraham himself was more weary of Asking, than God of Granting; but
when this Master of Requests had nothing more to offer to his Lord, he humbly
bows, and makes his Retreat to his own Lodgings.

In Order of History, the Judgment against Sodom should here follow, which is
made up to the Reader, in the Book of Tragedies.

CHAP. IX.
Abraham removes from Mamre into Gerar, where Sarah is taken from him by the
King, and restored by means of a Dream. The Birth of Isaac. The casting out of
Ishmael. Abraham and Abimelech enter into League.

ABraham had long enjoyed the sweet Air and Pleasures of the Plains of Mamre,
but the Overthrow of these Cities, and the unwholesome Vapors issuing from the
Bituminous Lake, rendered the bordering Country less pleasant and unhealthy for
him to dwell in: Besides now here were few left to whom he could extend the
Duties of Hospitality; he was deprived of the comfort of Company on whom he
might exercise Piety; he resolves therefore to remove; and doubtless 'twas not
necessary for Him who was ordained as another Sun to enlighen the dark corners
of the Earth, to stand still too long in one station: Other Countries must be
blessed in the happy influences of his Presence. You may find him now in Gerar,
where if you see the Comedy of Egypt Re-acted, and Sarah become the Sister of
Abraham the second time, do not much admire that she is taken from him, since
Sarah is the Miracle of Women; who now in the Nintieth year of her Age is able
to dragg Princes after her, and carries those Charms in her Face, that lays all
the Scepters of the World at her Feet. The Learned of her Posterity tell us,
That God continued her Beauty by the same power (as he did afterward Moses's
strength) without any decay or Impeachment of Wast: And her Ninety would not
have passed for above Forty in the conjecture of Judgment; the Rose and the
Lilly still vying superiority in her Cheeks, and she lives a Type of the
Church, that is without spot or wrinkle, but all Fair in the Eyes of her Lord.
Abimelech is desperately in Love, and this is the second time that Sarah might
have been made a Queen, had she been but the pretended Sister, though we find her
not repining at the loss of that Honor, since to be Abraham's Wife was greater
Dignity than to wear all the Crowns of the Earth. This being the year of
Isaac's Conception, God sends out an Injunction to stop proceedings; it must
not be suspected that Abraham's Heir is the reputed Son of the King of Gerar,
whom God smites with such a disease, as cools the Heat of his Lust after Sarah,
and renders him perfectly Impotent to all. While he is startled at the Plague,
God unriddles it to him in a Dream: There was a Lady too many in his Court,
whose company was ever fatal to all besides her own Husband; his own Life must
be redeemed by her Liberty, but if he restore her not, let him look for Death.
There are Authors that find such Characters of Piety on this Abimelech, as have
emboldned them to signalize him for a Saint; others will acknowledge him good
and Righteous in this Act only; Some say all was but the effect of a Fright. It
were well if those Evidences were found in many Christians that profess true
Grace, as appeared in this Heathen. You shall find, First, That the Threatening
had Impression upon him, he Hears and Fears, and hardens not his Heart.
Secondly, He humbly Vindicates his own Innocence: In the Integrity of my heart
have I done this. Thirdly, He justly fixes the Guilt on Themselves, who had
both of them concealed the Conjugal Relation. Fourthly, God himself takes part
with him, and accepts his honest Plea: I know that thou did this in the
Integrity of thy Heart. Fifthly, As soon as he was convinced of his Error, he
Repents it. Sixthly, He reproves Abraham for exposing his Kingdom to the
Dangers of Sin, which he knew to be Great: Thou have brought on me and my
Kingdom a Great Sin. Seventhly, He presently sets on the Duty of Reformation,
and removes the cause of the Judgment: He restored him his Wife. Eighthly, He
imparts the Menaces of God to his Courtiers, that they also might fear God: The
Men were sore afraid. Ninthly, He makes satisfaction to Abraham for the Injury
done, and presents him with Cattle and Money. Tenthly, He submits to the
Ordinance of God, and accepts of the Prayers of Abraham as the Means of his
Healing. Eleventhly, He enters Friendship with him as a Favorite of God, and
thinks his Kingdom Blessed in his Company: Behold my Land is before thee, dwell
where it pleases thee.

What fair Fruits are here growing in the Wilderness of Nature, while the
Enclosed Garden ^s overspread with so many Noisome Weeds! whose Heart does not
bleed to see those that call themselves Christians, Laughing at those Threats
that Menace infallible Death to such as retain the Lusts They keep! who yet are
stupefied to that degree, as to think rather that God Himself is False, than
that they themselves shall Dye: Who has yet Sworn by Himself, that they are
all but Dead Men and cannot Live: If they should, His Honor and Truth must Dye
for them. These draw the Curtains about them, and sleep on Securely in their
Guilts (while yet their Judgment sleeps not:) They are so far from arising to
Reformation with Abimelech (whose Bed could not hold him after the Affrightful
Dream) that they fancy no Necessity for any, and they resolve against all, till
they awake in the next World, and Flames open the Eyes that Sin had shut, and
makes them Feel the Tormenting Sense of their Folly and Impenitency for ever.

But what is so rarely found among us, we may note all the parts of a True
Repentance Appearing in this King. With what Care does he clear himself of this
matter to God! With what Indionation does he charge Abraham for bringing this
Sin and Evil upon him! Thou have brought Sin upon my Kingdom. With what Fear
does he Summon his Servants about him, to declare the danger they were in! With
what Zeal does he hasten about the removing the Cause that had brought that
danger upon them! What Revenge does he act upon himself, by laying a chargeable
Fine, which he contentedly pays unto Abraham for his Folly! From the first
Revelation he passes to Conviction, from Conviction he proceeds to Reformation;
from that to Satisfaction, from all to Absolution and Health again. If after
all this Abimelech's Soul miscarry of Heaven, and fall short of Salvation, what
shall become of Thousands that never kept him Company half this way, in the
high Road to eternal Life?

But why does God suffer Abraham and Sarah to Trip a second time, and subject
themselves to the just Reproof of an Heathen; who seemed in this the more
Righteous of the Two, and one would have taken Abimelech for the Prophet, and
Abraham for the Pagan, that had heard him so severely checked? What shall we
say? Was there not Need of a Thorn in the Flesh to humble him, under the
abundance of all the Revelations that God had made to him? Or was it for our
sake? yea for our sake doubtless, that if through the Infirmity of the Flesh we
should unhappily Relapse into the same Sin, whereof we have truly repented
before, yet may we not despair, when we remember that the Great Abraham twice
fell. Let us be sure that we be Heirs of his Faith, as well as of his Frailty,
and then will God overlook our Iniquity as he did his, and remember our sin no
more.

God Himself keeping Sarahs Reckoning for her, fails her not a day. The
Hundredth Year of Abraham's Life, is the Joyfullest that ever he saw. Now the
Womb of the Divine Promise opens to Purpose, when he sees himself the happy
Father of the long expected Heir, his Faith and Patience is ripened into
Fruition. Long did the World wait for a Savior, at the last he came, and the
World must again wait for his second coming to complete up all their Happiness;
for yet a little while, and he that is to come, will come and will not tarry,
and the Just shall live by Faith. The Child at eight days Age, is given back to
God, and receives the Seal of that Covenant which entitles him to a better
Father than Abraham. Sarah is so astonished at the Joy, that she hardly
believes yet, what her Eyes see, and Laughs at the Conceit, how all the World
will Laugh to hear the News of her being a Wet Nurse in her Dry Age: She gives
a good Example to her Greatest Daughters, Not to deny the Breast to the
Children of their own Bodies; Even the Sea Monsters draw out the Breast, they
give suck to their young ones, but the Daughter of my People is become Cruel,
like the Ostritches in the Wilderness. Sarah will not endure that her little
Isaac should have a second Mother, whose ill Qualities he may perhaps unhappily
Suck in with her Milk. It Is pity but unnatural Mothers should feel the Judgment
of a Miscarrying Womb and Dry Breasts, who have no Rolling of Bowels toward
their Innocent Babes, who hold up their little Hands and Eyes, begging with
what Earnestness they can, that they may not be turned off to a Stranger. Isaac
is more happy than to be deserted by his Mother, she thinks it not below her
great Ladyship to Swaddle up his little Body with her own Hands, and to suffer
the Trouble with the same Satisfaction that she enjoys the Comfort of a Son.
Had Mephibosheth's Mother been the true Daughter of Sarah, he had never been
Crippled as he was, by the Negligence of a Nurse.

Abraham, to keep up the Practice^ (in this Country) of his old Hospitality
which he ever exercised in all the Rest, and taking hold of an Opportunity
wherein ^he might do Good to the Souls of Men by his holy Familiarity and
Conference, as also to strengthen his Interest in their Affections by an Act of
Humanity and Courtesy, Celebrates the Feast of Isaac's Weaning with great
Solemnity and Cost, and makes Invitation of all the Neighboring Persons of
Quality to be his Guests; where doubtless he Sauced his Dishes with such
Excellent Discourses, as tended chiefly to the exalting the Wonders of Gods
Love in so signal a Mercy, as that of a Son in his Dead Years, and what the
World might expect in due time from that other Promised, who should one day
come into the World to make them Happy in the next. He was not any to read the
Lectures of his own Life and History, (a Life so full of Miracles and
Benedictions) that if by any means he might provoke some of them to join
themselves to the same God, that had been Good and Kind to him in every Region
where he came. And Sarah had not forgotten the holy Trade she drove on so
Zealously in Haran; she had her Arguments too, and helps to Clinch in her
Husbands Doctrine by her own Exhortations: Abraham's Company must needs be the
most Delightful and Profitable to them, who of all Men living was best
qualified to speak from his own Experience on Subjects they had never heard or
known. If Foreign Affairs and Customs of Nations delight them, he can lead
them into Egypt, and acquaint them with the Intreigues of Pharaoh's Court,
where himself so long had conversed among them. If Military Affairs better
please them, he can give them the Faithfulest account of the Late War with the
four Kings, wherein himself had been General. If they will listen to more
Melancholy Matters, they may hear from him the Tragedy of Sodom, of whose
Flames his own Eyes had been sad Witnesses: If they will pass from all, and
attend to the Wonders of his own Family, He can recommend to them the Advantage
of Civility to Strangers, forasmuch as himself thereby had entertained Angels,
and held long Conferences with God Himself: It Is a noble Design to Consecrate
the Fruits of our Lips and Tables together, to the Glory of God and the Profit
of Men. Speech is the peculiar Faculty of Man, by which the Sentiments of the
Mind are communicated and made public for the Good or Hurt of others. What
Care then is Incumbent on the Children of Abraham to speak, as well as to Act
like him; My mouth shall be filled with thy praise, and with thy Salvation all
the day long. The Tongue is the Glory of Man, which should not be employed in
dishonor to God; he deserves not to speak at all, that speaks not the Praises
of his Maker. The Feast being ended, and the Guests dismissed, Abraham returns
to make Digestion of all, by taking a Walk with God in Meditation and Prayer,
and begs that what had passed that day in his Family, might redound to the
Honor of God, and the everlasting Good of his Friends.

Not long after this, there breaks out a little War in his Family; His two Sons
are of different Mothers, and consequently have different Interests to carry
on. Ishmael (questionless set on by Hagar) is found not to bear so fraternal
Affections to little Isaac, as he ought: He is told that he is come into the
World to undermine him, who stood so fair in the hopes of his Fathers Estate
before his Birth: Some are of the Opinion, that he minded privily to kill him:
Others only that he loaded him with Jears and Flouts as he played with his
Companions, rendering him Ridiculous and Contemptible, by holding out of the
Finger, and putting out of his Lip, boasting himself to be the true Heir;
whatsoever it were, the Fault is expounded by the Holy Ghost Himself, into the
Guilt of Persecution, which is as well performed by the Sword of the Mouth as
the Hand. Little Isaac is an Early Martyr, and the Type of Him that was sought
for to be slain in his Swadling-Cloaths. Herod would fain Worship and Kill him
at once, which afterward was effectually done by those who first wounded him
by their Lips: Behold the King of the Jews; and then dispatched him with their
Hands: The King dies on the Cross.

Sarah knew well enough whence all this Spite and Malice was derived, the Sons
Spirit was but Exasperated by the envious Mother, and she finds no possibility
of Peace or Security while they continued together in one Family; she prudently
foresaw some danger in case of Abraham's Death. What knew she but Hagar by her
subtle Insinuations and Carriage might form such a Party against her, that she
and her Isaac might be cast out: Therefore, to secure her Self and the Right
Heir, she plots betimes to prevent the danger, and brings her Writ of Ejectment
against her Adversary with such Passion and Resolution, as she seems to command
the Issue of the Suit, before the Judge had considered the ground of the
Quarrel. Abraham is the only Arbiter in the Case, and is hardly solicited to
give Sentence against his own Bowels. He is divided in his Affections, and has
no heart to pass the Order for his own Child's Expulsion. The thing was very
grievous unto him, because of his Son. While the matter hangs in suspense, (and
Abraham is struggling between the Duties of an Husband and a Father, and cannot
so easily be brought over to forget his Nature and Natural Affections,) God
Himself comes in to give the Casting Voice, and Votes clearly for Sarah: The
good Man that never stuck at any thing that his God commanded, be it never so
grievous or opposite to his Interests, now is willing to forget himself and
every thing in Obedience to his Will, and gives present Order for the departure
of the Bondwoman and her Son. He rises early to begin the day with so
difficult a Piece of Obedience, having wrestled all the Night against Nature,
Affection, and Self: Neither Hagar's entreaties, nor Ishmael's cries, can work
any Repentance in him, Though they sought it carefully with Tears: He is
Obstinate and Peremptory in his Obsequiousness to God, whose holy Commands must
be cheerfully followed with a Deaf Ear, and Heart hardened against every thing
that oppose them. We never arrive to the degree of Abraham's universal
Conformity to the Divine Will, till we shut out all Inclinations to the ruinous
Solicitations of the Creatures.

But if nothing will avail, and the young Gentleman must determinately be gone;
we hope the Son of so great a Prince, shall pass off in State, with a suitable
Provision of Maintenance, and Servants to attend him: What should be the
meaning that he who is Prophesied to be the Father of a Nation, and of Twelve
Princes, should be sent away with a loaf of Bread, and a Bottle of Water from
so Great and Rich a Parent as Abraham: (The Ladies of this Age are not so
cheaply untwisted from their Amorous Gallants, without Honorable Settlements
for Themselves and Children.) Abraham was Affectionate and tenderhearted:
What? not so much as a Slave or an Ass to carry the Wallet, but it must be hung
on the Shoulders of Hagar, whose heavy Heart was ready to Break with the Load
of Sorrow and Care, that already oppressed it? Is Abraham grown thus Pitiless
now? 'Twere Blasphemy against his Piety to assert, that He whose Generous
Nature Appeared in the profuse Communications of his Charity to very Strangers,
should be thus Penurious and Miserlike in his Fatherly Contributions to his own
Child. The Learned strive to clear up his Reputation by many Arguments: Some I
fear overdo it, when they conclude, That Servants and Cattle, and all
Accommodations for Life, are included here in the Scripture Phrase of Bread and
Water: Others perhaps under-do it, when they tell us, that he gave them no
more, to teach them Faith and Dependence upon God, whom he left to provide for
them, when that little was spent. With the same Argument He might have given
them nothing, committing them altogether to the Providence of God, with the
cold Charity of a naked Wish, Depart in Peace, be ye warmed and filled. These
make the Father of the Faithful almost an Infidel, and at best but a
Solifidian: Some falsely enough impute it to Sarah's Revenge; and they that
aimed at All, should now have Nothing (surely he that was so well treated in
Pharaoh's Court, was not so ungrateful to a poor Handmaid of his Country, to
send her forth to starve:) Others affix it to their own Insolence, who were
grown too rude and turbulent in the House of Abraham. The most probable
conjecture that best agrees with all Circumstances, is, that what was now given
them, was to serve only for present necessity, and Abraham directing them
whither to go, promised to take care to supply them further, as their
Necessities required: which also he did.

'Till Isaac's Birth, the Bondwoman and her Son had quiet entertainment in
Abraham's Family: Now the Heir is born, they agree not together; but Hagar
trudges out with her Bottle and Bag to wander in the Wilderness: Who sees not
the Old Law marching after her (with all its Ceremonies in the same Bag) at the
bringing in of the New by Jesus Christ, the true Heir of Righteousness and
Salvation: For ever are they departed now, to return no more into the Church of
God: And how peaceable possession Sin does enjoy in the Natural Heart, where it
rules all the Roast, has an absolute Dominion, and beats down all before it;
till anon God in pity to the miserable Soul, gives it Grace to conceive the
true Heir, which once Formed, and growing up to some Strength, takes Arms, and
with the Assistance of Heaven maintains the War, which is happily Crowned with
thorough Conquest of all Opposition, and receives its Palms in the Everlasting
Kingdom.

Hagar and Ishmael are gone, whose wanderings and sufferings in the Wilderness,
are but a farther Allegory of the present Sorrows of the miserable Posterity of
Abraham; who when the true Heir appeared in the World, were then in possession
of their Fathers House: But for mocking and Persecution of the Great promised
Son, are dealt with as Ishmael, cast out of the blessed Inheritance of both
Canaans, and are wandering in the Desert of damnable Error with the Wallet of an
insupportable Burden on their Shoulders, feeding still on the musty Bread, and
drinking out of the Old Bottles, the stale Puddle Water of the Law, in contempt
of the pure Springs of the Living Water so freely offered them, and the New
Wine of the everlasting Gospel. They lie with Ishmael under a Shrub, not so
sensible of their Penury as he, forlorn and dejected, with the Curse of the
Blood of Jesus upon them: They perish in the midst of Abundance, and have no
Eyes to see the Well of Life, out of which the whole Church is so sweetly
refreshed in Vivacity and Power. O that same Good Angel would come with a
Message of Comfort and Mercy to them, as he did unto Hagar, and taking away the
Veyl that is upon their Hearts to this day, they may clearly perceive the
things that belong to their Eternal Peace! Even so come Lord Jesus, Come
quickly!

Holiness is that Great Luminary (darting its Beams so conspicuously round
about the World where it shines) that draws every Eye to admire it, rendering
its Subjects so Amiable, that those who cannot shine in the same Light, desire
yet to sit under and enjoy its Blessed Influences. Abraham scattered the Divine
Rays of his Piety and Goodness so illustriously over all the Kingdom of Gerar,
(for which God had sent him thither) that the very Court is Clarified by his
Brightness, and cannot think its self happy without a nearer Conjunction with
this Great Planet. Sarah's Beauty had Fettered the Affections of this King
already; now is his Understanding Captivated perfectly to the divine Presence
of Abraham's Piety. What a Glory was it to this Great Saint to see Abimelech
himself, with Phicol his Lord-General, and all their Princely Retinue, come
bowing to him, and making earnest Suit that he would become their Allie. The
King had found by experience that God had blessed his Kingdom for Abraham's
sake; and now Abraham must bless Abimelech for his own sake: He had certainly
learned how great things God had done by and for Abraham, and therefore thought
it a part of true Policy to confederate himself with so great a Favorite, and
to ensure the Friendship of him that was the Friend of God: He grounds his
Request upon Abraham's Interest, and nearness to God. God is with thee in
every: thing that thou do. A very Glorious Testimony out of the Mouth of a
King, and doubtless no whit ungrateful unto Abraham himself, who loved to hear
the Kindnesses of his God to him acknowledged by very Heathens: This gave
Abraham the Honor, and Abimelech the Benefit of the League. If God were with
Abraham, how much should Abimelech advantage himself by his Friendship! And the
King knew well enough how far he strengthened himself by being in Covenant with
him that was in Covenant with God: That God who had sworn to him to be a Friend
to his Friends, and an Enemy to his Enemies: Hence he is so zealous to
perpetuate the Agreement, that he moves for the durable Extension of it to his
Heirs and Successors: His Son, and his Sons Son; and will have it confirmed by
the highest Obligation of a Sacred Oath, which binds the Conscience under the
dreadfullest penalties. Well did Abimelech know that Abraham (having once
sworn) would suffer even Death it self, rather than to be false to his
Covenant, or incurr the Anger of his God. (Piety has a place in the
Consciences, tho not in the Affections of Strangers to God.) Abraham would be
steadfast enough when once he had fastened him with the Nail of the Sanctuary:
And himself should dye with greater satisfaction, when he had confirmed his
Successors by linking in their Interests with his. He cunningly makes him the
very Guardian of the Prince, whose Crown would never totter on his Head, while
he had so formidable a Person as Abraham to keep it on; who had made Four Kings
to fly before him: Therefore by this Oath is Abimelech and his Heirs secured
both against Abraham himself, (whose growing Greatness he might justly fear) so
against all others by his means. Thus had God caused the Dread of Abraham to
fall on the whole Court and Kingdom of Gerar: Kings and Generals fall low
before him, and Devote themselves to him, while he the more humbly bows to his
God, and under all the Courtships of Crowned Heads, Remembers that his own must
stoop to the Dust.

Abraham who had before stricken a League with Heaven, was not pufft up with a
vain Elation of being a Confederate with a King, who ambitiously sought that
Honor from him: The highest Promotion on Earth, cannot swell the mind that is
closely united with God. All the benefit he draws from it, shall advantage the
Kingdom, whom he blesses with his Presence, and Five and twenty years Residence
in it. He had pitched his Tent at Beresheba, where he planted a Grove (and
needs must the Trees thrive well, that are set by so good an hand.) Jonathan
tells us, 'twas an Orchard of pleasant Fruits, wherein he made his Oratory, and
took many a delightful walk with his God by Contemplation and Prayer; here also
he used to entertain his Guests that visited him, making themselves more happy
by his Company than his Cheer (which yet was ever such as spoke the great Heart
of a generous Abraham) from whom they never departed without Invitation to take
share with him of a greater Felicity in Heaven, always plying them with such
prevailing Arguments from his endearing Lips, as made many of them hunch away
their unprofitable Idols, to make room for the Worship of the True God. Mark
Reader, what a busy Trade is the great Abraham d^^ving on for the glorious
Eternity; does he live to himself in the Affluence and abundance of all his
Riches and Honors? Are his Aims, or the Ends of his Life any other, than such
as tend to the glory of his God, and the good of Souls? Even Pagans and
Infidels flock in to him, to embrace his Kindness and Counsels together; they
are Courted and Feasted into his Religion, his very courtesies Convert them,
they cannot but be convinced that Abraham's God must be the only True one, who
had polished him up into all the perfections of a sweet Nature, and such
ravishing Grace that dragged all the World after it, and envassal'd all his
Admirers, and should they not be persuaded by him, neither would they, should
one come to them from the Dead.

CHAP. X.
Isaac 's Immolation.

WHile Abraham is thus passing away his Days in a constant Course of Pleasant
and Profitable Duty, God is contriving to employ him in a Service that shall
render the Honor of his Obedience more Eximious and Renowned than all he had
hitherto done; to keep on and trace the High way of vulgar and ordinary Duty,
is the work of every common Professor: But Abraham shall do that at the
command of God, which none but an Abraham could do besides, and what all the
World shall admire him for, till Time it self shall be no more. By Nine Trials
already had God experimented the Integrity of his Loyal Heart; yet (as if all
these were nothing) a Tenth shall follow, the Bitterest of them all: If
Abraham's Faith hold out in this, Heaven and Earth shall know how worthy he is
of the Favor and Goodness of God, and how entirely he had observed the
Conditions of the Covenant, that obliged him to pay an universal Respect to all
his Commandments, how Severe and Difficult soever; let us see with what
Gallantry of Spirit he will acquit himself in this last and greatest Encounter.

'Twas but a little while, since he had parted from a Son at the Command of
God, yet that loss (though very grievous) was made up to him by another, which
was dearer to him at Home. But now comes a Second Summons, for This also, who
must pass, not out of his House only, but Life; and (which was yet more
afflicting) by his own Hands. Take now thy Son, thine only Son Isaac, whom thou
love, and get thee to the Land of Moriah, and Offer him there for a
Burnt-offering upon one of the Mountains that I will tell thee of: Behold all
the many Promises of God, and all the many hopes and comforts of Abraham's
Life, perfectly cut off and destroyed at one Blow. Strong were the
Heart Strings of Abraham that could hold out from Cracking at the breaking out
of the First syllables of this Killing Command; but could he live so long as to
hear out the whole Sentence? The Rabbis fancy, that God himself doubted it,
and therefore have feigned, that God to give him a breathing time, brake it in
pieces by many Abruptions, framing it into a Dialogue; Wherein God is made to
begin: Abraham take thy Son; To which Abraham Answers, I am ready, Lord, (well
hoping it might have been Ishmael,) But which of my Sons do thou call for,
for I have two? Abraham yet little daunted, God replies to him, Thine only Son;
To whom Abraham again (not willing to understand it of Isaac) Each one of them
is the only Son of his Mother: Nay but (says God) The Son whom thou love:
This touches close: To whom therefore pantingly, Lord thou know that I love
them both; God to end the dispute is fain to discriminate; It Is Isaac thine
only Son whom thou love, thou must take him: But whither Lord must I carry
him? To the Land of Moriah; And what to do with him there? Offer him up for a
Burnt-offering: Is the old Man alive? If so let him live for ever. May we carry
on the Dialogue a little without offense, to the Glory of Abraham's Obedience,
who never so much as opened his Mouth in the least to dispute the will of God:
Lord, How long have thine Altars thirsted for humane Blood? I have Offered up
many a Sacrifice before, which have pleased thee well: Will nothing satisfy
thee now but the Blood of my Child? Take I say thy Son; Each Infidel can offer
up the Blood of Beasts to their Deities, but thou must exceed them all in the
Sacrifice of thine own Child, to thy God. But Lord, if nothing less than humane
Blood will suffice, may not Isaac be exchanged for a Slave, or as many of them
as thou shall please to call for? No, the Blood of Slaves is a slender Offering
to that of thine own Son, it is Isaac himself must Bleed and be the Victim. If
then mine Isaac must die, will no hand content thee to Offer him but mine own?
with what Heart shall I be able to Sacrifice mine own Child? Nor will I favor
thee in this, it is thine own hand must give the fatal stroke. Behold I have
taken upon me to speak to the Lord: What will become of thy Great Name, when
the very Heathen shall hear that Abraham's God requires so unnatural a
Sacrifice as this? Fear not, for mine Honor is not subjected to the censures
of Men, who can raise up a Glory to my self, by the Sacrifice of them all to my
Justice. O let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak but this once; by whom
shall Jacob arise, if Isaac be cut off, and what shall become of thy Truth and
Covenant to thy poor Servant? Shall thy Faithfulness and Promises fail for
evermore? It Is I that visited Sarah, and gave her a Son when she laughed in
despair, and once thou believedst against Hope; Is mine hand shortened that it
cannot save? May I not raise up another Isaac unto thee, or do means fail me to
accomplish all my Promises, are they confined all to the life of this Son;
Arise therefore and Take him, etc.

Let the base World blush and be confounded that has learned to Quarrel and
wrangle with every trivial Precept of God that crosses their Ease and Interest,
or seems but a little to break in upon their Carnal Hopes and Confidences; When
they see the Great Abraham paying an humble and undisputed Obedience to such an
Injunction as lets out the life Blood of all his Joys and Comforts on Earth.
God had made with him an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure:
This is all his desire and all his Salvation, although he should not make his
House to grow. Who can see Him rising early to whet the Sacrificing knife that
must cut the Throat of his beloved Isaac, and giving orders for the cleaving
the Wood, that must afterward Burn his dearest Body into Ashes, and hastening
his Son and Servants to the Journey? The Lord has a Sacrifice to be Offered on
the Mount of Moriah; how is This Righteous Soul straightened, until it be
fullfiled! Who can see him thus busy in the Annihilation of his own Flesh,
without believing that his Affections were all ravished away into Heaven, and
that Divine Grace had absorp'd him to that degree, that he seems to have little
of Man or Father appearing in him. As Levi, he knows not his own Children, but
packs away the one into Banishment at the Command of God, and the other into
Death. So wholly eaten up by divine Zeal, that for three whole days together
(Traveling toward the fatal Mount) he has both his Eyes so intentively sixth
on the holy Commandment, that he does not so much as glance on his Isaac, who^
he Devotes unto Good, and looks on him as nothing but Ashes already. The Law of
his God, (that by this Command had dispensed with the very Law of Nature) was
so strong upon his Heart, that he becomes obediently Unnatural and Cruel, not
in the least repining as Jacob against God; Me have ^hou bereaved of my
Children, Ishmael is not, and ^ilt thou take Isaac also? all these things are
against me. Not so much as pouring out one Prayer to revoke the dreadful
Injunction: Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass away. But totally
resigning Himself, with his Blessed Heir: Let thy will and not mine be done. O
Holy Abraham, how Illustriously do the Graces of Him shine forth upon thee,
that would be Nothing else than what he was unto God! Thou art that Righteous
Man of the East, that has learned to fall down and lie thus Submissively at
the Foot of God: Whither shall we go in Pilgrimage to find out the least Track
of thine Obedient Steps; there is scarce a little Line of thy Miraculous
Devotion left upon the Face of the Earth.

Though St. Austin and some few more are pleased to give Sarah the Honor of
consenting to the Death of her Son at the Will of God, yet others more
generally deny it; and that Abraham, afraid that her Faith might be drowned in
the Flood of her Passion, very prudently concealed the Divine Mandate from her
till after the Execution, (and that possibly he might bring her back a Son
preternaturally raised out of his own Ashes; for his God was Almighty.) In vain
should he occasion a Precipitation of her Sorrows, the woeful Tidings would fall
too soon as a Talent of Lead to crush and break her miserable Heart. It Is
Abraham alone has that Masculine Spirit to bear up under so sinking an
Affliction as this.

Nor does the Appearance of the fiery Mountain, upon which his Son must be
Offered, dismay him: David (piteously lamenting the Fall but of a Friend)
bitterly execrated the Gilbo^ that had sucked in the Blood of his Jonathan,
devoting it to the Curse of Heaven for ever: But Abraham can view the place
where the Fire must consume his dearest Child, and yet with Aaron hold his
peace. And now, what his Faith assures him will be acceptable to God, his Fear
tells him may not be so very Grateful to Men. He prudently dismisses the
Servants, whose Eyes and Hearts (he thinks) would not serve them to view what
his own unhappy Hands must Act: He desires no Witnesses of so Tragical a
Sacrifice. It Is enough that he who had set him on the Work (and could not but
See him) should Sign the Certificate of his Faithful Obedience and Service.
While he Approves himself to God, he values not the Testimony of Men: He cries
not as Jehu to Jonadab, Come see my zeal for the Lord. Some fancy that he left
them behind, least (when they should see him doing what he must do) they might
think that he had left his Wits behind him, and so might hinder him of his Duty
(as once the Good Meaning Friends of Jesus did him) on pretense of Distraction
and Want of Senses. It was not improbable, but these young Men might have
obstructed his Offering, from as Ardent Zeal to their young Master, as those
afterward who rescued Jonathan (Sworn to Death) from the Hands and Oath of his
Violent Father. But Abraham will not be interrupted by Men, in a Duty which is
commanded him by God. If he himself will cut the Cords of the Sacrifice, and
his Isaac's Redemption be wrought by the same Authority from Heaven that his
Death was imposed, most happy should he think himself; but no other Hand shall
take him from the Altar, than the Divine one that laid him on. Whence then is
His Authority, who pretends a Power to Dispense against the Positive and
Absolute Commands of God?

The Servants and Beasts are disburthened, while the whole Load is laid upon
Isaac; the Son is oppressed and the very Slaves go free, yet he Murmurs not:
Who Sees not here those Innocent Shoulders that once bore our Griefs and
carried our Sorrows? The Iniquity of us all was laid upon him, yet he opened
not his Mouth. Can we view Isaac bowing under the Wood that is designed to
devour him, and not behold our dearest Savior Fainting under the weight of his
own Cross, both ascending by weary Steps the very same Mount?

Abraham and Isaac, the Holy and the Spiritual; these tug with difficulties,
and attain to Mount Sion the City of God, while the Carnal and the Brutish lag
below, and perish in the Valley of Darkness and Death, where no Sacrifice is
offered by them, none is accepted for them, their Iniquity is not purged by any
offering for ever.

Nor is there any true Son of Abraham, but who (in this Life) divides Himself;
the Brutish Part is left behind here below, while the Aspiring Soul climbs the
Hill to meet with God, and does so effectually prevail with him there, that
hereafter the poor Dust shall be called up too, and participate of those Divine
Qualities that will fit it for so Glorious a Communion.

The Ascent to the Mount, was the most difficult part of the whole Journey, and
strong is the Body that bears up it Self against its Proclivity and Steepness:
Yet must not Isaac be pitied, but instead of ease has an heavy Burden heaped
upon him by a Father that tenderly loves him, with design it may be to make him
weary of the World, and more willing to dye and pass out of it, while the
Slaves and Brutes are at ease, and free from All below: If the Cares of Life
that are common to all, are sound too light to humble the dearest Children of
God and keep them low; behold God hanging on them those Weights of Affliction
that should make them more sensible of their Pilgrimage Estate, and cause them
to Sigh for Redemption and Ease: Nor is he less a Father, because (with
Abraham) he bears the Knife in one hand, that lets out the Blood of their
dangerous Corruptions, and the Fire in the other that is to burn up their
Combustible Lusts, since while they Groan Himself is Afflicted, and under a
seemingly Cruel Hand, does ever retain a most gracious and compassionate Heart,
which harbors no other purpose by the roughest Wind of his Fury, than the
fanning away their Iniquity; themselves at last shall find this happy Fruit by
the Storm, that it has taken away nothing but Sin; though they know as little
the end of Gods Proceedings, as Isaac did those of his Father, when he so
Innocently put the question; My Father, behold the Fire and the Wood, but where
is the Lamb for a burnt Offering?

Is Abraham become, as Lot's Wife, a Pillar of Hardness and Insensibility? Or
was this a Rebellious Son, whom he delivers up to Justice and Death? Or why do
we not see him staggering under the weight of so killing a Temptation as this:
That no doubt pierced deeper into his very Soul, than the first Command of God?
No, if Abraham could have melted at all, it had been when this hot Gleam beat
so strongly upon his Heart. Isaac cannot forget that he is Blessed in so dear a
Father as Abraham, though Abraham must forget that he was once Blessed in so
dear a Child as Isaac: He must learn to answer neither to the Name nor the
Nature of a Father. It evidently shows us, with what Care Abraham had stiffled
all his Griess within his own Bosom, that he had not hitherto so much as let
fly a Sigh or Groan unstrangled, that might survive to give Intelligence to
Isaac, that there was no other Sacrifice to be expected than Himself.

A Frantic Outragiousness under Sufferings, is but digging into the Wound, and
causing it to bleed at a wider Orifice, when silent Submission makes half the
Plaster that heals it up. If it be the good Pleasure of Heaven to clap Fetters
upon us that we would not wear, while we madly strive to tear them off, we do
but rend our own Flesh, and make the Iron to enter the deeper into our Soul. If
the hard Burden of the Lord has fallen upon Abraham, which would have sunk any
but Himself into Death; what does he but with holy Job, take it quietly on his
shoulder, and bind it as a Crown to him. This heavy stroke from Isaac's Mouth
(charged by God himself for a greater Trial) and lighting upon the very Wound,
is so far from moving him to let go his Integrity, that under the fresh Assault
of this menacing Billow, he still swims above Water, and holds it fast.

Isaac is the Sacrifice that Himself calls for, and Abraham only knows it,
though Isaac knows it not; yet God knew that he intended another, though
Abraham knows it not: The Son is not kept in greater Darkness by the Father,
than is the Father kept by God. How little does Man know of his own Concerns in
the future Event of Gods Decrees? Some pass merrily on, because they see not
the Dangers that are before them, while others mourn under Jealousies of
Troubles, that (God knows) shall never come upon them. The Prophecy shall come
to pass indeed, and God will provide another Sacrifice.

Josephus has adventured to Fancy the Arguments by which Abraham (now come to
the Mount, having erected the Altar and made all things ready) prevailed with
Isaac to surrender up his Life unto God. But I shall do my Reader no Injury, if
I present him with another which the Golden Pen of our Excellent Hall has
drawn up to my hand, as despairing to find any where a more Natural or
Powerfully Effectual than his.

My Son, thou art the Lamb which God has provided for this Burnt Offering, if
my Blood could have excused thee, how many thousand times had I rather to give
thee mine Own Life, than taken thine: Alas! I am full of Days, and now of long
time have lived not but in thee. Thou might have preserved the Life of thy
Father, and have comforted his Death, but the God of us both has chosen thee:
He that gave thee unto me Miraculously, bids me by an unusual means return thee
unto him. I need not tell thee that I Sacrifice all my Worldly Joys, yea, and
my Self in thee; But God must be obeyed. Neither art thou too Dear for him that
calls thee. Come on my Son, restore the Life that God has given thee by me;
offer thy self willingly to these Flames, Send up thy Soul cheerfully unto thy
Glory, and know that God loves thee above others, since he requires thee alone
to be Consecrated in Sacrifice to Himself.

Behold the very Figure of him that has said, I and my Father are One; One in
Nature and One in Will. Isaac lays down his Life of himself (with Jesus) and
no Man takes it from him. He gives up himself with the same Resignation: Lo I
come to do thy Will, O God.

Let us only Contemplate what Conflicts Young Isaac endured in his Bosom,
'twixt the different Interests of Flesh and Spirit; what Struglings 'twixt
Nature and Duty (for a while) as the different Twins in Rebekahs Womb; till
recollecting his Spirits, and rouzing up his Faith, he humbly addresseth his
Dearest Father with such a Retortion as this.

My Father, though Nature once framed into Life grows kind and dear to it Self,
and Flesh is not easily persuaded to pass into Nothing, if by any means it can
preserve and maintain its own Being: And we see all the World sticking in Self,
and fast Bound to the pleasing Enjoyments of the present Life: Yet the Son of
Abraham has been Educated into better Hopes, and has been taught to Obey but
never to Dispute the Commands of his Father's God. Yes, Sir, your Isaac is
ready to surrender up the Life he has received; Seek not for any other
Offering than your own Son, who is prepared to Bleed on the Holy Altar of God,
and approve himself the Obedient Child of so Good a Father, by whose excellent
example he has learned to Resign up his All to his Maker.

See the patient Victim kissing the Cords that bind him, and the fatal Knife
that is sharpened to let out his Blood and Life, while his Father inwardly
Bleeds more Drops than he, and has just Strength enough left to lift up his
trembling Hand to give the Mortal Stroke, which Heaven never designed that
Isaac should feel or suffer: Real Intention weighs as heavy in the Balance of
the Sanctuary as the best Action: Thou do well Abraham, in that it was in
thine heart to build this Temple unto God: Which though uneffected, shall
reflect an equal Honor upon thee.

When God called young Samuel, he arose and went to Eli, for as yet he knew not
the voice of the Lord. But Old Abraham had been so long accustomed to Celestal
Sounds, that the Voice of an Angel could be no Surprise unto him. He that ever
kept his Ears open to every Call of God, could not be Deaf to this Music that
ravished his Ear and Heart together. 'Twas a very Melancholy Note, Take thy
Son Isaac, and offer him up, etc. But now the Spears strike up a more
melodious Tune, Lay not thine hand upon the Lad. Yet Abraham danced after both,
but his very Soul makes a Caper at this. He that refused not God in the
killing, very easily obeys him in the Sparing of his only Son: Commands that
Run counter to our Wills must all be received; but those that jump in with them
are embraced with open Arms. The glad Father stands not to argue the Authority
that brings him a Discharge from the Execution of the first Warrant, but
readily Believes what he heartily Desires, and knows that God himself is the
best Dispenser with his own Statutes. The Sheep of Christ that know his Voice,
are startled at the Arrogance of the Stranger, that presumes to countermand the
plain Injunctions of Heaven. Read the Scriptures: No, they are dangerous: Drink
ye all of this: No, not all, but the Priest only. Pray with the Spirit and with
Understanding: No, but in an Unknown Tongue. Marriage is honorable to all Men:
No, not in the Sacerdotal Order. There is one Mediator, even Jesus Christ: No,
there are Innumerable others, Angels and Saints. This Intercessor is able to
save to the uttermost all that come to him: No, not unless you join your own
Good Works with him, which are Filthy Rags, Dung and Nothing. In vain does
Diotrephes p^ate against the Divine and Infallible Spirit of Truth: Lord, where
will this New Gospel stand in the Great day?

You have heard the Faith and Patience of Abraham, now see the End of the Lord.
Will any one think that Isaac's Blood could be profitable unto God? yet shall
Abraham's Obedience bring Him Glory, and be profitable to Himself and to the
whole Church of God for ever; to teach us, that Faith without Works is dead,
and by works of Obedience is Faith perfected: And both Faith and Obedience
perfected by Grace through Christ.

Now has God built a Tabernacle for the Table of his Covenant with Abraham to
rest in to the end of the World; that all Flesh may know that he who refuses
to offer up his Isaac on Abraham's Altar, can never expect Salvation with him.
God leaves such for Moses, and not this Angel to deal with, who came on purpose
four hundred years after, with a killing Letter to those as spare their darling
Sins from the command of God to have them Crucified; when Abraham, his
Favorite, could not be suffered (and had more love to him than) to withhold
his only Son. Abraham himself has no Bosom for such as hide their Iniquity in
their own. And it is observable how little Compassion he had for the Man in
Hell, that of Three Requests made by him, he granted him not one, and Torments
him with the same Uncharitableness that himself had used to poor Lazarus: He
should not have a Drop, that would not give a Crum. Abraham is the only Saint
that we find prayed to in all the Scripture, and that to so little purpose, as
the miserable Supplicant gets not the least Ease from his Pains, who had kept
all his Isaacs about him on Earth, and now very idly becomes his Votary in Hell.

Mercy to Sin is Tyranny to the Soul; If Absalom be dealt gently with, and
suffered to Live, David himself is in danger to dye. Most Men take David's Care
for the Rebels Safety, as if their own Life were bound up in the Life of him;
when (if God be True) either Sin or the Soul must certainly dye. If we cannot
part with our Lusts for Gods sake, we shall part with our Souls for our Lusts
sake. Who, that is wise, but would harden himself against damning Corruption
that lurks to destroy him. When Abraham has a Courage for the sake of his God,
to stick his Knife into the Throat, and to burn into Ashes his own Flesh, and
would have thought himself unworthy of the Kindness of Heaven, had he refused
that Obedience to the holy Commandment. If the Interest of God be so low in
thine Eyes, that for Sins sake, That must suffer, take heed the Interest of thy
Soul be not one day so low in Gods Eyes, that for Sins sake thy Soul may suffer
for ever.

But if Abraham's Obedience and Love to God be grown quite out of Fashion, and
Men fancy they may be saved on cheaper terms than He: Let them show the
Dispensation whereby they are allowed to spare their Beloved Isaac; since not
Abraham only, but God Himself spared not His, and delivered him up a Sacrifice
for those Sins whose safety Men so carefully provide for: Ah me! never
considering that those they are so fond of, would not suffer the Son of God to
live; 'twas Sin that brought him to his Death, and are the Sinners like to
efcape with life, when He Himself (that had none of his own) dyed, and was
destroyed but for wearing the Garment that was spotted with the Flesh, tho his
Own were so pure and without Stain: Whence is it, that notwithstanding Christ
has dyed, so great a part of Mankind dye too and perish, but from this very
Treason, they will not deliver up their Lusts to dye with him, but maintain a
Friendship with those Enemies that destroyed him; as if the same Iron that
pierced his Flesh, would not one day enter into their own Souls, making wounds
there that shall never be healed; Nor will any thing make them rage with a
greater Torment, than to consider, That God delivered up his Son, and that Son
delivered up himself to free them from those cruel hands, which they will find
too soon embrewed in the Blood of their Souls, tho they believe it not, nor
will be persuaded to free themselves in time. Methinks they might pass to
Golgotha, and see what bloody work Son made on the blessed Body of an Innocent
Jesus; and can they think that Justice is become more Merciful to wilful and
obstinate Offenders: It Is one of the Mysteries in Religion, that after God
himself, the Almighty Father, has bin prevailed on by his own free and
unexpressible Love, and Riches of Grace, to give out his Son (ten thousand
times dearer to him than all the Creatures) from his holy Bosom, where he had
lain from all Eternity, to be delivered up to bitter Sufferings and Death it
self, for ungodly Enemies: And that after Jesus that blessed Son had yielded so
readily to become the Sacrifice lying upon the Altar, and not as Isaac
countermanded again, but actually Bleeding out his very Heart for them to the
very last drop; yet when all this is done, and the Gates of eternal
Righteousness and Redemption opened to all that will but humbly and thankfully
enter them, the sottish World should stand at a distance, and look to be
courted into a Compliance with those happy terms that would bless them into the
Felicity of a perfect freedom from those Chains of Darkness that bind them over
to an endless Captivity; Nay, to hugg those very Fetters, and and to fall in
love with Bondage and Misery it self, and by no Arguments be wrought to embrace
the purchased Safety: Whence is this unaccountable Madness but from the Devil,
and that cursed Heart of unperswasibleness and Infidelity that detains them
Prisoners to their own Obstinacy, with the same Obduration and Judgment of God,
as that unhappy Nation, upon whom his wrath is come to the uttermost? Let such
consider whether all the World, much less the poor Slaves of his Family could
have tempted Abraham to have shed the Blood of his dearest Child; or with what
offers could Isaac have been bribed to suffer that deadly Massacre, when only
the Command of God revealed by his Father brought him to it? and shall not the
Power of the same God prevail with thee to save thy self, by a little pains
only in mortifying an unprofitable Lust or two? Shall this indulgent Father
Kill a Son (in whom was all his earthly happiness,) at the will of God, and
that Son as quietly lie still in a minutely Expectation of the destructive
Gash, while he does it from a pious Conformity to the same Will? Nay further,
shall God Himself for such a Slave to Sin and Lust as Thou, lay hold on the
dearly Beloved of his Soul, and most pitilesly suffer him to be Mangled and
Torn, nothing all over but Wounds and Gore, and Himself all the while silent
and submissive? Not a murmuring Thought seizing on his heart, not a
discontented Syllable passing his Lips, while he has nothing to comfort him
but the Remembrance of the Happiness that thy unsensible Self may reap from
those Sorrows? When now after after all this his very Passion is Ridiculed, the
whole Process looked on but as Story and Romance: The Stone of his Sepulcher
rolled on thine own Heart, shutting thee up in Unbelief, and hardening thee to
that degree, that nothing but murdering a second time will serve thy Turn; the
Jewish Malice rekindled within thee, and thou art Crucifying him afresh, with
the same Fury, driving in more Nails into his holy Body than ever did they, and
giving him more bitter Potions to drink! The Angel from Heaven not hearkened to,
when he cries to thee to spare Isaac. Blessed Redeemer! Is this the Fruit of
thy Sacrifice! Did our true Isaac bleed for this? Was the Fountain of Life
opened to gush out in so full a Stream, for no other end but to damm up the
Current of Sin and Uncleanness, that it should not issue from us, but abide in
us for ever? Was this the Mercy promised to our Father Abraham, That we should
be delivered up into the hands of our Enemies (of whom Sin is the greatest) and
not from them? Where is the blessing (so often repeated) of being turned away
from Iniquity, if we continue for ever in it? How long has Jesus been a
Savior from the Guilt, and not from the Dominion of Sin? Is he become
favorable to the Thorns that pierced His Sacred Head, and the Spear that
wounded his innocent Heart, that He can tolerate them in Christian Hands? In
vain do Men think Him reconciled to these Traitors, because themselves give
them harbor: When they know not how soon they may be surprised in the Guilt of
that Treason, and made to suffer the Penalties of Eternal Death for it; either
Isaac must be sacrificed, or themselves, for not doing it.

Abraham (by this) having given convincing Evidence of his perfect Integrity,
and unreserved Devotion to the Divine Precept, God is so greatly Affected with
it, that he cannot forbear from letting him know how very grateful this Eminent
Service was unto him: He first sends him down Letters Testimonial, whereon he
sets his Seal to the Truth of Abraham's Religion, (which all his true Heirs
must imitate and follow) Now I know that thou fear God, etc. Thou fear
God, and I know it, and all the World shall know it too, by what thou have
done, etc. And further, for his sake he will now be so very kind to confirm to
him and his for ever, all the Mercies of his Gracious Covenant, with the
unalterable Ratification of an Oath, which shall make it impossible to be
broken, and as sure to them as Truth it self can make it: That as Abraham had
been faithful to God in his Obedience and Duty to him; so it should be past all
possibility for God himself to fail in his Promises, or be unfaithful, that he
should not perform the Mercies he had formerly engaged to grant them who should
walk in the same steps of Abraham's Faith and Sincerity. By this Grace he
opened his very Heart to show them the Immutability of his Council, and
Greatness of his Affections to them, with this advice, That they would draw
from this Living Well the refreshing Draughts of strong Consolation: When they
shall consider, That God must first cease to be, e're he be unconstant or fail
in his purposes of showing Kindness to them.

What a reviving Julip is this to the drooping Spirits of Abraham's Children!
That all their Mercies are as secure to them as the very Being of God is to
Himself! Every Link of the whole Chain of their Salvation so strongly fixed,
that he seems not free from his Oath till they are Lodged in the same Kingdom
with him, whither he has so resolvedly sworn to bring them. It Is a strange
Faith that gives no Credence to the Oath of a God! As I live says the Lord,
that in blessing I will bless thee, etc.

Do but think, Reader, with what unspeakable Joy, the Soul of this holy Man
overflowed, not only for the preservation of his Sons life, but the Attestation
of his own Integrity, in that he had approved himself so faithful a Servant to
his great Lord, in yielding up his Isaac so cheerfully to his pleasure. Our
enjoyments are doubled to us in sweetness, when they have been first Offered in
Sacrifice by us, and we hold them only at his Devotion. In this work of
Righteousness, he had present peace, and in the effects of it, quietness and
Assurance for ever. The same Comfort has every Son of Abraham in the
conscionable discharge of his Duty, with a sweet Testimony of divine
Acceptance sealed to the Conscience by a ravishing voice from Heaven: He that
does my Commandments, and loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will
love him, and manifest my self to him. The obedient Soul shall not only be
loved of God, but a manifestation of that Love shall be given into Him by the
Witnessing Spirit. It Is Common in well doing, to hear ill from the World; but
Who ever did well for God, that heard ill from him? The Lord will Create the
Fruit of the Lips, Peace and Joy: While holy Paul triumphed in the Testimony of
his Conscience, that gave him the Assurance of his Truth and Sincerity, how
little did he value the censure of those that impudently branded him for a
Reprobate! 2 Cor. ult. Let God himself draw up the Certificate of Jobs
Integrity; That there was none like him in all the Earth: Yet will the very
Devil undertake to disprove him in it, and his Three Friends are all drawn in
to close with him, and by many Arguments labor to asperse him with the foul
Imputation of Hypocrisy, till that mistaken Counterfeit is accepted only to
pray away the guilt of that Ignorance, and then they look on him with the Eyes
of God. It Is no matter how thick these stones of Persecution ^lie upon us,
while with the Protomartyr the Heavens open to us, and our Eyes are blessed
with the glory of Jesus. How little would Abraham have felt the smart of
Reproaches from scandalous Mouths, whose Ears had heard that blessed Encomium
from God himself, Now I know that thou fear me! Not but that God knew it
before, but Abraham must know it too, that he might rejoycingly walk in the
pleasant light of Gods Love and his own Integrity together. He that has not
passed Abraham's trial, and given the same proof of Fidelity, cannot reasonably
expect to feel the same reward of Joy.

Let no Man think himself free from a Temptation of the same Magnitude, since
under the Gospel, not Isaac thy Son, but thou thy Self art called on, to be
Sacrificed on the same Mount: And he is accounted unworthy to be a Disciple,
that hates not his Own Life for the sake of his Master. The great Savior has
abounded in Votaries, proud of the Honor of writing their Love in the Blood of
their Hearts, and have been reduced into Ashes with as burning Affections to
his Glory, and has every where Those that hold their All at the only pleasure
of his Will; and who can at all times pass not only into Poverty and loss of
Estate, but also of Life for his Truth. They loved not their lives to the
Death, and should they never be called to climb the Mount and suffer the fatal
stroke, yet since the Sacrifice is ready and the Hand list up, God does accept
the ready mind, and Isaac is Sacrificed though yet alive: He is dead for Christ
on God's account, who is willing to die; it is the Heart and not the Blood that
he requires.

If Isaac the Fruit of the Body be refused, shall the Ram in the Thicket be
taken? Will the Lord be pleased with Rams, with thousands of them? Sacrifices
and Burnt-offerings thou would not, but God himself will provide the
Sacrifice, and prepare the Body of another Son of Abraham yet behind, he is the
only Lamb of God that must take away the sins of the World; him will God
accept, though Isaac be not taken.

In the despair of Abraham's Age must Isaac be called into Life, in the despair
of his Hopes must he be saved from Death. When the Knife is at the throat of
the whole Church, and Posts are every where flying with orders to give the
Blow, then shall Salvation break out; God is seen in the Mount still. When all
means of deliverance fail below, and his people brought into the extremest
streights, then does enlargement come from himself, that all the World may know
that He is God alone, and besides him there is no Savior.

CHAP. XI.
Sarah's Death. Abraham's Purchase of a Grave for Her.

ABraham's Affections were not so strongly rooted (as the Trees of his pleasant
Grove) into the Soil of Gerar, but he can easily pluck them up, to be
transplanted from Beersheba into his Canaan again. The Heart that is fixed unto
God, does ever hang loose from the Earth: It is he that makes all places a-like
delightful to us by the Gracious Shine of his Presence; Fear not, Jacob, to go
down into Egypt, for I will go with thee.

Abraham who not long since enjoyed God in the Mount, and had the Life of a Son
given him, must now as contentedly pass down into the Valley of Tears, and
suffer the Death of a Wife. Six and thirty years enjoyment had God given her of
the delight of her Heart, (she that so long had patiently waited for him,
should not too hastily be hurried from him) but now must she pass from her
Abraham and Isaac together, to the God of both. The great Sarah dies: Twice
already had she been sent for, and taken from her Husband by Kings, but now
(never to return more) she is once for all sent for to the King of Heaven, who
provides her a place in his Own, till Abraham comes to lay her again in his
Bosom. The Angels she had entertained in her Tent, give her welcome into
Glory, and furnish her Lodgings suitable to the Quality of the Great Mother of
all the Faithful, and Wife to the Friend of God. That all Generations may know
what respect God himself bore unto Sarah, she alone of all her Sex has the
peculiar Honor to have her Age registered in the Rolls of Heaven; who
notwithstanding all her Labor and Travel, ever moving from one Nation to
another, from one Kingdom to another People, kept up an unwearied Courage and
Faith, till God in Pity put an end to all her Toils, and sent her a Writ of
Ease in the Hundred twenty and Seventh year of her Life.

Holy David has well observed, that our whole Life is but as a Tale that is
told; (and God knows the Lives of too many make up a very Inconsiderable and
sad one.) This great Lady, the very Mirror of Women and Wives, for her
incomparable Piety, unspotted Purity, unparalled Patience, exemplary
Subjection, and incessant Pers^verance in all, makes up an History, and when
all the Memories of the great Princesses of the World are devoured by Time and
buried in Oblivion; the smallest Circumstances of Her Life must survive them
all, and Her story exactly Chroni^led in the everlasting Volums. Sarah may not
laugh but all the World must know it; she may not pay her dutiful Respect to
her Husband, by giving him his Title of Lord, but that Obedience must be
recommended to the imitation of all her Daughters, above Two thousand years
after, with a gracious design to keep up her Honor and Memory for ever.

Abraham receives the tidings of her Death with lamentable Resentment, and
passes in a grave and solemn Procession into her Tent, (as the House of
Mourning) to pay her the just Tribute due to the merits of so incomparable a
Consort. There instead of a Wife he finds a Corpse, whose cold Che^ks and wan
Lips he bedews with his warmer Tears, which yet give some little ease to his
heavy Heart from the oppression of that Grief that is ready to break it. Here
the remembrance of all her Goodness and Virtues crowd in upon his Mind and
Memory, which while he reflects on, (together with his own loss of them all)
his Spirits are broken; the loss of his Friends and Country cost him not a
Sigh, he hardened himself against the Fate of Isaac, but his dear Sarah's Death
melts him into Water. The joyful sense of divine Grace does not so perfectly
banish away natural grief, but that the best of Saints, even Abraham, and Jesus
himself, under the Tyrannies of Fate shall find themselves subject to those
Passions, as loudly speak them to be but Men.

Behold the great Sarah lying Dead, and the mighty Prince her Husband
(acknowledged to be such by all the Chieftains of the Country where he dwells)
not Proprietor of so much Earth, as shall suffice to Ground her Monument; nor
is this so great a Wonder, when afterward we find (his Heir) the Lord of all
the Creation in the same condition, and obliged to a Friend to lend him a
Grave. Who can date an Happiness to himself from his Interest in the Turf and
Clod, when Jesus and Abraham have not so much Glebe in the World of their own,
as to set a Foot on? How unlike to their Father were those degenerous Children
of Abraham, who joined House to House, and lay Field to Field, till there was
no place for others, that they alone might be placed in the Earth! Isa. 5.8.
Does it teach us nothing, that Abraham (so exceedingly Rich as he was) should
never mind to purchase Land of Inheritance, but only for a Burying-place here
in the Earth? He Sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country,
dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the Heirs with him of the same
Promise. Why did he this, but because he looked for a City which has
Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God? If we had Abraham's Faith, we
should have Abraham's Spirit, as free and disengaged from the World as He:
When, God knows, our Affections are so deeply Riveted into the Creature and
pleasures of Life, that we have as little Will to mind the purchase of a
Sepulcher, as he to buy an Inheritance amongst Men. Indeed the whole Kingdom
was his own in Reversion, and surely secured to his Children; while his own
Faith was Estate enough, with the Promise of God for Himself to live on. While
we was Traveling on, keeping Heaven in his Eye, he had no leisure to think of
a poor settlement in the Earth. 'Twas not for Pilgrims to wait on Building,
whose affections were no deeper staked to the World, than the slender Pillars
of their movable Tabernacles, which they lightly pluck up with ease and have to
follow the conduct of that gracious Providence that ever so faithfully led
them; they little minded Palaces, who were themselves nothing else but the
goodly Habitations of God upon Earth, to whom he therefore retired so often,
with the sweetest Assurances of their Interest in a City of his own Raising,
where he attended their Company with him, and came down so frequently but to
see whether they were ready for it.

Indeed it was not the design of God that Abraham should fix any where long,
whom he intended to make a public Blessing every where, and therefore being
always ordered to remove upon every Call of God, it was requisite that his
Estate should have Wings too, and be ready to Fly with Himself into every
Country where God had Business for him to do: Nor was this the least
Diminution to him, but rather an Increase of his Grandeur; since all Motions of
Princes bear the greater Majesty from the splendid Appearance that attends
them: you might have seen his Royal Pavilion, graced with the Flagg of Honor
waving in the Air, sorrounded by Those of his Sons and Servants at an awful
distance: The Wagons of his Ammunition guarding those of his Treasure, while
the numerous Flocks of his Cattle and Herds feed round about him securely, and
the Trained Bands of his Household standing by turns as Sentinels over all: Not
to mention the invisible Troops, who as Tutelars gave their constant Attendance
upon him, and ever adjoined him as his Guard. The Kings of the Earth knew well
enough that God was with him as a sure Refuge.

In this Glorious Estate was Abraham, when his Lady left it All to be
translated into better. She passes from one Heaven below to another Above; from
the Courts of Princes to the Palace of a God: Her Earthly Part was the care of
Abraham to provide for: He will not meanly dispose of the Cabinet, wherein so
precious a Jewel for so many years has had its Lodging: An Honorable
Interment is equally Abraham's Duty, and Sarah's due.

There was a Cave in the Field of Machpelah, (now in the possession of Ephron
the Hittite,) which pleased him well, he had cast his Eye upon it, (not as
Ahab, covetously Sick for Naboth's Vineyard) but as a convenient Purchase, if
the Good Will of the Right Owner shall please to favor his Innocent desires of
Appropriating it to himself by his Money: And now that he had present need of
it, he is forced to make use of those honest means, that with greatest
Probability may succeed to his Wishes and want. He Convocates the Neighboring
Heads of the Country ( Ephron being one,) whom with a Gravity mixed with
Majesty, he Addresses to this Effect.

I freely acknowledge it the Natural Right of the Lords of the Country to
Grant Liberty to Strangers to make Purchases in their Land. I am a Stranger
among you, and must declare my thankful Resentments of that Kindness which has
permitted me so free and peaceable Cohabitation with you. It has pleased God
to Call away my Wife from the World, for whose Sepulture I must make some
Provision, and it will not be long e're I my self shall follow Her. This is
only my Request to you, that I may have Liberty to purchase a Burying-place
with you, where we may rest in Death with the same Quiet and Peace, as we have
continued amongst you in Life.

To the Reproach and Confusion of our more Ill-natured and Paganish Christians,
let us take notice with what Civility and Condescension these Heathens framed
their courteous Replication to him.

Hear us, my Lord, Thou art a mighty Prince among us, and we know that God is
with thee. We have no Power or Will to deny thy desires: Make thine own
Election, in the choicest of our Sepulchers bury thy Dead: None of us shall
withhold his Sepulcher from thee, but that thou may bury thy Dead.

While Real Piety in all its Services aims only to bring Glory to God; He, in a
gracious Compensation of so good Intention, makes that Honor to beat back on
it self. God is honored by Abraham, and Abraham is honored by God: There is
no Man that gives his Heart unto him, but who shall find it again in the Hearts
of others; The surest way to secure the Affections of Men, is first to devote
our own unto God.

Prince Abraham will not receive this Complement without giving Demonstration
to them, That he is not more High in Estate than Humble in Spirit: He arises,
and makes them a Genteel Bow, in Acknowledgment of their great Civility and
Kindness to him in that Offer: Yet while they were all so courteous, 'twas
Ephron alone that must gratify his desires, and all the Kindness the rest can
do him, was but to Intercede for him, that on valuable consideration his Field
and the Cave in it might be secured to him and his Heirs for ever. -- But when
the brave Hittite perceives himself concerned in Abraham's Choice, and that He
only has the desired Cave that must be honored in becoming the Repository of
these precious Ashes; how proudly does his Liberality contest with Abraham's
Justice, and is hardly conquered from Resolutions of giving that Freely, which
Abraham desires only at a Price. What pity is it that sweet Disposition and
Generosity should go to Hell, while sordid Niggardliness and base Selfishness
hope for Heaven! Can bare Nature so easily depart from her Rights on Earth,
which has no pretense for others in Heaven, while those who pretend an
Interest there, have their very Souls cleaving to the Dust below, and their
feet sticking fast in the Mire; are so far from yielding up the least shadow of
a Title to what they have of their Own, that they greedily invade and fly upon
the Properties of Others: Abraham tho he minds not to accept the noble proffer;
yet is so greatly affected with it, that once again he repeats his grateful
Sense of Ephron's, and all their Reverence toward him, by an yet more humble
Obeysence than before. He bowed himself down before the people of the Land. Who
can see this Great Prince, and Friend of God, twice together paying his Duty of
civil Respect and Honor to the very Heathen, by the External Demonstrations of
it, without pity toward those Rude and Unmannerly Professors of our Age, whose
very Religion has no other Test of Distinction but Surliness and Inhumanity.

Abraham while he is treating about a Grave, takes great Care that he may lie
down in it with a peaceable Conscience: He has been hitherto a mighty Pattern
of Holiness in all his Transactions with God: Here we shall find him an Example
of Righteousness, in all his Affairs with Men: That all his Children may know
that Commutative Justice and the Duties of the Second Table were written by the
same hand that will require as exact Observation of them, as of all the other
of the First. In vain do we pretend Sanctity to God, if we are not Righteous to
Men. He that does Righteousness is of God, and he that loves his Brother. See
how Strait the Lines of Abraham's Righteousness run through all the management of
this Compact with Ephron.

First, He will by no means take advantage of his Neighbors Good Nature
against his Profit; he will neither defraud him, nor suffer him to defraud
himself by an easy Disposition. Hear me, I pray thee, I will give thee money
for the Field, take it of me, etc.

Secondly, When he has the equitable Value of the Land set to him, he
undervalues it not, in hopes to beat down the Price: It is Naught, it is
Naught, says the Buyer; but when he is gone his way he boasts.

Thirdly, He makes present Payment for what he Buys, and purchases not with
Paper and Wax: Abraham weighed out the Silver, etc.

Fourthly, He Buys not Good Land with Bad Coin; but all is Current Money with
the Merchant.

Lastly, The Conveyances are Sealed, and Witnesses taken, to prevent all Causes
of future Debate: The Field was made sure unto Abraham in the presence of the
Children of Heth, and before all, etc.

And now is Abraham as pleased with a Grave, as ever was Prince of a Palace:
How many Men's Estates are their Graves while they live, and never think of
another. Their very Souls are buried in their Acres below, wherein if they
might, they would lie for ever. They Live and Rot in their Pleasures, and are
Dead while they seem to Live: Life to any thing but God, is but very Death.

This is the only Jointure that we find ever settled upon Sarah, which the
Heirs of her Body, against their coming to Age, shall find enlarged into a
Kingdom, for by the purchase of this little Field, which cost not much more
than Two and twenty Pounds or thereabouts, he had given Security to the Faith
of his Posterity, That God would one day give them the Inheritance of that
whole Land, where Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with Sarah, Rebekah and Leah, lay
close together to keep possession for them until themselves should come: And
sure there is a better Security given to us also by his Great Heir, Jesus
Christ, who is gone before us, and entered into the Heavens as a Forerunner to
prepare places for us: That where he is, we may be also. And is not his Spirit
lying Leiger in us, as the Earnest of our Inheritance until the Redemption of
the purchased Possession, to the praise of his Glory.

It Is observable, That after Sarahs Death, God makes no more Appearances to
Abraham from Heaven, having now performed the Great Promise of a Seed, he
leaves him to walk in the Light and Comfort of those he had already made: To
teach us that the Great Heir being now come into the World (in whose coming all
the Promises are perfectly secure to the Faithful) the Church is not to expect
any Extraordinary Revelations of any farther Truths than what he has already
sent into the World by his Son. He has now sealed up the whole Canon, and will
hereafter be silent for ever. To these received, we ought to trust, in the Hope
of these we ought to Live, in the Comfort of these we ought to dye. For this
cause God in the close of his whole Book has carefully contrived the
Prevention of Alterations, Additions or Diminutions, by the Menace of an
Eternal Curse imposeable on that Guilt; and the multiplying Plagues upon Him
that shall add any thing to it: There being enough Written (if well believed)
to make us Blessed and Happy for ever.

CHAP. XII.
Isaac 's Marriage.

FOr Three full years together had Isaac mournfully lamented the Death of his
Mother, now will God make up that loss to him in a Wife. Eliezer the Steward of
his Fathers House is dispatched as Legate (with an Angel Attendant) into
Mesopotamia, and takes with him his Masters Orders, where and from whom to
choose him a Daughter. Abraham before his Journey Swears him to Fidelity in an
Affair of so grand Importance, and he as cautiously Swears, that he might the
more Religiously keep his Oath. When he draws near the place, he Invocates his
Masters God for Prosperity and good Success, and begs that the first Match may
be made up between the Decrees of Heaven and his own Endeavors, that they
might not thwart each other, but happily Marry together. He humbly resigns up
his own Discretion to the wise Council of God, which he knew had determined
already in the fittest Choice of a Wife for so great a Prince as Isaac. He knew
that Marriages were made in Heaven: Let her whom thou have appointed, etc. His
Prayer is no sooner made than granted. Those drive on heavily, where God knocks
off the Wheels of Expedition, but where Himself is in the Course, the Chariot
flees like that of Aminadab. Abraham might have taken his Choice of all the
Princesses of Canaan for his Son; but behold here a Woman with a Pitcher on her
Shoulder, is ordained to make his Daughter! Has not God chosen the Poor of
this World, Rich in Faith, to make a Spouse for his own Son? We Note not the
Meanness of Rebekahs Family, (the same with Abraham's) but the Simplicity and
Innocence of those early Times in the plain Education of their Children, when
Pride and Idleness ruins our own. Eliezer is so far from liking her the worse,
that her Humility was the only Virtue that recommended her to him, and the
Woman that could be so courteous and lowly to draw Water for himself and his
Camels, is a concurrent Evidence from Heaven to his own judgment, of the best
Wife for his Young Master. While the Dainty Fingers of our Ladies muff up
themselves from Rebekahs Pitcher and Rachel's Crook; God thinks them unworthy
to be promoted into the Beds of Isaac and Israel in the Family of Abraham. It Is
the humble Mary, that (in the rejection of all the Proud Princesses of the
World) is called to the everlasting Honor of drawing out her Breasts to a God.
Eli^zer makes the first Attack upon Rebekahs Heart by a Charge of Jewels, and
Manacles her Arms and Affections together. Now is the House and all in it too
little for him, into which she runs (as his Prisoner) with the Chains on,
little yet thinking that within a day or two she should be drawn out of it by
the Man whom she calls her Brother to lead in. The diligent Servant will
receive no Entertainment, till he knew whether his Message may not be as
welcome as his Person. It Is not enough that he comes from Abraham, unless he
may go away with Rebekah. He politickly takes the course of the World, and
first presents them with an Inventory of his Great Masters Estate. He thinks
that the Argument of Riches will prevail more than that of Consanguinity, and
he Doubles it to them, when he truly tells them that all was given him of God.
His Gold would wear like Iron, without the Canker of a Curse upon it: And to
all he adds this, That the Excellent Person he woes for, is the Sole Heir of
all: And in conclusion, entreats the result of their Thoughts, and that they
might come to some speedy Resolution.

So good a Motion as this, requires no long time for Consideration, unless they
purpose to deliberate to their own disadvantage. They could not mend themselves
any where in all the World, and therefore they think it Prudence to come off
Frankly, and yield up a ready Consent. They plainly perceive a Divine
Providence in the Motion, and will not oppose the Holy Will and Wisdom of God:
Behold Rebekah is before thee, take her and go, etc. The Hearts of Men are in
the Hands of God, therefore Eliezer humbly bows in Thanksgiving to the God that
had bowed them. The Good Servant had learnt this holy Practice from his Old
Master, that was ever falling down before his Maker. Not a word all this while
of any Portion, it is a Wife that Abraham requires for his Son, not Money.
Matters thus Auspiciously concluded, the Presents are delivered, first to the
Bride and then to her Friends: This was the laudable Custom of Antiquity.
Rebekah by these Jewels may judge beforehand what a well-furnished Closet she
will find at home. All Parties are satisfied, Mirth and Joy refresh their
Hearts, while they eat and drink together in Love. Eliezer (as a good Servant)
urges dispatch, while they plead for Ten days time to take leave of their
Sister. The Controversy at length is referred to Rebekah her self, who
modestly yields her assent to the Stewards Request. She is dismissed with her
Nurse and Maids, and a Thousand Prayers to attend them. While we leave them a
little on the Journey, let us take notice how happy she is like to be in an
Husband.

Isaac's Holy Mind was not so vainly carried away with the pleasing Conceits of
Marriage, that should cause him to neglect the Remembrance of his Duty to God:
Piety is the sure Ground of every Blessing; He builds aright indeed, that lays
his foundation in Heaven. The World is but a tottering Basis, that has buried
the Greatest Families in Ruin. Blessed is the Heart that is first Married to
Christ, and from the Crowd of Distractions here below, makes very frequent
Retreats to keep up a daily Converse with the Spiritual Husband, who is not so
Strange or Unkind, but will give it a Meeting at any time, and manifest Himself
to it: Thou Lord meetest him that rejoices in thee. We are assured he will not
fail drawing near to those that draw near to him. This was the Heavenly
Practice of Isaac, the Holy Son of so Blessed a Father, whose Soul was ever
filled with God. What a lovely Draught of his Devotion has the Divine Pencil
presented to our Eye. Isaac went out to meditate in the Fields in the Evening.
Meditation is the Souls pitching on some Branch of the Tree of Life, where it
sits viewing its own Happiness, and chirping out Praises to God the Author of
it. Next to Abraham, no Man living had a more pleasant Prospect of sweeter
Objects than Isaac to contemplate. Heaven and Earth was but one Field for his
unlimited Soul to walk in: From the lower Terraces here in the World (without
the help of his Sons Ladder) might he mount up to the the Turrets above, and
Feast his Eyes with the Glories of Paradise. He was equally Heir of both
Canaan's, confirmed to him by the very Oath of God. Could he want Subject then
for holy Meditation, or Praise, or Comfortable Matter for his busy Thoughts to
work on? Thoughts are the Issues of the Mind, that Prolifick Parent, whose
Children are all of one Nature with it self, and never differ in Quality from
it: If that be Terrestrial, so are They; but if Holy, they cannot be unclean,
and should they prove so, they are with Ishmael cast out: There is no lodging
for them in Abraham's House.

Behold Isaac's Pious Exercise (like an Antiquated Custom) grown quite out of
Use: The Defection of the Old World come upon us. All the Imaginations of the
Heart (for the greatest part of Men) evil, and only evil, and that continually:
God is not in all their thoughts. He by whom we have the Power and Faculty of
Thinking, quite forgotten: The very Cream of our Souls leaking out in full
Streams after Vanity, and nothing left for God; Ephraim feeds on Wind. But
has the Christian no better fare to Feast on? Has God spread all the
Treasures of his unsearchable Grace, and laid them before him, to make his own
Choice, and to take them all to himself? Is this price in his hand to be happy
for ever, and has the Fool no heart to it? Is the Everlasting Charter fairly
Copied out, and sent him down from above to peruse and read over, wherein he
finds all the Privileges of Heaven and Earth made over and secured to him, and
all this not worthy reflecting on: And the Book lying as fast clasped up as his
own Heart? See how grievously God takes this Affront to his Goodness. I have
written to him the great things of my Law, but they were counted as a strange
thing: A matter not concerning them at all. The Feast is prepared, and all
things ready, themselves Invited, but they make light of it, they have other
Pleasures to follow! O Judicial Blindness! O cursed Insensibleness! Israel
would none of me, so I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts,, to walk in
their own Councels. He that has no Heart for God, may jealously fear that God
has no Heart for him. Pray not for this People, for my mind cannot be toward
them. Why? Their Heart is turned away from me: Yet is this but the first
Seething of the deadly Poison, see it boiling up into the height of a mutual
Abhorrency and Loathing. Their Soul abhorred me, and my Soul loathed them.
Tremble to think on the fatal Effects of thy Hearts aversion from God: It Is a
perfect Predamnation, the very Devils arrive at no greater height of Impiety:
And thou that wilt not meditate Love, may shortly meditate Terror, and become
a Magor Missabib, a very Fiend to thine own Self: Go miserable Creature! sit in
the Dust, lie on the Ground, cloth thee with Ashes, put on Sackcloath, let
bitter Tears be thy drink! Abhor thy Self! Thy Soul is departed from God, and
God (as from Saul) is departed from thee, and what will thou do in the end
thereof? On what will thy miserable Thoughts feed on to Eternity? 'Twere a
Judgment to pass one day without Meditation on God! but how will thou spend an
endless Life without him? which yet thou can not do, while all thy Faculties
will be enlarged to take in naught but Plagues and Torments, which here fed on
nothing but Vanity and Leasing: There thou will do nothing else but think on
His Wrath on thy Self and Others, who here had no leisure or Heart to think
on his Love and Goodness to thy Self and Others. Bethink thy self a little,
while thou art in the World, summon up thy Considerative Faculties, set them
all at work to ruminate on the unchangeable Estate wherein thou will either
Praise or Blaspheme the Name of God for ever: Have thou a Soul given thee for
no other Work but to complete thine own Misery? And does God wait upon thee but
until thou fittest thy Self for destruction, whiles thou art little thinking
how soon it will come upon thee? And then all the vain Thoughts that lodge
within thee, will take their flight from thee, and perish for ever with thee:
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider thy ways. And remember, it is the proper
work of the Rational Soul (and of no other Creature but Angels) to reflect on
it self, and wisely to project for its future Happiness. When God has laid
before thee all the Contrivances of his everlasting Councels and Love toward
thee in Jesus Christ; and set Him forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his
Blood, that thine Eyes and Heart may be astonished with Admiration of such
Mercy: That this White Flag should hang up so long, and none consider the Black
One of Judgment may appear in its stead; when all hopes of Life are gone and
departed for ever: This is an Evidence of a fatal Obduration, and a mighty
Contempt of Divine Grace. See Sinner! Mercy is yet offered! Proposals of Peace
are laid before thee! Consider, thy Life and Soul are in hazard; if thou art
drawing lines with Archimedes in the Dust, while the City is stormed, and the
Enemy entered, the next News will be the Sword in thy Bowels, and an everlasting
Adieu to thy presumptuous Hopes.

But while Isaac's holy Heart was better exercised, and he was sweetly walking
with his God in the Fields, his Eyes discover the Camels Coming. In the doing
thy Commandments there is great Reward: Mercy overtakes him in the midst of
Duty. In the very Moment that he is enjoying God, God gives him the Enjoyment
of his Rebekah, to whom (for the Honor that she does him in lighting off her
Came^l, and Veyling her self at the first Meeting) he pays so entire Affection
and constant Love, that in all his Life he never leaves her to depart into
another Bed: And having now gotten so good a Wife, he endeavors to forget the
loss of a Mother, and to remember his Sorrow no more.

I question not but the Readers Observation has already prevented me, in the
Noting of the clearest Allegory of the Proceedings of God in the raising a Seed
to his Son, illustrated by the Care of Abraham in this Transactions of Isaac's
Nuptials: It Is the Project and the Council of his Will to propose him as the
Spiritual Husband to his Church. He makes the first Motion by his Servants that
are sent forth to Woe and Beseech: They are sworn to Fidelity, under the
dreadful penalties of destruction to themselves, if they be found Careless or
Unfaithful in so great a Trust. Their Blood will I require at thy Hand. The
Arguments they use, are the Promises of an Everlasting Inheritance, durable
Riches and Honor in the heavenly Canaan: There is nothing required but bare
Consent, and an hearty willingness to the Match. What does the Lord require of
thee, etc. My Son give me thine Heart only. The Holy Spirit cooperates with
the Messengers, and helps to convince and persuade. Our Gospel came not in Word
only, but in Power, and in the Holy Ghost. He enlightneth the mind to see what
are the Hopes of his Calliing, and how great the Riches of the Inheritance. He
works the Heart to a free Consent; Thy People shall be willing; etc. When Faith
is wrought, and Consent gotten, the Jewels are produced; Gifts and Graces:
After ye believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit. Dispatch is urged; Be
ye ready, the Faithful Soul called to depart: Hearken O Daughter, and consider,
incline thine Ear, forget thine own People, and thy Fathers House. While she is
traveling on the Road of Life, the Bridegroom meets her; I will manifest my
self unto her; she receives him covered with a Veyl, and blushing at the
Thoughts of her unworthiness: But he likes her the better, and greatly delights
in her Beauty, while the Worships him as her Lord, and passes in with him into
the everlasting Pavilion, where she alone enjoys his Love, and entire Person
for ever. We shall be ever with the Lord: -- Wherefore comfort one another with
these words.

The Nuptials of Isaac thus happily Celebrated, (and Rebekah in Possession of
Sarah's Tent) what has the joyful Father to expect more than an happy
Translation to Heaven: But to hear of a Marriage Bed instead of a Grave, and
six flourishing Branches to spring out from the Dead Stock of his Body; this is
a little strange and surprising. Let not my Reader profane himself by imputing
Levity, much less Lasciviousness to Him that for so long a time had conversed
with Angels, and God Himself on Earth: For as Jesus could not Bow his Sacred
Head, nor give up the Ghost before each Syllable that was Prophesied of Him was
perfectly fulfilled, even to the bitter Draught of Vinegar and Gall in his last
Moments; so neither could Abraham suffer a Demise ever the Promises made to Him
were as perfectly Accomplished: And by the Power of a Divine Revelation, (I
will make thee a Father of many Nations,) he is Invigorated with Prolifick
Virtue for blessing six Countries more with Princes from his own Body: Nor
shall this Numerous Brood of Keturah be injurious to the Great Heir, the very
Offal of the Estate shall suffice for Portions to Them, while Isaac's Dishes
stand never the Thinner on his Table. Let the Men of this World run away with
the poor Legacies of general Providence: Heaven is enough and enough for the
true Heirs of God. Lord, however hardly thou deal with me here in the World,
Reserve a Portion for me with thy Self, and it shall suffice.

The Glorious Sun is now upon Setting, and my Pencil must prepare to draw the
Shadows of the Night, which are Doubled by the shutting up the Eyes of the
Great Abraham in Death. Since Eternity was Retail'd into Parcels of Time and
Days, never was there a Century better passed in Universal Obedience to the
Glory of the God of Life, whose Divine Wisdom thinks it but just to send him a
Writ of Ease from all his Travels under the Sun; and having finished the Work
he had given him to do, to call for him Home, and to fix him in his Lodgings
with Himself in the Unmovable Kingdom.

Abraham is dead, and the Prophets: They have chalked out to us the Path of
Life, and then retired to Heaven. With what Impudence can any Church tell me,
That if I follow the Steps of the Great Abraham, believe and Live as He; yet
shall I never Arrive to his Bosom, unless I seal to the Articles of their own
devising, and believe what Abraham's Holy Heart would have Risen at, and
Abhorred to consent to? Should God send again this holy Saint from Heaven to
walk a while among his Children on Earth, retaining still but his own
Principles, and teaching them to others, as what were sufficient to bring them
to Happiness, in a Zealous Rejection of all the vain Inventions of Men, imposed
now on the Christian World, under the Anathema's of Death; confident I am, even
Abraham would very hardly escape the Censures of the Cursed Inquisition, which
Wracks the Faith of every Soul (within its Clutches) into larger Extensions of
impossible things to be Credited, than the Tortured Joints are drawn out to
under the cruel Twitches of the Tyrannical Engine.

If Revelation of Divine Truth, imprinted on the Heart (fitted and softened to
receive the Impression upon it,) and gaining upon the Affections to embrace and
delight in it, working off the Life from unsuitable Practices, to reduce it
into a Natural and pleasing Conformity to the Holy Rule, be not enough to
secure me from the Dangers of Error and Delusion, wherewith the Superstitious
World so uncharitably charges every Dissenter from its Follies, (so
unreasonably imposed,) let me contentedly dye, and put it to the Trial before
the Tribunal of the Great Judge; who I am sure cannot deny his own Work, in
Attempering an Heart to his Holy Knowledge and Obedience, that naturally is so
Averse and Rebellious against both: And for Appendices to Religion, Policies of
Government, and offensive Ceremonies, etc. I can easily distinguish (in the
Light of Truth) how far I am obliged to conform to them for the sake of Peace
and Honor of the Church; and in the same Light to differ from them, where they
dissent from the Truth, and grate too much upon Conscience; and yet still it is
my Duty to pay Respect (so far as I can) to the Persons of Men: Tho I know it
mine Interest in no wise to bend to their Principles, or close in with them in
Cringing to a false God; and this I learn from Abraham, whose Demeanor toward
the Children of Heth was full of Condescension and Civil Respect, while he
would have chosen to Dye, rather than given them the Honor of his Presence in
their Idolatrous Temples. Civility and an Endearing Carriage has its huge
Advantages in the World, where Crabbedness and a Morose look is not only
ungenteel, but affrighting. If Abraham had been a Person of a Rugged
Supercilious Deportment amongst Men, how dimly had his Light shined in the
Diversity of Nations, where God directed him to go! how little had his
Profession profited toward an embracing of the Truths he followed! I think it
may be truly Remarqued, That the Generous and obliging Spirits of some
Gentlemen in the Romish Communion, have done more to allure the Minds of our
unstable Neighbors, to harbor good Thoughts of their ill Religion, than all
the designing Attempts of their Priests, whose Cloyst^^ naturally breed them to
a sort of Carriage that never fails to create Jealousies and Fears upon the
Minds of Men that occurr them; and bespeak them rather to stand upon their
Guard against them, than to receive them in open Arms of Love: And while very
few of that Fraternity can give a rational Account of at least Two parts in
Three of their Faith, which they ever devolve upon the Church, (who takes care
too that a prying Inspection be ever discouraged and Brow beaten) it shall
suffice me to walk in the luster of Abraham's Religion, from whom the Reformed
Churches have received the Pattern; and care not to follow any other: And for
my Self, had I a thousand Souls to Answer for, I would adventure them all upon
the pure and unspotted Profession of Him, who had all his Knowledge from God
sanctified into an Excellent Life, which fitted him in the End for a Glorious
Death, and a blessed Eternity.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultrey, over
against the Compter.
(1) A Continuation of Morning Exercise Questions and Cases of Conscience
practically Resolved by 31 Reverend and Learned Divines in the City of London,
in October, 1682. Printed in a very large Quarto. Price bound 10 s.

(2) A complete History of the Lives, Trials, Sufferings, Deaths and Characters
of all those Excellent persons who fell in the West of England and elsewhere,
from the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfry to this present time, with the Pictures
of several of the chief of them in Copper plates: To which is added, The Life,
Death and Character of George Lord Jefferies. Written by a Person of great
Learning and Piety.

(3) Reformed Religion or Right Christianity described, in its Excellency and
Usefulness in the whole Life of Man: Wherein is given an Impartial Character of
a Right Christian in General, of a right Christian Minister, of a right
Christian Magistrate, of a right Christian Subject, of a right Christian
Worship, of a right Christian Parliament, and of a right Christian Soldier:
Written by M. Barker Minister of the Gospel in London. Price bound 1 s.

(4) Mr. Howes Sermon at the Funeral of that Faithful and laborious Servant of
Christ Mr. Richard Fairclough: price 6 d.

(5) The Joy of Faith, or a Treatise opening the true Nature of Faith, its
lowest Stature, and distinction from Assurance: with a preliminary Tract
evidencing the Divinity of the Sacred Scriptures. By Samuel Lee, M. A. sometime
Fellow of Wadham College, Oxon. price bound 1 s. 6 d.

(6) Early Piety, Exemplified in the Life and Death of Mr. Nathanael Mather,
who at the Age of 19 dyed an Instance of more than common Learning and Virtue.
The second Edition, with a Prefatory Epistle by Mr. Matthew Mead: price bound 1
s.

(7) Mr. Slater's Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. John Oaks: price 6 d.

(8) -- His Sermon preached to Young Men, at their desire, Dec. 25. 1688. price
6 d.

(9) Mr. Shower's Sermon upon the Death of a young Gentlewoman, Mrs. Ann
Barnardiston, Daughter of Nathanael Barnardiston Esquire late of Hackney, with her
Exemplary Life and Death.

(10) Mr. Roger's Sermon preached upon the Death of a Young Gentleman, with an
Account of the young Gentleman's Life and Death.

(11) A Sermon, occasioned by the Execution of a man found guilty of Murder,
preached at Boston, March 11. 1686. By Increase Mather Rector of Harvard
College in New-Engl. price bound 1 s.

(12) Mr. Baxter's Directions to a sound Conversion: The Fourth Edition: price
bound 2 s.

(13) Mr. Doolittel on the Sufferings of Christ from the Garden to the Grave:
price bound 2 s.

(14) A necessary Companion for a serious Christian, directing him aright
through the whole course of his Life: price bound 6 d.


