Philanax Anglicus: OR A CHRISTIAN CAVEAT FOR ALL Kings, Princes and Prelates,
How they entrust a sort of Pretended Protestants of Integrity, or suffer them
to commix with their respective Governments. Showing plainly from the
Principles of all their Predecessors, that it is impossible to be at the same
time Presbyterians, and not Rebels. WITH A Compendious Draught of their
Portraictures and Petigree done to the life, by their own Doctors dead hands,
perfectly delineating their Birth, Breeding, bloody Practices, and prodigious
Theorems against Monarchy.

Faithfully Published by T. B. Gent.

Tunc male res agitur, cum ad gustum populi Principatus exigitur.

Cassiod. Qui stat, videat ne cadat,

1 Cor. 10 12. LONDON, Printed for Theo: Sadler, next door to the Dolphin,
against Exeter house in the Strand, 1663

T. Jolley Esquire F. L. A.


To the Right Reverend Father in God, Gilbert Lord-Bishop of London, and Dean
of his Majesty's Chapel Royal.
AFter a tedious. Contraste with my self, whose Patronage I might most properly
implore, to protect this fatherless piece; I must needs confess that your
Lordship was the first and last of my thoughts; and I hope good reason will
vindicate me in that boldness.

First, Because your Lordship is by Divine Providence, chosen to be the
Diocesan of this great City, where so much mischief and villainy has been of
late (and we still may justly fear is) concentred: and your Lordship is so far
concerned in the care of those souls, that it may be hate yours, that those
whom you cannot bring into your Fold, by your sweet Paternal-Call, may be drawn
to it by the power of your Pastoral-staff, or abandoned to the mercy of their
own beloved Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing.

Secondly, Because your Lordship is honored to be so near his Majesty's Royal
Ear, and is, as to all Church matters, his chief Intellectus Agens; so your
Lordship is concerned again, to inform his Majesty of the Civil dangers, that
are like to proceed from such religious Mutineers. For this sect here treated
of, are of the very race of the Hyperphanii that ingenuous Barclay speaks so
largely of in his Argenis, Bar. Arg. lib. 2. fol. 92.93.94.
and descended from the same Father Usinulca, and are truly (as he is pleased
to say) a sort of people, who as certain creatures are nourished with poison,
so they grow strong in public calamities, and are only fatted with War and
slaughter. The first Children of the Church, bore neither rod nor stick to
plant faith in the hearts of men; but these Protestants of Integrity (as they
call themselves) have published a Religion to the world, all bristled with
Swords, all sooted over with the smoke of Canon, all besprinckled with the
blood of Christians. Senec. Epist. 24.
Now in such a case the Philosopher advises all Statesmen, Quicquid fieri
potest, quasi futurum cogitare, to conceive that all things may, which can come
to pass: and though the wisdom of Modern Statists has been seen a little in
some neat and cleanly evasions, fine deliveryes, and shiftings of dangers when
they are near, yet the most approveable part of prudence will be seen, as it
has always been your Lordships course, in solid and well-grounded preventions
of them before they fall, and to keep them aloof: and therefore Josephus that
learned Jew most judiciously advises likewise, that Bonum est dum adhuc stat
Navis in portu, Joseph. de Billo Jud. l. 2.
praecavere tempestatem futuram, and non eo tempore, quo in medias irrueris
procellas, trepidare; It is necessary for him that goes to Sea, to foresee a
Storm coming, if he can, and not to rush into the fury of the Seas, and tremble
at the tempest afterward; that will avail little, but to be rendered ridiculous
for rashness.

Your Lordship very well knows that this kind of Caterpillars when they have
once taken head, will not easily be taken off: and it is as true as old,
Turpius ejicitur, quam non admittitur. They are of the nature of those birds,
whose feathers are so imperious, that they will not quietly mix with the
plumage of others; if they do, they then consume them as with a dull file: Nor
are they unlike that unsociable Tree, which the wise Secretaries of Nature have
called by the name of If, that insensibly draws the juice of all plants to it.
But I need not enlarge more concerning the danger of their admission into
power; for there is none that has converst with them, but knows, that the Sea
it self is less furious, a Thunderclap less dreadful; nay the gall of
Dragons, and poison that swells up the necks of Asps, is much more tolerable.

My Lord, all this that I have said, is not to inform or advise your Lordship,
whose knowledge is super-excellent in all things; but to justify to the world,
the economy of your Prelatical Proceedings: For under whose wing soever this
Cockatrice Egg gets life, it will repay it with a death, and sting to the heart
of him whose bosom hatched it, ensnaring him in his own goodness. These
Cockatrice Christians doubtless intend nothing more (for they are not afraid to
speak it) than to play their old game over again, and rebel again against this
most Excellent and Clement King, and the Church, and will grow every day more
and more insolent upon his Majesty's, and your Lordships pious mildness and
gentleness: For we have seen sufficiently, that how great virtue soever may be
in a Prince, or Prelate, it will be all contemned by them, if there be not
seasonably added an opinion of their justice and severity: For no Persons in
power are better beloved of the people, than they that show in time, that they
have in themselves matter worthy of fear. They must be made I say to know, ere
it is too late, that the Miters of Prelates, are like the Crowns of the Kings of
Egypt, which carry Aspicks upon the top of them, that insensibly sting those
who too near approach with intention to offend them: and by this means your
Lordship shall prove to the world, that you have not spent so much time in your
former divine solitudes, and the sweet delights of your studyes, to gather so
much honey, but that you yet retain the vigor of a sting; which casts me
naturally upon the third and greatest reason of my present presumption: Which
is, that I have had the honor long to know your Lordship, (though the Author
of this piece now departed much longer and better) when you were a principal
Governor amongst us, in that most famous University of Oxford, the glorious
Seminary of so many great Spirits, that have held predominance in all manner of
learning and sciences, and Warden of Allsouls-Colledge: which has always been
a most principal part in that Pantheon, and like the Altar of the Sun, from
whence light has been borrowed to illuminate all other Lamps. I have been long
knowing (I say) to your most incomparable piety and parts; and indeed what is
fitter then that that Soul should be full of light and flames, that is to serve
others, for so great a guide? for by your Lordships great reading of men as
well as books, there are become incorporated in your sole person, the virtues
and faculties of thousands others. Your fair soul ever appeared to be (like the
Ibis, that precious bird of Persia that builds her nest always in Palms)
perpetually conversant in great contemplations, and had no more impressions of
earth, than the supreme Sphere of Celestial Bodies. As nothing was too high for
your understanding, so nothing was too low for your bounty and beneficence.
Psalm. 104. Ep. ad Heb.
God Almighty has bestowed upon you the gift which the Scripture attributes to
the Patriarch Joseph, to oblige hearts by sweetness; not unlike the Engines of
Archimedes, which made water mount in descending; so your Lordship ever caused
your humility to descend, but still to make it reascend to the sourse of the
prime sublimity; and your virtues upon earth, will make your Crowns in Heaven.
Your Lordship has always communicated your self with so much sweetness,
facility and affability, that you increased always respect by familiarity,
which usually dissolves it; and like a precious Amethyst, shined so much the
more, as it has been often worn. It has been only the mischief and misfortune
of our late times, that hindered your Lordship from being sooner preferred to
the Pontifical Robe; for the opinion of the world did point your Lordship out
for it with your first blooming beard: your early learning and gravity so much
anticipating your years, and virtue rendering you Reverend before time. But it
is your Lordships glory to have deserved the honor of a Bishopric, sooner
than to enjoy it.

Pardon my Lord, that I have dared to draw your youthful Character with my
rude pen; but those excellent endowments of your Soul, so much akcnowledged by
envy, cannot but be admired by truth. And now that your Lordship is so far
stepped into years, we find yet the vigor of your divine virtues augmented by
time, in their happy influences upon us, as it is said, that the best Incense
comes from old Trees, and Torches made of Aromatick-wood, cast out their
odoriferous Exhalations when they are almost wasted. Before you were an example
only to youth, but now your Lordship is become a pattern to Priests, and a
president to Prelates; under whose heart remains a Temple of true Piety. Who
then so proper for the highest Prelacy, as he that can entermarry Sobriety with
Chastity, and Piety with Learning? How pure ought those persons to be, who are
not only of the House of God, but of his Cabinet, and as it were of the very
bosom of God? In the Sacrifices to the Sun, there was never made an effusion
of Wine; How far from that then ought they to be, who are to sacrifice to the
great Master of the Sun? And Chastity as holy Zeno tells us, is happy in
Virgins, strong in Widows, St. Zeno.
faithful in the Married; but with Priests and Prelates, it ought to be as it
is in your Lordship, wholly Seraphical.

Some Bishops we have known, that have lived in Bishoprics like blind Cyclopes
in a hollow cave, insomuch that they have gone very far toward a persuasion of
the world, that piety was a thing almost impossible to be aspired to, like
ill-Physicians that make the sick despair of health, because they cannot cure
them. Julius Caesar wondered to see men dandle Apes, having Children in their
houses; and who can but admire in Prelates, to whom God has afforded so many
spir^tual Children, to see them kiss Monkeys, and it may be something worse,
play with Dogs, and carry Hawks, etc?

From all these vanities your Lordships known innocence and piety has always
defended you, and you appear now in the Church as you ought to do, like those
ancient Statues of Polycletes and Phydias, of which there was not a lineament
but spoke. Your Lordships example has been a perpetual Sermon, which is the
best of preaching (as St. Greg. Nazianzen divinely observes of the great St.
Athanasius) that his voice was as a Thunderclap, and his life a Lightning
flash; Greg. N.^z. in Jamb.
because words never thunder well, if examples enlighten not. There is no
Libertine but will be daunted at the sight of such a life, lead truly according
to Christianity: it is a mirror that kills Basilisks by the repercussion of
their own proper poison. So may your Lordship thunder on still, and enlighten
this distracted people with your pious Precepts and Practice; that these poor
seduced Christians, may be reduced out of the Claws of the Cockatrice, and
recovered into your Christian Fold. And sure I cannot at all despair of the
effect, if their refractory spirits will be at all won with sweetness. It is
said, that Amber sweetly draws a trifling straw, and Adamant gently wins the
hardest iron, and with a Honeycomb fountains of the most troubled waters are
cleansed. Nothing disarmes a Passion, (and their whole Religion is no more) so
much as Patience and temper, which your Lordship is known to be the
accomplished Master of; and so shall by that means throw prostrate at your
feet, those hair-brained Zelots, who seem now to roar over your Lordships head.
Flecti autem qui recusant, frangi oportet; nec invalescenti Ecclesiae and
Reipublicae morbo, S. Fulgent.
molli uspiam Diaeta succurrendum est, sed Chirurgia. So may your Lordship
proceed and prosper in your happy Prelacy, and grow up to be as exemplary an
instrument of your Royal Masters peace, his Kingdoms happiness, the Churches
good, glory of your gown, and honor of your University and College as that
great and glorious Prelate Henry Chichly was, your most famous founder; which
is meant for as much temporal felicit, as can be wish*d from the heart of

My Lord, Your Lordships Most humble Honourer, and most dutifully obedient
Servant, Tho. Bellamy.

The Preface to the Reader, rendering the occasion of the following Discourse,
with some (...) marks or characters of that sort of Christians that call
themselves Protestants of Integrity.
THough the Author of this ensuing Treatise intended it principally for a
Caveat to all Christian Princes and Prelates; yet it is as properly applicable
to all sorts of Christian people too, who ought to take it for a Warning Piece,
to arm themselves against that most horrid cheat of Presbytery, now called
Protestancy of Integrity: For how can the supreme Prince either of Church or
State, be capable to govern well, unless their Subjects be taught how to obey?
which is absolutely impossible they should ever learn to do, so long as by the
Principles of any wretched Religion, that they shall suck in with their first
milk, they find themselves bound to rebel? Now that the Presbyterian Profession
is clearly such a one, and not only inconsistent with Monarchy, but all sorts
of Civil Government, you shall find most evidently made out to you by the
Process of this discourse. The occasion whereof was (as I have been informed)
this. There was a Presbyterian Pamphlet published about a Twelvemonth since,
under this glorius Title, A Letter from a Protestant of Integrity, in answer to
a Letter from a person of Quality, to the same Principal Peer of the R^alm now
sitting in Parliament, etc. Upon the sight and full perusal of beth these
Letters, our Author truly concluded, that he who writ the former, was indeed
as the Title spoke him to be, (a Person of Quality) and that was evident by the
evenness of his style, cleerness of sense, strength, rationality and candor of
his discourse: and the other to be (as he likewise entitles himself) a True
Protestant of pretended Integrity, noe only for the barbarous Billings-gate
language, most abominable lies, and unchristian virulency that fell from his
pen, without any respect had to the reasons which he pretended to answer; but
also for his most presumptuous daring to defend the most notorious Traitors and
Rebels in the whole world; and to that purpose has an entire Paragraph to
prove, nay does most magisterially affirm, that the Presbyterians by name,
ought to be numbered amonest the best of Subjects, if they would be as
conformable in Ecclesiastics, as they were sound in their Politics.

Our Author therefore finding himself offended with that insufferable affront
offered to his Majesty, and indeed to all Christianity, by such an irrational,
undutifull, and traiterous vindication of those Persons, and their Doctrines,
fairly endeavors to prove how unsound they are in their Politics; and that it
is as utterly impossible that they should be ever brought to a conformity to
the Civil, more then to the Ecclesiastical Government; and all this he does out
of the undeniable dictates of their own dead Doctors, though but lately
flourishing, and their most Primitive Fathers; Let him look to it then that
dares (now they are declared) to defend them.

Now if they shall please to disabuse their own souls, I beseech them to peruse
this following Treatise, with all patience and impartiality, and then I am
confident that they will quickly find by their own reason, those false
spectacles to fall off, that have been so long clapped over their eyes, by their
own falls seers, (possessed with the Spirit of lies) who are continually working
of more for their deception and forgeing on still in the shop of Hell, their
Religious Instruments of Rebellion, which shall persuade men always (if they
will believe them) to take glass for Diamond, and such Kestrels as they are,
for Faulcons. But he that will find out the bottom of any religious or civil
debate, must prepare himself to carry a spirit thoroughly discharged of all
anticipations, bold animosities, and false apprehensions, which will raise
mists even upon the most resplendent lights of Truth.

Pausanias tells us of a false Mirror kept in the Temple at Smyrna, which did
represent the most beautiful and amiable faces, with notable deformity; and on
the contrary, gave to Creatures ugly and misshapen, some false luster of a
borrowed and wholly imaginary beauty.

The Ministers of the Presbyterian Religion make no little use of such mirrours
as those in their Temples (as they call them) and represent in the false glass
of their Doctrines, the true Church of Christ, (that has all the Epithets of
beauty and comeliness given to her, in the divine book of Canticles, as the
only lovely, and chaste Spoase of Christ) as a Monster composed of all sorts
of abomitation: and their own pitiful and ugly geer, for the only pure and
legitimate product of the Gospel. If the People have their ears perpetually
beaten, with the seven Hills of Rome, with Antichrist, with the horned Beast,
with Idolatry and Superstition, which they maliciously obtrude upon all
Hierarchy; and their own Heresies, Blasphemies, Prophanations, Sacriledges and
Rebellions against God and their King, are all covered with the specious
outside of Godliness, which they now call Protestancy of Integrity; how can the
poor people choose but embrace them as the blessed fruits of the Spirit it self?
if they remain fixed in these persuasions, how can they choose but hate what
they know not, or that which is represented to them for bad? Some there are,
that in the opinion of the world (at least the ignorant or indifferently
knowing part of it) are gazed at, and admired in their Pulpits, as flying fire
in the air, when indeed they are mere nothings, or truly (which is far worse
then nothing) stark naught, and villainous Ignes fatui, only disposed to lead
men to their destruction. The Hebrews therefore ha l a most excellent saying,
that Vinegar was an ill Son of a good Father, for it is commonly made of the
best wine; so nothitg can be worse than a corrupted Churchman: capable they may
be perchance, to perplex the most evident propositions, and that is indeed a
most eminent piece of their learning, which is no more then that of common
Sorcerers or Conjurers, (as they call them) who can cast mists upon the
cleerest mornings, or like the divinity of Dogs, who do usually bark at the
Moons brightness: The blessed eyes of Bats they have, to mock at the gr^atest
lights, and the malice of the old Atlantes, to shoot their arrows against the
Sun. Nothing is so absolutely consirmed on all sides, as that no man can be
saved without true Religion, and yet nothing) by the malice of the Devil and
such Doctors) is so controverted, as the verity of Religion: notwithstanding,
if we err in the choice, we make shipwreck before we weigh anchor; and so long
as we remain in error, nothing can save or deliver us from eternal damnation,
St. Fulg. in lib. de fid. ad Pet. Diac. c. 48
as St. Fulgentius declares at large, in the book which he composed of Faith,
ad Petrum Diaconum: For we must all know, or be maliciously ignorant, that the
true Church, is as the Pole Star that is ever in motion, but never sets. It is
high time therefore, and as I humbly conceive, hugely necessary, to lay down
some (...), or certain marks, to distinguish these pure Protestants of
pretended Integrity, from the true Professors and Practisers of Christianity.

Now first, we are sure, that all true Religion has this property inherent, to
tend wholly toward Monarchy, that is Hierarchy; and whosoever goes about to
introduce any other form of Government into the Church, as if it were fit, or
reasonable, it is clearly to thrust thorns into the feet, and to put straws
into the eyes of it; and this property is so well agreeable (we all know) with
our holy brethren of the Presbytery, who pretend to be the purest Protestants
of Integrity, that I shall not need to make any further dilucidation. So I
shall pass to our second (...), or mark of distinction, which you may please to
take to be clearly this.

All Innovation is utter poison to true Religion; and it is as clear, that the
whole persuasion of all these wretched Religionaries, that call themselves
Protestants of Integrityis nothing else but a heap and huddle of Novelties: for
as to Antiquity, and succession of their Doctrines, they do not, or ever did
(for as much as I have ever heard) pretend at any time to it; but just like
Aesops Ass, that vaunted he had great secrets of wisdom to communicate to other
beasts; and that he might the better authorize his Philosophy, and gain credit
to himself and discourse, he hid himself a long time a deep dry pit, from
whence he came out at last with a goodly grave Philosophers cloak about him,
saying, that all the while that he had been so invisible, he had very much
addicted himself to the study of sciences, Tertul. in Marc. l. 4. c. 23.
and the knowledge of truth.

This was the very Parable that Tertullian spoke to the Heretics of his time
(and that is pretty ancient) They come forth, says he, as an Ass out of Aesops
pit, and can neither tell who they are, nor whither they would, from whence
they came, nor who sent them; nor what right they have to extinguish that
glorious light of our blessed forefathers. Just such a shameless and
ridiculous beginning have our pretended pure Protestants of Integrity, which
well proves their nullity, and that they ought to be so nobly attended, as to
to have for retinue, Rapine, Robbery, Murder, Sacriledg, Rebellion, and
Regicide. All innovation, we know, is dangerous in any State, whither Civil or
Ecclesiastical, but principally in matter of Faith; but you may please to take
this for a Rule; They that follow the main current and g^n^rality of a
Religion, ancient and well-grounded, cannot perish, but by the falling of
Heaven; nor stumble in their belief, but by entombing themselves in the ruins
of Christianity; which God neither can nor will suffer to be lost, according to
his Promises. They which adhere to Novelties, sail na Sea full of Monsters and
Tempests, without Pole Star, without Rudder, without Pilot, or any other guide
then their own single judgment, which cannot choose but very certainly deceive
them; and doubtless if there be any flames in Hell employed for the punishment
of sinful Souls, there is no question but they shall be inflicted chiefly on
those who do endeavor daily to rend the garment of Jesus Christ, to break the
sacred seams and connexions of the Church, to strike at all the lawful powers
ordained by God, to throw disorder, fire, and blood into the State of their
Prince; nay upon his very person, commit that sacred murder (called Parricide)
upon their King and sheath their swords ia the bowels of their Country, which
puts me naturolly upon the Third (...), or mark of a true Religion, and that is
obedience to Magistrates both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and adue reverence in
divine Worship, and to all holy things. As to the point of Obedience, how well
it squareth with our Protestants of Integrity, and how demonstrable it is, that
they are, and must be Rebels, according to their own Principles, this following
Treatise does most sufficiently make appear, to which I refer you. But for the
manner of their Divine service, (as they call it) it is so barbarously ugly,
and abominably nasty, that it would turn the stomach of a good Jew, or
reasonable Turk, so much as to look upon it: Nay all the reverence that they
bear to holy things, is only to prey upon them by sacrilegious rapine, and
horrid profanation: But let them look to themselves, for such Godly doings;
for those Crimes which do affront the Divinity, ever bear their punishments
behind them. Did not Crassus feel amongst the Parthians, the Religion of the
Temple at Jerusalem, Joseph. lib. 18. c. 28.
which he had so sacrilegiosly violated? God making the steel of those
Barbarians to revenge his injured Sanctuary, as Josephus has well observed. A
hand from Heaven charactered a dread fall Decree against a great Babylonian
Monarch, which has served for a Tragedy ever since the Prophet Daniels time,
Dan.
and will be so continued as a terrible spectacle to all posterity. And
afterward we find Heliodorus in the Machabees, 2 Match. c. 3.
to be prodigiously punished by exterminating Angels, who ^n the mid day
scourged him in the sight of all the world; employing their heavenly whips upon
his body, for the same crime, as he had bestowed his hardyness, and audacious
hand, to steal a jewel from Heaven. Whatsoever they think of the story, I am
sure the moral of it is not Apocryphal. Herod, in like manner, opened King
David's Sepulcher, Joseph. l. 16. c. 11.
and took the spoil thereof; but note his miserable end, and what dissasters
did ever after attend him, as Josephus will relate to you; Urraca went to rob
the Sanctuary of S. Isidore in Spain, to defray the charge and expense of his
wars; Hist. genesis Hispan. part. 4.
and his guts burst out of his belly in the Church Porch: as is observed in the
History general of Spain. Leo the fourth Emperor, took a most precious Crown
out of the Church of Sancta Sophia, in Consttntinople, Sigon. l. 1. de regno.
Ital.
which was dedicated to it; and he dyed soon after of a cruel Carbuncle, as
Sigonius witnesses. Gondericus, King of the Vandals, when he took Sevil,
Tarapha in Houric.
took also the spoils of the Churches, and seized upon the riches thereof; and
to requite him, the Devil straight seized and possessed him, as Tarapha tells us.
What Punishment had Julian the Apostata, amongst his other sins, for his
notorious Church-robbing at Antioch, Trip. l. 6. c. 31.
the Tripartit History will inform us. To conclude, (for what need I use more
instances of terror?) read only the story of Nicephorus Phocas, who resumed all
donations that were made unto Monasteries and Churches, commiting a thousand
Rapines and prophanations upon sacred things; but see what afflictions and
furies haunted him ever after: and therefore his successor Basilius thought fit
to abrogate those Laws of Phocas, which tended to the suppression of
Monasteries, as the Root of all the calamities that happened in that time. I
have been a little larger upon this particular, because our Pure Brethren of
the Presbytery, these pretended Protestants of Integrity, do please themselves
so much with this their sacrilegious Dalila, though it is not a little
admirable, quorum facta imitantur eorum exitus non perhorrescere So I pass to
the next mark of true Religion, which I take to be a faithful, constant, solid
course of devotion toward God, by a dutiful address to him in Prayer, and
practical imitation of his Holy Life.

The Spirit of the best man, (we know) is in no better condition than a
Sun-Dial; which is of no use at all, but when the Sun reflects upon it: nor can
any man expect that his understanding should receive any true light, but what
is reflected from the Rays of God; and that must be by the means of Prayer.
The practice therefore of this holy Duty, has been every styled and esteemed by
all the holy fathers of the Church, as the key of Heaven, and confusion of
Hell; the standard of our Christian warfare, the conservation of our peace, the
bridle of our impatience, the guardiau of our temperance, the seal of chastity,
the Advocate of offenders, the consolation of the afflicted, and the Passport
of the dying, etc. for the Just do live and die in prayer, as the Phaenix in
her perfumes. A Christian therefore without Prayer, may be compared to a Be
without a sting, which can neither make honey, nor wax. The Apostle therefore
bid us to pray always; which St. Gregory Nazianzen interprets thus, that we
are to have God in our minds so often as we breath. It is not therefore unfilty
styled the Spirit of Prayer, for it is the breath of the inward man; Os meum
aperui, says the Scripture, and attraxi spiritum, I opened my mouth, and drew
in the spirit; we are all of us ready to be choked with filthy flesh and fat,
and to be devoured with the flames of concupiscence, unless upon all occasions,
we do open our mouths, to take in that gentle air of God: a good Christian is
therefore resembled to the Palm Tree, which as it is the tallest and straitest
of all trees, so bears its best and most solid strength in its top: just so has
a true Christian his whole vigor in God, and for God; his life is a perpetual
Sabbath, Sabbathum delicatum, a most delicious Sabbath, as the Prophet calls it,
nourishing and reposing the Soul, with the constant draught of this holy Spirit
of Prayer; a true Christian makes it not only his lock and key of the day, but
his bolt at night; nor only so, but his very meals and recreations. The
Primitive Christians therefore were usually called the Crickets of the night;
because at any time of it, if any interruption of sleep hapened, they ever made
it out, with esaculatory Prayer, and elevation of their hearts. Those that love
God truly, will have recourse to him at all hours, and upon all occasions, not
confining their devotions to time or place. Jonas and the three Children, found
sufficient Chapels in the Whales belly and in the fiery Furnace, because the
love of God, the wisest Architect had erected them; and God was as near them in
the intrals of fish, or the midst of flames, as he would have been in his most
holy Temple. Now methinks I hear our Pharisailal Protestants of Integrity
crying out, O we have enough of that to say for our selves; there are none
living so conversant in that holy duty of frequent, and Family Prayer, as we;
Yes indeed, like some of those devotes which Horace speaks of, Jane Pater
Clare, Clare cum dicit Apollo -- Labra movet metuens audire, etc. Da mihi
fallere, da justum sanctumque videri: Pray much, and very often; but
immediately fall to cozening, lying, and cheating, and to study how to entrap
men: a devotion much like his, whose way to his wench, lying through a
Churchyard, said his prayers always going and coming. This is not the true
devotion that is spoken of; but as St. Gregory well expresses it, to sacrifice
the Calf without the flower; which is to make Prayer with the lips, without
application of the heart: so granting the Prayers of these Protestants of
Integrity, to be never so good or frequent, they do no otherwise than one
Neanthus did, who having inherited Orpheus his Harp, and thinking to do wonders
with it, played so ill, that dogs affrighted with his untuneable skreaking
noise, tore him all to pieces: So it is not enough, to have a great many holy
Frayers in our hands, which sound like the strings of Gods Harp, and may be
consigned to us by Jesus Christ himself, and all the Primitive holy Fathers,
and to repeat them as often too as they did; but we must use them with that
true devotion of heart, as is required, least we find our punishment in the
very sacrifice of Propitiation. Nor must this high Christian duty be performed
in that strange, sawey, familiar and Pharisaical manner, as is customary with
these Protestants of integrity; but rather in our most retired privacies, and a
becoming silence, better than any exterior ostent, resembling those rivers
which run under the earth, choosing to steal from the eyes of the world, to
seek for the sight of God only: So true devotions ever study solitude and
retirements, and are always best, when shut up within themselves. I have the
rather chose to insist upon this, because the pretense of these Protestants of
Integrity, to a true performance of this duty, is the grand cheat and
imposture, that they put upon poor Christian souls, to draw them into their
unchristian Conventicles. So I come to the second part of our last remark upon
true Religion, which is, a practical Piety toward God, and Man; for as the
heart and marrow of Religion consists wholly in the interior, so we can make
no other judgment of that, than by the apparent practice of Piety, and true
Godly and religious lives of men, etc. and all this is but a natural effect of
that precious Spirit of Prayer before spoken of. For true devotion (as the
great St. Tho. of Aquine has described it) is nothing but a prompt will for the
service of God: Aquin. l. 2. q. 82.
his words are these, Voluntas quaedam prompta tradendi se ad ea, quae
pertinent ad Dei famulatum, A very prompt and affectionate vivacity in things
which concern the service of God: nay we may find so much as that said by
Porphyry himself a Pagan, and one of the most Atheistical ones that ever lived;
Deus (says he) omnium Pater nullius indigit, sed nobis est been, cum eum
adoramus, ipsam vitam precem ad cum facientes, per inquisitionem, and
imitationem de ipso: That is, God the Creator and Father of this great Univers,
has no need at all of our service; but it is our good to honor, serve, and
adore him, making our lives to be perpetual prayers to him, by a diligent
enquiry after his Perfections, and a holy imitation of his Virtues; St. August.
All this St. Austin (the Oracle of the Latin Church) recites out of that
Heathen, to teach us faith from the Philosophy of the most perfidious, and
religion from the writings of the most irreligious man in the whole world: just
as if an ^honest man should pull a thing stolen out of a thieves coffer. And
indeed it is a most evident truth, that the best life is the best prayer, and
therefore St. Greg. Nazianzen tells us, that (...), Greg. Naz. in Jamb.
A dumb work speaks a Christian better, than the most eloquent oration; and a
golden tongue, and a leaden heart make an ill march together: yet we know that
some there are of these pure Protestants of Integrity, who have appearance
enough of the Spirit, and will pray in the similitude of Angels, but practice
like Devils, resembling the Ass in the fable, that carries daily to the
hot-house, wherewithal to shift and cleanse others, and yet goes himself
perpetually bemired and slovenly; so whilst they preach to others, (as the
Apostle tells us) become castaways themselves: or yet more like the impertinent
drone, they can go buzzing up and down, with their empty prayers, and yet as
aforesaid, neither make honey nor wax. To what purpose is it therefore to be
so, vox and praeterea nihil, to warble like a Nightingale, or a well strung
Lute, and to be deaf to all harmony? Is not that to be at best (as the Apostle
tells us) but as sounding brass, or a tinck ling Cymbal? Undoubtedly all the
devotion of a Soul truly Christian, tends to practice, as the line to its
Center; and therefore St. Cyprian most piously proclaims thus, Philosophi
factis, Cyprian in lib. de Patientia.
non verbis sumus, nec magna loquimur, sed vivimus, Our Philosophy and
Christian wisdom, says he, is a prudence of works, not of words; and we are to
live, not talk great things. We are to march in our Christian warfore, like the
brave Soldiers of Gideon, with the torch in our hands, as well as the trumpet
upon our lips. But now all this is Superstitious, nay Popish in the esteem of
our pure Protestants of Integrity, who will do no good works at all, for fear
of meriting by them, and profess none but a solifidian way to heaven, which my
faith can never reach to believe, will bring them thither: somethings, it may
be, they will do as their elder brothers, (the Pharisees before did) but with such
a pitiful deal of ostentation and vain glory, or the same abominable pa^^ed
hypocrisy too, that it is plain, they court their own interest in all that,
more than their conscience, and apparently love themselves so, more than they
do God, for which they are like to receive their reward in this life, which is
to have the execration of all mankind; for verily there is no vice deserves it
better, than that, which distends snares over Altars, and under color of zeal
and piety, seeks to entrap men. God Almighty therefore requires of us, that
all which we do, should be done with sincerity and alacrity; with sincerity
first, and for Gods sake, and our left hand ought not know what our right hand
does: but these Protestants of Integrity forsooth, will none of that sincerity,
nor do any thing that may appear good, but the whole Town shall ring of it, and
all the Trumpets sound to it, to proclaim their great Integrity. The Divine
Majesty (in the mean time we know) has ever reproved, condemned, and chastised
with a most particular indignation of his heart, that abominable playsterd kind
of life, amongst Christians sure, as well as Jews, to whom (we find) that
therefore it was given for a Law, that the Swan and the Ostrich should never be
made use of, in divine Sacrifices; upon which Mosaical Ordinance, all the
interpreters of Scripture, are jointly of opinion, that the Swan was first
rejected, notwithstanding the whiteness of her feathers, and sweetness of note,
so much ascribed to her, because under those pure white plumes, she hides so
black a flesh. Then for the Ostrich, which carries only an ostentuous boast of
fair large wings, and very little or no flight at all, she could never he
admitted into the number of divine Victims. So much does God abhor apparencies
fruitless and effectless. What shall we say less of these pure Protestants of
integrity, do they not perfectly appear like those Swans and Ostriches? Or
rather like to pityful Snayles, who in their courses, make long silver traces,
and are indeed in their interior, nothing else but mere froth. They have their
backs, like Cushions, covered with Velvet, Satin, Taffata, or Cloth of Gold,
and stuff't within, with nothing but Hay. They make a fair ostent of leaves and
verdure like a wood, but are replenisht with nothing but serpents. In fine,
these Hypocrites, and formal Professors of Religion, are very Seraphims in
appearance, but Seraphims without eyes, without heart or hands, and have wings
of mighty zeal, inflamed with a prophan fire, only fit to burn the
Propitiatory it self, which indeed is their constant study to do. To conclude
the sincerity aforesaid in these practical parts of piety, is not more
requisite or agreeable to God, then alacrity in his service, nor indeed more a
mark of a true and undefiled religion. God loves a cheerful giver, not only of
his money, but of himself: God loves (I say) a cheerful Liver, as well as a
cheerful giver. For what hinders (as our incomparable Lord Chancellor, L^.
Chance lour.
was pleased in Parliament most judiciously to allege) that a merry man may be
a godly man? nay the Godliest? For there is no game, nor recreation in the
world, can be compared to the soul of a good Christian? whose conscience is not
only a continual feast, but a Portative Theater, wherein are incessantly
represented most admirable shows, as Tertullian tells us in his Book de
Spectaculis. Yeptull. de Spectac.
Undoubtedly there is not a thing in it self more unacceptable to God, then
that dullness and heaviness of spirit, taken up as a practice amongst these
Protestants of integrity. God is not pleased, that we should enter into his
service, as if we were to be lifted upon a rack to be tortured. Nay I do affirm
it must be of necessity a most horrid injury done to the divine Majesty, to
think there can be no true Piety, or devotion in the world, if our bodies be
not torn in pieces, and our spirits quite to be beaten down; And therefore
Gilbertus (an excellent Doctor) writing upon that Sentence of Saint Paul to the
Corinthians, Gilbertus.
Glorificate and portate Deum in corpore vestro, 1 Cor. 6.
Glorify and bear God in your bodies, makes this most elegant and remarkable
observation, you must bear Jesus Christ, not dragge him. Portari vult Christus,
non trahi, so he proceeds, non est foenum Christus, sed flos campi, and
fasciculus mirrhae, inter ubera sponsae, etc. Now he plainly draggs him, who
makes himself surcharged with him, and who indiscreetly afflicts himself in the
service that he renders to the divine Majesty, not considering, that Jesus
Christ is the Flower of the field, or the Poesy of Mirrh, between the breasts
of the Spouse, and not a load of hay, to be drawn, under which we must needs
groan, like to wheels ill greased; this was so foolish a superstition, and so
old a one, that the Philosopher himself (though a Pagan) could not but find
extreme great fault withal, and condemn for horridly extravagant superstition.
Superstitio (says he) quos colit violat, amandos timet. It is a strange fond
Superstition indeed, says this wise Pagan, and raised by simple people only,
which through gross error fears, what it should love by virtue, and can
hardly have any knowledge of, or approach to the Deity, but by violation of his
Clemency (a thing most hateful to him) through a false presumption of his
severity. They must be very silly souls sure, and have very little or no
feeling of the divinity, that can apprehend God, whom we hourly find to be
infinitely merciful, to be as Terrible as a Minos or a Radamanthus mentioned in
Poetical Fables, who were always represented in those Fictions, to be most
Spiteful Deities, to come and pry into all humane actions, to number all men's
steps, and taking pleasure to prepare punishments for them, were wont to raise
themselves immortal Trophyes, upon poor Mortals ruins.

It would be a pretty piece of Christianity, one would think now, to be
preached amongst us, that devotion, and all labors in Religion, should be
undertaken by us without any relaxation; perpetual disturbancies undergone by
Christians, without any repose, and miseries without any remedy, or comfort at
all. This sure must be thought the oxtream of all extremes, and fit only for
our Protestants out of their wits, that now call themselves Protestants of
Integrity, but I sear will be found to be Protestants of pure knavery; I mean
those Hypocrites and formal Professors of Religion treated of, whom we may very
well compare to those Oxon of Baal, who are cut and mangled for Sacrifice into
little Gobbets, but notwithstanding receive no fire from Heaven: just so these
pitiful creatures, this sad sort of Christians, do most miserably macerate,
and almost kill themselves, to sacrifice only to the opinions of the world, and
their own brutish appetites, without ever tasting the consolations of God. A
true good Christian in the mean time endeavors so to distribute his fastings,
watchings, prayer, repast, recreations and studies, with so prudent an
economy, for the service of his God, that he holds his life most admirably
interlaced between Action, Contemplation, and repose, that he makes on earth, a
perfect figure of Angels ascending and descending, and receives already so
great a taste of those benefits, which he is to hope for in the other world,
that he seems to have his soul in heaven, whilst he dwells upon the earth, to
fathom mysteries, and with his, beatified understanding, to enjoy an Antepast
of Paradise it self. Who then can with more justice and reason show forth a
jolly, cheerful countenance, and make the clarity of his heart break forth at
his eyes, and lips, then such a Christian? How well this (...) or Character
agrees with the sad Professors of this age, let the whole world judge; who are
just such as Seneca described some of his time, Seneca.
Tristes and omnia deplorantes, quibus nulla non causa in querelam placet,
semper presentibus infesti; Sad and melancholy Companions, always complaining
of every thing, and nothing, displeased still with the present state of
Affairs; and then concludes upon this kind of mal' contents, Aegri proprium est
animi nihil diu pati, and mutationibus ut remediis uti, Their sickly
dispositions are always given to change, and so use mutations for remedies: So
that these sad Christians are altogether as dangerous to all Civil States
wheresoever they live, as to the State of the Church, and are only fit to hold
compliance with that sort of people whose Religion is to worship a Cat. The
last (...) or Symptom of true Christian Religion, is Humility; the stars we
know are best beheld in the bottom of a Pit, and the most radiant splendors of
a Christian, do appear in a profound humility; St. Cyprian therefore says of
this transcendent virtue, that it is Primus Religionis introitus, and ultimus
Christianitatis Exitus, The gate of all Religion, and the very Crown of
Christianity; for who can think that that man will be faithful at all to Jesus
Christ, that can be unfaithful to that holy v^rtue which shined so (...) in
him? the whole course of his life upon earth, being nothing else, from the Crib
to the Cross, but a constant moving Homily of humility. The Sun (we see) which
is the Prince of Planets, dispelleth always all the grosest, thickest, and
stiffest vapors, and draws the thinnest and most subtle to himself; how much
more then that we do attenuate, lesson and annihilate our selves, by the
practice of this caelestial virtue of humility, so much the nearer we are sure
to approach to the Son of righteousuess, and true glory. But our pure
Protestants of Integrity, are so overgrown with Pride of Spirit, that it may be
quickly seen, how far they run out of the road of Christianity. Their Pride is
far greater then that of the old Pharisee, who boasted only that he was not as
other men are, but they boast themselves to be what all others should be, and
so prescribe themselves to be pure patterns of Perfection, to all the world:
But it is (we know) the terriblest blow in the whole world, when a man is
wounded in the head, by his own proper judgment, Pride and Presumption. We come
to the end of most things by strength of Industry; stones are pulled forth from
the very entrals of men; the head is sometimes opened, to make vapors issue
out, but what hand has ever drawn a false opinion out of the brains of a
spiritually prond, and presumptuous man? All seems green (says Aristotle) to
those that look upon the water, and all is good and specious, Arist.
to such as behold themselves in proper love. Better it were according to the
counsels of the old Fathers of the desert, to have one foot in Hell, with a
docibility of spirit, than a hand or arm in heaven, with ones own judgment. To
be short, this unhappy Pride of Spirit, commits a massacre upon the whole chain
of holy virtues: It marres all that can be called good in a man; let this
cursed dram be infused, and all together will signify no more, than a wholesome
medicament with a commixture of poison in it. It is such a spiritual venom,
that it turns the sublimest virtues into specious vices, and makes them become
but holly Trayters to the souls of men. Thus if the pulses of our pure
brethren, these Protestants of Integrity, be judiciously felt, the world may
quickly find, their adulterate, new, no Religion. From these proud
melancholic, malcontent, hypocritical Spirits, it is that all those impious
doctrines of disobedience and rebellion have proceeded; as you will see proved
by the process of this discourse. It Is plainly they, and only they, that have
sturred up the ashes of old Rubelais here again amongst us, and do still so
delight themselves to convers with putrefaction, that under their wings we do
daily behold new vermin to arise in the Church, which endeavor to gnaw, and
dissipate all that has any Piety, or fear of God, in Christianity. Nor are
they only content to throw poison and putrefaction into the State
Ecclesiastical, but are always brewing of new mischiefs, bloodshed and
rebellion in the Civil States of their Princes. Their Cities themselves where
their holy villainies have got footing, resemble more Cyclopian Caverns, rather
then Temples of peace, piety and justice: indeed briefly to conclude, the whole
fabric of their Religion, is lik a Castle, that I have seen in ancient
painting, built upon ruins, in a land of quick silver, cemented with blood,
and overthrown with frequent earthquakes, and violent outrageous winds: For it
is certain, that if the arm of God sustein not an affair, the more exaltation,
it receives, the deeper ruins it finds. Sic Pereant, and qui moliri talia
pergunt, which ought to be the Prayer of every good Subject, is, and ever shall
be, in spite of all Protestancy of Integrity, the constant devotion of him,
that takes the honor to extitle himself.

Philanax Anglicus.

The Publisher, to the Christian Reader.
I Have made bold, good Reader, to publicsh this Posthume Piece, the genuine
off spring of a dead Brother in Law of mine, who was to my knowledge a most
observant Son, and in every honest man's esteem, a pious, Reverend and learned
Priest of the Church of England; out of duty to which, as became an obedient
member, and allegiance to my Sovereign, as a Loyal Subject, I have dared to
produce it into the worlds light; especially being informed by better
judgments, that it was of a most considerable concernment both to King and
Church: My zeal therefore to the Public good, I hope will apologize for any
particular errors in the impression, there lying an unhappy necessity upon us,
to collect the whole out of very dispersed, and ill written Papers. My Brothers
name I hope you will excuse me for concealing, because is does appear to be his
will to have it so; for it was ever his desire to live, and so to die, Plebeius
senex unnoised in the world. But if any one desire a further satisfaction. I am
ready to answer, as becomes his faithful Brother, and good Reader,

Your very Servant, Tho. Bellamy.

A Christian Caveat TO ALL KINGS, PRINCES, AND PRELATES.
IT has been a very great Controversy of late amongst Divine Antiquaries, and
not yet determined by them. I must beg pardon therefore, that it is attempted
by me now, where this Egg of the Consistorian Cockatrice, was first laid,
whether at Wittenbergh in Germany, or amongst the Religious Lollards, or
Wickliffists in England, or the Waldenses before them. But this we are sure of
(wheresoever it was laid) that it was first hatched at Smalcald, then fostered
and nourished at Geneva, and from thence took wing over most of the European
Continent, and at last arrived upon the fag-end of our Island, called Scotland;
where meeting with too good a reception, this fiery Serpent so inflamed the
zeal of that cold Climate, and increased his own confidence, that he presumed
to advance his flight amongst us in England, where he has for these many years
fed himself upon the blood, and destroyed the souls of poor Christians. But now
it is to be hoped, that he is upon his last wings (if not legs) unless some of
his own Plume have the unhappy power to imp him again, (to His Sacred
Majesty's, their own, and the whole Kingdoms ruin:) In the mean time, I take
it to be the duty of all good Christians, to offer up incessantly their Prayers
and Tears to God, with their utmost endeavors amongst men, A Dios rogando, y
con el maso dando, as the wise Spaniard advises, that this devouring Dragon
may be at last overthrown, trampled under foot, and tied in iron chains under
those altars which we daily charge with our vows.

The duty now incumbent upon me, is only to represent him and all his brood,
in their truly native, and rebel colors, as they are malicious oppugners of
Sacred Majesty. Now as the skilful in the art of Imagery inform us, nothing is
so curious in a statue, nor so hard in any piece to polish, as the Nails, which
are the only outward arms that nature has afforded us; yet that is my present
task to do, nor only so, but their very scratchings of the faces of Kings, and
the tearing up of the whole Earth with their diabolical Nails, for the
undermining, subversion, and demolition of Monarchy, through the whole World,
like true Protestants of Integrity!

Now to begin with the Foreman of this grand machine of Iniquity, we shall
find Un Suiss a la Port, a Swiss at the door, as no man fitter to be Porter
to such an Infernal Palace; and he appears to us sometime in his grave
Rug-gown, and pretended Pastoral-staff, sometimes again in his swaggering
Swash-Buckler habit, striking and laying about him like any Madman, but still
keeping this Cockatrice Egg in his robustious bosom, where he is resolved to
hatch it, if he can. The first letter of this modern Cerberus his name, is
Uldericus Zuinglius, Zuing. T^m. 1. Art. 42.
and thus he begins his game. Reges (says he) quando perfidi, and extra
Regulam Christi egerint, possunt cum Deo deponi, etc. Kings may be deposed
where they advance ungodliness, as Saul was. Now how they are to be deposed, he
explains his own meaning best, Gum suffragiis and consensu totius, Art. 42, 43.
aut majoris partis multitudinis, Tyrannus tollitur, fit Deo auspice; that is,
By the suffrages, votes, or consent of the whole, or the major part of the
multitude; and this is a work so pleasing to God, that they are sure to have
his blessing upon it. Here like a true Protestant of Integrity, he puts the
Sword plainly into the peoples hands; and to make it yet more clear, see his
Epistle Conrado Sonnio. L^b. 4. page 868.
Permittendum, says he, est Caesari officium debitum. We must suffer our
selves to pay a duty to Caesar; but upon this condition, Si modo fidem nobis
permittat illibatam; si nos illud negligentes patimur, neglectae Religionis rei
erimus; if he will suffer us to enjoy our own Religion, as we will have it;
otherwise, if we should be so negligent as to suffer him, we shall be guilty of
abandoning Religion it self. Thus they will be pleased to obey Caesar, if Caesar
will be advised and directed by them; otherwise they have another course to
take with him, they will talk with him to the purpose; but yet he will explain
his meaning further and more fully to us in his Epistle Ad Ulmenses, whom he
admonishes, Epist. l 4. sol. 196.
Ut coram auditoribus su is, sensim incipiant detrahere personam Imperio
Romano, quomodo stultum sit agnoscere hoc Imperium in Germania, quod non
agnoscitur Romae, unde nomen habet: And again, Nimis Amantes est is Rei
Romanae; quid Germaniae cum Roma? Sed prudenter and paulatin agenda sunt
hujusmodi atque cum paucis, quibus credere possis, etc. That they should by
little and little in their Congregations, unmask the usurpation of the Roman
Empire, and show them how ridiculous a thing it is to acknowledge that Empire
in Germany, which is not acknowledged at Rome if self, from whence it has its
denomination. He tells them further, That they ought not to be so fond of the
Roman Government; what had Germany to do with Rome? But yet this kind of
doctrine must be instilled by degrees, and the business cunningly carried,
before a few first that may be trusted, etc. Who is now so blind, as not to
see how this wicked Swiss labors, to undermine all Monarchy, and to blow up the
Roman Empire with his breath! And how craftily the business must be carried,
Sensim and paulatim, not openly and plainly, nor all at once, no by no means;
Et coram auditoribus, pure doctrine for a Pulpit, a most rare Sermon to the
people, who are most likely to applaud it! I am already quite tired in the
pursuit of this debaucht Satanical Swiss, and tracing of his damnable doctrines
of Rebellion; and I believe every prudent Reader will so be, or at least rest
satisfied, with what is already produced, as all the Princes of Europe may
sufficiently see, what they are to expect from him, and the whole brood of such
Reforming Brethren, Protestants of Integrity, when they are armed with power.
Exit Zuinglius.

Now enter Mr. Calvin, and let us see, whether his reverence will prepare and
dispose the hearts of his disciples to more obedience, humility, and patience,
than this rough Swiss aforesaid has done. Now as those of the Swiss race were
called Zuinglians and Sacramentaries, by Luther; so the French named themselves
Hugonots, from one Hugo another Patriarch of theirs. So now all of that Sect
have their title and denomination from Calvin, who as a Transcendent, has
overshadowed and obscured the glory and name of Zuinglius, and Hugo himself;
and now forsooth they must be called Protestants of Integrity. For the
description of the life and conversation of Calvin, of his nature, behavior,
delicacy of diet, and physical Epicurism, I shall refer you to one that sat
long by him to draw his Picture vivis coloribus, and that is Dr. Jerome Bolsec,
(one that was frequently conversant both with his pulse, and humors) as his
constant Physician; whose testimony is confirmed likewise by the learned
Francis Baldwin, who concurreth with him in the portraicture of the man, and in
the very colors. He was a famous Lawyer of Calvin's own faculty, and one that
lived long with him, and knew full well what blood was nourished in every vein
of his body. The like is done by Florimond de Remond, a Gentleman of quality,
Claudius de Saints, and diverse others, who have left us the lively image of
him, and of his fine Companion and Fellow-laborer, Mr. Theodore Beza, his
successor in his Chair and Jurisdiction, an usurping Parson of another man's
Parish, and an Husband of another man's wife, a greater friend to Love than
Charity, to wit than Piety: But it is not my business now to meddle more with
their virtues and lives, nor yet with their School Points and Doctrines of
Faith, which I shall leave to the examination of the more learned, intending
only to deliver to the world their Doctrines, Problems, and Paradoxes in
points of State, and to demonstrate to the world, how much their refined
Reformation does derogate from the Royalty and Sovereign Authority of Christian
Kings and Princes; and how much it is more favorable to Democracy and Popular
Government, as more consonant to their Consistory and Eldership, whereby they
have wrought such horrid confusions over the face of Christendom, like true
Protestants of Integrity: And yet truly we may find Calvin go as slily and
considerately to work as the other, and by certain degrees too, nor altogether
so bluntly as the rude Swiss before him did. First, he goes about to commend
Aristocracy, and labors to abuse Monarchy to the height, and all that, to
prefer the reputation of his. Consistory and Sanhedrim, as you shall hear him
speak for himself in his artificial Institutions. Non id quidem per se, Calv.
Inst. l. 4. c. 20. v. 10.
sed hominum vitio; mark his cunning, not that Aristocracy were naturally, and
of it self better (no by no means, things were not ripe for that yet) but
through the Vices and Deficiencies of men; why this one would think to be
pretty plausible, but mark his reason, Quod rarissime contingit Reges sibi
moderari, deinde tanto acumine and prudentia instructos esse ut unusquisque
videat quantum satis est. So he makes it very rare and dainty, to find a wise
and temperate Prince, or almost impossible for a King to see sufficiently into
his affairs; and therefore concludes, Facit ergo hominum defectus, ut tutius
sit ac magis tolerabile plures tenere gubernacula. So his reason proceeds upon
the defects of Princes, and maintains it to be more safe and tolerable, for
many jointly, than for one absolutely to govern and command; and concludes with
an ingenuous confession, Atque ut libenter fatear, nullum esse gubernationis
genus isto felicius; that no kind of Government can be happier than that: Now
the effects of that doctrine do most plainly appear by that Popular State, yet
governed Aristocratice, as Bodin very well observes, established by him in the
City of Geneva, after the ejection of the Bishop, who was their lawful Prince,
as his Predecessors had long before him there enjoyed it, since Frederick the
First. So those were the first fair fruits of the propagation of his Gospel
there, of Protestants of Integrity.

Now after all this, to prevent that man should object, That princes have
always grave and wise Counselors about them, to advise with, and to inspire
them; and if they should be so weak themselves, as he imagines them to be, yet
so their defects might be supplied, he gives this resolution in his Comment
upon Daniel, Kings (says he) make choice of such men for their Counselors,
Cap. 11. v. 26. Dan.
as can best fit their humors, and accommodate themselves best to serve their
bestial lusts and appetites, instancing particularly in Cruelty, Fraud, and
Rapine. So he makes Kings rather worse than better for having Counselors, and
consequently staineth the honor and credit of a Counselor, with a scandal and
blemish intolerable.

And yet a little further upon the same Book of Daniel, Cap. 2 v. 39.
They are (says he) strangely out of their wits, quite void of sense and all
understanding, who desire to live in Sovereign Monarchies: for it cannot be,
but that order and policy should decay where one man holds so large an extent
of Dominion. Nay, to make this impious proposition seem good, he adds in the
same Book thus. Cap. 5. v. 25.
Kings (says he) forget that they are men, that is of the same mold that
others are: They are called Kings and Dukes, Dei gratia; to what end serve
these words? to show by their title that they acknowledge no other Superior;
and yet they will tread upon God with their feet, under that cloak: So it is
but a mere abuse, and blind, to disguise and conceal their wicked designs,
when they vaunt that they reign Dei gratia. Is not this a most excellent
doctrine to be preached in a Monarchy? and a very fine descant upon Dei gratia?

Yet he goes a little further in the same Book. Cap. 5. v. 21.
Kings (says he) make their boast that they reign Dei gratia, yet they indeed
despise the Majesty of God, Voila quell est la rage and forcenerve de tous
Roys: That is to say, Observe here the rage, fury, and frenzy, of all Kings,
none excepted; and to make that good, he adds this strength to it, It is
common and ordinary to all Kings, to exclude God from the Government of the
World. May we not here truly say of him, and the rest of his Reforming
Brethren, Plusquam regnare videntur quibus ita licet censuram agere Regnantium?
They are sure, more than Kings, who thus imperiously dare pass their censures
upon Kings; and thus are Protestants of Integrity.

But yet if you have a mind to hear John Calvin Preach more like a Switzer,
and which you may think more strange, to Lutheranize, with the proper spirit of
brave Martin himself, See what he says further upon the same Book of Daniel.
Darius (says he) will by his example condemn all those who at this day profess
themselves either Catholic Kings, Cap. 6. v. 25.
or Christian Kings, or Defenders of the Faith; and yet not only do they
deface, and bury all true Piety and Religion, but they corrupt and deprave the
whole worship of God. This is not yet all neither; for in the same Chapter, he
is bold to touch Kings a little more to the quick, and curiously describes what
kind of Beasts they are generally. Les Roys sont presque tous hebetez and
brutaux, Cap 6. v. 3, 4.
aussi semblablement sont ils coment les chevaux and les Asnes de Bestes
brutes. Kings are for the most part stupid and brutish, nor liker any Brutes
upon the Earth, than Hackney Jades and Asses: Fitting Titles for the Majesty of
Gods Anointed. At length to crown all that he has said or done in this point,
he turns his tune to sharps and menaces in this brave manner. Abdicant se
potestate terreni Principes, dum insurgunt contra Deum, Cap. 6. v. 22.
imo indigni sunt qui censeantur in hominum numero: Potius ergo conspuere
oportet in illorum capita, quam illis parere ubi isic proterviunt, ut velint
spoliare Deum suo jure. Earthly Princes (says he) divest themselves of power,
when they make an insurrection against God; nay, they are unworthy to be
reputed amongst men; men had better therefore spit in their faces, then yield
obedience to their commands, when they shall grow so insolent, as to rob God of
his right. Is not this a most rare and learned homily of obedience for
Subjects, and befitting Protestants of Integrity?

By so much as has been produced, it is evident, that Calvin was, at least, a
well-willer to the extirpation of Monarchy, though the affairs of the world
were then in a little too good a composure for him to dare to adventure further
at it. Exit Johannes Calvinus.

Now enter the Tibullus of Geneva, sweet Mr. Theodore Beza, and by his opinions
and practices, it will be more easily made appear, that it was his Master
Calvin's, not only opinion, but design, to make all the world dance the Geneva
Jigg, and to propagate his godly Government throughout all Christendom: For he
was both his disciple and companion, who soundly did understand his doctrine,
and did as bravely second him; so we know, that noscitur ex socio, etc.

Now first in his Preface to the New Testament, dedicated to Queen Elizabeth,
1564. B z 1 Praes. in Nov. Testam. 1564
he uses these words, Quo die, scilicet, 19 December. ante biennium, Gallica
Nobilitas (Illustrissimo Principe Condaeo duce) tuis and Illustrissimorum
quorundam Germaniae Principum, subsiaiis freta, non procul urbe Druidum,
fortissime Praeliata, prima restituendae in Galliis Christianae Religionis
fundamenta, sanguine suo feliciter consecratunt, etc. Here he speaks, not only
as approving, but glorying in that famous battle that was given at Dreux, by
the Prince of Conde, and all the Hugonot Party, against the King; which act
has been by all indifferent persons, condemned as a most unanswerable
Rebellion; yet brave Beza so boldly justifies and magnifieth it, that in the
same place commending the good services at Meaux and Orleans, and that famous
battle of Dreux, wherein he boasts himself to have been a principal actor, not
an accessory: He adds thus, Id quod liberius testor, quod istis tum consiliis,
Praef. ibid.
tum etiam plerisque rebus, quando ita Deo visum est, interfui. This (says he)
I do more freely testify, because I was present at those counsels, and most
actions, when it pleased God, etc. But to know this Gentleman in his proper
humor, and in puris naturalibus, read but his Positions, and Catechism of
Sedition, the Practice of his Piety, V^nd. cont. Tyran. p. 15.
the Book called Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, where he acts the perfect part of
Junius Brutus: And first, Page 15. he propounds this question, If Subjects be
bound to obey their Kings, when they command against Gods Law? And then Page
22. he resolves, We must obey Kings for Gods cause, when they obey God: Page
22.
And then concludes Page 24. Page 24.
As the Vassal loses his life, if he commit felony; so the King loses his
Right, and his Realm also, if he forsake God. But above all, the bravest Maxim
he produces Page 65. Page 65.
That all conspiracies are good or ill, as the end is at which they aim, which
is a most diabolical principle, and capable to maintain all the Rebels and
Traitors in the World. Page 66.
Yet Page 66. he goes a little further; The Magistrates (says he) and one part
of the Realm, may resist the King, being an Idolater; as Libna revolted from
Joram, for forsaking of God. Here he gives all Rebels a sic dicit Dominus, for
their defense. But yet this is not all, he must fortify his Axioms a little
further, Page 132. Page 132.
The Government of a Kingdom (says he) is not given to the King alone, but
also to the Officers of the Realm. And again, Page 103.
Page 103. France, Spain, and England (says he) are custumarily consecrated,
and as it were put into their charge, by the States, Peers, and Lords, which
represent the people. Page 199.
And Page 199. There is a stipulation in Kingdoms hereditary, etc. Now I would
fain know, what can any Rebel say more? And upon these Positions, what
difference would there be between the Crown of a King, and the la Beretta of
the Duke of Venice?

I cannot here forget, how irreverently this Eusebius Philadelphus, (for so Mr.
Theodore Beza was pleased there to call himself) did use his own King Charles,
in his Book entitled Reveille Martin, Reveille Martin.
where he usually calls the King Tyrant, and makes this Anagram Chasseur
Desloyal. Read his rimes and scandalous reproaches against the Queen Mother;
peruse the Forty Articles recorded in that Book, Art. 40.
for the better advancement of Seditious and Rebellious Government; and in the
last of them, they are obliged never to disarm so long as Religion, as they
call it, is pursued and persecuted; that is, according to his meaning, so long
as the King goes about to chastise their Rebellion.

It were too much to trouble any ingenuous Reader with all those holy Articles
of Bearne, Articles of Bearne.
1574. coined with Mr. Theodores own stamp, and communicated at Melun to all
the Mosches of the French Church, that they might the more strongly, as they
said, make war against their enemies, till it pleased God to turn the heart of
the French Tyrant. By all this it must be very evident, that Beza and his
followers have caused all those uproars and commotions in France, when he
himself writing to Christopher Thretius, Epist. 40. Christoph. Thretio.
speaks his resolution to fight it out to the very last. Ego quidem pacem
nullam, nisi debellatis hostibus ausim sperare; he could hope no peace, till
the enemies were quite subdued. Now if you ask who were those enemies, he
quickly clears that, Cacolicorum castra trans Ligurim sunt, meaning the Kings
Army that were Roman Catholics; and says a little before, Ab eo tempore
nostri (copiis felicissime instauratis) Tholosanum agrum infestarunt, unde ad
Rhodanum usque progressi, occupatis aliquot oppidis and Arcibus, in quibus
praesidium reliquerunt: About that time our forces, with their recruits invaded
and possessed all about Toulouse, and thence marched toward the Rhone, taking by
the way Towns and Castles, wherein they had left Garrisons.

Thus you may see, how these good men made no bones to disturb the public
peace, to surprise the Kings Towns and Castles, and fortify them against him,
and to oppugn his forces, plunder his friends, etc. like true Protestants of
Integrity.

I might here travel a great way further, and weary you with as good stuff out
of the Book De jure Magistratus, Lib. de jure Magistratus.
a Bird of the same nest; for if it was not Beza's own, as most think it was,
it must needs be Ottomans, one of his chief Comerades. But Dr. Sutcliff, Dr.
Sutcliff.
a Countryman of ours, and very near of the same Sect, confesses the Book to
be Beza's and says, that Beza in his Book De jure Magistratus, does too much
arm Subjects against their Princes, and blames him for going about to
overthrow the Authority of all Christian Kings and Magistrates.

To Dr. Sutcliff may be added, the judgment of the famous Lawyer, Fr. Bald.
Resp. alt. ad Joh. Calv. p. 74.
Francis Baldwin, who had particularly converst with Galvin at Geneva, in his
Book called Responsio altera ad Johannem Calvinum, Paris 1562. Page 74. Mirabar
quor sum evaderet inflammatus tuus quidam Apostolus ( sc. Mr. theodore Beza)
qui cum hic concionaretur, suis auditoribus vehementer commendabat
extraordinarium illud exemplum Levitarum, strictis gladiis per castra
discurrentium, and obvios quosque Idolloatras trucidantium: Sed nunc audio te
vix contentum esse talibus Levitis. And P. 128. Leviora (says he) sunt illa;
Page 128.
cum statuis, sepulchris, and ossibus Principum ac Martyrum, Barbarum bellum
indictum videmus, cum Civitates occupari, fana spoliari audimus, etc. I
wondered, says he, what your fierce Apostle meant, and whether he would, (by
name Mr. Theodore Beza) who when he preached here, did most extremely recommend
to his Auditory, that extraordinary example of the Levites, running through the
Camp with their drawn Swords, and killing all the Idolaters they met withal;
but now I hear that you are hardly contented with such moderate Levites, etc.
And then in Page 128. Those are small matters (says he) to what we hear and
see now; a Barbarous War is waged with the Statues, Sepulchers, and Bones of
Kings and Princes; nay, and of Martyrs. Cities are seized on by force, Churches
profaned and spoiled, etc. Perfect pranks of Protestants of Integrity.

And Dr. Sutcliff adds yet further, that that Book of Vindiciae contra
Tyrannos, gives a power to Subjects, not only to resist, but to kill their
Kings, if they impugn Gods Religion, of which, and all their other
misdemeanors, they must be the only Judges, as it is fit they should be. Sed
Transant cum caeteris erroribus. I shall forbear to insist any longer upon the
Doctrines of these French Champions, which touch too roughly upon the String of
Majesty and Monarchy; for I fear I have said more than enough already; but now
to show you that it is not only a French disease, or accidental only to
Zuinglius, Calvin, and Beza, but that it is Morbus innatus in their Religion,
called Protestancy of Integrity; and that Mali Corvi est malum Ovum, and an Egg
still of the old Cockatrice, we will pass the Alps but of France into Germany,
and there take up Bohemia, for the next Stage of our present Tragedy. Exit Beza.

Yet before I enter the Bohemian Stage, I shall be bold to take the Palatinate
in my way, an unfortunate Province of late, and which in a hundred years, has
changed its Religion five or six times; at whose disorders we need not much
marvel, if we read but Paraeus and Gracerus. Paraeus Com. 13. Romans
Paraeus in his Comment upon the Thirteenth of the Romans, teaches plainly,
That Subditi possunt suos Reges deponere, quando degenerant in Tyrannos, aut
suos subditos cogunt ad Idololatriam, Subjects may depose their Kings, when
they degenerate into Tyrants, or press their Subjects to commit Idolatry; that
is, if they go about to establish any other Religion besides Calvinism. After
that, he is pleased to add another ground for the Excommunication, Deposition
and Deprivation of Kings, Quando praetextu Religionis quaerunt propria commoda.
When under pretext of Religion, they seek to make out their own particular
profit, which sure had been a lecture not very plausible to Henry the Eighth,
nor his Instruments, nor in the Protectors ears after him: And surely, if a man
should ask, whether Murrey and Morton in Scotland? whether Orange and Horn in
the Netherlands? whether the Admiral of France, and Prince of Conde himself?
whether the Protector and Duke of Northumberland in England, had not their
particular ends too? I believe we shall find them Subject to them same
censure. There is yet another Warrant that he is pleased to assign for the
Deposition of Princes, that must be forsooth, Quando gravant Conscientias
Subditorum, when they oppress the Consciences of their Subjects. Then
afterward to show his noble constancy in that opinion, is pleased to expound
his own opinion thus, Subditi adversus superiorem Magistratum, se and veram
Religionem possunt etiam Armis jure Defendere, si aliter in Conscientiis
incolumes esse nequeant. Subjects may lawfully defend themselves and the true
Religion by Arms against their Prince, if they cannot otherwise enjoy their
Consciences. So this is pretty well; Idem Com. in Jud.
but yet he thinks fit to proceed a little further in his Commentaries upon the
Book of Judges. Ma istratus minor potest, says he, occidere majorem. The
inferior Magistrate may kill the superior; and then explains his meaning in
that case, Quod Tyranni domestici magis sunt reprimendi. That Domestic and
Intestine Tyrants are rather to be represt; as if a man should say, That
Bailiffs, Sheriffs, and Perti-Constables, for Religion sake, may kill Kings and
Privy Counselors, because Tyrants within our doors are most to be feared, and
soonest to be cut off, upon the considerations before alleged. Yet Paraeus was
not the only Doctor that did impoyson the Palatinate with that infectious
pestilential doctrine; Gracerus.
for Gracerus his Pew-fellow, taught the same things; Coercenda gladio est
Antichristi ambitio. That Antichristian ambition is to be cut off with the
Sword; that is, all Princes and Prelates. And Aretius a Bird of the same
Feather, Aretius.
laboreth to stir up the people to hate the name and the authority, both of the
Empire and the Emperor, with this divine Lecture, Draconem liquet dedisse
potestatem suam Imperio: It is plain, that the Devil erected and authorized the
Empire. Ask him his reason why, and he tells you, In Imperio habitare
plenitudinem diabolismi pro comperto est. For it is evident, that in the Empire
dwells the fullness of devilishness; but it is not only Paraeus, Gracer, and
Aretius that taught this doctrine; for it is and has been sufficiently to be
seen in the practice of their whole Church. Gieskenius, Gieskenius.
a Lutheran, will tell you how they behaved themselves at Emden. Emdenses
illustrem dominum suum, mota seditione, fere tota ditione pepulerunt. 2. Pacti
etiam sunt, ne Illustrissimus Comes habeat illius Religionis nisi Calvinisticae
exercitium, subditis suis concedere Emdae. First, they of Emden made a
seditious tumult, and thrust their Illustrious Lord almost out of all his
Territory. Secondly, They covenanted, that the most Illustrious Count should
not have it in his power to tolerate any Religion, but that of St. Calvin, in
any part of his dominion. And thirdly, They were graciously pleased to be so
kind to their Sovereign, Et tamen liceat ei habere in Aula sua Concionatorem
qui sit Augustanae Confessionis. That for all that, he should have the
privilege, if he pleased, in his own Court, to keep a Preacher that was of the
Augustan Confession. A very great favor indeed, and a high prerogative will
doubtless accrue to Kings, when it shall be at the disposition of Subjects to
tolerate their Princes Religion, and frame it for themselves after their own
cut; the Protestants of Integrity must direct their Governor, and he must obey.

By these and such like Firebrands was Bohemia put into a most miserable
combustion; the original and progress of which unfortunate Wars, the stories of
Mercure Francois, Mercurius Gallob^lgicus, and diverse others relate so amply,
that I shall not need so much as touch upon them; and that the drift of all
those Riots, Uprores, and Rebellions in Germany, was only for the setting up
of this new no Religion, called now Protestants of Integrity.

And first this will appear by Page 121. Cancellaria, p. 121. Achatius a Donau.
of the Cancellaria, where Achatius a Donau writes to Anhalt, 15 November. 1619.
That the intention of Bethlehem Gabor and his correspondents was pied a pied to
extirpate the Antichristian Papacy; and as in the Articles of their Union, Art.
8. they declare unanimously, Artic. 8.
That their intention was to extirpate Papism; which is as much to say in their
sense, All Monarchy and Prelacy: Nay, part of this sense, Bethlehem Gabor.
Bethlehem Gabor himself speaks plainly out in his own Letter to the Great
Turk, That he must now labor ut rasa Pontisiciorum Cohors e medio tollatur;
that all the shaved heads may be quite cut off. Anhalt.
And Anhalt made out the other part in his Letter to Donau, in May, 1619. That
it were better the Turk or Devil should be chosen and preferred to wear the
Crown, than Ferdinand. Nay, Bethlehem Gabor himself by his Letters further
certifies the Turk, that the Palatinate and Brandenburgh were resolved no
longer to endure Ferdinand; and that all those Provinces which were in their
League, Sulta^^ and toti Nationi Mahumeticae, cord and anima omnia officia
sidelissime praestabunt; should most faithfully perform from the bottom of
their hearts and souls, all duty and allegiance to the Sacred Majesty of the
Sultan, and to all the noble Nation of the Mahumetans. Was not this a very holy
League? were not the ends most charitable, and the means most Christian? Were
not these pure Protestants of Integrity?

This is that Bethlehem Gabor, who to hold himself in the ^urks good grace,
delivered unto him the Town and Fort of Lipp, and the Towns of Solymos,
Tornady, Margat, and Arad, all of them being places well fortified in Hungaria.
Was not this done like a Protestant of Integrity?

This is he that swore Allegiance to Gabriel Bathori his Sovereign Lord and
Prince of Transylvania, afterward most traitorously murdered him, and usurped
his state. Was not this a perfect Protestant of Integrity?

This is he who made a League with the Emperor Matthias, 1615. not to attempt
any thing against the Liberties and Peace of Hungary, and afterward practiced
with the Rebels of that State, invaded the Kingdom, and took upon him the
Crown, 1620. Immediately banished all the State Ecclesiastical, that he might
feed his Soldiers with the spoils of the Church, still like a true Protestant
of Integrity.

This is that Bethlehem Gabor, who having entered Poson, presently profaned the
Cathedral Church of St. Martin, and spoiled it, and afterward with his own
hand certified the Turk, that at last he had entered upon that worthy exploit;
to which his Mahumetical holiness had so often encouraged him, that now he
would with all might and main have at the Clergy; and seeing that they gloried
so much to shave their Crowns, he would glory as much to cut off their heads. A
proper undertaking for a Protestant of Integrity.

Whereupon in June, after the Turk made peace with the Tartars, he promised to
assist Gabor with Forty thousand Tartars at his need, to expedite that good and
godly work. Pure Confederates with Protestants of Integrity!

Indeed there needs no other argument to convince and confound this accursed
League, but the bare subscription of this Monsters name to it, as a principal
in the Contract, whom the world must needs judge very unlike to be a fitting
instrument to advance the Cross of Christ, and to reform Religion: Yet this was
the man upon whose head the Union did agree to set the Crown of Hungary.

Now I do wish, that the partial Reader would look upon Germany, and see the
Picture of Troy on fire; see the image and horror of War, which we have already
pretty well tasted of; and by the same means, and how well it would please them
to see (which of late we were very near) the face of London and Middlesex, etc.
so disfigured with wounds, and desolation; and they who are now most forward to
blow the coals of discord and sedition, and to inflame a State with fury and
quicksilver, may quake and tremble, when they shall consider in what
devastation all that beautiful Country of the Empire has lain long mourning
and groaning. The Provinces about the Rhine, were wholly wasted and
impoverished by the Soldiers on both sides, especially Worms; all Tillage was
suspended, Traffic decayed, Trades ceased, Taxes imposed, new Fortifications
still charged the Country, Men were not masters of their own Goods, and above
a hundred thousand men then accounted to be slain. These are the fruits of
Civil Wars, which are bitter to them that taste them, as I think we in England
have done sufficiently, if we do not yet long for more. And these are the very
fruits and effects of Calvinism it self, if we can yet take warning of it, and
not be longer deluded with the pitiful pretense of Protestancy of Integrity.
For their justifying sole Faith, can never justify without it bring Charity in
her bosom; and the true marks of Charity, bring Patience, Humility, Zeal, and
Obedience, strongly conjoined in one link. Now the little Patience, Humility,
or Obedience, that these new Evangelists, our Hot-spur Protestants of Integrity
have showed, convince their Zeal to be counterfeit, and Faith to be fruitless.
Could ever Charity have directed these godly Bethlemites to invade the Duke of
Bavars Territories, if he refused to stand Neuter? Charity sure did not counsel
Anhalt in his Letters to Donau, 1619. Charity does not use to direct Christians
to solicit the Turks assistance against their Emperors and Princes, the
Nursing Fathers of Gods Church, as Page 80. Cancellariae. Nor to set down such
Plots as they intended, Page 42. and 32. and 66. But these Minions of Geneva,
now called Protestants of Integrity, bring Religion to plead in the defense of
their Union; and that they endeavored only to punish Ochosias for consulting
with the Idol of Acharon, and to root out all superstition.

Here indeed is the voice of Jacob, but the roughness of Esau; words of Saints,
but actions of Devils: All must be presently Idolatry and Superstition that
does not please their humor. Besides, could they show as good a warrant as
Elias did? Did God call them, did God authorize them to deprive their Princes?
Per me Reges regnant; By me Kings reign, was Gods own Proposition; 1 Pet. 2.13
and St. Peter's commands us to be subject to every humane creature for God;
whether to a King, as excelling, or to Rulers, etc. I am sure there is no
ground for such a doctrine, as to degrade and depose the King; and these
Protestants of Integrity must needs find St. Paul, in his Thirteenth Chapter
to the Romans, Romans 13 1.
to be of another Religion. Exeunt Paraeus, Gracerus, cum Bethlehem Gabore,
with all his Protestants of disloyalty; and enter some, if we can find them of
better of Integrity. So we change our Scene into the Netherlands.

The Cockatrice is now arrived in Holland and Zealand, that horrible Akeldama
and Field of Blood, and the Theater of most tragical and lamentable stories.
Now as you have heard the Axioms and Positions at large before, of those grand
Patriarchs of our pure Protestants of Integrity; so the practices and tyrannies
of these their followers, are here best to be discovered; and above all the
actions of their Conspiracy in the Union of Utricht, were the most capital and
infamous. A device it was, perfectly framed according to the rules of Junius
Brutus, and in imitation of their great Grandfather the Swiss before spoken
of, and of his sanctified Cantons; which of it self, is argument strong enough
to convince them of Rebellion, though they have been ever pleased to march
under the notion of Religion, and naming their War Bellum Sacrum, a Holy War.
This Union was made by the States 1578. who seeing the fortunate proceedings of
the Duke of Parma, and the whole course of the Malecoutents, entered into a
perpetual League, comprised in Twenty Articles for their mutual support and
union, as they were pleased to term it.

First, They of Holland, Zealand, Friezland, and Gilders, did join contra omnem
vim, quae sub praetextu nominis Regis aut Religionis inferretur. Against all
force that might be offered, under the pretense of the name of King, or of
Religion.

After that, the Prince of Orange, and they of Antwerp and Gaunt, came with him
into the League, and subscribed it the Fourteenth of February, 1579. The which
was afterward confirmed at the Hague, 20 July, 1581. And the scope of all
this, was to abandon and expel the King of Spain, and to depose him from his
own dominion and inheritance. Therefore upon that, they established an Edict,
Que le Roy de Espagne est deschen de la Seigneurie du Pais Bas: That the King
of Spain was fallen from his Sovereignty over the Low Countries. And to make it
more authentical, they devised a form of Abjuration from the King, and a
particular Revocation and Dispensation of their former Promise and Oath of
Obedience, in these words.

J. W. N. Do swear, avow, and bind my self to the Provinces united, to be loyal
and faithful to them, and to aid them against the King of Spain, Coment un bon
Vasall du Pais Bas, as a good Subject of the Low Countries.

And when they had taken that Oath, they broke all the Kings Seals, pulled down
his Arms, seized and entered upon his Lands, Rents, Customs, and all other
Hereditaments, and took the same into their own hands; and as absolute Lords,
they coined money in their own names, placed and displaced Officers of the
State, banished all the Kings Counselors, published Edicts, possessed the
Church Lands, suppressed all that were of another Religion, besieged Amsterdam,
and used all the Marks and Notes of Sovereignty in their own names. Did not
their Brethren here that were equal Protestants of Integrity, do just the same
things in England?

Now the Reasons they gave, why the King of Spain had forfeited his Title and
Right, were these.

First, The suppressing of their Religion. Secondly, For oppressing them with
Tyranny. Thirdly, For abrogating their Privileges, and for holding them in
Bondage and Servitude: For such a Magistrate (they said) they are not bound to
obey, (and so indeed are, as we have seen, the rules of their Religion) but to
eject him as a Tyrant.
Were not these the very Reasons that our Protestants of Rebellion in England,
used against our most glorious good King Charles, to wage War against him, and
afterward to murder him? Believe it, these were examples and presidents of
most dangerous consequence, and which not a little concern all Princes to look
well to; for if Subjects may depose their Princes, and make themselves Judges,
when they shall so forfeit their Crowns and Dignities; Qui stat, videat ne
cadat. He that stands, let him take heed least he fall. Kings had need to make
their Seat secure, and to sit fast if they can; for these men make Monarchy
itself but a very slippery hold: And indeed, Ambition and Treason can never
find a fitter cloak for their wearing, than that which is made of the Holland
fashion, by the Religion of these Protestants of Integrity.

Now that you should the better judge of the particular quarrel of the
Hollanders and their Confederates, I should give you the whole story of that
Rebellion; but it is too long to recite; I refer every ingenuous Reader to
their own Annals, which will convince them of the horrideft Apostasy from, and
Rebellion against both King and Church, that was ever seen in the world before,
nor can ever be matched, but by that of our Protestants of Integrity here in
England.

It is most true, that the Hollanders began their Rebellion with Lutheranism;
but that being too hot to hold, the gentle stuff of Calvinism forsooth must be
brought in, which carried within it, as it does every where, its cursed
Quicksilver; which being once admitted, made the fire ever after to be most
unquenchable.

Thus did the flame burst out, the people as in spite of all Laws, begun to
mutiny, broke down the Kings Arms, and grew so wild, as in a rage they pulled
down Images, robbed Churches, rifled Monasteries, and contemned all Magistrates
that sought to appease the troubles. And upon what grounds did they do all
this? Blessed St. Calvin gave them a Dispensation, which they have not been
ashamed to urge for their apology. Lih. 4. cap. 13, 21.
A man, says he, once illuminated with the truth, Simul vinculis omnibus
obediendi legibus and Ecclesiae solutus est. That is, he that has once perfect
knowledge of their Gospel, is presently absolved from all Laws, and Oaths of
Obedience to the King or Church.

Is not this a blessed Lesson? are not these holy Evangelists? It is here worth
noting how a certain Hollander in his third Defense of the United Provinces,
calls the King of Spain, Raptorem and Haereticum notorium, most insolently;
and thereupon he infers, Annon potius Regem Hispaniae, quia Haereticus notorius
est, ex suo Regno, omnibus omnium Evangelicorum viribus expellere oporteret?
Thus Proclaiming it the duty of all good Evangelists to expel the King of
Spain, with all their might and main out of his Territories, because he was a
robber and a notorious Heretic.

Does not this man look like one of Catilines Religion, though cloaked with
this new Gospel and pretended Protestancy of Integrity?

Now that this was downright Rebellion, under that specious pretext of
Religion, their own Countryman, if they will be pleased to study him, Honderius
in Prax. Criminal. cap. 132.
one Honderius shows at large, and indeed has drawn up their Process:
Seditiosi sunt, says he, qui movent conspirationem adversus Rectores and
Administratores Regnorum, vel illicitas Congregationes populi cogunt, cives
Commotionibus turbant, etc. They are guilty of Sedition, who contrive any
thing, or conspire against Governors or Deputies of Kingdoms, or make any
unlawful Meetings, or trouble Citizens with Commotions.

Now what is all this, compared with their dealings against Alva, Don Juan, and
the Duke of Parma? with their many Meetings at Breda, and Osterweal; with their
incensing and encouraging the Geuz; with their defense of Harlem and Alcmar.
Are not those Actions good Comments upon their Law, and clear against
themselves? But in another Chapter he proceeds to declare the conditions of a
just War.

1. Ut Bella sint just a, Ide^ c. 82.
requiritur ut justa sit causa. 2. Recta intentio. 3. Personarum idoneitas. 4.
Autoritas Principum, sine qua est laesa Majestas.
First, A just Cause is requisite. Secondly, A right Intention. Thirdly, A
rightful capacity of Persons.
And lastly, The Authority of the Prince, without which, to take up arms is
Treason.

Now if the States do but mark that sine qua, they may well hold down their
heads, and blush for shame of their impious Rebellion. For in all their wars
they neither had just cause, nor yet good color of a cause. They were secured
for their Religion by the Pacification of Gaunt, by the Perpetual Edict, and by
the Articles of the Treaty at Colen; by which they were to enjoy all without
disturbance, and yet would not they join with the States General to accept the
same.

Neither could there be recta intentio; for it was only to nourish discord and
disobedience against their Prince. It is true, they pretended ever Religion,
and the peoples safety, as all Rebels use to do; but it is as true, that they
likewise prosecuted the common ends of other Rebels; not for the love of them,
nor their Religion, but his own private ends and preservation. Ambition and
Despair were his principal Motives and Counselors, and a Revenge upon, and
Dispossessing the King of his Sovereignty, were his perfect ends; and poor
Religion his beloved Protestancy of Integrity, served him but as a mere
stalking-horse to all those.

Claudius le Brun in P^ax. Civ. and Crim.
Besides, let us but consider what Claudius le Brun lays down in his Book of
Process, both Civil and Criminal, who adds, That whosoever surprizeth Towns,
Castles, or Forts, without order of his Sovereign, (as the Count de Lumay did
in Holland, and Voret, and Barland did at Flushing in Zealand,) whereby the
peace of the Country is broken: Or, who attempteth against the life of his
Sovereign or his Lieutenant, is guilty of Treason.

Now these Maxims all Europe has ever held as Judgments and Decrees of
eternal Reason, and inviolable Principles of State which are never to be called
in question. And if the States of Holland do not observe, hold, and practice
the same, they can never expect peace at home, nor any order and obedience in
any of their Dominions.

By this it is manifest, That as in the beginning these Hollanders are justly
to be charged with Sedition; so in their progress they stand guilty of Treason
and Rebellion: And then being so convinced Traitors by Law, is it not now a
little wonderful, that they should become High and Mighty Lords by Law? I am
sure it is more by luck than cunning, that they have made themselves so; and it
may prove a good encouragement to their own Soldiers (if men can so win
Dignities by Offenses) to share the Towns in Holland amongst themselves, or to
induce them to a Bellum Pyraticum or Sociale, a smart and quick war amongst
themselves, and to Cantonize that Province by their own Hogen Mogens example.

Now that I call all in this Religious Rebellion Hollanders, I do it for diverse
reasons. First, For that they were the most notorious leading Cards; and for
the Matter of Religion at the making of their Union, they made themselves
Heads, and Supreme Governors of the Church and Religion, by these words; Quant
au point de Religion ceux d'Hollande and de Zealande s'y comporteront come, bon
leur semblera, and les autres selon les Placards de l' Archiduke Mathias. As to
matter of Religion, they of Holland and Zealand might dispose themselves as
they pleased; but all the rest were to conform to the Archduke Mathias. So by
this the States of Holland and Zealand got the start, and mounting the
Tribunal, did advance themselves to be Heads of the Church in those Provinces;
for all Ecclesiastical Matters must be, Come bon leur semblera.

They are now the Regula Lesbia, to square, judge, direct, govern and order all
things in Religion; and what they shall follow, must pass for current, and in
that manner, and for so long time as they shall please.

Thus did the Cockatrice play his game, and got footing for his beloved
Children, these Protestants of integrity, in that concave Country.

Now as for their pretended Privileges, it is plain, That the King did never
intend to make them void; so they have built themselves upon most false
grounds, which some time or other, must of necessity fail them. And yet I would
ask of them, if it had been so great an offense for the King to go about to
abrogate their Privileges? is it not a greater offense for Subjects to usurp
his? Is it not pretty for them so to make themselves Parties and Judges, and by
their own authority to punish their Prince? Which (if it had not been backed
and exactly copied out by our English Protestants of Integrity) had been an
insolency and indignity incredible to all Posterity; and such, as neither the
Swi^zers, nor the Amphictiones (the Confederate Cantons of Grecia) did ever
parallel, or come near. For so they make Monarchy to be a wild kind of hold,
Kingdoms to be occupantium jus; qui potest rapere capiat, the strongest take
all, catch as catch can. A presumption opposite to all Laws, and a portal to
let in all confusion and ruin: But if the King should, as they would have him,
forfeit and lose all his Authority and Jurisdiction; yet I see not why or how,
they could also challenge his Lands, and private Inheritance, for that must
needs descend by Law. Besides, if the King could forfeit his Sovereignty, how
can he forfeit it to his Subjects? It is true, a Subject may make himself Civem
alienae Reipubicae, a Citizen of another State, or subject himself to another
Prince: But if he stay in his own Country, he cannot of a Subject, make
himself no Subject, (for though he do rebel, as the Hollanders did, yet he is
still a Subject;) but it is more admirable, how of a Subject, he should become
a Sovereign; that is indeed, scientia scientiarum, a very supernatural skill,
and far exceeding my capacity.

As for the grievous Exactions they complain of; videlicet, Of the tenth penny
imposed by the Duke of Alva: It will be necessary here to draw the Curtains,
wherewith they labor to shadow and obscure the truth. Extreme necessity and not
his own will, forced Alva to exact that, which neither he would have done, nor
the King have suffered, if possibly to be avoided; but being driven to a sad
strait, for satisfying of the Soldiers, who always grow wild without pay; and
so to avoid a greater mischief as he thought, he was forced to incur that
inconvenience.

At this time, some of the Counsel in England, in the Queens name, seized in
Hampshire Six hundred thousand Ducats, sent from Spain to pay the Army,
without any charge at all to the Country. Besides, the King of Spain had sent
the Duke of Medina, a man of a milder nature, to succeed Alva (who partly by
misfortune, partly by his sternness, partly by some errors, but most of all by
some Foreign Princes disfavors, was grown odious) who brought with him Two
hundred thousand Ducats, which the Zealanders intercepted upon the Seas; and
so was Alva by these means further plunged and perplexed. But hereby it appears
plainly, That it was neither the Kings pleasure nor purpose (who intended so
largely and liberally to furnish those Countries;) but the extremity of his
present wants which compelled Alva to those Demands and Exactions: And so it
was rather an occasion of scandal and offense, reflected upon the King and
Alva, than deserved by either, and a quarrel rather made and contrived, than
given.

But now these popular Orators that plead so earnestly for the ease of the
Commons, and seem so careful to procure the Exoneration of the Impositions and
Taxes laid upon the people: Why do they not now inveigh as much against these
new Magnifico^s, now Hogen Mogen Lords of Holland, who are so far from laying
down and diminishing the Subsidies and Excises there, that they have raised and
augmented them in such sort, as at this day no Kingdom or Commonwealth in
Christendom, groaneth under the like burdens. And it cannot be yet forgotten,
how the Gentle Father of the people, as they call him, the Prince of Orange did
propound and labor to wrest and wring from them of Holland, the sixth penny
toward his charge and maintenance, Anno 1584. I could show you an endeavor to
raise the sixth penny upon the Hollanders; a strain far higher than the Duke of
Alva's; sed transeat.

Now one thing I must not pass by, for it will illustrate all the rest.
West-Friezland in the beginning of their Rebellion, did scarce contribute Denis
octies centena millia Florenorum, and now they are charged to pay Quadragies
centena millia librarum and dues milliones. Barnevelt in Apol.
I use Barnevelts own words in his Apology, because I would not be challenged
for mistaking them: Whereas they paid before but Eight hundred thousand
Florins, they are taxed to pay Forty hundred thousand Libers, and two Millions,
which makes a pretty difference. Who is therefore now the Grand Tyrant or
Exactor? Though the people have changed their Lord, they are not at all eased
of their oppression; and where before they complained they had one, now are
they subject to the command of many Tyrants, who fleece them to the purpose,
nay unskin them daily. If Alva beat them with whips, I am sure these new States
chastise them with Scorpions.

Examine but their Excizes and Impositions, how they are increast upon Meat,
Drink, Fuel, Men, Servants wages, besides Loans, and Benevolencies, and you
will find that they have well leapt out of the Drying Pan into the fire.

Hen. Cnickins.
Henry Cnickins charge them to exact the fourth part of their Revenues that
are Hollanders, and live out of their Country; Si in Provinciis nostris venia
eorum, degunt, semissem jubet solvere; si secus, bonis exuunt, etc. Sed de his
hactenus. For these and such like frivolcus pretenses must they have (as all
these Protestants of Integrity ever had) that intend Rebellion; but when they
come to be balanced in the Scales of Right Reason, and are found too light,
and all their specious Allegations not to hold water, Religion must be the
masterpiece to play the prize by, and a cloak that will never fail to cover
knavery. So Exeunt Hogen Mogen Protestants of Integrity.

The Religious Cockatrice having with so much success and applause played over
his Evangelical game in the Low Countries, sets his Pseudo Apostolical face a
little more Northward, directly pointing at our British Islands for his next
Rendezvous; and the most Northern corner of all them too, he was pleased to
choose out to receive the principal honor of his first arrival. Now we may well
know aforehand, what we are to expect ab ^^quilone; so then enter true
Israelites indeed, our gydd and godly Brethren of Scotland, that no doubt will
approve themselves and all their Bearns to be legitimate Protestants of
Integrity; for God forbid, there should be any Bastards in Scotland. Indeed it
is not to be denied, how eminently they ever did, and do still patrizare,
though one would have thought that the fiery zeal of these Serpentine Geneva
Rabbis, would have been somewhat qualified in a colder climate, and proceeded
with better temper.

Now if we look upon the Primary and and Principal Authors and Actors of the
Alterations and Tumults in Scotland, the first and dearest beloved brood of the
Cockatrice, we shall find them sure, as violent as Whirlwinds, blowing down
with their breath, all that ever stood in their way, even Royalty, and the very
Crown ir self.

The Principal Instruments, and as it were Legati a Latere, from his Holiness
Mr. Calvin, for this great work, were John Knox, Goodman, Gilby, and Buchanan,
who were bravely seconded by Mais, David Fergusson a Learned Shoemaker, and
Minister of Dundee; as also Mr. Coverdale, Willax, Rous, Harriot, and
Mongomery, Victrix Legio and Novatores strenni, a conquering Legion of the
right Cockatrice kind, stout Innovators and pure Protestants of Integrity. Not
all Writers of Books, but all of them Ministers (forsooth) of the new Gospel;
and such rare Salt-Petermen as were fit for Fireworks, and to prepare Matter
to blow up both Church and State of any Nation. What a pretty Gentleman Knox
was, and how well conditioned, his Countryman Langey can amply tell you, who
has writ at large of his virtues. For Buchanan, he was ever known to be a rude
and slovenly Swits, of a presumptuous audacity, and a factious nature, and one
of those Protestants of Integrity, that in Edinburgh in the time of King James
the Fifth, did solemnly in Lent, eat the Paschal Lamb; and being convicted of
that Judaism (which the King himself sat to examine) his Partners and
Colleagues in Religion were there condemned and burnt for that Heresy; he with
some of his associates escaped, and fled over into other Countries, as men
reserved to be further Plagues to their own. But by their Godly Theorems
likewise, and Doctrinal Maxims, you shall be better able to discern them, and
find them extraordinary Doctors of Loyalty, pure Protestants of Integrity, and
scarcely matchable.

First, Knox in lib. ad Nobilitat. and Pop. Scot.
Gentle Mr. Knox in his Pook to the Nobility of Scotland, begins thus to
instruct them. Neque promissum, neque juromentum obligare potest populum, ut
obediat and auxilietur Tyrannis contra Deum: No promise nor oath whatsoever can
oblige the people to obey and help Tyrants against God. And in his History of
Scotland, Id. in Hist. Scot. page 372.
he expressly assums, That Princes may be deposed by the people, if they prove
Tyrants, and act against God and his truth; and in such cases all Subjects are
free from their oaths of Allegiance and Obedience.

His Fellow Goodman also sings the same note in his Book of Obedience, and that
out of Exodus 17. Goodman in lib. de Obed. in Exodus 17
Toti populo, says he, hoc orus incumbit ut animadvertat in Idololatram
quemcunque; nemo excipitur sive Rex, sive Regina, sive Imperator. It is a duty
incumbent upon all people, severely to prosecute all Idolaters; none is to be
excepted; neither King, Queen, nor Emperor. A brave Homily to the people, to
teach them how to punish their Princes; then he proceeds to show how, and by
what order that is to be done. This is Gods Commandment, says he, to the
people; Ui in simili defectione Rectores suos, qui a Deo ipsos abduc^nt, ad
furcas abripiant and suspendant; that in case of such a defection, they seize
upon their Princes who would seduce them from God, and carry them away to the
Gallows, and hang them up. Is not this a rare Justiciary over Kings?

Nor is their fine Companion Buchanan, Buchan. de jure Reg. Scot. p. 61.
in his Book De jure Regni Scotiae, a jot behind these two gallant Fathers of
the people, in his wholesome counsels to them. For, says he, the people are
above the King, and of greater authority; they have right to bestow the Crown
as they please; they may arraign their Princes, and depose them: To them it
appertains to make Laws, and to Princes to execute them. Sure our Protestants
of Integrity here in England conned this Lesson perfectly; we see they have
followed it exactly: Yet this was the great Solomon of Scotland, and well
chosen, if you mark it, to instruct his King as a Tutor; but fitter far to
infect the people as a Preacher.

But if you will yet have a little patience, you shall hear these Godly Men
speak their sense more plainly.

And first, Knox, sol. 372.
Knox tells us plainly, That it were very good, that rewards were publicly
appointed by the people for such as kill Tyrants, as well as for those that
kill Wolves, and other Beasts of prey. But brave Buchanan enlarges upon this
point a little further in a learned Diaglogue of his, Buchan. in Dial.
wherein he shows abundantly both his excellent Divinity and Humanity. They
hold, says he, that Kings must be obeyed, good or bad; but it is no better
than blasphemy so to say. It is true, That God often places evil Kings to punish
the people; and it is as true, That he often appoints private men to kill them.
But in the first to Timothy, we are commanded to pray for Princes; yea, so we
are also to pray for Thieves. Is not this rare? Yet again he must have the
other firk at the coat of Kings. But (says he) Paul commands obedience to
Kings; he answers, Yea, it is true, Paul did so in his nonage of Christianity,
and in the infancy of the Church; but if he had lived now, he would have writ
and said far otherwise: As if the time wherein Buchanan lived, had been more
enlightened with the Spirit, than that of the Apostles; and that he himself were
enriched with a greater fullness of the Holy Ghost, and had a more ripe and
solid judgment than poor Paul could possibly comprehend.

Thus are the people closely armed to kill Kings under the notion of Tyrants,
by the Zeal of Gods Church and Truth, and the Light of the Gospel; as by the
Sword of Gideon, and the Arms of Judith, which must be drawn and directed by
the people, even against their Kings.

Now that these impious Paradoxes be the Doctrines not of one Goodman, nor one
Knox, or one Buchanan, but of the whole Congregation of those Protestants of
Integrity, is to be seen by their holy Geneva Bible, Bib. Genev. 2 Chronicles. c. 5.
v. 16.
admitted by their whole Kirk, wherein their Notes upon the Second of
Chronicles show, That they allow the deposing of Queen Maacha, by her son Asa,
for Idolatry, and yet reprehend him for want of zeal, that he did not put her
to death by fire. The like Axioms sure are not allowed at Doway, nor the like
Notes to be found in the Rhemish Testament: But yet the practice and execution
of these poisonous Positions and Doctrines is much worse than the pronouncing
of their bare Decrees. Less. l. 10. Hist. etc.
Lessaeus, the learned Bishop of Ross, says, that Eo Knoxii prorupit audacia,
ut public Nobiles pro concione perstrinxerit, quod Jesabelem ex medio non
sustulerunt. Knox grew to that height of impudence, as publicly in a Sermon,
to rebuke the Nobles of Scotland, that they did not put their Queen that
Jesabel to death; and yet these are all but words: But observe how speedily
blows followed; For all the Histories of Scotland do sufficiently testify,
That their first act of Reformation of Religion, as they called it, or
Establishment of their Protestancy of Integrity, was the surprising the Castle
of St. Andrews, without Warrant or Commission; then the murdering of Cardinal
Belua, 1546. And from thence proceeded to the Deposition of their own most
Gracious. Virtuous, and Religious Queen, our Kings Great Grandmother, and
afterward pursued her to her murder here in England.

All which practices were sufficiently furthered by the rest of their Reforming
Brethren abroad, B^za in Epist. 78. ^d Buchanan.
the Prime Protestants of Integrity, as appears by Beza in his Letter to
Buchanan, provoking him to those Barbarous and Satanical Treasons, by his
bitter railings against that best of Queens, calling her Medea and Athalia, and
saying with his foul mouth, that Nullum illius sceleribus idoneum nomen
invenio; That he could not find out words to express, or names to set out her
wickedness; and a great deal more in his Reveille Matin; Reveille Matin.
and only because she was not (forsooth) a Protestant of Integrity. Nay King
James of blessed memory himself, her son, and our Sovereigns Grandfather, had
much ado to escape their hands, though but in his Cradle, as he was pleased
frequently to acknowledge, and so openly, that it could not pass the
observation of learned men abroad, especially one Johu Schuts, Joh. Schuts his
observation of K. James.
a Lutheran, who repeats the Kings words thus; Ab illis ego non solum a
nativitate continuo vexatus fui, verum etiam abipso matris utero propemodum
extinctus, antequam in lucem editus sum. I have not been only vexed and
persecuted by this kind of people from my Cradle and Infancy, but also from my
very Mothers womb, and was almost by them extinguished before I could see
light. But we know better sure here in England, than any Lutheran abroad could
possibly, how that great, most judicious and knowing King was satified in their
Religious rogueries, and what he thought of them to his dying day; and the
warning he gave his most virtuous son upon his deathbed, to beware of them:
Which how well he did observe, I know not; but this I am sure of, That they
were the principal movers of all his, and his Kingdoms troubles, and the cursed
hands that joined with the English Protestants of Integrity here, to work his
final ruin. Sed transeat cum reliquiis erroribus.

But now here before I proceed any further, I must be bold to make a stand, and
sadly intermix the water of my eyes with my mourning and sorrowful Ink, and
with a black distempered Pen, deplore the madness of those malicious men, who
were the first engagers of us in our late unnatural Wars.

Ah poor England, Paradise of the Earth, Eye of the World, Pearl of all
Beauties! How many times by the means of these Infernal Spirits, Spawn of the
Cockatrice, Protestants of Integrity, have thou seen thy fruitful bosom,
heretofore crowned with Ears of Corn, and Gilded with Harvests, all bristled
over with Battalia's? How many times have thou seen thy Land covered with
Swords, and thy Seas with Ships? How many times have thou felt the arms of thy
Children encountering within thy proper Entrails? How many times have thou seen
flames of Brothers hostility flying through thy fat and fragrant Fields? When
have thou not sweat in all the parts of thy beautiful body? When have not
Rivers of Blood been drawn from thy Veins, and such Blood as would have
cemented the best Bulwarks for thy best defense, against all foreign enemies
whatsoever; and if well employed, had made the great enemy of Christendom, the
Turk, ere this to tremble at thy Standards, and have replanted again the
beautiful Plains of Palestine? But all has been sacrificed to such Religious
Furies.

Nor could these sacred Blood-Leeches yet rest satisfied, till they had embrued
their hands, and made their hearts drunk with His, whose every drop was worth a
whole Ocean of ours. Murder they must, the most Religious and Clement Monarch
of the Universe; a Prince wise as Apollo, Valiant as Achilles, Virtuous as
Socrates, Pious as Aeneas, and Beautiful as an Amazon, must pass away as a
Pearl parcht up with Lightning, and leave his Anointed Head upon a Scaffold as
a sacrifice to these Religious Monsters of Mankind: An action so dire and
dreadful, a Tyranny so barbarous, that no voice or pen can ere be able to
express it; it makes the hair stand an end on the heads of all good men so much
as to think upon it; nay nothing but a style of fire, or pen of Adamant steeped
in blood, is capable to declare it. And certainly, (as it was said of Sylla) If
that Mercy her self had come upon the Earth in humane shape, they would have
murdered her. Are you not yet ashamed of your ingratitude, you children of the
Scottish Belial? Had you had one drop of true English blood in your bodies, you
would have been readier to spend that for Him, than to take His from Him.

What, you would have been all Kings? We remember indeed too lately, that you
were so, and would have a perpetual seat in Parliament, as you once thought you
had got. And truly, it is great pity but it were so again, especially being so
good Patriots, as you have been? I wonder truly, that then you did not vote
your selves to be immortal too! So you might have been too hard for Dun, and
the Devil himself.

Let any temperate and knowing man in England now be judge, whether when you
sat so with all your power and splendour about you, so loudly proclaiming your
selves such Magnifical Members, you did not stink in the nostrils of the
people; who generally looked upon you then but as busy Apes upon a house top,
and as a towering smoke in the Socket of a greasy Candlestick. St. Bern. l. 1.
de Consid. c. 7.
For such (as St. Bernard tells us) are all dignified persons without merit;
and so accordingly you went out in your own snuff, the stench whereof is not
yet, nor ever will be in all succeeding Ages extinguished. But I forbear, least
I lose my self in this vast field of Passion, Wonder, and Astonishment; and
indeed I would willingly pass over this discourse with silence, as over coals
covered with ashes, were it not that as it was fit to expose massacred bodies
to view, thereby to cure the madness of the Milesian Maids: so we are bound to
discover the bloody effects of this late unnatural War, to raise a horror in
all good souls, against the wicked and diabolical causes of it; those bloody
Religionaries, covenanting Cockatrices, in a word, Protestants of Integrity;
for killing and robbing more villainous than ever was a Cacus, or a Polyphemus;
more like Centaurs than men, much less Saints; and if you could but look into
them, you would find for all their reverend pretensions to purity and
godliness, their hearts all spotted over like the skin of a Panther. Wretched
Religionaries, who carry with them the voice of Jacob, but the hands of Esau;
whose godliness truly is not unlike a Tomb of Glory, full of rotten Bones; and
a fair Eye to show, but purblinde at hand: And yet truly, notwithstanding all
out unworthy sufferings from this kind of Cockatrice-Christians, we in England
have now no little reason to rejoice in those very miseries, and congratulate
with our selves, that very bloodshed it self of those unnatural wars, if we
could at no cheaper rate have acquired the enjoyment of those most inestimable
blessings and benefits, which we have since received by the undeceiving of the
good people of the Nation, from this grand cheat of Presbyterian Religion, and
above all the rest, the sovereign influence of that most precious person his
Sacred Majesty, and most gracious Government. Thrice blessed England in such a
purchase, though with so much cost and pains! O happy voice of thunder, which
made this Hind to bring forth so glorious a Birth, after so many terrible
throws, and such direful agitations of many years!

Methinks I see still, and it will be always present with me, how upon his
entry into London, all the hearts of the poor Subjects of this Nation, which so
much sighed in the Civil Wars, and under the late Usurpers, freshly bloomed,
and newly opened themselves as Roses, at the benign and gentle aspect of this
incomparable Prince. Some steadfastly beheld him, and became as statues, yet
showing by their eyes, that they were not made of marble: Others spoke to him
with an infinity of dumb testimonies of a never silent and hearty affection:
The rest made the resentments of their hearts burst forth from their lips, not
being able to withhold from Acclamations.

But what shall we say then, if our English Protestants of Integrity have been
the causes of all this great happiness, both to Prince ann People? I am sure
they glory in it, as their own proper product, which if truly done by them, out
of a true resentment of loyalty, without any mixtures of their own private and
pernicious designs, and a perfect repentance for their past crimes, no doubt
will prove sufficient expiation both in the sight of God and man, for whole
myriads of their treasonable transgressions before. For this dry victory of his
Majesty over us, has been the greatest and most conducing to the public good,
that ever was heard of in the whole world. It was well observed of Tacitus.
that Ingens victoriae decus citra domesticum sanguinem bellanti, the greatest
glory of a victory is that which a Captain gains by the least expense of
homebred blood. And this has been his Majest es constant study to do, ever
since his most barbarous banishment: Nay, his endeavor likewise has been to
save as much as he could of his very enemies blood. He has never sought to
purchase fame by such a cruel vanity, as Pompey the Great did, who building a
Temple to Minerva, caused to be engraven over the Gate of it, how he had taken,
routed, and slain, Two millions one hundred fourscore and three thousand men;
pillaged and sunk Eighty hundred forty and six Ships; made desolate One
thousand five hundred thirty eight Cities and Towns. If this be the way to
glory, his Sacred Majesty sure has steered a clean contrary course; for he
has written and engraven by his actions on the Gate of the Temple of Eternity,
the Men, Ships, Cities and Towns that he has preserved. Haec divina potentia
est, gregatim and public servare, says the ^n^est Excellent Sentca; It is a
piece of no less than divine power, to save publicly, Since, de Clem. l. 1. c.
26.
and by troops. By the other way, it may be his Majesty might have rendered
himself more remarkable and terrible, like a dreadful Comet, by the ruin of
his Kingdoms; but his gracious goodness knew, that nothing could be so
honorable as to save: And it is not his Majesty's fault, if notwithstanding all
those great and fierce contradictions of peevish spirits, we are not yet
reconciled into a brotherly amity, and as one man's children, if we do reverence
his Sacred Majesty as our common Father.

Our Cattle are as plentiful as ever, our fields no less fertile and fragrant;
nor yet are our Hillocks less filled with Ears of Corn, than they were before
cur late unnatural Wars; all which we must needs attribute to his Majesty's
most pious care and preservation, in whose power it was for our ingratitude, to
have thrown us all into our deserved confusion, and consequently desolation; by
which means he has built himself a living monument in the hearts of all true
Englishmen; in which he will live more honorably a thousand times, and so be
represented to after ages, than all those great Monarchs of Egypt, in their
rich Marbles, Pyramids, and Obelisks. And if our Protestants of Integrity have
been, as they pretend, so highly instrumental in this happy production, it is
fit they should have their due honor and acknowledgement; and very requisite it
is, that we should all join in prayers to God, that they may perfectly forsake
the Cockatrice and all his works, and continue like good Christians in the
payment of those dues of obedience and loyalty which they have so worthily
begun.

But now you must give me leave to tell you a story, which though in its
surface may seem something fabulous, yet is grounded upon very good History,
and the whole moral of it will be found, I fear, to be too perfect truth. That
Monsieur De Bean Mannoir, a Noble Breton, being as honorably, as religiously
engaged in the holy Wars, took part with a Lion, that was combated by a
Serpent, in a Wilderness in Palestine, and killed the Serpent with his sword,
who had in all likelihood, otherwise worsted the Lion, is as fair and faithful
History, as any humane Authority can derive to us. But upon this it is not
impossible but some skillful Mythologists might erect this Fable. A Princely
Lion that was for long time acknowledged King of the Wilderness of Sinai, made
himself a most stately den, a Palace equal to the dignity of his Royal Person
and Authority: Now there was a brood of most subtle and most mischievous
serpents thereabouts, who had an evil eye upon the state and authority of this
Royal Lion, and a desire to make themselves Masters of his den. This wicked
design of theirs they most secretly and craftily carried on, by private plots
and conspiracies, bandying in his counsels, and ploughing with his Heifers. But
prevailing nothing with all that, they entered into a Solemn League and
Covenant, by arms and open force to expel him from thence, or reduce him under
their obedience. Upon this very many Battles were fought betwixt them, but the
valor and vigilance of the Lion, was ^o great, and such the fidelity of his
other good Subjects, that in some years they could yet gain little or nothing
from him. At last the Serpentine power growing stronger, and the good Lions
weaker, by their subtle insinuation into his Counsels, and intelligence with
some of his unfaithful Counselors, and when almost all his honest friends
power was exhausted, both purses and persons spent in the pursuance of the
Royal right; the Devilish serpents at last took him prisoner, seized upon his
Royal den, and at length most villanously murdered him before the very door of
it.

The young Lion in the mean while seeing two most vast and hideous Serpents had
gotten the possession of his Imperial Den, endeavored to save himself by
flight from their infernal serpentine fury, and accordingly transported himself
into another country, where he lived for many years a disconsolate stranger,
and not a little distressed: Yet notwithstanding leteth slip no opportunity that
might advance his Interest in Palestike; at length after many most valiant
Essays and Attempts, to regain what his father had lost, and with little or no
success, he calls a Forest Council about him, and was at last advised by the
Fox to lie quiet for a while, not to stir at all; for all his quick and active
opposition, did but keep his enemies more waking, and hold them cemented
togerher in bonds of stricter union; and so he was contented to sit still for a
while, and give that viperous brood more leisure to destroy one another: which
fell out according to the Fox his counsels, and the Lions expectations; For the
two great Serpents that had made themselves Princes of the place, and usurpers
of the Lions right, fell into such fierce and unreconcileable differences, that
the quarrel could never have end till one had banished and driven out the other;
for it is most certain, as the wise Spaniard informs us, in el amar, in el
mandar no quieren compania; nor love, nor lordship can brook any Rival: There
is but one Sun necessary in heaven, and one King in a Country; a great spirit
cannot endure a crown made Crescent-wise, but will furnish out the roundness of
the Circle.

In fine, the worsted Serpent now being beaten into extreme despair, addresseth
himself to the young Lion, and proffers his utmost assistance to restore him
effectively to his right, so he will be pleased but to let him have onr corner
of his Den, and a part of his power; to which the Royal-hearted Lion readily
assented; so with mutual forces they prevailed to repossess the Den, and slay
the Master Serpent. Now it is very notorious, that the beaten and banished
Serpent, was aiding and assisting to the Lion, not for any kindness, or love to
him, or his cause; but for his own preservation, and to revenge himself upon
his treacherous companion. And it is said, that so noble and so perfidious a
nature not being able to cohabit long in peace together, the Serpent still
according to its Devilish Luciferian nature, conspiring to be aut Caesar, aut
nihil, sole King or nothing; they fell into a most bloody combat, at the same
time that this Seignior of Beaumanoir was passing by, who like a noble, cordial
Cavalier, engaging his sword in the Lions behalf, slew the Serpent, and so
freed that Monarchy from any more of the Serpentine servitude.

But now here I must be forced to draw a curtain over the horrid misdeameanours
of my own Countrymen, which are not only past, but those that are feared to
come, least if I should make any Application, I may be mis-construed, and
appear to ambitiate rather the business of a Prophet than a Historian; so I
refer every man to his private application, and the whole Nation to their
earnest prayers, that it would please God in his goodness to avert what the
malice of some does threaten us withal.

So I return to my business, and to search out if I can, the very first bed of
this viperous brood; the proper Pedigree of these State Serpents, and the very
source and origin of those Religious Cockatrices before spoken of, from whence
they are truly and lineally descended.

Now there are three derivations alleged, but a fourth I believe is most
probable. The first is from the old Wicklefists in England, who are registered
by Mr. Fox amongst his Martyrs, and are still accounted by some of the late
Doctors of Integrity, Inter primos testes veritatis, amognst the first Winesses
of the Truth: and yet we shall find that they did hold as the Knoxians did
since them in Scotland, that the people might correct their Princes, if they
offend: And therefore Melancthon a reforming Brother too, Melanct. in com.
super Pol. Arist.
in his Comment upon Aristotle's Politics, says, Varias Tragoedias excitavit
Wickleffus, qui contendit eos qui non habent Spiritum Sanctum; Idem in lib. de
jure Magist. Osiander, cent. 9.
amittere Dominium: Wiccleff raised strange Tragedies, by teaching that they
lose all right of Dominion, who have not the Spirit of God: And in his Book, de
jure Magistatus, he says, Insaniit Wickleffus, qui sensit impios nullum
dominium habere. Wickleff was mad who thought that no wicked man had any right
of dominion.

Osiander witnesses the same in his ninth Century, and diverse others of the
same reforming race, who have themselves written altogether as Rebel Doctrines,
yet tax Wickleff highly for this; that all wicked men should lose their
propriety: So as if Princes be so, which rests in their sanctity only to
judge, they must presently forfeit their Crowns. And yet Mr. Fox calls him,
Stellam matutinam in medio nebulae, and Lunam plenam in diebus illis, a morning
star in the middle of a fog, and the full Moon of the time; and the consequence
of those Doctrines may be seen in the stories of Sir John Oldcastle Lord
Cobham, and Sir Roger Acton, two of Wickllffs Disciples, who raised a Rebellion
accordingly, and were by that active King Henry the fifth, defeated, and
deservedly put to death for Heresy and Treason. And how careful that
phanatical Oldcastle was of his Followers, may be seen in his Speech to Sir
Tho. Erpingham, that if he saw him rise the third day from the dead, he should
procure quietness and favor to those of his Sect: But by his not resurrection
as he promised, his Sect lay strangled in the Cradle, and buried with him till
King Edward the sixth his days, when some ends of it were taken up again, and
set out with more ostentation then ever in that Princes Minority; and what rare
effects of obedience, were by that means produced in Queen Mary's time, who
brought them up again to the Test, may be easily read in our Chronicles.
Wherein it is plain, that in the poor five years of her Reign, there was de
facto more open and violent opposition and rebellion made by her own Subjects,
than Queen Elizabeth had in forty five years, or any Prince before, or since
the Wickliffian Doctrine; till the same smothered fire broke out at last in our
good King Charles his time, to his utter ruin, and the shaking of the very
foundations of his Monarchy.

And yet to this very day is Wickliff held for a grand Apostle amongst all the
Phanaticks in England, who are at present more numerous than ever. Howsoever it
cannot enter into me to believe that he deserved the Honor to be reputed the
first Father of our Protestants of Integrity; though he might possibly by that
single Doctrine of his, open a gap to all those gallant Champions against Kings
that succeeded him. So exit Wickleffus; and enter valiant Martin Luther, who is
by some, and truly not altogether undeservedly, supposed to be the great
Grandfather of these prodigious Doctrines against the State, Dignity and
Persons of Kings and Princes.

It is well known that in the year of our Lord 1514 the whole estate of the
Church joyed a settled Peace, and all their ancient Rights and Privileges: All
Princes with great devotion were Nursing-Fathers and Protectors of it; there
was a perfect harmony and correspondence, (for all matters of Religion and
Faith) between the Church of Rome, and the Princes and Commonwealths of all
Christendom.

Anno 1515. Martin Luther an Augustane Friar, a man of a turbulent spirit, was
indeed the first that broke this long and happy peace, who having interposed
himself in the fatal business of Indulgences (sent by Pope Leo the tenth into
Germany) began first as Proctor for his Order to preach against the injury done
to his fraternity, against the covetousness and abuses of the Collectors, and
against their Authority which did nominate them, etc. And finding (as Novelty
is ever at first well entertained by the multitude) Populo placere quas
fecisset fabulas, and perceiving also some of the greatest Princes in Germany
did hear him, and would be ready to back him upon all occasions, and in all his
proceedings, pufft up with vainglory, and an ambitious conceit of himself, he
presently set himself upon higher strains, and as a man grown sick in his
spirits, and of a fiery disease, he begun to rave and defame all Church
Government; he abandoned his Cloister, cast off his Habit, and renounced all
obedience to his Superiors: For now he preaches against the whole Clergy,
against the Tyranny and Superiority of the Bishop of Rome, (whose Authority in
matters Ecclesiastical was till then held sacred) persuaded thepeople not to
render him or them any obedience: The Pope he termed Satanissinum Papam, and
Messem Asino; the Prelates, he called blind guides; the Religious, he termed
Swine, and Candles set under a Bushel.

Thus he sought non purgare abusus, sed tollere ordinem, Triticum cum zizanio
evellere studuit; not to cleanse the Church of abuses, but to extirpate all
Order, and to pluck up the Wheat with the Weeds.

Now his first step toward all the Tragedies he intended, was this; that he
might work his mischief and confusion in the Civil State the better he first
tears in pieces the Ecclesiastical, and so proclaims open War against all the
Bishops in Germany; and therefore writes a Book expressly, Contra statum
Ecclesiae, Luth. in lib. cont. stat. Ecc. etc.
and adversus falso nominatum ordinem Episcoporum, against the State of the
Church, and the Order of Bishops falsely so called; in which he sends out his
Bull, as he calls it, in these words.

Attendite vobis Episcoporum umbrae, vult vobis Bullam and Edictum legere, non
valde teneris vestris auribus placiturum; and this was his Lecture worth the
hearing: Omnes quicunque opem ferunt, bona, famam and sanguinem in hoc
impendunt, honoremque sunm in hoc exponentes, ut Episcopatus Pompatici
devastentur, tam remoti and alieni ab omni functione Apostolica, totumque hoc
Satanicum Regimen Episcoporum extinguatur; Hi sunt dilecti filii Dei and vere
Christiani observantes praecepta Dei; Whosoever shall succor us in this
business, with their goods, good name, or blood, and lay out all their honor
too in it, that these pompous Bishoprics may be laid waste, and all the
Devilsh Regiment of Bishops be extinguished; Id. in lib. cont. Sylv. Pricat.
Tom. 1. dat. Wittenbergh.
these are the beloved children of God, and true Christians observing the
Commandments of God. And in another Book he tells us, Si fures furca, latrones
gladio, haereticos igne tollimus, cur non potius hos magistros perditionis, hos
Cardinales, hos Papas and totam istam Romanae Sodomiae colluviem, omnibus armis
impetimus and little sanguine manus nostras lavemus? Nothing must now serve his
turn but to wash his hands in the blood of Bishops: But here he must not stop
neither; the ruin of the whole Hierarchy of the Church will not satisfy his
furious Reformation: But as if it were, as I doubt not but it was, purposely to
bring in Barbarism, and to put out the eyes of the poor Almains for ever, that
neither they nor their posterity might ever discover his Frenetick Errors, he
endeavors madly in the next place to ruin and deface all Universities, as in
his Book Contra Ambrosiam Catharinam, Id. in lib. cont. Amb. Cathar.
he says thus, Vt videat ad Evangelium funditus aextinguendum, nec astutius,
nec efficacius invenisse Satan commentun quam erigendarum Universitatum, the
Devil never invented a more subtle and effectual means to extinguish the Gospel
than that of founding Universities.

And in his Book de abroganda Missa, there he disswades the people from sending
their children to the Universities, Id. in lib. de abrog. missa.
and generally condemns them all in these words; Academi is per Idolam Moloch
figuratas puto, That Universities were figured out to us by the Idol Moloch;
and gives the Reason after, Ex isto enim fumo prodeunt istae Locustae, quae
omnes Cathedras occupant; for out of that smo^k, says he, do issue those
Locusts, which swarm in all Chairs, and possess Pulpits: And so in order to
that Doctrine did his learned Companion Carolostadius choose to go to Plough,
Carolostad.
rather then he would read one Lecture more.

And his fidus ^chates, Melanct^in Did.
Philip Melancthon, in his Book called Didymus, says, Equidem sapientem virum
^udico fuisse Wickieffum Anglum, qui omnium primus, quod ego sciam, v^dit
universitates fuisse Satanae Synagogas: I take truly Wickliff an Englishman to
have been a wise person, who was the first of all that I know, who discovered
Universities to be the Synagogues of Satan.

Nor could this famous Reformation satisfy it self with the extirpation of
these two the tallest Cedars in the Empire; that is the Hierarchy, and the
Universities; but a greater mischief must follow, and that must be the ruin of
the Empire, and Caesar himself: Which is first to be seen plainly by his
prodigious incivility, arrogance, and disobedience, toward the Emperor, and
the Princes of Germany: Nay, what a reverent esteem had he for Sacred Majesty,
by his usage of Henry the eight of England, Luth. in lib. cont. Regem Angliae.
in his Book that he entitled against him? he called him an envious mad fool,
full of Cowardice, and without any vein of Princely blood in his body: After
that he says, He was a Basilisk, to whom he denounced damnation.

And p. 335. he says, This glorious King, lies stoutly like a King: Page 335
And again, He is a lying scurra, covered with the title of a King, and a
chosen vessel of the Devil: And p. 338. Thou art no more a King, but a
Sacrilegious Thief: p. 338.
And then most mannerly, p. 333.
and like himself, p. 333. Jus mihi erit majestatem tuam stercore conspergere,
etc. For more of that stuff I refer you to Sir Thomas Moor the famous
Chancellor of England, Sir Tho. Moor. cont. Lutherum.
who recapitualtes them in his Latin work against Luther: But iudeed it is no
great wonder how he treated Henry the 8. when we do but consider how he behaved
himself toward the Princes of the Empire, and to Caesar himself, who was his
own Sovereign Lord, to whom whether he gave what was due to Caesar, or did
preach and persuade obedience to Magistrates, as a good Christian ought, we
shall see anon: And first in his Book, Luth. in lib. cont. duo man data
Caesaris.
Contra duo mandata Caesaris, he gives him and all the Princes of the Empire
the plain Lie; Turpe quidem est Caesarem ac Principes manifestis agere
mendaciis, it is a shameful thing that Caesar and the Princes should deal in
such manifest lies: And a little after calls them all Beasts, Deus mihi dedit
negotium non cum hominibus ratione praeditis, sed Cermaniae Bestiae debent me
occidere, meaning that the Princes, the savage Beasts of Germany, should
murder him; then he proceecs to make them worse than Turks, Ne ullo pacto eos
sequar^vel in militiam ire, vel dare aliquid contra Turcas: Quandoquidem Turca
decies prudentior, probiorque quam sunt Principes nostri; quid tal^bu fatuis,
etc. he would neither follow them into the War, nor give any thing against the
Turks, In lib. Artic. 500: in Art. 361
or the Turk was ten times an honester, and a wiser man than his Princes; what
had he to do with such fools? etc. Yet further in his Book of Articles, Quid
ergo boni in rebus divinis vel decernant, vel consrituant Tyranm tam impii and
prophani? what good can such impious and profane Tyrants do, In lib. de
Seculer. Potest.
or determine in Divine matters? before they were liars, beasts, fools, and
worse then Turks; and now plainly Tyrants, impious, profane. And yet a little
higher still, in his Book of Secular Power, he delivers his opinion of all
Kings and Princes in general, and how they are to be esteemed; Scire deb^s quod
aeb initio mundi, rarissima avis est prudens Princeps, ac multo rarior probus;
sunt communiter maxim fatui, and nequissimi Nebulones in terra from the
beginning of the World Princes generally are, and ever have been, the arrantest
Fools, and wickedest Knaves living; and for fear he should not be sufficiently
understood, he interprets himself presently after, Quis nescit Principes esse
carnem ferinam in coelo, In lib. de Bello cont. Turcas.
as great a dainty in Heaven, as Venison is upon the earth, that a Prince
should have a saved soul: And then in his Book of War against the Turks, he
concludes them absolutely unfit to govern the affairs of Christendom. Caesarem
neque caput esse Reipub. Christianae, vel defensorem Fidei, and Evangelii: and
oportere sane. Ecclesiam habere alium defensorem quam sunt Imperatores and
Reges: That is doubtless to say, That he will have no body Head of the Church,
nor Defender of the Faith, but his own sanctified self. Kings at least cannot
be; for he gives his Reason for that, Eos namque esse pessimos hosts
Christianismi and fidei. Did ever any Prophets, Apostles or Primitive
Christians, use such a barbarous liberty of speech against their Persecutors?
no not against Nero, Dioclesian, or Julian, the wickedest Tyrants that ever the
earth bore. Did Elias his Prototype, as his Disciples would have him to be,
ever rage so madly against Ahab and Jezabel? Did not St. Paul use Festus with
more Reverence? And without doubt no Christian and true zeal can be so
irregular, so rude and so intemperately passionate, as to give the plain lie to
Caesar his Sovereign, and to the Princes of the Empire: To proclaim him and
them Salvages, Baboons, Fools and Tyrants, blind Buzzards; and that the Turk
was a wiser, and an honester man than they. To affirm as it were in scorn and
hatred of Majesty and Royalty, that a wise and a good Prince is as rarely to be
found as a black-Swan; that commonly Kings and Princes be the most doting
Fools, and Reprobate Knaves in the world, that they were a cursed and a damned
Crew; as if there were no place vouchsafed in heaven for such Caitiffs as
Kings. These are rare motives doubtless to the people, to render due obedience
to their Princes.

But yet least this railing should not do his feat, and that the world should
favorably interpret all that language to be but a passionate heat against some
particular persons; and not that he did intend to abuse and enervate the very
sacred Power it self and function of Kings: nay to take the Crown from off
their heads if he could, and to expose their Prerogatives and all Regalities to
the malice and contempt of the people, he must yet determine the business more
positively and cathedratically against them; and therefore in his book against
the Bores, Lo. 1. contra Rusti cos.
he sends this greeting to the Princes; Sciatis Boni Domini Deum sic procurare
quod subditi nec possunt, nec debent, nec volunt, Tyrannidem vestram far
duitius. Know ye my good Lords, that God has so provided, that your Subjects
neither can, shall, will or ought to endure your Tyranny any longer. Then in
his Common places, Pulchre vero non turbandam pacem Publicam arbitraris, Lo.
Com. class. 4. c. 30.
and turbandam pacem aeternam Dei; non sic Palatini, non sic: As if it were
undoubtedly true, that the peace of God, and the peace of the Empire, were
incompatible: I am sure the old Laws and Government of the Empire, and Luthers
new Gospel were very inconsistent.

But yet more plainly he sets it down as a divine Decree, L.de Captiv. Babyl.
c. de Baptismo.
in his book of the Babylonish Captivity; At omnibus hominum legibus exempti
sumus, liberate Christiana nobis per Baptismum donata, we are exempted from
obedience to all humane Laws by our Christian liberty given us in Baptism: And
in the same book in his chapter of Matrimony, Scio, says he, nullam
Rempublicam Legibus feliciter administrari; Ibid. c. de Matrimonio.
I know no Commonwealth that is happily governed by Laws: Ibid in c. de
sacris Ordinibus.
and again in his Chapter of Holy Orders, Turpe enim est and iniquiter servile,
Christianum hominem qui liber est, aliis quam coelestibus and divinis legibus
subjectum esse. It is a foul thing, and most wickedly servile, that a Christian
man who is free, should be subject to any other but the Divine and Heavenly
Laws.

So that it is most plain, that it was not Luthers design only to pull down
Monarchy, but all other kinds of Civil Government, and to extirpate all humane
Laws, and so to subject the People only to his interpretation of the Gospel.

And indeed he excellently well and very ingenuously expresses his own meaning
in his book to the Nobility of Germany, Lib. ad Nobilitatem Germaniae.
first giving his sentence upon the Imperial Chamber at Spyci^; Tribunal
Camerae Imperialis; ecce quam Diabolica est Meretrix: Behold what a divelish
whore the Tribunal of the Imperial Chamber is become! Then proceeds thus,
Ferunt nullum esse pulchrius Regimen quam apud Turcam, qui tamen neque
Canonicum, neque Civil jus habet, sed solum Alchoranum. At nos fateri oportet,
nusquam esse turpius Regimen qaam apud nos per jus Civil and Canonicum. They
say there is no better Government anywhere than amongst the Turks, who yet
have neither Canon or Civil Laws, but only their Alchoran. But we on the
other side must acknowledge, that there is nowhere a worse Government than
amongst us by the Civil and Common Law. Now see I pray you, and observe whether
it was not this grave Doctors meaning to abolish all Laws, and that men should
be only governed by his Gospel.

Now by these and such like abominable Doctrines, was not he only the cause of
those horrible tumults which happened in his days, but of all the sad wars and
most dreadful desolations that have followed since, and so must derive still
an unhappy influence to all Posterity? For if it were lawful for the Elector
of Saxony his great Master and Patron to take Arms for defense of Lutheranism,
because he was persuaded by him, that there was no other true and infallible
Religion but his; why might not another Prince with the same pretext take Arms
for Calvinism, and Hulberstat for Epicurism, and a Muncer for Anabaptism; and
so by an Anarchy under color of their liberties, and the prerogative of
Conscience, tear the Empire in pieces, and open the Ports of Germany to let in
the Turk, as they have very often done already? and all the Princes of this
later age have too sadly seen the dangerous and dismal consequences of that
Doctrine, That it is lawful for Subjects by their swords to defend their
Religion against their Kings.

Nor did this Civil Gentleman use with more respect and reverence his Friends
and Patrons of the house of Saxony. As for Duke George of Leipswig, he called
him once, when he was displeased with him, the Apostle of Satan, and
scornfully gives him the Title of Illustrissima Inclementia vestra: and so to
old John Frederick his chiefest friend and favourer, upon occasion of a
Commission or visitation of his which disoleased him, Lo. in ferm. Dom. Lo.
contra Ambros Cathar.
Ite, quoth he, eis visiatoribus, and then he tells you presently, because he
was not himself called to counsel about it, Nescio qua de causa me praeterierit
Princeps; and in another place, says he, Si licet mihi Decretales Papae,
Conciliorum decreta, leges and mandata Imperatoris, omniumque Principum, pro
liberate Christiana, nedum contemnere sed and conculcare, vestrasne res gestas
praeclarae visitationis, legum vice acceptem? If it be lawful for me not only
to contemn, but tread under foot the Popes Decretals, the Decrees of Councils,
the Laws and commands of the Emperor, and all Princes, for the defense of
Christian liberty; must I be forced to accept the transactions of your
pitiful Visitation, in the place of Laws? See how he served his own Master;
Indeed I Will say that for him, he dealt his blows against Princes very
impartially.

Now indeed after all this, may it not be very well imagined, that this
Antimonarchical Egg of the Religious Cockatrice was laid in Martin Luthers
bosom? especially if we well observe how Calvin and he do symbolize together
in the point, how they speak one language, wear both the like colors, and the
very same fashion, if you will observe a little further out of Luther, Tom. 7.
fol 441.
Nebulones isti ex Nobilitate, Tyranni and qui inducunt animum ideo nobis
Evangelium dedisse, eosque ex carcere Pontificio expedivisse, ut possint ipsi
avaritiae suae litare: These Knaves, says he of the Nobility, these Tyrants
persuade themselves that God has therefore given us his Gospel, and delivered
us out of Popish bondage, that they may sacrifice to their own Covetousness. In
Epist. fol. 350.
And in his Epistles he says, Principem esse and non ex aliqua part Latronem
esse, aut non aut vix possibile est, To be a Prince and not an Oppressor, Tom.
3. fol. 32 5.
nay an arrant Thief and Robber, is not at all, or very hardly possible: and
again, Non est Principis esse Christianum, etc. It is not the part of a Prince
to be a Christian. Nay yet again, Tom. 6. fol. 143. in Psalm. 101.
Mirum non est saeculares Reges Dei hosts esse, ejusque verbum hostiliter
persequi; hoc ipsis a Natura est insitum, haec little proprietas, It is no
wonder, says he, that secular Kings are Gods enemies, and do with all
hostility persecute his word; it is planted in their very natures so to be, it
is their inseparable propriety.

Thus by his Rules as well as Calvin's, there is a plain Antipathy between
Royalty and Religion; and so I am sure by better consequence between their
Religion and Loyalty.

But to proceed a little further: Aulaes Principum, Tom. 3. Latin: fol. 459 in.
Psalm 45
says he, vere possunt dici seeds and Thronus Diaboli, ubi tot sunt Diaboli,
qnot fere Aulici; Courts of Princes, says he, may be truly said the Seats and
Thrones of the Devil, and by consequence Kings must be the Devils, Tom. 2. f. 8.
though he says only that Courtiers are so. Yet again, Principes sunt
flagitiosissimi Nebulones: Princes, says he, are most wicked Knaves; the
reason follows, Sunt enim Dei Lictores, and Carnifices quibus ira divina ad
puniendos improbos uti solet, etc. For they are no better than Gods Sergeants,
Executioners and Hangmen, to punish people upon earth. Yet further, Nullum
neque jus, Fol. 190.
neque fidem, neque veritatem apud Principes saeculares reperire licet; There
is neither faith nor truth to be found amongst secular Princes; Tom. 3. fol.
149.
they have neither honesty or justice. And then you may take for a very good
conclusion, Quid ergo Principes doceam and hususmodi Porcis scribam? To what
purpose should I go about to teach Princes, or instruct such swine as they are?

Thus you see how these holy men and blessed Reformers, have divinely conspired
in this unity, (how different soever they are in other points, even
diametrically opposite in all other doctrines) as led by the same Spirit, to
arrive at the same most Christian and holy end, to nourish a deadly feud
against all Kings and Princes, animate them to Rebellion, and in effect to
subvert all Civil Government.

That Luther was a Protestant, is most certain; but what his integrity was you
have fully seen; nor will I deny that Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, Paraus,
Gracerus, Knox, Buchanan, Gilby, were all as good Protestants as Luther himself
in this point, and of great integrity, who have all like great and glorious
Champions of the Protestant Faith, attempted to Cantonize all Kingdoms into
several Circles, as they have done already their French Church, which they call
their new Ark to preserve and redeem the miserable world from a pretended
inundation of impiety, ignorance, and irreligion.

Thus I have been bold to draw the Picture of Faction abroad, that is now
distinguished by the title Protestants of integrity, with a face so full of
frowns and sternness, that by the very physiogmony of them, you may easily judge
how unquiet and turbulent the constitution of them is like to be; but yet we
cannot justly determine who is the great Grandfather of these seditious,
rebellious and King-killing Doctrines.

But now at length by tedious travel, we are at last arrived at Rome it self,
and there we are told, that we shall not doubt to find the Origin of this
pernicious Cockatrice.

Now first the Reverend Picture-maker Ormer assures us, 'that this was Dr.
Allens Divinity; Dr. Allen ^ng Apol^
and he taxes him highly, that men may murder their Princes; and that in his
Apology for the Seminaries, he cites the 25 of Numbers, and thence concludes,
that Subjects may fairly take their Sovereigns and hang them up: so impious a
position, and such unchristian words, that certainly could never come into the
heart, tongue or pen, of any true Roman Catholic whatsoever, though I must
confess Dr. Allen did speak a little too profusely as to the point, yet not
comparably so dirtily as he has pleased to quote them: He was better read in
his friend Goodman, Goodman in lib. de obedientia
and I am confident that in his quotation he mistook one for to other; for
Goodman indeed in his Book of Obedience, has just the very same language that
he puts upon Dr. Allen, and in his Descant upon the same place: So the mistake
is very easy. Factum illud, says he, quod memoratur, Numb. 25. perpetuumest
exemplum in omnem aeternitaten, Numb. 25.
and certa denunciatio populo, ut in simili defectione a Cultu Dei, Rectores
suos qui a Deo ipsos abduount, ad furcas abripiant and suspendant; and quamquam
possit videri haec magnae confusio, ut populus sibi tantum assumat, tamen quum
Magistratus officio suo fungi desinit, populus ita considerandus est, ac si
careret omni Magistratu, and tum Deus ipse gladium in populi manus tradit, and
Deus ipse efficitur immediate eorum caput. That fact, says he, in the
Twentieth fifth of Numbers, is commemorated for a standing example to all
eternity, and a cerrain Declaration to the people, that in the like defection
from the service of God, they take their Kings and Rulers, who would seduce
them from God, away to the Gallows, and hang them up. And though this may seem
to cause a great confusion, that the people should assume to themselves so
great a power; yet when Magistrates are so slack, as to desist from performing
of their duty, the people is to be considered as if they had no Magistrate at
all, and then God himself puts the Sword into the peoples own hands, and God
himself is immediately made their Head and Conductor.

Now let us see the Doctors words, and examine the difference between them. He
says thus, Cap. 5.
Pro Catholica Religione certare praeclarum est, sed modo and tempore, ut
conscientiae lex Sacra supremi Pastoris sententia dirigatur. It is glorious,
says he, to contend for the Catholic Religion, but in good manner and time,
that the Sacred Law of Conscience may be guided and directed by the sentence of
the supreme Pastor. And then he recites, Deuteronomy. 13. and Numb. 25. and infers.
Illud autem in omnibus iis exemolis est notandum, populum non sua voluntate and
impetu ad has caedes, sed a Prophetis and Sacerdotibus commonefacti: Id quod
omni Posteritati sequuturae exemplo est, ne alias privato odio, superbia, etc.
in errores ruamus, and improbitatem nostram religionis velo tegamus. But this
is to be observed in all those examples, that the people did not rush
violently, and upon their own heads, into those slaughters, but as they were
admonished by their Prophets and Priests; which may be an example to all
following posterity, least otherwise by private Spleen, or Pride, etc. we fall
into terrible errors, and think to hide our wickedness with the cloak of
Religion.

This as I take it, serves not to their purpose. I am sure here is more
discretion and duty, than ad furcas abripere, to hurry them away to the
Gallows; more Order and Government, then presently suspendere, to hang them up:
And if we mark well, we shall find that in this last Century of years, there
have been more Princes deposed and murdered for their Religion, by these
Protestants of Integrity, than have been in all the others since Christ's time,
by the Popes Excommunication, or the attempt and means of Roman Catholics. How
can then the Princes of this age, walk amongst so many shelves and precipices,
not so much as once opening their eyes to behold the Abyss that they have under
their feet! so many heads crushed in pieces by these cruel Cockatrices, may
serve as broken Masts, and shivers of a shipwreck, advanced on the Promontory
of Rocks, to give them notice of their deplorable events, whose examples they
still pursue; yet they look on them (for ought I see) with arms across, and
daily in their own dangers, like wanton Victions, leap and skip between the
very Ax and the Knife.

But the greatest tempest of tongues which I see ready to rise against the
Romanists, and indeed the main ground why any thing of these opinions was ever
suspected upon them, was a false supposition, That Mariana, a Jesuit, and all
the Fathers of his Society, did maintain that ungodly and treasonable position
of Murdering and Deposing of Princes for their Religion.

As touching Mariana, it will not be denied to be his personal fault; I say
Mariana's proper opinion only; yet was he not resolute in that opinion
neither, but handled it only problematically, inclining indeed to the worst
part; but yet he absolutely and dogmatically affirms it not. His words are
these, Falli possum ut humanus; si quis meliora attulerit, gratias agam. I may
be deceived as a man; and if any man bring me to a better light, I shall be
thankful to him.

Secondly, His question was not for killing of Kings, but for killing of
Tyrants; which something alters the case, though gives too great a latitude to
Rebellion.

Thirdly, His whole Order disavows his Position, and have Categorically
determined the contrary.

Cardinal Tolet in his Summary, lib. 5. cap. 6. asserteth, That is is not
lawful to attempt against the life of a Prince, though he never so much abuse
his power; and that it is flat heresy to maintain the contrary. So Greg. de
Valentia, part. 2. q. 64. And of the same opinion is Cardinal Bellarmine, cap.
13. of his Apology; and Salmeron, Tom. 2. expounding the Thirteenth Chapter to
the Romans, where he refers the act of Ehud against King Eglon, to Gods
express Commandment. So learned Lessius, in his Book de Scienitiae and jure,
lib. 2. cap. 9. dub. 4. The like does Serrarius in cap. 13. Scid. Azor. in his
Institut. And Becanus in his Answer to the Ninth Aphorism. Gretzer in his
Vespertilio Haeretico-Politicus, confutes all Mariana's Grounds; and so does L.
Richcorni in his Apology. Over and above all this, That opinion of Mariana was
condemned by a Provincial Congregation of the same Society that was held at
Paris, 1506. And that condemnation was ratified by Claudius Aqua Viva, then
General of the Order. The Doctors of Sorbonne likewise in the same year,
declared and avowed, that it was an unlawful and ungodly position: And lastly
this Doctrine of Mariana's was most justly condemned by the Court of Parliament
of Raris in the same year.

By this time, I hope, the tempest is pretty well laid: I am sure, I have been
so happy as to satisfy diverse of my good Friends, whom I have found
scandalized at the Fathers of the Society, for protecting so villainous and
treasonable a Thesis. King James himself in his Proclamation of the Seventh of
November, was pleased to declare his good opinion and assurance of Roman
Catholics in that point, notwithstanding the horrid conspiracy then of some
few.

We are, said he, by good experience so well persuaded of the Loyalty of diverse
Subjects of the Roman Religion, that they do as much abhor this detestable
conspiracy, as we do our selves. Nay hear a Confession out of the mouth of the
greatest adversary they ever had, that is, the Oracle of Geneva, Calvin in cap.
1. Hos. and in c. 9. Amos.
upon the First of Hosea, and Ninth of Amos, Et hodie, says he, quam multi
sunt in Papatu qui Regibus accumulant quicquid possunt juris and potestatis.
And at this day there are most in the Papacy, that heap upon Kings whatsoever
they can, of right and power. Of that, I am sure, Geneva was never guilty. And
truly it is not a little observable, that this prevaricating Calvin, Epist.
136. id Corenrum.
was pleased frequently to say, Magis sibi placere Reformationem Scoticam quam
Anglicanam; and he gives his reason, Corruptelis Papatus adhuc relictam esse
congeriem, quae non obscuret modo sed propemodum obruat purum and genuinum Dei
cultum. That he was better pleased with the Scottish than the English
Reformation, because there was a heap of Popish corruption left amongst us,
(that is, too much affection to Monarchy and Prelacy) which did not only
obscure, but almost extinguish the pure and genuine worship of God: That is,
afforded not so fair a latitude for his fowl practices. Nay the beams of his
Evangelical Sunshine, did break out pretty early too amongst us in England, as
you may see by Mr. Dudley Fenner, Fenner in lib. 5. c. 13.
who jumps right with the Apostle of Geneva, in his Fifth Book, where he gives
this fearful sentence on an evil Prince as he calls him, Hunc tollant, vel
pacifice, vel cum b^llo, vel Regni ephori, vel omnium ordinum conventus: Let
him be cut off, either privately, or by open War, or by the judgment of the
Peers of the Realm, or by the assembly of States. Who says now, that Calvin had
not a very forward disciple here in England? and I think he has been pretty
well followed too. But if he had lived in this last age, and had seen what
people have done and suffered, he would have liked our late Reformation, as
well as that of Scotland, and adopted our English Protestants of Integrity for
his whitest Boys, and best proficient Scholars.

By all this it is plain, that Rome is so far from being the Author and
Fountain of these Rebel doctrines, that all Loyalty is in their reputation
Popery. Would you know how much they of Rheims condemned Treason and
Disobedience? you may read in Page 301. their Notes upon the Testament lately
Printed: Subjects were bound in temporal things to obey the Heathen, being
lawful Kings, and to be subject to them, even for Conscience; to keep their
Temporal Laws, to pay them tribute, to pray for them, and to do all other
natural duties. And Dr. Kellison in his learned Survey, gives a good reason for
it: Because, says he, Faith is not necessarily required to jurisdiction,
neither is authority lost by loss of Faith. Which was the monstrous opinion of
Wickliff, and of the Waldenses before, and has since continued amongst all the
greatest part of our Reforming Protestants of Integrity.

Saint Thomas tells us expressly, St. Thom lib. de Regimine Principum cap. 6.
Decret. 2. Part. Cause. 23. q. 6. de Episcop.
Tyrannus non potest a quopiam, privata authoritate interfioi: A Tyrant cannot
be killed by any private authority; quite contrary to the rules of Paraeus and
Knox, etc. Nay, the Canon Law it self may give the best satisfaction, where it
does decree thus, De Episcopis vero and quibuslibet Clericis, quod nec sua
authoritate, nec authoritate Romani Pontisicis, arma accipere valiant,
probatur. As to all Bishops and the Clergy, it is clearly proved, That they can
neither by their own, no nor the Popes authority, take up arms, etc. Nay the
Canon Laws of England do explain it yet more fully, as by the Provincial
Constitutions in the Council held at Oxford, Provinc. Constit. Council. Oxon.
1228.
by Stephen of Canterbury, 1228. And Anno 8. Hen. 3. an absolute
Excommunication is decreed against all those, Qui pacem and tranquillitatem
Domini Regis and Regni perturbant, who shall go about to disturb the peace and
tranquillity of our Lord the King and his Kingdoms.

But to avoid all questions whatsoever, the General Council of Constance
concluded, That it is an error in Faith, to maintain that Subjects may kill
their Princes, being Tyrants; the words are these. Nuper accepit Sancta Synodus
quod nonnullae assertiones erroneae dogmaticae sunt Rei Publicae statum
evertere cupientes, Council. Constanc. Sess. 15.
etc. Scil. ut quilibet Tyrannum potest and debet licite and meritorie
occidere, per quem cur que Vasallum suum and Subjectum, etiam per clanculares
insidias, non obstante quocunque juramento, nec expectata sententia and mandato
judicis, etc. And thereupon the Council determined, Eam esse doctrinam erroneam
in fide and moribus: Then condemns it, and enacteth, Quicunque doctrinam hanc
perniciosissimam pertinaciter asserentes, sunt Haeretici, and tanquam tales
juxta Canonum Sanctiones sunt puniendi. The holy Synod has understood of late,
that some erroneous dogmatical Assertions have been broached, endeavoring to
overthrow the Civil State, etc. To wit, That any Tyrant may lawfully and
meritoricusly he put to death by any of his Vassals or Subjects, even by any
secret contrivance, notwithstanding any Oath, or expectation of Sentence, and
command from Higher Powers. This doctrine is erroneous in Faith and Manners;
and whosoever shall pertinaciously assert this damnable and most pernicious
doctrine, are Heretics, and are to be punished as such, according to the
Sanctions of holy Councils.

All this I am sure, accords with the doctrines of the most ancient Fathers of
the Church, as St. Irenaeus testifies, who sets down amongst Heresies, St.
Irenaeus, lib. 5. cap. 14.
to think that Kings are given to men casually, and not by the divine
providence, and appointment of God; and his ground was, quia omnis potestas a
Deo, because all pover is of God. And St. Ambrose says plainly, St. Ambros.
contra Auxentiun.
Lachrymae meae arma-mea, aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere. My tears are
my Arms; I neither ought, nor can resist otherwise. Valentinian the Emperor
sent Calligonus his Chamberlain to threaten the said St. Ambrose, and terrify
the said St. Ambrose from his opinions, by the name of death, and torments; he
answered in another tune than our Protestants of Integrity have taken up; Deus
permittat tibi ut impleas quod minaris; ego patiar quod est Episcopi, tu facies
quod Spadonis. God permit to thee that thou fulfill what thou threatnest; I
will suffer what belongs to a Bishop, Theodorct. l. 4. c. 14
and thou will do what belongs to an Eunuch. Valentius decreed to banish
Eusebius from Samosata, the people resisted, but Eusebius appeased the
sedition, dissuaded the people, and obeyed the Decree. These were true
Christians of Integrity; will you hear yet what St. Austin says further in his
Sermon de verbis Domini? Sr. Aug. in sermon. deve^bis Dom. in Matthew.
Solomon did fall into most grievous sins, Ad prosundum Idololatriae lapsus
atque demersus, He was fallen into, and drowned in the depth of Idolatry, and
did notoriously, and directly contrary to Gods Commandment, to keep and marry
strange women of the Gentiles; Non ingrediemini ad illas, Thou shall not go in
unto them: besides he worshipped Moloch and Astarthes, the Gods of the Sidonians;
yet neither Priest, nor people did rise against him, to depose him; they left
it to the proper Judge of Kings, who in his wrath did appoint and raise up
Jeroboam to ruin his Son: If any Rebel of these times could show as good a
Commission, and so immediate a warrant, he were indeed excusable. Julian proved
a perfidious Apostate; yet though the Doctors of the Primitive Church, as
Gregory Nazianzen, and others, did sharply reprove and detest his impiety, they
never persuaded, nor taught the people to deprive him.

He that proclaimed the Prerogative of Kings, Vos estis Dii, Ye are Gods; he
taught the world, that as Gods have Summum Imperium, the chief command, so the
people are to obey; and are therefore called Subditi, Subjects, because of
their subjection: And there were never any but Giants heard of to fight against
the Gods, and yet they perished for all their greatness; for that hand must
needs wither which rudely touches Gods anointed. Now he that takes Arms
against him, does provoke the King into the field, and when the flame rages,
who can tell where the sparks will light?

And yet he that gave Kings that glory, Vos estis Dii, Ye are Gods, did
likewise give them this caveat; that for iniquity and impiety, he would
transfer Regna de gente in gentem, transfer Kingdoms from one Nation to
another. He is the Judge of the Princes, and his Audit is dreadful, and to that
alone we must leave them. Xiphilin in the life of Mar. Antonius tells us,
Xiphilinus in Vita M. Ant.
that Solus Deus est judex Principum, only God is the judge of Princes. Belloy
yet more plainly, Belloy in Ano^. Cathol. par. 2.
Orationibus tantum pugnandum, We are to fight only with our Prayers; Arms
against Princes have no warrant. Quis est Judex si Rex transgreditur
conditiones Regni? Solus Deus: Who is Judge if the King transgresses the
conditions of his Kingdom? only God. Navar Cunerus, and all the Catholic
Doctors that ever I have seen, Navar. Cunerus.
agree perfectly in this same sentence.

Now if you will be pleased to take the pains to compare these Primitive Catholic
and truly Christian Doctrines and Duties, with the opinions and practices of
our modern Evangelists, and late Protestants of Integrity, which we have
already deduced, you will quickly find their pedigree, whether they are
descended from Jesus Christ, or the Cockatrice. And truly it is worth the
noting, what an (...) they carry about them, how they shuffle up and down, and
flutter like shot birds, to evade their duty of obedience, their oaths, and
natural obligations; and sometimes speak good and godly sense, but only the
better to palliate their more treasonable designs. As first you may see
Melancthon in his Epitome of moral Philosophy, Phil. Mel. in. Epit. moral.
Philos.
preach very gravely and wisely to this purpose: Violare leges civiles seu
edicta Magistratum civilium, est peccatum mortale: It is no less than a mortal
sin to violate the Civil Laws, or the edicts and commands of civil Magistrates.
This is very Catholic and Christian-like; so on: Sciamus conscientiam fieri
ream, si non obtemperemus, and considera quantum est hoc vinculum obedientiae
and publicae tranquillitatis. We are to know that we bring a guilt upon our
consciences, if we do not obey, and consider well how great and obliging this
bond of obedience is, and of public tranquillity: all this is very good still,
but now comes the Killcow; Debet autem haec sententia de Magistratuum edictis
prudenter intelligi, scilicet de iis edictis quae non jubent facere con^ra
mandatum Dei. But says he, this that I say concerning the edicts of
Magistrates, is to be prudently understood of those edicts which require
nothing against the Commandment of God. Then as I said before, Id. in lib. de
Consil. Evang.
he says, that the inseriour Magistrates may cut the throats of the Superior,
and all this for reforming of Religion, and the overthrow of Idolatry. So that
if some Justices of Peace, or petty Constables, be pleased to judge in their
Consciences that the Prince erreth in his Religion, then are they both to judge,
and give Laws to their Prince.

Nay Luther himself likewise, when he is in his right wits, prescribes very
well matter of obedience to Municipal Laws, Luth. T^m. 3. Wittenb.
as in his 3. Tom. but if you object to him ne excitetur tumultus, etc. then he
falls into Melancthous Gap; An ideo negliget verbum Dei and peribit Populus?
Shall the Word of God therefore be neglected, and the People perish?

Nay examine the Confession of the French Church, and you will find some things
very well said as to matter of obedience, but the sting lies still in the Tail
of all that, Confess^^ Prot. Gal. Art. 39.
as in Art. 39. Affirmamus parendum esse legibus, solvenda Tributa,
subjectionis jugum tolerandum, etiamsi infideles fuerint Magistratus: We affirm
that Laws are to be obeyed, Tributes to be paid, and the yoke of subjection
to be born, although the Magistrates be Infidels. Thus far excellent well; but
that which follows spoils all, with a dummodo Dei sunmum imperium integrum
maneat; and as their French edition has it, Art. Bearn. 1572.
Le Soverain Empire de Dieu demeurant Tousjours en son entier: So long as the
chief and Sovereign. Empire of God is not violated. Here is a gallant latitude
still for disobedience and rebellion. Nay this desrerate dummodo is explained
in the Articles of Bearn. 157^. Dei imperium dicitur manner illibatum, cum Rex
exterminata Catholica Religioze solam veram and puram extollit: that is, Gods
Commandments are then said not to be violated, when the King shall have rooted
out the Catholic Religion, and advances only the true and pure one; that is
as much as to say, when their own is established; that is Calvinism, now called
Protestantism of Integrity. And in case the King maintain his own Religion
against them, what then follows? they have rods in piss for him. Fol. 349.
Rex a populo potest exauthorari per ordinum in Regem authoritatem, That the
King may be dethroned by the States of the Realm, who have an authority over
him: and again, Nec omnes Regni parts commituntur Regi, sed tantum superior
Regni dignitas, cujus tamen, suo modo, and certis conditionibus, inferiores
Magistratus sunt participes, maxim officiarii Coronae; Nor are all the parts
of the Kingdom committed to the King, but only the supreme dignity; and of
that too the inferior Migistrates have their share, especially the Officers of
the Crown. Then that which follows, mends the matter; populi juramento tacita
aut expressa est conditio, semper se obtemperaturum Regibus, quamdiu justo
imperio rem gererent: that is, there is always in the peoples oaths either a
tacit, or expressed condition, that they will obey their Kings, so long as they
command just things: which they must be judges of too. Thus they will have one
evasion or another still to cozen themselves into Rebellion. Our Oaths must
only bind us to observe and obey the King so long as he serves God, which we
are likely to be very capable judges of. Nov indeed as to all oaths of this
nature, Mr. Calvin from his high Cathedral and Consistorian Tribunal gives this
Absolution; Calvin^. 4. c. 13 21. Listitut.
Quibuscunque hujus Evangelii lux affulget, etc. ab omnibus laqueis and
juramentis absolvitur: Whosoever sees the sunshine of Geneva Gospel, is
presently absolved and discharged of all oaths, and from all snares that do
enthral the conscience.

It would be but to throw water into the Sea, to show more largely how these
Rebel Doctrines are backed by the generality of those that call themselves
Protestants, that Subjects may not only by Arms defend their Religion, Dan.
l. 6. Polit. c. 3. P. Mart. in cap. 11. Jud. and in loc. com. Althus. Polit. c.
35. p. 137.
but offend also: yet you may please to look into Dansus in his book of
Politics, and 3. Chapter, and Peter Martyr upon the 11 of Judges, and in his
Common-places, and Althusius in his Politics, chap. 35. and page. 37. where he
makes three just causes of War: 1. Justitiae denegatio, A denial of Justice: 2.
Purae Religionis defensio, The defence' of the pure Religion: 3. Repepetitio
rerum ablatarum, Recovery of goods taken away.
The famous Minister Sureau, called Rosures, Sureau, alias Rosiers. Bellfor. l.
6. c. 102.
who was after imprisoned at Paris, writ a book expressly to prove, that it was
lawful to kill Charles the Ninth, and the Queen Mother, if they would not obey
the Gospel, that is Calvinism: and to this Belforest is a sufficient witness.
Nay Zuinglius the grand Ringleader of them all, most dogmatically concludes,
Dum flagitiosi loco non moventur, totus populus a Deo punitur, Whilst wicked
men (meaning Kings and Princes) are not taken away, or remain unpunished, the
whole people are punished by God. So as I begun with this Gentleman, I will
even make an end with him; for I am truly weary with talking unto these nasty
dunghils; and so I fear I have tired my Readers patience. But my abundant care
to have the good people of England clearly disabused from that abominable
rebellious blood of Presbyters, that viperous crew of Cockatrice Christians,
that call themselves Protestants of Integrity, I hope will plead my pardon for
all that prolixity.

And now after my so long beating about the banks of all the branches and
streams of this Infernal River, I am almost as far from finding the head and
source of it, as I was before I begun; which proves clearly that it is an
enchanted War-tower: But yet because I am obliged by promise, I will boldly
give my guess, and you shall have it.

1. Negatively from Rome it cannot be; for its Doctrines, with the opinions and
practices of all its Doctors, are as we have showed, quite contrary, and all
that is said against that Church in this particular, is mere calumny. It cannot
be in Scotland, Low Country, Palatine, or Bohemia, for they had it all from
Geneva. It cannot be in Geneva neither, for it was derived thither out of
Switzerland. Nor could Smalcald be the fountain, for those bitter waters were
pist thither from Wittenberg; And Luther may very well pretend to have taken
his waterccurse from the Conduit of Wicklefists and Waldenses; and they again
have borrowed out of the broken Cisterns of Gods Church, those ancient sons of
disobedience and Rebellion, the declared enemies and castaways of Christianity
in all ages; I mean the whole gang of old condemned Heretics, till you come up
to the Grandfather of them all Simon Magus, who was the faithful scholar, and
legitimate successor of the Traitor Judas, who was undoubtedly the first
Christian of this crew, that now call themselves Protestants of Integrity.

And if you please to mark it, our English Protestants of Integrity that
bought, and their Religious brethren the Scots that sold, played the very same
game with our late most gracious Sovereign, as that Arch-Traytor Judas, with
his confederate purchasers did with our Savior, the eternal King of Glory:
that one would swear, that reads both Stories, that they had perfectly copied
out their treasons from his: and so like him besides they will be found in all
his lineaments and particular conditions, that all the world may very well
conclude him to be their true Apostolical Father, and Prototype.

But yet God forbid that we should here set a stop to the Princely Pedigree of
our pure Protestants of Integrity; for the noble spirit of Rebellion reignd
sure before Jesus Christ as well as since; and good Jews of Integrity there
were, before the kind of Christians. And now methinks I see the old Pharisees,
and our young ones called Protestants of Integrity, sitting very lovingly
together in our Sanhedrim, and agreeing perfectly together in all points, as
Buchanan and his Accomplices did since about the Pascal Lamb. How religiously did
those old Jews of Integrity murder the true Prophets of the Lord, that he had
graciously sent unto them, and harkened to dreamers of Dreams, and new fangled
false Prophets of the Cockatrice kind, that blew and bolsterd them up in their
wickedness! Just so did our late Protestants of Integrity murder their pious,
reverend and learned Prelates; as the Archbishop of Canterbury with the Sword,
and others with Imprisonments, Exiles, and Starving.

Did not this Spirit of Integrity possess Absalom, when he rebelled against his
King and Father, and spoke buttered words to the people? and Shimei when he
reviled the Lords anointed? It did so sure, and the one for his rebelling, and
the other for his reviling, were perfect Patterns, as well as Predecessors, to
our Protestants of Integrity.

To pass by all others (for I should be infinite to enumerate all particulars)
let us come to the murmuring and disobedient Israelites in the Wilderness,
against Moses and Aaron, the Civil as well as Spiritual power, especially
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and you will swear, that these are lineally
descended from those: A blessed Offspring from most precious Parents.

From hence let us step up to Nimrod and his associates, making Fortifications
against Heaven, and daring God himself into the Field, and we shall see that
whole story perfectly modelled out to us by their followers, these Protestants
of Integrity in all the late Wars of Christendom, where Subjects encouraged by
the Conduct of these Captains, and influence of those Doctrines, have dared to
take Sword in hand against God, and his Anointed, their Sacred Sovereign: And
this you will say is strange, to fight against God for Religion.

Nay let us pass the Flood, and we shall find in the very infancy of the
world, this Religion of our Protestants of Integrity, copied out to us in Cains
lean Sacrifices; which besides his disobedience, argued more his ingratitude:
And will not our Cainists disobey God and the King at any time, to save
charges? Nothing grieves them more, than what they are to pay to God and the
King; and therefore they have instituted a Religion that will dispense with
giving to neither: For to the King we are not bound, longer than we please, to
pay any thing; and to give any thing to God, or the poor for his sake, is
Superstition. Who says now, that our Protestants of Integrity are not of a very
ancient Extract?

But yet we must trace them a little higher; who was it preached and practiced
Disobedience in Paradise, was it not the Serpent? and to whom was this Doctrine
of Rebellion first preached? to a woman: which makes all our Presbyterian Tribe
still to be tampering with that sex. And as one said, that the best way to
raise an Army was to press the women, for that men would follow: so they as the
old Cockatrice did with Eve, first ensnare the simple weomen, and make them to
drag their Husbands by the horns after them.

And upon what pretense does the Serpent work? that mankind might know Good and
Evil forsooth; such specious pretenses have our Diabolical Brethren now, to
bewitch poor people from their duty and obedience.

Nay this Serpent too was the first Rebel that ever was, for he would have
dethroned God himself: What do our Luciferian Crew endeavor less every day,
making him in their Doctrines guilty both of sin and folly, and fighting
against his Images and Vicegerents upon earth? So then I think We have it, this
Cockatrice egg was laid in Paradise it self, and what greater Petigrce can be
than from the high and mighty Lucifer?

Now truly to make these presumed deer children of God thus to proceed from
their Father the Devil may be taken for a bitterness and extremity of passion
in me against that Party, and hate to their persons, which I protest before God
I am clear from, (for I have and always had many of my nearest relations
unhappily engaged that way) but only a detestation of their impious opinions,
and more prodigious practices, which do clearly demonstrate them to be derived
from the Devil, or all the world besides to be so; For the doctrines of the
whole Church of Christ have always been diametrically opposite to theirs; if
they then stand upright in the sight of God, Christianity it self must of
necessity fall to ground, which God has promised never to suffer.

Over and abone all this, I did ever presume, the derivation of those Doctrines
to be from the Devil long before I made this strict search and inquisition into
their extract and petigree: and my reason was only this, because their
positions did not at all consist with humanity; and therefore man, nor any
power humane, could at any time be founder, or undertake to be defender of them.

We have seen sufficiently already, how much these terrible Tenets do
contradict both reason and Religion, Canon Laws, and Divine Relveations, the
opinions of all Primitive Christians, and the practice of the whole Church: nay
are they not most clearly convinced by Civil and Common Law, nay Philosophy and
Common sense. The Law is plain, Legibus non alligati sumus, we are not tied to
Laws; who then is capable to judge a King, that is above Laws? though it is a
great part of their goodness to observe Laws, as the same Emperor declares,
Legibus tamen vivimus^; and again, digna vox est Majestate regnantis legibus
alligatum se Principem profiteri, It is a Princes dignation to descend to
oblige himself to Laws: and the reason of all this is, because he is presumed
to be a living Law.

The Law again is plain, as has been showed already, that no war can be made
without the Authority of the Prince, sine qua est laesa Majestas; otherwise it
must be treason; and this I say is a fundamental Law in every Monarchy: but it
is plain our Protestants of Integrity would turn the whole world into a
Democracy, by leaving the bridle in the peoples hands, which what a pretty
beast it is when it has assembled its many heads and horns together, they best
know that have felt its Arietations. We in England I am sure have reason to put
into our Litanies, From a Popular Tyranny, Good Lord deliver us.

Nay heart St. Austin once more, the most ancient and learned Father of the
Christian Church, St. August. l. 22. cap. 75. contra Faustum.
how contrary to the false Principles of these Religionaries, he proceeds to
back these Civil Laws, with the Law of nature it self. Ordo naturalis
mortalium paci accomodatus hoc poscit, ut suscipendi belli authoritas atque
consilium pones Principem sit; The course of nature it self accommodated to
peace, requires that the only authority and counsel of making War should be in
the Prince: and he gives a reason; for non est potestas nisi a Deo vel jubente
vel sinente, For there is no power but of God, Cap. 76.
either commanding or permitting: and then he answers the objection of all
those, who think they ought by force of Arms to resist their Princes for
Religion, and that by the example of the Apostles; Isti, says he, non
resistendo interfecti sunt, ut potiorem esse docerent victoriam pro fide
veritatis oscidi: They were not put to death resisting, that they might teach
us, that it is the greatest victory to be slain for the truth. The Philosophers
themselves may teach the same thing to these wretched Religionaries.

The King in the Philosophers sense, is, Anima Corporis, Spiritus vitalis,
Caput membrorum, vinculum per quod cohaeret Res publica, sine quo nihil Res
publica ipsa futura, nisi onus and praeda, si men's illa imperii detrahatur: He
is the Soul of the Body, the vital Spirit, the Head of the Members, the bond by
which the Commonwealth holds together, without whom the Commonwealth it self
will be but a burden to it self, and a prey to others, if this soul of the
Empire be taken away.

This was Senecas opinion, Seneca.
and a sound proposition; for if the Soul offend the Body, the Body cannot
punish it, without participation of the punishment. Neither is it a proper
faculty of the Body to judge, but of the Soul and understanding: so much
Philosophy as this, the very Bees understand in their little Monarchy, Virgil
Georg.
as Virgil testifies of them, Rege incolumi men's omnibus una; Amisso rupere
fidem; Whilst the King is well, all is well and in union; but he being gone,
all falls in pieces.

To conclude, Let us look a little upon the Common Law, which, if any thing, by
our own Kings condescentions, has proved prejudicial to Monarchy; and its
Professors most of them, the forwardest Incendiaries, and the greatest Knaves
in our late troubles; yet that gives the King power and prerogative enough; for
it constitutes him to be the body Politic, which is a dignity Royal annexed to
the natural body, whereby he is made Lord Paramount, and is not surnamed as
others are, but styled by the name of the Body Politic, declaring his Royal
Function, as Carolus Rex: And to show the Nature, Quality, Majesty and
Prerogative of that Body, I pray you observe the Circumstances.

First, It cannot hold lands in joint-Tenancy, nor endure a Partner.

2. It cannot be seized to uses, and so limited. 3. It is not bound to give
Livery and seizin of Lands, nor tied at all to the circumstances of a natural
body. 4. It is supposed to be everywhere, so cannot be Nonsuited. 5. It cannot
do homage, having no Superior. 6. That Body is so precious, that the very
imagination only to compass his death, is Treason, though there be no attempt
at all. 7. That Body vested in a blood, ought to descend; and though the
natural Body be attainted of Felony or Treason before, yet by the access of
this Body Politic, he is to take his Inheritance; for that dignity always
purges the blood, as it did in Henry the Fourth, and Henry the Fifth; for this
Body was founded without Letters Patents, not only by the Civil and Common
Laws, but those of Nature, and of Nations, and for the defense of the people:
And if Criminal causes cannot disable the descent, much less can they disenable
his Title, when it is descended. For the Crown of England is Independent; his
jura Regalia are holden of no Lord but the Lord of Heaven: so it cannot escheat
to any, being holden of none.
From this sacred Fountain is all authority and honor derived: Judges are
created by it, and have their Commission from the King, to judge both Criminal
and Civil Causes. The Constables and Marshals Court for Arms and Honor; the
Chancery for equity, the Exchequer for the Revenues of the Crown. The King then
alone appointing Judges, who is I would fain know to judge him? I very well
understand what a Parliament means, which at it is ever summoned by the King,
so their Acts must be judged, allowed, and confirmed by the King, before they
can be Laws; in the Senate rests Consilium, but in the King is the power and
majesty of the Realm; and he is to judge and allow or disallow what he pleases.
In fine as the Spaniard very wittily and truly observes Ni Rey Traydor, ni Papa
descommulgado, No King can be a Traitor, nor Pope excommunicated. There can be
no Judge above the King, nor Court of Law higher than the Kings Bench, where I
shall now be bold to leave these Protestants of Integrity to answer Guilty, or
Not guilty, for their future demerits; and let every one join with me, to say

God save the King, and deliver him from such Treacherous Friends, undermining
Adversaries and Hypocritical Religionaries as are our Pretended Protestants of
Integrity.
FINIS.

