TREATY Of PEACE, Good Correspondence and Neutrality IN AMERICA, Between the
most Serene and Mighty Prince JAMES II.

By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of
the FAITH, etc.

And the most Serene and Mighty Prince LEWIS XIV. The Most Christian King:

Concluded the 6/16th Day of November. 1686.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

In the Savoy: Printed by Thomas Newcomb, One of His Majesty's Printers.
MDCLXXXVI.

TREATY Of Peace, Good Correspondence and Neutrality in America, Between the
most Serene and Mighty Prince JAMES the Second, By the Grace of GOD, KING of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. And the most
Serene and Mighty Prince LEWIS the Fourteenth, The Most Christian King:
Concluded the 6/16th Day of November 1686.
I.
IT is Concluded and Agreed, That from this day forward there be a firm Peace,
Union, Amity and good Correspondence, as well by Land as by Sea, between the
British and French Nations in America, as well Northern as Southern; and within
the Islands, Colonies, Forts, Cities and Governments (without exception of
Places) belonging to the most Serene King of Great Britain, or to the most
Serene most Christian King, and which are under the Jurisdiction of either King
respectively.

II.
That no Ships or Vessels, great or small belonging to the most Serene King of
Great Britain's Subjects in the said English Islands, Colonies, Forts, Cities
and Governments, shall be fitted out or employed to Invade or Attack the most
Serene most Christian King's Subjects in their Islands, Colonies, Forts, Cities
and Governments, or to do them any injury or damage. In like manner that no
Ships or Vessels, great or small, belonging to the most Serene most Christian
King's Subjects in the said French Islands, Colonies, Forts, Cities and
Governments, shall be fitted out, or employed to Invade or Attack the most
Serene King of Great Britain's Subjects in their Islands, Colonies, Forts,
Cities and Governments, or to do them any injury or damage.

III.
That no Soldiers, Armed Men, or any others whatsoever, inhabiting and living
in the said English Islands, Colonies, Forts, Cities and Governments, or who
come out of Europe to be in Garrison there, shall commit any Act of Hostility,
or do any injury or damage directly or indirectly against the most Serene most
Christian King's Subjects in the said French Islands, Colonies, Forts, Cities
and Governments, neither shall they give any Assistance of Supplies of Men or
Victuals to the barbarous or wild Indians, with whom the most Christian King
shall have a War.

In like manner no Soldiers, Armed Men, or any others whatsoever inhabiting
and living in the said French Islands, Colonies, Forts, Cities and Governments,
or who come out of Europe to be in Garrison there, shall commit any Act of
Hostility, or do any injury or damage directly or indirectly against the most
Serene King of Great Britain's Subjects in the said English Islands, Colonies,
Forts, Cities and Governments; neither shall they give any Assistance or
Supplies of Men or Victuals to the barbarous or wild Indians, with whom the
King of Great Britain shall have a War.

IV.
It is agreed, That both Kings shall have and retain to themselves all the
Dominion, Rights and Pre-eminences in the American Seas, Roads, and other
Waters whatsoever, in as full and ample manner as of right belongs unto them,
and in such manner as they now possess the same.

V.
And therefore the Subjects, Inhabitants, Merchants, Commanders of Ships,
Masters and Mariners of the Kingdoms, Provinces and Dominions of each King
respectively shall abstain and forbear to Trade and Fish in all Places possessed,
or which shall be possessed by the one or the other Party in America, viz. The
King of Great Britain's Subjects shall not direct their Commerce and Trade, nor
Fish in the Havens, Bays, Creeks, Roads, Shoars, or Places which the most
Christian King holds, or shall hereafter hold in America; and in like manner
the most Christian King's Subjects shall not direct their Commerce and Trade,
nor Fish in the Havens, Bays, Creeks, Roads, Shoars, or Places which the King
of Great Britain possesses, or shall hereafter possess in America. And if any
Ship or Vessel shall be found Trading or Fishing contrary to the Tenor of this
Treaty, the said Ship or Vessel with its Lading (due Proof thereof being made)
shall be Confiscated; Nevertheless the Party, who shall find himself aggrieved
by such Sentence of Confiscation, shall have liberty to apply himself to the
Council of State of that King, by whose Governors or Judges the Sentence has
been given against him, and there complain of the Matter, which nevertheless
shall not stop the Execution of the Sentence: But it is always to be
understood, That the Liberty of Navigation ought in no manner to be disturbed,
where nothing is committed against the genuine sense of this Treaty.

VI.
It is also agreed, That in case the Subjects and Inhabitants of either of the
Kings with their Shipping (whether Public and of War, or Private and of
Merchants) be forced through stress of Weather, persuit of Pirates and Enemies,
or any other urgent Necessity, for the seeking of Shelter and Harbor, to
retreat and enter into any of the Rivers, Creeks, Bays, Havens, Roads, Ports
and Shoars belonging to the other in America, they shall be received and
treated there with all Humanity and Kindness, and enjoy all friendly Protection
and Help: And it shall be lawful for them to refresh and provide themselves at
reasonable and the usual Rates with Victuals, and all things needful either for
the Sustenance of their Persons, or Reparation of their Ships, and Convenience
of their Voyage; and they shall in no manner be detained or hindered from
returning out of the said Ports or Roads, but shall remove and depart when and
whither they please, without any let or impediment: Provided always, that they
do not break Bulk, nor carry out of their Ships any Goods, exposing them to
Sale, nor receive any Merchandise on Board, nor employ themselves in Fishing,
under the Penalty of the Confiscation of Ships and Goods, as in the foregoing
Article is expressed. And it is further agreed, that whenever the Subjects of
either King shall be forced to enter with their Ships into the other's Ports,
as is above mentioned, they shall be obliged at their coming in to hang out
their Flag or Colors of their Nation, and give notice of their coming by
thrice firing a Cannon, and if they have no Cannon, by thrice firing a Musket,
which if they shall omit to do, and however send their Boat on Shore, they
shall be liable to Confiscation.

VII.
If any Ships belonging to either of the Kings, their People and Subjects,
shall within the Coasts or Dominions of the other stick upon the Sands, or be
Wreckt (which God forbid) or suffer any Damage; all friendly Assistance and
Relief shall be given to the Persons Shipwrackt, or who shall be in danger
thereof, and Letters of Safe Conduct shall likewise be given to them for their
free and quiet passage thence, and the return of every one to his own Country.

VIII.
When it shall happen, that the Ships of either Party, (as is abovementioned)
through danger of the Sea, or other urgent cause, he driven into the Ports of
the other, if they be Three or Four together, and may give just ground of
Suspicion, they shall immediately upon their arrival acquaint the Governor or
Chief Magistrate of the Place, with the Cause of their Coming, and shall stay
no longer than the said Governor or chief Magistrate will permit, and shall be
requisite for the furnishing themselves with Victuals, and the Reparation of
their Ships.

IX.
It is also agreed, That the King of Great Britain's Subjects, inhabiting the
Island of St. Christophers, may fetch Salt from the Salt-Ponds there, and carry
the same away, as well by Sea as by Land, without any Hindrance or Molestation:
And also that the Most Christian King's Subjects of the said Island may enter
into the Rivers of the great Road, there to fetch or provide themselves with
Water; upon condition nevertheless, that the King of Great Britain's Subjects
shall only in the day time lade Salt upon their Ships or Vessels; and in like
manner that the Most Christian King's Subjects shall fetch Water in the day
time only. And also, that the Ships or Vessels, of either Nation, which shall
come for Salt or Water, shall be obliged to give Notice of their coming, by
hanging out their Flag or Colors of their Nation, and by thrice firing a
Cannon, and if they have no Cannon, by thrice firing a Musket. And in case any
Ship of either Nation shall Trade or Trafick under pretense of fetching Salt or
Water, the said Ship shall be Confiscated.

X.
The Subjects of either Nation shall not Harbor the Barbarous or wild
Inhabitants, or the Slaves or Goods, which the said Inhabitants have taken from
the Subjects of the other Nation. Neither shall they give them any Assistance
or Protection in their said Depredations.

XI.
The Governors, Officers and Subjects of either King shall not in any wise
molest or disturb the Subjects of the other, in settling their respective
Colonies, or in their Commerce and Navigation.

XII.
And the more to assure the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, and of the
Most Christian King, that no Injury shall be offered to them by the Ships of
War, or private Men of War, of either side; all the Captains of the Ships as
well of His Majesty of Great Britain as of the Most Christian King, and all
their Subjects, who shall set out private Men of War; and likewise their
Privileged Companies shall be enjoined not to do any Injury or Damage
whatsoever to the other; which if they do, they shall be punished, and moreover
be liable to satisfy all Costs and Damages by Restitution and Reparation, upon
Pain and Obligation of Person and Goods.

XIII.
For this Cause all the Commanders of private Men of War shall from henceforth
be obliged, before they receive their Commissions, to enter before a Competent
Judge into good and sufficient Security, by able and responsible Men, who have
no Part or Interest in such Ships, in the Sum of One Thousand Pounds Sterling,
or Thirteen Thousand Livres, and when they have above One Hundred and Fifty
Men, then in the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds Sterling, or Six and Twenty
Thousand Livres, that they will give full satisfaction for any Damages or
Injuries whatsoever, which they or their Officers, or others in their Services,
shall commit in their Courses at Sea, contrary to this present Treaty or any
other whatsoever, between His Majesty of Great Britain and the said Most
Christian King, and upon Pain of Revocation and Annulling their said
Commissions; in which it shall be always inserted, that they have given such
Security as abovesaid: And likewise it is agreed, that the Ship it self shall
be also liable to make satisfaction for Injuries and Damages done by Her.

XIV.
And whereas several Pirates Roving up and down the American Seas, as well
Northern as Southern, do much damnifie Trade and molest the Subjects of both
Crowns in their Navigation and Commerce in those Parts; it is agreed, that
strict Orders shall be given to the Governors and Officers of both Kings, that
they give no Assistance or Protection to any Pirates of what Nation soever, nor
suffer them to have any Retreat in the Ports or Roads of their respective
Governments; and the said Governors and Officers shall also be expressly
Commanded to punish; as Pirates, all such, who shall Arm out any Ship or Ships
for Privateering, without lawful Commission and Authority.

XV.
No Subject of either King shall ask or take any Commission, or Letters of Mart
for Arming any Ship or Ships to go Privateering in America, whether Northern or
Southern, from any Prince or State, with whom the other is in War; and if any
Person shall take such Commission or Letters of Mart, he shall be punished as a
Pirate.

XVI.
The Most Christian King's Subjects shall have full Liberty to Fish for Turtles
in the Islands of Cayman.

XVII.
That in case it should happen, any differences or disputes should arise
between the Subjects of the said Most Serene Kings in the said Islands,
Colonies, Forts, Cities and Governments under the Dominion of either
respectively, whether at Sea or at Land, this Peace and Good Correspondence
shall not thereby be interrupted or infringed; but the said differences, which
may happen between the Subjects of both Kings, shall be adjudged and determined
by the Governors of each Jurisdiction respectively, where they shall have
arisen, or by them whom they shall depute; and if the said differences cannot
within the space of one Year be determined by the said Governors, they shall
transmit the same, with the first, to the Most Serene Kings, to determine the
same according to Justice, in such manner as they shall think fit.

XVIII.
It is further concluded and agreed, That if any Breach should happen (which
God forbid) between the said Crowns in Europe, no Act of Hostility, neither at
Land nor at Sea, shall however be done by any of the most Serene King of Great
Britain's Garrisons, Soldiers or Subjects whomsoever of the Islands, Colonies,
Forts, Cities and Governments, which now are, or hereafter shall be under the
English Dominion in America, against the most Serene most Christian King's
Subjects, inhabiting or residing in any of the American Colonies: Likewise
reciprocally, that in the abovesaid case of a Breach in Europe, no Act of
Hostility, neither at Land nor at Sea, shall however be done by any of the most
Serene most Christian King's Garrisons, Soldiers or Subjects whomsoever of the
Islands, Colonies, Forts, Cities and Governments, which now are, or hereafter
shall be under the French Dominion in America, against the most Serene King of
Great Britain's Subjects inhabiting in any of the American Colonies, or
residing there. But a true and firm Peace and Neutrality shall continue in
America between the said British and French Nations in the same manner, as if
such Breach in Europe had not happened.

XIX.
It is provided and agreed, That this present Treaty shall not in any wise
derogate from the Treaty concluded between the said most Serene Kings at Breda
the 21/31 day of July, in the year of our Lord 1667. But that all and singular
the Articles and Clauses of that Treaty shall remain in force and be observed.

XX.
That all Treaties or Articles at any time heretofore made and concluded
between the said Nations, upon the Island of St. Christophers or elsewhere in
America, shall be in force as formerly, and shall be observed on both sides as
heretofore, unless where they shall be found to be contrary to this present
Treaty.

XXI.
Lastly, It is agreed and concluded, That this present Treaty, and all and
singular the Matters therein contained, shall, as soon as may be, be ratified
and confirmed, and that the Ratifications thereof shall within the space of two
Months from the date of these Presents be reciprocally exchanged between both
Parties: And within the space of eight Months, or sooner if it may be, be
published in all the Kingdoms, Dominions and Colonies, as well in America as
elsewhere, of both the Kings.

In Witness whereof, We, the Plenipotentiaries, have Signed and Sealed this
present Treaty. Given in His Majesty's Palace of Whitehal the 6/16th day of
November 1686.

Jeffreys C. (L. S.) Rochester (L. S.) Sunderland P. (L. S.) Middleton (L. S.)
Godolphin (L. S.) Barillon d'Amoncourt. (L. S.)


FINIS.
An Advertisement.
THe following Treaties, together with this Treaty, are all Printed in one
Volume, and sold by Edw. Poole at the Ship in Cornhil.

TReaty of Peace and Commerce with Spain, 1667. Treaty of Peace with France,
1667. Treaty of Peace with Denmark, 1667. Treaty of Peace with Holland, 1667.
Treaty of Navigation and Commerce with Holland, 1667. Treaty of Navigation and
Commerce with Holland, 167^. Treaty of Friendship and Commerce with Savoy,
1669. Treaty with Spain for settling Differences in America, 1670. Treaty of
Alliance and Commerce with Denmark, 1670. Treaty of Peace with Tunis, 1674/5.
Treaty of Peace and Commerce with Tripoli, 1676. Treaty of Peace with Holland,
1673/4. Treaty Marine with Holland, 1674. Explanatory Declaration of the Marine
Treaties with Holland, 1677/8. Capitulations and Articles of Peace with the
Ottoman Empire, 1675. Treaty Marine with France, 1676/7. Treaty of Peace and
Commerce with Algiers, 1682.

