The LETTER of the King of Poland, To His Excellency the Marquess De Grana,
From the Turkish Camp in the Visiers Tent at Vienna, the 13 of September 1683.
John the III, by the Grace of God, King of Poland, Great Duke of Lithuania,
Russia, Prussia, Masovia, Samogitia, Livonia, Kiovia, Volhinia, Podolia,
Podlachia, Smolensco, Severia, and Czernichoven.
According to the Original Copy Printed in Latin at Brussells.

MOst Illustrious, and well-beloved. Being called to the Relief of endangered
Vienna, with such Military Forces as were called in have, in how short a tract
of time we Mastered first the difficulties of the ways, the distances of Place,
the Banks of the Danow, and then the Ridges of Mountains, and the Thichets of
the Forest of Vienna; we make no doubt but Fame has Informed you. We only
shall choose to Report to your Illustriousness, what without Injury to the
Christians in comm^n, we cannot conceal. God being our Leader, and the good
Fortune of the most Serene Princes, Dukes, and Electors our Companion, the
Christian Forces, of which the Van was by all committed to us, yesterday, in
the present Fields, obtained an extraordinary, and never to be forgotten
Victory over the Turks and Tartars. For the Turkish Gran Vizier, swelled bigg
with the entire Force of the East, and of the Crim-Tartars, already swallowing
in hope, not only what (without Relief) was within three days of its Fate,
Vienna; but with that, even all Christendom; was notwithstanding in one days
Battle and Onset, entirely Routed and put to Flight. Their Infantry (in the
common Style Janissaries) as being a slower Force, and no ways equal in Flight
to their Horse, was left behind in the Tents, and abandoned to the Discretion
of the Conqueror. The Tents themselves taking up well nigh two Miles in length
and breadth taken. Their Canon, all their Powder, and Ammunition, with the
Richest of their Spoils, became the just Reward of the Victors Arms. Vienna
freed thus from so hard a Siege, and from such Dangers as had almost proved
Fatal, and the Imperial Seat restored to its own Caesar.

Night put a stop to completing the Victory, the Enemy betaking themselves to
a base flight, a Panick Terror Leading the way to Pannonia, darkness befriended
them; nevertheless our Light Horse follows them close at the Heels, and of
their Straglers, cut in pieces part, and part they take Prisoners. Moreover, we
our selves, to the Honor of God, are not wanting to Pursue the same Victory,
nor will we leave, if it so please the Heavenly Powers to favor us till such
time as Winter Quarters shall open to the Christians, in the Enemies Country.
If therefore, the Power of Europe with its experienced Troops on every Side
prepared for War, might contend at any time, to dare any thing worthy the Name
of Christendom, never could any more seasonable Moments of Affairs be possibly
obtained than the present.

For if after the Noise of a Victory so fresh in Memory, there should follow
but even a slender appearance of War by Sea and Land, it is not to be doubted,
but that Greece Groaning under its Tyranny, and even Constantinople it self
would shake off the Usurper, and look back to their first Originals. The same
we may believe of Epyrus, Macedon, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Dalmatia, Walachia,
Moldavia, and the rest of the Usurpt Kingdoms and Provinces, as we have no
slight Indications of the premises: Parhaps, that constant Vicissitude which is
seen in all Humane Affairs, may even now wait the Turkish Empire, that as
proceeding from small beginnings, it has Increased to that Pass, as it Labors
under its own Weight; so Fate changing its course, and the Wheel of Variable
Fortune turning round, it may Roll Back again to its first beginnings, and now
that it has Rose to a sufficient Height, it may Tumble down with the greater
Fall. But leaving all this to the Supreme Disposer of Crowns and Empires, we
altogether persuade our selves from your Illustriousness, that you have that
sense of Piety, and a Generous Inclination for the Christian Affairs, as not
only to rejoice together with us for these happy Successes, but at some time
also to Store them in common with us, and that you will let slip no
opportunities for the Mutual Advantages of Christendom: For which, as we
Multiply our most Hearty desires, so we wish your Illustriousness the greatest
Health and Prosperity of Affairs. Given from the Turkish Camp, in the Visiers
Tent at Vienna, the 13th of September, (being the day after that great Victory)
in the Year of our Lord, 1683. In the Tenth Year of our Reign.

LITERAE Regis Poloniae, Ad Excellentissimum Dominum MARCHIONEM De GRANA,
Belgii Gubernatorem ex Castris Turcicis, in Tentoriis Veziriis ad Viennam, Die
XIII. Septembr. MDCLXXXIII. JOHANNES III. Dei Gratia, REX Poloniae, Magnus Dux
Lithuaniae, Russiae, Prussiae, Masoviae, Samogitiae, Livoniae, Kioviae,
Volhiniae, Podoliae, Podlachiae, Smolensciae, Severiae, Czernichoviaeque.
ILlustissime, grate Nobis dilecte. Vocati in Subsidium pereclitantis Viennae
lectis confestim Militantibus Copiis quam Angusti Temporis spatio prius
Incommoda viarum, Distantiam loci, and Ripas Danubii; demum Acumena Montium,
and Saltus Sylvarum Viennensium superaverimus, famam distulisse non dubitamus.
Nobis vel illud Illustritati vestrae refer placet, quod sine injuria Communi
Christianorum reticere non possumus; Deo Auspice, Comite Serenissimorum
Principum, Ducum and Electorum fortuna, Christiani Exercitus, quorum Nobis
cuncti detulerunt Imperium, die hesterna in Campis presentibus insignem and
seculis Memorandam de Turcis and Tartaris reportarunt victoriam. Magnus quippe
Turcarum Vesirus integris Orientis and Hanicrimensium Superbus viribus, jam non
Viennae duntaxat intra triduum (in subventum fuisset) periturae, sed Universae
Christianitatis spem deglutiens acie and praelio unius diei caesus, atque
fugatus est; Peditatus (vulgo Janisseri) utpote tardior Militia, aequalique cum
Equestribus fugae insufficiens in Castris deserta, and victorum relicta
discretioni, Castra ipsa Longitudinem and Latitudinem duorum fere Milliarium
exequantia capta Tormenta, atque integra res Tormentaria cum opimis Spoliis in
praemium Victricium cessere Armorum. Vienna gravi Obscidione, and extremis
liberata Periculis, suoque seeds reddita Caesari, ulteriori Victoriae nox metam
posuit, ac turpi fuga sese recipienti Hosti, terrori Pannico in Pannoniam
Monstrante viam, umbra fuit Beneficium: Infidet nihilominus tergo illius levior
nostra Militia, deficientesque in via partim caedit, partim in Captivitatem
abducit. Porro and ipsi in Dei nomine eidem insistimus victoriae, non prius
destituri, donec, si ita propitiis visum fuerit Superis, hostili in terra Armis
Christianis stativa pateant Hyberna. Tali itaque Rerum Ottomanicarum subsecuta
Confusione, si quidpiam aliquando Europae vires ubique promptis accinctae Armis
dignum Christiano Nomine audere contendant, nunquam opportuniora rerum Momenta
praesentibus nancisci poterunt; si namque ad Clangorem Memoratae victoriae, vel
levis Armorum Terra Marique succedat Ostentatio, proculdubio gemens sub
Tyrannide Grecia, ac ipsa Constantinopolis perfido recalcitraret Domino, ad
suasque respiceret Origenes. Idem de Epgro, Macedonia, Bosnia, Bulgaria,
Dalmatia, Valachia, Moldavia, aliisque Regnis and Provinciis raptis credendum,
prout non levia premissorum habemus Indicia: Forte jam and illam continuam
Rerum Humanarum Mahometano Imperio superesse Vicissitudinem, ut postquam ab
exiguis profectum Initiis eo creverit, ut Magnitudine sua Laboret, rursus
vertente Fato, and volubilis Fortunae Rota alio melinante; ad sua devolvatur
Principia, and ubi satis in Altum surrexerit, Lapsu graviori ruat: sed his
omnibus Supremo Imperiorum, Regnorumque Arbitro relictis, de Illustritate
vestra omnino persuasi sumus, habere illam tantum Pietatis, and Generosissimae
Mentis in res Christianas, ut non solum foelicibus hisce congaudeat
Successibus, sed eos Communes sibi aliquando faciat, nullasque ad mutua
Christianitatis Commoda intermittat Occasiones. Quod dum profundissimis
ingeminamus desideriis, optimam Illustritati vestrae, cum prospero Rerum
Successu precamur valetudinem. Dabatur in Castris Turcicis, in Tentoriis
Vesiriis, ad Viennam, Die 13th Mensis Septembris, Anno Domini MDCLXXXIII. Regni
Nostri Xo. Anno.

LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner, 1683.


