A SERMON PREACHED Before the King and Queen, AT WHITE HALL, In November 1692.

By WILLIAM JANE, D.D. Dean of Gloucester, and Chaplain in Ordinary to their
Majesty's.

Published by their MAJESTY'S Command.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, for Thomas Bennet at the Half Moon, in St.
Paul's Churchyard, London 1692.

PSALM. CXIX. 106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous Judgments.


THE Prophet David spends this whole Psalm, partly in recounting his own
misfortunes, partly in magnifying the study, and meditation of God's Law, as
the greatest comfort, and refreshment, that he met with in all his distresses,
and persecutions. He enlarges throughout upon the excellency, the necessity,
and advantages thereof, that the true and only felicity of man attainable in
this life depends upon it, and that so great was the satisfaction, so cheerful
the reflections he derived from it, that all the pressures and afflictions of
the world were not able to make him miserable. He frequently declares the high
esteem, and value, that he had for it, his steadfast resolutions to continue,
and persevere in the observance of it, together with a constant intermixture of
his earnest and fervent Prayers for Gods Grace, and assistance to enable him so
to do.

In this verse we have a noble expression, of an Holy and Courageous
resolution, flowing from the conviction of his Judgment, and deeply rooted in
his heart, I have sworn, and I will perform it, or as the other translation has
it, I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgments.
i. e. By my admission into the number of thy people I am entered into a solemn
Sacramental Covenant to perform obedience to thy Commands, Hammond in loc.
I do now acknowledge my self indispensably engaged to thy Service, and withal
renew my vows, and resolutions never to depart from it.

The only inference I shall make from the words at present shall be only to
show, of what great use, benefit, and advantage it is in the business of
religion to lay down fixed, and steady resolutions to undertake it, and to
pursue the designs of it with the whole bent, and bias of the Soul. And thus we
find the Saints in Scripture have usually devoted themselves to the service of
their God. Thus David in another place, my heart is fixed O God my heart is
fixed, Ps. 57.7. Thus Mattathias 1. Mac. 2.19. Tho all the Nations under the
Kings Dominions shall fall every one from the Religion of their Fathers, yet
will I and my sons and my brethren walk in the Covenant of our Fathers. Thus
those in Jer. 51.5. Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant, that shall not be forgotten. And this Barnabas recommends to the
Converts at Antioch Acts 11. 23. that with full purpose of heart they would
cleave unto the Lord. A certain velleity, a languid and incomplete will, some
zealous pang of devotion, may be discerned in Ahab, and Herod, Balaam and
Agrippa; I am almost persuaded to be a Christian, says one, and O that I might
dye the death of the righteous, says another; but they were still destitute of
the true foundation of religion, a strong, firm, and well bottomed resolution;
they had not wrought their hearts to the Psalmists conclusion, I have sworn,
and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgments. In discoursing of
this point I shall show

First What is required to the forming a firm and settled resolution, Secondly
The great moment and importance of such a resolution in the business of
religion.
And 1. of the First of these, what is required to the forming a firm and
settled resolution. And here first it is requisite that it be the result and
issue of a mature, and serious deliberation. Now deliberation is an act or
exercise of the practical Judgment, or understanding, employed and set on work
by the will to consult, and debate the proper means conducible to the end,
together with a due weighing and ballancing the several conveniences, and
inconveniences that attend them. This is the work of deliberation in general,
and is of very great moment throughout all the actions of our lives.

In the present Case it is a through, and impartial consideration of the Duties,
and difficulties of Religion, the pleasures of sin for a season, and the
bitterness of them in the event, and issue; a due comparing of rewards and
punishments, the present, and the future, the sweetness of a good Conscience,
and the torments of a bad, the beauties of virtue, and the deformity of sin,
the shortness of time, and the length of Eternity: till upon a fair
representation of the whole Series of things to our own minds, we have at
length brought the debate to this determination, that all the advantage lies on
the side of religion; that the reward of obedience has infinitely more weight to
persuade, than all the hardships we must grapple with have to dishearten, and
discourage us; that there is no proportion between a moment and eternity; and
that all the pleasures, profits, and honors of the World are of no account at
all, when they are laid in the balance with the everlasting concerns of our
immortal Souls.

This method of the workings of our own minds in forming a settled resolution,
Divines have very fitly represented by Joshuas dealing with the Children of
Israel Jos. 24. where he summons the people together, and plainly sets before
them the great obligations they lay under to forsake all strange Gods, and
faithfully adhere to the Worship and Service of the God of Israel. He
represents to them on the one hand, what great things God had done for them,
and what greater things he would still do, if they continued steadfast in his
Covenant. On the other hand he acquaints them with the difficulty of God's
Service, the accurate purity, and strictness which was required for the
performance v. 19. Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an Holy God. To this he
adds the dreadful Judgments, he would bring upon them in case they should
transgress his Covenant, and go and serve other Gods, for he is a jealous God,
he will not pardon your transgressions, nor your sins And at last after a great
many arguments to this purpose, and those repeated and inculcated to make the
stronger impression upon their minds, he refers the matter to their own choice
v. 15. If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day, whom
you will serve. Not that he hereby set them perfectly at liberty, as if it were
a matter indifferent, whether they served God, or Idols. For his whole design
had bin hitherto to confirm them, and their posterity for ever in the worship
of the true God, and in Case they had revolted from it, he would never have
suffered their Apostasy to go unpunished. In the words therefore he eloquently
insinuates to them the gross inequality of the Comparison, that being stirred up
with indignation at so vile a choice, as the preferring dumb Idols before the
living God, they might the more easily, and of their own accord yield an
explicit consent to his proposal, totally renounce, and detest all false
worship, and adhere to the true Religion with their utmost vigor and
resolution. And this effect it had upon them v. 15. God forbid, say they, that
we should forsake the Lord to serve other Gods, and v. 21. Nay but we will
serve the Lord. Whereupon, for the greater solemnity of the whole transaction,
Joshua sets up a stone as a memorial to them of the obligations they lay under,
and also a testimony against them, if ever they fell off from such a deliberate
resolution.

And surely whoever undertakes the business of religion, will be sensible in a
little time, that it required, and needed the most solemn and serious
deliberation. He will soon find it to be an enterprise, that will engage his
whole strength and all his powers for the achievement of it, that it is a work
of difficulty, as well as importance, and accordingly represented in Scripture
under the harsh names of Mortification, and Crucifixion; that it is a striveing
to enter into the straight Gate and walking in the narrow way the subduing our
most forcible inclinations, the cutting off a right hand, and the plucking out
a right eye, an utter detesting of the dearest, closest, and most affectionate
lusts, and the denying our selves some of the most pleasant gratifications of
flesh, and blood.

He will quickly experience the frailty, fickleness, and inconstancy of his
will, the subtilty of Satan, the deceitfulness of sin, and the treachery, and
falsehood of his own heart, the snares that are laid for him, the dangers that
surround him, the enemies that lie in wait for him, the temptations from
within, and from without, that are by one means or other always thrusting him
upon his ruin.

And when he has but slightly considered this, he will need no argument to
convince him, that all his most specious and glittering resolutions, will
quickly vanish and come to nothing, unless they are founded in a deep sense of
the importance of the duty, of the motives, and arguments to embrace it,
together with the labor he must undergo, the delays he must sustain, and the
discouragements he must meet with in the discharge of it. The want hereof is
the true, and immediate Cause of most of those shameful Apostacys, which have
caused the enemies of God to blaspheme, and made the way of truth to be evil
spoken of, when men beginning in the spirit, have ended in the flesh, and after
they have known the way of righteousness turned from the Holy Commandment
delivered unto them. Many there are, that are sometimes in a good mood, in a
fit of devotion, when their hearts are warmed with some affectionate discourse,
when they are surprised with some sad accident or disaster, which disappoints
them of the pleasure that they expected from iniquity, or when God lays siege
to them by Sickness, or some other pinching affliction, so that the provisions
of lust have lost their relish with them for the present, and the calamity has
embitter'd the pleasantness of the temptation. In this case it is very usual
with men to be very liberal in their promises, Covenants, and resolutions. But
when the fit is over, when Gods hand is taken off, and the allurements of sin
grow strong enough to present themselves again, they unravel all their former
vows, the heart returns to its old byas, and upon the approach of the next
temptation, their goodness vanishes like a morning Cloud, and like the early
Dew, it passes away.

When Nebuchadnezar laid Siege against Jerusalem Jer. 34. the Jews made a
solemn Covenant with the Lord to set free their servants, but no sooner had the
King removed his siege, but they retracted, and repealed their vows, and
brought their servants back again into their former bondage.

And the reason hereof is plain. For in such a Case the motive of their
resolution is not adequate to the matter they resolve upon, the foundation is
too narrow for the superstructure, and where the principle is particular and
temporary, it can never be a sufficient ground of a general, and constant
resolution. A resolution that arises from the sense of a present evil, or the
fear of an approaching danger, will ordinarily last no longer, than the
calamity that occasioned it. And so as men's fears abate their virtuous
resolutions fall off together with them, since that short, and transient
principle, which first gave them life, is no longer able to support them. For
there can be no more strength in the conclusion than in the premises, and as
their motives change, their resolutions must change too. No wonder therefore if
the temtations return as strong as ever, and prevail as much against the
resolution, as ever the resolution prevailed against the sin.

And this is usually the fatal issue of all those other hasty light, vain, and
unsettled purposes of men, which arise from heat, or passion, or a sudden
transport of zeal, or any the like principle, which is not commensurate to the
whole compass, and extent of their duty. The principles are weak, and wavering,
and so can beget no other, than faint, and floating resolutions.

The Jews Jo. 6.15. upon the sight of our Saviors miracles were of a sudden so
highly transported with love to him, that they resolved nothing should hinder
them, but they would even take him by force, and make him a King. And yet at
another time, when the Pharisees, who knew well enough how to do it, had slily
insinuated into their pliable, and unresolved affections, they cried out
against him as against a slave Crucify him, Crucify him, we have no King but
Caesar.

This then is the difference between reason and passion in forming a good
purpose, and resolution. The former does not prevent or anticipate, but slowly
follows, and attends the mature Counsels of the mind; it first brings the
matter to a grave, and calm deliberation, and thence wisely, and sedately
proceeds to action, and execution. But the other is impatient of serious
thinking, as being a tedious, and irksome task, and so setting forward too
speedily without Counsel, usually comes off too cowardly without Courage.

This is that temper, which old Jacob reproves in Reuben his firstborn Genesis
49.4. Unstable as water, which some render rash, and hasty, others light, and
inconstant; and the one is ordinarily a consequent of the other, and therefore
he could not excel, not only in the number of his tribe Deuteronomy. 33.6. but
neither in valor, courage, or any excellent achievement. The same is taxt by
Solomon Pro. 14.29. he that is hasty of Spirit exalts folly. i.e. he makes
his folly manifest to the world by rashly adventuring upon that, which when it
comes to trial, he is not able to go through with. They that are the most
forward and bold in an undertaking, are often found to fall off most shamefully
in the encounter, and the greatest boasters before a danger are commonly very
timorous or at least inconstant, when it comes.

We have a sad example of this in no less a Person than St. Peter. How
confident was, he in protesting, and promising and resolving that he would
stick to Christ even to the death. A threefold rashness some have observed in
his behavior in that business: he opposed himself to our Saviors forewarning
him of his fall. He preferred himself indiscreetly before the rest of his fellow
Disciples, and he took the matter wholly upon himself, as that which he thought
himself upon his own strength to be well enough able to account for. Though all
should be offended, because of thee, yet would not I. I will never deny thee:
though I dye for it. I will lay down my life for thy sake. I am ready to go
with thee unto prison and unto death. Matt. 26.21. Jo. 13.38. And what more
pregnant testimony than this of his love to Christ, and resolution to adhere to
him? Greater love than this, in the Apostles Judgment, no man has, than to lay
down his life for his friend. And this St. Peter had, if we may believe
himself, yea he began to express some acts of it, when with his usual boldness,
and fervency of Spirit, he manfully drew his sword in his masters quarrel. And
yet all this proved nothing but a piece of gallantry, an heat, and bravery in
our Apostle; he had never forcasted with himself, what might ensue, and his
vain glorious resolution included a thousand particulars, which he was not
aware off. For see how soon the Scene is changed. This great Champion of our
Savior is of a sudden daunted, and stricken out of countenance, he that had
his name from a rock, is immediately shaken like a reed; and after so solemn an
engagement, and protestation not to forsake Christ, tho every one else should,
he is driven from this steadfastness by the voice of a silly Damsel, and was
the first of all, that not only disowned, but even with oaths and imprecations
denied, and forswore his master. Surely this was written for our admonition,
and left upon record for a standing example of the deceitfulness of our own
hearts, the frailty of the greatest passions, the folly of presuming upon our
own strength, that every man at his best estate is altogether vanity, and that
the deepest thoughts, and most advised consultations are all little enough to
support and strengthen our resolutions.

But secondly and more particularly it is required for the forming a fixed, and
steady resolution, that the mind be prepared for all events, and armed, and
fortified against the worst of evils, that can befall us. To which purpose it
will highly contribute, if we make these things, as much as we can, actual,
and present to our thoughts, and suppose our selves at our first setting out,
already incompast with all those difficulties, and distresses, which we may
reasonably expect will afterward assault, and set upon us in our Journey.

Under these apprehensions it was, that the prophet David here made, and
continued, and renewed his resolutions of steadfast adherence to his God. The
wicked (says he) have laid a snare for me, yet I erred not from thy precepts,
v. 110, and 109. My soul is continually in my hands i.e. every moment ready to
be snatched out of them, yet do I not forget thy law. Thus v. 87. they had
almost consumed me upon earth, but I forsook not thy Commandments and v. 157.
Many are now my persecutors, and enemies, yet do I not decline from thy
testimonies

And surely he that deliberately, and entirely devotes himself to the service
of religion, has forcast with himself the worst that can happen, and so is by
that means ready and prepared with an undaunted resolution to encounter it. He
has considered what it is, and so is well enough contented to deny himself, to
renounce the friendship of the world, to smile upon the face of danger, to hate
Father and mother, brother and sister, lands and possessions and even life it
self rather than part with that, without which even life it self is not worthy
the enjoying.

Through honor and dishonor, through evil report, and good report, through a
red sea, and a wilderness, through watchings, and fastings, through afflictions
and distresses, through dangers, and discouragements, he will press forward
toward the prize of his high calling, and will neither be byast from his mark
by the flattering considerations of the world, nor forced from it by any
terrors, or sufferings whatsoever.

He that frames his resolution with this prospect, will not so easily fail in
the execution of it, he foresees what he must trust to, he knows the worst of
it, he will not have his arms to seek, when the enemy is upon him, and so is
not likely to be, surprised with sudden assaults, or to be beaten off, and
worsted in the conflict. And this is the method, which our Savior took with
his Disciples, and also with others, who offered themselves to be his
proselites. He acquaints them before hand what they must look for, in diverse
places plainly teling them, that they must expect in this world the worst of
temporal evils, that so they might be enabled to meet them with courage and
resolution, and habituate their minds to entertain them. We read Mat. 8.19.
that a certain Scribe struck with admiration of our Saviors miracles was very
earnest to become one of his Disciples. He comes to him with a very forward
profession of his Zeal to serve him, Master I will follow thee wheresoever thou
go. Our Savior, to try what grounds he had for such a confident resolution,
informs him how mean, and contemptible his worldly condition was, the Foxes
have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests, but the Son of man has not
where to lay his head. He bad him think of this, and then resolve what to do.
We do not indeed read what became of him afterward, but from the silence of
the Evangelists it is very probable, that he slunk away in the Crowd, as
frustrated, and disappointed in his mighty hopes, and expectations. And thus
our Savior frequently deals with those, whom he had chosen for his Disciples.
In the world ye shall have tribulation. Joh. 16.33. Ye shall be hated of all
men for my name sake, Mark 13.13. And if this should not always happen to be
their lot, yet the constant resolution to undergo this heavy task was
absolutely necessary. For Matt. 10.24. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor
the servant above his Lord. It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his
Master, and the servant as his Lord. And if they have called the master of the
house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household, and v. 36.
He that takes not up his Cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me.
And least we should think these to be only Counsels of perfection, or
particular injunctions, as some do, and not necessary precepts, to which all
Christians are obliged, our Savior directs the same lesson to the great
multitude, that followed him Luke 14. v. 25. And there went great multitudes
with him, and he turned, and said unto them If any man come unto me, and does
not hate his father and mother, wife, children, and brethren, and sisters, yea
and his own life, he cannot be my Disciple; and whosoever does not bear his
Cross, and come after me, he cannot be Disciple.

The necessity of this method, for the fixing a through resolution, he there
more fully illustrates in two apposite comparisons; he that will build a tower
must first be able to compute, and calculate the charges, and the means to
defray them, otherwise to begin, being unable to make an end, is to make
himself ridiculous to the world of scorners for an unadvised and foolish
undertaking. A Prince likewise that will go to war, must first sit down and
consult with himself, whether he be sufficiently provided with all necessaries
for the expedition, whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that
comes against him with twenty thousand. Otherwise it will be better for him to
keep peace, if he have it, or, being engaged, to get it if he can. For else he
will thrust an advantage into the hands of his enemy, and procure nothing but
disgrace and poverty to himself.

The conclusion of there two parables our Savior repeats again, v. 33. So
likewise whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot
be my disciple, i.e. he will never be able to hold out, and so had better never
pretend to such a glorious profession. The sum of which short inference is
briefly this, that ere we can upon sure grounds resolve upon a religious
course, or safely proclaim war against Satan, it will be necessary to make over
all interest in our lives, or whatsoever is near and dear to us, to love all
persons and things less than our Savior, which will then appear, when we
suffer none of them to make us desert his service, or flinch from our purposes,
and resolutions to obey him.

When the young man in the Gospel came to Christ to show him the way to eternal
life, our Savior replies, sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, and
thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come, and follow me. Upon this, says
the text, he went away sorrowful for he had great possessions. This soon
discovered the weakness and insufficiency of his pretended resolution, that he
had only cheated his own soul with a bare appearance of religion, which was not
truly seated in his heart, for his heart was in his treasure, and so he could
not endure to think of selling it, and entering upon a poor, and persecuted
religion.

And this was the case of a great many more besides him, and has been the cause
of many fearful shipwracks of faith and a good conscience to this day. This
temper our Savior has represented by the stony ground, in the parable of the
sower Matt. 13. Men may receive the doctrine of the Gospel into their hearts
with joy, but for want of a good soil, where it may take deep root, for want of
an entire resolution to bear whatsoever the Gospel requires of them, they last
but a little while. For tho they seem to thrive, and flourish for a while, yet
as soon as persecution arises because of the Gospel, when any chargeable duty is
exacted of them, immediately they are offended, i.e. galled and discouraged
from any further progress: which notes unto us, that when secular interest
outweighs duty, when Christ is forsaken because of persecution, then that
imaginary resolution, which men before made show of, was not founded in the
true motives of religion, which are the same at all times, nor upon any other
ground, but such as is contrary to persecution, i. e. their secular interests
and advantages. And then no wonder if the change of their interest alter their
resolutions, and the same motive, which makes men zealous for the temple at
Jerusalem, be at another time of equal force for the calves of Dan and Bethel.

But a true Christian resolution is built upon a fixed and immovable
foundation, that has no dependence upon times or seasons, upon fair or fowl
weather, and makes a man uniform and constant in his course, whatever betides
him, the same in a storm as in the Sun shine, he will receive the word with
joy, though it be also in much affliction. And surely that man much undervalues
God, and so cannot resolve to serve him as he ought, who deems any thing
comparable to him, or fit to be considered, when he comes in competition. He
that holds his body dear (says the Philosopher) must count honesty but little
worth, and it is impossible that a man should earnestly fix his thoughts or
settle his resolutions upon the pursuit of things above, unless he first wholly
take them off from all things here below, and be indifferently affected toward
all outward comforts, and complacencies. The whole of this consideration is
summed up in that comprehensive advice of the wise man, My son, when thou
come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul for temptation count the cost, as
our Savior bids thee, forethink the worst of it, consider well what thou will
do, when things come to the push, and this will be a great help with Gods grace
and assistance, to plant such a firm resolution of piety and obedience in the
bottom of thy heart, as shall enable thee to devour all difficulties, to break
through all discouragements, and to hold out manfully, till thou have finished
thy course to the end, notwithstanding the fiercest oppositions thou shall meet
with by the way.

3. It is requisite to a well grounded resolution that it be entire and
comprehensive of our whole duty, not taken up in a humor against this or that
particular sin, but equally set against all known sins, and uniformly bent to
walk in all the good ways of God, without any exception or reservation. David
is our example here in several places of this Psalm. Thus v. 101. I have
refrained my self from every evil way, that I might keep thy word. and v. 6.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments. and
v. 128. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right,
and I hate every false way.

The Jews had entertained a corrupt notion among them, that God at the last day
would put our good works and bad into the balance, and according to the heavier
scale determine our condition in the world to come, so that if the most part of
a man's actions were holy and just, though in others he sinned often, yet the
greater ingredient should prevail, and the bigger number of his observances of
the law, should outweigh the lesser of his deviations from it. Nay some went a
great deal further, and taught, that if a man observed but one command well, it
was not absolutely necessary, that he should keep the rest, and so left men at
liberty to take to themselves what part of duty they pleased, and let the rest
alone.

But surely a truly religious resolution is founded upon a general, and
universal reason, which takes in all our concerns, and equally extends it self
to all sins, and duties whatsoever.

And this is one sure way to discover the strength, and soundness of men's
resolutions in religion. This was the Case of Jehu, notwithstanding all his
flourishing pretenses for a through reformation. He made great show for a while
of Zeal for God, and his worship, and Jonadab must needs go along with him to
see it, Come see my Zeal for the Lord of hosts; he destroyed Baal, and his
worship, out of Israel very courageously: But he presently discovered the
selfish principle that he was acted by, For he gave way to the Calves no less
abominable in the sight of God, and cleav'd to the sin of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, who made Israel to sin

The like was the Case of Herod, Mark 6.20. He stood in some awe of, John,
knowing him to be a just man, and Holy, and because he would be esteemed
religious, and would seem to respect him, he heard him often, and upon his
motion did many good things, and it is like enough that he reformed many things
amiss, which John found fault with, either in his Court, or in himself. So fair
a testimony does the Evangelist give him of many specious performances in
matters of religion. But no sooner was he touched in that tender point in his
Herodias, in his darling, his reigning sin, but the mask of a sudden falls off,
and he presently discovers the base and corrupt ends of his former zeal, and
reformation.

There are many partial principles and ends in men, which will oblige them to
abstain from some sins, and be very careful in some duties, as shame of the
world, the fear of temporal punishment, and the hope of temporal advantage, the
power of custom, the influence of education, their particular temper, and
constitution, the affectation of popularity and natural ingenuity, the terrors
of an affrighted conscience, and even the antipathy of sins, and inconsistency,
that is often found between one sin, and another. But if in the mean time there
be no Care nor conscience of other sins, where there appears no influence
from these and the like considerations, the principle is still defective, we
are as much under the universal reign, and dominion of sin, as ever, and are
far removed from such a resolution, as will prove a solid permanent foundation
of virtue and religion. For it is founded barely in particular reasons, and so
has no more strength than is derived from them.

But a true resolution is uniform, absolute and universal, free from all by and
sinister respects, all concealed, and hypocritical reservations. It enables a
man to abstain from sin out of an entire hatred of An as such, and to yield
obedience to the law of God, out of a sincere esteem of the authority of the
Legislator. And therefore he cannot be persuaded to pick and choose what
particular duties to observe, such as may be most for his own advantage. For he
looks upon the whole law of God as one, and the same rule, impartial, constant
and unvariable, and that it was given us by God to direct our actions, and not
to be bowed, and accommodated to the lusts, and interests of men.

Satan is well aware of this, and so is not much concerned to see men observant
of many duties, so long as he holds possession by one single sin. This is
enough at any time to maintain his authority, and secure his interest in the
Soul. He knows well enough, that the cherishing of one lust, will corrupt and
vitiate all other laudable performances; that one Achan could bring a Curse
upon the whole Congregation; that one sin is enough to ruin us; or if it were
not, yet while he holds that one fast, he will quickly make way for a whole
Legion to enter in.

And thus I have shown, what things are required for the forming a religious
resolution. It remains that I add a word or two, of what great use and moment
it is in the business of religion.

And 1st. a resolution thus framed will have a powerful influence over the
whole Soul to keep it fixed, and intent upon its duty, to engage all the
faculties thereof to proceed immediately to act according to their respective
offices, and apply, and put forth their forces with vigor and constancy for the
attainment of that end, which it has fixed, and determined to its self.

As we see in other resolutions, when a man resolvedly intends his profit,
pleasure, advancement, or whatever state in this life how does it set the whole
man at work, 'twill employ all his thoughts, his cares, his endeavors, it is the
business of his parts, his study, his whole life to pursue it, he sticks at
nothing that may promote, or further his design, he spares no pains, neglects
no means that may tend to compass it, all the powers of Soul and Body, yield a
cheerful obedience to this commanding resolution.

The like effect we should perceive in the business of religion, if men were
but as earnest, resolute, and intent upon it, as upon their worldly advantages
and satisfactions. For were our wills fixed to it, did our affections concenter
in it, how eager should we be in the pursuit, how lively and vigorous in our
actions, and performances. for then it would be nothing more but following the
natural tendences of our own Souls, to act suitably to our tempers and
inclinations; our duty would become our choice, and our delight, and 'twould be
force, and violence to be drawn from it. So that if once we are arrived thus
far, that virtue is become the matter of our firm purposes and resolutions;
when the heart is set upon it, it will sweeten all our Cares, make all our
labors easy and natural, breath life, and Spirit into our works and actions.
For it has won the principle that commands them all, as the spring of a watch
imparts a motion to all the wheels of it.

And therefore Deuteronomy. 26.17. we find this to be the great argument which Moses
presses upon the men of Israel. Thou have voucht the Lord this day to be thy
God, and to walk in his waves, and to keep his statutes, his Commandments, and
his Judgments, and to hearken to his voice. He thought this a mighty
enforcement of the obligation they lay under, that they had then resolved upon
it, they had plighted their fidelity, and engaged their truth to God so, that
the very shame of being false to such an avowed solemn resolution should oblige
them, even in point of honor, to make it good.

For this is evident, that resolution with its own strength would be able to
effect that, for want whereof the greatest part of mankind prove so often
successess in their undertakings. We see by experience the force of it in other
things that it attempts, how it goes through against greater difficulties than
the ways of virtue are encumbred with. And we may be sure in the present Case,
that it will prosper in the thing it undertakes, and unless men have a mind to
be conquered, and basely desert their resolutions, they cannot miscarry.

This will prove an effectual remedy against the main mistakes, errors, and
imperfections of our lives, secure us from unsettledness, and flitting from one
thing to another, and keep us steadfast in our duty, fix and fasten us to our
business. It will confirm, settle, and stablish the fickleness and slipperiness
of our hearts, which without this are very various and changeable, and like a
ship without ballast, ready to be overturned with every wind that blows against
it. It will preserve us from being faint and weary, when we meet with any
unexpected obstacles in running the race that is set before us. It will make our
conversation all of apiece, breed a constancy, and unswaydness in our lives and
actions, make us firm and immovable in the practice of religion, to continue
and persevere in our Course, to add to our faith virtue, -- and so onward, to
go from strength to strength, until we appear before God in glory.

2d. A firm and well settled resolution, will prove a powerful preservative
against Satan's temptations. It will either discourage and dishearten them, or
else enable us to repel them. The Devil has but small hope to seduce, and
mislead a resolved Christian: when he discerns men in earnest to stand upon
their guard, watch to avoid all opportunities and occasions, to prepare and
fortify against him, there he will not stay to receive a baffle and
disapointment, he will leave off soliciting, when he sees it is to no purpose.

And surely if we survey, and sum up all the forces which the Devil, the world,
and the most dangerous enemy, our own flesh, are able to raise against us, all
means and devices, stratagems and policies, whereby they continually attempt to
abuse and ruin us, there is force enough in a holy resolution to frustrate and
defeat them all. For it is not here as in other wars, where the bravest
gallantry and resolution may be sometimes overpowred and vanquished. But in our
conflict with our Spiritual enemies, we can never be conquered, as long as we
hold our resolutions, unless we make a cowardly and dishonorable retreat, or
shamefully consent to our own overthrow. For let the Devil do his worst, let
him discourage or allure, assault and storm us, we can never be vanquished, if
we will not yield. Temptation puts on its strength according to the frame and
temper of our wills, and as long as we are unwilling, all the Devils in hell
cannot force us upon a sin. Temptations may knock at our hearts, but they
cannot enter, unless we open the doors, and let them in.

When ever therefore thou find thy self tempted to the commission of a sin,
especially thy bosom, thy beloved sin, the sin that does so easily beset thee,
which thy Soul delights in, be assured that it comes upon Satan's errand, do not
treat with it, but call up all thy former Vows, Oaths, Covenants, and
resolutions say, I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to live in obedience
to my maker. How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God. Away
from me ye wicked, for I will keep the commandments of my God. I am engaged by
a solemn vow, the strongest bond I can think of, and have taken a Sacrament
upon it, never to admit that into my heart whereby I have been formerly
betrayed.

If the devil further endeavor to fright thee with the Crosses and reproaches,
that thou art hereby exposed to, that thou will probably suffer many things not
very grateful, and pleasing to flesh and blood, say, it is no more then I looked
for, the Cross is no scandal to me. I have sworn to fight manfully under
Christ's banner, and to continue his faithful soldier, and servant, to my lives
end. I know well enough upon what terms I listed my self in his Service, and
I Will not desert it whatsoever shall befall me. These considerations, with the
assistance of Gods Grace, will by degrees work thee up into St. Paul's
resolution, that neither life, nor death, things present, nor things to come,
shall be able to separate thee from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

Collect for the 2d. Sunday after Epiphany
And thou O God that know us to be set in the midst of so many, and great
dangers, that by reason of the frailty of our nature we cannot always stand
upright, Grant to us such strength, and protection, as may support us in all
dangers, and carry us through all temptations, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom
with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor, and Glory World without
end. Amen.

FINIS.

