The true and perfect SPEECH OF John James, a Baptist, and Fifth-Monarchy-man,
on Wednesday last at Tyburn, the place of Execution; with his Prayer and
Confession, in presence of many hundreds of people, and his desire to the
Sheriff of London; Also a Declaration, concerning the Charge of High Treason
exhibited against him, touching his Sermon preached in White-Chappel, taking
his Text out of the eighth Psalm, and the second Verse; his Doctrines
thereupon; and a true Narrative of his proceedings, to the last minute of his
being executed under the Gallows.

depiction of leg and arm in armor

LONDON, Printed for George Horton, 1661.

The Speech and Declaration of John James in the Press-yard at Newgate, on
Sunday last.
When the Christians in the primitive Times had their private meetings, the
Church was hidden, and it was death for any to profess Christ openly; then
Cellars, Garrets, and Woods, were their places of Assembly; but who reigned
then, Nero? Blessed be the Name of God for ever more, we have the word preached
amongst us faithfully, we need not go into Corners and Holes to hear the Word
of our blessed Lord and Savior taught; it abounds, through the great hand of
Providence, in a most miraculous way, to all Liege and Loyal Subjects, and the
Conduit-pipes of Heaven we see apparently opened, from whence descends the
Fountain of Living Water, God in his great mercy continue the powerful
influence thereof: And if there be some (as I suppose too many) that have a
design to sore high beyond their Capacities and undertakings, let them learn
that good and Christian Lesson of the holy Apostles, Submit your selves to the
Higher powers, etc. Blame me not therefore, I beseech you, though I urge this
with tenderness to tender Consciences; for I verily believe Ananias the
Button-maker, Flash the Cobbler, or any others of that fraternity, never did
more injury to poor Souls then the deluding Foxes of this Age; as is too
manifest in these days, by the delusion of a Generation of men, whom I dare
not call Loyal Subjects; witness the actions of a people that walk and go under
the name of Fifth-monarchy men, whose principles to Monarchy are both dangerous
and pernicious, as appears by their results at their meeting places; touching
which, in reference to the following Discourse, the Reader may be pleased to
take notice, that in one of their private Conventicles at White-Chappel, on
Saturday October 19, 1661. John James a pretended Preacher to that Society, a
Silk Weaver by Trade [mind that] took his Text out of the 8th. Psalm and second
verse; the words these, Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings have thou
ordained strength, because of thine enemies, that thou might still the enemy
and the avenger. From whence he raised several Doctrines, which alluded to
Seditions and Rebellions, as appeared by the testimony of some witnesses, who
being then present, departed the place, and acquainted the next Justice of
Peace with it; upon which information, the said Justice sent for some Officers,
and immediately came to the place where this Convinticle was, where they found
the aforementioned John James in the full height of his Seditious exercise; and
making their approach near him, they commanded him to come down, he boldly
answered, he would not, unless they pulled him down; whereupon an Officer took
hold of his Coat, forcing him to decline his station; and was thereupon carried
before the Right Worshipful Sir John Robinson Lieutenent of the Tower of
London, where was laid to his charge merry traitorous expressions, uttered in
his private Conventicle against the present Power and Government; for which,
the Lieutenant told him he would stretch for it: And in order thereunto his
Mittimus was made to be sent to Newgate, where he remained till the 19th of
this instant Novem. being Wednesday, from whence he was carried to the Kings
Bar in Westminster Hall, and there arraigned for preaching maliciously and
traitorously against the life and safety of our Sovereign Lord the King, and
against the peace and Government of the whole Realm, etc. But this is
observable, that upon his coming to the Bar, and being commanded to hold up his
hand, according to the ancient Law of England, he yielded obedience thereunto,
but with his Glove on, which the Court perceiving, he was commanded to pull it
off, saying, That he he^d up his hand as a testimony, that he ^as there
present, to answer what that Honorable Court had to lay to his charge, etc.
But to evade circumstances:

The Charge of High Treason being read, wherein he was accused, to Act, Plot,
and Conspire, against His Royal Majesty's Sacred person, to be instrumental of
levying a New War, and tha^ he should say, That if ever they could get the
Power into their own hands (which God forbid) that they would ca^ of all
Monarchy, and perfect the work formerly began thoroughly.

This and much more was made apparent and attested by several Witnesses;
amongst whom, Mr. Tipler a Tobacco-pipe maker, made Oath, That he heard the
said John James publicly declare at his private Conventicle in White-chapple,
That the Cup of Iniquity was filled more fuller by the blood of the Saints at
Cherring-Cross a twelve month last, and by the blood of the Saints in Scotland
to wit, the Covenanters, then it had in many years before, and that a sudden
ruin and destruction would befall the Authors thereof.

Thus did this sad Soul justify those Bloody Murderers, who for their horrid
impieties were executed for their most notorious and wicked Treasons, and
seemed to justify himself, pleading innocence: But this, and much more being
fully proved by several Witnesses, before the Lord Chief Justice Foster, and
the rest of the Justices of that Court, he was brought in Guilty of High
Treason, which he seemed very obstinately to evade; for when it was demanded by
the Honorable Court, Who he would be tried by, He answered, By the Laws of
God. The Lord Chief Justice told him, He must answer according to Law,
otherwise he must be recorded for a Mute. The Clerk then telling him, he must
answer, By God and his Country, he desired to know what the meaning of that
was; it was answered, That by God was meant the Laws of the Land, and by
Country, twelve M^ddlesex men for his Jury, honest, and just, to deal
impartially between the King; most excellent Majesty and the Charge against the
Prisoner at the Bar, whereupon he replied, that he was satisfied: And the Jury
going out, he desired them to be tender of spilling of Innocent blood; but
finding the evidence of the Witness so clear and apparent, he was brought in
Guilty of High Treason, and soon after received Sentence to be Drawn, Hanged
and Quartered. Which was accordingly put in execution on Tuesday last; being
drawn upon a Sledge from N^wgate to Tyburn: who upon his coming thither, was
set up in a Cart right under the Gallows, where standing upright with his hat
off, and a Satin Cap upon his head, he addressed himself to the Sheriff who
was in his Coach close by) desiring to know what time he might have allowed
him, the Sheriff told him he might take what time he thought good in reason,
provided he spoke nothing that was seditious, which he promised he should not,
n^r had he, as he said, the least intention or desire so to do. T(...) of his
f^iends giving him somewhat in a Glass to drink, he took it and drank, and
then began his speech in the manner as follows.

First of all, I desire to clear my self of an aspersion cast upon me, and
reported up and down, that I am a Jesuit: to which I answer, I was born in
England, and never out of it since I was born; I understand no other Tong^e,
which will argue me very unfit to be a Jesuit; besides, I am a man but of weak
parts, and those that are employed for such, are commonly very learned and
knowing men; I am born of very mean Parents, and I may say as Gideon did,
Judges 6.15. Behold my Family is poor, and I am the least in my Fathers House:
I came indeed of a mean Family, the meanest that I know among the people of
God, but ^y Parents were very careful to have me brought up in the fear of God;
yea they were so careful, that I verily think, that my Father when he died, had
not the least to trouble his Conscience for that; the like I may say of my
Mother, who is still living, and attaining to a good old age.

The second thing I shall speak of, is about my Religion, I am of that Religion
mentioned in the sixth of the Hebrews, the second Verse, I am a Baptist, in
which way I have walked some time: I believe the Resurrection of the dead, and
eternal judgment: I also own all the Commandments, as they are laid down in
the 20 Chapter of Exodus, and I dare not to break one of them to save my life:
I am for the seventh days sabbath, as it is commanded in the 4th Commandment.

Then desiring some time for prayer, he prayed to this effect.

Most gracious Lord God, in whose sight all the Nations of the Earth, is but as
a drop of a Bucket, I beseech thee in mercy look upon thy poor Creature here
before thee, blessed be thy holy Name, that such a poor worm as I am, can call
thee Father, bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his
holy Name. Lord I am now a coming to thee, send down thy holy Angels to convey
my Soul into Abraham's Bosom.

Then the Executioner asking him if he had any more to say to the people, he
answered, he had not, he being very weak in body, was spent: then he stood a
little time praying privately, and lifting up his hands, when he had done, he
gave the Sheriff thanks for his courtesy, and then told the Executioner he had
done; upon which, he put the Rope about his neck, and just as the Cart was
drawn off, he lift up his hands and cried out, O Lord receive my Soul.

FINIS.

