AD CLERUM. A VISITATION SERMON PREACHED At Beckonsfield in the County of
Bucks, April the 9th. 1678.

By JOHN JAMES, A. M. Rector of Latimers in the County of Bucks.

LONDON, Printed by T.H. for R. Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678.

Imprimatur, Geo. Thorp. Rmo. in C.P.D. Domino Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris
Domesticis.

May 31. 1678.
1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Moreover it is required in Stewards, that a
man be found faithful.


SAint Paul having planted Christianity among the Corinthians, by preaching the
Gospel of Christ in the City of Corinth, and other adjacent Provinces in the
Country of Greece; after the space of Eighteen Months he departed from those
Regions, and took his Journey into Asia, where he alsodelivered what he had
received from the Lord, and instructed the People both publicly in the
Synagogues, and privately in their Houses, in the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
God: Immediately after his departure, Apollos being by Priscilla and Aquila,
sufficiently instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel upon his coming to
Ephesus, is by them recommended and sent to the Brethren at Achaia, where he
boldly delivered and diligently taught the things of the Lord; confirming those
who were converted by the Ministry of St. Paul, in the grounds and principles
of the Christian faith, and by arguments unanswerable confuting the most
obstinate Jews, and putting to silence publicly in the Synagogues the most
subtle and shrewdest Disputants among them, Acts 18. verse. 24 etc.

But though Paul had planted the Christian Religion in converting many by the
preaching of the Gospel to be Proselytes to it, and Apollos after him, had
watered those Converts, in contributing his utmost assistance to settle and
establish them on the Foundation which Paul had laid, though God himself had
given increase in making their labors effectual by the blessed influence of
his Spirit, to obtain those great ends he designed, in the promulgation of the
Gospel; to wit, the Conversion and Edification of Souls, in the faith of
Christ; yet, in a short time the heat of their Devotion began to be abated, or
rather to be misimployed upon improper objects: For those which had enrolled
themselves into the same Society, professed and were Baptized into the same
faith; and so became members of the same mystical body; broke forth into
furious contentions and animosities against each other, rendering most
miserably, and most cruelly tearing the Church of Christ to pieces in its very
Infancy; for through the enmity of those impure Gnostics, against the Rules
and Precepts of Christianity, and the malice of the Judaizing Christians,
against many points of Doctrine contained therein; most lamentable Schisms and
Factions broke forth in the Church of Corinth, which like flames of Fire were
ready to consume and burn it down to the ground; Errors and Heresies were
scattered abroad, and greedily received by too many among them, which like ill
Weeds soon grew up, and brought forth most unwholsom fruit in their lives and
manners.

This sad news no sooner came to the Ears of our Apostle, but it sunk heavily
down upon his Soul, and made a deep impression of sorrow upon his mind;
therefore to redress these mischiefs, and if possible, to settle the
distractions and divisions of Corinth, he presently composeth and directs this
Epistle to the Church there, and to all other Christians both Jews and Gentiles
inhabiting the Regions of Achaia, in which after a Religious and most
affectionate Salutation to procure from them a favorable Audience, and a
candid entertainment of what he delivered, from v. 1. to v. 9. He most
earnestly exhorts them to an Unity in Doctrine and brotherly Communion one
among another; verse. 10, 11. And then laying open before their eyes the
grievousness of their Schism, he charges them boldly with it to their very
faces, verse. 11, 12, 13. Telling them plainly that the Christian Religion is
but one, and Christ Jesus the only Author of it: That the excellency of its is
such, that though it be not ushered into the World with sublimity of speech,
and the Ornaments of humane wisdom, and therefore is styled the foolishness of
Preaching, and by the learned Scribes, and wise Disputers of the World, was
rejected with pride and insolence; yet, it consists in the power of God, and
so far excels the wisdom of this World, that it destroys the understanding
of the Wise and Prudent, and confounds the things that are Mighty and Noble:
Chap. 1.2. That as Christ is the Author of this Divine Institution, so he is
the only proper Foundation for men to lay the Superstructure of their Faith and
Salvation upon; and according to the expression of St. Peter, Acts 4.12. The
only Name under Heaven given among Men, whereby they should be called: And
consequently that thoso who labor in the Church of Christ, have no dominion
over the Faith of men, or authority to command their Consciences;
notwithstanding they are Ministers of Christ, and fellowlabourers together with
God: Stewards in the Household of Faith, and Dispensers of the Mysteries of the
Gospel; and therefore as men are obliged to show them their respective and just
esteem, but not to transcend its prescribed limits and bounds, so it is required
these be faithful in their Office, and Conscientious in the discharge of so
Sacred a Function: which as it is a prevalent means to repair the breaches and
cure the divisions in the Church of Christ, so it is the advice of the Apostles
to the Corinthians, and the immediate design of the words in my Text. Let a man
so account of us, etc.

That my discourse may be full and comprehensive, proportionable to the just
design and import of these words; and serviceable in some measure to the
present occasion, and future necessities of this Assembly; Three things
necessarily require our consideration: First, The Subjects of the Apostles
discourse employed under the Pronoun, Us. Secondly, The matter predicated of, or
attributed to these Persons: The Ministers of Christ and Stewards of the
Mysteries; both which Particulars joined together, make up an entire
Proposition; that the Persons intended by the Apostle, are the Ministers of
Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Thirdly, Practical Inferences
deduced from the truth of the Apostles assertion, one respecting the men to
whom these persons are employed as Ministers and Stewards: Let a man so account
of us, as of -- The other relating to the Persons themselves, to whom their
Office is committed. Moreover it is required in Stewards, that a man be found
faithful.


First, We shall consider the subjects of the Apostles discourse, employed under
the Pronoun, Us: The Persons here intended, being the very Foundation of the
Apostles Argument, and a just determination of this Particular, the most
regular and orderly Method to assist us in the undertaking, and progress of our
present employment. It Is certain, that the Persons spoken of, whom St. Paul did
directly and immediately respect are those mentioned, Chap. 3. verse. 22. Paul,
Apollos and Cephas, who were separated by the Lord for the work of the
Ministry, and appointed as subservient to the Faith and Salvation of the
Corinthians; but that this particular direction to the Church of Corinth may be
of larger use and service to the Church of Christ in general, it is most
rational and consentaneous to the whole scope and tenure of the Gospel, to
affirm, that all those, who according to the Canons of Christ and the Apostles,
are consecrated to the same employment, are invested with the same Authority
and Office, implicitly included in the expression of the Apostle, and
therefore as justly styled, Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Gospel, as
Paul, or Apollos or Cephas were.

And if particular Commission be necessary to constitute the Offices of the
holy Order, the Negative holds as infallibly true as the Affirmative, that no
person may presume to administer any Office appropriate to this sacred
Function, but those who are Legally called to, and Canonically invested with
it: for the Gospel, almost as often as occasion is offered to make mention of the
Ministers and dispensers of it, plainly intimates, that the Master of our
Religion, designs a separation of persons from secular employments, to
officiate in the Ministry and Preaching of the Gospel, as in 1 Cor. 12. The
Apostle resembles the Church to a Body, which is constituted of several
Members, and every one designed to serve in its proper place for the benefit
and advantage of the whole; that the foot cannot usurp the Office of the Head,
nor the Arm exercise the Authority of the Brain; but every one discharge its
proper Function; that there be no Schism nor Division in the body; in
proportion to which similitude the state of Christ's mystical body is to be
understood, in which every the meanest Christian is a Member in particular, but
every Member cannot dispose and regulate the affairs of the whole; For are all
Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? do all speak with Tongues? do all
Interpret? Verse. 29.30. Shall the foot say, Unless I am head, I will not be of
the Body? Or the ear say, Because I am not the eye, I am not sufficiently
honored? If the whole Body were an eye, where were the hearing? And if every
Member were the Head, where were the Body? But God has set the Members every
one in the Body as it has pleased him, Verse. 16, 17, 18. First Apostles,
Secondarily Prophets, Thirdly Teachers,
Verse. 28. And that this distinction should remain in the Church to the end of
the World, is confidently conffirmed by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
Wherein he declares, that the Officers of the Church therein mentioned to be
given for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the Body of Christ,
etc. Which Phrases must of necessity denote their continuance in the Church,
till the number of Gods Elect are accomplished, and the state of Christ's
mystical Body perfectly completed; and for this reason St. Paul justifies his
special designation to the Apostleship, 1 Timothy 2.7. And St. Peter exhorts his
Presbyters to continual diligence in their employment, as their proper and
necessary duty, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.

And inded if we search into the ancient Records of the World; or consider the
account, which Modern Historians have privately collected, and publicly
presented to us, the most learned and faithful among them, do confidently
assure us, that never any Nation in the World, made a public profession of
Religion, but the Governors thereof solemnly appointed a separation of
Persons, whose constant employment it should be to Solemnize and Celebrate the
Mysteries thereof; and Moses in transcribing the History of the Church of God,
both before and after the Flood, and under the admistration of the Law, has
recorded the observation of the same custom, in those several forms of
Church Government; thus Enoch and Noah, were Preachers of Righteousness to the
old World; Abraham, and the succeeding Patriarchs were Kings and Priests, in
their respective Families, and duly administered the affairs of Religion to
their several charges: And when God erected his Theocratical Government over
the Jews, whom he had chosen for his own People, he commanded Aaron and his
Sons to be set apart for the Priests Office, that they might wait at the Altar
of the Lord, and Minister to the People in Holy things, which was appointed a
Statute unto him, and to his Seed after him for evermore, Exodus 28.1, 43.

And if the Christian Religion must be denied this honor, and no such Custom
observed in the Church of Christ; this strange innovation must be grounded upon
one or both of these reasons, either that it contains matters of less value and
concernment to Christians, than the Religion of other Nations to the Proselytes
of it: Or else that they are so plain easy in all and every particular
Doctrine, that the meanest understanding can comprehend their most intimous
sense and meaning, and it is impossible for the most illiterate to be deceived
in his judgment concerning them. These are the fairest pretenses that can be
alleged against the necessary distinction of the Ministerial Office, yet their
weakness is apparent at the first view, and their absurdity so gross, that it
may palpably be felt: For the Gospel of Christ is so far from deserving this
reproach and contempt, that it contains matters of the greatest moment and
importance for Man to know; such as are the excellency of the Divine Nature,
the state and condition of man's Soul; and that incomparable Method contrived by
the Divine Wisdom for man's eternal happiness; comprehends matters of the most
universal Satisfaction to the minds of men, and propounds the duties of a
Practical Religion, which are most agreeable to the Divine Nature to require,
and most reasonable for Mankind to observe; in all which respects it infinitely
transcends all the Platforms of Religion entertained in the World, and even the
worship of the Jews themselves; and though those Practical points which are
essentially necessary to man's Salvation, are extremely suitable to the dictates
of right reason, and delivered with the greatest perspicuity and clearness
imaginable; yet, it discourses concerning points of Faith, of the greatest
depth and mysteriousness which are altogether inconceiveable and
incomprehensible, and do exceed the apprehensions of any created Being; such
are the Eternal purposes and decrees of God; the Doctrine of the Trinity, the
Incarnation of the Son of God, with other Doctrines of like affinity, scattered
up and down the Gospel; for so St. Peter tell us, That in the Epistles of St.
Paul, are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and
unstable so wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures to their own
destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. What can be spoken of such infinite importance? What
can be delivered of so tremendous consequence, as the Christian Religion? And
shall not the sacred Offices of so Divine an Institution* be handled with the
most awful Solemnity, and Celebrated with the greatest reverence and most
Religious adoration imaginable? And when many stumble at this Rock of offense
and miscarry at the sight of those wonderful things represented therein, is it
not extremely necessary that men of the greatest wisdom and gravity be
Consecrated for the work of the Ministry; that they may improve their time and
abilities for a right understanding of the Mysteries of the Christian Faith,
and then employ the Talent of their Wisdom and Knowledge, for the information
and direction of others; that men may not promiscuously intermeddle with those
Holy Offices, nor any man after the strictest distinction of Pastor and
People: go astray through want of instruction, and perish for want of
understanding?

But because the subject of our present Argument respects a Matter of Fact; and
to discourse only de Jure concerning the Ordinances of Christ is insufficient
to our present purpose; let us consider what the Master of our Religion has de
facto determined concerning the Ministerial Office; the first remarkable
Instance that affords any light to this disquisition, is the Election and
nomination of Apostles, recorded Mark 3.13. Luke 6.13. Whose Commission is
granted by their Lord and Master, Matthew. 10.1. Luke 9.1. After this, Luke 10.1.
He called his Seventy Disciples, to whom he gave Commission to Preach the
Gospel; these were the only Persons which that supreme Head of the Church
Ordained in Person; and to these he gave Commission to execute the Ministerial
Office, as their proper and peculiar Function; the Twelve Apostles, and the
Seventy-two Disciples: And that these sacred Orders might remain in the Church
to the end of the World; when he first appeared to an Assembly of his Apostles,
after his Resurrection, he breathed on them the Holy Ghost, and thereby
invested them with full Authority to execute the Pastoral Office, for the
Ordering and Governing his Church, which his Father had committed to him, Joh.
20.21, 22. As my Father has sent me, even so send I you; which immediately
before his Assention he again renews, with a plain intimation of the
continuance of that Order; and consequently the necessity of Ordaining men to
succeed them in it, till all things should be fulfilled, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.

And that the Apostles understood their Master in this sense is apparent,
because as necessity required through the death of the present Officers or the
larger grows and extent of the Church, they Assembled together, and exercised
Episcopal Authority in Ordaining others to that Holy employment. Thus they
Consecrated Matthias, though he were Elected by God himself, into the place of
Judas, and he was numbered with the Eleven Apostles, Acts 1.25. And though St.
Paul was a singular Instance of an immediate miraculous Call, when by a voice
from Heaven he was made an Apostle; yet, he began not to Preach the Gospel,
till Ananias had put his hands on him, and prayed over him, that he might be
filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts 9.17. And when the Gentiles had received the
Gospel through the dispersion of the Christians upon the prosecution of St.
Stephen; the Apostles remaining still at Jerusalem, sent forth Barnabas, that
he should go to Antioch, who finding Saul at Tarsus, joined together, and
mightily confirmed the Believers there, Acts 11. And in the Thirteenth Chapter,
these Two men were solemnly Ordained Apostles of the Gentiles by those
Apostolical Persons mentioned, Verse. 1 To all which agrees that Rule of the
Apostle, comprised in the Interrogation of St. Paul, Romans 10.15. How shall they
Preach except they be sent? (i.e.) They have no Authority, and can expect no
blessing upon their labors, till they have a lawful Commission to set them on
work. To which practice of the Apostles, the Primitive, and all succeding
Churches in Christendom, till some Zealots of late, have justly confirmed, as
all Ecclesiasti^al Histories do fully testify; and thus St. Clemens,
contemporary, with Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians has left on
Record: (...).
That the Apostles first Ordained Ministers in Churches, and gave command, that
as any were removed by death, the most deserving Persons should be Chosen into
their place, and Ordained to execute their Office. Now certainly, the Example
and approbation of so great a Cloud of Witnesses, is not only a sufficient
Warrant, but a just Authority to regulate the affairs of the Church, according
to their Pattern, to the Worlds end. So that I may lawfully assume my designed
Proposition, and confidently deliver it as a just and regular Conclusion, that
whatever Persons have been successively Ordained into, or at present invested
with the Sacred Order of the Ministerial Office, by imposition of hands from
Regular Bishops and their Presbyters; such men from the Authority of
Apostolical practice, are to all intents all purposes the Ministers of Christ,
and most properly Stewards of the Gospel; and that all other persons, whatever
be their Natural abilities, their Supernatural Graces, their acquired parts, or
their great experience in Church Affairs, have lot or portion as Agents in
these matters, till they receive Commission from good Authority; and which is
more considerable, do wilfully cast themselves out of the Church of Christ,
whilst they reject and disown his lawful Ministers; which was the Judgment of
that most ancient Father, St. Ignatius, Epist. ad Trall. P. 50.
(...). So that it was not without great reason, that that blessed Martyr
called upon the Church of Philadelphia, with such zeal and importunity. Epist.
ad Philad. P. 43.
(...).

What shall we then think of the insolence of those men, who Sacrilegiously
usurp the Ministerial Authority, being neither sent by men, nor as they
pretend, called by God? I mean those illiterate, but conceited Mechanics, who
being engaged in some civil Calling as the business and employment o their
lives presume to be Masters of Divinity, and Teachers in the business of
Religion; as if Divine Knowledge were in this latter and declining age of the
World, conveyed into the minds of men, by the working of Miracles, through an
immediate inspiration; or the Sacred Mysteries of Christianity were exposed by
Christ without any Guardian to the open World, to be prostituted to, and
desecrated by any the most common or unsanctified Persons. It Is true that the
Prophecies of the Old Testament might be fulfilled, and to illustrate the glory
of the New; in the beginning of the Christian World, God did communicate
extraordinary gifts, even to mean and ordinary persons, who being inspired by
the Holy Ghost did extraregularly Prophecy, or Interepret, or speak with
Tongues, Acts 2.17. For so it was spoken By the Prophet, Joel. 2.28. But as
they were but few, beside the Officers of the Church, to whom God dispensed
those miraculous gifts, so they did not pretend to assume the Ministerial
Office, nor presume to execute any part thereof, but only altered the inspired
Dictates of the Holy Ghost, for which their extraordinary endowments were a
sufficient Commission, and when those ceased, the men returned to their former
condition.

And it is agreed by all, that there are but two ways, by which men may enter
into the Office Ministerial, by immediate Command from God, or mediate
Commission from men; at the first Plantation of the Gospel, those extraordinary
Ministers were admitted to their Function by an extraordinary Call from Heaven;
but because God cannot work in vain, and will not multiply Miracles without
just necessity; that other Method of initiating Church Officers, is by Divine
appointment established in the Church, I mean the Imposition of hands with the
prayers of the Superior Clergy, which Form as it is more ordinary than the
former, so it is sufficient for its purpose, and fairly correspondent to the
perpetual Rules of a settled and established Religion; the former Ministers gave
evidence of their Ordination by their miraculous Operations; the latter must if
at all, by the Testimonials of the Presbytery, of whom they are ordained:
therefore I cannot but ask those bold Pretenders, by what Authority they
exercise those strange and irregular courses, and who gave them that Authority,
that six days in the week they shall labor and do all that they have to do in
their Secular employments; and behold on the Seventh, they sit as Masters of
Assemblies, or stand forth as Preachers in a Congregation; if they receive
their power from God, let them come forth and produce their evidences; let them
in the name of Christ do wonders, and work Miracles, then we will embrace them
as Apostles, and give them the right hand of fellowship; otherwise it is
certain, they are not the Messengers of God; if they derive it from men, I ask
from whom? From the Bishops and Presbyters? Who are entrusted with the Office
of Ordination, as being competent Judges of the qualifications of men for
Spiritual Ministries? If not from them, they are Invaders and Intruders into
the Offices of the Church, and in the language of Christ himself, Thieves and
Robbers, Joh. 10.1. But if they will usurp the Priestly Office, which belongs
not to them; and take the Censer into their hands, when Christ forbids them,
Let them remember, that Nadab and Abihu perished by Fire; and Corah with his
accomplices were swallowed up alive into the Earth, for committing such things;
and though their pretenses may be fair, and their designs honest; yet Uzzah was
smitten for his indiscreet zeal, and died, though his intent was good: And if
the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every trangression received a just
recompense of reward, of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall they be
thought worthy, who have trodden under foot the Laws of Christ, and counted the
blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, and done despite to the Spirit of
Graces.

From the Subjects of the Apostles Discourse, we proceed to consider the Matter
predicated of, or attributed to them, which was the second Particular delivered
from the Words; and the other part of the Proposition implicitly contained in
them, They are the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God;
the proper intent and purpose whereof is really the same, to represent the just
Authority of the Ministerial Office; yet because it is a complex Proposition,
the parts whereof are not in all respects coincident, and a real difference is
apparent in them, they may justly be severed in our consideration of them, and
therefore shall be handled apart in our intended discourse upon them; the
former respects the Authority and Commission of Ministers, They are the
Ministers of Christ: the latter their Office and employment: They are the
Stewards of the Mysteries of God.

First, Consider the Authority and Commission of the Persons in the Text: the
Apostles and their Successors are the Ministers of Christ: the former ordained
by Christ in Person, or by an immediate Command from Heaven, the latter
regularly invested with same Commission by the solemn Prayers of the Church,
and Imposition of hands by the principal Officers thereof; which was the Form
of Ordination exercised by the Apostles themselves, and other Persons in their
Generations (as has been already sufficiently demonstrated) the practice
whereof must necessarily be a sufficient Authority to Consecrate others in the
succeding ages of the Church, and all such Persons by virtue of that
Apostolical Institution regularly ordained according to the will of Christ, and
without all controversy acknowledged by him, as his Servants and Ministers.

For as Men and Angels were sometimes employed by God, as Ministers and Agents
in the delivery of some Message, as conveying some blessing to the World before
the Incarnation of Christ; so our blessed Lord, that absolute and supreme
Monarch of the Church, in imitation of his Heavenly Father, called to his
assistance a certain number of Persons, to act the part of Ministerial Officers
under him the great Diocesan, and Bishop of men's Souls; and after his departure
from the world, and Ascension into Heaven, poured down the Holy Ghost upon a
full Congregation of them as they were Assembled to Solemnize the worship of
God, Acts 2. By whose descent they were immediately taught from God, inspired
infallibly to Preach the Gospel, to confirm it by Miracles, and had a gracious
promise, that the same blessed Spirit should attend them and their Successors
to the Worlds end; and accordingly when a complete body of Religion was
perfected, and the Scripture finished, yea, so that that extraordinary work of
supernatural Revelation ceased; the Apostles in the name of Christ Ordained a
degree of men to succeed them in Ordinary in that honorable Function of the
Ministry, whose it is to Rule under Christ over the several Flocks, (...).
and to speak unto them the Word of God; which account we receive from St.
Clemens Bishop of Rome; that as Christ was the Angel of God under the second
Covenant; so the Apostles were the Messengers of Christ, who being filled with
the Holy Ghost, went forth and Preached the Kingdom of Heaven; and as the
number of Converts increased, Constituted the most eminent and worthy
Christians to edify the Church, and perfect the body of Christ: from hence the
Holy Ghost describes these pers^ns by those Phrases and Expressions, which
denote their relation to Christ to be like that of a Servant to a Master, or a
Steward to a Lord; for so they are styled (...), Messengers, that Receive
Commission from him to exercise Authority in his name over the Church; (...),
Disciples or followers of Christ as their Lord and Master; (...), Legates, or
Ambassadors to deliver some Message from their Heavenly Sovereign to poor
distressed mortals here on Earth; Parallel to which are those other
Appellations of (...), all which are used with reference to those immediate
Officers of Christ, who were employed as Commissioners under him, andsent with
Authority from him, to treat with their Fellow Creatures in the business of
Religion, and to communicate the Mysteries of the Gospel to them; which by a
just Analogy may also be attributed to all succeeding Ministers, who are
legally appointed to serve at the Altar of Christ, and to Minister to his
People in Sacred things.

Which is the second part of the Proposition, and respects the Office and
employment of the Persons spoken of in the Text, They are the Stewards of the
Mysteries of God; that the Gospel of Christ or the Doctrine of Christianity is
intended under this Phrase, will most evidently appear, if we compare this
Expression of the Apostle with others of the like Nature; and then consider the
most genuine import and signification of them: in Col. 2.2. the Apostle
professing his ardent Zeal and Solicitude for the Church of God at Colossi,
and Laodicea, inserteth this very expression into his prayer for them, that
they might be united with one accord, into the the knowledge and profession of
the Mysteries of God; of which he affirms in the next Verse, That all Treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge are contained in them, the same he calls their Faith in
Christ, Verse. 5. And receiving Christ Jesus the Lord, Verse. 6. Which Phrases
can admit of no other Exposition to explicate their sense and meaning, than to
signify the Christian Doctrine, which at the first was delivered by the Lord,
and afterward confirmed and perfected by them that heard him; Parallel to
which is that Illustrious Aphorism of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3.16. Great is the
Mystery of Godliness; that is, the Religion of Christ, which prescribes the
most excellent and perfect Rules of Piety; and that this notion requires so
general a signification appears, by the several branches enumerated by the
Apostle, as a Basis or Foundation to support the Church of God, which were the
common received Articles of the Christian Religion.

For that men might not wander eternall^ in the dark, and an everlasting
blindness possess their Souls; it has pleased the infinitely Wise and Gracious
God to communicate to the World, by Divine Revelation many sublime and
mysterious points, and whatever else is necessary to be believed and observed
in order to Men's Salvation; and that these things might be perpetuated to the
World, and secured from the corruptions or invasions of Enemies, it seemed good
to the Holy Ghost to commit them to writing in the Sacred Records of Holy
Scripture; which by an especial providence are preserved entire to this very
day in the Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament; which latter was the
only Foundation laid by the Apostles; and therefore the Catalogue of Books
contained therein, the sum and substance of the Christian Faith, which St. Paul
says, was made manifest and known to the Saints; and so certainly could not
remain in unwritten Traditions; for then it would have been hid from the World,
Romans 16.26. And another Apostle calls it the Faith, once, or at once delivered,
Jude 3. Which directly opposes any Innovation or Introduction of Doctrines
into the Gospel after its consummation by the Apostles; which is an assertion
of such Catholic verity, that all the Writers in the Church of Christ have
constantly acknowledged it, till those few persons in the late Council of Trent
durst venture to reject the universal Tradition of the Church, and run counter
with the best Antiquity; which is plainly demonstrated by the incomparable
industry, and elaborate inquiry of the late Reverend Bishop of Durham, in his
Scholastical History of the Canon of Holy Scripture.

So that, though the Writings of Apocryphical Authors may be Read in the Church
of God, for example of life, and instruction of manners; yet, the Governors of
our Church in Compiling her public Liturgy, have appointed no part of those
Books to be Read, but what is agreeable to Canonical Scripture; and always
accounted their Authority too weak to lay any Foundation for, or to establish
any necessary Doctrine upon: Which was the Judgment of Saint Jerome, concerning
this matter, who was also the most strenuous Assertor of the certain and
indubitate Catalogue of Holy Writers; for, speaking of the Writings of
Apocrypha, he says, Legit quidem Ecclesia, sed eas inter Canonicas non
recipit, and though we receive the Name and Number of Canonical Books from the
Authority of humane Tradition, and upon the same credit believe those Copies
which now we enjoy, to be Authentic, and in all material parts agreeable to
the most Primitive Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles; yet we dare not
receive the Traditions of men, as the Doctrine of God; nay, we utterly reject
such Impositions, as presumptuous and impudent, and are afraid of the Curse of
God, if we should receive them as Articles of Faith; because the Holy Ghost in
the Comsummation of the Gospel, has consigned and Sealed it up with an
Anathema, Rev. 22.18, 19. Itestifie, etc. Therefore the Church of England
according to the practice of the Catholic Church in all Ages, since the time
of the Apostles, has prescribed the same Canon of Scripture, and utterly
disclaimed all pretense of Adition to, or Detraction from it, as it is recited
in the Sixth Article of our Religion. So that the written Word of God, the
Sacred Records of the Gospel, the several Contents therein, the various parts
thereof, and no other Writings or Traditions, whatsoever are that depositum
committed to the charge of all Ministerial Officers, whose duty it is to
preserve and improve the same according to the pleasure of their Lord and
Master; for this purpose they are constituted Stewards of God, and Dispensers
of Holy Mysteries; thus St. Paul affirms in general, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. God
has given Us the Ministry of Reconciliation, and committed to Us the Word of
Peace, that we are Ambassadors for Christ, to pray men in Christ's stead to be
reconciled unto God; and in particular, proclaims of himself, that he was
appointed a Preacher of the Gospel, and an Apostle, and a Teacher of the
Gentiles, 2 Timothy 1.11. And for this reason he exhorts Timothy, to stir up the
gift of God which was in him, by the putting on of his hands, to hold fast the
form of sound words, which he had heard of him, and to keep by the Holy Ghost,
the good thing which was committed to him, Verse. 6, 13, 14. To which agrees
that description of a Minister or President in Sacred affairs delivered by that
Mystical Divine, that he is the proper Interpreter of Divine Theology, (...).
and the Angel of Almighty God, being to learn from those Divinely inspired
Oracles, and then to teach and explain them to the Church.

And if the Commission of those Apostolical Persons be restrained within the
prescription of certain bounds, that they durst not go beyond the command of
the Lord, to do either good or bad of their own mind, had power to say nothing
in the name of Christ, but what he communicated to them by Divine Inspiration,
and none to diminish ought of what he bid them speak, (for though they enjoyed
under Christ the greatest pre-eminence imaginable in Relious affairs; yet they
durst not detract from, or add to the will of God, by Preaching up their own
fancies, and the imaginations of their own Brains; this St. Paul professes of
himself, 1 Cor. 2.1. to 7. And both the Evangelists and Apostles do seriously
protest, that whatever they delivered to the World (as to all the main and
necessary parts of Doctrine) they received it from Christ in Person, or by
Revelation from the Holy Ghost; as we may well believe, considering those
miraculous gifts and graces, which were communicated to them; which was an
irrefragable demonstration of the Spirit and Power of God, by which they
spoke;) it is highly absurd to imagine that their Successors should have greater
liberty in the Church of Christ, and especially at such a vast distance of time
from the propagation of the Gospel and the cessation of Miracles; indeed it
might be deservedly accounted a Miracle, not the least, if we should be
Sovereign Lords over men's Consciences, or have absolute dominion in matters of
Faith, if our Embassage should be of an unlimited Nature, like the command
which Tiberius gave Drusus upon a certain expedition, Nullis certis mandatis,
exre consulturum; that every man might have the power of a Plenipotentiary, and
deliver what seems good in his own eyes; when every tittle of our Errand is
comprised by God, rati^ed and confirmed from Heaven, and explicitly contained
in the grand Charter of our Commission; the Records of the Gospel: So that as
the Civil Law adjudgeth those Ambassadors guilty of High Treason, who transcend
the bounds and limits of their Commission; and both Modern and Ancient
Histories Record, that such presumption has received a just recompense of
reward; the Apostles always accounted it a Sacrilege most horrid and
inexcusable in the sight of their Master, and loaded that Person with a most
dreadful Anathema, who should presume to broach his own Inventions, and to
intermingle them with the Doctrine of the Gospel, Gal. 1.8 9. If we, or an
Angel from Heaven Preach any other Doctrine, then that ye have already
received, let him be accursed; which Ap^sto^ical Constitution is of equal
Authority in the Church, to this very day; for in reference to that Text, is
that gloss of St. Austin. Maledictus est qui quidpiam praedicat, praeterquam,
quod in Scripturis Legis and Evangelii recepimus.

And if these things be true, what just indignation may the Master of our
Religion conceive against the presumption and boldness of the Church of Rome;
which advances the Pope into His Tribunal, and ascribes a like power, might
and dominion to him, as to the eternal Son of God! For though Christ alone can
instruct us in the Laws and Ordinances of his Kingdom, and by the influence of
his Spirit direct us in the way of life; though that pretended Vicar of Christ
be styled the Minister of our Lord, and in his Canons and Decrees subscribe
himself; Episcopus and servus Servorum Dei; yet dares he proudly usurp the most
proper Offices of his Master, and boldly assume the Title of Head of the
Church: For he, as they confidently boast, has received full Authority from
Christ to deliver the whole will of God to the World; and to decide all
Controversies in Religion, who, according to them, is certainly infallible,
when he acts as Head of the Church, whom the Holy Ghost does continually attend
in Council, lawfully Summoned, and in his Consistory assists him to Judge
infallibly of Spiritual affairs; he has Supremacy over the Souls of Men, can
dispense with Divine Laws, dissolve men's Obligation of obedience to them, and
secure their Persons from the wrath of God, which for their disobedience they
justly deserve; he can constitute new Articles of Faith, and impose his
definitions on the whole World, as Credentials necessary to man's Salvation; the
Keys of Heaven are delivered to him, for though Chritst alone opens and no man
shuts, and shuts and no man opens, Rev. 3.7. Yet, by Succession to St. Peter,
he dares Sit and Reign as Universal Sovereign, by his Papal Authority
determining the Conditions of Life and Death; and according to men's observation
of them, adjudging them to the one or other: as if he that Reigns in Heaven
above, and Rules on Earth beneath, had ceased to execute his Kingly Office over
the Church, and had derived it to St. Peter, as his immediate Successor, and to
the Pope as Universal Vicar.

That these are indeed the Principles of the Church of Rome, and not the
slanderous suggestion of Protestants, is apparently manifest, not only from the
Writings of their private Doctors, but from the decretals of their general
Councils, and the most solemn Bulls of several Popes; in which they have acted
so directly opposite to the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Gospel,
that they have exercised Authority over Christ himself, and by their Traditions
made the Gospel of Christ of no effect: Witness that Decree concerning the
Canon of Scripture, in the Fourth Session of the Council of Trent, Celebrated
under Paul the Third, wherein it was declared, that the Books of Apocrypha, and
all their unwritten Traditions, are equally the Dictates of Gods Spirit with
the most Canonical Scripture, Synodus Libros Scriptos, and sine sc.
traditiones, tanquam velore tenus a Christo, vel a Spiritu Sancto dictatas pari
Pietatis affectu ac reverentia suscipit ac veneratur. Si quis autem sciens and
prudens contempscrit, Anathema sit.
and as necessary to confirm any Article of Faith, and to prescribe Rules for
the regulating of manners; and therefore to be embraced with the like affection
of Piety, and received with the same religious Reverence, under peril of the
most dreadful Anathema. And now I appeal to the judgment of and sober
considerate man, whether such Doctrines as these are agreeable to the Tenor of
the Gospel, and becoming the Ministers of Christ, or not rather highly
derogatory to the dignity and honor of his Majesty, as being palpably
erroneous, and horridly blasphemous; if tried by the Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament, which are the only Canon of Faith and good manners.

We have hitherto considered the Doctrine of the Text; which was naturally
contained in the two former Particulars; that the Apostles and all other
Persons lawfully Consecrated into their Spiritual Office, are the Ministers of
Christ, and the Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Now both the Nature of the
precedeing Discourse, and the Order of the Method propounded, require our
consideration concerning the last Particular; which contains Two practical
Inferences deduced from the truth of the Apostles Assertion: One respecting the
men to whom these Persons are employed as Ministers and Stewards: Let a man so
account of Us, -- The, other relating to the Persons themselves, to whom this
Office is committed: Moreover it is required in Stewards, that a man be found
faithful; both which are a complete and necessary Application to our present
discourse, and require our most serious consideration.

First concerning the men to whom these Persons are employed as Ministers and
Stewards; the Apostle delivers this exhortation, Let a man so account of Us;
which words will easily admit of a double Exposition, and thereby present the
Laity with a Twofold duty concerning their respect and carriage to the Clergy.
First, That they set no greater value upon them. Secondly, That they account so
worthily of them, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Gospel.


First, That men set no greater value upon the Ministers of the Gospel, than
what their Office and employment requires: They are the Ministers of Christ,
not Ministers of their Peoples Consciences: They are the Stewards of God, not
Lords over any men's Faith; it is therefore unreasonable for men to terminate
their glory in the worth and excellency of those that dispense the Mysteries of
Salvation; and a pride, not much inferior to that of Herod, for these to take
such honor to themselves: It was this Ostentation in the People, and this
Ambition among some of the Clergy, that occasioned those Schisms and Divisions
in the Church of Corinth, when the Christian Converts in the Regions of Achaia
adhered so implicitly to the Authority of those Ministers from whom they
received the Faith, that they slighted and disregarded the Preaching of others;
whilst they magnified the Dictates of their own Apostles, as men should adore
the Oracles of God: For this reason I conceive the Apostle so sharply reproves
their erroneous conceit, 1 Cor. 1. 13, 14. Was Paul crucified for you? Or were
you Baptized in the name of Paul? I thank God, I Baptized none of you, that men
might not glory in my name: Or else because of those gifts and excellencies,
which they apprehended more eminent in one Apostle than in another, every one
as his Fancy directed, admiring either Paul or Apollos, or Cephas. One
extolling the powerful plainness of Paul, whose discourse was sharp as a
two-edged Sword, and his arguments nervous and weighty, the weapons of whose
warfare were not carnal, but mighty to the pulling down of strong holds.
Another applauding the fullness of Apollos, as one that could entertain their
minds with an ample variety of Heavenly Rhetoric, could expatiate upon the
glory of Heaven, as if he saw the Gates of that Jerusalem open and Christ Jesus
sitting at the right hand of God, and enlarge upon the torments of Hell, as if
he heard the languishing cries, and saw the insupportable miseries of the
Damned. A third admiring the solidity and perspicuity of Cephas, who could
explain the Oracles of God, and unriddle the Mysteries of Salvation to the
life; the depth of Divinity he was able to fathom, and to render the most
difficult points plain and intelligible; so much had the Spirit of Antichrist
possessed the Spirit of the Corinthians, that they forgot the Lord their
Redeemer, and refused not to glory in men, whilst they neglected to render unto
God the honor of their gifts and graces, and attributed it to the industry and
endeavor of his Servants and his Stewards and Vassals, as if those who were at
best but the Ministers of Christ and Stewards of God had been the sole Authors
of their faith, and could infallibly finish their Salvation. But the Apostle so
extremely disliked the weakness and vanity of those Persons, that
notwithstanding their splendid profession of the Christian faith, and glorious
ostentation in their respective Ministers, he confidently tells them they were
so far from being Spiritually eminent in the Church, that they were but carnal
men, and nothing Superior to the most imperfect Christians, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3,
4. After which reprehension he subjoyns a most seasonable Admonition to
instruct the Corinthians and all Christian professors, with that just measure
of honor and respect, which the Ministers of Christ should be entertained
withal; that they are Servants of God, and Ministers attending in the Church
for men's Salvation; but their abilities are neither the endowments of Nature,
nor the mere advantages of Education and industry; but all their sufficiency is
of God, who distributes to every man according to the pleasure of his own will,
and therefore the glory of men's Conversion to the Faith, of their Edification
in it, and Salvation by reason of it; should be attributed to God as the
Principal efficient cause, who both preventeth his Ministers in all their
undertakings, and blesses their labors with good success; which is the
substance of the Apostles argument, Verse. 5, 6, 7. And is excellently
illustrated by the Paraphrase of the Learned Doctor Hammond, and the Marginal
Annotations of Junius and Tremelius. Yet as if the Writing of the Apostles
concerned not us, and the Church of Christ were in no great danger by the fond
dotages and vainglorious Ostentation of Schismatical and Carnal Spirits; with
what confidence and vigor have the Divisions of the Corinthians been
frequently renewed and reinforced upon the Christian World, as if they were
entailed to the Epistles of St. Paul, and were inseparable Companions to the
Gospel of Christ? For alas! most woeful experience too plainly manifests, that
those who call upon the Name of Christ, and lay the greatest claim to an
interest in him, most wickedly arrogate that glory which is due to His Majesty,
to those instruments who are men of like passions and infirmities with
themselves: For how common is it for Christians to separate, and stand at a
more than ordinary distance from their Fellow Christians; and when they have
adopted themselves into this or that Party, to cry up their Faction, as the
only true Religion, to confine the Spirit of God within the Walls they
Assemble; and to look with reproach, contempt and scorn upon those that will
not be as Schismatical in the Church and disobedient to Governors as
themselves? So wretchedly do men abuse their own Consciences with the Vizor of
an Hypocrital Zeal, and under the pretense of a singular Piety dishonor the
Christian Religion, when they adhere to their Teachers more than Christ,
adoring their Persons, though never so Ignorant and unlearned, as if an Angel
from Heaven were dropped down among them, like the Image of Diana, among the
Ephesians, and implicitly assenting to whatever they deliver, though never so
ridiculous and absurd; as if the gods were come down to them in the likeness of
men, or at least they spoke the very Oracles of God; of these men the Apostles
long since Prophesied, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. After their own lusts, shall men heap to
themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, who shall turn away their Ears from
the Truth, and be turned unto Fables: But my Brethren these things ought not so
to be, there is one only Lawgiver, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and who art thou
that constitutest another? It Is an excellent saying of Nazianzen, and extremely
pertinent to our present judgment; Orat. 30.
I reverence Peter, yet will not I be called a Petrian: I honor Paul, yet will
not I be called a Paulian: But the Assertion of Lactantius, though very severe,
Instit. L. 4. C. 30.
is undoubtedly true, Christiani esse desierunt, qui Christi nomine amisso,
humana and externa vocabula induerunt: And indeed it is such a reproach to
Christianity, for its Professors to assume those (...), De Consc, Prael, P. 3.
that as the Reverend Bishop Sanderson sadly complained, Non est dignus, qui
sit Christi, qui non est Unius Christi discipulus.

But if men did seriously design the Peace of their own Consciences, or the
prosperity of the Church and State in which they live, they would rejoice
exceedingly in the Name of Christians alone, would reverently observe the
lawful Constitutions of a well settled National Church, and embrace
Christianity in its purity and simplicity, without any sinister respect to
Parties and Divisions. I heartily wish that the Sons of the Church of England,
do neither by their flattery or pusillanimity, their connivance or lukewarmness
contribute any thing to these sad distractions in this Nation; and I humbly beg
that they will most seriously declaim against, and sincerely endeavor to
suppress such extravagant vanities in the Religion of their Auditors, and that
the People of this Kingdom would once be persuaded into this necessary piece of
Christian Prudence, not to think of their Teachers more than they ought, but
whatever Reverence they bear to their Persons, however fair and plausible their
reasonings may seem to their weak understandings, to let none of their
Stratagems deceive their Souls, nor a Multitude of Words to sway their
Judgments to make unjust separations in the body of Christ's Church, to affront
the Authority of the lawful Powers, by which under God they are protected; much
less to be perverted from any one Article in the Christian Faith, or to receive
any Doctrine that overthrows it; for this is the Command of him, who is the
only Potentate, and Lord over Heaven and Earth, Mat. 23.6, 7, 9. Though your
Patriots love the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief seats in the
Synagogues, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi; yet call no man your Father
upon the Earth, for one is your Father, which is in Heaven.

2. The Exhortation of the Apostles admits of this Exposition, that men account
so worthily of these Persons, As the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of God;
as those denominations, are applied to Ministers which denote their servitude
and subjection to Christ, so the same and other Titles of honor are attributed
to them; which import some Power and Authority inherent in them; thus (...)
denotes their Dignity and Commission in the Government of the Church; for as in
Temporal Kingdoms, when Rulers or Procurators are sent into any Province, they
receive Authority to regulate the affairs thereof, as Deputies or Vicegerents
to their Sovereign Lord; so Christ sent forth his Apostles with Commission to
Succeed him in the Administration of the Government of his Spiritual Kingdom,
to execu (...) in his Name several Offices in the Church, which he in Person
performed when he was conversant with it, thereof they are called by the Holy
Ghost, (...), 1 Timothy 5.17. (...), Heb. 13.17. (...), 1 Cor. 12.28. Of like
signification is that honorable Appellation of (...), which respects the
eminent Dignity of the Ministerial Officers, who are employed by the Prince of
Heaven, as his Ambassadors to Treat and Negotiate with the Sons of of Men,
concerning the Mysterious affairs of his glorious Kingdom: For so the Romans
gave the Title of Legates to those Persons, who were invested with Dignity to
represent their Masters Person, and with Authority to manage their Commission
with Foreign States; which employment as it highly advances the Dignity of
these Officers, so it justly requires from men an honorable respect to their
Message, and a Reverend estimation of their Persons; and for this St. Paul
commends his beloved Corinthians, because of their kindness and obedience to
Titus, that out of respect to his Spiritual Function, with fear and trembling
they had received him, 2 Cor. 7.15. In conformity to which practice, the
Apostle frequently inserts an Exhortation of the same Nature, as a necessary
injunction to the Church, 1 These. 5.12, 13. We beseech you Brethren to know
them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and to esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake; and Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have
the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls, as
they that must give account: and from hence St. Ignatius Exhorting the Church
of Smyrna, to Unity and Order, presents them with that repect, (...). etc.
Epist. ad Smyrn. p. 6.
which is due to the Officers of the Church, as a proper expedient thereto. Let
the Bishop be obeyed as your Spiritual Father; the Presbytery, as the Apostles
of Christ; and the Deacons revered in obedience to the Command of God; let
nothing be done without the Bishops appointment.

I must confess that the best of us are but men of like Passions and
infirmities with others, and consequently many imperfections through the
degeneracy of humane Nature are in us unavoidable, and perhaps there may be
some in sacred Orders very disorderly in their lives and profane in their
Manners; such as should adorn the soundness of their Doctrines by the holiness
of their Conversations, but bring it into contempt and derision by their unholy
and vicious course; yet so long as their Doctrines are sound and Orthodox, and
till they are suspended from their Office by lawful Authority, (which is
heartily to be wished) they stand in Christ's stead, who has extended his
Precept concerning this very purpose to the vilest of men, that People should
follow the good Doctrine of their Teachers, not the evil example of their Lives
and Actions, Mat. 23.2, 3. So that though the Person for his immoralities
deserve to be degraded into the lowest Rank of Christians, according to the
Twenty Fifth of the Apostles Canons, and upon continued disobedience after
sufficient admonition, to be expelled the Christian Church, Mat. 18.17. Yet
it is easy to distinguish his Office and Employment from his personal vices,
and necessary to respect him for his Works sake.

But I may return from this digression, and take up a just reprehension against
an impudent Generation of Men, who are not afraid to abuse the Messengers of
Christ, and to confront the Message delivered by them; such as deride and
affront their Persons, as if they were the refuse and offscouring of the
World, and endeavor by Sacrilege and injustice to deprive them of their
competent and necessary Allowance, which the Laws of God have commanded in
general, and the contribution of charitable friends with the just Authority of
the civil Powers have prescribed in Particular; most contrary to the Canon of
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17.18. That those who labor in the Word and Doctrine, be
counted worthy of double honor, for the labourer is worthy of his reward: And
an Ordinance of Christ himself, 1 Cor. 9.14. That they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel. Such as refuse to attend to his Embassage though of
Divine Authority, and neglect to consider the grand importance of it, though he
speak the very Oracles of God, and discourse to them of the Kingdom of Heaven:
Such as scorn to endure the reproof of their Minister, though never so just and
necessary, and are enraged at his reprehensions, though ushered with meekness,
wisdom, and gravity; whose affections are so corrupt, and their Spirits so
haughty, that they become his enemies, because he tells them the Truth, and if
the Power of their hand were equal to the Passion of their hearts, would
Parallel the Oppression of Ahab, the Impiety of Jehoiakim, or the Cruelty of
Herod; Et alia insunt stolida and vana, vel si mollius acciperes miseranda, sed
non ad invidiam ista, verum conciliandae misericordiae refero: Which Epiphonema
of the Historian, may be expouned by the words of the Apostle in the Language
of the Holy Ghost; we are made a Spectacle unto the World, to Angels, and to
men, we are fools for Christ's sake, being despised and reviled, I speak not
these things to shame our enemies, but as a faithful Minister of Christ to warn
and remember them, 1 Cor. 4.^9. etc.

Father forgive them, they know not what they do, they consider not what
reproach and affront, they cast upon thy Son our Master, when they contemn and
dishonor us his immediate Servants; which yet our Lord has expressly
signified, Luke 10.16. He that despises you, despises me, and he that
despises me, despises him that sent me. But that we may be persuaded better
things of the People in our several charges, may this Petition be inserted into
our daily Litany, that they will cheerfully ascend to the House of God, to
recieve instruction; will attend with reverence and devotion to our Words of
Exhortation, will impartially examine and seriously consider the rational
importance of our Doctrines and Admonitions, and either friendlily inform us,
if any Error or Corruption fall from us; or if we speak the truth in Christ,
and lie not, faithfully believe, and sincerely obey us. But whether Men will
hear, or whether they will forbear, let us remember the Vocation, whereto we
are called, that arming our selves with the resolution of St. Paul, Acts. 20.24.
That there Bonds nor afflictions shall move us: neither will we count our life
dear unto us, so that we may finish our Course with joy, and the Ministry we
have received of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 6.4. etc.
We may attain the Christian simplicity and courage of that blessed Apostle,
And approve our selves the faithful Ministers of Christ, and good Stewards of
the Mysteries of God.

Which is the Second Inference delivered in the Text, and respects the Persons,
who are the Ministers and Stewards of the Gospel, that they be faithful in
discharge of their Office committed to them: Moreover it is required in Stewards,
that a man be found faithful; the just design of which Exhortation will be
fully answered by them, if they be endowed with these two qualifications.
First, A good understanding of their Office and Employment. Secondly, A good
Conscience in the discharge and performance of it.


First, A good understanding of their Office and Employment, is necessary in
the Stewards of God, that they be found faithful; for it is impossible that men
be faithful in their Stewardship, whose intellectuals are Naturally defective,
or their understanding, though capable of improvement, yet rude and ignorant in
the knowledge of their duty. How can they discharge the Office of Teachers,
that have need to be taught the first Principles of the Oracles of God? Or how
can those Persons instruct their People in the Mysteries of Religion, that are
Novices in the Faith of Christ, and know not those Canons by which the House of
God is to be ruled? and how shall they then take care of the Church to preserve
it pure and undefiled, or be able by so und Doctrine to exhort and convince the
gainsayer? It Is our Saviors observation, if the blind lead the blind, they
shall both fall into the Ditch: So necessary it is that the Ministers of
Religion be themselves sufficiently instructed, that they may communicate to
others in all Spiritual knowledge: And as the Lacedaemonians called the
Governors of their City, (...), because they framed the dispositions, and
fashioned the manners of their Subjects according to the Laws of their
repective Communities; and the Wise Athenians for the same reason gave their
Rulers the same denomination, and styled them (...), because they constituted
good and wholesome Laws for the direction of the People, and used most prevalent
means to have them observed. So God that Sovereign Lord of his People has
given the like Appellations to the Deputies in his Church, the Ministers of
Spiritual affairs, as Seers, Prophets, Overseers and Stewards, that from the
signification of their Name, they may be put in remembrance of their duty, that
the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the People should seek the Law
at their mouths.

What the Office of a Minister in general is, has been already discoursed,
when we considered that depositum committed to his charge, and for whole
service it should be employed, the substance of which is, that the whole will
of God concerning man's Salvation be faithfully delivered and explained, as it is
contained in the Gospel of Christ; the particular Offices, wherein this general
duty is to be performed are briefly comprehended in those short instructions
recommended to the Ministers of Christ in their Ordinations; to them are
committed the blessed Sacraments of the Christian Religion; that as opportunity
serves, and necessity requires, they Administer those Sacred Rites in the
Church of God, Mat. 28.19. 1. Cor. 11.24, 25.
by Baptizing such as are duly disposed for that Solemn Ordinance and
distributing the Holy Communion to those pious and humble Souls that are
Religiously disposed to celebrate the honor of God in that Sacred Institution;
and into their hands me S. Sc: are put, who are Commanded to Solemnize the
worship of God is public, either as Priests to wait at the Altar of Lord, to
intercede with his Majesty in the behalf of the People, and to present in their
stead, Prayers, and supplications and thanksgivings to him; this St. Paul gave
in charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. And for this reason that great Apostle so
frequently inserts his Petitions in his Epistles to his beloved Converts,
protesting that he should sin against God, if he neglected to pray for them,
and resolving never to omit so necessary a duty; and upon this accout those
public Offices were composed in the Primitive Church, and Hours of Prayer
appointed that the Priests might almost continually be praying for the People;
according to which practice it is commanded by our Church, that the Ministers of
Religion offer up a Morning and Evening Sacrifice to the Throne of Grace, in
the public Service and Liturgy of our Church, which in all Cathedral Churches,
and Collegiate Chapels is duly observed; or as Ambassadors to treat with the
People in the business of Religion, and reveal the Will of their Maker to them,
faithfully explaining the Gospel in its true and prosper sense, and framing
their discourses according to the qualities and capacities of their Auditors,
that their understandings may be well informed in the Principles of Religion,
and their hearts strongly confirmed in the Faith; to warn sinners of the evil
of their ways, and to Preach up the duties of a Practical Religion, to present
them with the most convincing Reasons and powerful Exhortations to a good
Life, if by any means, the hearts of men may be inclined to the love, and their
lives to the practice of as universal Piety. Hitherto may be referred that
necessary Office of Catechizing the Christian youth by some short and familiar
Questions concerning the Essential parts of Religion, which if duly performed
by the Ministers of Religion, would in a great measure prevent that infidelity
and profaneness, so scandalous and offensive in the Christian Church, even by
those which are arrived to the use of Reason, and the exercise of their
understanding: For this purpose, that admirable Compendium of the Christian
Religion, the Catechism of our Church is commanded to be learned by every
Baptized Person, before he be confirmed by the Bishop, that he may be able to
give an account of his Faith, before he be admitted to the Holy Communion.

But the duty of a Minister is still of larger extent. The Apostle tells us,
and experience too truly manifests what busy Agents the Emissaries of Satan
are to disseminate the Doctrine of Devils, and to spread abroad most damnable
Errors; of which sort are they that creep into private Houses, and lead Captive
silly Women, laden with diverse lusts, and those false Teachers, who being
unruly and vain Talkers and Deceivers, call in Question the most undeniable
Principles of Religion, and turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, whose
folly should be made manifest to all men, and their mouths stopped, that they
proceed no further; which is certainly the duty of those men, to whom the word
of God is committed, that they may be able by sound Doctrine to convince and
reclaim the gainsayer, Tit. 1.5, 9. For it is absurd to conceive, that the care
and vigilance of Ministers whose employment is to watch over Souls, and to
endeavor their Salvation, may without affront to their Lord and Master be
inferior to the pains and solicitude of those Seducers, whose business is to
tempt and entice men to sin, and thereby to ascertain their eternal Damnation.
So that it is undoubtedly their Office by Private instruction and admonition as
well as by Public, to contend earnestly for the Faith of Christ, against the
clamorous and impertinent cavils of malicious Spirits and false Apostels; to
study the preservation of the Truth in the hearts of those unhappy Persons that
are assaulted by them, that they neither embrace the Errors of those men, nor
fall into a state of sin and Death; and to wrestle with God by their most
fervent and importunate prayers, till their People are delivered from the
snares of the Devil, and their Souls confirmed in the way of life; thus St.
Paul, when he had called together the Elders at Miletus, committed to them, the
Flock of God, and warned them of false Teachers, that they faithfully watch
against their Invasions, least they draw away Disciples after them, Acts.
20.28, 29, 30, 31.

Add to all this, the gross Ignorance of many, which cries aloud for Personal
instruction; the open Profaneness of others, which stands in need of the most
serious Admonitions, and seasonable Reprehensions from their Spiritual Guides;
and always the Visitation of the Sick is incumbent on them, who according to
their various conditions require the most affectionate Exhortations and
convincing Arguments to confirm their Patience, to increase their Faith, to
quicken their Hope, to complete their Repentance, and to perfect their Charity:
All which the Apostle has Ordained as a perpetual Office in the Church, James
5.14. Is any man sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and
let them pray over him, and the prayer of Faith shall save the sick. All which
particulars are briefly recommended to the Care and endeavor of Polycarp
Bishop of Smyrna, by Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, and comprehended in the
Epistle of Polycarp to the Presbyters of Philippi, as their necessary and
indispensable Offices: These are the several parts of the Ministers Office, and
are therefore necessary to be known by the Stewards of God, that by these
Spiritual Ministries, they may faithfully discarge their duty in the Family and
Household of Christ.

And so I proceed to the Second branch of the Apostles Exhortation to the
Ministers of Christ, viz. A good Conscience in the discharge and performance of
their Office. And if the Solemnity of our Ordination, or the Injunction of our
Lord and Master; if the manifold Advantages which our faithfulness will
infallibly effect, or the severe Account we must render to God concerning our
Stewardship; if any or all of these have any weight and importance in them,
they lay the strictest Obligation upon us, to engage our faithfulness in the
work of the Ministry. For in our Ordination we received Authority to preach the
Gospel, and explain the Scriptures, to Administer the Sacraments and other
Rites and Ceremonies belonging to the Church; and when we received Institution
from our Diocesan, were strictly enjoined to watch over the Flock of Christ, of
which we were oppointed Overseers; and if the Gospel of our blessed Savior be
of Divine Authority, what variety of Precepts are then delivered by God
himself? There being neither an Evangelist, nor an Apostle, but from the Spirit
of the Lord prescribes our Duty, and requires our Fidelity: Besides, the Glory
of God is extremely concerned; the Salvation of our People lies at Stake, and
our own everlasting Doom most certainly depends upon the faithful Discharge or
wretched Neglect of our Office and Employment. For by the strength of this
Argument St. Paul exhorts Timothy, to discharge his duty, with the greatest
care and a good Conscience. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ
who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing and his Kingdom, that
thou observe these things, 1 Timothy 5.21. 2 Timothy 4.1.

But because he that is unjust in his own affairs will scarce be faithful in
Administering the goods of others; I mean if our Consciences be loose and
treacherous in ordering our own lives, we shall discover but little Conscience
in prescribing Rules and Directions to others; or if we do employ our knowledge
and our strength to explain the Mysteries of Salvation to the Souls committed
to our charge, we cannot challenge a Blessing from God upon our endeavors, nor
rationally expect that our labors should be successful; for God himself has
taken up a quarrel against such men, Psalm. 50.16, 17 -- Unto the wicked says
God, What have thou to do, to declare my Statutes, or to take my Covenant in
thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee?
therefore I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thy eyes. And
the Apostle assures us that such men are inexcusable before God, and that his
Sacred Name is blasphemed by them, Romans 2.1, 17 -- -24. And as our People may
justly upbraid the Indecency and absurdity of our Lives, when our Actions
confront our Doctrines, and our Manners give our Preaching the Lie, as St.
Jerome has observed, Perdit Authoritatem docendi, cujus Sermo opere
destruitur; so they may be provoked to reproach and contemn the Gospel it self,
as an unholy Institution, or a fabulous Legend; like those in Salvian's time,
Si Christus Sancta docuisset, Christiani Sancte vixissent. Of what great
concernment is it then, that we demonstrate our knowledge in the sound
Mysteries of Religion, by our Reverent apprehensions of them, and a Religious
deportment in the whole course and frame of our actions, correspondent to them?
That every Article of the Christian Faith, of whose truth we labor to persuade
our People, be influential upon our Practices in such proportion, 1 Cor. 14.24,
25.
that if there come in one that believes not, or one that is unlearned, into
our Assemblies; he may be convinced, and falling down on his face worship God,
and report that God is in us of a truth: And every Precept in the Body of
Christianity, which we bind upon the Consciences of men, and exhort them to
practice, may be delineated so fairly in our Lives and Conversations, that
others seeing our good works may glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Such
was the faithfulness of our Apostle in this particular, that without any
remorse he could take the Philippians by the hand, and lead them to the
Practice of every good work, by the conduct of his own Example; Brethren be ye
followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an
example, Phil. 3.17. And in his Epistle to these, he appeals to their own
Consciences, to judge in what manner of Conversation he walked among them, 1
These. 2.1.10. Your selves, Brethren, know our entrance unto you, and ye are
Witnesses, and God also, how justly, and holily, and unblameably, we behaved
our selves among you: Lib. 3. de Jub. Dei. P. 78.
for which reason Salvian so highly and deservedly commends him, Boni Domini
bonus famulus, and singularis Magistri praeclarus imitator.

And now, Brethren, we see our Calling; and are we Conscientious in the
management of it? We have heard our Profession; and are our Practices
answerable to it? We cannot, I am sure, be ignorant of those Arguments, that
oblige our Faithfulness, and do they preswade us to a constant Universal
Obedience? Or are not the best of us too little serious in the work of the
Ministry; and therefore our labors the less successful Do we persuade our
People in the Mysteries of Godliness, and press them to unfeigned Repentance,
and uniform Obedience to the Laws of Heaven, as men that know the terrors of
the Lord, and believe without these things our Auditors shall perish Eternally?
Do we entreat, exhort and beseech them as it were for their Lives and
Salvation? Or do we count our Office a burden, and substituting others into our
Stewardship, are indifferent what Persons labor in the Vineyard, so we may eat
the Fruit thereof, and receive the Profits in their appointed Season? Do none
of us by our scandalous lives disgrace the Gospel we Preach, and so offend our
weaker Brethren, by laying a stumbling Block in their way to Heaven, and
scandalizing them by our licentious Courses?

I come not into this place to Caluminate any, much less to accuse my Fathers,
and my Brethren; this work I refer to the scrutiny of every man's Conscience,
and the Inquisition of our Spiritual Governors. And I heartily wish that every
Minister in this Assembly after the strictest Examination will be found to have
approved himself a faithful and wise Steward in the House of God; that our
care is to rertench the sins and impieties, and to repair the Schisms and
Divisions in the places were we live: that we are obedient to the voice of our
exact Conformity to her Laws and Canons, and Brotherly kindness to one another;
that in our Instructions and Exhortations, we display the odious Nature of sin
in its proper colors, that sinners may blush, and be ashamed at their profane
and vicious courses: And use the most prevalent Rhetoric to set forth Virtue
to the life, to represent it with our utmost skill in the most amiable and
lovely attire, that men may be drawn as with Cords of love to Court and embrace
her; and above all these things, that we keep our selves unspotted from the
sins of the World, for hereunto are we called, to be blameless and harmless, as
the Sons of God, without rebuke, that our Conversations may be living Sermons,
and our Sermons the lively Oracles of God.

These are the qualifications to make us faithful Stewards in the Church of
God: We must be Wise to understand the Mysteries of Religion, lest we be
deceived by the Stratagems and Sophistry of Imposters; and Faithful, lest we
seduce and delude others: We must be Learned in the word of God, that in our
Doctrines we may show Incorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, and found speech, that
cannot be condemned; and Conscientious in Preaching the same, that he who is of
the contrary part may be ashamed; and those that gainsay the faithful Word of
God, by the soundness of our Doctrines and faithfulness of our Labors may be
convinced. Who then is a faithful and wise Servant, whom his Lord has made
Ruler over his Household to give them meat in due Season; Blessed is that
Servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing: For he shall say
unto him, Well done thou good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things; enter thou into the
Joy of thy Lord.

FINIS.

