Mrs. JAMES's VINDICATION OF THE Church of England, IN AN ANSWER TO A PAMPHLET
ENTITLED, A New Test OF THE Church of England's LOYALTY.

It is not Interest that moves me to this, for I never made Gain of any thing
that ever I did, nor none I do desire; for it was nothing but the Fear of Gods
Judgments that has been the sole Cause of all my Actions for above these
Twenty years.

London, Printed for me Elinor James. 1687.

An Advice to the CHVRCH of ENGLAND.
AS for Conscience, I do not count it a sufficient Guide, because it is not so
Infallible, but it is subject to Err, and therefore it ought to be Guided by
the Word of God; for I find those that will not be Guided by that, does not
yield Civil Obedience to Temporal Magistrates, and how can they to God: And
therefore I am not so much for Liberty of Conscience. But since it is the Kings
Pleasure, I rest satisfied; for if they misimploy it, is not Gods Hand long
enough to reach them? But who knows but that God that Converted St. Paul, may
Convert them all that are Zealous and did not intend any thing else but His
Glory; but for those that are Envious, you must not look that they will ever be
otherwise. I know they offended you, because they pretend to be Loyal Subjects.
Indeed I wonder how they dare say so, when the World knows they never had any!
But why should any be unwilling to return the King Thanks, I think it is no
more than what every one is obliged to; and since the King was pleased to Renew
His Promises, that none need to doubt his Fidelity; I think it is but Reason to
renew your Thanks. And as for Oxford, they are no Example, because none lies
under their Circumstances; but when His Majesty is pleased to remove their
Doubts, I don't question but that they will be forward enough with their
Addressing, and 'till that be done, I cannot blame them; but I find you
scruple, because you will not be after the Dissenters, what a simple Pride is
that? For a Christian ought to Imitate all Good Things, and therefore there is
no Excuse. Fear not any thing, but Trust in God, Love the King, and be Kind one
to another, and do not Addict your selves to any thing but what is Agreeable to
Christianity. And I think you are obliged to frequent the Prayers of the
Church, for Christ did it, and how much more ought we. I am very ambitious that
you should exceed others, I have always Loved the Church of England, and
therefore I would have them to be Dignified above all; and that the Love of God
should be the Mover of all their Actions.

As for Mr. Dryden, though some blame him for using my Name, I do not; because
he has used it civilly. Indeed I do not know him, nor never read his Book, but
I am told that he does Abuse the CHVRCH of ENGLAND, for which I blame him: For
I count it not Wisdom for a Wit, to Reflect on that he so lately owned.

I hear there are Queries Cried, but I have not seen them, but understand they
are of the same Nature. O that I were but a Man, I would study Night and Day,
and I do not doubt but I should be more than a Conqueror, and so I hope to be
nevertheless.

Mrs. JAMES's VINDICATION OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND, etc.
SIR,
I Am very sorry to think that you should be always such a Subtle Adversary,
but you say, You never had an Opportunity to show your Spite and Malice until
now. You say you could never find a Convincing Reason, and what was the Cause?
Is it not because it does not consist with your Interest; for that is all that
you aim at, for that is the God of this World, and he has blinded your Eyes,
and stupefied your Understanding, and thickens your Scall, so that if an Angel
came to Instruct you, you would not be able to receive it, if it did not agree
with your Interest. I thought Liberty of Conscience might have changed your
Disposition, seeing that the Kings Intention is so Gracious, as thinking it is
the best way to Unite our Differences, and to heal our Breaches, and you know
it was the Care of the King and Parliament, to prevent Scandalous Pamphlets
against the King and Government, and therefore it is strange to me how you can
Print your Paper with Allowance, when it is of such a Pernicious Nature, and
its whole Aim is against the Government: surely those Gentlemen that had the
Care of the Government, are very Negligent, or else you dare not say, With
Allowance; certainly none that is in Authority would grant it you, and if they
did, they must be Treacherous to their Trust, and are no Friend to the King and
Government: for can there be any thing of a more Pernicious Consequence than
this, that would destroy the very Foundation? How do you think I can bear it,
when God has filled my Heart full of Love and Loyalty, and I know you Abuse
them, for you have no cause to call their Loyalty into question, for I know
Their Loyalty, and have been a Labourer with Them, therefore I have the greater
Reason to Plead for them: but I know you will say I am a Woman, and why should
I trouble my self? Why was I not always so, when I pleaded with the Parliament
about the Right of Succession, and with Shaftsbury, and Monmouth, and at
Guild Hall, and elsewhere; and I made Applications to my late Sovereign Lord
the King (whom my Soul Loved) That he would be pleased to let me Undertake for
the City, and to make me a God Mother, to which the King Answered, It would be
too great an Undertaking for me, but I replied, That if it might not be for
all, that it might be for some, and the King granted my desire, and I asked His
Majesty whether He would not wish Well to it, and the King Replied, Ay, with
all my Heart and Soul: Was not he a Gracious Prince, for I am sure He sought
nothing but the True Interest of His People, but I know such as you, are none
of His Friends, for you did all you could to Pervert his Kingdoms and Sow
^ivisions amongst his People, and (by such Doings) you made his Throne Uneasy.
Indeed then you might be for the Dukes Interest, because it was your own, but I
am sure it was His loss, for before He looked toward you, all the People Loved
and Admired Him: And who was the cause of the Change, was it not you, That went
up and down Incensing the People of the great Proselites you had made (for I
suppose you are a Priest, and they were of the same Nature) for they came to
me, and I know what they said; therefore I find such as you are the Plotters,
for they troubled me many Weeks together, and I thought I should never get Rid
of them, but I Fasted Seven Days and Nights to give the late King a Petition,
that He might know in what State His Kingdom stood in, and though I never saw
them afterward, yet I do not question but there was endeavors used to blind
Him; but if it had pleased God, that His Majesty had Li^ed a little longer, I
do not doubt but he would have taken New Measures, That you should never have
had cause to Boast, that you made him a Preselite: And as for my Sovereign that
now is, he is as Sweet and Precious a Prince as the World can afford, and it is
pity you should Abuse Him, for He is a King of Great Experience, and has
Suffered as much as any Prince in the World, which does teach His Majesty such
Wisdom, that it is His whole Ca^e to keep His Kingdoms in Peace, and to have
His People to Flourish, and will not disturb the Peace thereof upon any
Condition whatsoever, and (God be Thanked) the King has no need to distrust
us, for is not His God our God, and we acknowledge Him to be a Christian King,
who Belives in the Almighty who made the Heavens and the Earth, and he does
believe that Jesus Christ is His Son, and that he came into the World to Save
Sinners, and I doubt not but that His whole Trust is in His Merits, and we all
hold and own the same; so that we lack nothing but a Holy Life, agreeable to
the Life of Jesus; but I find you are Mettlesome Spirits and want Employ;
therefore I would desire you to go to the Turks and Infidels, and Convert them,
and in so doing you might expect your Reward, and I should like it well; but
for you to think that you can Convert People when they are Converted already,
is mere Nonsense; for it is Perverting, and undoing what the Blessed Spirit
has done, which will be a Sin of such a Nature, that I would not be guilty of
it for all the World. I know you will be Angry, but I do not value it, for I
must discharge my Conscience toward all, and if you would have me to be your
Friend, you must take New Measures, and Learn of Christ, for he did Good to
all, and hurt to none; and if you would not have me to speak against you, you
must not give me the Occasion.

I am sure my Sovereign will not allow you to Villifie and Abuse us; for He is
a Prince of Justice as well as Mercy, and has promised, That He will Defend
us, and not only so, but will venture as far as any in our Vindication, and the
King was satisfied with our Loyalty, and declared it to the World, and how dare
you condemn the Kings Judgment, and Scandalize the Church; for all that knows
Her, knows Her to be the only Church for Loyalty: for does any of you own the
King to be Supreme Head and Governor but She? And for your part, all the World
knows what you own; so that my Sovereign cannot be your Supreme Governor, and
therefore there is no Comparison to be made, I my self can Weigh you all down
for Loyalty; and if I can do so much for that am but one, what shall we all do?
Therefore I know the King will not be Angry with me if I Vindicate the Church
of England, for in Vindicating of Her, I Vindicate His Majesty, which I have
always done; for when the Peers Speech Abused my Sovereign, I Answered it; for
I hate Rebellion, and the Church does not hinder any one from that Singular
Gift of Loyalty, for Her Desire is, That all should Fear God and Honor the
King; and She is the Spouse of Christ, and He will own Her for His Mystical
Body, and every one that truly believes in Christ, is a Member of that Body,
and all the Members makes the Whole, and Her Doctrine is Holy: I wish those
that own Her, would Live according to Her Doctrines, for then they would be
Safe and Happy: She has been Infallible in Her Duty to Her King, which Her
Discontented Brethren knows full well, for that was the only thing that they
laid to Her Charge, That She would not be Treacherous to Her Prince, nor Side
with His Enemies; for if She had, you would not have been so great as you are
now, tho She was not for Popery as some thought, for indeed She has always
been the Bulwark against it; and that makes you Envy Her so: for you think if
you can but bring Her down, you shall do well enough with the Brats whom you
Begot, tho your Infallible Belief in them may deceive you; for though you made
them Enemies to the Church of England, yet I find they will prove no Friends to
the Church of Rome; for indeed every Good Soul will rather endure any thing
than to be inslaved with Popery: And as for the Church of England, She never
Lived under the Slavish Fear of it, as the Dissenters did, but does Trust God
with all, and desires nothing else but to Serve God Truly, and the King Rightly
And as for Her Revelations, as you say is Peculiar to Her Self, is a clear
Mistake, and yet Her Lord and Head has promised, That the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against Her: And what is the Gates of Hell? But all those things
that lead us to Darkness and Ignorance, and to fling down Gods Holy Will, and
to set up the Will of Men, and secretly makes us to be an Enemy to Christ, and
a Friend to Antichrist? But Christ is able to Save HIS OWN, and that you shall
know, for He has His Chosen People amongst all, and I really do believe He
has His Saints and Servants in the Church of Rome as well as any other, and I
hope (our of His Infinite Mercy) He will Reconcile our Differences, and make us
Happy: And as for those that envies our Happiness, They shall not be able to
stand before the Almighty in the Day of His Anger, for His Power is able to
disperse them, and to blow them away in a Minute, as his Divine Power did the
Locusts. Therefore I would Advise all the Enemies of the Church of England to
be Quiet and Amend for the time to come, for while we are Contriving the Ruin
of one another, God may justly destroy us all, and bring in the Heathens, who
may bring forth better Fruits than we: And for your Allowing our Loyalty to
King Charles I. I do not thank you, for it is well known, or else you would not
have owned it; For that Destruction of Three Kingdoms, and the Death of the
Best of Princes, is Writ in Gods Book, and who shall be called to an Account
for it, God Almighty knows, but I am sure You cannot be Acquitted: For was it
not the Fear of Popery, with your Pride, that caused the Difference, when you
Compelled the Queen to go barefoot, and in the mean time such as you Rid in
Her Coach; to the great Hazard of Her Life: For (as I was told) She Miscarried;
who did you learn it of, I am sure not of Christ, nor His Disciples: And for
your Loyalty to King Charles I. was it not for your own Protection? For the
wrath of God was so upon you for you Sins and Iniquities, that you might very
well have the Fear of Cain upon you: And as for the Liturgy and Discipline,
what made it so hateful, but because we had Complied as near as we could to you
for Unities sake. And the Occasion of the War, and of that Good Prince losing
His Life and Crown, might be (for ought I know) for Sheltering such Unfortunate
Men as you are, for you were not so Sensible nor so Honest as Jonah was, for he
declared the Truth, That he was the Man that had Offended, and by his Counsel
the Ship was Saved; but you are of a contrary Nature, for you do not care if
you perish your Selves, so others perish with you; but the Saints and Servants
of God are not of that Nature, as Abraham, Moses, David, and Christ Himself;
for He undertook Death that we might Live; and Poverty, that through Him we
might be made Rich; but You are an Enemy, for you would have none Rich but your
selves, thinking thereby to enslave us and triumph over us. Therefore I find
you have the Nature of Cain, who Envied his Brother, because his own Deeds were
Evil. For my part, I can call God to Witness I have been always for the Peace
of the King and Kingdom, and there is nothing in the World that is dearer to me
than the Kings Life and Happiness; and if I had a Thousand Lives, I could
Sacrifice them all in Vindication of His Sacred Majesty, without the hope of
Rewards or Gain; and there is none of my Enemies can Object any thing against
me, but being over Zealous for my Sovereign Lord: For my Blessed Savior has
Taught me. That I cannot serve Two Masters, and the Primitive Christians were
always olig'd to be for the Interest of the Prince in whose Dominions they
Lived; so that it is our Christian Duty to Love and Pray for our own Prince,
but we have nothing to do with any other; and whoever is for the Interest of
another, cannot be a True Subject to their own: Therefore my Resolution i^,
That I will be True to my God, my King, and my Country, and I am resolved (by
the Blessing of Almighty God) never to Change if I were to suffer a Thousand
Deaths, because God has Instructed me in that Way from my Infancy, and I find
it most agreeable to the Word of God and my Temper, for I am naturally Inclined
to Love Kingly Au^hority: And as for my Faith, it is to Believe Sincerely in
Christ, and there is no other Faith whereby any one can be Saved; for I am sure
He is the Infallible Rock, and I have always kept to that from the beginning,
^^d I hope I will continue so to the end: And as for The Changes of Rel^gious
^orship, that is not any thing as to Matter of Faith, for Prayer may (...)
according to Peoples Occasions, for they were never designed to be Infa^^^^
(...) if the Common Prayer has been Altered, I did not care if it had been
Altered again, and again, rather than it should be a stumbling Block to any
(the ^here is not any thing but what I like and love) and I think There is no
Good Christian but may say Amen to them, and I could Wish our Hearts were as
Holy as the Prayers are good, then I am sure there is no Body would be weary of
them: But has not such as you put the people out of Love with them, in saying,
They came out of your Mass Book, and this you did to Wound the Church of
England, for Her Good Will toward you; but you may see how the people Love
you, for they will not accept of any thing from you, tho never so good; and if
they will not accept of that they may, I hope they will not accept of that
which they may not: for if they do, they will not deserve the name of Men, and
how much less then, will they be worthy of the name of Christians, for if they
do not own Christ now, they shall not be owned hereafter.

Sir, I wonder how you dare Condemn the Church of England (I mean that part of
it, which is for the King, Common Prayer and Bishops) for Her Faith Teaches Her
Piety to Her God, and Loyalty to Her Prince; therefore She may appropriate to
Her Self alone, The Principles of True Loyalty above all; for Her Doctrine is
True, and Exhorts all to Repentance and Good Works, and Teaches a True Faith in
Christ, and does not Judge any Heretics that differs with Her, but owns that
whoever truly believes in Christ and Works Righteousness, may be in a State of
Salvation: and She is Christ's Beloved Spouse, and He will own Her, and I doubt
not but Her Faith is great enough (with Gods Help) to stand against all Her
Opposers, for Christ will Beautify Her for His Words sake; for tho She does
not Teach us that Presumption as to think that any Man is Infallible, yet She
owns Gods Word to be Infallible, and Eternal, and a Perfect Guide to Salvation.
I wonder how any one can be Her Enemy, but why should I? Was it not so from the
beginning, for was not Cain Envious against Abel, and was not brave and
renowned Men in their Generations Enemies to Moses, and did not the High
Priests Plot against my Blessed Savior? And did not Christ tell his Disciples,
That the time would come, that they should think they did God good Service to
destroy them? They were not Heathens that did it, but those Mistaken Christians
that thought they should Merit by it; for I find all along that Satan has made
use of those that ought to be the greatest Friends, to be the most Inveterate
Enemies, as when he made use of a Disciple to betray his Lord; and that great
Disciple that declared most Love to his Lord, was the first that disowned Him.
This is the Spite of our Spiritual Adversary; and the Wisdom of God suffered it
so to be, that we should not Trust in any thing, but in the most High God, that
always takes care of them that Trust in Him, and none can prevent the
Providential care that God takes of His, and Christ's Church must look to be
Persecuted by the Enemies of Her Lord, but through Him She shall be more than a
Conqueror. Who is he that is so Presumptions to Brand her with Killing of
Kings? She Abhors such Doctrines, for She is a Preserver of Kings and Princes,
and makes more of Her Word than the Enemies does of their Infallible Promise,
and I doubt not but it will pass current. Has not you been Angry with her
Kings for Her sake, and for what Reason; only because She owned the Word of God
in Sincerity: And out of Envy you sent Men to divide Her Members, and destroy
Her Government, and have you not been Contriving Her Ruin all along, and
Tran^forming your selves into all Shapes to bring it to pass? And who begins
all Quarrels but you? And do you say, That the Church is a Viper? No, no, it is
such as you are; for you envy our Happiness, and would Hurry us into a
Confusion, because you think the King Loves us too well, and stands in the gap
to hinder Your Intentions, and is like an Angel to keep Peace amongst us, that
every Man should Enjoy His Right and Property: But this is contrary to your
Temper, for you long to Enjoy what other Men have; and therefore the Church of
England is the great Eyesore: And since the King has been so Gracious to give
Liberty of Conscience, you think that all the Dissenters should be against the
Church to Devour Her: but God knows it was for your sakes that the Laws were
put against Dissenters, and how many Good Souls was against it, but dare not
speak for fear of being counted Whiggs; but for my part, I made Application to
the hate King, That the Laws should not be put against them, not that I loved
them so well, but I know their Nature, and don't delight that any should be
Afflicted; no, not the Roman Catholics: but you intend well to Reward us; and
for my late Sovereign you have Abused Him sufficiently, but you got Money by it.

Sir, I am sorry for your Ignorance, that you should think the Church was in
Her Infancy in Edward VI. Time. It is a clear Mistake, for She has been ever
since Man has had a Being; and do not Despise King Edward, for he was a brave
Prince, and I doubt not but that he is a Saint in Heaven; and methinks it is
not Wisdom in you to Lampoon upon the Confession of Faith, because it was
Compiled in Thirty Nine Articles; for they will stand when you will fall: and
for you to say, She Set up a Brat of Her own: Was it not the Kings desire that
it should be so to Prevent Popery, and what harm would it have been for Queen
Mary, if it had been so? For her Reign was but Short and her Life full of
Trouble, and tho she sent a great many to Heaven, she will have no Reward for
it; for she might have been a Better Christian, if she had Let Them Alone: But
why were They so End ous as to Burn the Bibles? For whoever Hates that, is an
Enemy to God: From such the Lord Deliver my Sovereign and all Good Souls; And
the Lord grant a Right Understanding, for what Mischief has been wrought for
want of it: For Christ says, He is a Door and a Vine, and if any could not
understand it, must they be put to Death. Who is the giver of Understanding but
God? And to some it is not given that they should understand the Mysteries of
Heaven, and since it has pleased God to give us a Right Understanding, why
should you be Angry? You had need to pray to God to Rectify your own
Understanding; for there is not any thing more like the Devil than Envy: And
how Destructive would you be if you had but Power, that you dare to lay the
Death of Queen Mary at our Door, when you ought to have blamed the
Presbyterians for hunting her out of her Kingdom; and if Queen Elizabeth did
Cut her off, what have we to do with that? Should the King be blamed because
the Duke of Monmouth was Rebellious; God forbid, for I am sure my Sovereign
loved him so well, that he would have delighted to have made him Great and
Happy, if he had not wrought his own Destruction by his Rebellion; therefore
let it be upon his own head, and to those that Advised him to such a wicked
Thing: And for to Villifie Queen Elizabeth, is a thing I Abhor, for I hate any
should speak Evil of any Body that is Dead, but how much more of Queen
Elizabeth: And do not all know that King Henry VIII. was lawfully Married to
Her Mother, and if the Pope delayed the Divorce, it was no Fault of the King
nor Kingdom; and did not John the Baptist lose his Head, because he told Herod
it was not lawful for him to take his Brothers Wife? Therefore how dare you to
say, That the Queen was a Bastard, when all the World knows it is a great Lie?
For every Good Christian ought to Love Her Memory, and you to Chusei for if She
had not denied her Self that blessed happiness of Marriage, my Sovereign Lord
had never been King; and therefore for His sake as well as Her own, I shall
always Love and Admire Her Memory: And if Gods Providence had not defeated the
Powder Plot, my Precious Sovereign would not have had a being in this World,
nor that which is to come. Therefore I will always Admire and Adore the God of
Heaven, that does prevent the Wicked Intentions of Evil Men. For how has God
preserved His Anointed from the Spite and Malice of Men and Devils, and from
the Raging of the Seas? And I hope He will Preserve Him still, that He may
Glorify Him, that neither Men nor Devils may prevent Him from doing His Liege
Duty to God; for it is He alone has Preserved Him, and kept Him hitherto, and
I hope He will for ever and ever: And that He may not forget who Destroyed His
Grandfather, Henry IV. of France, For They are the Snakes that will sting to
Death: And for the LAWS, they shall stand to Whip such as You, that would
Destroy both King and Government. I know you would Unthrone my Sovereign, for
to make your selves Lords and Princes ower us; but I hope God will never suffer
it: for I know you are like the Wheadling Dissenters, that would not Trust the
King with His own Power, but pretended they would Employ it, and make Him a
Glorious Prince; but it was to Destroy Him: so You would Wheedle the Church to
take away Her Power, and then you think to do well enough with my Sovereign,
when you have got the Power, and then you will show your Loyalty: but I hope the
King will keep His Power, and Trust to none of you; for you will all prove
Treacherous if you can but make any Advantage of it; for you cannot but know
the sinking Condition of your Kingdom, and that makes you so Busy; therefore
you don't care who sinks, so you swim: But what is it that can hinder Gods
Intentions, but Repentance and Amendment of Life, for that is the Glory that
God desires; for that end Christ came into the World, that God might be All in
All, and these is no doubt but God makes the Angels Ministering Spirits, but
they cannot do any thing of themselves, for they continually Wait upon the
Almighty; for when He moves they flee, and what Injury can it be to you to pray
to God that moves all Things? I think it is the greatest Favor that can be
given to Mortals, but you say, You are not Worthy; and pray what is the Reason
of that? For did not Christ Die for all that would lay hold of Him? But I find
you have not attained to that Excellent Perfection to have a True Faith in
Christ, for if you had, you would never have brought your false Accusations
against us; for what do we do, that you find so much Fault with us? for I am
sure all Condemns us for doing so much. And as for the Dissenting Parliament, I
was as much against them as any, but I wondered that they did do no more, when
the late King said, He would Establish the Protestant Religion to the End of
the World; but they were so Factions they could not agree; for there was a Duke
stood in their Way; but did not we stand for Him, and overthrow all their
Doings? And did not we value the Kings Life (that now is) above our own: We
could not adhear to their fair Pretenses, to do Evil that Good might come of
it, neither to hurt Him in the least, but Trusted God with all; and if He was a
King (as He is) we would lie at His Mercy: And what made the Dissenters to be
so much against us, but because we were so much for His Majesty? And how dare
any to Abuse us? I have not Patience to bear it, for if I let it alone, the
very stones would speak in Vind^cation of U^. And as for the Parliament that
now is, it is a very Honest Parliament, and I Love them, and Wish them all
Well, and they are Knaves and Fools that speaks against them; for they have
Established the King in His Throne, and Bear down His Enemies, and have
Supplied His Wants; And what is it We have not done for our Sovereign? For we
Love Him above all things in this World, for we Acknowledge Him to be Christ's
Vicegerent, and therefore we own none (for our Governor on Earth) but He; and
I do not doubt but our Loyalty will out-doe all Upstart Loyalty: for ours does
not proceed from Shaftsbury, but it proceeds from God: Therefore the Church of
England needs not Change Her Loyalty, neither will the King doubt it; for He is
assured of Her Fidelity long ago, Therefore She need not Learn of Her Catholic
Neighbors, for she is able to Teach the World Loyalty to Princes. And as for
the Kings Persuasions, he has Manifested to the World, He is a Christian
Catholic, and no Roman Catholic; for he does not Tie up Conscience in such a
Narrow Compass, as to think none are Christians but those that owns Rome; and
He has declared, That it has always been His Opinion, and that His Majesty
calls God to Witness: And as for Your Complaint of King Charles I. That He
would not own nor Succor you; He is not to be blamed for that, for was not the
Factious Party so set against Him, that they were ready to devour Him for Your
sakes? And for Your Beast, That you Exposed your Lives and Fortunes in the
Kings Service, it would have been better for Him if you had not been so
forward; you say, You took great Pains in Persuading to Loyalty I do not know
what you did for the Father, but I am sure you did it not for the Son: And for
You to Examine the Behavior of the Church, Is it not known to the World that
they both Perished Together? And the Dissenters were in good hopes They should
never rise no more; but (contrary to all the Expectations of such as you) God
has given them A Blessed Resurrection: And who should His Sacred Majesty be
Kind to (when He Entered the Throne of His Brother) but the Church of England,
who stood ^n the Gap, when you did not dare ^o appear^? You say, The Kings
Promise did Elevate our Spirits; And well it might, for is not the Favor of a
King Life? And ^f we did Droop, it was not that we Feared our Prince, But Such
as You, as Counts Us Heretics: You say, It was never known that the King did
break his Word; but it is no God-a-mercy to you; and now You think you should
be Happy if the Test and Penal Laws were Taken Away, but I hope the King (...)
satisfy your Desires; for though His Majesty does not make use of them, They
may stand as Rods does upon Mantle-Trees, to keep Rebellious Children in
Subjection. What have you done for the King that He should so much admire you?
I am sure he has been a great Sufferer for you, and why should you Condemn the
Power of our Church for Chastizing Offenders, when God never Established a
Church without it; for did not God give the Children of Israel Laws in all
Things, and those that would not submit to them, was to be severely Punished;
and if any did secretly Entice to serve other Gods, They were to be stoned to
Death: And as for the Death of the Priests that you so much complain of, were
not the Laws of God and Man against Them? But what do you make so much
Complaint for, has not the King Pardoned every Body, that all should be Quiet?
And I would not have any one think that the Church of England is not worthy to
obtain the Affections of Her Sovereign, because she will not comply to you: For
God knows she is no Snake, and therefore the King may Trust her, and She needs
no New Article; and were not you ashamed to say, That One Article of Loyalty
was more than the Thirty Nine, You are a Goodly Christian: And as for Your
Parliament you boast on; That will not so easily Admit a New Article into Their
Creed: They may be such (for ought I know) that will not own any like them that
will own Christ within, but disobey Him in the Chief of His Commands: But is
this your Love? You ought rather to have studied the Peace of his Kingdoms, but
you would hurry all into Confusion, and then Laugh at us when you have done. Do
you think we value the King and Government at so small a Rate, as to resign up
our Interest to such as you? No, we value that above the World, and therefore
do not Condemn them that are not free to Abrogate the Test; for if they be, I
think they do not Love His Majesty, or is not willing to serve him; for the
Test is only an Assurance that they might Serve Him: and as long as They are
Just and Honest, I know none more fit; for they have been True to their King,
and I hope they will be so to their God, for I am sure Gods best Servants, are
the Kings Best Subjects: and as for Your Opinion which is Spread through
Christendom, Is no Argugument of the Truth of it; for Christ says, My Flock is
but a little one, and many are Called, but few are Chosen: And as for the
Corporal Presence of Christ, which you count is his Real Presence, is a Clear
Mistake to think that any of the Divines of the Reformed Church do own; for
Christ cannot eat Himself, but for His Divine Presence, God forbid any own
should disown; for Christ has promised, That where two or three were gathered
together, he would be in the midst of them, and how much more at the
Administration of His Blessed Sacrament, which Represents His Death. None
disowns, but that (by Faith) it is the Spiritual Body and Blood of Christ, but
as for His Natural Body it is in the Heavens, and there to be Reserved till the
Dissolution: Therefore It cannot be broken nor eaten. And as for the Gravity of
the Church of England: That She is fond of any New Point of Faith, and that you
say her own Children blames her. Alas, they do not understand the Subtilty of
the Spiritual and Temporal Adversary, for God would not allow a Similitude of
His own Presence, for God says, What will you liken me to? And when M^s^s Died,
did not God hide him, and was it not because the People was naturally Inclined
to Idolatry? And does He not fill the Heavens and the Earth, and is He not in
all Things else, and where was He before the Heavens were made? Is He not
Almighty, and His being is in Himself, and who can conceive Him? For when He
moves the Angels flee, and the Cherubims cover their Faces? For who is able to
behold His Glory? What then will become of sinful man, since God is so Glorious
that none can stand before him, if Christ had not took Humanity upon Him, and
thereby made us partakers of His Divine Nature, that we might be capable to
partake of His Glory, in his Eternal Kingdom? Therefore you that are Enemies to
Christ and his Saints, I would entreat you (if ever you intend to be happy) to
Repent, and do not be overmuch Conceited of Your Infallibillity; for you see
the Jews were Mistaken, and do you think to be more Infallible than they that
God planted with Miracles, which he never did yours? I know there is nothing
Infallible but God and His Eternal Word, and I do really believe the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against His True Church, but is it any Argument that you
must be that, because you have a Being in the World, and don't you know some
may Die and yet Live, and the Fallen Angels were not destroyed, for God
prepared a place for them; for there is nothing comes by Chance, for Gods
Providence takes Care of all, and God will be Glorified of all. Therefore I
would not have you to be deceived, but to Believe, for God tells you, That Soul
that sins shall die, he does not say, That he shall go into Purgatory, and that
some Men of your Order should Punish it, and when you think it is enough, a
good sum of Money will send it to Heaven. Does not this Rob God of His (...)
And whereas He has commanded, that there should be no other Gods (...)
Himself, does not it make many? For there is none has power over the Soul but
God, for is it not His own Breath? But pray tell me where this place is, and
which way they go to it, and who it is that keeps the List of every Man's sins?
For certainly you must send some Trusty Messenger that must bring the Last of
their Iniquities safe, for else every sin will not be punished, and how do you
know when they are, and who is he that can tell how many sins a man commits,
for they are very cunning and may not confess all? And there be some things
that Men count sin, which God may not, and some things which Men count not; how
can you distinguish. I am very Inquisitive to know because I loved my late
Sovereign, and I highly condemn you for your Unkindness, for if you had had any
Charity, you could not have let him staid so long; but I hope God will deliver
my Sovereign (that how is) that He shall never come under such Dominion. You
stole away my Sovereign, and yet are not you Contented? Methinks this should
have made you New Creatures, the Favor of such a Prince. But what disturbs you
that you should be so Angry with us? What does the Sun shine too bright upon
you? Or does God show you too much Favor? Or have you got the Nature of the
Fallen Angels, that did not know when they were Happy, or has Shaftsbury left
his Spirit for a Legacy, that you may carry on his Designs? Do not Disturb the
Kings Peace, but rest Contented, lest God Clips your Wings, and if you Fall, I
hope you will have no more Resurections in this part of the World. And tho
others may prompt you, to be an Enemy to the Church of England, yet their Fall
would be your Ruin. But God be Thanked we have no need to Fear, for the King
will not withdraw his Favor from us, neither shall Men or Devils prevent it.

And so GOD Save the KING.

