ERRATA.
PAge 10. l. 6. r. love of God. p. 23. l. 45. r. praerequiritur. p. 42. l. 19.
r. analogum. p. 47. l. 15, 16. r. where he says man has not causalitatem, p.
50. l. 32. r. indiguisset. p. 52. l. 23. fruitionis. p. 54. marg. l. 5. r.
infinitum. l. 17. r. ^re^tu^. p. 56. l. 39. r. patet. p. 5^. marg. l. 19. r.
libe^e. p. 61. l. ult. r. as already. p. 64. l. 6. r. added. l. 12. r. usual.
p. 68. l. 6. r. (...). p. 70. l. 13. r. is lapis p. 71.. 35. r. you spend. p.
72. l. 5, 21, 42. r. intension. l. 40. r. supplied. p. 73. l. 43. betwixt
length and there is insert, is a greater intension. p. 74. l 21. r. of. p. 75 l.
5. r. knev^. p. 77. l. 40. r. vel unum. l. 41. r. rationem marg. l. 7. r. actu.
l. 40. r. vel necessaria ^unt. p. 78. l. 26. r. confer. l. 39. r. a qua. l.
44. r. his. p. 81. l. 35. r. Monachis* ^b. r cap. 13. p. 82. l. 15. r. that a
Scholar. l. 24. r. rake. p. 83. l. 34. r. lavvfully. ^. 84. l. 11. r. appetitu.
l. 16. r. bear.

There are diverse other escapes, mispointings, mispellings, misaccentings, and
the like omitted, because they are so obvious that every ordinary Reader may
easily discern them, and so slight, as that every ingenuous Reader will
pardon them.

There were diverse pages in the Defendant misfigured, against which the Author
in his quotation of them had found an expedient; but the Printer not having
observed his direction, the matter is left to be rectified by the Reader
himself.

Dr. CREED'S Voluminous Defense OF Dr. HAMMOND'S KTENE'STEPON Briefly EXAMINED,
And The weakness thereof fully discovered.

By HENRY JEANES.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Brewster at the Sign of the Crane in Saint
Paul's-Church-yard, 1661.

Dr. CREED'S Defense OF Dr. HAMMOND'S KTENE' STEPON, EXAMINED.
I Shall premise three things touching this doughty Work of Dr. Creeds.

The first shall be, concerning the Insolent and Scurrilous Incivilities
wherewith it is every where fraught. And it is to acquaint the Reader, That I
shall not honor them so much as to take a distinct and particular notice of
them, for they are so gross, as that they carry their condemnation in their
forehead. Indeed I have not heard of any wise, sober and moderate man, though
of the Doctors persuasion in other particulars, that has made the least
Apology for them, when they have been told how he has in them trespassed
against all good manners. I shall therefore leave them unto his Romance^
Readers, who are so much taken with their gaudy language, and for the Meridian
of whose soft understandings they were especially calculated (...) and they
shall have my fair leave to make themselves as merry with them, as they please:
their mirth may stir my pity, but it shall have no influence upon either my
anger or envy.

The second shall be concerning the wonderful prolixity thereof, occasioned by
his frequent extravagancies or out leaps, his numerous, but impertinent
Qu^tations, his frivulous Objections, in all which should I follow him (...)
the bulk of my Book would be so swelled thereby as that all Readers would be
a^righted from the perusal thereof. In favor therefore to the Reader, I shall
pass by most of these with a just and deserved neglect, and select only such
passages to be examined, which those learned and judicious friends whom I have
consulted, have judged most material and important.

A third thing shall be concerning the sense of Doctor Hammond in the
controversy. He never affirms (says the Defendant) that the self same
numerical act of holy love in Christ was more intense at one time then at
another: but only that one act of his love of God compared with another, was
more high and intense then another. page 22, 23, 63, 64, 185. Unto this I shall
readily agree* neither know I any reason that he has to charge me for
dissenting herein.

About the state of the Question he objecteth, ( page 17, 47.) that the terms
of the Question are much altered from what they were at the first. Says he,
This Refuter charged the Doctor with a direct and flat denial of the
all-fulness of habitual grace in Christ, and now it is only by consequence. To
prove the notorious falsehood of this crimination, I shall only refer the
Reader unto page 258, 259. of my Mixture, for there he may see* (...) by sequel
I did deduce my charge from the Doctors words; and the validity of this
deduction I have made good against Doctor Hammond, and shall further clear
against this our Defendant, by discovering the vanity of all subterfuges, that
he has, to evade the force of my argumentation.

They are in number four.

When the Doctor says that the acts of Christ's love of God are ^^pable of
degrees, and sometimes more heightened, more ardent and intense then at other
times, or in other acts.

1. He speaks by a Metonymie of the effect, or Synecdoche generis, and not of
the love of God properly and formally taken.

2. He is not to be understood of those acts of love of God that are
immediately terminated on God the only good; but of those that are immediately
terminated on us men for God's sake.

3. By the actual love of God he understands (says he) not the action of
loving, but the term of that action, a quality produced thereby, which for want
of words is called love.

4. By the actual love of God he understands not that which agrees to him as
Compre^ensor, and was a sequel of the beatifical vision; but that which
belonged to him as he was V^ator, and arose from the infused knowledge of God,
and the infused habit of Divine charity.

Having thus propounded the evasions of the Defendant in General, I shall take
a distinct and several survey of them.

The first is page 5, 6, 217, 335, 336, 546. and it is, That when Doctor Hammond
says that the acts of Christ's love of God, or holy charity, are capable of
degrees's and sometimes more heightened, more ardent and intense then at other
times, or in other acts; he speaks by a Metonymie of the effect, or Synecdoche
generis, and not of the love of God properly and formally taken.

But that Dr. Hammond is to be understood of love properly and formally taken,
when he asserts a greater ardency in Christ's love of God at one time, then
another, is as clear as the Sun, from sect. 22. of his (...). For there he
says, that love as a genus is predicated of that love which he speaks of. Now
the genus is predicated properly and formally of it is species, for it is
predicated thereof in primo modo dicendi per se.

But perhaps you may say, that though the love which Dr. Hammond speaks of, be
love properly and formally taken, yet it is called the love of God only
tropically.

Unto this I Reply,

I. That Christ's love, which Dr. Hammond says, is capable of degrees, etc. is
that very love which is commanded Deuteronomy. 6.5. a love of God with all the soul,
heart, might, and strength, etc. and that is a love proper and peculiar unto
God, and not to be communicated unto any creature. And, pray Sir, is not this
that high, and transcendent act of Divine love you speak of page 5. whereby the
soul is immediately fixed, and knit to God as the only good? and then with
what face can you deny it to be the love of God properly and formally taken?
But however, the poor Refuter must be condemned lege falsarii ( page 5.) right
or wrong. For whereas Doctor Hammond spoke expressly of Christ's love of God,
the Refuter is so dull and simple an Animal, as to understand him of his love
of the Creator, whereas alas, Doctor Hammond had a profounder conceit, which is
highly rational in it self, and is to be interpreted concerning his love of the
Creature. And this is enough to clear me from the crime of Forgery, with which
this shameless Defendant asperseth me.

But his Calumny will be the more apparent if we insist upon those two Tropes,
One of which he says the Doctor makes use of.

The first is the Metonymie of the effect, and that is when the effect is put
for the efficient. Now do not you by your Discourse plainly insinuate, that the
efficient is here taken for the effect; the love of God, for the issues and
effects of the love of God. If there were then a Metonymie in Doctor Hammond's
words, it was by you a Metonymie of the efficient, and not of the effect. And
indeed you tell us, page 217. that all the acts of piety, and mercy, and
charity, and virtue, are called the love of God by a Metonymie of the
efficient, because they flow from it. And either this is a flat contradiction
to what you here say, or else the Metonymie of the efficient and of the effect
must be confounded, and be all one.

But secondly, Dr. Hammond does not make use of any Metonymie at all, either of
the efficient, or of the effect. For that which is termed the love of God only
Metonymically, is so called only equiv^cally* and that the love of God is here
taken by the Doctor, for that which is so styled only equivocally, you dare not
aver; for that which is predicated of a thing equivocally, may in propriety of
speech be denied of it: that which is the love of God only equivocally, may be
said not to be the love of God.

But you may perhaps say that he speaks, if not by a Metonymy of the effect,
yet by a Synecdoche generis.

But Synecdoche generis (as Vossius, Alsted and other Rhetoricians have taught
me) is when the genus is put for the species, as creature for man Mark 16.15.
But how the love of God is here by Dr. H. taken for any of its species, passes
my dull imagination. I shall not therefore adventure so much as to guess at
your meaning, but patiently wait for your own Learned Explication of it.

And thus the Reader sees, how this first Evasion, that Dr. Hammond speaks of
the love of God only as it is taken tropically, by a Metonymy of the Effect, or
by a Synecdoche generis, fails against both Logic and Rhet^rick.

But it may be objected, from page 6. That Christ's love of God which Dr.
Hammond speaks of, is his prayer unto God: now prayer is properly an act of
Religion and Devotion toward God; and improperly and figuratively an act of
holy Charity or divine Love.

For answer

1 Though Prayer considered formally in it self, be an act of divine Love only
improperly, and figuratively, yet it implies the love of God properly and
formally taken; and it is undeniable, that Dr. H. speaks of Prayer under this
consideration, as implying the love of God properly and formally such; for he
brings Christ's praying more earnestly, as a proof to make good his exposition
of those words, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, heart,
might and strength, where the love of God is taken properly and formally. Now
of this exposition it can be no confirmation, if the Doctor do not consider
Christ's prayer, as implying his love of God properly and formally taken.

Though Prayer considered formally in it self be not properly an act of divine
love, but only implyedly, viz. preposi^ive and concomitanter, yet the reason
which the Defendant brings for the confirmation of this, because it is properly
and formally an act of Religion, is very questionable. For

2 According to the language of Protestant Divines, one and the same Act may
properly be an act of both Religion and holy charity too; for they take
Religion in so large a sense, as that it comprehends all duties of he first
Table. Thus Ames makes all parts of Gods Worship both natural and instituted to
be parts of Religion. Now if this acception of Religion be proper, it will not
be material, though it be somewhat different from that of the Schoolmen.

2 But proceed we unto his Second Evasion, which differs little from the
former, if at all, but in terms, and it is concerning the acts of Christ's love
of God. These, says the Defendant, are of two sorts: 1 Those that are
immediately terminated on God the only good. 2 Those that are immediately
terminated on us men for Gods sake, in whose love as the prime act they are all
radicated and founded; the one the Schools call charitas ut finis; the other
they call charitas propter finem. Though then the acts of Christ's love, as
immediately terminated on God, were always at the height and one equal
perfection (as was never yet questioned or denied by the Doctor) yet this
nothing binders but that the other acts of this love (of which alone the Doctor
speaks) regarding us for Gods sake, might consist in a latitude, and gradually
differ from one another, and fall short of the fervor of those acts that
immediately respected God, etc. See page 3, 5, 22, 70, 71, 216, etc. usque ad
248, 279. usque ad 291, 328, 329, 335 336, 338, 343, 361, 372, 373, 516, etc.

Well then, the great mistake of the Refuter is, That whereas Dr. Hammond spoke
expressly of Christ's actual love of God the Creator, and yet meant thereby his
actual love of man a creature, the Refuter was such a dull Block-head, as not
to reach this hidden and invisible meaning of Dr. Hammond.

But first, if this were a mistake, it should not (me thinks) be so criminous
and unpardonable; For

First, The Refuter in his exposition of the actual love of God went by that
common rule, Analogum per se positum stat pro faviosiori analogato; If a word
has two significations, one proper, another improper and ^^opical, it must be
taken properly if it be put by it self and have nothing added to determine and
carry it unto an improper and tropical sense. Now the actual love of God is
taken properly only of those a^^s that are terminated immediately unto God, and
all those that are terminated unto us men for Gods sake, are termed the love of
God only improperly, and by a trope; and Dr. Hammond speaks absolutely of the
actual love of God, and has nothing to restrain his speech unto the latter
sort of acts; and therefore he is to be understood of the former, those that
ar^ immediately terminated on God.

Secondly, If this were a mistake, it had been an easy matter for Dr. Hammond
to have prevented it in his (...), by a clear and distinct explication of his
meaning: but he has not done this, and therefore if the Refuter be to be
blamed, Dr. Hammond cannot be altogether excused.

But I deny that I am guilty of any such mistake as is imputed to me. For that
Christ's actual love of God in Dr. Hammond cannot rationally be understood of
all those acts of love that were immediately terminated on us men, all duties
of the Second Table, etc. I shall prove by an Argument drawn from the Relation
that Dr. Hammonds discourse concerning Christ's actual love of God, etc. has to
the Commandment Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy (...),
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. It is brought as an
Exemplification and proof of his interpretation thereof; and therefore this
actual love of God in Christ, must be the same with that love of God which is
there commanded. Now that love of God which is there commanded, is that only
which is immediately terminated on God. For,

1. It must be with all the heart, soul, might, and strength: and the Acts of
love that are terminated unto the creature immediately, cannot be performed in
such an intension without gross and palpable Idolatry.

2. The love of God here commanded, is by our Savior himself distinguished
from the love of our neighbor, and of our selves, and consequently it is
restrained unto the love of God, which is terminated immediately upon God. Jesus
says, The great Commandment (...) the Law is, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, this is
the first and great Comman^ement; and the second is like unto it, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, Matthew. 22. verse. 36, 37, 38, 39. Here these two
Commandments, are the two Summaries of the Commandments of both Tables: And
seeing they are distinguished by our Savior himself, we must not make any
confusion betwixt them. But they are confounded when the duties of the second
Table, or this Commandment, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, are
ranged under the first Table; Or this Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, soul, might, and strength. Now those acts of
charity that are immediately terminated unto us men for Gods sake, are all
Duties of the second Table, and belong unto that Commandment, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self.

3. Unto this let me add a third Argument (which may be reduced unto the
first) taken from the second Part of Doctor Hammona's Exposition of the place,
and thus it stands; That act of the love of God which transcends all those acts
of love that are immediately terminated on the creature, is that high act of the
love of God, which is immediately fixed and terminated on God, as the only good.
But the act of the love of God which is commanded D^ut. 6.5. transcends all
those acts of love, which are immediately terminated on the creature: Therefore
it is that act of the love of God, which is terminated and fixed immediately on
God himself, as the only good.

The Major is undeniable, and if the Minor be not Doctor Hammond's own, let the
Defendant expound unto us these words of his, That Phrase thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul; denotes secondly, the
loving him above all other things, and not admitting any thing into competition
with him, not (...) any thing else in such a degree.

This argument may briefly be thus also varied. No acts of the love of God,
that are superior unto those that are immediately terminated on us men for
God's sake, can be those very acts that are immediately terminated on us men
for God's sake; for one and the same thing cannot be superior unto it self.
But those acts of the love of God that are commanded Deuteronomy. 6.5. are superior
unto those that are immediately terminated on us men for God's sake, and so
much is evident by Dr. Hammond's exposition of the place: And therefore those
acts of the love of God, that are commanded D^ut. 6.5. are not those that are
immediately terminated on us men for God's sake.

But suppose that Dr. Hammond spoke of those acts of holy charity that are
terminated on us men for Gods sake: yet by what the Defendant says, it will be
no injustice to think, that he speaks of those act^s under this reduplication,
as terminated immediately on God himself. For by the Defendants opinion, page
234, 235 holy charity and it is acts, are terminated unto us mea for God's sake,
only as a material object, and unto God's infinite goodnss alone, as the
formal object. Now things are rather denominated from that which agrees unto
them formally, then from that which is ascribed unto them only materially, for
d^n^minatio fit a pottori. Now those acts of charity that are terminated unto
us men, considered as terminated on God as their formal object, ought to be in
all, and were in Christ always at the height, and one equal perfection.

Our Defendant himself confesses, page 217. that to English ears, this ph^ase,
the love of God, seems especially to import the prime and more principal love
that has God for its immediate Object: but then withal he adds, that in
Scripture phrase it frequently does not.

The first place he quotes, is Luke 11.42. Woe unto you Pharise^^, (says our
Savior) for ye tithe mint, and rue, and all manner of h^rbs, and pass over
judgment, and the love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave
the other undone. But this place he confesses to be otherwise expounded by
diverse, and we have (says he) no need of doubtful places. But it is without
doubt, that the love of God is not there taken in such a latitude o^ amplitude,
as to contain the whole duty of man toward God and our neighbor: for it is
distinguished from judgment, and that compriseth, if not all, yet a great part
of our duty toward our neighbor.

But the Defendant in the next place alleges instances out of the first
Epistle of St. John, that are (he says) beyond all exception.

The first instance is 1 John 2.5. But who so keeps his word, in him verily
is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him. But to prove
the impertinency of this place, we need go no further then Dr. Hammond's
Pa^aphrase of it. But the observing his commands, is the only sure argument,
that he that does so, is a perfect lover of God, truly so called (the
appellation being falsely assumed by the Gnostics) and an argument of evidence
to himself, that be is a branch, a member of Christ, as the Gnostics boast
that they are, and that whatsoever they do, it cannot make them cease to be so.
The observing of God's commandments is an argument of the perfect love of God,
but it does not therefore follow, that it is the love of God it self.

The two next places, the 1 John 3.17. 1 John 4.20 every rational Reader will
judge wide from the mark. For the utmost that can be gathered from them is,
that the love of God is inseparably connexed with the love of our Neighbor,
and has an influence or impery upon the acts thereof. But what is all this
unto the purpose?

The last place the 1 John 5.3. may perhaps be thought to have some color of
an Argument, For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments.

Here it is plain, that the Apostles speech is to be understood Metonymically,
and the meaning of it is, that the love of God is the cause of the keeping his
commandments, and the keeping of God's commandments i^ an inseparable effect,
or fruit of the love of God. This meaning of the place is excellently laid down
by Estius; Sensus idcirco adjec^ de mandatis ejus servandis: quia diligere
Deum, per consequentiae ratione^^ est mandata ejus servare. Charitas si quidem
erga Deum, ait Cajetanus, ratio est servandi mandata ejus. Unde quamvis
praeceptum diligendi Deum, ab aliis ^^us praeceptis diversum sit: quicun^ue
tamen boc dilectionis servat praeceptum, ex ca dil^ctione ettam caetera Det
praecepta servat, ut quorum obs^rvatio ex dilectione Dei nec^ssario dep^ndeat,
ac sequatur tanquam effectus ex propria causa. Quod etiam significant illa
Ch^^sti verba J^an. 14. Qut babet mandata mea, and servat ea: ille est qui
diligit m^. Et iterum: Si quis diligit me: sermonem meum servabit. Et ca. 15.
Ves ami^s met estis, sifeceritis quae ego praecipio vobis. Simile est buit loco
qued supra capite ^. dixit Joannes: Qui servat verbum ejus: v^e in boc charitas
D^i perfecta est. By what has been said, the Reader may perhaps think that
this place seems to be very advantageous for the Defendants turn.

But upon more serious consideration it will be found to do him no service at
all: For,

First, though there be a Metonymy in the Apostles words, yet it lies not in
the love of God: the Metonymy is in the praedicate, and not in the subject of
the Proposition; and the love of God is the subject of the Proposition, as is
evident from the prefixing of the Greek art^cle (...), and there is nothing
hind^eth, but that it may be taken in the greatest propriety, only the
praedicate (this, that we keep the commandments of God) is affirmed of it
Metonymically.

Secondly, it is plain, that in S. John's words there is a causal predication
Praedicatio impropria ca^salis est, qua unum extremum alteri ad ejus causam
designandam n^n repugnante loqu^^di consuetudine conjungitur, e.g. Ira est
fervor sanguinis circa cor, est oration vera sensu causali. Nee ^nim ira, quae
est affectio auimi, proprie loquendo est servor seu ebullitio, sed existit ex
illa ebullitione, and ebullitio illa existit ex ira, sed diversa respectu. Huc
reser and illa: hic bolus est mihi mors, boc est mortifer. Alsted.
for the love of God is the keeping of his Commandments, not formally, but
causally, that is, it is the cause of keeping Gods Commandments. Now every one
knows, that in a causal predication there is ever a Metonymy of either the
efficient or effect. But no^ in th^s proposition, one act of Christ's love of
God was more intense then another, which the Defendant confesses to be the
sense of Doctor Ha^mond; there is no causal predication, nor any footsteps of
any other argument, from which a man may Logically conclude a Metonymy.

Nay, thirdly, if any Argument can be drawn from coherence, it is (as I have
already shown) evident that Dr. Hammond cannot be understood of the love of
God in a Metonymical acception, for he speaks of the same love of God that is
commanded, Deuteronomy. 6.5. and that is undeniably the love of God properly taken.

In the next place, page 219, 220, etc. Usque ad 227. the Defendant
endeavouresh to prove by arguments from the Doctors writings, that he takes the
love of God in such a large sense, as to take in all duties to our neighbor.
The weakness of which arguments it were an easy matter to discover, if it were
worth the while: but indeed we may justly despise them, for it being cleared
that Dr. Hammond cannot rationally be understood of any other love of God, but
that which is immediately terminated on God himself; if they prove any thing
they will conclude that the Dr. contradicts himself, and that is a matter
wherein I that am none of his Idolaters, am no ways concerned.

Once it is very apparent, that this large acception of the love of God^s very
Catachrestical, for according to it, the lowest and meanest acts of both
Charity and Justice toward our neighbor (even the Hangmans conscientious
performance of his Office) may be termed the love of God: and most men would
judge this to be an unsavory expression; it would sound very harshly unto not
only English but all Christian ears. And whether so harsh a Catachresis be to
be tolerated in Controversal writings may justly be doubted. If Dr. Hammonds
cause then cannot be upheld, but by flying unto such a Catachrestical and
abusive acception of the love of God, it is a shrewd sign, that it is in a very
tottering, if not desperate condition.

From what has been said, the Reader may furnish himself with an answer unto
the greatest part of the book: But more particularly unto two of those
arguments, which the Defendant brings to make good this affection, that there
is and must be in Christ, a gradual difference in respect of the several acts
of the habit of the love of God. As for the third argument, p. 244. the
confirmation of it may more fitly be referred unto a more proper place.

The first argument he prosecutes from p. 227 usque ad 236. and it is by him
thus summed up, p. 227, 228. Where there is, and of necessity must be, a
gradual difference, and more in respect of the goodness of the Objects of the
habit of charity, or the law of God, there is, and of necessity there must be,
also a gradual difference in respect of the several acts of this habit of
charity, or the love of God. But there is and must be a grad^al difference, and
more in respect of the goodness of the objects of the hab^t of charity, or the
love of God in Christ. Therefore there is, and must be, a gradual difference in
respect of the several acts of this habit of charity, or the love of God in
Christ.

In the Argument there is committed that fallacy which is termed fallacia
ignorationis Elenchi; for, the conclusion takes the acts of the love of God in
Christ in such a latitude, as to comprehend those acts of love which were
terminated unto man: Whereas Dr. H. and the Refuter are to be understood (as
has been shown) only concerning those acts of the love of God, which are
terminated on God himself: and between these there is no gradual difference,
for they have one Object alone, Gods infinite goodness in himself.

Unto this we may add ex abundanti unto the Minor, that the pretended
difference betwixt the Objects of the love of God in Christ, is by the
Defendants opinion, only as touching the material objects thereof, for the
formal object or reason is asserted by him to be still one and the same; and
hereupon 'twill follow, that the acts of Christ's love of God are formally the
same, and consequently the acts of this love which have their specification
from their objects, are, by his opinion, formally the same too; and the formal
consideration of things is chiefest and most to be heeded.

These answers might easily have been foreseen, but instead of them the
Defendant falls to his conjectures, p. 232, 233. There can (says he) be but
two things possible (as far as I can foresee) returned in answer to this
discourse. First, that it is not one and the same habit of charity, whereby we
love* God and our neighb^us a^ our selves; and and therefore as the precepts
are several, so the objects are diverse, and the affections of the soul, that
carry it on to the love of God, and our neighbor, are as different as the
Objects themselves are. And therefore though it be granted that the several
acts that flow from these severally distinct habits, do gradually differ in
themselves in respect of intenseness, according to the gradual distance of
goodness in the object; yet it follows not, that therefore the acts of one and
altogether the same habit, of charity and holy love, do gradually differ^ also;
which was the thing to be proved.

Secondly, Though it were granted, that the h^bit of charity and holy love to
God, and our neighbors, be one and the same habit, yet a gradual difference in
the goodness of the objects of this love will not argue a gradual difference of
intenseness in the inward acts of this love, but only in the outward acts and
expressions.

These answers are none of mine, but the groundless sictions of the Defendant,
and therefore I may justly pass them over in filence.

But yet unto the first I shall say something, because it affords occasion of
some discourse that may be acceptable unto the Reader.

First, Scotus resolves indeed, with Aquinas, that eodem habitu diligimus Deum,
and proximum; but then scripto Parisiensi in 3um. sent. did. 28. he determ^ues
that diligere proximum is velle eum condiligere D^um. Dico, quod eodem habitu
diligimus Deum and proximum, quia eodem actu volo vel diligo Deum in se, and
volo proximum Deum in se diligere, perfect autem amans, dilectum vult diligi,
and Deus, qui est bonum commune non vult esse bonum particulare, ideo habens
habitum talem, cujus actus praecipitur in communi, quod possibile est fieri,
potest diligere Deum, and proximum velle Deum diligere, quia eodem habitu
possum tendere in objectum, and reflecti super illud, ergo eadem charitate
possum diligere Deum, and velle proximum diligere Deum: and hoc est diligere
proximum, quod est respectu honesti. Quod probatur ex bo^, quod ista duo, sc.
alquid velle, and diligere, sunt ejusdem rationis. To love our Neighbor, is to
will, that together with us he should love God. Scotus then does not take the
love of our Neighbor in such a latitude as the Defendant, but far more
restrainedly.

Secondly, If Aquinas his opinion be, that the habitual love of God, and the
habitual love of our neighbor be one simple and indivisible habit, one specie
infima, then his opinion may be impugned by two arguments, in the solution of
which the Defendant may do well to take some pains.

The I. argument is because the habitual love of God is or ought to be more
intense then the habitual love of our Neighbor: and this inequality is an
argument of a real essential, and consequently specifical disti^ction. For it
cannot be numerical, because duo accidentia, numero tantum diversa, non possunt
esse in eodem subjecto simul.

Secondly, If the habitual love of God, and the habitual love of out Neighbor
were one and the same specifically, then the acts of love that are terminated
to our Neighbor, all Duties of the Second Table would be elicite acts of the
habitual love of God; whereas it is evident, they are only imperate acts
thereof.

But the Defendant objects, page 233, 234. That God and our Neighbor, are
beloved for one and the same formal reason or object, and therefore the habit
of Divine love toward them must be one and the same.

Unto this it may be answered.

First, That the love of God, and the love of our Neighbor, have one formal
ultimate object or motive: Yet their formal immediate objects may be different.
The formal object or motive of our love of God is his infinite Goodness,
considered as it is in himself, and the immediate formal object of our love of
our Neighbor, is the Goodness of God commu^ cated unto, and shining in, our
Neighbor.

Secondly, though the formal object be one and the same, yet the application
thereof, and the way of tendeney thereunto, is far different. For it is applied
unto God intrinsecally, unto our Neighbor extrinsecally: Unto God as the end,
unto our Neighbor as the means. And therefore our love of God is called
Charitas finis, and the love of our Neighbor Charitas propter finem. To clear
this, I shall quote the words of Suarez, Metaph. disp. 44 sect. 11, n 30.
Advertendum est in omni habitu dari ex part objecti aliquam rationem tendendi
in illud, quam motivum operandi possumus appellare, etc. habitus antem
voluatatis tendunt ad prosequ^ndum aliquod bonum: omais autem prose^utio boni
est ex aliquo motivo, seu ex aliqud ratione boaitatis, quae voluntatem
attrahit. Hoc ergo motivum seu rati^ tendendi, est absque dubio, quae dat actui
specificam rationem, quae eadem erit, si aequaliter aut eodem modo per actus
attingatur: quia semper id, quod est sermale, est quod dat spectem: materiale
autem est quasi per accidens, vel individuale, respectu talis actus. Dic^
autem, si aequaliter vel eodem modo talem rationem tendat, nam contingit (...)
and eandem rationem tendendi non aeque applicari diversis materiis, and ideo
non eodem modo attingi per actus. ut ect, v. g. bonitas divina quatenus est in
Deo, and reddit illum amabilem, vel quatenus per quendam respectum applicatur
proximo, ut illum etiam amabilem reddat. Nam licet illa bonitas in se una sit,
non tamen ill is rebus aeque conve^t: and ideo modus tendendi in illan non est
idem. Et idem est universum de bonicate finis, respectu ipsius finis, and
respectu mediorum, and de similibus, in quibus ratio tendendi alteri
intr^as^ce, altis vero extrinsece applicatur. I confess Suarez holds, that the
habitual love of God and the habitual love of our Neighbor are but one
indivisible habit. But this is no hinderance, but that we may make use of his
words against himself; and the rather, because what afterward may be picked
out of him in answer hereunto, is very unsatisfying: The utmost that he says
is, that there is a necessary sonnexion betwixt the acts of the love of God,
and the love of our neighbor; he says the same of other acts, But this
connection of the acts, does not prove an unity of the habits. The habits may be
connexed as well as the acts; and connection, if it be real, implies a real
distinction. And it is very observable, that Suarez himself infers from the
connection of acts only a possibility, not a necessity of the unity of the
habit* Tandem, quando actus ipsi sunt inter se connexi, and quasi radicati in
aliquo primo, tunc etiam possunt habere similem connexionem, saltem virtualem,
in ipso habitu: ergo quantum est ex hoc capite, si aliud non obstet, poterit
idem indivisibilis babitus esse principium hujusmedi actuum. Disp. and sect.
praedict. n. 32. But I shall not pertinacio^sly contend about this matter, but
leave it to the judgment of the learned Reader.

Here I shall digress a little from the Defendant, to consider the opinion of
some Schoolmen, who maintain, that it is always one and the savie act whereby
God and our Neighbor are loved: and they have of it a pretty illustcation,
from their tenet of Image Worship. Look (say they) as an Image and its
Prototype are worshipped with one and the same worship, so God and our
Neighbor are loved with one and the same act of love.

But the real distinction of the acts of the love of God and the love of our
Neighbor, I shall prove from four Arguments.

1. From their separability: there may be an actual love of God, when at the
same time there is not an actual love of our Neighbor. And so again on the
other side, there may be an actual love of our Neighbor, when at the same time
there is only virtual or habitual love of God: For at the same time there may
not be any actual cogitation of God. Now things that may really be separated,
are q^estionless really distinguished.

2. From their inequality: The love of God ought to be more intense then the
love of our Neighbor, (for it is to be with all the soul, heart, might and
st^ength) and therefore it is really distinguished therefrom.

3. From the dependency of the love of our Neighbor upon the love of God: The
actual love of God is the efficient cause of the actual love of our Neighbor,
and the efficient and the effect are always really distinguished.

4. From this may be drawn another Argument, proceeding from the posteriority
of the actual love of our Neighbor, unto our actual love of God: For being the
effect thereof, it must needs be after it, and that really a part rei, and not
only in regard of our consideration. Now this is an evidence of the real
distinction of these acts; for if they were one and the same act really, then
one and the same thing should be really both before and after it self: which is
a manifest contradiction.

But I return unto our Defendant, and unto his second Argument, which he
pursues very copiously p. 236, etc. usque ad 244. The sum of it is this, There
are not only perfect and effectual, but also imperfect, conditionate, and
uneffectual acts of Christ's will, and those are gradually distinguished from
these, etc.

But what of all this? it will not therefore follow, that one act of Christ's
love of God is more intense then another act, unless you can prove, that these
imperfect and uneffectual acts of Christ's will, are elicite, proper and formal
acts of his love of God. This is a thing that you all along presuppose, but
have not proved, nor never can prove. Not only Scholastical D^vines, but all
that have any moderate insight into Practi^al Divinity will tell you, Master
Defendant, that to say that Christ's actual love of God is imperfect,
uneffectual, conditionate, is an ignorant, gross, and very lewd blaspbemy.

I shall but remark two things more, touching this second Evasion of the
Defendant, and then proceed unto a third.

First, Christ's actual love of God, which Dr. Hammond speaks of, is not (says
the Defendant) frequently the action of loving, but a term produced thereby:
and yet he says p. 70. that the acts of Christ's love of God, are some of them
terminated immediately on God, and others of them on us men, etc. By this then
it seems that the supposed utmost term of the action of loving in Christ, is
terminated further unto another term, if not effective, yet objective. Now this
is a very deep subtilty the clear explication and confirmation of which, we
shall justly expect from the Defendant.

2. The Defendant grants, that the outward expressions of love, are not love it
self, and wonders that I can be so uncharitable, as to think that Dr. Hammod
was a man of so shallow and slendor parts, as to take the outward expressions
of love for love it self, page 84, 90, 95. And yet he tells us, that Dr.
Hammond takes Christ's actual love of God, in such a latitude or amplitude, as
that it contains the whole duty of man toward God and our Neighbor,
whatsoever is good and excellent in him, page 216, 219, etc. Now the outward
expressions of the love of God, are a part of man's duty, and therefore, by the
Defendant, are the love of God in Dr. Hammona's sense of the word. How the
Defendant will reconcile this, the event will show.

But go we on unto the third Evasion of the Defendant. He distinguishes of a
twofold actual love; 1. the action of loving; 2. the term of that action, a
quality produced thereby, which for want of words is called love. Now Dr.
Hammond (he says) is to be understood of the latter, the term, and not of the
former, the action of loving. p. 21, 22, 25, etc. usque ad 42, 73, 74, 75, 76,
77, 115, 116, 117, 118, 120, 121, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 211, 212,
113, 214.

But first suppose, though not grant, that there were such a term of the
immanent action of loving, yet this cannot be the actual Divine love which Dr.
H. speaks of. For,

1. The actual love which he speaks of, is the matter of that Commandment,
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, etc. Now that
the supposed term of the immanent action of love is not in any probability. For,

1. That is most likely to be the matter of this precept, whose being is most
undeniable, and uncontroverted: but the existence of immanent actions is less
questioned, then that of their terms. The existence of these has been much
questioned by many subtle Philosophers; and setting aside Philosophers, the
most of men never so much as d^camt of them. Take ten rational and knowing men
that never heard of this Question, An omnis actio habeat terminum? and demand
of them, whether they think, that by the immanent actions of their senses,
their understandings, and wills, they preduce within themselves certain
qualities of the same name with the actions themselves? and I am confident that
most, if not all of them, will return a negative answer.

2. The matter of this precept, is of a very important, general, an necessary
obligation: and therefore it must be obvious and evident unt all that have the
use of their reason, so that the knowledge of it ma be gained without any great
difficulty, but now the pretended term of the action of loving, is a very dark
and abstruse thing, and it will be a very difficult matter to make unlearned
men understand it: Nay I believe many great Scholars are yet strangers to what
the Schoolmen say about the nature of it.

3. We may and ought to examine the sincerity of that love of God in us which
is commanded Deuteronomy. 6.5. But it would be new Divinity, to say that we are to
examine the terms of the immanent actions of divine love, whether they be in us
or no: men may with some certainty review, and reflect upon the habit of love,
and the immanent actions thereof; but their reslex knowledge of the terms
thereof, can be but conjectural.

2. The Love of which Dr. Hammond speaks, is, by the Defendant, such wherein
there is exercised that freedom of the will, which is usually called a
freedom of indifferency: But there is no freedom of the will exercised, in
the supposed terms of the immanent action; for they presupposing the actions,
are supposed to be necessary and unavoidable, and therefore the will has no
indifferency unto them: the will indeed is a free cause of the action of
loving; but this action, if it be the cause of a term, it is the natural and
necessary cause thereof.

3. The Term of the immanent action of loving is called love, says the
Defendant, for want of sufficient words: but to affirm this of that actual love
which Dr. Hammond speaks of, is very very ridiculous. For of that love (says
he) love is predicated as a genus; and so in primo mod^ dicendi per se: the
love therefore that Dr. Hammond meant, cannot be the term of the immanent
action of loving.

But secondly, It is denied also by many great both Philosophers and Divines,
that there is any such term as the immanent action of loving: and they say the
same of all other immanent actions. Indeed our Defendant takes notice of no
Diffenters, but my self and my poor Master Scheibler. But this bewrayes his
gross ignorance in the Schoolmen, many of whom lead the way unto Scheibler
into this his opinion, and go herein a great deal farther then he. Durand is
very express for it, Lib. 1. did. 27. q. 2. Capreolus l. 1. did. 27. q. 2.
quotes also Aureolus, Petrus de Pallude, Gerar. de Carm^lo, as of the same
judgment unto these I may add Scotus upon the same Did. quaest. 3. and two
Eminent Scotists, Philip. Faber Fav^ntinus, lib. 1. disp. 21. and Reda l. 1.
Controvers. 7. represent this to be the Common opinion of the followers of
Scotus. Unto all these let me farther subjoyn Raphel Aversa Philos. tom. 2. q.
58. Sect. 3. And Franciscus bonae spei in lib. de anima. Disp. 2. dub. 3. who
mentions others of the same persuasion. Oviedo though he blame Cajetan, and
other Thomists, for denying actual intellection to have a term, because every
action he thinks is productive of some term or other, yet he thinks this
opinion may be so interpreted, as to be drawn into a good sense; and that is
done (he supposes) by making the term not to be really distinct, but the same
with actual intellection. Haec opinio jure ab omnibus rejecta, si loquendi
modum attemperaret, mea quidem sententia optime posset defendi. Existimo enim
tantum in modo loquendi discedere a sententia, quam post a omnibus praeferam,
asserente intellectionem consistere in qualitate immediate per se-ipsam nulla
interjecta action a principio dimanaute, vel in action identificata cum
termino, quod sic ostendo: utraque opinio constituit intellectionem in entitate
quadam immediate ab intellectu dimanan^e per suammet entitatem, ex vi cujus
intellectus in actu secundo constituitur formaliter intelligens: Ergo tantum
differunt hae duae opiniones, ex ^o quod una entitatem hanc essentialiter per
suam entitatem ab intellectu dependentem, and nullum distinctum terminum
respicientem vocat actionem sine termino; and altera ^andemmet entitatem vocat
actionem ^um termino identificatam. Neutra ^nim barum opinionum novam
formalitatem concedit, vel negat, quam altera opinio diverso modo de^endat. De
anima Controv. 6. punct. 1. S. 1. It were an easy matter to produce many other
testimonies: But the matter must not be carried by the number of voices, but by
the weight of Arguments. And therefore I shall next propound the Arguments on
both sides.

The Arguments for the Negative may be ranged into two sorts, the first prove
that some immanent actions have no terms; the second, that no immanent actions
have any term.

The 1. That some immanent actions have no terms. Cajetan, as it is said,
determines that intuitive intellections have no term and such are the
Beatifical Vision of the Saints in Heaven, the Angels intuitions of themselves.
And the reason which he gives is, Because the Objects of such intellections
are per se present unto them, and intimately conjoined with them.

But omitting Cajetan, I shall insist only upon the Arguments of Scheibter,
which I referred unto in my refutation of Dr. Hammond's (...). The Defendant is
pleased in derision to call him my Master: But where the wit of the Sarcasme
lies, is best, if not only known unto himself. If his meaning be, that I have
no Metaphysics but what I learned from him, unto this I shall make no
Apology: though he in his Epistle Dedicatory, vain gloriously boasts of his
Rhetoric, yet I am not so foolish as to say any thing of my Metaphysics. But
if he mean that Scheibler is but a poor and sorry Master, one that can teach me
but little in Metaphysical Learning, a vulgar Author, one too low for Doctor H.
to consult, page 26. One that first lighted his candle at the taper of Suarez,
p. 119 I shall then refer the Reader unto Dr. Barlow his Epistle prefixed unto
Scheibler's Metaphysics, and by that the Reader will be satisfied touching the
falsehood, pride, and immodesty of this censure. But proceed we unto Scheiblers
Argument. Metaph. lib. 2. cap. 10. n. 30. Quod non omnes actus imman^ntes
habeant terminos, patet. Quia secus omnes actus immanentes essent (...), sive
effectivi. Per terminum enim nunc ille intelligitur qui per actionem
producitur. At actio postquam ^lind relinquitur (...) est, sive effectrix.
Absurdum autem est omnes actiones esse (...), ut saltem patet ex discrimine
artis, and prudentiae apud Arist^t. l. 6. E^thic. quae per agere and facere
a^stinguuntur. Et confirmatur: quod nullus possit dari terminus, qui producatur
per actiones aliquas immanentes. Quid enim producit, v. g. intellectio vel
visio. Nihil hic dici specio^e potest, quam quod per istos actus producatur
notitia habitualis. Sed haec imprimis per accidens est ad actus illos, ut hic
etiam fatetur Suarez d. l. ali^que. The Argument reduced unto form stands
thus.

If every immanent action be productive of a term, or work, then every immanent
action is poieticall or effective.

But some immanent actions are not poietical or effective:

Therefore some immanent actions are not productive of any term or work.

The sequel of the Major may be confirmed from this, because (...) or effectio
is nothing else but the production of some term or work.

If it be objected that effection is properly only in an external matter,
efficere ea proprie dicimur, quae extra edimus: Unto this you may have an
answer in Scheibler's introduction to Logic, cap. 1. n. 33. where he shows
this to be false. For there be, as he there declares, internal as well as
external effections, as the making of a Syllogism in the mind; and we may say
the same of definitions, divisions, and propositions. Falsum est, inquit, quod
dicitur: Ea tantum proprie effici, quae extra eduntur. Nam effectio est omnis
ista operatio, ad quam opu^ sequitur, sive extra nos, sive intra nos sit; atque
sic factio syllogismi, etsi in mente nostra enni formamus, est revera effectio.
Probatur: omnis nostra erudita operatio est vel speculatio, vel praxis, vel
(...) hoc est effectio. At factio Syllogismi non est speculatio, (haec enim
tantum est secundum habitus speculativos.) Nec praxis, haec enim tantum fit per
directionem rationis factam secundum prudentiam, vel virtutem moralem, Ergo est
Effectio. With Scheibler all those concur, that make Ars to be the genus of
Logic, for they say, that the effection, which is proper unto ars, may be, and
often is in an internal, as well as in an external matter. So Doctor Saunderson
in his first Appendix De usu Logicae page 309. Effectio, quae est propria artis
operatio, non minus est in materia interna, quam externa. Thus the Major is
sufficiently fortified by comparison of Scheiblty's Metaphysics, with his
Logic.

As for the Miner, Scheibler confirms it from the difference which Aristot. 6.
Ethic. makes betwixt prudentia and ars, which are there distinguished by agere
and facere or efficere. Prudentia est habitus cum recta ratione activus. Ars
est habitus cum recta ratione effectivus, or factivus. Actions then strictly so
called, moral actions, are not effections.

But the Defendant says, that the sequel is very infirm, and most evidently
false, page 28.

And why so I pray?

Why first, it is not true of all transient actions, that their terms must
remain after the action is ended, etc.

And secondly, it is not true of all actions that are artificial, and so
confessedly poietical, that their terms and work do remain after the action is
past, as appears in the artificial actions of singing, and playing on the Lute,
and other musical Instruments: and this (says he) is sufficient to prove the
inconsequence of his argument, and the weakness of whatsoever proof the Refuter
shall draw from it. p. 29.

Any rational by-stander must needs here wonder at the Defendants confidence,
that I give it not another name. For all this nothing infringeth the
consequence of the forementioned Syllogism: To manifest which, I shall reduce
it unto a Categorical Syllogism, by due change of the Major.

Every immanent action productive of a term or work is effective or poietical.

But some immanent actions are not effective or poietical.

Therefore some immanent actions are not productive of a term or work.

Now, Sir, apply what you say unto the Major, and you will find that it no way
opposes it. There be (you say) some transient actions which have terms that
are not permanent or lasting after the actions are ended; therefore every
immanent action productive of a term is not effective or poietical. A most rare
and excellent consequence, which follows a baculo ad angulum.

And your next is of the like, that is, no force. There be some artificial
actions which are confessedly poietical, whose terms or works do not remain
after the actions are past: as appears in the artificial actions of singing,
and playing on the Lute. Therefore every immanent action productive of a term,
is not effective or poietical. The Reader by this may see, that the Argument
stands unshakeable in it self, notwithstanding all the opposition of this
daring Defendant.

But I perceive he catches at an incommodious expression, in his proposal of
the Argument, and in his Answer to the first reason of Suarez. In the Argument
he says, Actio post-quam aliud relinquitur, (...), est, sive effectrix. And in
his Answer to the first Objection of Suarez, he says, Non omnis causalitas est
per m^dum productionis proprie, and rigeroses per quam, sc. producatur aliquid
post actionens remanens. From these passages I believe it is that our Defendant
thinks that Scheibler's opinion is, that (...) or effection is only such an
action, whose term or work remains after the action it past and ended. Indeed
if this were Scheibler's opinion, there were good reason for the denial of the
sequel of his Argument. But this opinion cannot reasonably be fastened on him.
For the instance which he gives of an effection, in the preceding number, is
the making of a Syllogism in the mind; and a Syllogism has no existence in the
mind after it is made, or longer then it is making. As for the two passages but
now mentioned, a favorable interpretation may be made of them. A term or work
may be said to remain after the action is past in order of nature, or in order
of time: Now the term of immanent actions remain after their effection, in
order of nature, not time. And that permansion or remaining may have such a
sense, may be gathered from another place in Schiebler, lib. 1. Metaph. c.16.
n.17. Nihilominus si subtiliter intueamur hanc rem, videtur etiam in unico
momento esse qualiscunque permansio. Momentum enim dicitur per defectum
successionis temporalis, unde in codem momento potest adhuc relinqui successio
secundum prius and posterius naturae. Veluti in codem momento simul sunt forma,
and res formata, ut sol, and illuminatio, sive lumen. Vide de his naturae
instantibus distinctis, in codem momento. Conim. l. 4. Phys. cap. 14. q. 3. a.
2. Atque sic etiam relinquitur, in tali momento, successio qualiscunque, ut non
sit prorsus repugnans, durationem and proinde permansionem tribuere enti
instantanco.

But our Defendant says, that this of Scheibler is an utter impertinency unto
the matter in hand. But now how these assertions (says he) if all were granted
[and these are two of these assertions, Actiones immanentes aliquae non habent
terminum: Actio ut sic non dicit respectum ad terminum] can any ways advantage
the Refuters present Argument, I leave any man to judge. For Scheibler expressly
asserts, that as some immanent actions have no terms, so others of them have;
and he proves it by an instance borrowed from Julius Scaliger against Cardan.
Exercit. 307. sect. 28. and Exercit. 1. sect. 3. Now to prove that nulla actio
immanens habet terminum (which must be the Refuters proposition, if he speak
any thing to the purpose; (for how else will he prove that the immanent acts of
love have no term by this medium?) by this assertion of Scheibler, that speaks
only of some such, and proves the contrary of others, will be impossible, till
he can show us a new Mood and Figure to prove an universal by a particular.

Here I must desire the Defendant to awake, and to consider, that I propounded
an Objection, that omnis actio habet terminum, unto which I oppose Scheibler,
asserting and proving that some immanent actions have no term. Now this
particular negative proposition made good, Some immanent actions have no terms,
is a full, home, and sufficient disproof of the universal proposition objected,
Omnis actio habet terminum, because it is contradictory thereunto. For of
contradictory Propositions, that which is true overthrows the other, because
it is impossible that both contradictory propositions, should be both either
true or false.

But go we on unto a second fort of Arguments, the Arguments of those who hold
that no immanent actions whatsoever have terms.

1. They all unanimously allege the testimony of Aristotle, l. 9. Metaph.
text. 16. Ubi distinguens actionem immanentem a transeunte, a^t illum distingui
ab ista, quia haec habet aliquid operatum pe^ ipsum tanquam terminum, illa
vero, scillcet immanens nullum habet operatum. The words of Aristotle by Kada
are thus rendered. In quibus igitur aliud quippiam est, quod sit praeter usum
little, eorum actus in eo, quod efficitur ^^est, qualis est aedificatio, atque
actus texendi, illa enim in eo, quod aedifcatur, hic in eo, quod texitur inest.
In quibus autem praeter actum non est aliud quicquam opus, in iis ipsis est
ipse actus, nam visio in eo est sane, quod videt, and contemplatio, in eo quod
contemplatur, and vita in anima.

I am not ignorant of the answers that Cajetan, Bannes, and Capreolus, give
unto this testimony of Aristotle: but they are such gross evasions, as that I
shall for reply only refer unto Rada, and Faber Faventinus in the places above
mentioned. But Suarez has another answer, which I shall lay down, and briefly
reply to. Ad primum ex testimonio Aristotelis dicitur, Aristotelis sententiam
non esse, per has actiones immanentes nihil fieri; sed vel nibil fieri extra
ipsum operantem, vel (quod magis existimo) nihil fieri, quod maneat transacta
action: and hoc modo ait, hujusmodi actionem consistere in ipso usu. Quomodo
1. Ethicorum, cap. 1. ait, In nonnullis artibus operationes esse fines, and non
aliquid per eas factum, ut in art cytharizandi: quod necessario intelligendum
est de termino facto, and permanente, quia manet post actionem ut supra
declaravimus tractando de causa finali. Sic ergo dicitur, per actiones
immanentes nihil factum relinqui, quia per illas nihil fit, quod ill is finitis
maneat. Metaph. disp. 48. sect. 2. n. 20. The sum of this is, that the meaning
of Aristotle is, that nothing is made, or produced by immanent actions, that
remain after they are past and ended.

But 1. There is nothing in Aristotle that gives the least countenance unto
this interpretation: and if men may be allowed the liberty of devising such
senses of Authors for which there is no ground in them, it were no difficult
matter to clude the most pregnant Authorities that can be alleged.

Secondly, If this were the meaning of Aristotle, then the difference of
transient actions from immanent stands in this, that they are productive of a
term or quality that remains after they are past of finished. But this cannot
be the difference of transient actions from immanent; for I demand, whether it
be predicated of transient actions per se, or per accidens.

If it be predicated per accidens of transient actions, then the difference of
them cannot consist therein; if it be praedicated per se of transient actions,
then it is predicated of all transient actions, for a per se ad de omni valet
consequentia. But it is not predicated of all transient actions, as is a little
afterward confessed by Suarez himself, concerning the actions of singing and
playing on Musical Instruments, and therefore it is not predicated of transient
actions per se, and consequently it is not the difference of them from immanent
actions.

As for reasons to confirm the conclusion, most of them will serve which are
brought to prove, that intellection has no term. For it is generally confessed,
that there is, as to this particular, the same reason of it, and all other
vital immanent actions. If then actual intellection produce no term, then
neither is there any term produced by the acts of the senses of the sensitive
appetite, or of the will. But now that intellection has no term, no verbum
mentis produced by it, Scotus proves by several reasons; two of which I shall
propound as managed by In lib. controv.
Rada, because he urges them with a great deal of perspicuity. Primo si verbum
esset terminus productus per intellectionem, impossible esset nos intelligere
intellectionem ipsam, quin simul intelliger. mus aliquem terminum per ipsam
produci (praesertim cum ex Divo Tho. p. p. q. 27. a. 1. de ratione intrinsec^
intellectionis sit terminus productus s^u verbum ibi; ^^im ait, quod
intelligens eo ipso quod intelligit producit in scipso aliquid) sicut
impossible est nos intelligere calefactionem, quin simul intelligamus calorem
per ipsam produci, tanquam ^jus terminum: Consequens tamen est falsum, nam
experientia constat, nos intelligere intellectionem, cum tamen non recordemur,
quod aliquid per ipsam producatur: Ergo verbum mentis non est terminus per
intellectionem productus. Probatur sequela Majoris (Caetera enim patent) quia
si intellectio haberet tanquam terminum proprium verbum meant is, diceret
ordinem essentialem, and intrinsecum ad verbum, sicut calefactio ad calorem per
ipsam productum, ergo non posset intelligi sine ordine ad verbum, sicut nec
calefactio sine ordine ad calorem, quia est talis ordo ei intrinsecus, and
essentialis. If there were any word or term, produced by intellection, it would
be impossible to understand or conceive the action of intellection, but we must
withal conceive this term produced thereby. But now the consequent is false,
for it is manifest by experience, that we conceive and apprehend the act of
intellection, when we have no thought of any word or term produced thereby, and
therefore there is no such term.

The sequel of the Major is thus proved: because if intellection had such a
term, it would carry an essential and intrinsical order thereunto, as
calefaction does unto heat, dealbation unto whiteness: and therefore it could
not be conceived or understood, without order unto it, even as it is impossible
to conceive calefaction without order unto heat, etc. because such order is
intrinsecal and essential unto it, and therefore it cannot be abstracted
therefrom. The Argument mutatis mutandis may be applied unto the immanent
actions of the Will, and conclude that they also have no term produced by them:
for if they have any such term, it would be impossible to conceive them without
order and reference thereunto: But it is very possible to conceive the immanent
actions of the will, and not to think of any terms produced by them; and for
this I may appeal unto the bosoms of all men; for their experience will tell
them, that they frequently review the actions of their wills, when yet they
have no reflection upon any term produced by them.

A second reason, Inteste^to est a^^^s (...) p^^^^iae ^^^^llect^^ae, ^ltinsaque
ejus perfectio (ut ai^ Aristot^les none Metaphysicorum ubi supra, and 1. Ethie.
c. 9.) ergo nihil producitur per eam. Probatur consequentia: quia jam ille
terminus productus esset ulterior, and per consequens ipsa non ess^t actus
ultimus. Intellection is the ultimate or utmost act of the intellective power
(as Aristotle says in both his Metaphysics and Ethics) and therefore nothing
is produced thereby: The consequence is proved, because if there were any term
produced by intellection, this supposed term would be beyond, or farther then
intellection; and consequently intellection would not be the utmost or ultimate
act of the understanding. This argument too may be sadled upon the ^mmanent and
elicite actions of the will: Volition is the utmost act of the will, and the
utmost perfection thereof; and therefore there is no term produced thereby,
for if there were, that term would be a perfection beyond it.

Unto these two reasons out of Scotus, I shall add three more out of Raphael
Aversa Philos. tom. 2. q. 58. S. 3. to prove, that intellection does not
produce verbum mentis, as a term distinguished therefrom.

The first is the uselesness of this term or quality; no use, office or
purpose can be assigned for which it should serve.

1. It is said, That it is for the assimilation of the understanding unto the
object known. But this assimilation being only in esse intentionali and
representative, that is, in esse cognito, is sufficiently made by the action of
the understanding it self, though no term be produced by it; for when an
object is known by the understanding, it is ^o ipso represented unto the
understanding.

2. It is said by others, that it is necessary to exhibit the object present
unto the understanding. But this presence required of the object in the
understanding is only intentional and objective; and it is objectively present
when it is actually the object of the action of intellection, and therefore the
action of intellection renders the object intentionally present, though we
suppose no term to follow it.

3. Tertia ratio quam Cajet. Ferrar. and Capreol. addunt; ad hoc ut in ipso
verbo tanquam in imagine expressa ipse intellectus intueatur objectum, ita ut
actus cognitionis immediate attingat verbum, and mediante verbo Objectum, etc.

Neque haec ratio potest admitti. Primo enim non cognosci cognitionis terminum
eodem ipso actu, patet ab experientia. Quia du^ consideramus, and contemplamur
aliquod Objectum, constat nos non percipere aliud, quam illud ipsum de quo
cogitamus, nullamque se nobis offerre imaginem mediantem. Quod si intueremur
ullam imaginem, realiter ab objecto distinctam, id nos non lateret, and sine
dubio evidenter discerneremus, nos intneri talem imagine^, sicut evidenter
discernimus, quicquid aliud ex part objecti cogitemus.


It is said, That it is an image, wherein the understanding beholds the object
that it understands. But now if it have this office, then, whenever an object
is understood, the image thereof must be understood also. But now this is
false, for we consider and contemplate objects, and yet take no notice of these
feigned images of them: Nay, such images are hidden from the most of men, none
but those that have swallowed this dictate, omnis actio habet terminum, are
privy to them: and what sense or feeling (I mean knowledge and apprehension)
they have of them, passes my sense and imagination.

A second reason that I shall urge out of Aversa, is, that those that aver that
intellection bath a term, which they call verbum mentis, do also affirm that
this term is propter intellectionem; Now non est ponendus terminus propter
actionem, sed actio propter terminum: Non en^m qui^quam est ad hoc ut
producatur, sed productio exercetur ad hoc, ut res producta ponatur. Non been
ergo, supposita jam intellectione, quae dicitur esse cognitio objecti, ponitur
verbum propter illam, tanquam terminus propter actionem: sed potius, si
intellectio esset actio productiva verbi, deberet ipsa esse, and exerceri
propter verbum. Cum ergo principaliter and per se constet, dari intellectionem
quae est cognitio objecti, censendum potius esset ipsam intellectionem fieriper
aliam actionem, quam intellectionem esse actionem per quam fiat alius terminus.

A third reason is, because the term of an action, is more noble and excellent
then the action it self: but suppose there be a term of intellection, it
cannot be more noble then intellection. The Beatifical vision is an action of
the understanding, but suppose it have a term, yet it connot be surmounted
thereby in perfection; for in it (as the Thomists determino) stands our
happiness, and our utmost end. Now if one intellection be not productive of a
term, then to be productive of a term, does not agree per se and effentially
unto intellection: for that which agrees unto intellection per se, agrees
unto every intellection, because a per se ad de omni valet consequentia. But
for the further strengthening of this Argument, I shall quote the words of
Aversa himself. Semper terminus est nobilior, and praestantior action, ut
habetur ex Aristot. 1. Ethic. c. 1. and ex re ipsa notum est. Sed certe
intellectio qua anima constituitur formaliter c^gn^scens, and comprebendens
objectum, non potest dici nobilitate inferior a^io verbo, quod tanquam terminus
ejus inducitur. Et Aristot. 10. Ethic. 6. 7, and (...). Docuit felicitatem
debere esse praestantissimam perfectionem in amma, and simul determinavit esse
contemplationem, id est intellectionem. Non ergo potest addi aliud verbum, quod
sit terminus intellectionis. Et plane repugnat, a^^d aliqui ex adversariis
respondent, in actibus immanentibus action^^ esse praestantiorem termins, and
terminum esse propter actionem. Id eni^^ manifest est contra rationem and
ordinem intrinscecum action^s, and termini. Thus you see that intellection has
no term; and if that has none, then neither have the immanent aictons of the
Will any.

But Oviedo has a distinct and peculiar Argument concerning the action of
love, De anima controv. 6. p. 1. sect. 3. In amore, de quo eadem est ratio ac
d^ intell^ctione, sp^^iale instituitur argumentum ad probandum in action
confistere, ex quo infer^mus talem actionem carere termino, quia in (...) tota
ratio anto^ls sita est. Argumentum is a precedit cognitio in om^ium sententia
praerequitur ad am^rem, sed cognitio tantum requiritur ad actionem voluntatis:
Ergo in has action consistit ratio amoris. Prob^ minorem, cognitio ex part
intellectus requirit, ut v^luntas valeat se determinare ad objectum
amplectendum: ergo requirstur ad determinatienem voluntatis; ^^d determinatio
voluntatis consistit in action, per quam ex actu primo reducitur ad actum
secundum: Ergo cogniti^ requi^itur ad actionem voluntatis: Ergo in action
consistit amor, ad quem cognitio praerequiritur. Hac etiam ratione ^ptime
assignatur ratio formalis amoris, cui primario and in se compet^^, esse
exercitium libertatis, quia hoc exercitium in action consis^it, ergo ad hoc ut
amor sit exercitium libertatis, in ipsa action constitui debeat, per quam
v^luntas constituatur amans, quae cum per^se ipsam hunc praestet ess^ctum,
n^^lo alio indiget termino, cui nullum superest munus, quod exerecat respectu
libertatis, quae per actionem formaliter amans constituitur. What he says may
be thus briefly summed up, Knowledge is necessarily pre-required (he means
immediately) unto actual love. But it is only pre-required immediately, unto the
action of loving, and not unto any term of such action: and therefore the act
of love consists wholly in the action, and not in the term.

It may here perhaps be objected, That all these Authors which I have
mentioned, differ from me; for they make the immanent actions of the
understanding and will, to be only qualities, and not predicamental actions:
they are only (say they) Grammatical actions; that is, they are word^d and
expressed, after the manner of actions: they are actions (says Rada) non
absolute and simpliciter, sed secundum quid and similitudinarie.

I confess this difference betwixt their opinion and mine: but this difference
is not material, for it nothing advantageth the adversary, nor prejudiceth me;
and the arguments may be considered so abstractly, as that they may very well
be applied unto my opinion.

Ovied^ tells us of some Thomists, who agree with me in making intellection,
(and the fame may be said of Volition) to consist in an action not having any
term. But he goes to reconcile them with his own opinion; and against this
reconciliation, he propounds the same Objection, that I now mentioned; viz.
that those Thomists which he speaks of, held intellection to be a proper
action, whereas he made it only a quality. Unto this he answers, That the
difference is not material, but only modo loquendi. His words I shall insert at
large, because I judge them very pertinent unto our present: purpose: Dices in
re differ has opiniones, quia Thomistarum opinio asserit, illam ^ntitatem
esse p^ram actionem, altera vero opinio formalitatem qualitatis in illa action
cognoscit. Contra, formalitas qualitatis ab hac opinione in qualitate
constituta, in co debet consistere, quod haec entitas tali modo afficiat
subjectum, illudque formaliter constituat intelligens, and informatum propria
objecti representatione, and imagine; ^ed in opinione asserente illam
centitatem, in qua intellectio constiruitur esse puram actionem, codem modo
assicit subjectum, illudque cadem ratione constituit intelligons, and informat
tanquam representatio, and imago objecti: Ergo in re Thomistarum opinio
concedit in hac intellectione, quam appellat puram actionem, formalitatem
illam, quam altera opinio qualitatem appellat: Ergo in nullo roi differunt, sed
tanquam in loquendi modo. Si dicas, rationem qualitatis non consistere in modo
respioiendi objectum, peto. ate, quae sit formalitas qualitatis, quam
constituit opinio, quae docet intellectione^^ esse actionem cum termino
identificatam? Et cum illam dederis, ^andem assignabo in entitato Thomistica,
quam actionem sine termino illius auctores vocant. Concludo, has opiniones
tantum in modo loquendi differ. Oviedo loc. praedict.

Before I proceed farther, I shall crave the Readers patience, to digress in a
few lines, for the examination of a passage in the Defendant, p. 119. I having
proved, that love is not a genus equally comprehending habitual and actual love
as its two species, because they are in several predicaments: Habitual love in
the predicament of quality, and actual in the predicament of action. In the
next place I forestalled an objection, that might be made from the opinion of
diverse groat Philosoghers and Schoolmen, that mak^ all 'Imma^ient acts, and
consequently all inward acts of love, to be qualities (they are, say they) only
Grammatical actions, not Metaphysical actions in the predicament of action. For
refutation of this opinion, I offered unto Dr. Hammonds consideration two
arguments out of S^belble^, unto which let us hear what the Defendant says.

Defendant. And have you not told us news indeed? You should have brought us
word that the Sun shines at Rbodes, or when it is in its Zenith. There is
nothing more generally received in the Schools then that is: And I dare say
searce any Philosopher or School-man of any note, has for these hundred years
almost delivered any thing to the contrary. Why then urge you Scheibler and his
reasons, as if he, being a late w^^tor, had discovored a truth which former
Authors were mistaken in? etc.

Here is strange considence, indeed downright impudence; for it is as clear as
the Sun, that many M^dern, both Philosophers and Schoolmen, have delivered
much to the contrary: and this is well known unto all that have read any thing
almost in either Philosaphers or Schoolmen, But you will be ready to but face
the matter, and thorefore to consound your (...), confi^^^^ce, I shall refer
unto souse Philosophers and Schoolmen that are of good here, and that have
s^ourished within theso hundred (...), who (...) terminis aff^m, That immanent
acts are only qualities, and nor (...), proper and predica^^tutal actions. Reda
that was printed 1620. super (...)* c. ^. Controv. 7. p. 121, 122, 123, 124
125, 126. Faber (...), licensed April (...) 1612. In (...) Rap^ael Avers^,
(...) Controv^^ puke^. 1. Pouclus, part 3. (...) p. 499.500, etc.

Unto these testimonies, it were very easy to add many others, b^^ these are
sufficient to satisfy the Reader, that you neither know nor care what you say
herein. But to return from this digression.

In the next place I shall add ex abundanti, that diverse great Philosophers
both Protestants and Papists maintain that immanents acts are properly
predicamental actions, and that yet they are not productive of any terms, that
are qualities.

Amongst Protestant writers, I may justly reckon the generality of Logicians;
for these qualities have no place in their predi^amental tables; and if they
had thought that there had been such qualities, the omission of them had been
an inexcusable defect in their Logicks, because supposing, though not granting,
such qualities, they would have been as numerous as any other entities
whatsoever, and there is nothing can be said to exclude them from the
Predicaments.

As for Papists Suarez confesses that there are many Thomists of this opinion,
Metaph. disp. 48: Sect. 2. n. 5. Secunda sententla negat esse de intrinseca
essentia actioni ut sit, habere terminum, qui per came fiat, ad quem dicat
respectum, de essentia (inquam) actionis quatenus est proprium quoddam genus
summum ab aliis distinc^um, quia sub eo genere quaedam sunt actiones habentes
terminum, aliae non. Habentes terminum sunt actiones transcuntes, in quo haec
sententia convenit cum praecedenti. Quae vero non habent terminum sunt actiones
immanentes, de quibus long diverso modo sentit haec sententia, quam
praecedens: Existimat enim has actiones immanentes esse proprissimas actiones
de genere and praedicamento actionis, esse tamen puras actiones, quae nullum
terminum intrinsecum, per se loquendo, producunt, sed immediate per sese
attingu^t sua objecta. Ita sentiunt de actionibus immanentibus multi ex
discipulis Divi Thomae: nam licet p^culiariter tribuant intellectioni, quod
producat verbum tanquam intrinsecum effectum, tamen ne^ similem aut
proportionalem effectum tribuunt omni actioni immanenti, nam in actionibus
sensuum, and utriusque appetitus id fere omnes negant. Neque inter se
convenient in attribuendo illo effectu omni intellectionis, nam quidam solum
propter absentiam objecti in quibusdam intellectionibus illum effectum
requirunt. Nec denique videntur ponere illud verbum per modum proprii termini
intellectionis ut actionis producentis, quia docent verbum and intellectionem
esse res omnino distinctas, quod repugnat actioni and proprio, and termino
intrinseco, quia actio solum potest esse modus illius rei quae est terminus,
non re^ realiter distincta, us supra probatum est disputando de causalitate
effectiva. Est ergo ^orum sententia, actionem immanentem ut sic perse nihil
producere, quod sit proprius terminus ejus, sed esse puram actionem, quamvis
interdum ex illa aliquis effectus resultet. Ita sentiunt citati Thomistae and
alii Moderni Interpretes D. Thom. in 1. part, q. 27, a. r. and Javel. 9.
Metaph. q. 16. Ubi non numerat alios effectus actionum immanentium, nisi
habitus, ad quos potius comparantur ut principia agendi, quam ut actiones: in
quo satis declarat, illas actiones non habere terminos intrinsecos proprie
dictos.

Suarez propounds three grounds they lay down for this Opinion, two are common
unto them with others, but the third, I believe, is proper and peculiar unto
them. Tertio potest adjungi haec ratio, qula hae actiones non sunt a natura
institutae ad aliquid producendum, neque ut agens per illas communicet suum
esse, sed ut per eas potentiae sese uniant objectis suis: Ergo sine causa
tribuitur his actionibus quod aliquid producant. These actions are by Nature
instituted for this end, that by them their Powers may unite themselves with
their Objects: but this union may be performed without production of any term
that is a quality, and therefore these actions have no term that is a quality.

Whereas Suarez says in answer, that the union is sufficiently Metapborical,
this no ways weakens, but rather fortifieth the Argument: For unto a
Metaphorical union of powers unto their objects, what need is there that there
should be produced de novo, real and physical qualities.

But to say nothing further of these Thomists, I shall trouble the Reader but
with one Author more, and it is a very late one, Franciscus Bonae Spei: That
which I conceive in him to be most pertinent, I shall here transcribe, in lib.
de anima, disp. 11. dub. 3. Dico 3. intellectio formaliter consistit in action
si^e termino realiter a se distincto. 1. Contra Molinam 1. part, and
Conimbricenses, Scotum, Lessium, Hurtadum, Fonsecam, Gonzalem, etc. docentes
illam quidem sormaliter consistere in action, sed habere terminum realiter a
se distinctum. 2. Contra Vasquez 1. part. Suarez etiam 1. part. Valentiam,
Salas, Arriagam, Poncium post Scotam in primum distinct. 3. etc. docentes illam
consistere in sola qualitate per actionem realiter distinctam producta.
Complutenses vero nostros disp. 21. q. 3. in sola qualitate, producta siae
action realiter distincta.

Probatur 1. Ex Philosopho. 9. Met. textu 19. apud Poncium hic, ubi aperte
docet, visionis, speculationis, vitae, etc. non esse aliud quoddam opus praeter
terminum, sen actionem. Et 10. Ethic, c. 3. Nec enim virtutis operationes, id
est, intellectus, and voluntatis operationes, qualitates sunt. Ergo, etc.

Pro^atur 2. quia alioq^ intellectio formaliter consisteret, vel in action ut
praec^sa a qualitate realiter, a se distincia vel in ipsa qualitate ut praecisa
ab action realiter did neta, sed neatium dici potest: Ergo, etc.

Probatur minor, pro prima part. 1. quia si impertinens esset qualitas ad
intellectionem, ipsaque ablata and per impossi^^le manente ^ola action (cui
tantum sub^istendae ferviret) remaneret int^llectio, unde illa qualitas esset
omnino ad constituendum intelligentem formaliter superslua.

Probatur Minor pro 1. part 2. quia non est ratio, cur in ipsa actiut praecis^
a qualit^te realiter a se distincts, formaliter consistat intellectio, and non
in qualitate ut praecisa, etc.

Probatur Minor pro 1. part 3. quia illa actio ut sic praecisa, solum facit
folmaliter producent and productum: Ergo, etc.

Probatur Minor pro 2. part 1. quia intellectio est verbale quoddam, quod
semper impo^tat formaliter aliquam actionem, five ab intrinscco five ab
extrins^co, ut per omnia discurrenti patebit; nam visio facit videre,
intell^ctio intelligere, volitio velle, quae omnia important actionem aliq^am.

Probatur Mino^ pro 3. part 2. in action praecise viventis ut viventis
salvati potest ratio vitae five accus vitalis, ut patebit discurrenti per omnes
definitiones actus vitalis supra disput. 3. dub. 2. allatas, quidni and in tali
accione praecise salvari posset ratio vitae, seu actus vitalis viventis ut
talis viventis? Unde non est ratio, cur in ipsa qualitate ut praecisa ab
action realiter distincta consistat intellectio, and non in action, ut
praecisa, etc. Ergo, etc. Hinc patet ad fundamentum P. Comptoni.

What this Author speaks of intellection, may be extended unto volition, and
indeed unto all the vital immanent acts.

Unto what has been said out of Philosophers and Schoolmen, I shall add the
testimony of other rational and knowing men, that never so much as heard of the
Question, Whether all immanent actions are productive of terms that are
qualities? These are likely to be the most impartial and unprejudiced Judges in
the Controversy, and let them be asked, Whether they think, that they produce
some quality within themselves, every time that they see, hear, etc.
understand, will, or desire (...) and I am verily persuaded, that very few will
give their Votes for the affirmative; they will much doubt whether there be any
such things in Nature. For they will think it very strange, that they should be
the Parents of such numberless and even infinite swarms of beings, and yet not
be in the least degree privy to their production.

But this argument may be thought but probable, and therefore I shall conclude
with one of a convincing nature. And it is that which I urged unto Dr. Hammond,
Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate. Now that there is no necessity
of asserting these terms of immanent actions, I shall evince by answering all
the Arguments which the Defendant brings to prove them,

1. He refers unto the reasons of Suarez, p. 31, 32. Secundum hos actus,
scilicet immanentes, vere dicimur quales, nempe boni aut mali, scientes,
amantes, irati, etc. Item hi actus sunt formae ultimo actuantes ac perficientes
ipsas substantias, quibus insunt; ergo convenit illis communis ratio qualitatis
supra assignata.

The first Argument is taken from the denomination by immanent acts. But in
this there is petitio principii: for it is no less doubtful and controverted, An
secundum hos actus immanentes vere dicamur quales? as, An actus ipsi sint
qualitates? And Suarez could not be ignorant, but that the latter would be
denied, as well as the former: for he thinks one to be as unknown as the other,
and therefore he does very unlike himself, only to suppose it, whereas he
should have proved it. That he thinks one to be as unknown as the other, will
easily appear by the exception that he takes at this Definition of Quality,
Qualitas est qua quales quidam d^cuntur. Quae desinitio, inquit, licet^ea
ratione essentialis videatur, quod d^tur per habitudinem ad effectum formalem,
quem omnis f^^ma essentialiter respicit: tamen quod ad nos spectar, aeque
obscura nobis manet propria ratio qualitatis. Sicut si defineretur quantitas
esse ^ qua dicimur quanti, licet confuse indicaretur ^^^ectus and deneminatio
quantitatis, tamen aeque ignotum maneret quid in nobis sit esse quantum, vel
quid conferat quantitas rei quantae. Ita ergo in praesenti aeque ignotum manet
quid sit esse quale, seu quis peculiaris modus affection is per hanc vocem
explicetur. Percontanti enim quid sit quale, been etiam respendebimus esse id
quod qualitate affectum, vel constitutum est: tame^^isi alia via supponatur ut
notum, quid sit qualitas, tota res aeque ignota relinquetur. Metaph. disp. 42.
S. 1. n. 1. This general answer may suffice. But I shall say something unto
every particular.

First says he, Secundum hos actus vere dicimur boni and mali. These acts
denominate us to be good and evil.

For Answer, Immanent acts denominate us to be good and evil, not qualitative,
but effective, or active; they denominate us not to be good or evi habitually,
but to do good or evil actually. And such a denomination may be from a mere
action, that does not include a quality as its term, though it presuppose a
habit as its principle, from which it flows.

Secondly, Secundum hos actus dicimur scientes, amantes, 'irati, etc.

But is it not every way as doubtful and controverted, whether these
concretes, sciens, amans, etc. be qualitative denominations, as whether these
abstracts, actualis scientia, actualis amor, actus sciendi, actus amandi, be
qualities? Nay, does not Suarez himself, in the place but now cited, make it to
be a most obscure and uncertain matter. Add inquit, interdum obscurissimum
esse discernere an res denominetur qualis, neene, aliqua denominatione, ut
dicitur homo amans, aut videns: incertum autem est, an illa denominatio sit
qualis, vel alterius rationis, etc.

The second Argument is taken from their actuating and perfecting the
substances in which they are: Item hi actus sunt formae ultimo actuantes ac
perficientes ipsas substantias, quibus insunt: Ergo Convenit illis communis
ratio qualitatis supra assignata.

The foundation of this Argument is this Proposition, that Every form which
ultimately actuates and perfects the substance in which it is, is a quality.
But Suarez could not but expect, that this Proposition would be denied by his
Adversaries.

1. They will say, that suppose immanent acts be pure and mere actions, no ways
including qualities, yet even so they are second acts, for every action is a
second act: and as second acts they actuate their active powers, and his
mediantibus they actuate the substances in which they are.

2. They will say, that mere and pure actions may be said to perfect the
substances in which they are. And for this they think they have Aristotle on
their side, for he defines man's happiness to consist in action; (...).
B^atitudo est operatio animae rationatis secundum virtutem optini^m, and
perfectissimam in vita perfecta. Now it cannot be denied, but that man's
happiness being his supreme end, does perfect him.

It may be said, that Suarez intimates a confirmation of the consequence of his
E^thymem, from his own definition of quality. Item hi actus sunt formae ultimo
actuantes, ac perficientes ipsas substantia, quibus insunt; ergo convenit illis
communis ratio qualitatis supra assignata. Now the definition of quality that
he means is, I suppose, in these words, Qualitas e^go videtur esse accidens
quoddam absolutum, adjunctum substantiae creatae, ad complementum perfectionis
ejus, tam in existendo, quam in agendo. Disp 42. S. 1. n. 5. Now this
definition is refuted by my Master Scheibler; and though it be too low for Dr.
Hammond to consult such a vulgar Author as Scheibler, yet I hope I may refer
the Defendant to him. But I shall refer (as he says of Suarez) not so much
unto his Authority, as unto his Reason. His words are as follows. Haec
definitio similiter mala est. Aut enim illae particulae: in essendo, vel
operando, intelliguntur conjunctim, five copulative, aut disjunctive. Hoc
quidem modo, ut quod alterutrum illorum praestat, dicatur qualitas. Illo vero
modo, ut intelligatur id solum esse qualitas, quod utrunque facit, hoc est,
quod perficit substantiam in esse, and operari. Utroque tamen modo vitiosa est
definitio. Nam si qualitas sit, divisim loquendo, quod substantiam perficit,
vel in agendo, vel in essendo: sie etiam locus, tempus, etc. erunt qualitates,
quae in existendo substantiam perficiunt: Item actio, quia ipsa forma est, unde
substantia agens denominatur: sin vero qualitas sit demum, quae utrunique
praestet, tum multe qualitates, non erunt qualitates. Multae enim qualitates
nullam actionem exercent: velutiex habitibus sanitas, si ea sit habitus, ex
potentiis natu^alibus, potentiae passivae: plurimae ex qualitatibus
partialibus, quae ipsae in unive sum, si quid operentur, est id secundario
solum, and quasi eventualiter. Ac den que etiam sigura, quippe quae activa non
est, non erit qualitas fuit autem de re before supra cap. 6. tit. ^. art. 3.
punct. 1.

Another Argument we have, page 121. As there cannot be an efficient cause
without its causality: so impossible it is there should be any causality, where
nothing is produced and caused by that causality. As it is impossible there
should be an active power, without respect to the act that terminates the
power: so impossible it is, there should be any action, without some product to
terminate the action.

This argument is in Suarez, Metaphys. disp. 48. Sect. 2. n. 16. and cited by
Scheibler, Metaph. lib. 1. cap. 10. n. 31. Est ratio a priori, quia actio ut
actio, si sit vera, ac propria nihil aliud est, quam productio aut effectio,
aut causalitas efficientis causae: sed impossible est vel mente concipere
veram productionem, quin per eam aliquid sit productum, vel causalitatem
actualem sine re aliqua causata: Ergo impossible est etiam intelligere
actionem sine termino. Unto this argument you have an answer in my Master
Scheibler, n. 32. Respondeo, omnem actionem esse causalitatem; sed non omnis
causalitas est per modum productionis proprie, and rigorose, per quam scilicet
producatur aliquid post actionem remanens. Nam and ipsae actiones dicentur
effectus praecise and in se, quia habent esse dependens aliunde, ut fatetur
Suarez Disp. 18. Met. sect. 10. n. 8. Ex quo etiam apparet: nullam in eo
repugnantiam esse, si aliqua sit causalitas, neque tamen sit aliqua res
causata, distincta caufalitate, quia causalitas ipsa potest esse boc ipsum
causatum. There is but one expression in the answer liable to exception, post
actionem remanens. Now leave out that, or else rectify it, by adding ordine
naturae, vel temporis, and the answer is good, and remains unshaken by any
thing that you say.

The same objection you have in Franciscus Bonae spei, de animd, disp. 11. dub.
3. resol. 3. applied unto into intellection in particular: unto which his
answer is, That some actions are productive of terms that are really
undistinguished from them. The words of both the objection and answer, are as
follows.

Objicies, actio est formaliter fieri termini, sive modus, quo aliquid fit,
ergo intellectio est aliquid realiter distinctum a suo termino.

In forma, Responde^, distinguendo antecedens, actio est formaliter fieri
termini realiter a se distincti, vel indistincti, concedo antec, necessari^
realiter distincti, nego antecedens. Sic patet ad consequentiam.

For further clearing this answer of Franciscus Bonae Spei; I shall desire the
Reader to take notice Quod eadem numere fa^ultas simul habeat vim agendi, and
sit principium re^ipiendi actionem quam elicit, non potest cum aliqua
probabilitate dubitari, supposita vera dectrina, de actibus immanentibus, qui
recipiuntur, ipn e^sdem potenti is, a quibus eliciunter, five ad eam
effectionem indigeant aliquo alio co-rincipio, ut specie vel ^bjecto aut ali^
simili, five non. Nam quidquam in hoc sentiatur, verum nibilominus est eandem
facultatem s^cundum rem esse simul potentiam activam and passivam respectu
ejusdem actus, and respecta sui ipsius, quatenus cundem actum and recipit, and
elicit. Et ratio est quia illamet qualita^, quatenus h^bet actualem
persectionem talis speciei, potest esse virtus eminenter, vel virtute continen^
alium actum, and potest esse sormaliter actuabilis per cundem actum, ut in
praedicta disputatione 18 latius diximus, Nec in hac occurrit nova difficultar,
quae ibi tractata non sit. Suarez Metaph. Disputat 43. Sect. 2. n. 14.
that a faculty or power ( verbi gratia, the understanding) is in several
regards or considerations both active and passive. It is active, as it
produces the action of understanding, and passive, as it receives and sustains
it: answerably the immanent act of this power or faculty, intellection, may
undergo the consideration of both an action and a term.

1. The consideration of an action, as it actuates the understanding, as an
active power, as it is from it, and produced by it.

2. The consideration of a term, as it actuates the understanding as a passive
power, as it is received and seated in it.

But it may be Objected, That by this, intellection should be a term unto it
self. But this cannot be, for then it should be both before and after it self,
and that is a thing utterly impossible.

For answer, It is impossible for a thing to be both before and after it self,
a part rei, really and indeed: but it is no repugnancy, for a thing to be
before and after it self, in regard of several considerations; a thing may have
several formalities and considerations; and one of them may antecede the other,
signo or momtato rationis. Thus the consideration of tho production of
intellection by the understanding, precedes the reception or inhaesion of it in
the understanding. By this you see then, that if immanent actions be productive
of a term, it is of a term that is distinguished from them only ratione
raci^einata, and therefore they are not properly productions, but conceived and
considered after the manner of productions.

But perhaps there may be another Argument, p. 116 in these words And give me
leave to tell you, That it will be impossible to make it good, till first you
shall demonstrate against Suarez and the best Metaphysicians and Philosophers,
that actie, ut sic, non dicit essentialens respectum ad terminum, and that
there can be any motion whether instantaneous, or successive, and not from a
terminns a quo, to a terminus ad quem, and give us a solid answer to their
Arguments.

If there be here any argument at all, thus it stands reduced to form.

Every motion, whether instantaneous or successive, proceeds from a terminus a
quo, to a terminus ad quem.

But now every action is motion:

Therefore every action preceeds a termin^ a quo ad terminum ad quem.

1 The Minor is false, unless motion be taken largely and improperly, and if
it be thus taken, then the Major is denied; indeed the Major affirms thus, the
(...), the thing in controversy: so that in the argument there is petitio
principi^; for it is every way as doubtful and controverted, whether motion,
taking the word in a large and improper sense, has terminum ad quem
effectivum, as whether every action has. For motion in this large and improper
sense, is the equivalent of action, I said, signanter terminum effectivum, for
there is no doubt, but all actions and motions have an objective term, such a
term as is their object: the question is, whether every action, and motion in
the large and improper sense of the word, have an effective term; such a term
as is its product or effect? And this being the only thing in question, is
only affirmed, and not confirmed.

But the Defendant not only presses us with reasons, but also burdens us with
the Authority of Suarez, Ruvio, Smiglesius, etc. p. 30. 31, 11, 6, 11, 7.

Unto these it were very easy to add many other, and as easy to oppose as many
on our side, but in points controverted amongst Schoolmen, it signifies very
little to muster up the Abettors of the several Opinions; for the matter must
be carried not by multitude of Voices, but by weight of Arguments. It is not
therefore material what Suarez, Smiglesius, or Ruvio say; unless withal they
prove what they say; having then answered all the Arguments that the Defendant
produces, either of his own or of others, there is no reason why we should
stay any longer upon the consideration of any of his witnesses.

But yet before I part from them, I cannot but profess my wonder how Scotus
comes to be reckoned in the number of them. Faber Faventinus, and Rada
represent him to be of a contrary Opinion, and they being his professed
Champions, are likely to be as well read in him as Dr. Creed. But let Scotus be
consulted, and he will speak another language concerning Intellection, and what
he says of that, may be extended to all immanent vital actions. Nec est
verbum mentis te^minus aliquis productus per intellectionem, quia intellectio
non est actio productiva alicujus termini tunc enim impossible esset eam
intelligere, et non esse termini, sicut impossible est intelligere
calefactionem esse, et non esse calorcin, ad quem fit cal^factio non est autem
impossible intelligere intellectonem in se, non intelligendo, qu^d sit
alicujus termini, ut producti per ipsam. But our subtle Doctor was but a man,
and therefore 'twas possible for him to contradict himself; but whether he has
done so, will appear by examination of the passages that our Desendant quotes
out of him, p. 30. And now if our Refuter shall think fit to lodge any strength
upon Scheiblers confirmation, I shall refer him for an answer to Scotus, l. 1.
Sent. d. 3. q. 6. where he shall find this largely discussed, that though
habitual knowledge be not the intrinsicke term of these Operations, sed quasi
consequens, and extrinsecus, and that operationes hujusmodi possunt intelligi,
and esse sine habitu, ur patet in habentibus habitum intensissimum, ut in
beatis, and in Christ in respect of habitual Grace which was always in him in
its utmost height possible; yet they cannot possibly be, or conceived to be
without actual knowledge, the quality that terminates them. To this purpose
also may the same Scotus be seen, l. 1. Sent. d. 3. q. ult s. 130. and 1 Sent.
d. 27. q. 3. p. 347. ad 3. ex edit cavelli.

As for the first place, l. 1. Sent. d. 3. q. 6. s. 32. indeed the former part
of the words are in Scotus, that a habit, viz. of knowledge, is not the
Intrinsic Term^ of immanent Operations, but only their Extrinsick, and
Accidental Term. But now as for the latter words, they, that is, Immanent
Operations cannot possibly be conceived to be without Actual knowledge, the
quality that terminates them: these are not found in Scotus, but are a bold
Supply, that I say not Forgery, of our Defendant, Scotus there propounds three
questions concerning Intellection, and the like immanent Operations. The first,
which belongs only to our present purpose, is cuiusm^di entitas sit
intellectio, v^litio, et hujusmodi operationes immanentes? and his Resolution
is, that they are only Qualities. This he proves by removal from them of all
other kinds of being, and because there is most doubt, whether they be not
actions, de praedicanento actionis, he chiefly insists upon that, and the chief
reason which he brings, is, because they are not productive of any term; he
thought Immanent Operations not to be Predicamental Actions; and herein, I
consess, he differs from mine opinion, and so he does also from yours. But pray
(...), mark what is the reason, for which he excludes them from the Predicament
of Action? It is because they have no term. With what face then do you affirm
that Scotus says, That Immanent Operations cannot be without a quality that
terminates them. But because you are likely to outface the matter, I shall in
ert Scotus his words at large: First, he has, N. 31. this passage, Praeterea
acti^nis est aliqualis terminus realis, hic autem praeter intellectionem? non
est aliqualis terminus, etc. And again afterward, N. 32. Quod intellectio non
sit actio, vel passi^, p^ob^ sic actio, and passi^, sunt alicu^us termini
accipientis esse per ipsas sed operationes immanentes sunt ultimi termini,
quibus nihil accipit esse, etc. Mark you me that Sir, Quod si dicos, qued cum
per actus habitus generantur, habitus est term^nus dicta^um operationum, and
sic sunt actio, vel passio.

Ad argumentum dicendum, quod actio illa, quae proprie est ad terminum, non
potest intelligi sine termin^: sed operationes hujusmodi possunt intelligi sine
habitu and esse, ut patet in habentibus habitum intentissimum, ut in Beatis:
Ergo proprie non dicitur terminus quasi intrinsecus, sed quasi consequens, and
accidentalis cum ergo hujusmodi operationes aliquid sint and probatum est, quod
non sunt substantia, nec relatie, nec actio, aut passio, neque quantitas, vel
aliquid extrinsecus adventitium, relin ^uitur, quod sint in genere qualitatis,
etc.

The Reader is by this time, I suppose, convinced of your unworthy
falsification of Scotus, for he says no such thing as you say; ^ay, he says
the quite contrary, Operationes Immanentes sunt ultimi termini, quibus nihil
accipit esse. This one instance is sufficient, to give a taste of your fidelity
and honesty in quoting Authors. Of it I shall make this Use, that for the
future I shall little trouble either my self or the Reader, with Examination of
your Authorities; for you have in so shameless, gross, and palpable amanner,
salsified Scetus, as that you deserve but little Credit in any Testimonies that
you shall allege. In the very same question afterward: N. 35. he expressly
denies, that Immanent Operations have any Term, which receives any being by
them. And in this particular he says they are unlike, proper and
praedicamental actions. Tertia prepric^as actionis proprie sumptae, est quod
est circa aliquem termnum, ad quem terminatur, qui esse accipit per eum idem
intellig^t de passione. Operationes ergo immanentes assimilantur actioni and
passioni in prima condition, et secunda, non autem in tertia, que est
completiva.

A second place is lib. 1. Sent. d. 3. q. ult. p. 130. n. 11. Is^^ est alia
conditio ulterior, videlicet, quod istae formae de ratione sui transeant in
aliquid, ut in terminum, and hoc sive illud aliud sit intra operans five extra,
non curo non est enim intelligibile, quod sic intellectio, and volitio, et quod
non sit alicu^us term ni hoc a^tem conveni^ actioni proprie dicts, ut transeat
in aliquid, ut ia terminum, propter istas igitur duas conditiones concurre^tes
in istis firmis, dicuntur istae formae esse actus secundi, cum vere sint f^^mae
manentes. The words are not quoted, but I suppose these are those the Defendant
means.

But it is plain that Sectus speaks of an Objective, not Effective Term.

1. From a comparison of this place, with other passages, that plainly, and
expressly deny Immanent Actions to have Terms.

2 From a following passage in the same page, Nunc aut^m aliquis actus
intellectionis vel volitionis, potest esse ejusdem rationis, licet non sit
alicujus termini producti: Here he supposes it possible for Intellection and
Volition not to have any Term produced by them; And therefore, when he says
in the place objected, Non est enim intelligibile, qu^d sit intellectio, et
volitio, et quod non sit alicujus t^rmini. Here by the Term he means only the
Object, and not the Product of Intellection and Volition.

3 From the Coherence of the words, with the foregoing: Scotus his design is to
prove, that Immanent Operations, though they be not proper actions, de genere
actionis, may yet be called Second Acts, because in two respects they resemble
Actions: 1 Because of their perpetual dependence upon their causes. 2 Because
they have a tendency unto a Term. Now this must needs be understood of an
Objective Term only; for if it were understood of an Effective Term, it
Would make them to be, by S^o^us his Opinion, proper and Praedicamental
Actions, which is a thing that he constantly denies.

4 That the word Te^m^, which Intellection (says Scotus) regards, signifies
only an Objective Term; the Defendant, if he had not been in haste, might
have gathered from the Margent, where we have these words: Intellectio, and
volitio dicunter Actiones, quia dependent continue a suis causis, et quia
tendunt in aliquid ut in terminum attingentiae. Here terminus attingentiae is
distinguished plainly, a termino efficientiae. This distinction of the Term of
Intellection, is plainly insinuated by Rada, a great follower of Scotus,
controv. Theol. p. 1. controv. 7. p. 124. 125. Intellectio, inquit, habet
terminum quem actualliter respicit, scilicet, objectum, etc. Sed non est
productiva sui termini nec per ipsam tanquam per actionem aliquid producitur,
etc.

But go we on to a third place in Scotus, lib. 1. sent. d. 27. q. 3. p. 347. ad
3. This place the Defendant quotes again, p. 32. and there he inserts the very
words of Scotus. Howsoever, says he, Though the Refuter thinks fit to refer
the Doctor, because he is a Critic, to learn some Metaphisicks from Sheibler;
yet I will be so civil to him, because he is a School-man, to refer him for his
learning in this point, to one of the subtlest of th^se Doctors. And let Scotus
be the man, it is, l. 1. sent. d. 27. q. 3. f. 19. ^d tertium. The place is
short, but full, and not taken notice of by Suarez; and the words are these: Ad
tertium, concedo quod N^titia est proles and vere genita, sed preductio illa
non est actualis intellectio, quia, ut dictum est supra, actualis intell^ctio
non est actio de genere act^^nis, sed est qualitas nata terminare talem
actionem, quae significatur per hic quod est dicere, vel in communi per hoc
quod est elicere; non igitur verbum est aliquid productum action, quae est
intellectio, quia ipsa intellectio non est productiva alicujus, sed ipsa est
producta action quae est degenere actionis, sicut dictum est supra. He here
referrs to the place quo^ed by Suarez, 1 Sent. d. 3. q. 6. p. 110. Col. 2. n.
31. and ib. q. ult. p. 130. ex edit Cavel, where he has very solidly proved it.

For answer, Scotus in this very question delivers (as you have seen) another
Doctrine; and it is very strange that he should so forget himself, as to
contradict it so soon: But the truth is, that in this pastage, there is not to
much as one word or syllable sounding for the Defendants purpose, viz. That all
Immanent Actions are productive of Terms: Nay, here is something that expressly
contradicts this tenet of the Defendant; and it is that intellection which the
Defendant cannot deny to be an Immanent Action, is not productive of any Term.
For which reason he makes it a Quality, and denies it to be an Action, De
genere actionis, non igitur verbum est aliquid productum action, quae est
intellectio quia ipsa intellectio non est productiva alicujus, etc. Indeed he
makes dicere to be productive of intellection as its Term, but the Defendant
should take notice, that dicere is by Scotus a Transient, and not an Immanent
Action; an Explication of which may be seen in Omnis actio habens terminum
productum per ipsam dicitur, transiers ab Aristotele, non quia transeat
inexternam materiam, sed quia transit in terminum, sive ille terminus maneat in
agente, five transeat in exteram materiam. De q^^ re videndus est Antonius
Tromb. to in sua Metaphisica. Controv. Theol. pa^^ 1. Controv. 7. p. 125.
Rada.

There is, I believe, now no impartial and unprejudiced Reader, but must needs
confess, that Heat and Rage of Opposition, has here blinded the Defendants
judgment: For else, how is it possible that he should thus mistake, and
misunderstand a plain place in Scotus? It is very probable that the Defendant
may judge Me incapable of understanding Scotus; but he has no reason to think
so contemptibly of all his other Readers, into whose hands his book may come.
For doubtless many of them are as able to reach the meaning of Scotus, as
himself: hereby a Guess may be given at the great Abilities of his Admirers,
who swallow such stuff as this.

Here, before I pass on, I shall briefly sum up the State of the Question, A^
omnis actio habeat terminum.

For Explication of the Terms,

I. Actions are either Immanent or Transient.

II. The Term of Actions is either only Objective, or else Effective also.

An Effective Term is either Extrinsick, and Accidental, or else Intrinsic,
and Essential, unto which an Action carries an Intrinsicall and Essential
Respect.

These Distinctions thus premi^ed: I shall lay down three things which are
granted, and uncontroverted on both sides.

1. That all Transient Actions have not only an Objective, but also an
Effective Term; a Term which they produce.

2. That all Immanent Actiens, have an Objective Term, an Object unto which
they tend, which is called Terminus attingentiae.

3. That some Immanent Actions have an Effective, Extrinsick, and Accidental
Term, viz. Habits. I call it an Extrinsick and Accidental Term, because it is
Accidental unto Immanent Actions, to be productive of such a Term: For there
are many Immanent Actions that produce no such Term.

The matter that is controverted, is, Whether all Immanent Actions have an
Effective, Intrinsic and Essential Term?

This is denied, no Immanent Actions have such a Term, for respect unto such a
Term is not Intrinsic and Essential unto such Immanent Actions: And the
Reas^n is, because they may be abstracted from such a resp^ct. Now nothing can
be abstracted from that which is Intrinsic and Essential to it.

Having thus proved that these pretended ^arms of Immanent Actions are excluded
e^numero entium, it is needless to enquire under what head of being they are
ranged.

Yea, but our Defendant tells us, page 37. that Suarez makes them to be
disp^sitions.

Does he so? What then I pray? Is he not our professed Adversary in this
Question? And therefore is it any News, or wonder, that he dissents from us?
The truth is, having affirmed that there are such things, it concerns him to
place them somewhere or other, and he could think of no such convenient place
to ledge them, as amongst Dispositions.

Yea, but the Defend. p. 37, 38. acquaints us with a Reason, which Suarez has,
why he makes them di^positious: For, dispositio is facile m^bilis, and so are
the Terms of Immanent Actions: They have no fixed and permanent, but a
m^v^able being, by reason of their dependence on the actual influx of their
Vita^l Powers.

For answer. 1. Though every disposition be facile mobilis, yet every thing
that is facile mobilis that has a moveable being, is not a Disposition, as is
apparent from predicament all Actions, and such Relations as have transient
foundations.

Secondly, this Reason weighs little with us; for we deny these pretended
Terms to have any being at all: And if they have no being at all, then
consequently no moveable being. This reason were of some Validity upon
Presupposition, that these pretended Terms were Qualities: But we deny them to
be Entities, and say that they have no being, but a fancied one, in the
imaginations of a Party, or Faction of Schoolmen; and for this Affirmation, I
have laid down as I suppose, sufficient ground.

But suppose the Terms of some Immanent Actions may be called dispositions, yet
there is no reason for calling so the pretended Terms of the Actions of Divine
Love in our blessed Savior: Because they disp^se unto nothing; and dispositio
disponit ad aliquid; neither the Name nor Nature of Disposition agrees unto
them; and therefore why should they be called dispositions?

For conclusion of this discourse; I shall adventure to give my Gu^ss at the
Reason which led some of the Schoolmen to devise these Terms of Immanent
Actions. It was, I suppose, to support, and clear their m^nst^^us, and
groundles^, Fictions that they have concerning the doctrine of the Sacred
Trinity, which they vent upon the first of the Sentences, Did. 27. and 32. And
on the fust of Sums, q. 34. and 37. Where they have usually these bold
inquiries An verbum divinum producatur per^^actum intelligendi? etc. An
Spiritus Sanctus producatur per actum diligendi? By these daring and
Presumptu^^s Disputes, they have exp^sed the Mystery of the Trinity unto a
great deal of scandal, and scorn amongst Socinians and other Anti-Trinitarians.

Before I Pass on to the f^urth, and last Evasion of Dr. Creed: I shall from
what has been said, in impugning the Pretended Terms of Immanent Actions,
infer the impertinency of all that he faith, p.
72.73.74.75.76.77.115.116.117.118. In defense of this pro-Position Position in
Dr. Hammond, the word Love is a Genus equally comprehending the two Species,
habitual and actual Love, or the Acts of Love. For Dr. H. by actual Love, or
the Act of Love, understands, as has been shown, the Action of Loving, and not
(as the Defend* most vainly pretends) any quality Produced by that Action,
which is its Term and Product. His Proposition then, notwithstanding all Doctor
Creeds Defense, is still chargeable with that absurdity which I objected
against it, viz. that it makes Love as a Genus equally to comprehend, as
Species, primo dive^sa, things put in several Predicaments. For habitual Love
is in the Predicament of Quality, and the action of loving in the Predicament
of Action.

For further disproof of Dr. H. his preposition, I shall add what I said
touching the habit of Love, and the sincere and cordial expressions thereof. No
one word can, as a Genus, equally comprehend the efficient, and the effect,
viz. as species; but the habit of Love is the efficient, and the acts of Love
are the effects thereof, (the habit of Love (says the Defend.) effectively
concurres with the Will, to the production of the inward Acts of Love:
therefore Love, as a Genus, does not comprehend habitual Love, and actual Love,
as Species. The Major of this Syll^gisme, the Defendant will say is most
ridiculously false, as appears by what he says to the like Syllogism, that I
framed concerning the habit of Love, and the Expressions thereof. His Answer is
very remarkable, for the transcendent and matchless, both ignorance and
impudence of it; and therefore I shall crave the Readers patience for a while
to consider it.

Dr. CREED.
YOur third (to begin with that, for I shall not tie my self to your Method) is
most ridiculously falfe. You say (not to trouble our selves about the Mo^d and
Figure (3) No one word can as a Gerus equally comprehend the efficient, and the
effect: The habit of Love is the efficient cause, and the sincere and cordial
expressions of Love are the effect: Therefore Love is not predicated of them
equally as a Genus.

Your Major, Sir, your Major; by all means have a care of your Major. For what
think y^u, Sir, of all Univocal pr^ductions? When Fire produces Fire, and Corn
brings forth Corn; when a Man begets a Man, and one Heat makes another; does
not one and the same word as a Genus comprehend the efficient and the effect?
And is it not in these a certain maxim, tha^, Qualis est causatalis est
effectus; such as the Cause is in nature, such also is the effect? And I h^pe
you will think it lawful for things of the same nature to be comprehended
under the same Genus: Nay, are not these distinguished from equivocal
productions, because in these, Effectum est ejusdem rati^nis cum efficiente;
but in the other, efficiens non convenit cum effectu in eadem forma, sed
eminenter illam c^ntinet? Nay, does not your own Scheibler, as well as Suarez
(both whom you so seriously commend to the Doctor's perusal) tell you that
Causa univoca, est quae pr^ducit effectum similem in specie? But methinks, Sir,
if (since your more noble, more serious employments in the Study and writing of
Scholasticall and Practical Divinity) you had thought sit to neglect such
Vulgar Authors, and to forget the Common Notions and Maxims delivered by them;
yet you should at least have observed, this in your reading of Aquinas, that in
his Sums does frequently deliver this doctrine, and makes very good use of it.
And now, Sir, I hope you will think it lawful for things of the same Nature to
be comprehended under the same Genus; For where, I pray, will you rank the
several individualls of the self-same Species (for such are all Vnivocall
Causes, and Effects, as is plain from Sense and Experience) if not under the
same Genus?

I might prove the gross and palpable falsehood of your Major. Sir, by diverse
instances drawn from equivocall productions, where the Cause and Effect must be
placed in the same predicament, and consequently under the same remote Genus at
least, which is sufficient to destroy your Major. When the Sun and Stars
produce Gold and Silver, and Brass, and other Mineralls, when they produce
S^ones of all sorts and kinds in the Bow^lls of the Earth, are not the cause
and the effect, at least as species subalternae, placed under the si^ne Genus
of substantia Corporea? When an Ass begets a Mule, or a Man produces Worms
and Vermin in his Head and Entrails; and when a Woman brings for m^nstr^ous
births instead of L^gitimate issues, as Serp^nts, Moles and Froggs, and other
such like (of which among Physicians there are ma^y true stories) I pray, Sir,
must not the cause, and effect be both ranged under the same immediate Genus
proximum, which is Animal? So when light produces Hea^, are not the Cause and
the Effect both put in the same Predicament under the same Genus of Patible
Qualities? To keep closer to the business more immediately in controversy. The
habit of Love effectively concurrs with the will of to the production of the
inward Acts of Love, and yet I say that love as a G^nas is Equally predicated
of the habit, and the inwa^d Acts of Love, as has already been demenstrated,
and may in due time b^ further proved, notwithstanding any thing you have, or
can say to the contrary. And this is abundantly more than sufficient to show
the fa^sho^d of your Major, when you say that no one word can as a Genus
(whether proximum or remotum, s^mmum, or subal^e^um) (for you ^bs^lutely
deliver it) equally comprehend the Efficient and the Effect.

The Major which you say Is most ridiculously false, and against which you make
so horrible an Outcry, I shall fortify by three reasons.

The 1. Is because Genus Analogum non praedicatur aequaliter dae speciebus. But
now Analogy, viz. Attributionis Intri^secae, consists in dependency, from which
Effective dependency is not excluded; as is maintained by the generality of the
ancient Thomists, by my Master, Scheibler. Metaph. lib. 2. cap. 1. art. 3. cap.
3. tit. 5. art. 1. And by Scheibler's Master, Suarez, M^taphys. di p. 28. s. 3.
disp. 32. s. 2. n. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. By ^^en^us a Friar Ca melite, Discep. in
Univers. Logic. p. 113. Martinus Exercit. Metaph. p. 521. And by diverse others
as you may see in Stalio Reg. Philosoph. p. 397. And upon this account is it,
that Ens is made to be Gerus Analogum to Ens creatum, and increatum, to
substantia and accidens. And I have read in the Manuscript of a Great
Philosopher of the University of Oxford, that for this reason Quali^as is ge^us
Analogum, because of the Dependency that Habi^^s has upon Potentia.

I know this is to be understood with many Limita^ions, with which I shall not
now Cumber the Reader: and besides, I am not Ignorant that it is Opposed by many
Modern Philos^phers.

But however it has so Great and Learned Patrons, and they br^ng so good
Rea^ons for this their Opinion, as that no modest man will Censure it to be a
m^st Ridiculus Proposition.

Se^ondly, No word that is predicated of things Secundum prias, et p^sterius,
is predicated of them equally, as genus univ^cum of its species, for the
equality that distinguishes genus univocum from analogium, Pro hac Sententia
vid^tur militare, qu^d habet A^istotles in cap. de ^^dis simul e^ dicens quae
ex e^d^m g^nere in divi^ione sibi invicem opponuntur, esse natura simul. Atqui
species immediate unum genus respicientes, ex codem genere in divisione sibi in
vicem opponuntur, ^ut albedo and nigredo, in quas color dividitur. Sunt igitur
natura simul. Quod si natura simul iunt, n^n potest una ab altera dependere in
participando genere. Stallio. Reg. ^bilosoph. p. 397.
is ae^ualitas ordinis, not dignitatis. But whatsoever is predicated of the
Efficient Cause and the Effect, is predicated secundum prius and p^sterius:
Erg^ nothing that is predicat^d of the Efficient and the Effect, is predicated
of them equally as genus un vicum.

Thirdly, Species totius generis univoci, are simul natura: but the Efficient
Cause and the Effect, are not simul natura: And therefore they are not species
of the same genus.

And thus have I sufficiently provided for my Major; as for your Arguments
against it, they had need be very strong, and convincing, for otherwise
indifferent Readers will judge your Vociferation against it, being with so full
a mouth, to be Frontlesse. But let them be what they will, let us hear them.

Dr. CREED.
For what think you, Sir, of all univocal Productions? When Fire produces Fire,
and Corn brings forth Corn, when a Man begets a Man, and one heat make another;
does not one and the same word, as a genus, comprehend the Efficient and the
Effect?

When I Read this passage, I was about, I confess, with a just indignation to
throw away your book, as unworthy mine, or any other Scholars further perusal.
I desire to have low and humble thoughts of my self, but yet I cannot think him
a dompetent Adversary for me to Encounter, who is so Ignorant in Logic, as to
say, that Man and Fire are genera: I propounded the Question to a Fresh man, an
(...) sit genus? and he answered no, and readily confirmed his Negative thus:
Nulla species infima est genus: hom^ est species infima; Ergo homo non est
genus. I make no doubt but that our Defendant has great abilities in other
learning, but I shall never acknowledge him to be a Philosopher, or School-man,
that thus trespasseth against the very A. B. C. of Logic. I shall give him
this friendly advice for the future, that before his next attempt in
Scholastical Divinity, he first con over Smith, Breerwood, Sanderson, or some
other such comp^ndium of Logic, that so he may be able to avoid such mistakes
as this, which will Expose him unto the Derision of every Boy.

If any shall Object in the Defendants behalf, that the Ramifts hold that every
species is genus, and that individuum is sp^cies infima, as may be seen in
Scheiblers T^picks: c. 28. n. 77, 78, etc. usque ad 85. This yet can be no
sta^ting hole for the Defendant, for this proposition, every genus is
predicated equally of its species, is a Maxim of the Aristotelians, delivered
by them long before ever Ramus saw the light; and there is no doubt can be made
that they take genus and species in a Peripat^tical, and not Ramistical sen^e.

If it be said again secondly, that even Dr. Sanderson in his Logic, l. 3. c.
24. confesses that Topically species infima is genus.

Why this can as little avail the D^fendant as the former shift, for it is
undeniable that we speak of genus as praedicabile, and the Maxim, Genus
p^aedicatur aequaliter de speciebus, is delivered by P^^phy^y in his Isag^ge,
where he handles the Doctrine of the Predicables.

In a third place it may be replied, that in that Interrogation of our
Defendant, does not one and the same word as a genus comprehend the Efficient
and the Effect? He is not to be Interpreted of any of the words imediately
preceding Fire, Corn, a Man, Heat, but of some words that are to be underst^^d
and Supplied as Elementum, which as a genus comprehends the Fire producing, and
the Fire produced: and planta, or corpus animatum, which in like manner is
predicated of the Corn bringing forth, and the Corn brought forth as a genus:
and animal, which is predicated in the same manner as a genus of the man
b^getting, and the man begotten: and qualitas patibilis prima, which in the
same way is predicated of the Heat making, and the Heat made.

But First, what Reason have I to make this Supply in your Words?

Secondly, We cannot Supply, or understand these words, Elementum, Corpus
animatum, animal qualitas patibilis prima: For Elementum is predicated of the
Fire producing, and the Fire produced; Corpus animatum, of the Corn bringing
forth, and the Corn brought forth, etc. and so Animal of the Father, and the
Son, only as of Individualls: whereas the comprehension, and predication of
the Genus, that we speak of, is only concerning its Species.

Unto all this I shall add Ex abundanti, out of Irenaeus, a Modern Thomist,
that which will answer your Objection. And it is the more pertinent, because it
speaks of one of your Instances, viz. Fires producing Fire; Cave tamen putes
quamlibet dependentiam facere nostram Analogiam, nam ignis generat ignem, qui
ambo un voce convenient in natura ignis, quia cum illa dependentia Physica non
reperitur dicta inaequalit^s: Vel melius ista dependentia est solum quoad
actualem existentiam, seu positionem extra causas, non autem quoad
participationem secundum essenti^^, seu esse objectivum si enim quaeratur,
utrum ignis B. genitus ab igne A. et ab eo dependens, ut generetur, et existat,
ab eodem dependeat essentialiter spectatus, non considerata existentia?
dicendum erit, quod non quia ignis A. non est principium igneitatis, altoqui
esset principium sui ipsius. At vero accidens dependet a substantia
essentialiter, ut sit ens. Qu^d fiet evidens comparanti singula hoc modo. Leo
non minus erit animal, eti^^ si homo sit impossibilis: At accidens non erit
ens, si substantia sit impossibilis; cum enim accidens sit entis ens, cujus
erit ens, si nulla sit substantia? ergo aliter accidens participat ens, quam
l^o participet animal. Nec refert, quod sublato hommine tolleretur leo,
quatenus rationale, and irrationale sunt relata, ac proinde simul sunt natura:
Nam hic non considerantur ut relata, sed precise ut Animalia. Discept. in
Univers. Logic, p. 113.

In the next place you tell us great news, of the difference betwixt Vnivocall
and Equivocall productions, a thing that is known, and obvious unto every
Puisny. But you spend many lines about it, and very gravely confirm it, by the
testimonies of Scheibler and Svarez: Then you intimate that I forget this
Notion, and therefore refer me for it to Aquinas his Sums. But what ground,
nay color, have you to say that I forget it? The truth is, you have not so
much as a shadow for such an imputation; but to Caluminate, is grown to be so
familiar with you, that it is even incorporated into your discourse.

But what infer you from all this? Why forsooth, that Individuals, whereof
one is the Efficient, and the other the Effect, may be comprended under the
same word as a Genus. But what is all this to the purpose? Is it not clear,
that my Major is to be understood concerning the comprehension of Species by
the Genus? Indeed no Reader, but such a Dis-ingenuous Caviller, as Dr. Creed
will understand me, concerning the comprehension of Individualls.

This supply of Species is no subter-suge, but may easily be gathered from the
coherence of my words. For the Proposition which I undertake to prove, is that
Love as a Genus, does not comprehend as Species, the Expressions of Love,
equally with the Habit.

But let us see next whether you have any better success with your Equiv^call
productions.

First, Most of your instances are of Genus remotum; whereas Dr. Han. and I,
are all along to be understood of G^nus pro^cimum, and the Maxim of Porphy^y,
which is the foundation of all this argumentation, has the same sense too.

But you next bring instances, wherein the Cause and the Effect, are both
ranged under the same immediate Genus proximum, which is Animal. When an Ass
begets a Mule, or a Man produces Wo^mes and Vermin in his Head and Entrails,
and when a Woman brings forth M^nstruous birth instead of Legitimate Issues, at
Serpents, M^les, and Freggs, and other such lich like (of which among
Phys^^ians there are many true Stories) I pray, Sir, must not the Cause and
Effect be both ranged under the same immediate Genus proximum, which is Animal?

But fiest, that Animal is a Genus proximum unto an Ass and Mule, unto Worms
and Vermin, unto Se^pents, Moles and Froggs, is a gross falsehood, easily
discernable by every one that knows any thing almost in the Predicament of
Substance. For such a one cannot be ignorant, that b^u^^m intervenes betwixt
all these and Animal: Arist^le in the 7th of his Meraph. text. 28. says, That
the Gerus proximum of Mulus, and Equus wants a Name. And the same may be said
touching the Genus proximum of an Ass and a Mule.

Secoudly, All these instances are impertinent, because they are of such
Efficients and Effects as are per accidens: Whereas it is undeniable, that I am
to be understood of such only as are per^se: For so at e^habituall and actual
Love, as also the sincere and cordial Expressions thereof. Thus in general.

But to take a particular Survey of the severals:

I. When an Ass begets a Mule, it is a Monstrous and Unnatural production,
and Monstra fiunt per accidens, as not being intended by particular nature.

II. That a Man produces Worms and Vermin in his Head and Entrails, as an
efficient, is new, strange, and false Philosophy* For,

1. No particular cause Suarez Metaph. disp. 18. s. 2. n. 26. Aversa Philos.
tom. 2. p. 238.239.240.241. Compton Carlton disp. 25. Phys. s. 3. n. 7, 8. p.
304.
can be the Efficient, viz. Principal, of any Essential form specifically
different from its own. I^ may concur thereunto dispositive, disponendo, ^ut
praeparan^o ^ueri^n, nec (...) came praeb^nd^, or applicative applicando acti^^
passivis, non effective, immediate attingendo productionem ipsius formae. Nay,
it is a received Opinion, that no Angel can produce any substantial form, but
only as causa applicans: and therefore the production of Animals out of putrid
matter, is generally resolved to be by a Universal Cause, either the Heavenly
B^dyes, or the first cause.

But 2. That man is not the Efficient of Worms and Vermin in his Head, etc.
The Reader may see in Poncius. p. 3. page 22, 23. Causalitat^m effectivam
respectu vermium, qui producuntur ab aliis causis extri^secis: Contra h^^ines
habent activiratem respectu humoris, seu substantiae illius, ex qua preducuntur
vermes: Ergo possunt dici habere activitatem respectu vermium; nec enim alia
ratione ma^es habent activitam, aut dicuntur principia productiva aliorum
hommum, nisi quatenus habent actitatem productivam seminis ex quo f^unt.

Respondetur, negando corsequentiam ad cujue probationem dicitur, quod non
pr^ptere^ precise home dicatur esse p^incipium alterius k^minis exeo, quod
producat, semen ex quo fit alter home, sed etiam, qu^a illud semen habet
aliquam activitatem in ordine ad preducendum al^^m illum h^minem.

III. A Woman may bring forth monstrous births instead of legitimate issues, as
Serpents, Moles, Froggs: but that she is the Efficient of them, viz. Pe^^se is
a palpable untruth; and that for the same reason, that man is denied to produce
Worms, and other Vermin in his Head and Entrails. Unto this let me add, that
the Effective dependanc^, which I speak of, is Necessary, and in some sense
Essential. But the Dependence of these monstrous births upon a Woman, is per
accidens, Fortuitous and Casual; and so most impertinently alleged.

Now let us sum up the State of my Major Pr^position, and thus it runs. No
word as a Genus proximum does equally comprehend as its Species, the Efficient
per se and the Effect. Unto this, now, let us see what a brave and gallant
opposition you make.

You say.

1. That one word as species infima does comprehend the Efficient and the
Effect.

2. That one word as Genus does comprehend, viz. Mediately, Individualls,
whereof one is the Efficient, and the other the Effect.

3. That one word, as Genus rem^tum does comprehend equally as species, the
Efficient and the Effect.

4. That one word as Genus does equally comprehend the Efficient per accidens,
and the Effect.

Now none of all this does in the least degree impugn my Major Proposition, as
meant by me: And therefore I might here justly desire you to sit down, and
sadly to consider, how groundless and soolish your Tragical Exclamation is
against my Major Proposition. But I appeal from you and your ignorant and
partial Admirers, unto the Learned and Vnprejudiced Readers.

I go on unto the Defendants fourth and last Shist. There was, says he, in
Christ, a twofeld actual Love of God, The one agreeing to him as Compreh^nsor,
being a sequel of the Bentisick Vision; this he grants to be always equally
full and intense. But this love, says he, was necessary, and therefore not
meritorious. There is therefore belonging unto Christ another Actual Love of
God, as he was Viat^r, which was free, and by which he merited: and this sprang
from the infused knowledge of God, and the infused habit of Charity. And this*
Love was more intense at one time then another, or one Act of it was more
intense then another Act: and this distinction he prosecutes very largely, page
68. 244. 288.290. 333, 334, 33^, 330, 336, 339, 344, etc. Usque ad 357, 362,
363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 370, 372, 522, 524, 525, etc. Usque ad 540,
622, 624, 626, 627, 628, 629, 635, 636, 637.

1. This Answer I saw in Suarez, but could not foresee that Dr. Ham. would make
use of it. Indeed I had no ground to think that he would: for it cannot do him
the least service, as I shall show anon; and therefore I had no Reason to
trouble the Reader with any mention of it.

2. Where you read this distinction in Suarez, you might have also seen an
Objection against it, which might have deterred you from using it, if you had
consi^ered how unsatisfying ^uarez his answers are thereunto. The Objection is,
that two accidents only numerically distinguished, cannot be at the same time
in the same subject. But now Christ's beatifick love of God, and that which
springs from the insused habit of charity, are distinguished only in number:
And therefore they could not be at the same time in Christ.

The first Pro^osition, that two accidents cannot be at the same time in the
same subject, is a proposition that you your self acknowledge, p 196.256. to
say the contrary, you say is a g^^sse absurdity, the salshood of which, reason
it self a^ the very first proposal is able to discover.

But it may be said, that Saarez has unto this Obj^ction two answers. B^t how
unsatisfying they are, will appear by the examination of them.

The first is, that th^se two loves differ, not only numerically, but also
specifically: S^d hoe altero ex duabus modis probabilibus dissolvi pot^st.
Primus est, d^cen^o actus illos differ sp^^^, quia actus amoris beatifici
tendit in Deam propter o^nnem pe^fection^m, and rationem, propter quam amabilis
est: nam to^a ill a per (...) b^ata^ did n^te, and clare vid^tur, and
proponitur voluntati; at vero amo, qui consequitur jcientiam insusam, vel
tantum fertar in D^um sub speciali aliq^a ratione bon^, ut justitiae,
misericordiae, etc. v^l solum sub rationae summi boni, qu^si confuse cognita,
and non distinct p^opofita: quatenus in se con^inet omnem bo^it atem and
perfectionem, Q^ae diversitas satis esse videtur ad diversitatem specificam
illorum actuam. In certiam part. Thom. tom 1. disp. 49. f. 2. p. 622.

Unto this I shall reply in the words of Beca^^s Sum. Theol. Scholast. part. 3.
trast. 1. cap. 22. q^aest. 5. having averred against Cajetan and Capreolus,
that actus cha^ttatis, in via, and in patria do not disserre specie; he
confirms his conclusion from the testimony of Aquinas, and from reason. T^rtia
Co^^l (...). Actus charitatis non solum potest esse tam in^ensus in via, quam
in patria, sed ^tiam tam perfectus in essentiali perfectione objectiva. Est
contra Cajetanum, and c^prcolum, qui do^ent actum charitat is in patria d^ffe
re specie ab actu charitatis in via, and essontialiter persectiorem esse. (...)
est, qu^a alter versatur cirea Deum clare visum, alter cirea D^i^m obscare
cogni^am. S^out ergo clara visio, and obseura cognitio differunt sp^cie, ita
etiam amo^ viae, and amor patriae, qui in illis fundantur. Sed conc^usio nostra
est D. Thom. in 2 quaest. 67. art. 6. ad 2. ubi asserit dilectionem sum^re suam
sp^ciem, and essintiam, non ex cognitione, sed ex re cognita: ac proi^de in via
and i^ pat^^ia esse ^and^m sp^cie charitatem, quia licet cognitio sit diversa,
tamen res cognita est eadem. Et confirmatur, quia diversitas essentialis in
actibus voluntatis, praesertim quando convenient in genere proximo, debet swni
ex diversitate objecti formalis. At in amore viae, and patriae, est idem
objectum formale, nempe infinita benitas, qua Deus in se infinite bonus est:
ergo in illis actibus non est diversitas essentialis.

The second answer is that duo accidentia solo numero distincta possunt salte^
supernatur aliter esse in eadem subjecto, etc.

But this supernatural providence of God, is not to be fled unto without a man
be necessitated thereunto by some cogent argument and if you can find any such
argument in Suarez, good leave may you have to manage it unto your best
advantage.

All the argument that I can find in Suarez, is, that he thinks it fit to
extend the merit of Christ unto his love of God. Now his beatifick love of God,
was not meritoricus, (says he) bec^^se 'twas not free, but necessary: and
therefore he thinks there must be another love of God in Christ assigned, which
was free, and so capable of meriting. This argument you also propound very
often.

Unto this argu^^here are in the Schoolmen several answers, of which you take
no notice: for which concealment I believe no probable reason can be rendered,
but your late and small acquaintance with the Schoolmen.

1. Some hold that Christ did merit by the beatifick act of his love of God, as
terminated unto God himself. Suarez, in the place by you cited, quoteth for
this opinion, Altisiodorensis, Gabri^l, S^^tus and Capreolus, unto whom you may
s^^ in Vasquez added, Almain, Occam Major. You refer the Read, to a short
passage of Scotus, in the place cited by Suarez, which proves nothing denied
by me. But I shall now refer you to another paslage in the same place, which
expressly contradicts you; for there Scotus declares at large how Christ
merited by his beaufice love of God, as he was Comprehensor, Dico (inquit)
propter argum^nt^m, quod Ch^istus meruit secuadum portionem superiorem and
secundum omn ^^actum ejus. Hoe^tamen est difficile tenere propter alios beato^,
qui tunc videntur posse mereri in infinitum: pro^o autem illud, quia omnis
actu^, acceptatus (...) Deo, tanquam actus ^ow^s and landabilis, pro quo Deus
velit a^ quid retribuere illi, cujus actum acceptat, vel alteri, pro quo fit,
est meritorius: bujusmodi est omnis actus Cbristi secundum naturam humanun:
etiam actus beatificur, quo secundum po^tionem superiorem fruitur D^o: quia
persona illa non secu^dum omnem conditionem sui, fuit simpliciter in termino;
ideo potuit Deus omnem actum creatum illius personae acceptare tanquam dignum
aliquo boto pro^co retribuendo illi personae, si indiguisset, vel alteri,
scilicet nobis, pro quibus meruit. Et hoc tenendo, oporter dicere, quod si
actus beatificus secundum portion^m superiorem Christi suit meritorius, quod
non includit contradictiounn actum beatifieum Michaelis, vel alterius beati,
pesse acceptari tanquam aliquid dignum retributione, quod retribu^um dar^tar
propter mer^tum; puta daretur Michaeli aliquid propter actum meritorium
custodiae quam exerces circa me, contradictio dico non esset; tamen de facto
D^us, non sic^acceptat actum illum, quia persona illa est totaliter extra
statum m^rendi secundum totum subjectum: non sic Christus, sed secundum aliquid
suit in statu viatoris, and propter hoc omnis actus ejus creatus acceptus erat,
and meritorius illis, pro quibus offerrebatur Deo.

O^e would think it very strange, that you should over see this passage in
Scotus, in the very same question that you quote. I may here make use of your
words concerning my self, p. 633. I can think of no other probable ground of
the Defendants m^stake, but only his writing at random, and c^njectures upon
other men's short notes and suggestions. But this oversight is trivial, in
respect of that which is in your Quotation out of Nicholaus Da Orbellis, p.
349. for in that there are words expressly gainsaying your opinion; for they
assert that it was possible for the beati^ick act in Christ (that is, in the
Scotist-language, his fruition of God by love consequent unto the beatifical
vision) to be meritorious. Ideo potuit Deus omnow actum creatum illius personae
acce^tare tanqu ^n dignum pro se, vel pro illis pro quibus offertur Deo, etiam
actum beatificum. Sicut enim meritum non tantum consistit in ipso actu clicito,
sed in conditionibus per^se elieitis; sic acceptatio divina non solum respicit
actum, sed conduioxes accidentales suppositi elicient is.

In pig. 637. with a great deal of gravity and scorn, you advise me for the
future to let the School men and Scholast^cal Divinity alone, etc. But I have
juster reason to advise you, that seeing you have been so unhappy in quoting
Scotus, and his Epitomator, Nicholaus De-Orbellis; to get some able friend, if
not to consture, yet to expound such passages, as you shall quote for the
future our of School men: seeing you are so wonderfully prone to allege out of
them such things as make nothing for you, but apertly against you. But to
return to the matter in hand.

This opinion of Scotus touching the meritoriousneffe of Christ's beatifick love
of God, is maintained by the generality of his followers, as may be seen in two
renowned ones of them, Faber Favent^nus in Sent. lib. 3. disp. 48. p. 210, 211,
212. Kada Super 3. lib Sent. Controv. 12. a. 1. p. 338, 339. In Faber^
Faventinus there are two other arguments, besides that already urged by S^^tus,
Contra eandem assertionem recentiorum, quod Christus non merucrit actu
beatifico, est aliud argumentum: nam certum est, quod Christus dilexit Deum ex
charitate, and voluit illi bonum affectione ^ustitiae, and in hoc praesertim
consistit meritum, lit ait Scot. and ipsi saten^u^, quia radix omuis m^^iti
^p^d Deum est charitas, and amor ipsius Dei, ergo non vid^tu^ negan^um esse hoe
meritum: (...) Christo, at hic amor, and dil^^^io in Christo fuit fruitio
beatifica, quia erat beatus, and videbat Deum clare, ex qua visione sequebatur
dilectio, and fruitio perfectissima, quae est beatifica.

Praeterca est argumentum Sco^i, sieut in nobis meritum respicit partem
intellectivam, sic in Christo, sed in nohis non est meritum, nisi sit in
portione superiori, neque (...) meremur acti^us nostris, nisi voluntas nostra
perfectissime jungatur Deo actibus, qui recipient Deum, sicut nec peccamus,
nisi ^oluntas nostra ^ cedat a Deo, ergo Christus non potuit mereri secundum
portionem inseriorem tantum, and non superiorem, si meruit autem superiori, hoc
suit per dilectionem Dei, quia hic actus immediate tendit in Deum, ergo
dilectio, quae est fruitio, fuit actus meritorius in Christo. loc. praedict.

Unto this some Modern-School-men answer, by distinguishing, as our Defendant,
out of Suarez, concerning a twofold love of God in Christ. This distinction
Faber Fav^ntinus, in the place but now cited, first propounds, and then refutes.

1. He propounds it. Respondent ad hoc Recentiores ubi supra diffingnendo de
duplici actu amoris and dilection is in Christo, nam alter actus dilection is
crat in Christo, quatenus erat comprehensor, qui sequcbatur visionem
beatisicam; and hoc actu non meruit, quia non crat actus liber; alter vero
actus dilectionis ^rat in Christo, in quantum crat Viator, qui sequ^batur, non
visionem beatificam, sed cognitionem insusam, and hoc actu m^ruit, quia erat
actus liber, and hanc s^ntentiam ^sserunt essa D. Th. multis in lo^is, sed
p^ae^^rtim, 3. p. q. 19. a. 2. in responsione ad primum, uli ait, quod Christus
per charitatem meruit, non in quantum crat Comprch^^ser sed ut ^^ot Vi^o^r.

2. Having thus propounded the distinction, he replieth unto it. Sed contra
hanc Responsionem est argum ntum secundum Sco^i ^^in ipalc, quo probat, quod
actus, quo anima Christi f^uebatur Deo, non poteran esse duo, sed unas tantum,
quod argumentum est tstud: actus fru^ti^nis est actus adaequatus potentiae,
quia voluntas creata fenitar quantum otest: seduna, and cadem potentia cirea id
m^objectum, non hab^t actum (...) adaequa um, and alterum in daequatum, and
distinctum a primo, quia boc implicat co^radiction m, nam primus non esset
adaequatus, ^rgo voluntas Christi per actum s^uitio^is non po^est diligere Deum
per se amo^e amicitie ad^qua^e, and per alium actum cundem Deum deligere per se
amo^e a^icitiae, sed in d^q^ate.

N^xt he sets down the Rejoinder of the Adversary, and unto it sub, oyns his
Triplication. Sed Responderunt, quod Major est vera, quin actus sunt omnino
cjusdem rationis, sed q^ando sunt d^v^^rsi actus, and diversae rationis, non
est vera In proposito autem sunt dive^siactus specie, quia actus fractionis
tender in Deum propter omnem perfectionem, and rationem propter quam Deus est
amabilis, sed amor, qui est meri oriustendit in Deum propter aliquam speccialem
^ationem, ut propter justitiam, vel misericordiam, etc. and haec diversitas
dicitur esse sufficiens, ut actus ille distinguatur a priori. Secundo dicerent,
quod s^nt diversi numero, quia tendant in Deum, quod est objectum idem diversis
viis, quia aliud per charitatem consummatum, aliud per charitatem viae.

Sed istae Responsiones non satisfaciunt argumento, queniam non recte probatur
istos actus distingui, nam actus distinguuntur per objecta ex ^^cando de anima:
at objectum actus fruitioni^ per se est ipse Deus diligibilis propter se amore
amicitiae, similiter objectum primum meriti est. Deus ipse diligiblis propter
se amore amicitiae volendo sibi bonum, cum ergo objectum sit idem materialiter,
and secundum eandem rationem formalem actus non possunt esse diversi.

Ad primam rationem, qua probat diversitatem specificam, dico qued illae
circumstantiae, non plu^ificant essentiam actus, sed solum mutant in eo aliquas
circumstantias, and accidentia, externa autem accidentia non plurificant
substantiam rei.

Praeterea dato, quod illae circumstantiae faciant diversitatem actus, tune non
solvitur argumentum, quia nos hic quaecimus, an actus amoris, quod tendit in
Deum plen^, and amat illum ^more amicitiae toto cord, and intensiori modo, quo
potest, sit meritorius, necne, non de aliis actibus dilectionis sub varils
circumstantiis minus perfectis, nam videtur absurdum negare in Christo actum
illum perfectiorem, qu odilexit Deum totis viribus, non esse meritorium cum in
nebis sit meritorius, Secunda ratio non concludit, qula eadem charitas, quae
est in via, remanet in Patria, ut docet Scot. in hoc 3. suo leco, ideo ex medio
non distinguuntur istiactus.

Praeterea, ut dictum est, m^dium non variat actum substantialiter, sed
accidentaliter, at distinctio accidentalis nihil facit.

Praeterea argumentum Scotistat in suo robo^e, vis enim argumentiest, quia
nulia poten^ia cadem pot^st habere unum actum adaequatum circa al^quod
objectum, and simal alterum actum inadaequatum circa idem objectum, q^^a
implicat contrad^ctionem, ratio est, qu^a in illo primo actu adaequato
includitut actus imperfectus, and inadaequatus. Ad proposuum, actus fruitionis
est actus, quo perfectissine, and sub omaibus circumst untiis diligit illud
objectum, ergo non potest also actu sub alia circumslantia dil^gere idem
objectum quia jam hic actus includitur in illo and ^^ustia maltiplicatur. Quod
verod cunt D. Th. fuisse hujus sententiae, ego puto falsum, quia loco citato,
dum ait, Christum me^uisse charitate non in quantum erat comarchensor, sed
viator, non infert diversi^atem actus ut ipsi volunt, sed diversitatem status
personae; ac si dicat, Christus meruit actu elicito ex charitate, quiactus erat
fiuitio, sed quia a^rus ille erat p^rsonae, quae simal erat Viat^r, and
Comprehensor, illo mer^it, non in quantum erat comprehensor, sed in quantum
erat viator, and hoc modo cum intelligendo, conven^t cum Scot. ut infra
videbimus. Sed dices, potu^t Christus habere d^plicem actum cognitionis D^i,
scil. per visionem beatificam, and per scientiam infusam: Ergo potuit quoque
habere duplicem actum amoris, alterum per fruition^m beatam, alterum per
charitatem infusam. Respondent, q^^d non est par ratio de scientia, and amore,
quia scientia eiat de codem objecto, sed diverso modo cognito, and per diversa
media, q^ae faciunt cognitionem esse diversam, distinguitur enim scientia penes
m dium, sed amo^, ut hic loquimur, est de cod^m objecto, codem modo, ac etiam
medio. Faber Faventinus. lib. 3. did. 18. q. 1. disp. 44.

There are two considerable Objections against this doctrine of Scotus, which
are at large propounded and ans^ ered in these two eminent Scotists that ^
mentioned, Sed est tune alia difficultas gravis, quia si c^n^edatur Christum
m^ruisse actu fruitionis, and beatifico, videtur idem dic^n lum de aliis
beatis, quod est absardum, quia Beati in Pat^ia su s^actibus non merentur, quia
sunt in termino. Resp^^d^t S^^t. non valere consequentiam, ratio est, quia ut
superins dictum est in ra^^on^ meritt inc^uditue acceptatio divint, placait
^rgo Deo acceptare omnes actus Christi, tam poritionis inforioris, and partis
sensiti^^, quam po^tionis superioris, and beatificos promevitoriis, idio facio
hoc pacto ab aetern^, actus illi erant merito ji, and hoc codem modo potu^sset
actus aliorum Beato (...) pro meritoriis acceptasse, sivolu^sset, and secisset,
hoc pactum, quia non implicat conradictionem, tamca quia non fecit hoc pactum,
ideo illi non sunt meritorii, non fecit autem Deus hoc pactum neceptandi actus
b^atorum pro meritoriis, quia in illis non crat congruitas, quae erat in
actibus Christi, dum erat in bac vita, number Christus in bac vita non crat
co^unctus Deo, q. o. ad affectiomem commodi perfect, ut ceteri beati, sed
poterat pati, and de facto patiebatur, ergo suit congruum, quod omnes actus
Christi, etiam beatisici acceptarentur pro meritoriis ratione personae, qua
erat Viator. Faber Faventinus in tertium lib. Sent. disp. 44. p. 212.

Sed his modus dicendi dissicilis est propter alios beatos qui tune videntur
posse mereri in infinitam. Nihilominus tamen probatur, quoniam omtis actus
acceptatus a Deo, tanquam actus bonus, and laudabilis pro quo Deus velit
aliquid retribuere illi cujus actum acceptat, vel alteri pro quo sit, est
meritorius. Sed omnis actus Christi sec^^dum naturam humanam, etiam actus
beatificus voluntatis est bujusmodi, ergo est meritodius. Consequentia optima
est cum majori, minor probatur. Number quia persona Christi non fuit seundwn omnem
conditionem sui simpliciter in termino, poruit Deus omnem actum creatum ejus
acceptare, tanquam dignu^n aliquo bone, pro co retribu^^do, vel Christo si
indiguisset, vel alteri, si nobis pro q^^bus meruit. Ex quo insertur non esse
contradictionem, nec eam includore, acture beatificum Michaclis, vel alterius
beati acceptari tanquam aliquid dignum retribution^, qudd daretur propter
meritum. Defacto tamen nullum actum beatisicum alicujus beati, n^c quemlibet
alium acceptavit, no^ acce tat, quia persona cujuscunque beati est totaliter
extra statum mere^di secund^m totum subjectum. Non sic Christus, sed
securdunali quid fuit in statu Viator is propter quod omnis ejus c^eatus ac^u^
liber acceptuserat, and meritorius illis pro quibus offerebatur Dco. Sed
objicies, quomodo Christus mereri potuit cum secundum portionem superiorem
suerit extra vi, am, non minus, quam alii beati, videtur sane, quod non plus
mereri potuerit quam alius beatus in Patria.

Respondeo cum Scoto, quod sicut meritum non respicit, nec consistit tantum in
ipso actu eli^ito, sed aliquo modo in conditionibus persona suae suppositi
e^^cien^is, sic acceptatio Divine non solum respicit actum, sed conditiones
etiam accid^^tates suppositi clicientis. Atque it^ actus Christi ctiam
beatisicus, cum ipse esset viator, nec totaliter in termino potuit ob hane
conditionem acceptari, non tamen actus beatificus alterius beati, licet in hoc
nulla esset contradictio. Rada Super tert. lib. sent. controv. 12. a. 1. p.
338, 339.


Faber Faventinus and Rada.

The first is taken from a comparison of Christ's beatisick love, with that of
the blessed Angels and Saints in heaven. If his beatisick love of God be
meritorious, then also that of the blessed Angels and Saints in Heaven is so
too: But this is absurd, for then they should merit unto all eternity.

They both answer out of Scotus by denial of the sequel of the Major, and for
this denial they give this reason: God's acceptance is requisite unto merit,
Now God accepts all the created acts of Crist as meritoriou^, whereas he made
no Covenant with, or promise unto the blessed Angels and Saints in Heaven,
touching any such acceptance. And for this different dispensation toward them
and Christ, they lay down out of Scotus this following congruence. Whilst
Christ was here in this life, he was Viator as well as Comprehensor, and
consequently all his created actions were capable of meriting: for merit
regards not only the action meriting, but also the state and condition of the
person performing the action: but now the blessed Angels and Saints in Heaven
were absolutely and altogether comprehensores, and so in termino extra statum
merendi incapable of meriting: You see then they resolve the meritoriousnesse
of Christ's beatisick love of God into the condition of Christ's person: Christ
merited by it, not so much because 'twas beatisick, but because 'twas the love
of a person who was in some respect Viator, in via, which was a state of
meriting

A second Objection is drawn from the necessity of Christ's beatisick love of
God: Every merito. ious act is free; for freedom is essentially requlfite unto
merit. But now Christ's beatisick love of God was not free, because 'twas
necessary. And freedom and necessity are incompetible in the same act: It
follows therefore that Christ's beatisick love of God was not meritorious.
This argument the Defendant inculcates frequently.

The Scotists answer by denying the Minor. Christ's beatisick love of God was,
say they, free, though not with a freedom of indifferency, yet with a freedom
of complacency, and that not only concomitant, but causal. I call that
concomitant, which is in acts whereof the will is not a cause, qua voluntas
sibi complacet in aliquo, etsi respectu ejus nullius causae^^ration^m habet:
and such a freedom there was (say they) in the Fathers b^get^ing of the Son,
the Father had a complacency therein, and was well-pleased therewith. But he
did not beget the Son by any act of his will. I call that cansal, which is in
acts whereof the will is a cause. This is that liberty which the Scotists call
the essential liberty of the will, and is by Rada thus defined. Haec libertas
est complacenter cognitione finis sub propria finis ratione, supposita, quasi
se determinare ad agendum, sive con ingenter se determinet, sive necessario. In
1. lib. sent. Controv. 13. p. 207. This freedom the Scotists make to agree
unto every elicite act of the will, and consequently unto the b^atifick love of
God. And the reason that they give, is, because freedom is essential to the
will, and is pred^cated of it quit^nus ipswn, and a quatenus ad de omni valet
argumentum: What is predicated of the will as the will, is p^edicated of every
act of the will. This reason is urged very acutely by Faber Faventinus against
Cajetan, who says that the will is a free agent only in respect of some acts,
and not in regard of others, Contra: vel competit vol^ntati s^cundum essentiam,
and abso^ute esse p^^ncip^um liberum, vel non, si non ergo volun^ as
accidentaliter est principium liberum, and tun^ quaere, quaenam fit illa
potentia, cui inest principium agendi libere per essentiam, vel est voluntas
vel non dabitur principiu^ liberum essentialiter, quod est absurdum, quia omne
per accidens redueitur ad aliquod per se, datur principium liberum per
accidens; ergo debet dari principium liberum per essentiam. Si dicas voluntaes
respectu aliquorum actum est libera per essentiam, resp^ctu a^ orum est
natueale principium. Co^^ra quod inest alieui per ess^ntiam, and secundum quod
ipsum inest ^i universaliter. Ex Arist. 1. Post. c. 4. exemplum. Homo per
eslentiam, and secundum quod ipsum est rationalis, ideo omnis actus, qui
provenit ab homine per essentiam, est rationalis, i. per rationem factus, unde
actus naturales sentiendi, vegetandi, etc. quia non sunt rationales non
competunt homini, ut homo est, sed ut animal and vivens: Est ergo verissimum,
quod inest alicui secundum quod ipsum inesse ei universaliter, tunc sic, at
voluntas est principium liberum per essentiam, ergo universaliter est libera
respectu omnis actus, vel est dicendum, quod non est libera per essentiam, sed
per accidens, quod jam rejectum est, ut absurdum, si dicas quod inest voluntati
secundum essentiam, tenc sic. Duo praedicata contraria, and mu^^ o se
destruentia, non poss^nt in^sse ^^dem subjecto, securdum id m, quia implicat
repugnantiam, sed voluntati secundum essentiam inest esse principium liberum,
ergo nonporest secundum essentiam inesse principium natural, ut contra
distinguitur a libero, ut in proposito intendimus, ex hace, go ratione
colligitur, qued voluntas essentialiter est libera non naturalis, and sic
patet, quod ratio Scoti concludit, n^m rum quod agere naturaliter, and agere
libere sunt differentiae primae entis, quae non possunt inesse eidem potentiae,
and principio essentialiter, sed necessario constituunt duo opposita principia
activa, quotum unum non redecitur ad alterum, nec ambo ad tertium, and per hoc
impugnatur, quo^ volt ^as r^spectu sin's cla. e^v^si, and beatitudinis in
communi habeat actum naturalem, si en^m est potentia essentia^ter libera, omnis
actus clic^^us ab ea est ei liber non naturalis.

Consi matur, quia aliequin voluntas in primo instanti, quo habet actum
naturalem, nonesset voluntas, sed natura, and ita non habe et esseperfectum,
sed transiret de imperfecto ad perfectum, quod de divina voluntate est
absurdum, and ^tiam de creata quia illa in instanti prod^c^tur, and ideo in
illo habet totam suam perfectionem. In lib. 1. Sent. disp. 37. p. 223.

Unto Faber Faventinus let me add Rada, who Lib. 1. Contr. 13. p. 210, 211.
proves largely, That the will, quatenus potentia est, cannot be considered
prout natura est, as nature is an active principle distinct from that which is
free, and therefore consequently cannot have any natural act, but all its acts
are free.

Quinta conclusio voluntas quatenus potentia est, nequit considerari, ut
natura, prout natura est principium activum distinctum contra liberum, nec ut
talis aliquam actionem habet. P^obo priorem hujus conclusionis partem. Primo
potentia naturalis and potentia I bera sunt oypositae potentiae, ergo cadem
voluntas non porest considerari, and ut natura, and potentia libera, vel
d^stingui in naturam, and petentiam liberam. Antece^ens probatur, quia Arist.9.
Met. tex. and 6. distinguit liberum a naturali. Consequentia probatur, quia
tunc idem distingucretur in se, and in oppositum sui, sicut si animal
distingueretur in animal, and non animal, vel homo in hominem and equum. Quod
patet: quia (ut diximus) potentia naturalis and libera opponuntur, sed
distinctio, qua distinguitur idem in seipsum, and in oppositum sui, est prorsus
absurda, ut de se paret: ergo illa distinctio, qua voluntas in naturam and
liberam distinguitur, est absurda, Confirmatur argumentum, quia unica potentia
non potest habere gem^num operandi modum oppositum atque diversum: sed agere
libere and naturaliter sunt modi oppositi immediatae dividentes potentiam
activam, ut supra diximus: Ergo voluntas non potest per modum naturae and
libertatis, utrumque consideretur, operari, etc.

Ad confirmationem dico, maximum esse inconveniens ^^ndem potentiam specie, and
numero diversos, and oppositos omni^ o operand modos habere. Nam sicut duas
differentias idem genus dividentes cid^m speciei inesse implicat: ita implicat
omnino idem prin ipium specie, and numero habere diversos, and oppositos
operandi modos, quales sunt agere libere, and naturaliter, quod ex aequo, and
immed^a^e d^vidunt principium activum. Et cum objicitur, quod an ma operatur
cum discursu, and sine discursu in ord^ne ad diversa, scilicet principia, and
conclusiones, R^spondeo quod ut ait Scot. in 2. d 1. q 6. (...) A. agere cum
discursu and sine d^sc^rsu, non sunt modi oppositi, arque (...), diversas
naturas indicantes, came eidem nitur^^ ^at onali ins nt: at ve^o agere libere,
and agere per modum naturae, modi sun^ omnino oppositid^versis nec^ssar o
pri^cipi^s convenient^s: (...) principium activum prima divisione dividitur in
liberum and natural, etc.

Secunda pars ejusdem conclusionis, ^t puta, quod voluntas nallam operationem
habeat, ut n^^ura, sed ut voluntas, probatur. Voluntas ut natura, pro^t natura
distinguitur contra agens liberum, nullaten is porest sine repugnantia
considerari: E go ut natura non potest habere actionem. P^aeter^a, cum
consideras voluntatem, ut naturam, vel ly natura, lumitur pro principio
opposito, and distincto contra liberum: and hec j^m manet impugnatum.
Volaccipitur in communi ad p^incipium liberum and natural. Et si sic, claumn
est quod nullam potest habere operationem: quia operatio cum sit singularis and
determinata, necessario o^tum habet a principio singulari determinato: Ergo
necessar^o debet esse, vel principitum liberum, vel natural: E^go si est illa
actio a voluntate, ut natura necessario voluntas ut sic, erit agens per modum
naturae, vel liberum, sed non primam propter dicta: Ergo s^cundum: Ergo
voluntas, ut natura, est vo^untas, ut libera: Ergo agit libere. ^Et
confirmatur: quia sicut omnis actus elicitus intellectus est ab intellectu,
quatenus intellectus est: ita omnis actus voluntatis, est a voluntate, ut
voluntas, and libera est. Et certe si voluntas praecise, ut natura quaedam est,
consideratur, solum habet propensionem and inclinationem in su^m sinem sicut
lapis in centrum: quia omnis actus and operatio elicita ejus est ab ipsa, ut
potentia libera est contra potentiam naturalem distincta. Quod voluntas ut
natura nullam habeat operationem, tenet subtilis Doctor in 3. d. 15. lit. A.and
did. 33. paulo ante lit. O.

Whereas it is added for the confirmation of the Minor, that Christ's beatisick
love of God was necessary, as being a necessary consequent of the beatifical
vision in him, and freedom and necessity are repugnant.

Unto this the Scotists Unde pro dilucidatione hujus rei, and rationum in
oppositum, notandum est, 1st elicitur ex Scoto quodl. 16. a. 2. circasinem, and
dicemus in Metaph. in propria disp. haec quatuor, contingens, necessarium,
natural, and liberum sic se habere, quod contingens, and necessarium
opponuntur, ut patet ex Arist. 2. Periher, inc. de modalibus similiter
natural, and liberum opponuntur, utpatet ex little definitionibus. Natural
enim est quod determinatum ad age adum, liberum, quod est indeterminatum ad
agendum, sed scipsum determinat, ex quo sequitur necessarium stare cum
naturali, and cum libero, quia illis non opponitur, non autemstare cum
contingenti; similiter sequtur liberum stare posse cum necessario, and cum
co^i^genti, quia illis non oppenitur, non outens ^oss^ stare cum naturali.
Confirmatur, quia in Philosophia multa naturaliter fiunt, and ta^^^per accidens
five contengencer siunt, ut monstra, and quae casu, and fortuna even unt, ut
(...) Et tam^^ causae per se illius omnes s^^^t naturales, multa etiam
natural^ter, and necessario siuat, ut patet in conting^^ generatione, crgo
aliquid produci (...), and contingenter no p^g^^nt, non crgo hae^ (...),
aliquid sit naturaliter, ergo (...): similiter multa a c^ssario (...), and no^
natura^iter, ut quae coacie, and vio^^te siunt.

(...) libere siua^, and (...) cessario non contingenter, unde ownes communiter
dieu^t, (...) and p^aes^^tim D. To. q. 10 de Pot^^ia. a. (...) ad 5. diligit
ergo D^^^ se liber^ (...), and (...), quia si libere, and necessario hic esset
(...), quod (...) Thomiste dicere, quod spiritus sanctus libere and (...), quo^
lamen dicu^t ^pugnare, ut rev^ra repuga^t ex little d^finitio^^us, omnes crgo
susii: en^es (...) dicant D^^m nece ario se deligere, (...) ut Theologi, and
m^^^i ex P^r^p^teticis, licet in actibus ad extra p^^^ant D^um agere
necessario, and beati in patria s^^undum nos libere diligunt D^^n, and tamen
necessario, lic^t ^rgo in volunt^^^ creata pro hoc statu cou^iagentia
concomit^nter libertatem, and saepe consun^^ntur, tamen propr e loqu (...)
idem, ut vidimus, ex hoc patet solut^o dab^tat onis, quia licet concedamus
Spiritum Sanctum procedere libere non tamen ab hoc sequitur contingerter
produci. Faber Faventinus. In 1um lib. Sent. disp. 37. c 4. p. 224, 325.


answer, that there is no such repugnancy betwixt freedom and necessity, as is
imagined: indeed a natural agent, and a free are opposite, and so also a
necessary agent and cowingent: And therefore the same agent in the sane act
cannot work naturally and freel^, w^^ssarily, and contingently. But now there
is no such opposition betwixt natural and contingent, and betwixt free and
n^cessary: and hereup on it follows, that a natural agent may work
contingently, and per accidens, as we see in Monsters, in casu, and so^^wta:
and so again on the other side, a free agent may work necessarily; thus God
loves himself most freely, and yet withal most nec^ssarily too. Rada has four
very shrewd Arguments, to prove the co^sistency of the highest freedom, with
the highest nec^ssity, which I shall insert for the Defendant to try his utmost
still upon. Quod summa necessitas ^star cum summa liberate, probo
multipliciter. Primovoluntas divina necessario vult bonitatem suam (ut supra
ostendimus) and tamen in volendo eam est libera: igitur libertas stat cum summa
necessitate. Consequentia tenet; minorem vero probo. Voluntas divina refert ad
finem alia objecta, quae sunt volibilia propter finem, igitur ipsa sub eadem
ratione potentiae est operativa circa utrunque: sed circa ea, quae sunt ad
sinem, operatur sub ratione potentiae liberae, ut etiam Thomistae concedunt,
ergo etiam circa sinem, (ut puta circa bonitatem suam) operabitur sub ratione
potentiae liberae, ergo libere vult bonitatem suam. Prima consequentia hujus
argumentationis probatur, quia potentia operans circa unum objectum, non
absolute, sed in ordine ad aliud, eadem sub eadem ratione est operativa circa
utrunque. Quod pater ex Philos. 2. de anima tex. Com. 146. ubi ait, quod
potentia illa, qua cognoscimus differentiam unius objecti ab alio, illamet sub
eadem ratione potentiae, cognoscit utrunque: ergo sim^liter in proposi^o
potentia operans circa unum objectum in ordin: ad aliud, ipsa sub eadem ratione
potentiae, operabitur circa ut^unque. Et c^nfi^matunquia alias oporterer
constituere unam potentiam, quae versaretur ci^ca sinem and aliam circa media.

Secundo probatur. Libertas est Conditio intrinseca voluntatis absolute, vel in
ord^ne ad actum vol^ndi, ergo est compossibilis cum condition perfecta
opera^ionis perfectae circa perfect^ssimum Objectum, praesertim illa conditio
n^n repugnat, im^ otest convenire tali operationi: sed talis conditio in
operatione perf^ct^est necessitas: Er^o libertas est compossibilis cum
necessitate. Antecedens est manifestum, quia voluntas natura sua int^inseca
libera est. Consequentia probatur, quia conditio intrinseca potentiae, quae
secundum se nullam dicit imperfectionem, non potesf esse contraria, perfectioni
operationis ejusdem potentiae, quia tunc prorsus repugnaret hujusmodi potentiae
habere perfectam operationem etiam in ente infinito, in quo reperitur. S^d^quod
talis conditio perfecta, sit necessitas, patet, quia perfectio voluntatis, unde
voluntas est, est diligere Deum, ergo perfectionis est habere illam operationem
sirmiter, and nec^ssario. Et confirmatur: quia posse non habere illam dicit
imperfectionem, ergo necessario habere illam, perfectionis est maximae, and
rutsus, ergo est possibilis illa necessitas in operatione perfect^ voluntatis,
ut voluntas est: alias enim, nec in Deo reperitetur.

Tertio probatur. Actio circa finem ultimum, ut finis est, est perfectissima,
ergo necessitas in tali action non tollit, sed magis ponit id, quod ad ejus
perfectionem per sepertinet, sed libertas maxim eam perficit, ergo necessitas
quae in tali action reperitur, non tollit, sed ponit potius libertatem. Probo
assumptionem, quia actio libera ex natura sua est perfectior cunctis
operationibus, ut in controversiis quarti, Deo favente, ostendemus.

Quarto probatur. Q^antoactio voluntatis circa finem ultimum est magis
necessaria, tanto est liberior. Ergo summa necessitas est compossibilis cum
summa liberate. Consequentia est evidens, antecedens probo, quia secundum
Anselmum and Augustinum, quos supra citavimus, illa voluntas est liberior, quae
omnino a rectitudine deviare non potest, sed illa quae necessario simpliciter
diligit bonum insinitum a rectitudine nullatenus deviare potest, ergo illa est
liberrima: sed talis est divina voluntas respectu dilectionis Dei, etc. ergo
est respectu carum liberrima. In 1^m lib. Sent. Controv. 13. p. 213, 214.

The Defendant is pleased to say, page 68. That the Saints and Angels in heaven
love God freely, with a freedom improperly taken, for a liberty from co^action.

But first, the Scotists Cenditio intrinscca potent^e ^^n repugnot perf^ctioni
in^p rando ip Gus poten^ie, si(...) ab sulate pot^mia consideretu, si^ in
ordine ad^actum perfectum, s^d libertas est coad tio intrinscea, and
essentiatis, voluntatis, ergo non repugnat p^rfici^oni ^^sius vol n^a^is in
operande ei ca actium porf^ctissmum. Faber Faventinus In 1um lib. S^nt disp.
37. c 3. p. 221.
will tell him that freedom is attributed unto their love of God in the
greatest propriety. For the beatisick love is the greatest perfection incident
unto their wills: and freedom is an intrins^cal and essential condition of
their wills. Now (say they) th^^ which is int^ins^cal and esscut^^l unto a
power or faculty, cannot be repugnant unto the greatest perfect on thereof:
therefore the beatisick love of God which is accessory, and freedom, are no
ways inconsistent.

Secondly, In their love of God there is a freedom, not only from coact on,
but also from natural necessity, such as that which is in the metion of a stone
downward, which prelupposeth no act of the understanding. The n^cessity which
is in their love of God, is not such anecessity, but a voluntary necessity,
which has always foregoing anact of intellectual knowledge. And this for the
first answer unto the difficulty propounded.

There is by some Schoolmen given another, indeed a quite contrary answer: and
'cis, that Christ's love of God was not meritorious, and in asserting this they
think there is no absurdity, because there is otherwise a very wide and
spacious field for Christ's merit, in the acts of his love of man, and in the
^cts of his other virtues. Of this opinion Beca^us makes mention, Sum. Theol.
Scholast. tom. 5. c. 14. q. 3. Alij sic s^^t unt Christiam suisse viatorens,
not solum ratione carnis, and animae passibilis, sicut jam expl^catum est, sed
etiam ratione animae, quatenus amabat proximos. Comprehensorem vero, ratione
animae, quatenusamabat Deum clare visam. Itaque meruisse per actium charitatis
circa proximos; non tamen per actum charitatis circa Deum. This opinionhe
thinks to be probable, and Suarez in 3am part. Thom. tom. 1. dis^. 39. S. 2.
says that it may easily be defended. The contrary opinion therefore, at the
most is but a Scholastical Problem. But Vasquez has a full defense of this
Opinion, that Christ's love of God was not meritorious: and with it he joyneth a
refutation of this distinction, of Christslove, given by Suarez, and others:
the passige is somewhat large, but because it is home, and accurate, I hope I
shall have the Readers patience for the inserting of it.

Mihi vero multo probabilius semper visum est, Christum non meruisse per
affectum ullum charitatis, and dilectionis erga Deum, sed per opera aliarum
virtutum, tam circa se, quam circa proximum, etc.

Primum igitur Christum non meruisse per illum actum charitatis ortum ex
scientia infusa in Doctrina S. Thomae, manifestum est, nam cum ille aperte
dicat q. 11. a. 1. essentiam Dei, ac proinde mysterium ipsum Trinitatis, non
cecidisse sub scientiam infusam, id quod nos etiam supra disputatione 53. c. 11
satis saperque probavimus, consequitur nullum potuisse in Chrislo esse affectum
dilectionis erga Deum p^aeter illum, quem vocant beatificum, cumque ille non
potuerit esse meritorius, ut p^aecedenti capite monstravimus, effieitur etiam,
per nullum actum dilectionis Dei Ghristum mereri potuisse: quamvis enim
di^amus, in Christo mansisse scientiam naturalem unins Dei, tamen illa non
potuit esse principium dilect^on^s ipsius Dei ex charitate, ut manifestum est.
Praeterea cum Christus non habuerit fidem, sequitur, ex nulla cognitione
potuisse Deum dil^gere. Age tamen, concedamus Christo scientiam-infusam
essentiae Dei distinct^m ab adquisita, nihilom^nus frustra in eo concedemus
daos affectus charitatis erga Deum, alterum ortum ex visione clam Dei,
alterum^ex scientia infusa; nam affectus dilectionis tendit in rem cognitam,
sicut in subjectum, non autem in ipsam cognitionem: ergo licet esset scientia
infusa Dei in Christo, quia tamen esset eadem bonitas ipsius Dei proposita
voluntati per scientiam infusam, and per visionem, idem-effectus esset
dilectionis: qua ratione, ut communis fert opinio Theologorum, eadem est
dilectio Dei in via, and in patria, and quamvis visio Dei in patria ess^t causa
novi actus dilectionis Dei, quia intensius eliceretur, aut alio modo, tamen non
potest esse causa diversi actus secundum speciem, and uterque actus simul non
posset manner in patria, etiamsi in patria posset manner fides, non quidem alia
ratione, nisi quia dum-voluntas movetur circa objectum duplici modo cognitum,
solum ab eo allicitur prout perfectiori modo cognito, ipsum autem prout
cognitum minus perfecto modo nihil mover voluntatem, ac^^ eo modo cognitum non
esset and hoc quisque quotidie in se ipso experitur; nam cum quis diligit alium
ex relatu, atque ipsum, and ea, quae de ipso audiverat, postea vider, jam non
ex relatu, sed ex clara visione, and experientia ipsum diligit, and aliorum
testimonium nihil in ipso operatur, ut eam diligat: quae doctrina multo majori
ratione in p^aesenti locum habet; nam cum essentia divina per claram vifionem
perfectissimo modo videatur, ita ut necessario ad se trahat voluntatem per
aff^ctum amoris, ut supra diximus, neque adeo rapiet ad se voluntatem, ut ipsa
deinceps moveri non possit ex alio genere cognitionis ad diligendum Deum alio
affectu, aut codem. Quod vero dicitur Johannis 14. Sed ut cognoscat mundus,
quia d^ligo patrem, and sicut mandatum dedit mihi Pater, sic facio, surgite,
eamus hinc, non probat Christum per dilectionem Dei nobis redemptionem
meruisse, quia eo loco solum commendatur charitas Christi erga Patrem, and
obedientia, de merito ^autem, and operatione meritoria non agitur.

Here Vasquez presupposes two things already proved by him.

1. That in Christ there was no infused knowledge of the essence of God and the
mystery of the Trin^ty distinct from the beatifical V^sion.

2. That Christ's beatifique love of God was not meritorious.

Having premised these t^o things, he next proves, that though there were in
Christ an infused knowledge of the essence of God distinct from the beat^fical
vision; yet it would not hereupon follow, that there should be in him a love of
God distinguished from that, which was the sequel of the beatisical vision;
and the reason is, because there was one and the same goodness propounded unto
his will, by the infused knowledge and the beat^sique vision; and therefore the
same effect of love, where the will is moved, and sti^ed up about an object
known after a twosold manner, it is only allured, and wrought upon as it is
known, after the more perfect way and manne^, (...) when I come to see by
experience those good things in a man, which before I knew only by report, I
then love him only upon mine own experimental knowledge, and no longer upon the
relation of others.

Lastly, Suppose this distinction of Christ's love of God were true and sound,
yet it is utterly unserviceable for the defense of D^. Hammond, and that by the
opinion of the Defendant himself: For Dr. Hammond (says he) is to be
understood of the acts of Christ's love terminated toward man for Gods sake:
Now the Authors and Fauto^s of this distinction, understand it expressly
concerning the act of Christ's love Dico ergo primo, habuisse Christum actum
amoris Dei liberum, supernaturalem, and elicitum a charitate, and ab amore
beatisico distinctum, and illo actu perfectissime meruisse. Ita intelligo
sententiam D. 'Tho. hic solutione ad primum dicentis, meruisse Christum per
charitatem non in quantum erat charitas comprehensoris, sed in quantum crat
viatoris: ubi de charitate lequitur, prost terminatur ad Deum. Suarez in 3
part. Thom. tom. 1. disp. 39. S. 2. p. 622.
as terminated toward God himself, and they do distinguish it from the acts of
his love of his neighbor. This is so plain in Suarez, out of whom the
D^fendant borrows the distinction, as that one would think it impossible for
the Gentl^man to oversee it. But this oversight renders it very probable, that
he never read Suarez himself, but had the distinction sent him from some
friend, who knew not the consistency of it with his other distinctions.

Unto this we may add, that those that stickle for this twofold actual love of
God in Christ, as terminated unto God himself, have not so much as one word or
syllable for the indifferency of his love as Viator, touching the degrees,
whereof all the indifferency that they assert therein, is Contradistionis quoad
exercitium actus. So much is affirmed by Gregory De Valentia, tom. 4. disp. 1.
q. 19. punct. 2. Hunc actum charitatis aiunt in Christo fuisse aliquo modo
liberum: ita scilicet, ut posset ab eo certe aliquando desistere, etc. quam
libertatem, modo diceudi in Scholis usitato, vocamus libertatem quoad actus
excreitium tantum, etc. But our Defendant himself will not deny, that all the
inward acts of the love of God in Christ, that were terminated immediately on
God himself, were always at the highest equally intense: And therefore this
distinction being meant of the acts of Christ's love of God as terminated unto
God himself, can do Dr. Hammond no service at all in this Controversy.

Having beaten the R^fater from all his Evasions, I shall next examine what he
says unto my three Arguments.

The first is drawn from the all fuln^ss and perfection of Christ's habitual
grace. The habits of all graces and virtues in Christ were always ful^ and
perfect, most intense, and not capable of further or higher degrees, and
therefore so are the inward acts or actions of those graces and virtues too.
Now what is said in general of the habits of all graces, may in particular be
averred of the habitual grace of divine charity. That in Christ was always
full and perfect, most intense, and not capable of further or higher degrees,
and therefore so were the inward acts, that is, actions thereof too. Here are
two Enthymems employed, the latter subordinate unto the former: For habitual
grace is the genus of divine charity, and not the equivalent thereof, as the
Defendant fondly thinks. That I make it, p. 330. B. the Consequence of the
latter Enthymem; I proved p. 3, 4, 12. from which the confirmation of the
former may easily be collected. The said proof of the Consequence I shall
briefly repeat, and somewhat reinforce. And it is, that there can no other
ground be assigned, for the intension of the action: of loving of God in
Christ, but the intension of the habit of love: which Dr. Hammond and his
Defendant both affirm, in Christ to be always so full, and intense, as that it
was not capable of further or higher degrees: For an action is not capable of
degrees of intension and remission, but s^condarily, mediante qualitate, which
it produces, or from which it proceeds, vatione termini, or vatione
principij: it cannot be ratione termini: any quality that was the effective
term, the product of the inward action of love; for that there is no such term
or product of the action of love, has now been largely confirmed. And if it be
said, that it was ratione principij, then it must be in regard of the habitual
grace of divine love: for there are but two qualities, that are the principles
of the action of loving God in Christ; the power or faculty of the will, and
the habitual grace of love. Now the power or faculty of willing, cannot be
intended in any man: and the habitual grace of love in Christ, was always so
intense, as that in him 'twas incapable of further intension; and consequently
all the inward actions flowing therefrom, were of an equal intension.

Here your Answer unto which you refer, is, that I ignorantly, or wilfully
confound the immanent acts of love with the action of loying, etc. And that the
Doctor speaks of the immanent acts of love, and not at all of the actions, p.
21, 22.

But first, I have proved, that there are no such things in rerum natura, as
the acts of love distinguished from their actions as their terms.

Secondly, Suppose that there were such terms, yet that the Doctor cannot
reasonably be understood of them, has been sufficiently demonstrated.

Unto this I add ex abundanti, the testimonies of some few Schoolmen, from
which may be gathered, that the habit and the act, are always equal in gradual
perfection: and from this it will follow, that if the habit be always equally
^ntense, the act m^st be so too. But now for preventing all future mistakes,
and to cut off the Defendants Objections, I shall lay down, of this a
limitation, which might easily have been foreseen, and is usually in things of
this and the l^ke nature. It is to be understood caeteris paribus, provided
that all other ca^s^s concur equally, and uniformly unto the act, so that the
habit be not hindered by them, but left to its natural way of working. Now in
Christ caetera erant paria: there was no dis^arity but a most absolute and
perfect equality, and uniformity in the influence of other causes, viz. The
will of Christ, and Gods assisting grace, in the production of his actual love
of God, h^s will never willed any abatement of the act, and God never withdrew
his assisting grace in the least degree or measure: and therefore his habitual
love of God wrought in him always equally and uniformly, as to the inward acts
thereof. Having premised this limitation, which I shall entreat the Reader to
carry along with him in his mind in that which follows, Let us come unto what
you say unto the testimonies themselves.

First, you quarrel me for that I cite not Aqui^as from his own writings, But
quote him twice from Caprcolus, but I had very good reason for this, for the
passages that I quote are not in Aquinas his S^m^nes or in his book Contra
gentes, which is all that I have of Aquinas. The first passage he quotes out of
Aquinas De Vertutibus, q. 1. a. 11. and the second is out of the same work,
question de charitate art. 10. I believe that if you had read Caprcolus, you
would have been as much to seek to sind these places in Aquinas as I was. If
you can direct me to them I shall thank you, but I suppose it is a book not
commonly to be had.

The first testimony you do not answer, but outface. From i^ I truly (as you
grant) concluded, that a greater vehemence in the operation of love, argued a
greater participation in the subject of the habit of love. Now from this it
undeniably follows, that if the operation of love be more vehement at one
time than another, then the subject does more participate of the habit of love,
at one time than another: and whether this be not to the purpose, Let any man
judge.

The pertinency of the second testimony, is as evident as that of the first.
For if it be, as you grant, an undoubted truth, that idem est cha^tatem augeri
secundum essentiam, and ipsam habere essicaciam a^ producendum ferventioris
dilectionis actum; then it is also as undeniable (...) truth, inevitably
following hereupon, that if the habit of charity is efficacious in producing a
habit of more fervent love, at one time than at another, the habit of charity
is increased; according to its essence, at one time more than another.

In answer unto the third testimony you spend part of four pages, which is all
nothing to the purpose: for you mistake the place of Aquinas, supposing it to
be 22 ae. q 24 a. 8. Co^p. whereas it is not, (as I have shown out of
Capreolus) in his Sums at all.

Unto the place out of Scotus, the Defendant, to amuse the Reader, talks a
great deai: p. 341, 342. but I must needs profess, that I cannot pick out of
all that he says, so much as one syllable that is applyable in a way of
answer. Unto what I urge out of Sco^us, Actus naturaliter elicitus (pray good
Mr. D^f^n^ant mark the word naturaliter:) ab aliqua forma aeq^a (...) in
p^f^ction ill fo^mae.

But of what I urged out of H^^tado De Mendoza, that intensio actus secundi
suppo^it aequalem in ensi nem i^ actu primo, you have a very rare, and iubtile
explication. His meaning is, say you, that the second act c^nnot possibly
exceed the first, in gradwal persection, though it may come short of it; p 334,
337. Away Trister: before you write any more Con^^ov^^siet, learn some Syleme
of Logic: And indeed every Syste ne of Lugick will discover the foppery of
this conceit, for it will teach that unequals are adequately opposed unto
eq^als, and that inaequalia a^e minora, as well as majora.

But unto this first argument, you have as you think, a most satisfying answer,
p. 331b, 337b, which you inculcate very often elsewhere, p. 24, 63, 67, 68, 69,
71, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 185, 186, 209, 210, 247, 249, 250, 340. And it is,
that though natural and a^c^ssa^y causes work a^w ties equally and ^^sormly ad
extremam viri^^m, yet it is otherwise with fr^e agents: and such are all moral
habits in general, and consequently the habitual love of God in particular,
which is as free (you say) as the will it self, in which it is seated.

Unto this I have two things to reply.

First, that any habits, either intellectual, or moral, are free Agents, is new
and strange Philosophy: for hitherto it has been a Proverb in the Schools,
that habitus agunt ad modum naturae, caeteris paribus. But having to do with
such a mod^st Adversary as our D^sendant is, it will be necessary to transcribe
some testimoties, otherwise I shall never stop his mouth; and I shall begin
with Scotus, Scripto Oxoniens. Lib. 1. did. 17. q. 2. p. 248. Operatio non
elicitur libere, cujus princip^um activum est mere natural^, and agens per
modum naturae: sed habitus cum non sit formaliter voluntas, nec per consequens
formaliter liber, si est principium activum, erit mere natural; ergo operatio
ejus non erit lihera; and ita nullum velle erit liberum, si eliciatur ab
habitu, ut a totali principio acti^o. Scripto Paris. lib. 3. did. 33. q. 1. p.
431. Q^ilibet habitus, quantum est de se, inclinat per modum naturae, and
charitas per modum naturae suae ad actum supernaturalem inclinat naturaliter
ficut habi^us acquisitus ad actum sibi proportionatum, quoniam babitus non est
liber, sed tantum voluntas; habitus enim ita inclinat per modum naturae
potentiam in objectum, sicut gravitas ipsum grave deorsum. Unto Scotus I shall
add Suarez in his Metaphysics. Atque, hine colligitur generalis regula, etc.
scilicet uihil obstare libertati, vel contingentiae actus^scu affectus, quod
aliqua causa naturali necessitate ad illum concu^rat dummedo aliqu^ cum
indifferentia efficiat, respectu cujus effectus denominetur liber. Ratio hujus
satis declarata est explicando fundamentum secundae sententiae: amplius v^ro
illastrari potest non nullis exemplis, etc. Simile quid dici potest de insluxu
habi us concurrentis cum p^tentia libera; habitus enim ex so non habet
indifferentiam, aut p^opriam libertatem, sed ex necessitate naturae operatur
eperawe s^t potentia, disp. 19. s. 3. n. 20. Unto Suarez I shall subjoyn a
Modern Scotist Pon^us, who, Philos. Curs. part 3. disp. 13. q. 3. n. 39. page
552. expressly averreth that it is absurd to say that the hali of charity
either infased or ^^quired is fr^e. Probatur sequela, quia asias habitus
chari^atis de f^cio tam insusus, quam acquisitus, esset liber, quod est
absurdum. But I night have spared the labe^^. of quoting all these Authorities,
for there is a place which I urged out of Scotus, that the D^fendant
transcribes at large, p. 340. b that will strike the matter dead. The place in
Scotus at large is this, Centra, possibile est illam anima^ hab^re summam
gratiam, ergo summam frurti^nem. Consequentia p^obatur; quia actus naturaliter
elicitus ab aliqua forma equatur in persectione illi formae; fruitio est actus
supernaturalis, and p^r consequens elicitus a causa supernaturali, quae est
gratia, and patet quod naturaliter, quia gratia non est formaliter libera. Ergo
see^dum quantit at^m gratiae potest esse quantitas fruitionis.

Here you see Scolus expressly affirms, that the fruition of God, which he
makes to be the actual love of God, is naturally elicited from grace, because
grace is not formally free: and is not this apertly contradictory unto our
Defendants dictate? page 337. b that all the habits of grace, whether in
Christ, or in all other men, are naturally free and undetermined in their
operations. And now can any man think, that the Defendant understood this
passage in Scotus? for if he had, he would in all probability have concealed
it, as much as he could, and not thus have transcribed it at large, seeing it is
so apparently destructive to his own Opinion. But by this the Reader may see,
with what profound judgment he quotes the Schoolmen.

Unto these Authorities I shall annex a Reason, taken from the Defendants own
notion of freedom, for he makes it to consist in indifferency: and habits
answerably to the degree of their intension and prevalency, take away and
diminish the indifferency of both-contrariety and contradiction.

1. Of Contrariety: for by inclining to their own proper acts, they render
averse from all contrary acts: by how much the habit of temperance prevails in
a man, by so much he abhors all acts of intemperance.

2. Of Contradiction: for they incline unto frequency of their acts, loco and
tempore debitis, and incline against sinful omission of their acts.

This Reason may, for the substance of it, be collected from what the
School-m^n usually say, to prove that free will does not consist in a habit. I
shall at present content my self only with a Quotation of Aquinas, Prima part.
q. 83. a. 2. Corp. Habitus dicuntur, secundum quos nos habemus ad p^ssion^s,
vel ad actus b^ne, vel male, nt d^citur in 2. Ethic. Nam per temperantiam been
nos habemus ad omcupiscenti^s. Per intemperantiam a tem male. Per scientiam
etiam been nos habemus ad actum incellectus, dum verum cognoscimus, per habitum
autem contearium, male. Liberum awem arbitrium indifferen^er se habet ad been
eligendum, vel male; unde impossible est quod liberum arbitrium sit habi^us.
This mutatis matandis will prove that no habit is formally free.

Secondly, Though habits be not formally free, yet I confess they are, in
regard of their use and exercise, subject Aquinas. 1. 2 ae. q. 52. a. 3. q. 63.
a. 2. q. 71. a. 4.
unto the impery of the will. So that the will freely uses or not uses them.
But this will no ways advantage the Defendant: for all men are obliged to act
the habit of love, as touching its inward acts, unto the highest, ad extremum
virium. They are bound to love God with all their might and strength, therefore
with all their habitual might and strength: and if their love fall short of
this height, it is sin^ul and defective, which cannot without blasphemy be
imagined of Christ, who was impeccabilis, and therefore fulfilled all
righteousness; and therefore when he loved God, he loved him as much as he
could: the all-fulness of his actual love, was for d^grees answerable to the
all-fulness of his nabitual.

As for his Answer to my secon^ Argument, drawn from the beatifical vision in
Christ, that has been sufficiently replied unto, in my examination of his
distinction of Christ's love of God, as he was Viator, and as he was Comprebenso.

The third, and last Argument was fetched from Christ's impeceability. It was
impossible for Christ to sin: but if the inward acts of his love of God, had
been less intense at one time than at another, he had sinned; for he had broken
that first and great Commandment, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all
thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy might and
strength, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37. Mark 12.30. Luke 10.27. In Answer unto this
Argument, the Defdenant insists from page 357. usque ad 520. of examining
which, his own concession will save the labor: for he grants that if we speak
of that eminent act of holy charity that is immediately terminated on God
himself, we are bound to love God to the utmost height we can, and that he who
does not so love him, does not love him so much as he deserves, or as much as
man ought: and that therefore the acts of Christ^ love, as immediately
terminated on God, were always at the the height and one equal perfection, p.
71.

Now that Doctor Hammond is to be understood of this eminent act of holy
charity, that is immediately terminated on God, I have clearly demonstrated:
and unless the Defendant can answer my arguments, his accusation of my third
argument, as guilty of that Sophisme which the Philosopher calls (...), will
pass but for an idle and ignorant calumny. The Defendants friends may be ready
to say that (...) decline the examination of that which follows, because it is
unanswerable, but alas* there is no such matter: for that it is a very ^otten,
e^roneous discourse, guilty of compliance with Pop^ry, in a great measure, I
shall shortly demonstrate in a d^stinct Treatise, if God grant me life, health
and liberty. The reason then why at present I take no further notice of it, is,
because not only the Stationer, but diverse good friends, have for several
reasons much importuned me, to contract this Debate as much as I could, and I
should now forth with put a period to it, but that I am desirous to give the
Readet in brief, a further taste of the incons^q^^^ncies with which (...) work
of Doctor Creed is every where fraught.

First, p. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57* he concludes that a habit of divine love in
Christ was not capable of further degrees because the act and exercise of it
was capable of further degrees. If Christ's love of God (in the act and
exercis^) was capable of Deg^ees, more intense at one time than another, and
had in its latitude, or amplitude several Degrees, one different from another
secund^m magis and minus, all them comprehended in because issuing from) the
habit of Divine Love, then this babitual love of God must be acknowledged
all-full and perfect, always (pray Master Defendant mark the word always) in
him so fall, and so perfect as not to want, and so not to be capable of further
degrees. But the Antecedent is true, and therefore also the Consequent. The
evidence of the sequel is supposed, and grounded upon two very ^now^ Maxims;
Nihil est in effectu, quod non prius erat in causa, and Nihil dat quod non
habit. This is an argument silly and ridiculous beyond all comparison: for,
mutatis mutandis, a man from it may argue against the growth of the habit of
love in all the Saints that ever were, are, or shall be on the earth. If their
love of God in this life, in the acts and exercise, was capable of Degrees,
etc. then their habitual love of God, must be acknowledged all-full and perfect
always in them, so full and perfect as not to want and so not to be capable of
further degrees. As for the two known Maxims, they will do him no service,
unless he put in the word semper. Nihil est in effectu, quod non erat prius
semper in causa, Nihil dat quod non habet semper. And if you add the particle
semper every fresh-man will soon discover their notorious falsehood.

Secondly, p. 57. he has another rare consequence: The Apostle says that
Christ's being in the form of God, though he thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, yet made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likunesse of man, and being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross, wherefere God also has exalted him. Therefore Christ's love, viz.
actual and inward, was more intense at one time than another: v.z. i^ his agony
and dying for us more intense, than in his suffering nakedness and hunger for
us.

Thirdly, in p. 18, 19. of my Refutation of Doctor Hammonds (...), I have these
words. If this be your meaning, I must needs assume the boldness to tell you,
that no such matter is visible unto me in any of the Schoolmen. But perhaps
you may mean such Schoolmen, as such a Puny, as I never saw or heard of;
however you cannot expect b^lief, until you produce their testimonies: And I
shall entreat you to allege such as may be had in Pauls-Church yard, o^ at
least in the Library at Oxford. Now from this the Defendant concludes, ^. 62.
that I tell the world in effect, that I have all the Schoolmen at my singers
end: nay just as many, no more, nor no less than are in Pauls-Charchyard, and
the L^b^ary as Oxford.

Fourthly, p. 88, 89. the Defendant says, that I do not thoroughly understand a
passage which I quote out of Raynandus: My words are these. Kaynaudus makes
mention out of Gabriel Biel, of a distinction of love into aff^ctive, and
eff^ctive: and that is this effective love, but the effects and expressions of
love.

But now that he does not take this to be a proper destribution of a G^nus into
its Species, appears by what he says out of the same Author concerning the
division, etc. Well, where lies my mistake in these words? why plain it is
(say you) from Raynaudus, that love effective is not only the outward sensible
effects, and expressions, but also something else. For though it be true, that
all the outward sensible effects, and expressions of love, be love effective,
or in plain English the issues, and effects of love; yet the terms are not
reciprocil, and convertible. For there are many effects of love, that are not
sensible, and thus external. For instance good wishes, good prayers, are the
effects of true love, so also are joy at the we fare of the beloved persons
w^ll-doing, and sorrow, and grief at his miscarriage; and yet they are not
always expressed, nor does any prudent man always show his joy or grief, or
express his good wishes, thoughts and desires to him be most tenderly affects.
Well, what of all this? Why says the Defendant, the subject matter of your
discourse leads me necessarily to understand your interrogation of the outword
sensible effects and expressions of love. Sir, you must put in the word only,
or else you say nothing to the purpose: and if you put that in, what you say is
very false. It is (I say) false that the subject matter of my discourse, leads
you necessarily to understand my interrogation, only of the outward sensible
effects and expressions of love, and you can never prove it by any rule of
argumentation. Indeed my design is, to prove that love is not a genus unto the
outward expressions of love, or that the outward expressions of love are not a
species of love, and may not this be very well proved, though in my
interrogation the effects and expressions of love be taken in a general sense,
abstracting from both inward and outward expressiens? may not that which is
denied of estective love in general, that is all effects and expressions of
love, be particularly denied of the outward and sensible expressions of love?
Did you never hear of arguing a gen^re ad sp^ciem negative, grounded upon this
Max^me Sander^^m, Log^^. p. 205.
Quod convenit aut not convenit generi, Convenit etiam, aut non convenit
sp^c^e^? Is it not a good argument to conclude, that hom^ is not lapis, because
nullum animal it l^pis: because no effective love, no effects, and expressions
of love are a species of love, will it not thence irref^agably follow, that no
outward effects and expressions of love are a speci^s of love?

Fifthly, I had said p. 10. of my Refutation, etc. I am very loath to enter into
a Contest with so great a Critic touching the meaning of a word: And from this
innocent and harmiess passage, the Defendant concludes, That I contemptuously
undervalue the Docto^'s excellent Critical learning, That with me a Critic is
but a whisting Gramma^ian, an empty Pedag^gae, p. 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101.
That the Doctor in my opinion is some petty Grammaticaster, that knows the
meaning of Musa, and can tell how to decline Lapis, some great Critic for
sooth, one fit to teach School-boyes perhaps the meaning of a Greek or Latin
Author: but for any skill in the Arts, and Reserches of Philosophy, he is a
very Dunce, and not at all seen in the curious speculations and subtleties of
School-learning. But what color is there for these odious sequeles in my
words* Indeed they can be drawn from no Topic place, but that of the
Defendant's furious malice.

Sixthly, Whereas Dr. Hammond had said, that each of the expressions of Christ's
love of God, had an act of internal love of which they were so many
proportionably different expressions: I answered, that if the Doctors meaning
were, that these different expressions in regard of intension, must be
proportioned exactly unto their inward respective acts of love, must be equal
or parallel unto them; then I denied what he said, and called upon him for the
proof of it. Now this my denial, which no rational man can or will deny, the
Defendant himself most unnecessarily and idly confirms in 16. pages, p. 139,
140, etc. usque ad 155. and p. 150, 151, 152, 153, 154. he quotes the
testimonies of many Schoolmen for the confirmation hereof, and in the close of
all this, he wonders at my omission of these, and the like testimonies: And
hereupon he concludes my ignorance in Schoolmen. His words are these: And
therefore I cannot choose but wonder, that our Refuter should take no notice of
these or the like passages, which to ordinary eyes would have showed more to
his advantage, than all that he has quoted in his Panphlet from the Schoolmen,
and Suarez, and Scheibler to boot. But this and some other passages in his
book, which offered themselves at first sight, make me not value his
School-learning at the same rate and p^ice he has put upon it in the Title Page
of his mixture. But old Homer was blind, though he were the Prince of Poets;
and our Writer of Practical, and Scholastical Divinity sees not all things in
those Doctors that may most serve for his advantage. Here by the way I deny,
that I put such a rate and value upon my School-learning, in the Title Page of
my Mixture, as the Defendant pretends: only I profess my self a Well-wisher
unto Scholastical Divinity, desirous to revive the study thereof: but however
there is not either in mine, or in his own discourse any foundation, (shall I
say?) nay, not so much as any shadow, for either his wender or censure. The
particle therefore (therefore I cannot choose but wonder) etc. plainly
intimates, that what he says, is a conclusion drawn from something foregoing.
And for my part, I have most diligent'y sought for premises unto this
conclusion, and can find none, and therefore must earnestly entreat the
Defendant, to direct us where or what they are. In my forementioned denial, I
acted the part of a Respondent; and by what laws of disputation a Respondent,
though a School-man, is obliged to heap up testimonies out of Schoolmen, for
the confirmation of every denial that he makes, especially if the proposition
denied be apparently false, as this was, viz. That the outward expressions and
the inward acts of love of God in Christ, must of necessity be of equal
intension. And thus hoping that by the next we shall know why you fell into
this fit of wondering, I pass on.

Seventhly, In the next place you tell us, that in men the inward affection
commonly varies, according to the intension and remission of the outward
expressions and effects: and in prosecution of this he spends, with a great
deal of noise and triumph, about 16. pages more, p. 155, 156, etc. ^usque ad
171. But what of all this, Sir? is this any thing to the matter in hand? Can
you from any thing in this tedious discourse infer any thing against my
Denial, vlz. that the outward different expressions of love, must of necessity
be proportioned exactly unto their inward acts of love? and if you cannot, (as
undoubtedly you cannot,) to what end serves all that you say, but to waste
time, pen, ink, and paper.

But you tell us often, that the Doctor is no ways engaged to prove, that the
inward acts of love, and the outward expressions, are of necessity equal in
point of intension, But the contrary will appear to every Pu^s^ny in Logic,
that will but peruse the Doctors sequel, as it is in him at large, for thus it
runs: and from hence I suppose is unavoidably cons^que^t (pr^y Mr. Defendant
mark the word unavoidably) that that act of internal love exp^es^ed by Christ's
dying for us, was supe^^^ur to th^se ^o^mer act (supply in intention) which
only expressed themselves in his poverty: and so the same person that loved
sincerely, did also love, and express that love more intensely at one time
then at another: which was the very thing I said in another instanc^. Now
choose unto this consequent what Antecedent you will, out of Dr Hammonds words:
either those that are immed^a^ely foregoing* yet it being ^e^^ain that each of
these expres^ions had an act, of internal love, of which they were so many
propertionab^y different expression^; or th^se that precede these. To this I
subjoyne that such as the expression wa^, such was the act of inward love, of
which that was an expression and from it it is impossible for you or any other
of Dr. Hammonds friends, to infer th^s consequent. But you pretend p ^68,
that you have done the feat your self. And now because you p^^sesse, (and it is
your third charge) that the reason of the Doct^rs consequenc^ is to you
invisible, and that you shall never acknowledge his Inference legitimate, u^til
you be d^iven thereto by ^educing his En^hyme^^e unto a Syllogism: I sh^^l
^nce, for your better satisfaction, ^^rs^r^e it; I^ ordina^i^y there i^ and
must be a proportionable agreement in respect of In^er^ion and R^mission,
betwixt the inward acts of love, and the outward expressions, then that act of
internal love expressed by Christ's dyi^g for us was superior to th^se former
acts which only expressed themselves in h^s Poverty, etc. But the Antecedent is
true, as we have showed from reason and experience, and the Auth^rity of
Gregory, and the Schoolmen. Ther^f^re also is the consequent.

First, for the major of this your Syllogism, I demand concerning the
Consequent, whether you infer it from your Ante^edent necessarily, or only
probably; If you say only probably, then your Consequent is none of Dr.
Hamm^nds: for he supposes that his follovveth nec^ssarily from what he has
said. Hence I suppose it (faith he) unavoidably consequent (that is,
necessarily consequent) that that act of intern^l love express^d by his dying
for us, was superior to those former acts which only expressed themselves in his
poverty. If you say you infer it necessarily, then the consequent is
evidently false; you must then change in your Antecedent the word ordinarily,
and in the room thereof put in the word necessarily, or else the consequent
will not follovv unavoidably.

As for the assumption, that is evidently false too, if you supply what is to
be supposed, for then thus it runs. Ordinarily there is, and must be in all
men, and was in Christ, a proportionable agreement in respect of intention and
remission, betwixt the inward acts o^ the love of God, and the outward
expressions thereof. Now all men are by the commandment of God, which Christ
fulfilled, obl^ged to love God, when they love him, with all their might, and
consequently with all their habitual might. But by the opinion of both Dr.
Hamond, and the Defendant, men are not bound in all expressions of their love
of God, to perform then^ with all their might: and therefore it is false, very
false, that there must be a proportionable agreement in respect of intension
and remission; betwixt the inward acts of the love of God, and the outward
expressions thereof. And thus you see what a rare Syllogism you have made,
both the premises of which are notoriously false.

By wh^t has been said, the Reader may, (as discover the faishood of your
Syllogism, so also) frame a true Syllogism, against the sequel of Dr.
Hammond: and it is as follows. If all the inward acts of Christ's love of God
were with all his habitual might, then that act of h^s internal love, viz. of
God, expressed by his dying for us, was not superior, viz. in intension to those
former acts, which only expressed themselves in his poverty: but all the inward
acts of Christ's love of God, were with all his habitual might: therefore that
act of his interral love of God, expressed by his dying for us, was not
superior, ( viz. in intension) to those fo^mer acts, which only express
themselves in his poverty. The Major is undeniable, and we may say as much of
the Minor: because Christ fulfilled the commandment, which was to love God,
with all his might and strength; Therefore with all his habitual might and
strength: and this is confessed by your self touching the acts of love that are
terminated unto God himself, of which I have proved Dr. Hammond only to be
understood.

Eighthly, Dr. Hammond says that if it be proved that (...), according to the
vulgar translation, signifies Luke 22, 44. Prolixius; the^e will yet be place
equally for his conclusion, viz. that one act of his eternal love of God was
more intense then another. But if there be any place for such a conclusion,
then thus the argument stands. Christ in his agony prayed longer then before;
therefore his inward actual love of God was then more intense then before. But
this sequel (as is evident unto every ordinary Reader) is very illogical and
irrational, and yet the Defendant justifies it, and in vindication of it
spends twelve pages, p. 253, 254, etc. usque ad 265. But how unsatistying this
h^^ vindication is, will quickly appear, if he please to cast into Syllegismes
what he takes to be argumentative therein. But this is a thing that he dates
not so much as attempt, for then every Freshman will easily discover the
foppery of his discourse. However in the mean time I shall give the utmost
strength that I can unto Dr Hammond's argument, as it is propounded by himself,
and as it is reinforced by the Defendant. The conclusion to be proved is, that
one inward act of Christ's love of God was more intense then another. Now this
Dr. Hammond proves from the length of his prayer: for parallel to a gre^ter
length, there is a greater intension of the inward actual love of God in a
longer prayer, compared with that which is shorter. All the proof that I can
find of this, reduced into form, stands thus. Where there is a multiplication
of Degrees, more degrees of the inward actual love of God, there is a greater
intension of the inward actual love of God: but in a larger prayer of Christ,
there was a greater multiplication of Degrees of love, etc. more deg^ee of
love, etc. then there was in a shorter: And therefore the^e was a greater
intension, viz. of the actual internal love of God. The Major is confirmed from
the nature of intension, which is nothing else but a multiplication of Degrees
in the same subject, an addition of one. Degree unto another.

And then the Minor is thus confirmed by Dr. Hammend, where there is a greater
multiplication of the acts of love, viz. inward; where there are more acts of
love, there is a greater multiplication of the degrees of love: for in every
act of love, there was some degree of intension, but in a longer prayer of
Christ there was a greater multiplication of the inward acts of love, m^re acts
of love then there was in a shorter; and answerably there was a greater
multiplication of the Degrees o^ love, more Degrees of love, etc.

My Answer unto th^s Sy^^gisme shall be, both unto the Major and the Minor.

First then, I answer unto the Major, by distinguishing concerning the
multiplication of Degrees. It is either of the same numerical form, or fo
fo^mes numerically different. Where there is a greater multiplication of
degrees of the same numerical form, there is a greater intension; but not
where there is a greater multiplication of forms numerically different, for
intension is an addition of Degree unto Degree in the same numerical form. The
Major then, if understood of the latter multiplication of degrees, is false:
but if understood of the former is true. But then the Minor, if understood
answerably of the same, will be false. And Dr. Hammond's proof of it will be
most impe^inent. For the several inward acts of Christ's love of God, are forms
numerically different, and therefore let them be multiplied never so much, this
will conduce nothing unto the greater multiplication of Degrees, in one act of
love then there is in another: So that from this it can never be inferred, that
one inward act of love in Christ, was more intense then another. But Dr. Creed
very stoutly and lustily affi^meth the contrary p. 256. I Reply and say, If the
Degrees of his live are in number multiplied as the acts are, there must be a
growth in their intensive perfection, and the last act, which has the greater
number of Degrees in it, will be gradually more perfect then the former. Here
you say that if the Degrees of Christ's love are in number multiplied as the
acts are, there must be a growth in their intensive perfection, and withal you
suppose, that the last act has a greater number of degrees in it: and here
upon you conclude of it, that it will be gradually more perfect then the
former. But, good Mr. Defendant, instead of saying and supposing, you should
have proved what you say and suppose: but of such proof there is not in all
that you say, any the least footsteps.

B^t ^e this how it will, plain it is, you say p. 257. that I do not re^ch the
Doctor's meaning, and the force of his argument. I have made the most of his
words that I could, but as for any hidden and invisible meaning, distinct from
that which his words hold forth, I know not that I was obliged to search after
it. And therefore I shall leave that unto the Defendant, who can see further
into a Millstone then other Mortals.

But however, let us examine this profound meaning of Dr. Hammond's. The Doctor
concludes and argues from the effect to the cause, thus, where the z^ale is
true and real, and not tersonate and counterf^it, (as in Christ without doubt
it was most true) there a multiplication of the outward acts of prayer, and a
longer continuance in them, argues a greater a den^y of inward affection, and
true zeal. And for the truth of this ass^rtion I appeal to the practice of the
whole world.

Here if you supply what is to be supplied, touching the object of this inwa^d
affection, This assertion, which you obtrude with such a confidence, is
apparently untrue. I say it is apparently untrue, that a multip^cation of the
outward acts of prayer, and a longer continuance in them, argues a greater
ardency of inward affection to God, or love ^f him. And for the falsehood of
this assertion, I appeal to the bosoms of all experienced, either Ministers,
or Christians, who can t^ll him that their inward love of God is frequently as
intense, in their shor^es, as it is in their longer prayers, and that the
shortness of their prayers, many times does not proceed from any abarement of
their love of God, but from regard to the infirmities of such as join with
them, and for diverse other reasons. Mr. Paul Beyne was es^eem'd a very plous
and devout man in his time, and it is said of him, that his prayer in his
Family, was not usually above a quarter of an hour long: as having respect to
the weaknesses and infirmities of his Servants and Children; and he used to
dissuade others from tediousness in that duty. I believe the Defend^nt will
not deny, but that a man may, in putting up the Lord's Prayer, have his actual
love of God every way as high and intense, as in the longest prayer either of a
man's own or another composition. But not to insist longer on other men, It is
plain of Christ, that his shortest prayers, his shortest eiaculations, did
proceed from an actual love of God, every way as intense as the longest. And
for the truth of this, I appeal unto the Commandment of God, that enjoined
Christ, and all other men, to love God with all their mig^t and strength:
therefore with all their habitual might and strength. Now however other men may
transgress this Commandment, Christ did not, could not; and therefore
whenever Christ loved God actually, he loved him with all his habitual might
and strength, ad extremum virium; and consequently one inward Act of his love
of God, was not more intense then another.

Ninthly, p. 268 you accuse my Answer unto an Argument of Dr. Hammond's, as
guilty of that fallacy, which is called petitio principii If this be not (say
you) (...), I know not what your great Master Aristatle mednes. But this is a
most ridiculous and groundless crimination, for this, as every other fallacy,
is a sault or defect in arguing, not in answering, it is (says my ^^rtle Master
Scheibler) d^cept^o in syllogizando. De Sydogism, cap. 17. n. 6. it is, says my
great Master Aristotle, Elenchus Sophisticus. It has always been observed for
a rule in d^sputing, that when the Respondent denies a sequel, and gives a
reason for it, it is the Opponents part to ^^fute the reason, and the
Respondent is not obliged to confirm it. It is then a gross non-sequitur to
conclude me g^^ltie of this fa^lacie, of petitio principii, because I do not
confirm the reason, for which I deny Dr. Hammonds consequence. But, Sir, if you
had not falsifted it, by adding must to may be, it is a Proposition so plain
and evident, as that it needs no confirmation, and can be denied by no rational
man. Thus it stands, my reason is, because in all these inward acts of Christ's
love of God, (and we may say the same of the inward acts of other virtues and
graces) there may be no gradual dissimilitude. Mark, Sir, the word may be, and
then tell us whether there be any contradiction in this Proposition, in several
inward acts of Ch^^sts love of God there is no gradual dissimilitude; it there
be, pray discover it, if there be hot, then give me leave to conclude, that in
the multiplied acts of christ's love of God, there may be no gradual
dissimilitude. You say this is the controversy betwixt me and, the Doctor. But
your own conscience must needs convince you that this is a faishood: for you
your self state the controversy to be, whether one act of ch^^sts love of God
were actually more intense then another? and yet if I had said, that in the
inward acts of Christ's love of God, there could be no g^adual dissimilitude;
this I have proved by three reasons, unto which you have given but ^orrie
answers: and these reasons I am not bound to repeat at every turn, for this
would quickly swell my book to such a Volume as yours is.

Tenthly, he has a passage page 272. for which he has not in my words the
least toundation: And will not every man think that our Refute^ was a man of
great judgment and parts, and fit to quote Suarez against Dr. Hammond? But I
rather think he was misguided by some Notes, and that he never consulted the
Authors he quot^s, but took them upon trust: otherwise m^thinks it is
impossible he should be so strangely deceived. But, pray Sir wherein, wherein
is the ^efuter so strangely deceived in Suarez? why it is clear and evident by
Suarez, though every act of Christ, in respect of the person that performed it,
was of an infinite, and so of an equal in ensive value, yet in respect of the
moral goodness, that is intrinsecally inherent in Christ's actions, nothing
hinders but that one in this respect may be better and more intensely persect
then another, as well as one grief and torment which he suffered was greater
then another. And therefore (say you) the same Suarez, even in that very page
and column, and in the section immediately preceding that passage that our
Refuter has quoted, expressly says to this purpose. Primum omnium satendum
esse, opera Christi fuisse inequalia in prep^^a bonitate intrinfec^, and
essential, vel ^^^ter inhaerente ipsi actai: quia ut dictum est, (...) he
bonites (...) fini^a, po^^rat ergo esse major and (...) and allunde unum ^pus
Chris^^ erut metioris objects quam aliud, and u^^m in^ths^u's (...), and sic de
(...), ^^go (...) vol poter^nt esse inaequalta in h^c bonitate, etc. Why what
of all this? h^^e I delivered a^y thing that contradicts this either expressly,
or implyedly, or does Suarez here oppose, in the least deg^ee, any thing that I
have said? does not Sed haec sententia and tot^ objectio procedunt ex falso
principio: singunt enim esse in eodem acta plures valores, seu plura merita,
juxta varias ejus circumst^ntias, quod patet esse falsum ex his quae paulo
superius dicebamus de infinitate sacrisicii, ex re obla^a, vel person a
offeren^e sumpta. Ostendimus enim reipsa non esse duas, neque pertinere ad
diversa merita, vel satis^ actiones: quia ratio merit^ vel satisfactionis
(sieut and ratio b^nitatis) non consu git ex singulis conditientbus actus p^rse
sumpris, sed ex col^ec^s ne omn^^m. Haec enim ratio ettam in praesente
pro^edit, nam intensio octus, vel obiectum, out persona ^p^rons per se sing^la
non s^ffici^nt ad mernum, ut ex singali^ distinctamer^ta in actu orientur, sed
omnia simu^ necessaria ^el su^t, vel su^ modo concurrunt ad unum meritum, and
quentitate ^eius. A^que ita cessat objectio: nom stoneritum actus tantum est
unum, and illud est infinitum, and aequ^le, ^^hil est me^iti, in que ce^ni
possit inaequalit^. In tertiam part. Toom. tom. 1. disp. 4. s. ^. 49.
Su^rez all along assert that there is but one me^itotious value, in one act of
Christ? and that in respect of meritorious value, one act of Christ was not
better and more intensively perfect then another. Nay, do not you your fel^e p.
271. quote a place out of Su^rez, where in he affirmuth that the moral
goodness inherent in the action^ of Christ, is a thing distinct from their
meritorious value Therefore Sua^tz (say you) acknowledges in that very fection
I quote, Valorem hunt quem habet actus in ordine ad meritum, esse quid
distinctum^d realt boni^ate quae est d^ffe entin ipsius actu, prout
cons^^ituitur in esse vi^ tu^^c, ^el illi a^rquo (...) inst^e inh^ret. Now Dr.
Hummond is to be understood only of a meritorious value, for he is to be
understood of a value, that was to be rewarded, and that out of debt: and such
a one is a meritorious value. Nay, do not you your self understand him to
speak of a merito^ious value? p. 266. And now to show the app^sirnesse of the
Proof. I must tell him what either he knows not, or will not observe, That the
Doctor ^gaine a gues a poster^ori, from the effect to the cause, and the
necessary rele^^^n betw^xt the work and the reward. His ^^gument is fun^ed upon
a Maxune of d^s^ributive justice; not expressed, but suppesed and int^^^ted,
and it is th^^; where the reward does proceed of debt, as in Christ certainly
it did and is properly wages, there must be a proportionable incre s^ of
thereward and the work, etc.

By this then the Roader may s^e, that all that you have concerning the moral
goodness in h^rent in the actions of Christ, in respect of their re^l en^^y
and good a^^se, is nothing at all to the purpose: for it is a thing quite
different from their meritorious v^lue, as Suarez faith in the very Words that
you your se^fe quote out of him. What has been said is enough to convince the
Defendant^ greateft friends, that I Was not a jot deceived in Suarez. But yet
for both his, and their further and fuller conviction, I shall compare the
passa^e that he quote out of Suartz. with the Words fore going and following.

A little before he propounds a second Objection, against the insinite value
and efficacy of Christ's W^^ks to sat^sle and merlt, Secund^ Objectio est ^b
inconveni mi: nam si satisfactio Chr^sti infinita es^, se^u^tur unum vel
^^fi^itum esse majus ulio, in ge^e^e^, in quo ^nfiritu^ ^st, quod est contra
Nationem infiniti, vel unum opus Christi no^ esse majorts v^lor^^ qua aliud:
nec duo, quam unum, quod videtur ubsurdum: ^^m quia totum est majus sua part,
tum e^^am quia unum opus Christ erat mellus alio, and unus dol^r major quam
alius quod mulium resert and quantitatem satisfactionis: ^um deniq^ quiainde
fieret, non magis redemisse nos Christum per passionem, and mortem, qu^m per
alios actus vitae suae, quod est contra scripturam, quae passioni semper
tribuit redemptionem nostram, ad Romans 3.4, and 5. (...) O^l. 3. ad Hebr. 2.9,
and 11.

In AnsWer.

First he propounds a Concession, the very passage quoted by the Defendant, and
therein he grants, that Christ's works Were unequal in regard of that moral
goodness, Which Was intrinsecal and essential to them, really inherent in
them; and in regard hereof one Work might be better then another. Responde^ur,
pri^^um omnium fatendum esse opera Christi fuisse inaequalia in prop^ia
bon^tate intrinseca, and essential^, ve^ realiter inhaerente ipsi actui quia,
ut dictum est, tota h^c boni^as erat finita: poterat ergo esse major, and
minor, and aliunde un^m opus Christi erat melioris obj^cti, qu^m aliud and unum
i^tensius alio, and sic de aliis cercumstantiis, ergo erant vel poterant esse
inaequelia in h^c bon^^a^e.

But then in the next place he shows at large, quomedo st^t aequalitas
meri^i, cum inaequali bonitate, as it is summed up in the margent; how an
equality of merit or meritorious value, is consistent with the unequal
goodness, that is really inherent in the actions themselves. Nihilomin^^
addendum secundo est, quod'ib topus Christi ex part personae operantis fuisse
infiniti valoris, quia licet ^onitas, and aliae conditiones actus c^nfer^t
interdum ad hunc valorem, tamen quia haec dignitas infinits personae extollit
hune valorem ad perfectissimum ordinem, and usque ad infin^tum gradum, ideo
tollitur omnis alia proportie: illa enim person^, cum in omni g^nere infini^^
fit, eminenter continet omnia alia bena, and ide^ consert actui, quidquid
valoris omnes aliae circumstantiae conferrae p^ssent. Quo circa totum id,
quoderat in opere Christi, ex p^^te ips^^s actus, intelligendum est quasi
materialiter se h^bere, personam vero esse quasi formem conferentem valorem,
quae omnes illos actus aequaliter informat, and ideo omnibus consert infinitum,
aique ad^^ equelem velorem. Exemplo explicari potest, fi pecunia tali regio
signo figurata, tantum vale^e^, cujuscunq, esset materiae ration figurae.

And hereupon in the third place he inferres, that which I cited out of him.
Hinc ter^io fit, plura opera Christi esse quidem extensive plura merita,
intensive tamen non esse plus valoris in mu^tis, quam in uno: ut si essent
plures calores infinite intensi, essent quidem plures, non tamen efficerent
unum intensiorem and pari ratione, si in uno opere Christi quod successive pe^
parts fi^bat, parts cum tot^ comparemus, intensive tan^us valor erat in
qualibet parta, sicut in ^^to opere, and in uno momento, sicut in long^
tempere: quia forma ^ quid erat v^lor, tote erat in toto, and tota in singulis
partibus.

And now ^^t the most partial Reader review this discourse of Suarez, and then
let them sit down and sadly consider, whether the Defend^nt does understand
Suarez; or if he does understand him, whether his conscience inform him not,
that I was not a jot mistaken in mine allegation of him, and if it does, then
what conscience is there in h^i affirming that I was.

Eleventhly, p 330. the Defendant pretends a grant of m^ne that I never made.
Howsoever, says he, I observe that in your first Argument you rightly
understand the Doctors notion of the love of God, and take it here as he still
does in the large sense, as it is all one with holy charity, as containing in
its general ^otion the acts of all graces and ver^ues whatsoever, and therefore
because now h^be mus confitentem reum, I am resolved to hold you to your
concession; You are, Sir, very quick sighted to observe that which never dropped
from my Pen, nor was ever in my thoughts. Pray Si reflect once more upon my
words; put them upon the Rack, and try your utmost skill in Logic, nay, call
in what assistance you please; and if you an from them prove this pretended
concession, then trample upon me with a much scotne as you please, and until
this be done, I shall assume the boldness to tell you, that your pretense is a
shameless untruth.

Twelfthly, p. 370. the Defendant has two strange sequels from my wor^s, which
until he can justify I shall look upon as slanders. If in the slate of Christ's
humiliation, there was by special dispensation, as our Resuter grants, a
restraint of his happiness or beatifical vision, he could not then see God so
perfectly, and so perfectly enjoy him, as after his Glorification, when there
was no restraint, and consequently his love could not be so ardent, so highly
intense and perfect as afterward, when now he fits at the right hand of
God. Let the Reader but view the place quoted by the Defendant, p. 261. and
add unto it another, p. 346. wherein I mo^e fully explicate my self; and
then if he will judge impartia^ly, he cannot but conclude the Defendant to be
a most unvvorthy Calumniator. My words p. 261. are at large, as follovveth. It
is not to be denied, but that by special dispensation there was some restraint
of the influence of his happiness or beatifical vision, in the whole course
of his humiliation, and particularly in the time of his doleful passion. Unto
this join page 346. where the point is farther explicated. Of this Heaven
happiness in the soul of Christ, from the beatifical vision, there would
always, without Gods miraculous restraint and prevention, have been two, as
it were, connatural sequels. 1. A fullness of unspeakeable, and unconceivable
joy, solace, delight, pleasure and comfort in his soul. 2. A redundancy of
glory from his soul unto his body. But by he special dispensation of God, the
resultancy of the former was suspended and withheld in the time of his passion,
and the latter the derivation of glory from his soul unto his body, was totally
deserted until his exaltation.

Here I do not say, that there was a cessation, interruption, or abatement of
the be^tifical vision, but only a restraint of its influence, not upon his love
of God, but upon the fullness of joy in his soul, in the time of his passion,
and the redundancy of glory from his soul unto his body, in the whole time of
his humiliation^ excepting his transfiguration. Now from this the Defendant
inferie^ two Propositions, one in the neck of another, one immediately, and the
other mediately.

1. In his state of humiliation he could not see God so perfectly and so
perfectly enjoy him, as after his Glorification, when there was no restraint.

And 2. Consequently, his love of God could not be so ardent, so highly intense
and perfect as afterward, when now he sits at the right hand of God.

But now, if any should presume to ask for a reason of the consequence of these
two Propositions, I must needs tell him that they are drawn from a Topic
place, wherein the Defendant is wonderfully sk^^led, fallacia cosequentis.
And in Keckerman's Logic p. 543, 544. there are amongst others especially, two
rare sequels instanced in, that are of the same stamp with these of our
Defendants. Beculus stat in argul^, e^go ^ra^ pluet. Divus Gregorius edit
cas^um. Ergo Div^ Veronica salt^t. I find afterward, p. ^22. that from this
very same Proposition of mine, he has two other like absurd and inconsequent
inferences. His words are as follovveth, If the inward acts of Christ's love
were always at the utmost height, because this most intense love is a natural
and necessity sequel of the beatifical vision, then it necessarily follows,
if his love were always thus intense, that then he always enjoyed the
beatifical vision, the sole and necessary cause of such a love. For it is an
undoubted maxim, That positis ^ut sublatis effectu, and causa necessariis,
ponuntur and ^olluntur causa and effectus. And if so, what then shall we say
to the Author of a mixture of Scholastical Divinity with Practical, Henry
Jeanes of Chedzey? for says he not expressly. That it is not to be denied,
but that by special dispensation, there was some restraint of the influence of
this happiness or beatifical vision, in the whole course of his humillation,
and particularly in the time of his doleful passion? And now if his fervor of
love were a natural issue of the beatifical vision, it will necessarily
follovv, that as that his happiness, and clear intuitive sight of the divine
essence was restrained, so the fervor of his love was proportionably abated
also. Here he draws two Propositions from my words.

1. That Christ did not always enjoy the beatifical vision.

2. That sometimes the fervor of his love of God was abated. Now both these
inferences are very inconsequent. For

First, this stands the first, there was some restraint of the influence of the
beatifical vision in Christ. Therefore he did not always enjoy the beatifical
vision, with as good Logic a man may conclude, that there was no heat in the
fire, D^n. 3. because God restrained its influence upon the bodies of those
three Worthies. It is very strange, that this our great Schoolman should b^ so
ignorant, as to confound the interruption or cessation of the beatifical
vision, with the restraint of its influence: or to think the former a
necessary sequel of the lat^er. Here by the way observe, that whereas the
Defendant p. 523. quotes a saying of Leo, which he says is approved of by all
Antiquity, that at the time of our Saviors passion. Non dissolvit unionem sed
substraxit visi^nem; It is to be understood warily, that the beatifical vision
was vvithdravvn only in regard of influence, and never in respect of
existence; for that in had a perpetual being or existence in the soul of
Christ* i^ upon very good reasons affirmed by the generality of both Papists
and Protestants.

The second Inference is every way as inconsequent: for thus it stands. There
was, by special dispensation, some restraint of the influence of his beatifical
vision: Therefore there was a restraint of the influence of it upon his love
of God; so that the fervor of his love was proportionablie abated, as the
influence of his beatifical vision was restrained. Here is palpable fallacy,
a dicio secund^^ quid, ad dictum simpliciter; the restraint of the influence of
the beatifical vision in Christ is particular, not universal. There was, I
said, some restraint of the influence of this happiness, or beatifical vision,
etc. And I instanced in the particulars, upon which the restraint of this
influence was, of which his love of God was none.

Thirteenthly, p. 378, 379, 380, 381. the Defendant charge me to make use of
an objection, that not only opposes Dr. Hammond in this particular, but equally
overthrovvs the whole Christian Religion, that destroys the doctrine of the
eve^^blessed Trinity the Godhead, and satisfaction of our Savior, and the
immortality of the soul, and hellfire, and eternal torments, that blovvs up
as well the office as the maintenance of Ministers, and opens a broad gap for
the Socinian and Anabaptist, the Ranter and Atheist, to come and invade all
that is sacred among us. This is a terrible and most horrid accusation, and if
the Defendant cannot make it good, he may (to use his own words, p. 11.)
justly be decried for the most monstrous Railer and Sycophant, or any vvo^se
thing that Christianity abominates. But he pretends that he has made it good.
And now that the Reader may see that I do you no vvrong. I shall for the
present suppose that the Doctor had borrowed this Exposition from Bellarmine,
and consider the force of your Argument against him, upon this supposition. I
reduce it thus into form, that the strength of it may appear. Whosoever makes
use of any Argument or Tenent, or Exposition of Scripture, that is to be found
in Bellarmine or other Popish Writers, is guilty of a compliance with
Papists. But Dr. Hammond makes use of this very Exposition which is to be
found in Bellarmine. Ergo, Dr. Hammond is guilty of compliance with Papists.

That you do me intolerable wrong the Reader may see, if he will but peruse my
words. "Your Reader has just reason to expect a confirmation of what you say.

"Because this very Answer is the shift of Papists in several controversies
between them and us, Bellarm Tom. 2. De Monarchis. lib. 2. cap. 1. Tom. 4. de
amissione gratie, and statu peccati. lib. 1. cap. 12. etc. And was it not fit
that you should acquaint us, what those cogent reasons were that necessitated
you unto this compliance with Papists? Now from these words of mine, the Father
of Lies cannot infer that proposition, which you most injuriously Father upon
me. viz. that whosoever make use of any argument, or Tenent, or exposition of
Scripture, that is to be found in Bellarmine or other Popish Writers, is guilty
of compliance with Papists. But the Defendant will extort this proposition from
my word^ whether I will or no. What say you Sir, is not this your present
argument? Can you give us any other proposition, to reduce your Socratial
Enthymeme into a Syllogism? If you cannot, pray tell me then, what strength is
in your Major, and what answer you will give to it, when a Socinian, an
Anabaptist, or Ranter, or Atheist, shall press you with it, etc. And so he
raves on most furiously, as if he were wood, not only in this but the next page.

But to discover to every ordinary Reader, that he does most grossly and
palpably calumniate me; I shall reduce my words into two Syllogismes, and yet
leave out that proposition, which he so maliciously imputes unto me. The
proposition to be proved it, that it was fit that Dr. H. should acquaint his
Readers what those cogent Reasons were that necessitated him unto the answer
that he gave, and thus it is proved. If this answer were guilty of compliance
with Papists then it Was sit that Dr. H. should acquaint us, what cogent
reasons necessitated him hereunto But this answer is gu^lty of compliance
with ^apists.

And therefore it was fit that Dr. Hammond should acquaint us, what cogent
reasons necessitated him hereunto.

For cons^^mation of the Minor the particle this, (this compliance) etc.
carries us to the foregoing words, and from them we may cravv this
Syllogism.

That answer which is the sh^^t of Papists in several controversies betvveen
them and us, is guilty of compliance with Papists.

But this answer is the shift of Papists, in several controversies betwixt
them and us.

And therefore it is guilty of compliance with Papist. And now my words being
thus Analyzed, the Reader cannot but be astonished, a S^h^lar, a M^n of wi^^,
and parts, a Minister, a Christian, should so forget himself, as to lay at my
doors a proposition, that has no bottom at all in my words, b^t is his own
mere invention, that I say not forgery, and I believe h^ can ha^dly tell
which to vvonder at most, the malice or ignorance that is in this crimination
of the Defendant.

But I forget my self, thus to go beyond the limits that I have prefixed to my
self, in the examination of this Volume. and indeed I believe it is very
inksome unto the Reader, as well as unto my self, to take in such a Dunghill of
Non-se^uiturs as this work is, and therefore I shall trouble the Reader with
the Examination of but one Argument more, and that I am vvilling to in^st a
little upon, because it seems at first blush ^o be of more force and weight
then the rest. And besides, it is concerning that which is the the (...), the
matter in connoversie, it is dra^^ from Luke 2.52. And Jesus ino eased in wisdom
and stature, and in grate wi^h God and man. This Argument the Defendant
prosecutes from page 188. usq^e a^ 206.343, 344, 369, 370, 572 573. etc.
us^^e^od 596. where he heaps up the ^est moneys of a world of Commentators,
whereof many contradict one ano hen st no purpose, that I know, but to
distract the unvvary* and unlearned Reader, and to work in him a belief, that
our Defendant is a man of vast reading.

The Argument for better distinction-sake may be branched into two parts.

First, he argue^h from Christ's increase in wisdom, he increased in wisdom;
therefore he increased also in the inward actual love of God.

The reason of the consequence is, because love of necessity bears propotion
unto knowledge, p 60 370 431, 512, 524. Unto this I shall return several
Answers.

The first is* in the first part of my mixture, p. 249. The increase in wisdom
h^re spoken of, is only extensive, not in^ensive, and from an extensive
increase in wisdom, can never be inferred an intensive increase, in the inward
acts of the love of God. Yea, but says our Defendant, p. 191. how you will
reconcile this with what follows, I will le^v^ any man to judge: and so will I
too, provided that he be a man that und ^stands any thing of an Argument (...)
for such a one will quickly perceive, that there is nothing in that which
follows, either in my own words, or else in those quoted one of Amos, which
does in the least degree contradict what I say.

Secondly, it is only an increase in the knowledge of the formal object of the
love of God, viz. his infinite goodness in himself, that will argue and
infer an increase in the inward actual love of God. Now that Christ increased
in knowledge of the infinite goodness of God in himself; St. Luke never
averred, neither will any man averr it, but an Ar^ian or Socinian.

The Defendant objects often against me, that I confess, that the fullness of
Christ's knowledge in the state of hum^liation, was consistent with the
nescience of di^^rs things. But, pray Sir, what were those diverse things he
knew not as man? I say the day of judgment, the barrenness of the fig^tree,
etc. p. 249. But do I, or any Schoolman, or any Orthodox Protestant say, that
Nescience of the tormal object of divine love, Gods infinite goodness in
himself, was consistent with the fullness of his know edge. If not, all that
you say is a mere extravag^^ce.

Thirdly, the increase in wisdom that Luke speaks of, is by none of all the
Authors that you allege, applied unto the beatifical vision; and if Christ did
not increase in his beatifical vision, then neither in his beatifick love, and
consequently not in his love at all: for there was in him at the same time only
one inward actual love of God, for accidenti^ numero tantum diversa non p^ssunt
esse si^nal in e^dem subject^: as for the acts of the infused habit of divine
love, distinct from the b^a ifick love, they (as I have already shown) are
proved by Vasquez to be but a fig^nent, and as much may be said of that love of
complaeency, that acquisite and experimental love, which you ascribe unto
Christ, p 537. for you make it to arise from Christ's acquisite or experimental
knowledge: And that Vasquez proves to be impos^ble, because the act of the love
of God, seeing it is of a supernatural order, ought to arise from a supernatutal
knowledge of God, and such is not that which is acquisite and experimental.
Exscientia ^cquisita nullum actam amoris circa Deum esse posse, ^^nisestum est,
quia actus charitatis cum sit supernaturalis ordinis, ori^i^d^bet exnotitia D^^
supernaturali, in tertiam ^^^tem Thomae tom. 1. d^sp. 73. c. 3. p. 790.

As for the Reason whereby your consequence is confirmed, our love must of
necessity be ^roportioned unto our knowledge; It is, I suppose, to be
understood of a gradual proportion, in point of degree, and yet even so it
needs limitation.

For it is evident that it fails, if it be understood universally of all men.
For,

First the knowledge of many surmounts their love of virtuous objects: but this
is a sinful disparity, and therefore I shall wave it.

But secondly, men's love many times does, and sawfully may, exceed their
knowledge in point of degree. A man's love of Philosophy, may be more intent
then his skill in it. Aquinas 1.2. q 27. a. 2. the Question there debated is,
V^um ^^^ni^i^ fit caus^ amoris; the second Objection against the Affirmative is
as follows, Ejusdem ratio^is vid^tur esse, quod aliqu^d incognitum ametur,
and quod aliquid am^tur plusquon c^gaoseatur: s^d aliqua amantur plusquam
cognos^untar, sicut Deus, qui in hic vit^ potest per seipsum amari, n^n autem
per sespsum cognosci: ergo cogni^o nonest c^usa amoris. Unto this Objection
A^uinas returns th^s following answer, Ad secundum dicendum, quod aliquid
requi^itur adperfectionem c^g^itio is, quod non requiritur ad persectionem
a^^is. Cognitio enim ad^a^onem perti^et, cuius est distingue e^interea quae
secundum rem sunt conjuncta; and componere quodam^odo ea quae sunt diversa,
unu^ ^lteri comparando, and id o ad persectionem cognitionis req^i^itur quod
hom^ c^gnoscat figilla^im qui^quid est in re, s^ ut parts, and virtutes and
propriet^^tes. Sed amor est in vi appetitiva, quae respicit rem secundum quod
in se est V^de ad perfectionem ameris sufficit, quod res prout in se appreh^n
litur, ametur. Ob hoc ergo contingit quod ^liquid plus ame^^^, quam
cognosca^ur: qu^a potest perfect amari et^^msi non persecte ^gnoscatur: sicut
maxim p^^et in scientii^, quas aliqui amant propior ^^iquam su^mariam
cognitionem quem de eis habent, put a quod sciun Rhetorican^ esse s^e tiam, ^er
quam homo porest persuadere, and hoe in Rhetorica am^nt E^^simil^ter est
di^endum circa amore^^ Dei. From the last words Irenaeus the Carm^lite d^ Anim^
c. 3. s. 6. p. 151. has this inference, Inde fit, u^ lic^t Deu^ l^vite^
cogn^scamus, vehementer t^men eum aliqu^ndo amemus. Against this doctrine of
Aq^^^^s Irenaeus propound, an Objection, and returns unto it an Answer, both
which I shall insert, Dices, Tuncigitur voluntas fertur in incogni^^^ rations
excessus amoris supa cognitionem. R^s^. Did. aneced. sertu^ in incogni^um
simpliciter, nego: fertur in incognitum cognitione distincta and perfecta,
conc^do. (...) eti^m^i distinc^^ and explic^^e non cognos^^^ singula, quae sunt
objecti; tamen implicit (...) cogn^scit, saltem novit illud esse appetibile.
Res^lara est exemplo. Plures enim ardenter appetunt scienti^^. v.g. Rhe^^ricam,
Philosophiam, etc. Eis^ viae sciant queles ^a sint, sed solum quod doceant
medum discrurrendi, etc Hinc etiam fit ut aliquando levis cogit^tio animi, aut
propositio alicujus objecti intensum excitet amorem, eo qood m^gna sit
convenientiatalis objects cum appeti^us, licet ill^^s notitia fit consusa in
intellectu.

And thus you see this proposition, our love of necessity must bear propotion
unto our knowledge, is not true, if it be understood universally of all men,
and so it is understood by the Defendant, for he speaks not only of Christ, but
of us: Our love of necessity, must bare proportion to our knowledge, etc. But
now concerning Christ we shall readily grant, that his love of God was always
for degree proportioned unto his knowledge o^ God, his knowledge of God's
infinite goodness in himself. But now that he increased in this knowledge,
Luke does not affirm, neither have you proved that he is to be understood
hereof, by any of the School*men in Paul's*Church-yard, or in the Library at
Oxford. Nor by any other of the Authorities, of which you make in the pages
forecited, such a vainglorious, but impertinent muster.

The second branch of the argument is taken from Christ's increase in grace, he
increased in grace, therefore in the love of God, at least actual: for love is
a grace of God.

But is it that grace of God, which Luke speaks of, let the Reader but look
upon the words following, (...), which God and man, and the addition of them,
(which addition our Defendant for the most part leaves our, in his quotation of
the words) will soon inform him, that Luke speaks not of the grace of the
Spirit in Christ, either actual or habitual, but of the grace of Gods favor
toward him: and in our Translation (...), is rendered in favor. Now in Gods
favor he did not increase otherwise, then in some effects, fruits and signs
thereof, and from that our Defendant can never conclude a gradual increase in
the inward acts of Christ's love of God.

The Defendant quotes me p. 189, 369. as saying, that Christ did as truly and
really grow in the inward acts of wisdom and grace, as he did in stature.
Indeed I said that he did as really increase in wisdom ask did in stature.
But that he did as really increase in grace as in stature, I never said, I
never thought, for I well knevv that his increase in stature was proper,
whereas he increased in favor or grace with God, only improperly and
metonymically, in regard of the effects and tokens thereof. That Christ then
increased in the inward acts of grace, as really as he did in stature, are
none of my words, but foisted in by the Defendant, wi^h what truth and
ingenuity, I leave unto the Reader to judge.

And now I shall dismiss the Reader, and take my leave of the Defendant too.
The Gentleman is pleased ( p. 643.) to promise, that if I manage my Reply in a
Scholastical way, then he will keep close unto our Ob. and So^^ this indeed
would be very acceptable, as unto my self, so also unto all judicious Readers.
But when I consider how in this pretended Defense, he has all a long vapored,
bragged, railed, and raved, like a Bedlam, I have little reason to expect from
him any such thing as a fair, candid, regular, and orderly disputation.
Hovvever he shall have my hearty prayers unto God, to cure him of this his
raging distemper, that (...) the future he may as Paul (Act. 26.25.) speak
forth the words of truth and sober^^^.

FINIS.

