Mrs. JAMES's DEFENSE OF THE Church of England, IN A SHORT ANSWER TO THE
Canting Address, etc. With a Word or Two Concerning a Quakers Good Advice TO
THE Church of England, Roman Catholic, and Protestant Dissenter.

I find those that Vilifies the CHURCH Prints with Allowance and without,
therefore I that Vindicate Her need not any; for the LAWS were made to Defend
the CHURCH and GOVERNMENT, and why should any one think to Abuse Her. Surely it
cannot be Unlawful to Vindicate Her.

Printed for me Elinor James, 1687.

I have been blamed for giving so much, and therefore Price 1 d.

A Short Answer to the Canting Address of Thanks, etc.
Mr. Larkin,
I Am very sorry that you should Print such a Scurrilous Paper against me,
because I never did you any Injury in Thought, Word, or Deed, and it seems to
be Unkind (you being a Printer) for I have always had a Tender Regard for
Printers (for my Husbands sake) but now you well Reward me; but if you can
Abuse the King and His Government, and Sir Roger (who has lately been so Kind
to you) well may you (for your Interest) Lampoon upon me; but I Will spare you
for this time, for the World knows what a great Enemy you have been to the King
and Kingdom, and tho you have suffered for it, yet I find you are not changed,
but is as Malicious against the Government as ever. The Roman Catholics boast,
That they would not Abuse me in any Thing, for all I have Printed so many
Papers against them: I must needs say, The most part of them has been very
Civil; therefore you are Worse than they: Tho the Innocent Dissenters thinks
that none of their Party would be guilty of any such Thing, as to Abuse me;
they are much deceived, for I am very well satisfied it was a Dissenter; but
however, I accept of their Excuse: I will not Think Amiss of those that are
Innocent for the Guilty; for if they do well, they will be accepted, and for
the Spiteful and Malicious, they shall he Rewarded accordingly; for God is
Just, and will give to every one according to their Deserts.

And for the Author, he says, The Sons of his Church are out of humor. What is
your Church? It is not the Church of England that you own; therefore all that
you say is Truth; for there was no Prince in the World could ever please you:
for it is impossible that such as you can be pleased; for Magistrates may know
where they begin, but they shall never know where to end: And if my Words has
operated upon you, surely it is a great Wonder (for it was more than all the
Wise Men in the Kingdom could do) for your Hearts are so Envious against Kingly
Authority, that you can neither Thank God nor the King for any thing that you
do receive: For your Ambition is so great, that nothing but a Throne will
Content you; so that it is not Liberty of Conscience will satisfy you, and
therefore You would Remove Principalities and Powers, that you might come into
Government your selves, and so you may shake hands with the Quakers, for you
can make Reflections upon the Spirit. And as for the Church, She needs no
God-mother, for She is under the Protection of the Most High: And for my
Fasting, it was not to Devour Widows houses: And as for your Reflection on the
Clergy: It is the common Policy of the Devil, for he always Shoots at the
Greatest Champions. You say, Our Church is the only Church for Loyalty, and so
it is, and there is none but Devils and Vipers that says to the contrary. You
talk of my Lightness, but I never was so Light as to Dishonor my Husband, or
Defile my Bed; and in this Excellent Qualification, I may Weigh all such as you
Down. You say, We are Good Subjects and Admirers of Prerogative as long as we
are Pleased: And so We are; and when were we out of Humor, so as to deny our
Loyalty, or the Interest of our Prince? And who can lay Rebellion to our
Charge? And as for Non-resistance, who has so much despised it as you? For
your Party did condemn the Church of England for a Foolish Church, because She
Taught Nonresistance. You say, It is boldness in me to Condemn your Loyalty. I
do not question, but there is Innocent Souls amongst you, that I do not speak
too, but it is such Snakes and Vipers as you, that would Destroy the Interest
of all Christianity: But since you are are so Angry, Pray tell me in what your
Loyalty consists; is it in plucking down Churches, and Destroying of Loyalty
under the Notion of Popery? But now I see you are for Promoting it; for you are
beholding to them for giving you Authority to Print your Paper; and so you are
obliged to Gratify them with some Good Services. Therefore such as you are the
Disturbers of Government, Destructive to Princes, by Misrepresenting them to
the People, filling them full of Fears and Jealousies, and for that Cause the
Laws were made for such as you; and I think it is enough that you have Liberty
of Conscience, and not to have the King Gratify you with His Laws: Are you so
Fearful that you cannot Trust His Majesty? Is your Deeds so Evil, that you are
afraid of the Laws? Surely I thought you would have Lived so Holy now, that no
Law could touch you; but I see you have your Old Nature upon you, that nothing
will Oblige you: And as for the death of Three thousand Persons; what is that
to the Destruction of Three Kingdoms and the best of Princes? But the
Destruction of those shall lie at the Doors of them that Perverted them: And if
God was pleased to call you into the Bosom of His Church, that His House might
be full, you had no Reason to Resist it, for it was not to Pray to Sticks not
Stones, but to come to God through the Merits of Christ, without which, none
can be Saved. Therefore there is none but bad Men that will be Enemies to the
Church of England; and I count them Enemies to the King and Kingdom tha^ is for
the Abrogating of the L^ws. Your Old Proverb, of Rese^ving the Rods for the
Back of Fools, You think to be counted Wise by destroying them. Does this
become the True Blew Protestants that were so Zealous for Religion? But all
this will not do, for we will not Trust you, for the King has graciously given
you Liberty to Serve God, and not to Destroy the Church of England, nor to
Afflict Her, for the King will not Allow any of you to Abuse Her, nor She to
meddle with you; but if you do Abuse Her, you must not think but some or other
will Vindicate Her. So I would entreat you to be Quiet, and keep your Addresses
unto your self, and let me alone, for I do not Love to be Disturbed with
Controversies, but Wish you the Grace of Repentance.

So I rest, ELINOR JAMES.

A Word or Two to the Quakers Good Advice to the Church of England, Roman
Catholic, and Protestant Dissenter.
YOu say, It is no Matter who you are, and you say, You are an English Man; Is
that any Argument that you are a Good Man? Who was it that Disturbed Three
Kingdoms and Destroyed the Best of Princes? Were they not English? You say, You
are Obliged to this Country, and the Laws has made you Free; but it is a
clear Mistake, for you are in Bondage and Darkness, and are afraid of the
Light, and therefore your Intentions are Evil; for if your Designs were Good,
you need not be Ashamed to put your Name to the Book, and then we should have
known who this Singular Friend was; but I find you are a Subtle Adversary, that
would Wound us, and none should know it; and I see you have more Policy than
Honesty: And therefore your Considerations signifies nothing; and we will not
be Persuaded by such Hypocritical Canters as you are, for you Quote the
Scripture for your own Ends, as the Devil did to my Blessed Savior, when He
was an Hungry, as to command the Stones to be made Bread, and then he would
Believe he was the Son of God; but Christ did not satisfy the Devil, neither
(I hope in God) will the King or the Church you: What Aileth you, that you are
so Disturbed? If you do Well, what Law can Hurt you? But I find you are a Great
Thief, and intends to Steal, and therefore you would have the Doors set open,
than it might be counted no Robbery. I know your Designs well enough, and what
you Aim at, and though you may Deceive others with your fair Pretenses, yet (I
hope in God) you shall not Deceive me. I know you can make your Self like an
Angel, with Specious Pretenses to Deceive the Innocent, and you know the way
very well, for you are highly Guilty of such Crimes; and I find you are an
Uncircumcised Goliath, for I have found you a Deceiver, for you told me, You
would be a Friend to the Church of England, and give Her the Right Hand of
Fellowship; but yet the Lord Deliver Her, for none has Deluded the Churches
Children so much as you; for you are like the Devil to Tempt those that go to
the Temple, but it was no more than what he did, when he Tempted my Blessed
Savior, and said unto Him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, for
it is written, he shall give his Angels Charge concerning thee, and in their
hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a
stone. See what sweet Words the Devil can use for his own Purpose; Can Mr. Penn
or any Mortal outdo him? And yet Satan knew at the same time, that if Christ
had yielded, He could not have been the Son of God, for it would have destroyed
His Intentions; for if He had yielded Obedience to him, how could He have
Conquered him? Therefore pray rest Contented, and let the Church of England
alone, for She meddles with none of you first, but 'till you provoke Her; but
you think to Rend and Tear Her, and set up your selves by it; for it is Honor
you aim at, and that is the Principle that moves you; and therefore (as you
say) You regard not Times nor Fashions, it is neither Thinking nor Talking, but
you would fain come into Action, to fling down the Penal Laws that You may come
into Government, and fling down others to set up Your Selves, and to be Members
in Parliament, then we shall have Fine Doings; but (I hope in God) it shall
never come to that. But for your Three sorts of People that will find
themselves Concerned in this Question, you say, the Church of England, the
Roman Catholics, and the Protestant Dissenters. As for the Church She does not
fear the Penal Laws nor Distrust Her Prince, for She intends to do no Ill
Thing, but to Fear God and Honor the King: And as for Roman Catholics, they
would be very disingenious if they should doubt the Kings Fidelity: And the
Protestant Dissenters seems to be very well pleased, and is Contented, and
says, They will not misimploy His Majesty's Favor, but hopes they shall do
Good, and redeem the Time that is past; and indeed if they do as they say, I
shall be very much their Friend, for I am a Lover of Peace and Unity, and
desires that all should do Well, and you may assure your self, they will never
be for the Abrogating of the Test; for it was them of their own Nature that did
it, and for the honor of them they will never disanul it? for you must not
think to Fool them, as you do us. Therefore I would have you Study to be Quiet,
and do not Deceive the People by your fair Pretenses; for have you not declared
to the World, That you are an Innocent, Harmless People, and did not concern
your selves with any thing of Government more or less? But I find you to be
great Liars, and Vipers and Snakes, that would destroy the whole. And what have
you to do with the Whole Body of the Kingdom? We are not to yield Obedience to
you: You say, If it appears to be their Duty, Principles, and Interest, the
Question is gained: Ay, that is true, but stay till that is made out; for I am
sure it is not their Duty, Principle, nor Interest, and therefore the Question
is lost, and you your self Mistaken: And for your Great Inclination to serve
them all, there is none desires it, and therefore their Good Nature cannot
plead your Excuse. You say, You are neither moved by Hopes nor Fears, private
Loss nor Gain: But who shall believe you, for you have been a great Enemy for
these several Years, and nothing will content you but our Ruin. And since
Liberty of Conscience cannot content you without taking away the Test and the
Penal Laws, it makes me to think that you have some Design underhand more than
the World knows of: Therefore I count you a Person not fit to be Trusted, for
the King has been to Gracious, that He has given Liberty of Conscience
Freely: But you say, The Penals Laws hinder you from coming into Action:
Therefore the Laws must be taken away to Humor you! Yes: For what Cause? That
the King should lessen Himself for you: And if you will not Trust His Majesty
with the Laws, why should the King trust you Without them? If you do Well,
there is no Law can Hurt you, but if you do Ill, why should not the King and
the Church have Power to Help themselves? For They are not to be Divided, no
more than a Man should be from his Wife: For the King is to Defend the Church,
and to keep all in Peace, and therefore you are Mistaken, it was not the Church
that Compelled you, but it was the Civil Magistrate, for the Peace of the
Kingdom, thinking it was the best way to Preserve the Government: For they did
not Force Conscience, when His Majesty gave Liberty to Four or Five to
Exercise, but when that would not do, but said, They wanted a Prince and
Governor whom they could Trust, I think it was high Time for the late King to
look about Him; and for that which happened, you may Thank your selves, for you
have been the sole Cause of it: For do you think that it would have been
Reasonable for the Church of England, when the late King desired Her
Assistance, that She should have refused it? No, no, such Treachery does not
Lodge in Her Breast; and therefore She needs not Repent of what She has done,
for She has done no more than Her Duty. You say, No Man ought to be deprived
of his Native Right: And who does is? For some Complained, That the Government
^^y too heavy upon them, but it was you that refused it, because you would not
have the Trouble and the Charge: Therefore She does not (as you say) deprive
you of any Station in Government: and you cannot condemn Her for being Careful,
for you your self would do the same; for if you were to Entertain any one at
your House, and was to Trust them with your Treasure, would you not question
him whether he would be True and Honest, and if he should not satisfy you,
would you think him a fit Person to be Trusted? And why should not the Church
have the same Power to question them that comes into Her Government? Is not the
Peace of a Kingdom of greater Consequence than that of a Private Family? And
Therefore do not Complain so much against Her, for God has given Her Power,
and (through Him) She will be so Wise as to keep it: For has not God
Reestablished Her by a Miracle? Can any deny, but that it was an Extraordinary
Providence to Restore my late Sovereign to His Crown and Dignities, without
Spilling of Blood; and do you think that we are so Ungrateful as to forget such
Wonderful Deliverances? No, no, it is our Resolution to Trust God with all
things, and therefore we are not to be Wheadled out of our Senses by Quakers or
Ranters, or any other: You talk of Gods Will, Faith, Conscience, Religion,
Christianity, Principles of Love, the Evidence of Truth, with its Light, which
silenced the Oracles of the Heathens: But what signifies these Good Words when
it is to Bad Purposes? And as for the Power of the despised Cross, I don't
allow that you should meddle with that; for it was not the Wooden Cross that
Christ Exhorted His Disciples to bear, for He could not carry that Himself, but
it was to bear such Evil Spirits as you with Patience, that Despises Him, and
counts Wholesome Counsel Madness, and imputes the Power of God to the Devil,
and to call His Blessed Spouse, The Whore of Babylon, and his Saints
Anti-christians: And when Christ says, Use all Things as if you used them not,
you contradict it, and make as if the Creature was Damned if they go in Gay
Clothing, when (God knows) you are Prouder in your Plain Dress than some are
in their Silks and Satoins. O! ye Hippocritical Devils, That strain at a Knat,
and swallow a Camel. You know Christ has commanded his Disciples to Baptiz^ as
well as well as Teach; and He left His Blessed Sacrament to be Administered in
Remembrance of His Death; but how presumptuo^sly do you disdain both? Therefore
I cannot count you Real Christians as long as you do so; but that you are
deluded by Lucifer, for you show his Pride to the World, and you think none
walks by the Spirit but you, and I believe he was of the same Nature; therefore
the Heavens could not contain him: and where will you be hurried when God is
Angry? I pity your condition: I desire you to beg of God to give you Humility
and Repentance, that you may Mend for the time to come. For the Church of
England does not delight in the Destruction of Her Enemies; but desires that
all might be Convinced and Converted, that they might be Happy, which bespeaks
Her to be a True Church; for Christ's Church must have His Nature, or else she
cannot be His: You say, Christ Settled not his Religion in Worldly Empires:
Pray where was it then? Or what did He come from Heaven for? Was it not to Save
His Church that was almost lost, and to Plant His Religion in the World, and to
restore Man to that Felicity he had lost, and to Reveal such Secrets that had
been hid from the Beginning of the World, and to Adopt us to cry Abba Father?
So I find it was Christ's Intentions that God should be all in all. And when
Christ departed this World, He did not leave His Church Destitute, but sent his
Holy Spirit to Subdue her Enemies, by whose Power Kingdoms were Converted; and
for the Building of his Church, he chose plain and honest Men, that had so much
of the Innocence of the Dove, that they wanted a little of the Subtleness of
the Serpent; or else Christ would never have Exhorted them, That they should be
as Wise as Serpents, and as Innocent as Doves. But I find you have more of the
Subtleness of the Serpent, than the Innocence of the Dove: Therefore you are
not Qualified for a Disciple: You speak of St. John's Love, and Christ's
Obedience to his Fathers Will; but what signifies that to you, when you are
filled full of Anger-and Mischief, and are Disobedient and Rebellious. Indeed I
have been told, That you were Subtle Dissemblers, but I would not believe it;
but when I came to speak to your Great Dons, I found I was Deceived! Tho I do
not doubt but there are Thousands of Innocent Souls; but it is not You, Mr.
Penn. I am told, You are at Bristol, very Busy about Parliament Members! But
if they be such as you, to Abrogate the Laws, they shall not Prosper, for Gods
Hand is against you. I know the Devil will Rise in you, but I value him not,
for Gods Power is above you all, and you must submit to it. You told me, You
were a Father; but what did you beget, Evil Spirits? You think to Deceive, but
I hope your Deceit is at an end, for the People begins to see your Cloven Foot;
therefore I would Advise you to go to Pennsilvania, for they are in a
Distracted Condition for want of you; for indeed it was very unkind for you to
Entice them out of their own Country, and to leave them Destitute. O! I would
not be in your Condition for a Kingdom.

FINIS.

