AN APOLOGY FOR, OR VINDICATION OF THE Oppressed persecuted Ministers and
Professors of the Presbyterian Reformed Religion, in the Church of Scotland;
emitted in the defense of them, and the cause for which they suffer: and that
for the information of ignorant, the satisfaction and establishment of the
doubtful, the conviction (if possible) of the malicious, the warning of our
Rulers, the strengthening and comforting of the said sufferers under their
present pressurs and trials. Being their Testimony to the Covenanted work of
Reformation in this Church, and against the present prevailing corruptions and
course of desection therefrom.

PROVE. XXIII: Verse. 23. Buy the truth and sell it not; also wisdom,
instruction, and understanding.

I. PET. III. Verse. 15. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts; and be ready
always to give an answer to every man, that asks you, a reason of the hope,
that is in you, with meeknes and fear.

JUD. Verse. 3. It was needful for me, to write unto you, and to exhort you,
that ye should earnestly contend for the faith, which was once delivered unto
the saints.

Prestat sero, quam nunquam sapere.

Printed in the Year 1677.

To the most Noble and Honorable LORDS, The Lords temporal of his Majesty's
Secret Council, in the Kingdom of Scotland.
Most noble and honouralbe Lords.
CAsting our eyes about us to see, under the wings of whose patrociny and
protection, we should shelter the ensuing Apology or vindication; we could not,
in our apprehensions, fix upon any so fited for this, as your Lo. who, by the
station, and office you bear under his Maj. in this Kingdom, are constitute the
protectors of the poor, the Releevers of the oppressed, and the breakers of
every unjust yoke: the serious thoughts of which does aflord us this
confidence, that as our unjust oppressions make us objects, fitted for your Lo.
compassion and justice; so your Lo. office. and what it binds unto, in the
behalf of the oppressed, before God and men, will* on the ingenuous and plain
production of our reasons, for the justice of our cause, at length prevail, for
breaking of these yokes of oppression now on us; and removing of their real
causes. We therefore cannot but in charity and reason expect, that much
humanity and justice, from your Lo. that was granted by heathen Rulers, to
Ministers and Christians, in the primitive times of the Christian Church; of
which we have in Scripture and History memorable instances. Was not Paul Act.
26:1 permited by King Agrippa to speak for himself, who, in vindication of his
righteous cause, deduced the grounds thereof, and cleared the so to the
conviction of his hearers, that they judged him neither worthy of death, nor of
bonds? Did not some of the Roman Emperors, upon the reading of the Apologies
of the Christians, as of Justin Martyr, Apollinaris, Mileto, Origin,
Tertullian, and others, declare their innocence, and mitigat the rage of
persecution, that then prevailed against them? May not we then, who profess
the same Protestant Religion with your Lo. entertain ourselves with the hope
of the same favor and justice, that was showed by Rulers, to the Lords people
before us?

As our adversaries calumnies and bitter reproaches, with which they labor to
render us odious to all, especially, to your Lo. are unjust and malicious;
(being partly their evil and uncharitable deductions from our principles and
actions, and partly gross and notorious lies; such as the heathens charged on
the primitive Christians, who finding no just matter for their accusations from
their Profession and behavior, gave it out to the world, that they worshipped
the Sun, an asses head, and used promiscuous copulation at their assemblies;)
So it is the Testimony of our consciences, that as a brazen wall does shield and
uphold our Spirits from sinking, under those burdens, with which they have
aimed to keep us at under with your Lo. We know, there is no new or strange
thing happened unto us, but what has been the common lot of eminent saints,
yea of Christ Jesus, our blessed Lord and Master; the servant is not greater
then the Master; if they dealt so with him, no mervail they deal so with us. So
great is the Testimony and witness of our consciences, as to all the grievous
things, they have and do charge upon us, that we have hitherto possessed our
souls in patience, and not opened our just and true greivances (as we might and
should have done) for fear of offending your Lo. But perceiving the truth of
the Gospel, the righteousness of our cause, and the welfair of immortal souls
are like to suffer through our too long silence, we have adventured to disclose
our thoughts, and to give, so far as we can, a satisfieing account of the
grounds of that faith and hope, for which we suffer. The God of Gods knows,
and Israel shall know, we use this fredom and plainness of speech toward your
Lo. and all others, not from any contentious and ill affected humor; but from
the sense of the obligations laying on us, for the conservation of the true
interest of Religion, and the hope of relief for these from your Lo. which we
most humbly beg and exspect, for the sake of truth and righteousness, that are
now fallen in the streets, and fled into Corners if on an impartial examination
of what we have said, in the defense of our cause, and of ourselves for its
sake, against the reproachs of our enemies, it shall be found that it is not
just, but iniquous, we ask no benefit from your Lo. clemency and justice; let
all severity be used. But if the cause of our former and present sufferings be
righteous (in the confidence of which, we have been bold to give to your Lo.
and the Christian world this sober ensueing account) we humbly entreat that
protection and relief in its defense, which your power and station in this
Kingdom do enable and oblige your Lo. to.

Wherefore casting ourselves at your Lo. feet. We do, in the behalf of pure
Religion and undefiled and the souls of all concerned therein, beseech your Lo.
First That our just and well grounded exceptions against Prelacy and
Erastianisme, may be taken into consideration and laid to heart: for if they
hold good, will not the future consequences of these evils, to this land, your
Lo. families, and posterity, be dreadful, who thereby are laid pento the
judgments, denunced in the the Word of God, against perjury and Covenant
breaking? We do not lay the stresse of our cause on the Covenants and Oaths,
taken by this nation, against the foresaid evils or corruptions, as the primary
and chief Argument (as will appear to all on the perusal of our subsequent
Apology;) but on their opposition to the Word of the holy and true God: for, we
grant, Covenants and Oaths, that are obligatory and bind to an observance,
suppone their matter to be antecedently just, and do bring their primary
obligation from it; hence the things contained in, and engaged to by Covenants
and Oaths, must be proven and made out to be necessare and righteous from the
Word of God, before their obligation can be admitted and received; which we
have labored to do, in this following discourse. And if from it, our
Covenants and Oaths do appear to be just, are we not assured, that the
corruptions and sins engaged against by such divine ties, and relapsed into
contrare to these engadgments, do provoke our Holy and righteous God, to the
inflicting of all those plagues and judgments, threatened in the word against
the violators of such sacred bonds? And if this be a truth; (as we hope none
will deny) what can we then expect to our selves and posterity, if reformation
and repentance do not prevent, but ruin and desolation, according to every
ones accession to these evils; which, no doubt, are crying for vengeance on
this declining Church? Next, We pray your Lo. to consider, that we build our
conclusions on no other foundation, then our worthy reformers in this Church
and others, laid down in their arguments and debates against popery; which for
its want of, and opposition to the holy Scriptures, they have condemned for an
Antichristian defection from the doctrines of Christ. We hold to the
sufficiency and perfection of the holy Scriptures, resolving, through the Grace
of God, to admit of no other rule of faith and obedience, in the matters of our
God, but these: what they condemn, we must renunce; and whatsoever doctrins or
practices, in the house of our God, want their authority and approbation, we
cannot, yea dar not admit? The experience of the Church in preceding ages
shows, what mischeifs, the opening of this door, has brought in upon her, to
the almost uter ruin of all her concerns.

The present grouth of popery, and the quick advance it makes among all degrees
of Professors, in this and our neighboring Churches, says to all, and, we
suppose, to your Lo. that the fasety and preservation of the protestant
reformed Religion, does, in all prudence, require, that its real and sincere
friends should be encouraged, and not thus persecuted with violence; which no
doubt, tends so to the weakening of the Protestant interest and cause, that in
one of Queen Elizabeth's Parliaments, it was judged a sufficient reason, not
only to restrain the rigide pressing of conformity, but likewise to encourage
all Non-conformists, who, in those times, were looked upon as stout antagonists
to popery, and such as might be employed, entrusted and made use of in
opposition to it. Is it not to be feared, that the ^ope, having his instruments
and emissaries amongst us, for working out of his designs on these Churches,
which, all his former engines have not hitherto effected; and finding, through
our confusions and distempers, the occasion fitted for his purpose, has no
question, a secret active hand, in influencing and increasing of this violence;
which, if the Lord, in his mercy to this many ways afflicted and ruined
Church, do not prevent; will facilitat his longed for, and much endeavored
designs against the reformed Religion in these Islands. And however we are
represented to your Lo. as unfriends to Religion, and the interests of State
(as if they must ruin if we stand) yet the experience of past and present
times, beside our public confessions, does sufficiently witness, how
malicious our adversaries are in this unjust calumny? We are no innovators, nor
pleaders for innovation in Church or State; but do hold, adhere to, and
resolve, through the grace of God, to maintain the reformed Protestant
Religion, against all sorts of enemies, as it is contained in the holy
Scriptures, summed up, and briefly comprehended in the Confessions of faith of
the reformed Churchs; especially in the Confession of faith, Larger and shorter
Catachismes of this Church, in opposition to all Popish, Arminian, Socinian,
and Sectarian errors and innovations. We hold for our maine and rooted
principle, the holy Scriptures to be the Word of God, the absolute perfect and
only rule of faith and manners; not needing any supplement of Ecclesiastical
tradition: yet we do not deny Antiquity its due respect, use and reverence: and
although we maintain, that every Christian, of what rank and degree soever,
ought to study, and be conversant in the Scriptures; yet we acknowledge the
necessity and great use of a Gospel standing Ministry, and receive the
directive authority of the Church, not with an implicit faith, but with the
judgment of discretion. We hold the teaching of the Spirit necessare to the
saving knowledge of Christ; but absolutely deny, that the Spirit brings new
revelations in matters of doctrines, worship and Government; but only that he
opens the eyes, and enlightens the understanding, that we may perceive and
rightly take up, what is of old revealed in the word by the same Spirit. We
rejoice in Christ Jesus, having no confidence in the flesh, or in a legal
righteousness; desireing to be found in him, who of God, is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption; yet we constantly affirm, good
works of piety toward God, of equity and charity toward men, to be necessare,
both necessitate precepti and medii: our Ministers press on themselves and
hearers, the necessity of Regeneration, as the solid fundation of good works;
and the severe, strict exercise not of a popish out side formal, but of a
spiritual, real mortification and self denial. We extol all ordinances of
divine appointment; but reject all humane inventions, especially religious and
significant not institute ceremonies in the worship of God.

It ought to have no little weight with your Lo. that by using of such
violence, the most sober, judicious, universally religious and industrious part
of the subjects, and consequently the most useful and steadfast to his Maj true
interest and honor, are exposed to daily vexation and trouble, to the great
damage and prejudice of this Nation and Kingdom. We suppose that, upon an
impartial view, it will be found, that the choice and better part of the
subjects is dissatisfied with the Government, now introduced into this Church,
and consequently obnoxious to the severity of the laws, enacted against
non-conformists: and of what dangerous consequence this may prove to Church and
State, we leave to your Lo. most serious consideration. We know, the certain
issue of all matters, is known to God only; but if we shall take our measures,
in conjecturing at future events, from the working of present causes, there is
all rational ground to fear, that there are dismal and heavy times coming on
this nation; which, by taking and fallowing of right ways, in the present
juncture of affairs, your Lo. may prevent; and if not done, will, no doubt,
afford matter of bitter sorrow, and repentance to your Lo or children
afterward. It is and shall be our hearty prayer to God, that your Lo. may have
the Spirit of wisdom, and of the fear of the Lord, poured out upon you, to
foresee the evils, that are hastening toward us, and in time to hide
yourselves, this Church and Kingdom from them.

Is it not apparent to all, that conscience does not act, nor lead our
antagonists? Do not their opinions about Prelacy; their Profession of all
readiness to comply with the contrare, if on foot; their frequent changes into
the interests and forms of all preceding times, how contrare soever to their
once professed and sworn principles (while true Presbyterians remained constant
and immovable, through the times that went over their heads;) their covetous
and licentious lives, discover their want of conscience in the courses, they
now so furiously run? Let not your Lo think, that it is his Maj. interests, (as
they pretend) or any true conscientious regaird to these, that moves them to
such obseqiuous compliance with the present laws? Let the out ward interests
of this world be separated from their way; and it shall soon appear, how void
they are of true zeal for his Maj. and his laws, as is evident beyond all
denial, from their carriage and behavior, in past and present times. As we
have no external benefit to expect to engage us against conformity to the
present laws about Church Government; so we are to look, from our principles,
and practices conform thereto, no less then the ruin of our selves and
families in this world: if conscience of duty toward God and this Church,
according to the word, did not determine and move us, of all men we were the
most foolish and miserable; but seeing our hearts, in the consideration of the
justice of our cause, and of the sincerity of our intentions, in acting
conform to it, does not condemn us; we have this confidence toward God, that
as we are acquit and shall be justified before him; so shall we be recompensed
and rewarded, to the abundant compensation of all outward loses; even for
these things, for which we are condemned of men; so that that which is esteemed
our folly, sin and misery, is and shall be reputed our righteousness, wisdom
and glory.

Albeit we have not the external advantages of power, riches and wordly policy,
but the contrare to contend with, and endure; yet, seeing the Word of God in our
hands, does prosper and prevail to the gaining of immortal souls, the
restraining of impiety, and the propagating of the savor of the true knowledge
of Christ Jesus, in all places where it comes, notwithstanding of the
opposition made unto us in this work; it will, on many accounts, be your Lo.
wisdom, not to stand in contradictory terms thereto, least your Lo. be found
to fight against God in the persons of his servants and people; for, we are
assured, that this work and cause is of God, partly for its conformity to his
holy word; and partly for its undeniable fruit and success, in converting and
saving of souls from sin, preserving and maintaining of its self, against the
opposition it meets with on all hands; which we take for a sign of its being
of God, as the Christians did of old in their debates for the Christian
Religion against its adversaries, which under great opposition grew and
prevailed exceedingly, although stripped of all the outward advantages of worldly
power and policy. If this cause be of God, and approven by him, as we nothing
doubt, it will not be in the power of the might to crush it. Men may afflict
and put us to great sufferings (which to them will be a sign of perdition, but
to us of salvation;) but while this Church continues Protestant, and has God
abiding in her, their contradiction will be in vain, as is hitherto manifest.
And a thousand to one, but it resolve in their own ruin here and here after.

The matter of difference betwixt us and our adversaries, being in their own
confession (a popular argument they much use with the people) not foundamental,
but indifferent, we humbly beg of your Lo, that for preventing of further
confusions in this Church, and attaining of the true peace of the same, you
will be pleased, to consider, whether it be better and safer for this Church,
that the Chistian Reformed Religion be totally ruined among us, for satisfying
of a few; or a thing indifferent, and far removed from the vitals of Religion,
be taken away, and not thus enforced by violence on so considerable a part of
the subjects, who, for conscience sake, cannot receive, nor subject thereto?
And knowing that a serious and impartial examination of this one question, if
diligently pursued, would quickly determine your Lo, to courses quite opposite
to these now prosecuted with so much heat against us; we entreat your Lo, not
to give ear to these calumnies and undue representations of the present case
of affairs in this Church, made by our enemies, the Prelates, by which they
labor to instigat to all this unjust and unseasonable violence, that will
Produce bitter and lamentable effects to this and the succeeding generation, if
not prevented in time.

Most noble and honorable Lords, we cannot but take notice of that too common
prejudice entertained against Presbyterian Government and instilled with so
much artifice by our opposits in the mind of many, on which, they have alas too
much advantag, through the love of sin, and natural enmity at the wholesome
severity and power of the Christian Religion, that is predominant in all
unregenerat persons; to wit, the strictnes and impartiality of Presbyterian
Government in its exercise, against all sorts of scandals, in all degrees of
Professors, the great as well as the mean; for we know, that while Presbytery
was up and in vigor amongst us, the zeal and faithfulness of Ministers, in
reprehending all sorts of sins, and exercising of discipline impartially,
conform to the commands and ruls of the word, without exception of persons, is
that which has caused all this dislike of, and rigor against Presbytery; and
conciliat that much respect to, and love for Prelacy, as to eject the one, and
bring in the other. We will not now enter on the debait, whether this strictnes
against sin be the native product of Presbyterian Government, when exercised
conform to its principles; or the contrare the genuine consequence of Prelacy,
that necessarly results from its constituent and preserving causes? Which were
no great labor to make out. But leaving this, we humbly entreat your Lo. to
have that patience toward us, as to suffer us to say. 1. In conformity to the
principle of the Christian profession, it must be, in the confession of all
Christians, matter of sad regrait and lamentation, that in places, where the
Christian Religion is owned, zealous faithfulness against soul destroying sins,
should be admited and received, as a prejudice against Ministers and their
Government; which should commend and cry it up; yea that does endear it to all
conscientious Christians, that rightly understand their own Profession. Must
it not be a terrible length, this generation is gone, in declineing from the
power of Religion; when that, which is its excellency and glory in the sight of
God and good men, is become the occasion and matter of its dislike and reproach?
Can there be a fuller evidence and discovery of the predomining and prevailing
power of naturs enmity, in Professors, over the life of true godliness; and
their being given up to the lusts and sinful inclinations of their own hearts,
that thus sets them in opposition to the means, appointed for their delivery
from the dominion and power of damning sins: whither are we gone, and what may
we expect will be the hight of our defection, and the judgment of it, if
Professors put themselves in such a plain and open professed contradiction to
their Christian Profession? 2. Let not your Lo. think, we say this with an
intention to justify any failing, in this matter, committed by any of our
persuasion, that shall be made appear to be such from the Word of God, and our
Professed principles. And although we cannot condemn all the instances, that
are now disapproved by our antagonists; yet we grant, there were considerable
escapes, in preaching and exercise of discipline, which were the effects of
imprudence and passion in some, and of wordly inclinations and designs in
others of corrupt minds; who to raise themselves in this world, and for that
end, to gain the favor of persons of leading influence and power, keept no
measure, but rune to strange hights of zeal against some sins, while they
connived at others; but seeing by their compliances with the cryed-up cause of
these times, they do now declare to all the world that they were never of us;
how unjustly are their wicked follies imputed to our Government and way. But
for all the instances given in against us, and the hideous cry raised after
them, yet we must say, the greatest and most common failing among Ministers,
was in the defect, in that the most were not so diligent, faithful and
impartial, in the application of the word to the sins of the times, personal
rebukes and censures, as they should have been; as (alas) was too visible and
observed by many; for which now they bear their rebuke, in that many of those
are now become their cruel persecutors, to whom they were sinfully sparing and
indulgent. Moreover, let it be granted, that many of these instances were in
the excess unjustifiable; yet if the constitution and principles of
Presbyterian Government were not for, but against them, it cannot be charged
with these: they must be the faults of the persons, and not of the Government;
otherwise all Governments must be condemned, as guilty of all the
mal-administrations, committed by Governors; which all acknowledge to be absurd?
But when any of the contrare minded shall demonstrat these to be the native
product of our principles for doctrine and Government, they shall be
considered, and according to the conviction they give of the same, they shall
be acknowledged. But will your Lo. be pleased, to consider the sad and
deplorable extreme our antagonists are run into, who meddle not with any sort of
scandals, except a few and these in the meanner and lower degree of persons,
over looking all in the more opulent and great; which has encouraged
wickedness to lift up its head, and to diffuse its self through all ranks
without control, to the infecting of this Church with all kinds of scandals;
which, no doubt, will resolve either into the total ruin of the Protestant
Religion, or else in sad desolating judgments, on this land; and if it come this
length (which we earnestly beg of the Lord he would prevent, by pouring out of
a Spirit of repentance and reformation on us) where will be our advantage by
Prelacy, that is now so much extolled?

Therefore not loving to trouble your Lo. any further, we shall add but this
humble and earnest request; that your Lo. would be pleased, to make some due
and just representation of the true State and low condition of this Church,
unto his Maj. who (we hope) through your Lo. intercession, will, in his wisdom
and clemency find out some just expedient, for relieving of this Church of her
oppressing evils, under which she groans; and undoing of these heavy burdens,
that lie on us: for which we are your Lo. humble petitioners, and had been so
alittle sooner, if we had not been discouraged by laws anent Church matters,
that seems to us, to close all door of access to his Maj. and your Lo. for
representing our just greivances this way. If we may not obtain this
reasonable and just request (as we suppose) there is not another refuge left
us, but to refer our cause to the righteous tribunal of the just and almighty
God, where your Lo. and we will stand on ev^n ground, and have judgment passed
without respect of persons.

An Apology for, or vindication of the oppressed persecuted Ministers, and
Professors of the Presbyterian Reformed Religion, in the Church of Scotland,
emitted in the defense of them, and the cause for which they suffer.
The Introduction.
IT is not unknown (as we suppose) to the Churches of Christ, in the Islands of
Britans and Ireland, and other parts of the Christian World, what persecutions,
upon the introduction of Prelacy in the Year 1662* the party, called
Presbyterian, has suffered, especially in the Church of Scotland, and yet
lytth under, throw the implacable and violent rage of their adversaries, the
Prelates and their adherents: who having (...) the Civil powers on their side,
have prevailed to the enac^^^ of such laws, that these (who from the
conscience of duty (...) wards God, and sense of the obligations of their
Covena^^^ and Oaths, lying on them and these Churches, cannot co^ply with, nor
give obedience unto) are not only expose^ to bitter and hard sufferings, for a
considerable time (...) loaded with all sort of reproach, and represented as
(...) ous and disloyal to Authority, contrary to their (...) ciples and
actings. It is not the design of (...) to descend into the consideration of
the (...) ferings, nor yet to lay any Odium on (...) pr^judice of their just
authority; (as the righteous judge of the wor^^^ knows, and we hope will make
manifest in due (...) ^o clear some. Necessary truths and duties; and to
vindica^ some of our practices, from the unjust aspersions of adversaries; who
by lies and unjust representations of our principles and carriage, do publikly
and privately defame and misrepresent to Authority and others, our behavior
under the present course of affairs: an artifice they have used of old and
late, for ingratiating of themselves, and their interests, into the favor of
our Rulers, and sharpening of the ^dge of persecution against us; in which they
have had no small success. If it were not for the Interests of truth and
Religion, which, through the hot contests and debates of their times (actuated
by ambition and covetousness, on the one ^and, and the love of truth, on the
other) are in hazard to suffer shipwreck, we incline rather to keep silence;
and to poss^sse our souls in patience under the present violence, used against
us: (as our too much silence hitherto does suffici^^^ly witness) but finding
that the interests of the Gospel, and the concerns of immortal souls, are
struck at, and are (...) to suffer no small prejudice through our silence, we
have (...) on a resolution, to give to the Christian world an account of (...)
grounds of our practices, for which, we are this day, (...) ^uch reproached and
persecuted. And seeing there is no (...) in the ordinary road, to give a due
and just information (...) ^ase, to our Superioures, by supplications,
petitions (...) ^^^onstrances, (allowed by scripture and natures (...) ^eason
of the influence and power of our adversaries; (...) but expect that much
justice from all, as to excuse (...) doing of this, in this way, which the
vindication (...) ourselvs for its sake, in the present juncture, (...)
^ecessary: for finding, in the present (...) that we cannot, without betraying
of the Gospel, and of our immortal souls, (for which as Ministers and
Christians we are called to contend on all high^^^ pains) keep any longer
silence; but that we (...) give warning to all, of the imminent dangers, that
threaten Religion, in its purity and power; we look upon it, as our
indispensible duty, by clearing truths and practices, ((...) much now
condemned) to endeavor the prevention, and recovery of all from the snares,
they are in danger of, and engaged into: wherefore, in all Christian sobriety
and humility, we crave leave, to open our hearts and minds to all, as they are
concerned in our case. 1. Anent the cruel and iniquous procedour used against
us.2. Our practice of preaching and hearing of the Gospel of Christ, by
Ministers and people, yet adhering to the covenanted work of Reformation, in
opposition to Prelacy and Erastianisme.3. Our not approving nor allowing of the
late indulgence although, as to the preaching part of it, it has been by some
of us, in so far practiced.4. and lastly, anent the Supremacy Ecclesiastical,
as it is now established in his Majesty's person, and sensed by law.

SECT. I. Of the act of Glasgow, with raisons why submission could not be given
to Prelacy.
WE love not to insist on the first, and if it were (...) connected with some
other things, that mo^^^ concearne the cause, and touch upon it, then any
ou^ward interest of ours; we would incline rather (...) it, in perpetual
oblivion, then thus to talk the (...) of past and present actions; the
mentioning of (...) cannot but reflect on some, whose (...) to us, then they
will readily admit themselves to believe: But we must not decline, what in the
present case is necessary for vindicating of our righteous cause, struck at
and wounded through our sides. We shall only touch a few instances of many,
that might be produced, and are yet fresh in the memories of this generation;
and we fear (if Historians prove impartial) will speak to the disgrace of these
times, in the succeeding ages. As first, That almost unparalleled Act of the
Council at Glasgow October. 1662. whereby at one stroke, a number of Ministers
above 300, without all legal precedour, were violently cast out of their lively
hoods, and inhibited the exercise of their Ministry; and thereby a great
number of Congregations laid desolate. And for any thing known to the Council
at their making and publishing of this Act, all the Ministers of the Church of
Scotland (a very few excepted) might have been throst out and ejected thereby,
and so the whole Church laid waste, and dispossessed of the Gospel and it is
ordinances; in which condition, she might have continued long enough, to such
a hight of prejudice and loss, which the mo^^^-cryed-up good of Prelacy could
never have (...) ^^^ed sit, in this or the following age. Was it not e^^^ent
(from the astonishment, that the disappoint^ent of the design of this Act had
on our Rulers, in (...) did not obey the law in subjecting to Prelacy, (...)
^^^mission) that it was passed without mature de^^^ (...) ou^ and was
influenced by the impatient Zeal (...) instigation of the Prelates, to the
precipitation (...) which since has been lamented, and not (...) by many of;
that party, who have never, (...) on ^ight methods and ways of cureing the
distempers and confusions, caused by this act to the Church of God amongst
(...) We remember of none like to this, but that of the Interim of Germany, in
the time oe Charl. the V. A precedent, we think, that should not have been
imitated, by any Christian protestant State, considering it is wicked design,
and bad success to it is contrivers.

At the passing of this Act of Council, it was not unknown to all, that the
Ministers ejected by it, were, for the generality of them, young men, educated
and indoctrinat in the Presbyterian principles; neither could it, in rational
judgment, be supposed, that in such a sudden and unexpected revolution of
affairs, in Church and state, persons of any conscience, could so suddenly be
moved to change the Principles they had received, and so long been in the
practice of, without the least offer of any convincing reason to the contrary.
In this case, to inflict so heavy a punishment on Ministers and Congregations,
without any endeavors previously used, for their information, looks to be a
streach, beyond the bounds of charity and justice which, according to all laws,
Divine, ecclesiastic and civil, allows time and patience, in dealing with
persons, erring in the matters of God, for bringing them to the conviction of
their errors, before the passing and inflicting of a sentence; a piece of
justice observed in the-darkest times of Popery, and hottest persecutions on
the Church of God, as is evident from the records of these times. 2. Besides,
in all executions of laws on persons found transgressing the same, there uses
to preceed the sentence, and infliction of the penalty, (...) judicial trial
and conviction of the transgression the natural right and privilege of all
subjects, observ^^^ all well governed States in the World, wheth^^ (...) or
heathenish: For, in the administration of justice to the subjects, there ought
to be an application of the law to persons, supposed guilty of it is violation,
by a judicial sentence, not only adjudging them to the penalty, but declareing
the guilt, as the meritorious cause of such punishments; which cannot be done,
without a judicial trial and conviction, by confession or witnesses: But in our
case no such thing was observed, no not so much as an hearing allowed us.

Moreover, in this act, the Ministers of the Gospel were, under highest pains,
discharged and forbidden the exercise of their Ministry, which they had
received from the Lord, and not from the State; and this antecedent to any
Church sentence, or ecclesiastical conviction of guilt, deserving so heavy a
punishment: an encroachment on Church power, without a precedent in this
Church, and in all others, ^^cept that of the Interim of Germany, condemned, on
that very head, both by Popish and Protestant writters, (...) a reatch beyond
the Limits, set to the Magistrates po^^^^ (...) the word of God. Is there not
here a Punish^^^^, form^^ly ecclesiastic, inflicted by the Magi^^^^^ without
owning of the Church, to whom the (...) of such punishments does properly
belong; (...) by whom they were, time out of mind, exer^^ed* But this with
other Acts of the like nature, which followed, was suitable to the basis and
foundation, on which the new superstructure of church government was founded
and built, the ^^premacy. How visible is it from this act, the (...) used for
bringing in (...) prelacy, the frame of the (...) of Parliament, anent it and
the Supremacy, (...) pro^^dour in executing of the same; that the design was
not only to subject the Church wholly to the State, but to rob her of all
power; which the prelates perceiving, labored to help, in their after outting
of Ministers not comprehended in this Act; some of them complaining, that
Ministers should be exautorated by the Magistrate, without any Church sentence
preceding: but more of this afterward.

But supposing, this to be within the compass of the Magistrates power; yet how
unproportionat was the penalty to the alleged crime? if there had been heresy
in doctrine, or scandals in life and conversation, a justification might have
been made of this sentence; but for simple nonconformity to prelacy, that had
been by Church and State exploded from amongst us, as an high corruption in the
government of the Church; and its reentry barred with the solemnest Covenants
and oaths, that ever any Church or Nation came under: we say, for such a crime
in such a case, to take from Ministers, as men, their lively hoods; and as
Ministers, their Ministry (dearer to them then their lives) is a punishment,
when weighted in the balances of equity and justice, much beyond (we are
sure) the demerit of the cause; especially considering, that the Persons
imposeing conformity, and punishing others so severely for refusing it, were
the same (for the most part) that had made and enacted laws, severe enough
against it. What? is prelacy a jewel of so much worth, that the Church of God
cannot be well without it? have we not found the contrare, from the experience
of past and present times? Although we should be judged uncharitable in this,
yet we m^^^ (...) it, that they, who see not this, do either (...) eyes throw
carnal interest, or wilful (...) ^^^inst all evidence, that not only Scripture
but the effects of Prelacy in this Church, affords to all men; Or else fight
against their light. If we take our measures, by the true interests of the
Church, or these things, wherein her true welfare does consist, we shall
undoubtedly and undeniably see, that prelacy is not of that worth and use, to
the Church of God, as to inflict such grievous punishments on Non-compliers
with it: sure we are, soundness of doctrine, purity of worship and holiness of
life have flourished in this Church, without it; and since its erection, these
have come under a sad decay.

Obj. But many place the demerite of these severe punishments, in the
disobedience to the laws establishing Prelacy; the now great cry of these
engadged in the present course, for justifying of all enormities, committed in
the administrations of government?

Ans. To this we say, first, that all Divines and Lawyers assert, if
non-obedience be separated from contempt of authority, (as in many cases it may
be) that the demerit of disobedience, is not rigourously to be pursued with
punishments, especially of so high a na^^^^, as these inflicted on us, for mere
nonconformity; and the reason they give, is because, there are and man be such
things in non-obedience, as will, to ^^^^teous judges, not only alleviat the
guilt thereof, (...) discharge it from disobedience, let be contempt (...)
authority; as invincible ignorance, inability, (...) of passion, the tendencie
of the thing commanded, (...) some cases, to the everting of the end of the
law, ^^^^ch in such cases, is presumed not to be the will of (...)-makers) the
disposition and profession of persons (...) ^^diei^nce-manifested, in all
others things etc. if our known and professed principles, extant in our publict
confessions and treatises on this head, with our actions in all other matters
relating to authority, be admitted and beleved, we will have as much so say,
for freeing of our non-obedience to laws, in this matter, from contempt of
authority, as any. Give us the just liberty of our Religion, in preferring of
God, our absolute and Supreme Sovereign, to all others; and in yielding to him
that obedience, he requires of us in his word, and none shall be found more
obedient to Authority, in all things that do not intrinch on this. We do
solemnly profess, and in the sight of the alseeing God, who searches the
hearts and reins, that this, and this only, is the cause, why we cannot give
obedience, to the laws establishing prelacy; for upon all the search, we have
made, we cannot find a warrant for it in the word of God, that perfect rule of
Religion and Righteousness; but find it contrar^ unto ^lagainst the precepts
and institutions of Christ ^^sus, anent the government of his house. This being
our persuasion, we are not able to evite the force of these obligations of our
Covenants and Oaths, made to God and one another, against it; to the strick
observation of which, we are by commands and threathings contained in the word,
most indispensibly bound, and from which ties, no humane power can loose us. Is
it not a sad matter in this case, that we meet with no other thing from any,
for satisfying our consciences, and bringing us the length of cheerful
obedience in this thing, but the cry law, law; which, in the matters of God,
can be no sure bottom to our consciences (...) seeing we as Christians are
under a law, antecedent (...) superior to that of men's.

Secondly. Where the guilt of disobedience is truly sound, yet the sentence
passed against it, ought chiefly to respect the matter of the disobedience, and
according to the quality and circumstances of it, the punishment should be
proportionated: there are no divines or lawyers (that we know of) but hold
this; and it is, beyond disput, evident from the judicial laws of the Jews,
enacted and established by God himself, for the administration of justice, in
that Commonwealth: for the guilt of disobedience being alike, in all deeds
contrare to law, disobedience in smaller matters sold have as heavy
punishments inflicted on the contraveeners, as in greater; which all
acknowledge to be a strange solecisme in government, contrare to all natural
equity and justice, the basis and ends of government.

Thirdly. And that our non-obedience to laws erec^^ng and establishing
prelacy, is so high a crime in itself, as to deserve such punishments, as have
been statute and execute upon us, we do not yet see; especially while we
consider. (1.) The little evidence (as has been said) for it in the word of
God; Some of that party ^^^e racked their wits, for finding out its divine
right and institution, as Joseph Hall, and some others; but wi^h so little
success, as has forced many of them, to ^^^te that plea, and take them to
arguments of another ^^ture.(2.) The confessions of some, who plead for the
(...) fullness of prelacy, to the well, but not to the being of the political
Ministerial Church; which they grant ^ay be such without it, as most of the
former opinion ^^^ld.(3.) Others that lean not to Scripture for the (...) of
prelacy in the Church, found it upon Ecclesia^^^ (...) ^^^stitutio^s, canons
and customs; which they take to be the Interpreters of Scripture in this
debate, as Dounhame and others with him, that make most use of antiquity.(4.)
Others more moderat, pious and more learned, then the rest, do so clip its
wings, that they bring it to a mere constant presidency, in the meetings of
presbyters, for government; making it a pure nonentity, as to what is
established by law amongst us, and for which they bring no Scripture: of which
judgment was that godly and learned Bishop Usher, who, for knowledge in all the
controversies of the Church, especially in Antiquity, was Nemini secundus.(5.)
Some others argue for it, as a mat^er of indifferency, that may be received or
rejected, as Churches and states see it fits their interests; asserting, that
all its authority and goodness depends upon and flows from the power, that
brings it in, thus Stillingfleet.(6.) Some of that party have fallen on a new
method, for justifying its divine right (being straitened, as it seems, with
our arguments, and the weakness of their own) alleging that Presbyters were
not institute in Scriptur^-times, by the Apostles; and that all Ministers,
mentioned in the Scriptures, were Bishops, in the sense controverted, as Doctor
Hammond; but his evidence from Scripture and antiquity, is so dim, that (for
any thing we know) he has gained few, or none, to follow him in this.(7) These
of the court party, place all its goodness in the authority and laws
establishing it; granting it signifies nothing antecedently to these.(8.) If we
shall consider prelacy, and view it in its several parts, as it is by law
constitute and settled amongst us, and bring them to the test and rule of the
word of God, that we may give judgment of them, according to it; how lite^^ of
prelacy will be found to be of divine right (...) the confession of our
adversaries: of all that have appeared on the field for its defense, there is
none, that ever pleaded scriptural institutions, precepts and instances, for
the Lordly titles, eminencies, and wordly dignities of the Prelates, that are
now annexed to their office; nor yet for their civil places and power in the
State; nor for their several orders, and degrees, as Primats, Metropolitans:
Archbishops, etc: Or for the like among their dependents, in their numerous and
various distinctions of degrees of superiorities, and subordinations; as
Vicars, Chancelors, Deans, Arch deacons, Subdeans, Deacons, Parsons etc.
whoever hitatherto did put pen to paper, and contended for the divine right of
prelacy, never opened a mouth to plead either Scripture or antiquity for these
(except Doctor Hammond who argues for Archbishops: and what is prelacy, in its
constitution amongst us, without them; The only thing debated betwixt us and
our Antagonists anent it, is the superiority of one Pastor over other Pastors,
and their respective congregations, to the probation of which, from scripture
and pure Antiquity, there are two things, that must of necessity be made out
from these: first the sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, and secondly
Diocesan Churches made up of several ^esse^ Churches and their respective
Pastores and Officers: in these does the essential difference lie (in their
own confession) betwixt Bishops and Presbyters or ordinare Pastores; none of
which two has been proven from scripture and antiquity. And if that, which
differences prelates from other Pastores of the Church, be ^or made to appear
from scripture, how will their office (...) of divine right? and how can it be
expected from (...) ^ho are under such strait divine engadgments against it,
that we should comply therewith; and submit to the laws, injoining conformity
thereto. We complain of the subdolous and uning enuous way of our opposites,
in this debate, who always keep in generals, and never condescend on the
particular differences betwixt Prelates and Ordinate Pastores; nor undertake to
prove these: and the truth is they cannot: for they are forced to confess,
that it is clear from antiquity, that Presbyters have ordained, sometimes in
conjunction with Bishops, and sometimes without them: And for diocesan Churches
with one fixed pastor over-feeing other Pastores and their flocks, we cannot
meet with the least probable evidence, from scripture and pure antiquity: we
find no argument from our adversaries concluding this. It is empty arguing to
say; there were Apostles, there were Priests and Highpriests in the Old
Testament; there were seven Angels in the seven Churches of Asia; therefore
there must be Bishops now: If they will from scripture make out the difference
now assigned betwixt Prelates and Presbveers, in these instances of the
Apostles, Priests and Angels, we shall yield the cause. Let none therefore
blame us, in holding to this as a necessare consequence of our Antagonists
succumbing in the probation of these things; that a parity among the Ministers
of the Gospel, in point of power or office, is of divine right; for if in the
institution of the Ministry, there be alike power given to all called thereto,
there can be no superiority of one above another by divine right.(9.) It is a
question much debated among the Popish school, men, and in which they are not
agreed to this day; wh^^ther their Prelacy be an order or office distinct from
that of Presbyters; or only a different degree of the same (...) with
Presbyters, including no power formally distinct from theirs: which last
opinion asserts, that all power, acclaimed by the prelates, is formally in
Presbyters; so that by office they are empowered to, and may do all that the
prelates pretend to. How hotly and stiffly was this question tossed the Council
of Trent, betwixt the Italian, Gallican and Spanish divines? which for this
cause received no decision in this Council, but was left undetermined as
before; As is to be seen from the History of the said Council.(10.) If any will
consider our adversaries arguments for prelacy, and compare them with the
arguments of Papists, especially Bellarmins for the Papacy, they shall find,
that they plead as strongly for the Pope or an Universal Bishop to the
Catholic Church, as for the Prelat or Bishop, now controverted betwixt us, as
will be made appear by a particular condescension, if our intended brevity would
suffer it. We refer such as question this to the arguments of both; and upon
an impartial collation of the same, we nothing doubt, but it will be manifest.
Does not the much courted and endeavored reconciliation with Rome by the
prelatical party, in former and later times, with their concessions to them,
for making way to this agreement, speak this with full evidence? As their
denying the Pope to be the Antichrist; their granting a primacy to him over the
Catholic Church; their purgeing the Roman Church of Idolatry and
superstition; their asserting the difference betwixt Papists and us, in
doctrine, worship and government, not to be fundamental, nor on their part
damnable, etc. All which discover to the world the native tendency of prelacy,
and what it will (if (...) ^^nue) ultimatly resolve into.(11.) Do not the
opinions of prelatists, their practices, the ways taken for bringing in and
establishing of Prelacy among us, reflect upon and condemn all the reformed
Churches and their divines, (except Scultetus) who, in their confessions;
treatises and reformations conform thereto, disclame prelacy, as no office of
divine appointment? As will be evident to any that peruse them. We know there
was a Pamphlet emitted in the beginning of prelacyes last introduction, that
undertakes to prove the contrare; but it is so destitute of all evidence of
truth, that we wonder exceedingly at the impudence and affrontedness of the
author, in alleging of Calvine, Beza, Bucer, etc. for prelacy; who in their
practice and writings have argued and debated against it. Did not this Author
know, that their writings are extant, and others as much versed therein as
himself? But the unjust know no shame.(12.) As prelacy or prelatical
government, in its constitution and exercise, is a compound of additions to the
Word of God, which for want of its authority we reject; so presbytery or
presbyterian government, in the confession of our Opposites, is, in all its
parts, of divine institution or right; which we offer to make out from
scripture and the concessions of our Antagonists, who first yield all our
Church Offic^rs (except Ruling elders) to be of divine appointment, (Doctor
Hammond only excepted) granting, that presbyters or ordinare Pastores and
Deacons, to be institute by the Apostles, and always used in the Church to
this day? they likewise grant the power of ordination and jurisdiction in
Presbyters, till of la^^ As also the meetings of Pastores lesser and greater,
for government and discipline, and all the particularities of power anent
these, asserted by and formerly exer^^^^^ among us. We think strange of
Stillingfleet, in denying of Presbytery to be of Divine institution, who yields
all we seek; for if all the former be of Scriptural institution and practice,
must it not be of divine right, even as to its form? We cannot for bear to
declare our resentments to the world, of the high indignities done to our Royal
and great Master, Christ Jesus, and his blessed word, the holy Scripture; in
that. 1. The form of the government of his house is asserted to be mutable, at
the pleasure of men, and made capable of any form they please to assign to
the same. Was it ever heard in the world, that the form of any government was
taken from the Officers thereof, and not from the Supreme head, in whom the
Legislative power is lodged? All that ever treated of governments, and spoke to
their different forms, did always found their forms on the head, and not on the
Officers of it? Is not Christ Jesus the Supreme and only Head of the Church, by
divine appointment? Are not ordinare Pastores or Presbyters found institute in
the word, with all the parts of their power, that we afterward grant to them?
etc Will it not then necessarily follow, that the form is of divine right,
both in the head and officers; which is truly Monarchical, and not alterable
at the will of any?2. For making way to this, the sufficiency and perfection of
the holy Scripturs, as to matters of obedience and practice in the Church, is
denied, and thereby the fundation of the Protestant Religion is shaken. How
inconsistent is this with their granting the perfection of the Scripturs, in
matters of faith? For if all matters of obe^^^^^^ be first and primarily Matters
of faith, must (...) they be perfect in these also? How our Oppo^its will
defend our arguments for the perfection of the Scripturs, in matters of faith
and manners, against the Papists (who in this speak more consequentially then
the Prelatists) and maintain the former affertion, is unintelligible to us.
For our arguments plead as much and as strongly for their perfection, in the
one, as in the other. But must it not be a desperate cause that needs such a
prop to support it?(13.) In the last place, We humbly offer the following
particulars to be considered by all; nothing doubting that, when they are duly
and seriously weighted, it will soon appear that our exceptions against
Prelacy, are not light and groundless. As 1. There is no good to the Church and
immortal souls attainable by Prelacy, that may not be win at without it. It is
a sure truth, that every ordinance of Divine institution has it is proper good
to the Church, in order to which, as it is end, it was appointed by Christ,
which is not easily reachable by other ordinances: As will appear to any on a
particular condescension: for as there is nothing defective in divine
institutions; so there is nothing redundant and superfluous. Now we desire to
know, what is that good to the Church and immortal souls, that cannot be
obtained without Prelacy? let our Antagonists give instances. If they think
that ordination and jurisdiction is the good that the Church has by prelacy;
we offer to prove from Scripture and antiquity (as has been done before us
without a reply, yea and granted by many of them) that Presbyters have the
power of ordination and jurisdiction; and the truth is, it was never questioned
by any, but yielded by all, till of late; for we have not only instances in
Scripture and antiquity, for Presbyters exercising ordination and jurisdiction;
but, the reason, that all gave for it, was, that the ministry conferred by
ordination, consisting of the power of order and jurisdiction, as it is integral
constituent parts, persons ordained receive the power of both: If this be a
truth, why may not the Church have these by Presbyters, as much to her
advantage and benefit, as by Prelates? But son e say, there can be no unity or
peace in the Church without Prelacy. The contrare is evident from the Churches
experience, in former and later times; for as the Church was never more rent,
and filled with contentions and schisms, then under and by Prelates, of which
there are innumerable instances in history; so there has been much
flourishing, unity and peace, under Presbyters, in Churches that wanted
Prelates; as is to be seen in the present case of the reformed Churches, and
will be evident to any that is acquainted with and seen in the records of the
Church: what unity and peace has the Churches of Britan and Ireland beyond
other reformed Churches. Yea is there not more of these among them, then is
with us, at this day? But what says unity and peace in the Church, if they
have not truth and righteousness for their cement and foundation, which are
seldom the attendents of Prelacy? But some place the good of Prelacy, in the
oversight and inspection, it takes of Ministers and their respective flocks
(of which they use to boast much;) But reason and experience do fully convince,
and leave us beyond all Doubt, that this good, is as easily and better wine at,
by Presbyters, in their associated and presbyterated meetings, lesser and
greater, then by prelates: what can prelates do in this, that may not, and has
not been done by Presbyters, to the great benefit of the Church? as is
manifest from the experience of this Church in preceding times, and now not
alittle confirmed by the contrare? Mworeover in the act of restitution Parl. 1.
S. 2. Act 1. it is given for one Reason, induceing to the bringing in and
establishing of prelacy among us, that it is most suitable to Monarchy. What
good this does or can bring to the Church, we cannot divine: we wish it had
been instanced in the foresaid act: we know, the government of the Church,
considered in its due latitude and extent, according to the presbyterian
principles, is truly and properly Monarchical; for is not Christ Jesus the
Supreme and immediate head of the Church? and do not her officers act in her
government in an immediate dependence upon and subordination to Him, as her
King? So that if the Churches government being Monarchical be the good intended
and meant, in this expression, it is as much attainable without prelacy, as by
it; but we suppose, that this is not the good understood. Next, if by
suteablenesse to Monarchy, be meant, that kind of Authority and Dominion in
Church officers, in and over the Church, that is exercised by kings and
Monarchs, and has been assumed by prelates, fince ever they appeared in the
Church: this is expressy discharged and forbidden to Church officers in her
government. Matthew. 20, 25. Luke 22, 25. How much Emperors, Princes Kings and
States have smarted by this dominion, is known in history? Some say, it is the
superiority and subordination of Church officers and judicatories, that is
understood in this act; This may be had, and has been attained in the Church,
under presbyterian government, both as to officers and judicatories; the
Pastor is superior both to Elders and Deacons etc. the classical presbytery
(...) above the congregational eldership; and the provincial synod above the
presbytery etc. Obj. there is not the superiority of one above the rest; Ans.
but what good does this either to Church or State? we know it has brought much
evil to both, but never any good, that might not have been wine at, yea and was
not actually attained, without it; they that judge otherwise, are bound to give
instances, which we earnestly beg they will do: we know this brought forth the
Pope, and did mid wife Antichrist into the Christian world. But the thing, we
suppose, that is truly intended, is the bringing of the Church into a slavish
dependence upon, and subjection to the Magistrate; for which, we confess,
prelacy is every way fitted: how excellently did it serve the Pope, in
establishing of his Dominion, and in bringing and keeping of all in subjection
to him? and albeit since the reformation, the prelates changed their head, in
taking on the Magistrate in the room of the Pope, yet they retain their use,
which exceedingly endears them to worldly Princes, that affect domination in
the house of God: but (is shall be proven afterward) this is contrare to the
fredome of Christ's kingdom, his absolute supremacy and dominion over the same;
and is inconsistent with Christain princes their professed subjection thereto;
so that this is no good, but and evil destructive of the true concerns of the
Church. 2. It is no small discovery to us of the evil and corruption of
prelacy, that it is much approven, allowed and cried up by all persons of
profane, dissolute and debauched lives (except where it crosses their wordly
interests) and the reason of this is obvious to all, for as corrupt and wicked
nature does dislike all that is from God, as opposite to its wicked
inclinations and ways; so it loves, and is in much liking with all that is
friendly to, and does encourage it in these. Is it not visible, that the
encouragement, which flagitious and wicked persons find for their impieties,
under the wings of prelacy, is the true reason and cause, for which it is so
liked and cried up by such? In this it is contrare to Presbytery in its due and
faithful exercise, which has been, and yet to this day, is hated for its
impartialitie, strickness and severitie against all sorts of scandal, in all
ranks of persons high and low: for this we appeal to the general sense and
observation of all in these lands: can we think that course to be of God,
which for this reason is approven by the generality of the wicked? 3. Besides
this, does not the prelates opposition to the godly (whom in rational charity
all are bound to judge such) in reproaching, oppressing and persecuting of
them, to a strange hight of severity, who in profession differ only from them
in a point, that depends on the mere will and pleasure of the Magistrate; we
say, does not this declare, godliness to be their quarrel, and it to be
inconsistent with, and contrare to their interests, which, we are sure, cannot
be the effect of these means and ways institute by God in his word, whose end
and tendency is to promove godliness, and not to persecute and destroy it; as is
now done. And whoever consider the constitution of prelacy, the rules for its
exercise (to wit, the doctrines and opinions of prelates about Church Power and
government) and the hight of Dominion, they lay clame to over the Church) will
see, that of its self, it must be an enemy to true god-lines, while it cries up
its form, and lays it self out for advanceing of it, in opposition to its
power. 4. It is received for a sure truth, among all protestants, that as the
renewed nature of the Godly does hate, and is an enemy, to all that is contrare
to, and destructive of true godliness; so it is the evidence and sign of the
evil and sinfulness of a cause, when it is disliked and opposed by the
generality of the truly sober, judicious and humble Godly. If we shall apply
this to prelacy, as it is established and exercised amongst us at this day,
have we not cause to suspect its corruption, and to judge its descent not to be
of God? seeing it is universally disliked and hated by the truly Godly; which
eminently appears in persons converted from wickedness and sin, in which they
lived before conversion; what ever likeing they had to prelacy, or hatred to
presbytery, immediately upon their conversion, they drink in an aversation from
and hatred of prelacy, and love to the contrare? We know, this was objected by
Independents against presbyterians, when the controversy about Church
government was hot betwixt them? But. 1. This objection was without any true
cause, as Independents were forced, afterward, and at this day, to confess;
they finding upon trial, that the Godly of the Presbyterian persuasion, were
exceedingly more numerous, then the other.2. The difference betwixt them is
very small (which may be incident to persons truly Godly, and consistent with
their grouth and exercise of godliness); and if there were a healing
condescending temper, might be healed and removed; their difference lying
mainly, in the authoritative subordination of Church judicatories ^^d
con^stitution of Churches, as to the qualities and engadgments of their
constituent members; which when their one ness in all other things about
government, and their concessions to one another, in the little they differ
about, is considered, might be quickly accomodated and taken up. But it is
other ways with prelacy, in its constitution and exercise with us; which, in
its effects, attendants, and the basis it is settled upon, is found to be such a
corruption in the government of the Church, and inlett to others in Doctrine
and Worship, that it becomes truly hateful to all the Godly, that give
themselves up to the conduct and light of the Scripture, and make them their
rule in the exercises of religion and godliness: far be it from us to think or
say, that there is none of the prelatical gang, truly godly or pious. We know
there has been, and do believe, there are some such among them; but O how few,
and how much have these few been looked upon, and persecuted by the rest, with
an evil or jealous eye, so as they have been judged more ours, then theirs? we
have not forgot the distinction, that on this head, was made in former times
among the Bishops themselves, and how they were distinguished into Puritan and
Court Bishops. Will not one of these two follow, either, that the generality of
the Godly, (whom Christians walking according to the rule of the word must
esteem to be such) are under a strong delusion in their opinions about, and
opposition to Prelacy; Or^els (which is most likely for the reason formerly
given) that Prelacy savours not of godliness, but in its native tendency is an
enemy to it; which says it cannot be of God, but for trial and correction? 5.
As the maine and chief qualification, the prelates require in their intrants
into the ministry, and in the people they admit to ordinances, is submission
to, and owning of the^ conform to the present law, how ins^fficient, and
scandalous soever they be, (which is overlooked and dispensed with in them); so
their bitter opposition to and uncessant persecution of pious, able and
faithful ministers, that comply not with prelacy, declares to all, that it is
not the good of the Church (that consists in true knowledge and godliness) they
seek; but the extending and establishing of their tyrranous dominion over all,
by ministers and professors submiting thereto, without gainsaying of their
impositions and commands. How contrare in this, is their way to the rules given
in the word, for calling and ordaining of ministers, 1 Timothy 3: 1, 2, etc. Tit.
1: 5, 6, etc. and the practice of the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1: 15. who rejoiced
Verse. 18. that Christ was preached, although out of envy and opposition to him?
Can that course be of God, which must be supported by such ways and means,
that cross the directions and rules of the word anent Ministers, and
disappoints the ends of the Gospel and Ministry? Believe this who will, we
cannot.

SECT. II. What moved Ministers to submit to the act of Glasgow: and some
remarks upon the acts against conventicles, and such as refuse to depone
against delinquents.
IT Has been often Objected to us, both by friends and enemies; why did
Ministers and Congregatitions obey so quickly that act of the Council at
Glasgow, in leaving and deserting of one another; seeing, by virtue of their
divine mutual relation to one another, as pastors and flocks, they were bound
to cleave together, in performing and doing of all mutual duties, which by
divine precepts and engadgments, they were bound to observe? Ans. As we will
not altogether justify our carriage, in that and several other particulars, in
our way through these sad times; (being willing to take with, and humble our
souls for, all our imperfections and failings, that shall be discovered to us
by any;) so there were some things, in the circumstan^^at case, that may plead
for us, and alleviat the offense taken at our too general practice in that
matter; As. 1. The suddenness of that act, which allowed very little or no time
for deliberation, and coming to any solid resolution, in a matter of such
weight and un usual practice, anent which, we had so few precedents in former
times. All know, how puzling surprisals use to be; and if there be not a
present divine hand to guide and support, under the power of temptation, with
which surprisals are ordinarily attended, all are in hazard, through the byasse
of corruption, to miscary, and in their resolutions to turn to the wrong side:
Ministers and Professors are men of the same corruptions and passions with
others; and whatever obligations be on them for truth and righteousness, and
the leading of others, in the same; Yet throw dark^ness, the influence of
corrupt affections, and temp^tations concurring therewith, (to which they are
obnoxious as much, if not more, then others) they are ready to slip; in which,
for the gospels sake, they should be pitied and prayed for.

2. It had no little influence upon us in determining our resolution to this,
that our party, in our neighboring Churches in England and Ireland, upon the
emission of an act of Parliament, disenabling all Ministers* that did not
conform to Prelacy, for the exercise of their Ministry, had quit their
charges, and removed themselves to other parts; not thinking it safe to
themselves, their people, the interests of religion, as it then stood, to
justle with Authority, in continuing their Ministry with and among the people,
contrare to the new laws made against them; while we confidered this leading
example, with the reasons moveing them to it, we thought our selves as much
pressed therewith, as they. And, no doubt, if we had followed the contrare
course, our Loyalty had been sadly reproached, and their practice made use of
to aggravat our disloyal disposition with which we had been often branded,
although faisly) to a great hight of contempt; which had, we grant, too much
weight with us.

3. The maine design, we had under consideration at that time, that did most
exercise our thoughts, and take them up, was, how we might be preserved from
the grand corruption, Prelacy, that did then enter into the Church: many
questions, in order to i^, were debated among us, for our mutual strengthening
against the assaults of our common adversaries, which we, in rational fore
sight, did apprehend would come upon us; never dreaming of this course, that
was followed with us; which with one stroke cut the Gordian knots of many
difficulties, with which we had often grapled, in our exercises and debars. In
this unexpected course of providence, clearing our way, under many
difficulties, we then thought it our happiness, in being rid of, and delivered
from many a snare; which, no doubt, made us give place more easily to the penal
part of that act.

4. We being at that time unacquainted with suffering, and contending for the
truth, in opposition to prevailing corruptions, in this way, it is not to be
expected in rational charity, that we could come so suddenly, to that hight of
resolution and courage, as to venture on the ut most of hazards, that then did
threaten the contraveeners of that act, and the laws upon which it was founded.
Suffering for righteousness Phil. 1: v. last, is imported to be a gift, as far
above the strength of nature, in our sinful imperfect: state, as that of faith;
as all find when it comes to be their case. It is easy for onlookers to
censure and condemn the failings of others, in persecuting times, but it is
not so easy to suffer: it requires the Spirit of power, love, and of a sound
mind, which is not quickly wine at by them, whom Christ calls to take up and
bear his cross. We grant this gives no discharge of guilt, in not doing and
suffering, as God calls; yet it cries for compassion and forbearance from
others, who, on this consideration, should be spareing in their censurs,
knowing they are in the body, and liable to the like snares and infirmities.

5. As that deed was too much influenced with fear, and other corrupt passions
and affections, bot^ in Ministers and People, (which did visibly predodomine at
that time,) so there was a palpable desertion on the spirits of all, that
rendered all counsels dark and perplexed, and in all deliberations, inclined
to that which was freest from suffering, and positive compliance with Prelacy.
Although this does not diminish fin, nor warrant any sinful neglect, nor give any
true ground of excuse for it; yet it calls for charitable constructions from
others, where sincerity is apparent in the maine; as then it was to the
conviction of all; yea to the refuting of these h^rd, unchristian, and bitter
censures of many, who judged our former professions of Zeal for the work of
reformation, in preceding times, to have flowed from a corrupt byas^e to the
world and the things of it, discovered, we grant, in too many, formerly seeming
Zealots, by their compliances at that time; from whom they took their
measures, in judging of others.

6. It is to be adverted, and ought to be of great weight, in the consideration
of this business, that Ministers, consulting their congregations, especially the
godly and judicious among them, were advised to lie by for some time, and the
truth is, they seemed as unwilling to venture on the hazards of suffering, that
threatened all, as Ministers. This we know was the reason, that most determined
not a few, to that resolution and practice: and what could Ministers do in this
case, especially, in so su^den a revolution, anent which they had the leading
example of others, in other parts of the Island?

Notwithstanding of all these, and much more, that might be said for charitable
constructions of Ministers and Congregationes practice in this, at that time;
yet we judge it the infirmity and sin of Congregations and Ministers, that they
did not cleave to one another as Pastores and flocks. We do not plead for
Ministers keeping to the accessories of the Ministry, as kirks, stipends,
manses, glebs, etc. which was, by divine precept, their right, but not in their
power to hold; but we assert it was sin, that they continued not in the
exercise of the Ministry* pastoral over sight of the flocks, keeping up the
government of the Church, we had been in the possession of; and peoples not
adhering to their Ministers, in hearing, and receiving of ordinances from them,
and not affording them all due encouragement and maintenance; all which was
done by Ministers and Churches, in times of sorer persecution then ours.

If the rigor and severity, that by this act, and its full exccution, with
others that followed thereon, for a considerable time, (which we forebear to
mention) had ceased, and gone no further, we would have looked on all, as
little, and labored to have borne the same, with that patience, meekness and
resolution, that becomes Ministers and Christians, professing the name of
Christ Jesus: but the engines and devices, that afterward were set on foot, as
the High commission, and several unchristian and illegal practices; with the
over violent pressing of the people to a conformity in their capacity; with
such illegal and inhumane usages by military force, (which alone without any
stated and formed design, gave the rise to that insurrection, in the Year
1666. and the blood that followed thereon, to the the full conviction of our
Rulers, who then searched unto the bottom of that affair) were strains so
high; that cannot be justified by the most extended rules of Christian
moderation and equity, that Rulers are bound to follow, in the exercise of
government: although this heat of violence, was for some time, a little cooled
with a shour of blood, and other dangerous consequences like to ensue; yet
afterward, fuel being by the Prelates brought and administrat unto it, it
again begins to take fire, and to break forth into strange kind of laws, made
(as it seems) to give a legal face to its proceedings; which in its former
height it wanted; the the bounds of which it cannot yet keep, but (according to
its genious) over the hedge it leaps, and gives a strain beyond these. It
would be tedious to take an exact view of all the particular laws made against
us, by which, the foundation of our past and present sufferings have bin laid,
and are like to be continued: therefore we shall only give instance in a few,
from which, we may take our measurs, judging of the rest.

As, first, Parl. 2. Carol. 2. Session 2. Act. 5. entitled, an act against
conventicles: As this act condemns all assemblies, convocations and meetings of
the subjects, not expressly warranted of his majesty; (which will make many
meetings and convocations of the subjects, now in use, illegal and unlawful) so
by consequence, reflects on the meetings, and assem^blies, that Christ Jesus
while here, his Apostles, Ministers and Christians held, in the primitive
times; who not only kept their meetings without, but against the acts and
edicts of the magistrate, in these times: for if it be laid down for a
foundation in government, that the only right of convocating the subjects is
proper to the Magistrate, what ever be the causes, occasions and ends of them;
then the Apostles, Ministers, and professors will be found transgressors and
enemies to government; who, although inhibited and discharged from meeting, yet
did not forbear to assemble them^e^^s for worship and g^vernment. What a
miserable strait are we brought to, that the me^^ing^ of the Lords people, now
called Conventicles, cannot be condemned, but on the same grounds, the
assemblies of the Church in persecuting times, must be judged dangerous,
unlawful and seditious? But this is not the worst; for in this act not only
prea^hing and expounding of scripture, by Ministers of Christ Jesus, (although
in a family beside their own) is judged to make a conventicle and an unlawful
meeting; but prayer also (a common duty of Christianity,) is declared to be of
the fame force; so that no nonconforming Minister or any other may pray
together, on any occasion, or for any cause what so ever, but they shall be
reputed keepers of conventicles, and hable to the penalties adjudged by this
law to such. Is prelacy come to this height of opposition to godliness, that it
cannot stand and be secured, except the worship of God in Christian societies
be laid aside, and its exercise discouraged (to which there needs no such
incitments in these times, the generality of professors being prone enough of
themselves to prove negligent and stack in this matter) under the odious names
of Conventicles, and by such penalties against them? Are we such odious
abominable creatures, that none must join in Christian communion with us, in
these means and duties of worship, that are of common obligation on all
Christians; but it must be forborne and laid aside? or if we once open a mouth
to and for God, in any society; we shall bring ourselves and others under the
hazard of so severe penalties, which, in the pursuance of this law, have been
inflicted on some, to the astonishment of its hearers? But moreover all such
meetings, beside the imputation of sedition and other ^orrid evils, with which
they are branded, are represented, as the seminaries of separation and
rebellion: a charge, if true, that makes them merito^us of far heavier
punishments, then some of these decreed against them: but from whence can this
come? Not from the nature of these exercises, confidered in themselves, which
are nothing, but the performance of some necessary commanded duties of
Religion, which all know to be the greatest means to, and cements of union and
obedience, in Church and State: not from the matter that is preached and prayed;
our principles for worship, doctrine, and government are known, being extant in
our publict confessions, which are of a contrare tendency.

If any say, we preach principles of separation and rebellion. They, who assert
this, are bound to make it out, of which we have heard nothing as yet, and
should have been condescended on, and given for the ground of this act, and not
the performance of these truly religious exercises, done by persons authorized
and enabled thereto, by the commands of God. We require of all engadged against
us, to do us that piece of common justice, they owe to all men, in the like
case, that they will instance in the doctrines we preach, and in the matter we
pray, wherein our meetings are become the seminaries of separation and
rebellion, if they can: when this is done, we shall either give a satisfying
answer to the charge, or else succumb to this act.

It is like, some place this charge, in our disobedience to the law. Then it
comes from the law and the Law makers, and not from these meetings and the
persons that keep them; for antecedent to this law they were not in themselves
seminaries of separation and rebellion, according to this objection: and if
this be the effect of the law, it had been more safe to have forborne it, Whose
work should be, rather to prevent and remove the seeds of rebellion, then thus
to sow them But this law in its narrative suppons these meetings to be such,
antecedent to its enacting; but gives no hint at any reason for this heavy
charge.

Others again fix the truth of this charge on our meetings, for our withdrawing
of the people, from the allowed publict worship, and the persons authorized by
law to dispense the same. If the act had only circumstantiated and described
such meetings, as had this effect, and not taken in all religious Christian
fellowship in the duties of worship, something might have been said for
justifying of this act, in a conformity to the principle of Church government,
now settled by law, without a wound to true piety; but to make all meetings of
Christians, wherein any part of worship is exercised (without an express
license from the prelat) seminaries of separation and rebellion, is in effect
to condemn Christ, his Apostles, Ministers and Christians, who, in opposition
to Heathenisme, Heresy, Profainness and shisme, have, under severe laws made
against them, assembled and met together* for communion in the worship of God;
whose assemblies have been accounted unlawful Conventicles, and loaded with
many of these evils, that are now charged on ours. Dar any, professing himself
a Christian, say, that the meetings of Christ, his Apostles and Ministers, in
houses and feilds, (who had the occasion of the Synagogues, the ordinare
allowed places for meeting in worship) were guilty of separation and rebellion,
(although charged with these) or did sow the seeds of these evils? Although
none will affirm this, yet we undertake to make it out, from the frame of this
act, as it now stands. Oh that such a law should be found in the records of
this Nation, which will speak (if ever we return to ourselves) to the shame
and disgrace of these times. But, as to our separation from the authorized
publict worship, with which* some with great confidence, brand us, we shall
consider it afterward, and see whether they or we be the separatists.

We forbear to speak to the penalties statute in this act, against the
contraveeners of it; which on many accounts might be made to appear, to be far
beyond the demerite of the crime, and an imitation of the popish cruelty, who
punished the Professors of the truth* with punishments equal to those inflicted
for treason; in which this act is not short, that adjudge the keepers of field
Conventicles, to death and confiscation of goods.

In the next place, it adds not alittle to our grief, under our present
sufferings; that although there be penal laws against Papists, and other
heterodox persons, yet no notice is taken of them, nor any execution of the law
upon them; yea in one act of Parl. Caroli. 2. Session 2. Act. 7. they are
exeemed from the guilt and severity decreed against us: which seems strange to
us, when theirs and our principles, even in matters of civil government, are
compared; theirs, in the confessions of all Protestants, are found to be
incompatible with, and subversive of that obedience and allegiance, that is due
from subjects to magistrates, supposed by them heretical: which was the true
cause of the severe laws, made against them, that for some time, (from the
beginning of the reformation) were put to some execution; but as to any
execution now, slackened and and laid by, as an almanac out of date. Are their
principles and designs changed, or their number any fewer? yea is it not
increased, beyond what they have been since the reformation? But poor we are
laid open to the lash of the severe laws, enacted against us, and all ways
taken to crush us and our cause, who own no other principles, but these, that
are either implicitly or explicitly asserted, by all Protestants, which are
known to the world, to be corroborative of government, and such as make way for
all just obedience from the Subject to the same.

To make way for the full and sure execution of this law, there is another
enacted Parl. Caroli. 2. Session. 2. Act. 2. Entitled an act against those,
who refuse to depone against delinquents; which is particularly designed, for
comeing at full information, against Conventicles and Conventicle keepers; as
is expressed in the body of that act; but so conceived and framed, as it
answers to that oath de super inquirendis, used by the Papists in their
inquisition; (condemned by all Protestant Divines, for its opposition to
justice, mercy and equity) for first, no sort of persons are exeemed, the
Father against the son, the husband against the wise, etc. were the relations
never so near, no exception of them is made in this act, which use to be
admitted in all other crimes, except that of treason. Next by this act, the
deponent (whoever he be) is oblidged to answer all interrogations and questions
proposed to him, although he has had no previous consideration of them, which
in all other crimes used formerly to be allowed; that so the deponent might
answer from mature and sure knowledge, which here is not granted. What a^
foundation is hereby laid for the molestation of the subject? Shall we be that
unmerciful and unjust to all men, yea to our nearest and dearest relations, as
to reveal that of them* which, if keept secret, brings no prejudice to Church
or State: And if revealed will ruin them, in this present world; and that for
a matter, that antecedent to the law, is no transgression before God; but the
doing of a necessare duty? An invention (we must say) framed against the good
and dousciencious, who cannot escape by this law; and for the encouraging of
the bad to the persecuting of such, who throw the power of their lusts, are at
liberty to say, and do, what they list* Are these the fruits of Prelacy, that
most endeared it to us? Whither are we gone? Shall we thus fight against
heaven, to reach a poor handful of persons, that are able to do nothing, but to
look up to God, and sigh to him, for these evils, that, no doubt, are
procureing and bringing dismal and sad days on this land? We forebear to
anatomiz these and other acts of the like nature, and to give judgment to every
clause and part of the same; but leave them to the impartial consideration of
all concerned, to whom the effects thereof may afterward speak more, then we
love to utter, at this time. Only, in all humility, we offer two things, to be
observed (which are the observations of not a few) that these and other acts do
pave the way to all sort of cruel persecution, if a further declension in
religion shall happen to follow* (which we beg the Lord in his rich mercy to
this nation would prevent.) Rulers are subject to ^erre, in the matters of God,
as well as others; (as the instances of all ages leave beyond debat;) and if
others shall arise after us, that incline to popery, or any other false
Religion, are there not laws made to their hands by us, that will facilitat
their work, and make it most easy? What have they more to do, but to rescind
some, very few in regaird of these that once were, and to execute those they
find in force and on record, for the persecuting of all opponents, to the
height of crulty. Next there needs no act of Parliament to this change, and
introduction of another Religion: an act from the King, reco^ded in the Council
books, and sufficiently published (which is declared to be of sufficient force
and obligation about this matter) is enabled by law to do all. An act without a
precedent in this nation, when confidered in its full latitude and extent.

From what is said anent these acts, any may gather the true reasons of our
refuseing the Bond (lately framed by the Council) that takes us engaged against
Conventicles, (as they are called) and was enforced by violence on us. Not
pretending to much knowledge in the laws, we have always understood, bonds to
be voluntare, and first to proceed from persons found guilty, and sentenced by
the judge, conform to the law; which the clemency of the Magistrate does often
suspend or remit, upon the guiltys offered and voluntare engagment for better
behavior, in times comeing; and never required of nor imposed on persons, not
proven nor found guilty. The truth is, if this violenting imposition of bonds,
be thus allowed and practiced, what ground will there be thereby laid down, for
the trouble and molestation of the subjects? And who can promise to himself
security from the oppression of others, that, out of malice or covetous
designs, may, on any pretense, give information against others, although never so
quiet and peaceable?

SECT. III. The Ministers preaching and peoples hearing vindicated: and four
Objections answered.
HAving thus far opened our hearts, and touched at some things, that are truly
grievous to us; not so much for what we have suffered, as for the fear of what
is like to be the consequences of the engines, framed and set on foot, for
perpetuating ours and the Churches oppressions, in this and the following
generations: we shall in the next place give an account of our practice, in
preaching and hearing of the Gospel, dispensing and receiving of ordinances, at
and from the hands of the ejected Ministers; the new cause of these heavy acts,
sentences and punishments inflicted on us, for the same: in doing of which we
shall, first, in all singlness of heart, bring forth the true grounds and
reasons, binding our consciences, to these practices, and then shall take off
the exceptions that are most used against us.

Our practice, in this matter, we build on such foundations, that all
Christians, especially Protestants, by virtue of their professed subjection to
Christ Jesus, (our only King and Law giver in the house of our God) are bound
to own and adhere to, and from which they cannot recede, without contradicting
of the said profession, and doing manifest violence to the law and word of
Christ, the holy Scriptures, our only statute and law book, in all matters of
doctrine, worship and government. If on bringing our case to them, it shall be
found, that our condemned practice in these stands justified, we hope with much
assurance, we shall be acquitted in the sight of God, and in the consciences of
all that have any feeling and sense of true Religion; the censures and talkings
of others against us (which do not a little afflict us, for the sad
consequences thereof to themselves) shall not much move us.

Therefore first, the Ministry of the Gospel being, by positive institution
and appointment from Christ Jesus, as Head and King of his Church; and the
persons qualified for, and called thereto, in his own way, without dependence
on the Powers of the earth, being thereby constitute his Ambassadors and
messengers, and in special delegation sent from him as such, to preach the
Gospel, to treat with sinners for reconciliation, and obedience; they by virtue
of this institution, and their special delegation or mission from him, are
bound to exercise the Ministry etc office, they are invested with, till it be
taken from them in the way, by which he coveyed and conferred the same upon
them. If this be a truth (as no Christian that does acknowledge the divine
authority of the holy Scriptures, and subjecte themselves to its light and
direction, will get refused) will it not follow that Ministers, in their
ministerial capacity, are first and immediately subject to Christ, and not to
men, in their ministrations of the Gospel? for they as his Ambassadors, having
and deriveing all their power from him, are oblidged on highest pains, be
reason of their special relation to him, and their commission from him, (which
contains all their instructions) to do the work of the Ministry, and cannot
be superseded therein by any, far less by them, that acknowledge Christ's
authority, in and over the Church, to be superior to, and above all other
authorities whatsoever. If they had their power and mission from men, well
might they submit to these, in taking it from them; but it not being so, they
cannot think themselves discharged of their office, but in the way, by which He
conferred the same upon them. Believe us, in this lies a great part of our
difficulty: we are sure, Ministers are Christ's messengers, sent by him, whom
they are bound to serve, in preaching of the Gospel and dispensing of
ordinances, for the salvation of sinners, from which obligation none can loose
them, but Christ Jesus, their only master and head in this work. (2.) It does
also natively flow from the former truth, that all, especially those in and of
the Church, are, by virtue of Christ's supereminent, supreme, and absolute
authority, and their professed subjection to him, indispensibly bound to
subject to the ministerial authority and its exercise, in the persons of those
whom he sends, and that on the account of their ministerial power and office,
which is truly Christ's and not theirs; they acting according to the
instructions contained i^ their commission: for they are Christ's servants,
serving him by special delegation in the Gospel, to which they are empowered,
commissionated, and instructed by him; they bear his name, stand in his stead,
and represent him to his people, as his Ambass^dou^s, being sent by him to all
finners, for attaining and carrying on the great ends of the Gospel, th^^r
conversion, edification and eternal salvation And, seeing it is so, we must
first renunce Christ's authority and dominon, over his Church, before we can
refuse and reject that power and authority of the Ministers of the Gospel, who
are thus sent by him to us: the truth is, the not receiving of them, is a
rejecting of him; a matter that should be tenderly and seriously laid to heart
by all; for it draws exceeding deep, upon all sorts of sinners high and low: so
that they not depending on any other infe^^our authority and power (except that
by which they were sent) their obligation to the work of the Gospel cannot be
annulled by men. Let us say it, in this we contend not merely for the
ministerial authority, (that for the fountain and ends thereof should be dear
to us) but for the prerogative of Jesus Christ, whose right it is, as King of
his Church, to constitute and send Ambassadors in his own name; if there be
any thing, that is the proper right of Soveraignity, this is one, which is the
native consequent of it, without which it cannot be: shall we allow this in
point of right to earthly Sovereigns, and deny it to Christ, the only Head and
High priest of our holy profession*

Secondly, Moreover, Ministers in this relation they stand under to Christ
Jesus, have the Gospel and its ordinances committed and entrusted to them, to
be dispensed in his name, for the conversion and edification of sinners; for
which they are called, the stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4: 1. this
is a talent they have received from their great Lord and master, of which they
must shortly give an account; and which, while they have it, they are commanded
in all highest pains to use, for the gaining of sinners to him, in the ways he
directs them to in his word. Now let all judge, what a strait Ministers are
cast into, in these times: If they forbear on the inhibitions of men, to
dispense the Gospel and its ordinances to sinners, thus committed to them, they
prove unfaithful to their master, betray their trust, and incur his heavy
displeasure and wrath: If they answer their trust and aim at faithfulness
therein, in preaching of the Gospel, and laboring in the work thereof, to
gain sinners, they provock men and expose themselves to all sorts of
suffering. But they, knowing the love and terror of the Lord, have on mature
consideration of this matter, chosen and purposed, in their master's strength,
to venture on the wrath of men; seeing they cannot, in this juncture, both
please their Master and them; resolveing to prefer the necessity of suffering,
to that of sin, the much commended and cryed-up choice of Moses, in the like
^ase, proposed to all in the word for their imitation.

Thirdly. Besides this trust of the Gospel, there is likewise the heavy trust
of immortal souls (to whom they are sent) committed to them, of whom they are
to give an account, and for whose blood they must answer, when they resign and
give up their stewardship, and lay down their office and trust a^ his feet,
from whom they received it. Do any think, the threats and inhibitions of men,
will discharge them of this trust at their master's hand? If they think so,
they shall do well to produce something from him, that will signify so much to
them, without which they cannot judge themselves exeemed from the care and
oversight of souls; whose blood will cry aloud in the ears of their master, if
they do not their part, in what he has commanded them, for saveing of such. We
have heard of nothing yet from our Rulers to satisfy our consciences in this
matter, but peremptory laws and acts, commanding them to obey the same, under
great penalties: If we were assured upon clear rational grounds, that their
voice and commands were the voice and commands of Christ Jesus, releeving us of
this pressing burden of immortal souls, once laid on us, how quickly and
cheerfully should we obey their present laws: but nothing can we learn from
them or any other, to ascertane us of this. Let any, that has any true feeling
of the natural state of souls, judge, what a cruelty it must be in us, to
behold souls perishing throw ignorance, wickedness, hypocrisy and a Spirit of
delusion, in all parts of the Land, while we have the dispensation of the
Gospel committed to us, the mean that Christ has appointed in his house, and
uses to bless with power to the salvation of sinners? Will not our neglect, in
slighting of this, make us guilty of their blood, and accessory to their
eternal perdition? We are assured of this from the word of God. While we
reflect and think on this, we dar not, for fear of men and the sufferings that
threaten us from ^^^m, stand by and look on, but labor, as we can, in our
ministerial capacity, to prevent the ruin, we see coming on immortal souls,
come of us what will.

If it be granted to us, that our obligation to obey God, in all he has
commanded us in h^s word, is antecedent and superior to the ties on us for
obedience to men; and that the commands of men should and ought to give place
to the commands of God, (as we expect will not be demed by any, that intertaine
the true notion of a God head, much less by them that profess subjection to
the holy Scriptures as the only rule of faith and obedience) then our practice
cannot be condemned, but must be justified, which is but a necessare
consequence of this truth, so universally received and closed with by all men;
(except those who have debauched their consciences, throw the predominant love
of temporal things, to a slavish subjection to the lusts and sinful commands of
others) for are not Ministers commanded to preach the Gospel, and the people to
hear it, to assemble and gather themselves together for that end? How many are
the commands and precepts of God to us in his word, about this matter? In a
thing so clear and evident through the Scriptures, it is astonishing to us to
think, that men professing themselves Christians dare issue out commands, so
directly opposite to the commands of God, and the obligation on Ministers and
Christians to obey Him, before all others. We grant, when there is another duty
on foot and called to, hic and nunc, the Magistrate may, yea ought to super cede
the practice of that, that would hinder the duty, necessare and called to, for
the time (to which in the circumstantiat case there is an obligation and call
antecedent to the Magistrates command^) bu^ (...) lay on, and fix a stated
cessation from the practice of commanded duties, on those, that are under an
obligation of serving God, in the matters forbidden by men, is beyond the power
of any; to do so, is to frame and state a war with God, and to fix ourselves in
opposition to him. Are not Ministers and Professors then in a pussing strait,
who must either disobey God, or men? To them that ask us, why do we preach and
hear, to the offending of our Rulers, and the causeing of so much trouble to
the Country? Our answer is, God in his word has commanded us so to do; they
that sus^ean the relevancy of this reason, but yet deny the consequence, are
oblidged to give us something, that takes off our obligation of obedience to
God, in these things, in our case; (sure we are they are commanded) but nothing
can we meet with from the Scriptures of truth, to answer our arguments, and
satisfy our consciences, but the cry of hazard from some, and sharp severity
from others.

Fifthly, We hold according to the Scripture, that as the Magistrate cannot, jure
Magistra^ico, exautorat the Ministers of the Gospel, or take their power and
office from them; so he has no power to untye the obligation on Ministers, and
Professors, for obedience to God, in the least of his commands. It is a
principle in politics, held by all, that no inferior power can disannul a
power, or hinder its exercise, that is immediately derived from, and dependant
on a power superior, except they show a warrant from the same: but in this
matter it is so: we know all will grant, that Gods supreme authority and
dominion is superior to and above all authorities and ^owers* seeing they
derive the same from and hold them of him, who is truly Lord of Lords, and King
of Kings. And seeing the Ministerial power, as to (...) ^^ing and exercise, in
the Church, is immed^atly ^^om God, throw his Son Christ Jesus, by positive
institution and appointment in his word; no other power can exautorat these,
that are clothed with it, but they must show a warrant for it from God in the
Scriptures; there being no other way, by which God makes known his will to the
sons of men; if there be, let it be shown, and this will end the debait, and
bring us to a quiet and cheirful subjection to the present laws, about the
matters controverted. We meet with confident assertions, but no proofs, without
which, we cannot look on our selves, as loosed from the obligations lying on
us, to use and exercise the Ministerial power, by virtue of the institutions
and commands of God, given anent it in the word. We know the Ministry was
institute without a dependence on the Magistrate, and exercised in the Church,
not only without, but against his will and command; and God was obeyed, while
the Magistrate did countermand and oppose himself thereto, to his outmost; which
says, that Ministers and professors did not then dream of a dependence on,
and subjection to the Magistrate, in the Matters of God: The truth is, to give
the Magistrate a power to dissolve powers institute by God, and to supercede our
obedience to him, in the things he has commanded, is to make him equal with,
if not to exalt him above the Almighty God; the only Absolute and Universal
Sovereign of all Creatures in heaven and in earth. Is not this to substitute
the Magistrate, and to put him in the place of the Pope, that Antichrist, the
man of sin, who in nothing so much, as in this, now under debat, exalted
himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped, as is prophesied of him,
2 Thessalonians: 2.4? The consequence of this usurped power, now given to, and assumed
by the Magistrate, in and over the house of God, is such, that we tremble to
think on that, which will (if things continue in this present course) be the
issue of it. As we find, in the accomplishment, that Luther did prophecy, in
saying that there should arise a Civil pope in the Church, who should extend
his power over the same, as far as ever the Ecclesiastical Pope had done; So we
fear, that the troubles, trials and persecutions of the Church, shall come near
to that hieght, they were at, under the Pope of Rome. This strange inhansing of
things, divine and humane, speaks some thing to fall out, that will make the
present and succeeding generations to tremble; for God will not always be
mocked, nor suffer his Glory to be taken from Him.

Sixthly, When we consider the sinful and evil consequences, that would of
themselves follow upon our obedience to the Magistrate, in the matter now
controverted, we dar not, for all that is dear to us in this world, comply with
what is required of us; nor desist from serving of God in the Gospel of his
Son; for (1.) If the former reasons, for our non-obedience, do hold and prove
concludent, would not our obedience to what is enjoined us, confirm the unjust
usurpations, made on the Church, and wreath the yoke of bondage about her neck,
to the enslaveing of the consciences of all, and the loss of her just rights
and privileges, purchased for, and granted to her, by Jesus Christ? As our
compliance would have made us accessorie to the Magistrates sin, and brought us
under the guilt of all the sin and wickeduesse, that has ensued on the same;
so we should not only have been cruel to the Church of God, and the souls of
professors therein, but we should have brought the ruin of the Church on our
own heads; for not only he that is active in and concurres with the causes of
evils, is accessorie to all the bad and evil consequences of them; but also he
that labors not in his capacity and station to hinder them, when it is in his
power to do: having therefore nothing left us and within our reach, to with
stand these usurpations and corruptions, under which the Church now groans, and
by which she is in hazard to be destroyed, but the Gospel of Christ, that we
find yet committed to us; we dar not give over preaching and hearing of the
same, which the Church in all ages has found to be the power of God to her
preservation, and recovery in evil time.(2.) While we think on the following
ages, and the obligations that are on us, for transmiting the Gospel to them,
in its purity and power, (as our worthy predecessors did before us) and what
are the means and ways, prescribed to us in the word, for effecting of this
great good; and with what success these have been essayed, in the former
generations of the Church, to the benefit of succeeding times; we find
ourself straightly tied, both against positive compliance with what is required
of us, and the o^ission of that, which God has commanded, and put within our
power, for resisting of these evils; which if yielded to and not withstood,
would bring our children, and theirs after them, into the darkness of
ignorance, Idolatry, superstition and prophanness, from which ^od in a great
measure delivered us. We dar have no hand in the blood of our children, or
those, that are comeing after us; which we know, the neglect of these means,
that are appointed for propagating the Gospel, would bring upon us, and make us
accessorie to. It is not unknown, what advance and progress these times have
made in the foresaid evils, since Prelacy reentered amongst us; and what further
length they would have gone, if it had not been for the obstruction, they have
met with, from the Gospel preached, by 2 persecuted and despised hand full, in
whom the foo lishnes of preaching has been the wisdom and the power of God, to
the salvation of this Church.(3.) Although the solemn ties, and obligations of
the Covenants, under which these nations once came, be decryed, and all
endeavors used, that are within the reach of these Lands, to disannul,
disgrace, and make them void; yet finding, on the exactest search we have made,
that they remain in ^orce on us, and this Church, either to the duties
contained in them, or else to the Judgments and plagues denunced in the Word of
God against Covenant breakers; we cannot to any thing that will bring us under
so heinous and land-destroying sins, as Covenant breaking and perjurie; which
we cannot evite, if either we comply with the corruptions, ejected by these
Covenants out of this Church; on do not, in our stations and capacities,
according (...) our power actively withstand and oppose the same; and labor
not for the preservation and advancement of the doctrine, worship and
government of this Church, as it was at our taking on of these obligations;
which bind us not only to Negatives, or non-complyances with the ejected
corruptions; but to endeavor the preservation of these concerns, in our
capacities, according to our power. Albeit this seem light to others, yet it is
not so to us; for till the matter of these Covenants be disproved, from the Word
of God, and made to appear to be unrighteous, antecedent to the Laws of men,
(which none has yet done) we must judge our selves bound by them to the
observation of all they contain, in this present case of the Church. We may
not, so far as our knowledge leads us, have any hand in furdering, and
advanceing of the ejected corruptions, whether in doctrine, worship or
government; but must of necessity, set ourselves, in our stations against
them; lest we be partakers of other men's sins, and consequently of the plagues,
that God has threatened (...) word against them.

We shall to ^onider next, some of these exceptions, most con^^^nly used
against us, with which we are publicly and privately branded, and stigmatized,
(...) rendering us odious and hateful to all. Excep^^^^^^ I That we refuse to
give that obedience to (...) ^^gistrat, his laws, and commands, that un^^^ the
^^ine of damnation, is enjoined to all sub^^^, in the Word of God? Answer.
Because this (...) the constant cry of our opposers, and given for the ^^oun^
of these rep^o^ches of dissoyalty, rebellion (...) ^edition so unjustly cast
upon us; we therefore most earnestly beg of all, they will weigh impartially the
following Answers, in the balances of truth and Justice.

First, As we cheerfully grant Magistracy to be the Ordinance of God, and by
divine institution, to be immediately derived from him; by virtue of which, all,
especially Christians, are bound to subject themselves to those clothed
therewith, and to obey them in all their lawful and just commands; so we
complean of no little injustice done to us, by our adversaries, who for our
non-obedience to the present laws about prelacy, do charge us, with being
enemies to Magistracy, and disloyal to them, that are now invested there with;
contrare to our known doctrine anent this matter, presented to the world, in our
publict Confessions of faith, yet extant amongst us, and our constant practice
conform thereto. If simple non-obedience, in some particulars, that greive the
conscience, be a sufficient ground for this charge, will not the Confessors and
Martyrs, in all ages of the Church, be held guilty of disloyalty and sedition,
who, for not obeying of Magistrates, in their sinful commands, have suffered
grievous and hard things? None can on this ground condemn us, but they will be
found to justify the persecutors of the Saints, and to condemn them; if our
reasons, for non-obedience in our case, were taken from the unlawfulness of
authority, and our Rulers clame thereto, the charge were most just; but seeing
they are brought from the sinfulness of the matter commanded, while we
acknowledge the authority, and grant obedience thereto in all other things,
how malicious and unjust is the charge? Reproaches and lies will be fo^^^
another day a weak covering and an unsafe (...)

Secondly, We suppose it will not be denied to us, that the power of Magistrates
is not simply absolute, but several ways bounded and limited; as. (1.) By its
own nature, which is properly civil and politck.(2.) By its objects, Truth and
Righteousness, to which it is astricted, and beyond which, in its exercise, it
cannot, jure, go.(3.) By the absolute and universal authority of God and his
laws, from which it and other powers are derived, and to which they are
subordinat. All these limits are set to Magistracy, which it may not
transgress; and beyond which, obedience is not due to these, that are installed
in it. By the first it is distinguished specifically trom other powers, as
immediately fountained in, and descended from God, as it; as the power of
Parents, of Husbands, Ministers of Christ, etc. some of which did exist and had
being, before Magistracy was in the world. We assert that these powers, being
specifically different from Magistracy, and as immediately derived from God, the
Mastrat cannot, jure, disannul them, hinder their exercise, nor dissolve the
obligations on those vested therewith, to those duties to which they are
antecedently bound. It is true, the magistrate has a power about these powers;
but it is only cumulative, and not privative of the same: he is to see, that
all do their duties in their several relations and capacities, and that Truth,
Righteousness, and Peace be kept, and flourish amonst them. By the second the
magistrate is bound up, and tied to, truth and righteousness, and has no power
to go beyond, far less to do contrare to them; they being the essential
objects and ends of magistracy, for the preservation and advancement of which,
it was first institute and brought into the world. By the third the magistrate
is so subjected to God and subordmated to him, (as all other powers are) that
not only the right of precedence, in the matter of authority and obedience
thereto, is Gods, and not the magistrates; but the magistrate is that much
subjected to his law, as that he has no jus, or power, to command any thing to
the contrare: his commands here are nullities, as a non habenie Potestatem: so
that non-obedience in this case is not disobedience to him; but obedience to
God; for as God has not given power to any of his creatures against himself;
so in the Collation of the magistratical power and authority, there is an
obligation conveyed with it on the persons called thereto, to improve and use
the same for him, and the furtherance of obedience from others to his laws; for
the magistrates power being of God, makes him the Minister of God, for the good
and not the hurt of others. Hence it is evident and beyond disput, with all
sober minded men, that the commands of the magistrate, do not bind any subject,
where God commands the contrare. Court parasites and flutterers may extend this
power of the magistrate, beyond these, who through the love of their worldly
interests and lusts, (when favored and advanced by Rulers) more then from any
true respect to their just authority and prerogatives, keep no bounds in their
assertions about the magistrates power; but the true marks, and Land marks are
set by God himself, and will not be removed, but to the prejudice and ruin of
these that labor to overturne them. If we make it not out (as has been hinted
above) that, that which is commanded is sinful, and contrare to the commands of
the must high God, let us be used with all severity; but noe are is granted to
us, all access denied, and every door shut up.

Exception 2. But our adversaries not finding sufficient ground, for the former
charge, take them to the actions, done in the times of our late troubles and
confusions, charging all that was then done upon our party and their
principles. Ans. We are confident that, when the carriage and actions of the
true Presbyterian party, in relation to the Magistrate, shall be searched after,
and known; they will be a sufficient confutation of these malicious Calumnies
cast upon us, from this head: we know, for justifying of this charge, all the
enormous actions of former times are fathered on our party, and their
principles; but contrare to all justice; for we are sure, if the actions of the
late preceding times were duly differenced, and distinguished into their
several kinds, and drawn up to their true fountains and heads, that these of
them, that are not justifiable, shall be found to rest on persons and parties
of designs, inclinations, and principles different from ours, who for worldly
respects and designs, betook themselves to, and sheltered under the wings of
the Presbytean party, while in power and succesful (as it uses always to be
in such cases:) of these there were different yea contrare sorts, that winding
into the favor of leading persons in those times, did climb up to that height
of reputation and power, as to influence their counsels and actions, to the
committing of several enormities, that we dar not, yea will not justi^^: but
after-alterations gave sufficient discoveries of them, who Proteus-lyke,
changing into every form, stroke in with the party, that did for the time
predomine: let preceding actions then be distinguished into those, that we
judge right and resolve to stand to, as the native effects and product of our
designs and principles (how much soever now misrepresented;) and these that
were influenced and brought forth, by the predominency of persons and parties
of different designs and principles, in our counsels; and also betwixt those,
that were the actions of particular persons, and not of the party; as likewise
betwixt those usual infirmities, that men in this sinful state are incident to,
in the best of actions, and those gross and wicked aberrations from the paths
of Righteousness, that are but seldom incident to men of honest intentions,
and well informed consciences: we say, do us the justice, thus to difference
former actings, while Presbytery was in the rise, prevailing and prosperous
against its adversaries, and we will quickly wipe off the dirt cast upon us by
persons, that keep no bounds of charity and justice, in their censures of the
late times: let Histories be consulted (partial as they are) and it will
quickly appear, what were the true genuine designs, and actions of our party
then, and what not; but thus to charge the whole party and their principles,
hand over head, with all the enormities of these times, looks rather like a
Spirit of bitter malice, then of meekness, sobriety, and judicious love, that
speaks no evil, without clear rational grounds, the great ornament of the
Professors of Christianity. Is it not known, and beyond all disput evident,
what the Presbyterians did in opposeing the change of g^vernment, and all the
sad practices committed before and after, in relation to it: so as the then
prevailing party confided more, in the prelatick and cavilier party, then in
the Presbyterian, finding them more truly averse from, and contrare to their
designs and ways, then the other? But some allege, that we did raise and put
them in a capacity to do what they did? O how weak is this argueing? If it
hold, the holy and righteous God will not escape the censures and imputations
of thi^ men; all the wickedness and mischief done in this world will, by this
medium, come upon him, as the cause and author of it; from whom they receive
all that power, strength, and capacity, that enables them to do wickedly. Shall
those that do good to others in educating, supplying, and affording them all
necessaries, abused by them to sin and ryotous living, be judged the authors of
their wickedness? O folly! If our intended brevity could suffer it, we would
make it out from undeniable instances, that the government had not such sure
and steadfast friends, as the Presbyterians, who were truly such, and acted
according to their professed principles; who stood to it, when others (who are
now the only favorits) turned their backs upon it, in going all the length of
compliance with the Usurpers, that was required; while the generality of true
Presbyterians refused, for which they were discountenanced, and looked upon, as
a party that was to be suppressed. If persons that speak thus at random against
us, could, by clear mediums, knit the practices, they charge upon us, to our
professed designs and principles, how would they triumph; but none (...) these
have we yet seen and heard. We know, the late wars are fathered on our party,
as the first causers and beginners of it? But groundlesly, as will appear to
any, that will be at the pains, to search out the true causes and grounds of
them: we are confident that, as any, who is truly unbyassed, comes to the
through knowledge of these, they will find our adversaries in the blame, and
not our party, who for Religion, liberties, and self preservation, (for all was
at the stake) were then forced to arms, throw the insatiable pride and tyranny
of the then Prelates; but too much of this. Only we must say, if things now hold
on in their present channel, in which they have run these few years past, we
doubt not, but many will justify and allow, what once they condemned.

Exception 3. It is with no little considence asserted by some, that although
the Ministerial power be immediately from Christ, by divine institution; yet,
the exercise thereof is from the Magistrate, so that Ministers may not convocat
the subjects, preach, and dispense ordinances, without l^berty from him? Ans.
(1.) We desire to know, whence our adversaries have learned this distinction?
Su^e not from the word; there is not the least footing for it there; if it be,
let it be produced. We know its original from whence it came, that man of sin,
the Pope of Rome (from whose Arsenal. the All of the Hierarchy has been
brought, and this among the rest) who for gain, and fixing of an universal
absolute dependence of all upon him; invented this distinction, that was
unknown to the Christian world before he arose.

But, (2.) We assert, that the exercise of the Ministerial power, is, as much
immediately from Christ* and independent on the Magistrate, as the power it self.
First, because we find this power was exercised in the Church, in the
primitive times and afterward, without any dependence on, and acknowledgment
of the Magistrate anent the same: this none will get refused. We desire then to
know, what it is, that now suspends the exercise of the Ministerial power on
the Magistrate, that was not then? Christianity adds no new power or right to
the Mag^strat, it only qualifies and disposes him, to use his power aright; but
gives none that he had not before: for if a heathenish Magistrate should
exercise all that power about the Church and her pastors, that is by Scripture
allowed to the Christian Magistrate, he should not exceed, nor go beyond the
limits of the Magistratical power. As we find several heathenish magistrates,
in the Scriptures, doing a great part of the work ascribed to the Christian
magistrate; (as Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes, etc.) so they are commended for it.
It is to us ridiculous, to say, that the heathenish magistrates power is not
intensive and habitualiter as great, as the Christian magistrates. 2. All moral
power does necessarly include, and has flowing from it, an obligation to its
exercise, if moral and Physical impediments hinder not; it not only gives right
to such and such acts, and makes them valide; but it binds the persons clothed
therewith to such acts, so that the omission of them in their season is their
sin; for the end of the power ties the person, that has it, to intend and seek
its accomplishment, in such and such ways, as is proper to the nature of ^he
power; as might be instanced; but in a matter so ^^^ar we forbear.

Thirdly, How comes this distinction to be given and made use of, anent the
ministerial power, and not anent others, about which the Magistrate may exercise
his power also? may not Fathers, Husbands, etc. do the duties proper to their
relations, without leave from the Magistrate? if they may, give us a reason why
Ministers may not do the duties, proper and specific to their function,
without the magistrate? their power is as immediately from Christ, and is as
little dependent on the magistrate, yea and less, then theirs; never one has
undertaken this task, but they, who make the magistrate the fountain of all
power: which is most absurd; seeing the magistrate did find other powers
existing and in being before he was.

Fourthly, As the power of ministers is from Christ by divine institution: so
they are under an obligation, for its exercise, by divine commands, which the
magistrate has no power to imped, as has been said. They that are clothed
with the ministerial office, are commanded to exercise it, who, in no place of
Scripture, are directed to the magistrate, for his license; If they be, let us
see it: no doubt we had heard of it, ere this time, if any such thing were.

Exception 4. There is one exeption used against us among others, and urged
with no little vehemence, in the matter of our loyalty and obedience to
Authority; to wit, our nonappearance before the Council, on summonds given
out against some of our number, at several occasions; which is held forth to
be, and strongly aggravated for a high evidence of our contempt of our Rulers,
and the authority wherewith they are clothed: for which up wards of 80. of
Gentlemen, Ladies, Ministers and yeomens are intercommuned; and the subjects,
under the same penaltyes due to such, inhibited all manner of assistance to,
and converse with them. Ans. Not likeing to dip into, and discuss the
severitie of this sentence of intercommuning, passed with such solemnity
against us, nor yet to canvasse the legality or illegalitie of it; but leaving
it to others, better versed in, and acquainted with our Laws; we offer the
following considerations to all, which we hope will, to the unbyassed, not only
alleviat but justify our nonappearance. (1.) Beside what the law of nature
has provided and teaches all men, anent self preservation; we suppose, it will
not be denied, but granted to us by all, that, if many of the precepts and
examples we have in the word of God, do allow flight to Ministers and
Christians from the unjust violence and oppression of Rulers, when it is within
their power to decline it; then our non-apperance before the Council will not
necessarily infer a contempt of their authority, or any true disloyalty and
disobedience to them: Otherwise Christ Jesus our blessed head, his Apostles and
others, will be found as chargeable with this crime, as we; from which all
Christians do free them. While we think on these precepts and examples of
Christ, his Apostles and Christians, who lived in Scripture times, we cannot
avoid these two conclusions, which in despite of all contradiction do make out
the former inference, as 1. That passive obedience to the unrighteous decrees
and punishments of Rulers, is as undue, as active obedience to their unjust
commands: injustice in sentences and punishments, binds no more to submission
to these, then unrighteousnes in commands ^yes to obedience, where the
infliction of such punishments is evitable; for Rulers are not enabled by their
authority to injustice more in the one, then they are in the other; and
consequently there can be no obligation on their subjects from their
authority, to give themselves up to their unjust punishments, more then to
yield obedience to their iniquous commands: and if it were not so, Christ and
his Apostles sinned in not giving this obedience: which is most absurd. Obj: 1.
But this is contrary to the doctrine of many Protestants, who teach that
passive obedience is due, and should be given, where active obedience is not?
Ans: 1. We know of no Protestants that teach so, except those who were prosy
lited into court parasites; it was neither the doctrine nor practice of most
Protestants, as is clear from their writings and History.2. We desire to know
of them that think otherwise, what this allowed flight is, If it be not a
removing of ourselves (when the circumstances of cases permit) from the decrees
and sentences of Rulers, appointing us to unjust punishments? which is nothing,
but a denying of passive obedience to such sentences. Who can evite this? Some
there are who grant this, in sentences that reach the life; but not in
sentences that only touch the body and estate, as imprisonments, fines, exile,
etc. But give not any just instances, or sound reason for what they assert.
Concl. 2. Hence also we gather from the foresaid precepts and examples, that
non-submission to unjust sentences, when within our power, is not inconsistent
with that respect, esteem, love, honor and obedience, which, by virtue of Gods
commands, we are bound to give to Rulers; and consequently is no contempt of
their authority, nor any true disloyalty; else Christ in allowing himself, and
his Apostles in practicing this flight, had been contemners of authority and
disloyal to it: which all Christians assert to be false. Hence it is evident,
and will be so to the unprejudged, that if our Opposites fasten not this charge
on the matter, they will never be able to do it from our nonappearance simply
and abstractedly considered. Obj. 2. Our Rulers summonds being properly their
commands to us. for our appearance before them, (which is lawful and in its
self just) we were bound to have appeared, both on the account of their
authority, and the thing commanded? Ans. This being the objection of greatest
seeming strength, and most used to our reproach, we shall consider it a little,
and (1.) Waveing the debate about the nature of summonds, and leaving their
native import, use and consequences to Lawyers; We assert, that when the
commands of Superiors, (although lawful in their immediate object or matter) are,
in their stated design, so connected with irreligion, injustice, oppression
and unrighteousnes, that they become the engines and means of oppression and
violence, or of any thing truly sinful in its self; we say, such commands
participat of the nature of their ends, and become unjust: as for instance,
when Rulers in order to oppression and persecution, command any subject to
witness his knowledge of the Orthodox opinions and practices of such and such
persons, the subject in this case ought not to obey such commands; which our of
this case and the like, that are abstract from such sinful ends, he not only
may, but ought to obey; or if a master or father should require his servant or
son to bring to him such a woman to such a place, they knowing it is for
commiting of uncleannes with her, they should not obey; which, when without
respect to this wicked end, they are bound to do. If this were not a truth, the
officers and soldiers, that apprehended Christ and Crucified him, were
innocent and blamlesse: which all grant to be false, for it was the injustice
of the ends of their lawful Rulers commands in this thing, that made their
obedience to them undue and unjust, so that they were truly culpable and
guilty of Christ's blood, as well as their Rulers.(2.) Supposeing but not
granting, the summones to be good and just in themselves; yet it is a Maxim
agreed to by all Divines, that where two things morally good, do t^yst in
Christians practice, the one of one or two degrees of goodness, the other of
three or four, that the last should be chosen and preferred to the first: but
so it fell out to be in our case. To our thoughts on this matter, it was beyond
question, that our nonappearance at these times, to which we were cited, was a
greater good (supponing the other to be good, which we do not yield) both to
the Magistrate, our selves and others, then our appearance could have been; for
th^reby the Magistrate was withheld from unjust oppression, he should have been
guilty of, the Gospel preserved with the people in its purity, much suffering
to others prevented etc. while we had no good to expect from our appearance,
but a mere act of obedience.(3.) That non-obedience, in some cases and things,
to the commands of Rulers, is no true disobedience, as (1.) In things without
the Magistrates line and reach, although the things commanded be just and good in
themselves: suppone the Magistrate should command a person unordained, to preach
the Gospel, dispense the Sacraments, etc. this being beyond the Magistrates
line, it were no disobedience in any subject, not to obey such commands.(2.) In
things contraire to mercy and justice, that one Subject owes to another, if
the Magistrate command either the not doing of these, or the doing of the
contrare; not obeying here, is no disobedience. The truth is, if the matter
commanded be not just, and, antecedent to the Magistrates commands, not
necessare; not obeying is no disobedience; and the reason is, because no power
can justly crave obedience, when it acts either beyond, or against its true
adequat formal object: but of this above.(3.) When Magistrates commands are
opposite to Gods, (which has often fallen out) obedience to God can be no
disobedience to the Magistrate. But in our case we undertake to prove, that
although the thing commanded, to wit, appearance, be within the compass of the
Magistrates power, that it was contrare to mercy and justice; yea and things
commanded and allowed us of God; which will exeem our nonappearance from
disobedience, and consequently from contempt of Authority.

Knowing and being morally certain, that the unjust violence, designed against
us, would have inevitably followed on our appearance, we chused rather to
forbear it, and to use the flight Christ allows to his servants and people, in
the like cases. It is a Maxim in Morals or practical divinty, accorded to by
all Divines, that of two penal evils, when the election of them is in our
arbitriment, the lesser is to be preferred to the greater: And to any that
consider the case, we then had before us, it will be manifest, that flight was
much preferable to the severity, we were to expect on appearance, of which we
were assured, not only from the standing laws of the Kingdom, but likewise
from the preceding carriage of our Rulers; who, although slow and negligent
enough in the execution of the laws against Papists, Quakers, and other
heterodox opinious and wicked practices; yet punctual and strick, in putting the
law to more then its full execution against us; to which they have been, and
are instigated by our enemies, the Prelates, to such a hight of keenness, that
if the matter contamed in our summonds cannot be made to appear, we are put to
answer such interrogatories, and required to give and subscribe such oaths,
engadgments and bonds, to which, they know, we cannot without destroying of our
principles yield; for refuseing of which, many of our party have been cast into
prisons, fined, banished, etc.

Thirdly, It had no little influence on us in determining our nonappearance,
that the usual legal form of procedour in judgment, allowed to and used with
others, is not observed toward us; from which we could not expect justice, but
all severity. On our appearance we have no accuser, often no lybel
condescending on, or containing our crimes, with the circumstances; no
witnesses produced; but an oath administered to the empannelled, for expiscating
of accusations against ourselves and others, and that in crimes made by law
capital; and the oaths of these, whom the law calls, socij criminis, sustained
for valid probation; ways of procedour condemned by the law of God and
nations, except where the Papists cruelty takes place. And if all these sail,
the subscribing of engagments and bonds is p^oposed and required (as is said
above;) on the refusal of which, a prison is the best we meet with. Let any man
of ordinare reason and justice judge, whether appearance before Rulers, who, by
following of such methods and ways in judgment, declare themselves resolved to
have at the persons arraigned, whether ^ure or not; we say, let any judge,
whether appearance before such, when it is in their choice to appear or not, be
rational and safe; except where the supposed guilty intends by their
appearance, to prevent greater severity.

Fourthly, Among other things, that came under consideration with us against
this appearance, was the oath de super inquirendis, lately framed into a law,
and now pressed on us, which (for the reasons formerly given) we dar not take;
for besides the severe punishments (as imprisonment, arbitrary fines, exile to
foreign plantations, etc.) we were to look for, for refuseing of this oath;
if we take it, we are, contrare to all natural equity, mercy and justice, made
the accusers of ourselves and others, contrare to the provision made in the act
establishing and imposeing of this oath, which declares that the oath taken by
any shall not militat in judgment against the takers of it to such and such
penalties therein specified, and yet the matter of their lybel uses to be
diawne from it, and if they deny their deposition, an oath is adduced for
probation against them: And it is not intelligible by us, how such an oath can
be sustained (...) valide probation against others, and not against the
deponent; seeing a person's own confession of his crimes is judged sufficient
against him, much more should this oath, which necessarly suppons and infers
confession, even judicial.

But Fifthly, In the next place, the evil consequences, that by our appearance,
we were certane, would have redounded to many, made us forbear it; for if we
had appeared, we were sure perpetual imprisonment, or exile from our native
country, had ensued thereon; whereby we should have been put out of a
capacity, for laboring the preservation and advancement of the Gospel in this
Church, of which we are members, and to which we, as Ministers and Christians,
are so straightly tied and bound; the people should have been robbed of a
faithful Ministry, an^ he benefit of the word purely dispensed by them; the
rod of persecution, now on the back of this Church, should have been more
sharpened against the remnant of our party; the people exposed to more shakeing
and winnowing temptations, to the endangering of their stedfastnes; our
adversaries of all sorts more emboldened to vent and spew out their venomous
doctrines, and to carry on their designed defection to a greater hight: all
which being more then probable, yea to us morally certane, we durst not do
that, which would have opened the door to all these evils. These arguments do
suppone, and lean on the unjust oppression, intended and prosecuted against us,
which is made out both as to matter and design, in the precedent and subsequent
discourse.

Sixthly, It was never a piece of disloyalty and disobedience to Magistracy even
for persons confessedly guilty, to keep themselves from the stroke of the law
to run away from it, and to escape out of prisons, if they could effect it, and
consequently not to enter into prisons, when cited thereto, must be as free of
disloyalty, especially when the cause, for which any is in hazard thereof, is
righteousness, as ours is at this day.

SECT. IV. Our practice cleared from separation; where it is also proved
unlawful, to submit to the Ministry of the Curats.
Exception 5. The ejected Ministers preaching, and dispensing of ordinances,
and peoples running to, and hearing of them, in this manner, and withdrawing
from communion with the Church, in the allowed public ordinances, is
separation; which is against the principles and practices of the Presbyterians
in foregoing times? Ans. because this, in acts of Parliament, publict Sermons,
and in Pamphlets, is with great confidence asserted; we shall take it a little
into consideration; and see whether the Prelates and their Creatures; or our
Ministers and the people adhering to them, be the separatists: a sinful
separation, we grant, there is, but who are the Causers of it, and guilty
thereof, before God, they or we, let our following answers and reason
determine, to which, that they may be more clearly apprehended, we premise. 1.
That it is not every sort of separation, that is sinful and evil; some kinds of
it are duty and commanded, as our Protestant divines make good against the
Papists, as Joseph Hall, (...) all that writ on that subject: for it is our
part, to separat from sin, and Professors joining together in it, with which
the worship of God comes too often to be vitiated, and polluted: for this we
have many precepts and commands in the word Ephesians. 5: 11. with other
Scriptures.2. To make non-presence* or absence from the meetings of Christians
for worship and government, sinful separation, there must be first a stated
habitual absence, secondly Such reasons and grounds for it, as will not justify
it; for if the absence be not ordinare, it is not esteemed separation; although
the reasons of it be not justifiable pro hic and nunc: and albeit the absence
be ordinare and habitual, yet if its causes, whether moral or physical, be
right and warrantable, it is not sinful separation; for absence from the
meetings of Christians in worship or government, is either sinful or not,
according to the causes or reasons of it.3. The grounds that will justify and
warrant a withdrawing, in ordinare, from such meetings, must be. (1.) The want
of a just authority or right, in those that dispense the ordinances of worship
and government: The Pharisees question proposed to Christ, Matthew. 21: 23. did
suppone a commonly granted, and received truth, which Christ does not deny, but
tacitly yields; that they who act publicly in the Church must have a just
authority and right so to do: we ought to have some rational convincing
evidence of this, and if it be wanting, it will warrant this withdrawing; much
more, if its want be positively clear.(2.) Corruptions in the worship of God,
so knit to them in their use, that they cannot be used without the use of these
corruptions, will also allow a withdrawing from such roeetings; as all in these
grant.(3.) Sinfol ^^^cumstances, as such places, times, causes, persons etc.
That in their connection with, and respects to things, that are truly sinful
and evil, becomes so, prohic and nunc; as fasts, thanksgivings, etc. when
observed at such times, and for such Causes, as are evil.(4.) Unsound and
heretical doctrine, taught in ordinare, in such meetings, Matthew. 24. We grant
it is not every error and erroneous doctrine, that will justify a peoples
withdrawing, from ordinances, dispensed in the assemblies of the Church, (there
being nothing besides that may justly cause it;) but only such as is truly
heretical and subversive of the foundations of Religion, Righteousness, and
peace. When poison is administered in stead of wholesome food, a people are
bound to see to their own safety, that they be not destroyed by that, which was
intended for their health.(5) There are some things in the stated case of some
times, and other circumstances, that will give sufficient ground for this
withdrawing, that will not do it at other times; as in the beginnings of
defection, under the contests betwixt the orthodox and unsound party, usually
some things fall in, that will call for a secession from Church assemblies;
which have often fallen out in the Church, and is evident from history;
particularly in the time of the Arminians, predomining in the Church of
Holland; and many others that are to be seen in the records of the Church.4.
Although in some cases, a negative separation be lawful and right, where a
positive is not; yet in some cases, a positive separation is lawful and duty:
it is hard to determine of cases in this matter, except where the ease has
been, or else is existent: there are two cases in which this is allowed;
intrusion, and an universal infection of the worship and government of the
Church, with superstition, idolatry and tyranny, to the polluting of all its
ordinances: we hope there will be no controversy anent the second, seeing it is
the doctrine, and has been the practice, of the reformed Churches, in their
secession and departur from the Church of Rome, on that very head; who not only
withdrew from the communion of that idolatrous Church; but erected themselves
into distinct Churches, with officers and ordinances, conform to the commands
and institution of Christ: and when the matter is seriously and impartially
weighted, there will be found, as little ground of controversy about the first;
anent which we take these two to be evident truths. (1.) That Churches are not
bound to subject to, but to withdraw from these intruded upon them; partly
because the just rights of the Church are wronged and taken from her, which all
ought to maintain, and not to quite, and partly because she is enslaved
thereby, and subjected to the lusts and tyranny of men, and a preparative laid
down to others for doing of the like, in times coming.(2.) That this intrusion
is either on Churches that have bin and are settled in Christ's way, with able
and faithful Ministers; or else on these that want and are vacant for the time:
If it be on Churches that are under the settled inspection of faithful
Ministers, they are bound to adhere to these, and not to give place to the
intruders, from whom to withdraw, can be no sinful separation; the intruders,
and these that fall off to them, are the separatists: if the Church or Churches
be without faithful Ministers, they also are obleidged to refuse the intruding
Ministers; and if this unjust and violent intrusion on them continue, they are
oblidged to provide themselves of Ministers, that under their oversight, they
may have and enjoy the benefit of the Gospel and its ordinances, to which by
the commands of Christ, and the necessity of the means of eternal life, they
are straightly bound; for as unjust intrusion brings nothing with it, to make a
people yield to the intruders; so it untys no obligation formerly on them, for
endeavoring of their setlment with a faithful Ministry. If we thought these,
in thesi, were questioned by any, we could with great ease make them out to the
conviction of all; but taking them for granted, we surcease any further
probation. Therefore5. We desire, it may be also considered, that there is a
vast difference betwixt hearing of, and submiting to Ministers, in the exercise
of their Ministry, in the general; and doing of these to such and such
Ministers: the question betwixt us and our adversaries, is not whether we
should hear and submit to Ministers in their Ministry, for this we do not
deny; but whether we should hear and submit to these, that were our Ministers
and set over us by the holy Ghost, before this change in the Church; or these
sent from and thrust in upon us, by the Magistrate and Prelates? It is no little
wrong done us by our enemies, who give it out to the world, that we contemn a
Ministry and ordinances, and are against hearing; while our practice, declares
the contrare to all, and for which we are daily suffering. We hold that, as it
is our duty to withdraw from, and not to subject to the Prela^^^s, and their
Creaturs; so it is likewise our duty, to cleave to our former Ministers, in
hearing of the Gospel, and receiveing of ordinances from them, as we can, and
have access: we have given reasons for the affirmative, and shall, the Lord
willing, do the like for the negative.6. It would also be adverted, that there
is a great difference, betwixt a Churches bringing in, and carrying on of a
defection willingly, in a Church way; and the Magistrates doing this of himself,
without the Church, yea forcibly, Ecclesia renitente ac reclamante; although
there should be no difference, as to the matter; yet there is much as to the
manner and way, to influence, regular and diversifie ministers and Christians
carriage under them: all in the Church are to subject to the power, proper and
peculiar to her, which they ought not to do to others, usurping this power, and
taking it out of her hands.7. In this matter a difference or distinction is to
be made, betwixt the personal scandals and corruptions in ministers walk, and
administration of holy things; and these that may be, or are found in the way
of their entry, which may be such, that although they do not invalidate their
ministry, in their dispensing of the word and its ordinances, to the
rendering of these nullities; yet may give sufficient ground to peoples
withdrawing from and not subjecting to them, as their lawful and sent
pastors.8. There is a great difference betwixt a Church regularly constitute
according to the Word of God, in her ministerial political being, enjoying the
exercise of all ordinances in purity, that comes afterward, while under that
constitution, to be intruded upon by the sole power of the Magistrate, and
persecuted in officers and members for adhereing to her constitution, in
opposition to the intruders, and the corruptions brought in upon her by them,
against her consent; and a Church declining from her former purity, in
doctrine, worship and government, abuseing her power to the bringing in and
furthering of the said defection, and universally concurred with, and submited
to in the same. The first is our cas^, and concerns the state of the question
betwixt us and our opposites, in the charge of separation they lay on us.

The question then betwixt us, and our adversaries, is not whether we may
lawfully separat from publict ordinances, for the corruptions and personal
miscarriages of fellow-worshipers, whether ministers or others; as one in a
little manuscript does maliciously or ignorantly state it: we are still of the
same mind with our worthy predecessors in their debats against the Brownists
and Separatists; as our practice this day does confirm, in our assemblies and
meetings for worship, differing in nothing, as to this, from what it was
before. Neither is it, whether it be simply or in it self sinful, to hear and
receive ordinances from these, who have entered by, and submitted to the
prelates, abstract from our present case; for we grant the case may be, in
which it is lawful yea duty to hear, and receive ordinances from such; yea and
has been. But the true state of the question, is, whether a Church or Churches
constitute according to the rules of the word, provided and settled with
ministers, regularly called and submited to, should yield to the Magistrates and
Prelates, violently ejecting their ministers, and thrusting in other ministers
upon her, not only without, but against her consent; in subjecting to such,
hearing and receiving of ordinances from them; while the Magistrate does all
this, for furthering and perfecting a course of d^fection, contrare to solemn
Covenants and oaths, by which they were oftener then once, ejected and cast out
of this Church? To this we answer negatively; that the Church should not
subject to such in hearing, and receiving of ordinances from them, but ought to
disowne, and withdraw from these, thus entered into the Church, and complying
with the introduced corruptions.

This conclusion we prove thus. First, They who have no just authority, nor
right to officiat fixedly in this Church, as the proper pastores of it, ought
not to be received, but withdrawn from: But the Prelates and their adherents,
the Curates, have no just authority nor right to officiat in this Church, as
her proper pastors: Therefore they ought not to be received but withdrawn
from. It is expected, they will not deny the first proposition: all the debate
will be about the second, which we make out thus. They who have entered into,
and do officiat fixedly in this Church, without her authority and consent, have
no just authority and right so to do: but the Prelates and their Curats have
entered into this Church, and do officiat therein, without her authority and
consent: therefore they have not just authority, etc. The first proposition is
clear, and we suppose will not be gainsaid by our Antagonists; seeing the power
of mission, of calling and sending of ordinare fixed pastors, is only in the
Church, and not in any other, as all Divines do assert. The Second is evident
from matters of fact: for there was no Church judicatory called or convocated,
for bringing of the Prelates into this Church; all was done immediately by the
King and acts of Parliament, without the Church (she being by violence
disenabled to meet in her officers for fear of opposition from them;) a
practice wanting a precedent in this and (for any thing we know) in all other
Churches. Object. 1. But our Prelates were consecrat by the Prelates of the
Church of England? Ans. What signifies that to the Church of Scotland, and
their just right to officiat in her (suppone the office of prelacie were right
and institute?) Does any think, the Church of England would acknowledge the
authority of Prelates consecrat here, and subject to the same, if all were done
not only without but against her consent; we suppose not. Either the Church of
Scotland, at that time, had no power of mission, or else she had; if she had
none, wanting prelacy, then our Ministers were no Ministers of Christ Jesus,
and all ordinances dispensed in her for many years were nullities, which some
of our adversaties, we hope, will not say: if she had the power of mission, how
came she to be neglected and usurped upon by another Church, to whom she was
not subordinat? Object. 2. But Presbyters cannot consecrat Bishops, they being
an inferior order. Ans. if it could be shown from Scripture that Bishops are
not only an Order and office different from Presbyters; but that they have a
different ordination to their office, from that of Presbyters, it would say
much; but nothing of this can be made to appear from the Word of God. But. 2.
We ask whether consecration be different from ordination? If it be one with the
same, why may not Presbyters consecrat? and if they may ordain (as we
undertake to make out from Scripture and Antiquity) what necessity was there
for going to England for it, seeing it might have been done by the Presbyters of
this Church? If consecration differ from ordination, sure it is a humane
custom and invention, for which we have nothing in the Scriptures and pure
Antiquity, that only speaks of ordination, the only way, in which all Pastors
entered into the pastoral office. 3. The truth is, as a Church Ministerial and
politic, constitute according to the Word of God, with all officers of divine
appointment, has the full power of the keys of the kingdom of God; so there
is no sort of officer, necessare by divine institution to her edification, but
she is enabled, to furnish her self with such, without a necessity of seeking
to other Churches for them: and if it be so, the Presbyters of this Chruch,
being her representatives, their consent should have been had. Although we had
no just exception against the office of the Prolates, as it is constitute and
declared by law (as we have) but their violent intrusion in this Church, it
puts a sufficient bar on our subjection to them, so that we may not, yea cannot
own them as the lawful pastors of this Church, Obj. 3. The Magistrate consented
to and procured their consecration? Ans. If any will make it appear, that the
Magistrate is the Church (as Erastus does insolently assert without all
probation) yea a member of it, as such, or has the power of mission, we shall
yield the cause and quietly submit: but when we search into the Scripture, we
find the Magistrate, as a Professor of Christianity a member of the Church
without all Church power ^et be to be the fountain of it) and subjected as
such to the care and oversight of Church Officers, in the exercise of their
ministerial authority and power. We grant, it is his part to put the Ministers
of the Church (when negligent in furnishing of her with officers) to their duty
anent it; but not to thrust in officers upon her of himself without her
consent. Obj. 4. But the Curats have entered by the Church? Ans. 1. This we
deny: the contrare is clear from constant practice; for the Curats come in upon
congregations only by the Bishop and Patron, who are not the Church, nor have
any power from her for what they do, in this: all their right and power is
founded upon, and derived from the supremacy, and acts of Parliament, and not
from the Church; in which the Bishop acts as the Kings delegat and substitute,
only empowered thereto by his law: so that the Curats having and deriving all
their power from the Prelates, cannot have the same from the Church; none gives
what he has not. But. 2. The prelates, not being the lawful governing Church,
any that enter congregations by them, cannot be said to enter by the Church; no
more then if a Minister should enter into a congregation of this Church by a
Minister or Ministers of the Church of France, or Holland, without the
Ministers of this Church, can be said to enter by the Church here; for the
Ministers of other Churches are not the governing Church of this Church. The
antecedent is to us clear; for as the Prelates have entered without the Church;
so the lawful Ministerial ruling Church, although scattered and persecuted, is
yet existent and in being, who by the unjust and violent intrusion of others,
have not lost their right of ruleing this Church; but in point of right and
obligation do continue to be her lawful pastors; for violence, persecution and
intrusion, do not dissolve the relation betwixt the Church and her Pastors,
either general or particular; there being nothing in our case, that can justly
do it; other ways, it should be in the power of the Magistrate, to undo and
destroy the political Ministerial Church, both formally and effectively which
is ab^ord. We ask at any, who think persecution and intrusion do in our case
annul the pastoral relation betwixt Ministers and Churches; whether the
Magistrates violent ejecting of Ministers, and putting of Mahum^tan or Popish
Priests in their rooms, will discharge Ministers and Congregations of their
obligations to one another? if they think not, then how can these untye their
obligations, in our case? We ask a reason. If they judge persecution and
intrusion by the Magistrate in ^his case, to have this effect; then it will
inevitably follow, that the Magistrate can destroy divine commands flowing there
from, contrare to the practice of divine relations, and obligations to the
obedience of the Church, in the primitive times, who, notwithstanding of the
Magistrates Edicts, threatenings, and much actual violence, performed the mutual
duties of pastors and flocks.

Arg. 2. All power of the Prelates and their creaturs in the Church is by law
fountained in and derived from the Magistrate, and in its exercise subordinated
to him; (as is evident from the act of restitution. Parl. Carol. 2. 1. Ses. 2.
Act. 1.) which derivation and subordination they own and homologat, by their
compliance with what the law does require, in order to it: therefore such we
cannot, we may no^ own, receive and subject to, as our ministers under seeing
they acknowledge and subject themselves in their ministry to another head,
then Christ Jesus, which by law is set in and over this Church. That the force
of this Argument may be more perspicuous and clear, we shall put it into form
thus: Those that receive and derive their Church power from, and are subordinat
in its exercise to another head, then Christ Jesus, should not be received and
subjected to, as the ministers of Christ in his Church: But the Prelates and
their Curats do receive, and derive their Church power from, and are
subordinat, in its exercise, to another head then Christ Jesus: therefore they
ought not to be received and subjected to, as the ministers of Christ in his
Church. We suppose the first proposition will not be denied; all the debate
will be in the Second, Which we prove thus; These officers in the Church
professing themselves such, that derive their Church power from, and are
subordinat, in its exercise, to a power truly Architectonick and supreme in
the Church, beside Christ, do derive their power from and are subornat in its
exercise to another head, then Christ Jesus: But so it is, that the Prelates
and their creaturs, do derive their Church power from, and are subordinat in
its exercise to a power truly Architectonick and supreme in the Church, beside
Christ; therefore the Prelates and their Curates do derive their power from,
and are subordinat in its exercise to another head, then Christ. The major
proposition is evident: for whoever has a supreme Architectonick power, in and
over the Church, must be an head to the same, and the fountain of all Church
power: it is a repugnancy to be supreme, and have an Architectonick power, and
not to be the head of that Society, to which any is such. Now to the Minor,
that the Prelates and their Curats have their power from, and in its exercise
are subjected to a supreme Architectonick power, is beyond disput clear, from
the act of restitution, formerly mentioned, and other acts to be mentioned
afterward; and will be so to any that consideratly peruse the same; of which
we are to speak at more large, under the last head; but for the time, we
propose these three from these acts, for making out of this argument. 1. They
are expressly made to have a dependence upon and subordination to the King, as
supreme to them, in their Church judicatories and administrations.2. The
government of the Church, in its ordering and disposeing, is annexed to the
crown, as one royal prerogative thereof, which not only suppons the government
to be in him, as the fountain thereof, but to be exercised with that dominion,
that is suitable to his regality.3. The giving of Church power to Church
officers, is supponed to be the effect and deed of his laws, and acts, without
which, all power in the Church is declared to be null and void. Objec. Although
the Kings Majesty be supreme governor in all causes, and over all persons
Ecclesiastical; yet he is not head to and of the Church? Ans. If he be supreme
governor in such causes and over such persons, in Linea directa, no question,
he is the head political to the Church; for GOVERNOR and HEAD are equipollent
terms: whosoever is supreme Governor to any society, in this sense, is a
proper political head to it; it is needless to quarrel about words, if the
thing be granted. And that this subordination or supremacy is direct, or in
Linea directa, is, we judge, clear from the fore mentioned acts, seeing they not
only make the King the fountain of Church power; but moreover in the act anent
the the National Synod, he is made the All of the same, and without him, it is
nothing. The like of these, the sun never shined on, except these made by King
Henry the 8. of England; which being scrupuled at by all sorts of persons, at
home and abroad, they were, in Queen Elizabeth's time, forced to alleviat the
matter by removeing the title head, and some mitigating explications allowed,
and ordered to be given to the subjects, at the taking of the oath of
supremacy; but no such explications allowed here.

Arg. 3. If the Ministers and Churches required by law to receive and submit to
the Prelates, and their Curats thus thrust in upon them, were constitut and
settled in Christ's way, as Pastors and flocks, in the just possession and actual
use of all ordinances, conform to the rules of the word; then it is no sinful
separation, for Churches, in adhering to their Ministers, not to receive nor
submit to the Prelates and their Curats: But so it is, that the Ministers and
Churches required by law to receive and submit to the Prelates and their Curats,
thus thrust in upon them, were constitut and settled, in Christ's way, as Pastors
and flocks, in the just possession and actual exercise of all ordin^^ces,
conform to the rules of the word: Therefore it is ^^^o sinful separation on
their part, not to receive and submit to the Prelates and their Curats, in
hearing and receiving of ordinances from them. We suppose, the consequence of
the major proposition is evident, and will not readily be denied by any; and if
it shall happen to be, we prove it thus. If there be divine obligations on
Ministers and their Churches to the performance of the mutual duties of Pastors
and flocks; then it can be no sinful separation, for Churches, in adhering to
their Ministers, not to receive nor submit to the Prelates and their Curats; But
so it is, that the Ministers and Churches, required by law to receive and
submit to the Prelates and their Curats, were under divine obligations to the
performance of the mutual duties of Pastors and flocks: Therefore it is no
sinful separation for Churches not to receive nor submit to the Prelates and
their Curats. The consequence of the major proposition leans upon these two,
and is infallibly made out by them, first that th^^e is a divine relation of
Pastor and flock, betwixt Ministers and the Churches, over whom they are set;
and secondly that they are bound by divine commands, to do the mutual duties of
such, contained and prescribed in the word of God: none that acknowledge the
Ministry to be an ordinance of divine instution, and the Scriptures to be the
rule of religion and righteousness, will be able to refuse these. We conceive
none, even of our Antagonists, will deny the Minor; if they do, will it not
follow that the Church of Scotland, before and at the Prelates introduction, was
no Ministerial political Church? which is false; as we undertake to prove; when
ever our opposites give their reasons to the contrare. But we know the greatest
debate will be about the Minor proposition of the first argument, to wit, that
Ministers and Churches, required by law to receive and submit to the. Prelates
and their Curates, were settled in Christ's (...) as Pastors and flocks, in the
just possession, and actual exercise of all ordinances of divine appointment:
This for matter of fact is beyond all denial, for the Churches of Christ in
Scotland, before and at the Prelates late entry among us, in the Year 1662.
were, for the generality of the, furnished with Pastors, and in the possession
of all ordinances; The debate then will run upon the jus of that constitution,
that was existent and in being at the Prelates introduction: against which there
is nothing, that can with any color of reason be objected, but one of these
three: Obj. 1. Prelacy was wanting in that constitution, which it should have
had? Ans. 1. To the validity of this objection, it must first be made out, that
Prelacy, as it is established by law, and in use and exercise, among us, at
this day, is of divine right, or an office institute in the word of God; which
is not yet done, and for any thing we have yet seen, never will; Let our
adversaries in this great debait. consider the reasons and exceptions we have
given in against i^, and answer them: yea, we undertake to prove, that it is
not only without, but against the word of God.2. We ask at the Patrons of
Prelacy, whether they judge it essential to the constitution of the Ministerial
political Church? If they judge it essential, does it not necessarily follow,
that all the Reformed Churches of France, Holland, etc. are no ministerial
Political Churches; and that all ordinances dispensed in them are Nullities;
yea that the Churches of the vallyes of Piemont, called the Albigenses. (which
by all historians have their original deduced from the Apostles,) were not
such, seeing (...) the confession of all, they never had Prelacy from their
beginning of Christianity to this day, which is contrare to the sense and
judgment of our Worthy Reformers, who always esteemed them pure Churches. The
truth is, the consequence is so necessare, that the most of the Prelatical
party of the Church of England, admit no Minister of the reformed Churches to
officiat among them without reordination; by which they fix a desperate Schism
between them and these Churches, while they desire and endeavor reconciliation
with Rome: which speaks out the tendency of their principles? If they think
Prelacy not essential to the Political Ministerial Church? (as some of them do
grant?) then our Church constitution, as to all essentials, was right, our
Pastores bound to feed, and people to submit, hear and receive ordinances from
them; Obj. Although Prelacy be not essential to the esse; yet it is usful and
necessare to the well being of the Ministerial Church? Ans. 1. As has been
said above, we know of no good, to which Prelacy is said to be necessate, that
is not easily attainable without it; yea and is not win at in the reformed
Churches.2. Then the former obligation on our Pastores and this Church must
continue; for if Prelacy be not essential nor necessare to the being of the
Ministerial Churches, the obligation, which flows from, and is dependant on
it, cannot be discontinued by the introduction of Prelacy upon us; it should
rather confirm and strengthen this obligation, in the opinion of such, then
dissolve it. It is, no question, the foresight of this and other consequences
of the like nature, that forces the most of the now Prelates, to maintain the
absolute and essential necessity of Prelacy in the Church, against the evidence
of Script^^^ and Antiquity. Obj* 2. But what was done in the Year 1662. for the
introduction of Prelacy in this Church, was but a repossessing her of it, that
had been ejected An. 1638? Ans. 1. The ejection of Prelacy Anno 16^8. was but
the pu^geing of Presbytery from Prelacy, that had been brought in upon it,
after Prelacy had been cast off by this Church in her first Reformation of
Religion from Pop^ry: It is evident from Histories, the books of discipline
first and second acts of Parlt. Particularly that of the Year 1592. the
National Covenant, and the records of the general Assemblies, that with the
Reformation of Religion in doctrine and worship, Prelacy was also removed and
cast out of this Church, as an high corruption in her government. So that from
the Reformation of Religion from Popery; Presbytery had the first possession.
It is true, the Bishops that then were, did continue in their bishoprics, and
kept their places in Parlt. but without all Church power or jurisdiction,
that they had formerly exercised in the times of Popery predomming in this
Church; And when their Bishoprics came to va^k ^horow death, their places were
not filled w^^h others, as formerly had been done, till Morions Regency, who
for the legal right of their revenues (which he labored to enhance for his
own use, and could not legal^y come at, without some shadow of them)
endeavored to bring them in (of which he repented at his death, as is to be
seen in the history of the Duglasses) which occasioned a hot contest betwixt
him and the Church, at that time, in her assemblies, who stootly opposed
prelacie, and never gave it over, till by law and pra^^ice it was wholly cast
out of this Church, Anno 1592. But King James afterward falling too much in
love with wordly designs and interests, for facilitating the much courted and
desired succession to the crown of England (to which Prelacy was then judged
necessare) labored by sinister and subtle ways, the introduction of Prelacy
upon the Church, (which then was most averse therefrom) that he gave not over
his design in this, till he had settled it by law Anno 1612. and brought it in
upon Presbytery: but Prelacy not being content with this establishment and
exaltation, it attained to in the foresaid Year, never ceased working by its
impositions, till it came to that hight of usurpation on Church and State, that
procured its ruin Anno 1638. All this is so clear from the preceding records,
particularly Spotswoods history, that he must be either an utter stranger to
these, or else impudently malicious, that denies it. Do men think, we are such
ignorants of and strangers to these things, that we are not able to discover
the vanities and lies of some of that party, who have put pen to paper, and
contradicted all this; as the Author of the seasonable case, and others, who
contrare to all evidence, will maintain the possession of Prelacy in this
Church since the reformation?2. Supponeing Prelacies possession in this Church
since the reformation (which is notourly sals) till its last ejection Anno
1638. as it was in England; yet till its divine right be proven, it can claim
no jus or right in the Church of God, whose concerns cannot be antiquated and
proscribed by length of time; Otherwise most of the popish heresies, idolatries
and superstitions, should have night as good clame, for their being in this
Church, as Prelacy; and it is li^^ (...) if ever Popery aim at its
restoration, and come any length toward it, in this Church, it will build it
self on this foundation, among others; as Prelacy does this day, in the laws
establishing it. Obj. But the Magistrate bringing in Prelacy, and commanding all
to receive and submit to it, (Prelacy being, as some say, a thing indifferent)
all should obey? Ans. leaving the debat about the Magistrates power to the last
head of our discourse, where it shall be considered alittle; we say 1. Whatever
power the Magistrate has about the Church, and her concerns as such, it is
astricted and subordinated; to the Word of God, which the greatest Patrons of
Erastianisme do yield, as Vedelius; yea Erastus himself, and all of that Sect:
hence the Magistrate may not command any thing in the Church, that is contrare
to, or without it; and if he do, none are bound to obey such commands, as all
Protestants grant: therefore till it be made to appear, that Prelacy is allowed
and appointed in the word, our non-obedience or non submission to it, although
commanded by the Magistrate, cannot be justly condemned. It is true,
Stillingfleet is at much pains to prove it to be indifferent, but on such
grounds as shake the foundation of our faith, the perfection of the holy
Scriptures; and with so little success, as we remain the more confirmed in
the contrare: woe were to us, if we had no better grounds for Presbytery, then
the strongest pleaders for Prelacy have yet showed for it.2. The Magistrate with
the subject being under the divine obligations of Covenants and oaths against
Prelacy, have no power to command its reception, neither ^^n the subject give
the obedience required, without horrid sin against God: If in such a case, a
power in the Magistrate to do, and command contrare to such divine obligations
and engagements, and an obligation on the subject to obey these, be asserted,
is there not a door opened to the introduction of any Religion what soever? And
a power granted to and established in the Magistrate, to make void all
obligation of obedience to God? Which, to us, is terrible to think on. Are not
our Antagonists then forced, either to assert this power on the Magistrate; Or
else to prove the matter of these Covenants to be sinful and unjust, and
consequently not obligatory on this Church? One of these two they must do,
before they can expect our obedience to the present laws anent it. We grant,
some of that party have undertaken this task, as to the last; but with so small
fruit, that on a serious and impartial perusal of their Argueings about it, we
continue more confirmed in the contrare, then before the said perusal: whether
this proceeds from our dullness and incapacity to reach their arguments, or the
weakness of the same, we leave it to the unbyassed to judge.3. We assert, that
whatever the Magistrate may do, either in causing or dissolveing of Church
relations and engagments; yet he cannot do this, immediately and of himself, but
by the Church; and the reason is; as the fixing and establishing of Churches
relations and engagments betwixt Ministers and Churches, does arise and flow
from Christ's institutions and precepts in his word; so the application of these
to individuals in the Church, either in causing or dissolveing them, is in the
Church, and not in the Magistrate: he may command the Church to act her part in
this, but cann^^ do it himself, for the power of calling and mission belongs to
the Church, not to the Magistrate; as all Divines ancient and modern assert,
and as, we suppose, is sufficiently proven afterward.

Arg. 4. The way of the Curats entering into Congregations puts a bar on our
subjection to them, that we dar not own them, for the lawful pastors of this
Church: for as their entry is without the Church, and the way that Christ has
settled in his house for that end, so they have come in on congregations, in
ways, which we judge corrupt, and without all warrant from the Word of God,
and the practice of the primitive times: In the search of Scripture, and pure
Antiquity, we find, that ordination by Ministers, the election and call of the
people, was the way, by which Ministers entered into congregations, and not the
institution and collation of the Bishop, nor the presentation of Patrons;
which, as they have their pedegry and origination from Popery; (a part of the
tyranny of that Hierachy) so they are but late human inventions, derogating
from, and vitiating the institutions of Christ about this matter, and that
several ways; as 1. This way of their entry, by the Bishops institution and
collation, does suppone, that their ordination does not sufficiently empower
them, to the exercise of the Ministry, without a further license; which is
contrare to the end of ordination, and the nature of the Ministerial power;
that, by virtue of its ends and the commands of Christ, does bind the persons
invested therewith, to its exercise, without which, he cannot prove faithful to
his Master, ^or attain the ends of his Ministry, the conversion (...)
edification of sinners. It is true, the Bishops dominion, in subjecting of his
Creaturs to him, is strengthened thereby; but it everts the very end and nature
of ord^na^ion, that, by this device, is only made to give po^entiam remotam,
not proximam.2. The Pa^^ons presentation, as it takes away the peoples right of
election and consent, granted them by Christ Jesus; so it suppons ordination to
give no right to the mantainance; or, at least, su^pends it; (the effect of
presentations being, in the grant of all, to give a right to the stipend;)
which we assert, according to the word, to be the effect of ones being the
Pastor of such a people, who, by divine commands are bound to maintain him in
all outward necessaries for his incouragment in the work, and enabling him to
do those duties, both common and special, which he cannot do without it; To
say, one is the Pastor of such a congregation; and yet has not just right to
the provided maintenance, is against the commands of Christ, and the practice
of the Church in many ages. But, as this is amongst the many other pieces of
slavery, unto which men, throw ambition and lost, have subjected the Church of
Christ, so the Curats, entering this way, we cannot receive, nor give up
ourselves to them, as our guids and Pastors under Christ.

Arg 5. Many Congregations, into which the Curats are entered, are under a
standing obligation to their former Pastors; not only on the account of the
pastoral relation betwixt them, but for the engagments they came under to such,
an their call and reception of them; which is not dissolved by any, thing we
have yet seen: sure we are, the Magistra^ can not do it: Obj. Solomon, for the
Crime of T^^^son, Committed by Abiathar against the state, banished him from
Jerusalem, (where the Tabernacle was) and Confined him to Anathoth, his own
inheritance, by which he habitually disinabled him, from exercising the priests
office: Therefore Magistrates may depose and exautorat the Ministers of the
Gospel. Ans. How wide and inconcludent is this consequence? it is only said in
the text 1. Kings 2 26, 27. that here moved him to Anathoth, which is but a
Civil sentence. Obj. 2. It is said verse 27. that Solomon thrust him out from
being priest unto the Lord. Ans. Solomon did this consecutive, and not
formaliter; it was a necessare consequent of his deserved sentence of
banishment, to which he was bound, on the justice of the sentence, to yield and
submit: a consequent that will necessarlie follow on the deeds of others, to
whom our adversaries will not grant the formal power of exautorating of
Ministers; suppone a man by smiting, or a physician by administering unwholesome
physic, do habitually disinable a Minister to the exercise of his ministry;
will it therefore follow, that he does depose him from his ministry, or has
the formal power of so doing No ways. And seeing the Scripture is plain in
showing the accomplishment of the Lords word, spoken against the house of Elie
by Samuel, in removing of Abiather, and in him, Elie's house, from the
High-priest-hood; and also the way how it was done; not by a formal sentence of
deprivation devesting Abiather of his office, but by a civil sentence of
confinement to Anathoth, that necessarly remo^ed him from the Tabernacle, and
disinabled him to ^o his office there; why do men contend? But ambition to
gain its design will keep at any hold, how weak soever. Obj. 3. As this deed
of Solomon's did discharge Abiather of his former ties and obligations, to the
exercise of this office in the Tabernacle, and opened a door for bringing in
another priest in his room; so we think the Magistrates sentence now does the
same, to the ejected ministers, seeing they are bound to submit to civil
sentences, and the Church may not want Pastors. Ans. Although we yield the
Antecedent, yet we deny the consequent: for 1. because the parallel betwixt
Abiathers case, and ours runeth wide: because (1.) Abiathers sentence was just,
his crime deserved it, and much more: but ours is not so; as the preceding and
subsequent reasons make out. 2. Abiathers sentence was personal, and terminated
on himself only, and did not reach the rest of the priests: ours is against all
that do not conform. 3. His was founded on a civil crime against the State,
and person of the King, to wit, treason. Our alleged crime is Ecclesiastic,
for not complying with a course of defection from the truth and ways of
Christ, to which we and all stand engaged by solemn Covenants and oaths, which
tie us, in our several capacities and stations, to withstand the contrare
corruptions, now brought in upon us. (4.) Abiathers punishment, to which he was
formally sentenced, was purely civil, confinement to such a place: Ours, although
it be partly civil, yet is mostly Ecclesiastic; (which is not within the power
of the Magistrate) we are not only robed of our lively-hoods and contined; but
inhibited the exercise of our Ministry, and stated by sentence, in a habitual
cessation from the exercise of it, which is truly dep^^vation. (5.) Abiathers
sentence and punishment was not ^^o s^cred, in a time of defection, and for
withstanding of it: outs is passed in such a time, and for resisting of the
same, and out of design, on our Rulers part, to carry on their intended
defection. 2. The iniquous commands, sentences and punishments of men (where
invincible force is not) does not untye our obligations to God and men; that we
by the authority of God are under, for serving of him and others in our day.

Arg. 6. If congregations have a just right and power of electing and calling
of their Ministers; then those that come in upon them without this, are not to
be esteemed their Pastors, nor to be subjected to as such by congregations,
but to be withdrawn from: But here it is so; the Curates have entered on
congregations, without this election and call of the people, their just right
and privilege. All the debat will be about the Antecedent of the first
proposition, which to us is clear from Scripture and purest Antiquity, as our
orthodox Divines prove against the Papists. All that Bellarmin has to say to
this, is the power of the Church to alter and change these and other things of
the like nature; the very answer of our adversaries: but how or from what this
is made good, is not yet shown us: Antiquity is so clear and full in this,
that it is a wonder, that they, who plead so much for prelacy from it, can be
able to cast it here: it the Prelacy, controverted among us, had but half of
the evidence from Antiquity, that the peoples right and power of election
has; it had gone far to have determined the question in its behalf, with some
that yet stand aloof from it: this shows, it is not the evidence or inevidence
of arguments, that resolves many, anent the debats of those times; but interest
and lust that sweys them more, then the love of truth. But more of this
afterward.

Arg. 7. Hearing of, submiting to, and receiving of ordinances from the Curates
alone, and not from others, is enjoined by law, and required as the sign of
our compliance with, and subjecting to the present laws, bringing in and
establishing of Prelacy, with other corruptions, which we dare not own.
Hearing, and receiving ordinances from such, has a twofold bar put upon it to
us; an unqualified instrument or object; and the respect that by the law it is
made to have to the corruptions obtruded upon this Church, as the sign of our
compliance with and subjection to these. The command of God about hearing, does
constitut the object and instrument (what and whom) we should hear: As we are
not to hear all doctrines, but these that are sound; so we are not to hear and
receive all, that pretend to come in Christ's name, but these, of whose mission
we have some rational evidence; at least against which, we have no just
exceptions. This, as to the Curats, is made out by the former arguments. But
besides this, the sign appointed and determined by the law, and required of
all in this Church, is that they not only withdraw from, and do not hear the
ejected and non-conforme Ministers; but that they hear and submit to Ministers,
that comply with and enter into this Church, by the Prelates: which to us makes
hearing and receiving of ordinances from them, a practical approbation of, and
compliance with Prelacy, and other corruptions, contained in the law: for such
is the connection between the sign and the thing signified, that he that
yields to give the sign, does in all rational construction approve the thing
signified. Obj. But hearing and receiving is a duty commanded by God, which
being so, cannot cease to be such by the Magistrates command enjoining it? Ans.
In this answer our Opponents do ordinarily triumph; but to unfold its vanity and
insufficiency in this matter, let it be considered. 1. That Gods law in
constituting of duty does not only determine the act, but the objects and
instruments, about and by which, they are to be exercised, and without which
they are not duty, nor acts of obedience to God, so that is not the act simply,
that is made a duty, but in its respect to such and such objects and
instruments: as for instance, praying is a duty, not simply in it self
considered; but in its respect to God in his son Christ Jesus, for such and
such things, he commands and allows in his word; so it is in hearing, whose
object and instrument must be such as is appointed in the word, other ways it
is not duty, but in many cases, a pofitive sin; for the commands of God about
hearing, do restrict it, in its objects and instruments, without which, it is
not duty; so that we must carefully see, what it is we hear, and whom. Let our
adversaries first answer our former arguments, and prove that they are those,
whom by the commands of God we are appointed to hear; and we shall yield.2. The
thing commanded by the Magistrate, in this case and matter, is not a duty; let
them prove it that assert this. We grant, hearing of the Gospel, and receiving
of the ordinances, is dury; but only as it suppons and takes in lawfully called
and sent Ministry (known to be such,) to whom the dispensation of the word is
committed: none will say, it is a duty to hear the word and receive ordinances
from those, that are not sent, or have no just authority to dispense the same:
the Magistrates commands in his present laws, restricts hearing of the word, and
receiving of ordinances to such and such, inhibiting these as to others; which
commands not having the due instruments appointed by God in the performance of
this duty, do not enjoin a duty but a sin. Obj. 2. If the Prelates and their
Curats be Ministers of the Gospel; then they are to be heard, and ordinances
should be received from them; for the Ministerial power gives to the persons
invested therewith, not only a right to preach the word and dispense
ordinances, and makes their acts valide; but it bind; them to the doing of
these; and all others to submit to them in the exercise of their power: as is
apparent in all relations, and the mutual duties, that the persons under them
owe to one another; so that if Ministers be bound to preach the Gospel, and
dispense its ordinances, the people must likewise be oblidged to hear and
receive ordinances from them? Ans. Albeit we should yield the Prelates and
Curats to be Ministers; to the denying of which, they have given and do give to
many, too much ground, by their open avowed perjury, enmity at and opposition
to true godliness; their renuncing of Jesus Christ for their immediate Supreme
head, by subjecting themselves to another foraigne Supreme in the Church; and
their wicked and flagitious lives) yet the consequence will not hold: for. 1.
The true state of the question is, whether we should receive and submit to
them, as the lawfully called and appropriat Pastors of this Church; which for
the former and subsequent reasons we deny: And we would gladly see how they
will prove it, for although intruders upon the Church be Ministers, yet their
intrusion puts a sufficient bar on peoples reception of and submission to them;
as we have made out both in thesi and in hypothesi: wherefore in so far, as
hearing and receiving of ordinances from Prelatical Ministers, in our case, is
an acknowledgment of this, we refuse it.2. Peoples obligation to subm^ssion to
Ministers, does not immediately flow from the being of the Ministerial power and
authority, in those clothed therewith; there a^e, besides this, other things
that must concur to the causing of this obligation, which, if they be wanting,
will make it void, or at least suspend it; as the rational evidence of its
being in persons pretending to the Ministry, the removal of just impediments,
the Churches call, etc. so that there are somethings either physical or moral,
that, if they fall out, will suspend this obligation in actu secundo, while it
remains in actu primo; as inability of body, just suspension for a time,
fundamental heresies, intrusion, etc. now many of these being existent on the
part of the Prelates and their Curats, in our present case, we find ourselves
under no divine obligation to hear and receive ordinances from them. We shall
not here urge the judgment and practice of our worthy reformers anent the
Romish Priests, Jesuits, and others in orders, among them, who sustained, the
validity of ordinances dispensed by such; and yet held, that they should not be
heard, nor ordinances received from them. The instance of the pharisees and the
scribes, Matthew. 23. will not be found to militat against this, till it be made
out, that they were intruders, which yet none has done.

Arg. 8. It is of no little weight to us, when added to the former, that the
generality of these violently thrust-in on congregations, are either
insufficient or scandalous; (creatures we confess fitted for carrying on of the
Prelates designs, against this Church and us) by whom the poor people were, and
yet are in hazard, throw Ignorance, Piophannes, Atheism, and a Spirit of
delusion, abounding in all corners of this Land: who, in stead of preventing
and cureing of the same, do rather further and advance these Church-destroying
evils; as we do not make personal scandal, of it self, a sufficient ground of
withdrawing from ordinances, dispensed by a Minister, guilty thereof; yet when
these are found in the carriage of those, whose entry is corrupt, and such as
cannot be justified, we cannot but think ourselves under straiter ties to be
ware of, and fly from such: partly because of the little or no ground we have
to expect any spiritual advantage from their administration of holy things: and
partly for the precepts we find in the word for avoiding and shuning of such
Philip. 3. with many others. Shall we give up ourselvs to the guidance and
conduct of such, in the ways of life, having nothing to engadge us thereto,
but the mere pleasure and will of men, who, we know, are carrying on corrupt
designs, tending to the overthrow of Religion in its purity and power? What a
folly and madness were this? It is said, that our charge, in this, is false and
unjust. But we appeal to the experience and observation of the generality of
Professors in this Church, good and bad* who have been and are witnesses to
their deportments.

Arg. 9. Besides these there were several things, in the stated case of the
time, and the circumstances of it, that withheld, and yet withhold us, from
subjecting to the prelates and their curates; which we wish were laid to heart
by all as they are concerned. As 1. For making way to the introduction of
prelacy, the very foundations of civil government were shaken and unhinged, by
the disannullig and rescinding of such a series of Parliaments, for many years,
in the most of which, there were, according to ancient customs and laws, all
that, amongst us, is held and reputed essential to the Constitution of
Parliaments. By this deed not only the Constitution of former Parliaments are
struck at; but (as is to be seen in the reasons given for it, in the act
rescissorie) a preparative is made, for the changing of the Government, by any
that, in after ages, have a mind for, and power to effect it. Although the
Parliament of England, at that time, was as highly prelatical, and as much made
for the Kings designs, as ours; yet they forbore such a deed, anent the
Long-lived-Parliament, albeit they had the same reasons and grounds for it,
that we pretended.2. This change made in the Church, was accompanied, and yet
is, with such a speat of enimity at, and opposition to true godliness, in its
necessare exercises; that the persons that savoured any thing of Religion,
sobriety and conscience, came under a cloud, and were discountenanced, even
from the highest to the lowest, as persons not fit to be entrusted in any place
of office or power: while these that were known to be of dissolute lives, and
given to all sorts of wickedness, were much made of, countenanced and entrusted,
as the only confidents of the time; from whence it came to pass, that
wickedness and prophanity finding it self encouraged, and reyns loosed to it,
abounded in all parts of the land, to the grief of the truly godly, and the
great scandal of the Protestant reformed religion at home and abroad. If it
were not for too much prolixity, this might be made to appear from a multitude
of undeniable, but lamentable instances; which for brevities sake we forbear,
not loveing to stir in this filthy puddle.3. As to the Government of the Church
in particular, the case was wholly altered, from that of our worthy
Predecessors, in the former Prelates time: for, as prelacy was then subtly
brought in upon them, by degrees, and not all at once; so they continued in the
possession of the Government of the Church, that had been se^led by law, and
never legally or actually disinabled to meet, and exercise the same, in their
fixed and ordinare judicatories: but continuing as formerly in Presbyterated
meetings, had the Prelates thrust in upon them; as is evident from history, even
of Spotiswood; But in our case, Prelacy is at the first raised by law to its
greatest height; Presbytery discharged, cashiered and ejected out of this
Church; all laws for it, either in late or former times, being disanuled and
abrogated; the meetings of Ministers in their fixed Presbyterial and Synodical
assemblies inhibited, under severe penalties by acts of Council, which became
so universally obeyed, that Presbytery had neither a legal nor actual being, in
the time that Prelacy was erected and brought in upon this Church: So that at
its actual introduction, we were, conform to Laws, required to come in,
submit to, and concur with the government settled by them, which was purely
Prelatical and Erdstiuml;an. They that deny this must contradict the law, and
make the law makers liars. if the laws and actings conform thereto have any
sense, that may be rationallie deduced therefrom. Hence, what was required was
directly contrare to our principles and known judgment, which to this day, we
never saw any convincing reasons, to make us relinquish, Here we cannot, but
complean of the palpable injustice, done us by the Author of the seasonable
case (falsely so called) who contrare to all evidence, makes the case now and
then alike. But notorious lies and untruths must be made use of to fill up the
room of truth, so shamefully deserted by that party.4. The government of the
Church that then was, was by law totally subverted, and Prelacy brought in its
place, at and by the mere authority of the King; the government thereof by a
preceding law or act being wholly put into his hands, (the authority of
Parliament interposed afterward for the establishing of prelacy, being by this
only corrobovative and precarious;) as if it were only of his frameing and
making, and had no higher derivation, but that of humane authority; which we
look upon, as an high derogation of the Regal and Supreme authority of Christ
Jesus, the alone Head and King of his Church; and a dreadful presumption in
changing the laws and ordinances, enacted and instituted by Him in his house;
which all Christians, especially Protestants, esteem sacred and inviolable. Can
we, according to the principles we have received and drunk in, from the word of
the liveing God, allow of this form of Government, this way introduced into
the Church? Those that love ease, and things of this world, may think light of
all; but it is not so to us, who are, through grace, resolved to own no other
Head of that body, (then Christ Jesus) of whom we profess ourselves members.
The recent and fresh memory of the National and Solemn League and Covenants;
under the tie of which this Nation and Church came oftener then once; all
ranks and degrees of persons, Noble and Ignoble, from the Kings Majesty to the
lowest Subject, being solemnly engadged thereby against the evils and
corruptions ejected by them. The obligation of which had been enforced, and
legally secured by a continued series of laws and practices, for a long time,
that seemed to promise all imaginable security, to the work of Reformation,
against the out most assaults of its adversaries: nothing was left undone, that
could be attempted by rational men in this case. While all these things were in
being, and recent in the memory of all, at home and abroad, at one dash, in so
little a time, to raze to the foundations, all the former, superstructure, and
build up the contrare; and that by persons, who, (for their generality) had
been so active for, and so deeply engadged in former proceedings, is strange to
think on; especially considering the verbal securities, and engagments made
unto us, immediately before this change. We say, in this case, to give the
concurrence and compliance required, in joining with and receiving the Prelates
and their Creat^rs, is, beyond all question, an approving of all that was done
contrare to our fixed judgments and these obligations, we, with th^^est of this
Church came under. Let any man of conscience put himself in our case, and
suppone our judgment and principles to be his own; and then (...) him judge,
if he would not find himself necessitated to carry, in this matter, as we have
done.

Obj. Some assert that they, never having taken on the personal obligation of
the Covenants, are not bound by them; for which they offer irrefragable
arguments, but yet see it fit to hold them in. Ans. However there are two
things we are sure of, First, All Ministers, that entered into the Church in
the time of Presbytery, were taken engadged for the government of the Church,
that then was, in opposition to Prelacy: and in or near the time that Prelacy
was a bringing in into this Church, Ministers in many Presbyteries and Synods,
declared their resolutions for adhereing to Presbytery, that then was in being,
and had been exercised in this Church, for many years preceding that time; but
it is like (as their after carriage did make out) that these are knots they can
easily loose; seeing they are, able to master and overcome far greater. Next.
That Church Goyenants in the matters of God, which by virtue of divine commands
and institutions do antecedently bind, do obleige all in the Church, both in
the time or afterward; and that with this adventitious and supervenient
obligation of a Covenant, beside the former. He has a stout conscience that
will get this denied, it is so evidently manifest from Deuteronomy. 29: 10. etc. they
must be arguments of iron and steell, that will break this Scripture in pieces.
These who assert the contrary, shall do well to try their strength, on what the
answerer of Mr. Gilbert Burnets first dialogues has on this Subject, that have
not yet received a reply. But it seems it is a piece of new policy, to make up
the weakness of arguments, with big swelling words.

We might here consider a little (if our purposed brevity could permit it) what
one, in a certain manuscript, has undertaken to prove in several
propositions: but his mistaking of the question in the second proposit^on,
makes us easy work; it being a truth we do not deny, and in which we close with
our predecessors: so that all his citations of ours are to no effect: for we
grant that the sin of fellow worshipers is no just ground for withdrawing from
publict ordinances, where there is no just exceptions beside; will it from
thence follow, that we should submit to and hear the Curates in our present
case? we must have other arguments then any he there produces* before we
subject to such: neither is it a sufficient argument, he uses in the 6.
proposition; that they are Ministers of Jesus Christ: Suppone it be so, yet the
consequence is wide: we ask at them, if they think it lawful to hear and
receive ordinances from our ej^cted and inhibited Ministers? If they do; how
comes it that they do not hear our Ministers, but dissuade the people from it?
If they judge hearing of us unlawful; they must either say that our Ministers
are no Ministers; or else that Ministers may be withdrawn from and not heard,
although they be Ministers of Christ Jesus: and consequently it will follow
from their own opinion, and practice anent us, that there are some things for
hearing and receiving of ordinances, from any person, beside there being
Ministers of Jesus Christ: Or else the charge of schism, and separation, will
fall as heavy on themselves, for not hearing and receiving of ordinances from
our Ministers, as on us. But enough of this. Whoever reads that manuscript,
will find it sufficiently answered in this short touch, for all his argueings
are against his own shadow, and miss the mark he should shoot at.

To shut up this wearysome and unpleasant subject; In the last place, we are
charged with all the profanity, wickedness and enormous practices, that are
committed, and do, since the erection of Prelacy, abound in the Land: yea our
meetings for worship, (now branded with the anciently odious name of
Conventicles, with which assemblies of Christians in the primitive times were
noted, and designed by their persecutours) are given out and represented to the
world, as the cause inductive to these horrid and abominable scandals, which
are boldly asserted to be acted and committed at them, in a paper of greivances,
given in from the Diocesan Synod of Glasgow, in Prelat Lightons time, and
presented to the then Kings Commissioner, the Duke of Lawderdal, and the
honorable privy Council, by the parson of Glasgow, Mr. Arthur Rosse, and now
Prelat of Argile, that impudent and viperous Calumniator, who, from the pulpit,
and other places, uses to father all the scandals of the time, on our party
and their meeting? Ans. passing that Prelates malicious and venomous railings
against us, (as not worthy of our notice) whose not-our and manifest lies, his
bitter invictives, and ill grounded assertions; (which not only speaks his
heart and tongue to be set on fire of hell, but renders him distiked and odious
to many of his own party) we say. 1. From whence came that fearful deluge of
all sorts of profanity and wickedness, that filled the before, at, and after
the last erection of Prelacy, and for a considerable time, when there were few
or no Couventicles? We have not forgetten (and we hope, the sober and humble,
that mourn for the abominations done in the midst of us, will not) with what a
Spirit of impiety Prelacy entered into this Church, and followed it, for a
long time: could our meetings for worship (called Conventicles) be the cause of
these, when they were not, and had not a being?2. We beg of our opposites, that
they will assign us the cause of the open reigning scandals, found in them
that follow not our meetings, but keep and adhere to theirs, especially in the
places, where there are no Conventicles, but an universal subjection to
Prelacy? That there are such impieties reigning without any control, in these
parts, is past all denial? And what will our adversaries give for the cause of
these? Surely they cannot, with any show of reason, Father them on our
meetings.3. Is it not observeable, yea observed by all, that, in places drowned
in ignorance, sin and wickedness, where Conventicles have come, and at this day
are in use, a sensible reformation in persons and families has ensued thereon,
and that to the restraining of these scandalous impieties, that prevailed in
these bounds before, and the shameing of these that yet live in them: can that
be the cause of scandals, that in experience, is always found to be the
effectual means of restraining and removing of them?4. While we cast our eyes
about us, to discover the grounds, on which they fix this grievous and heavy
charge, it does not appear to us, so much as to give the least degree of
probability to it; yea, the evidence of the contrare is so clear and full, that
we cannot think, our adversaries do believe themselves in these and other
reproaches, they load us with. Sure we are, they cannot bind this charge on
the doctrines we profess, and are preached in our meetings, which are
contained in our printed Confessions of faith, long since emited to the world,
especially in the Confession of faith, the large and shorter Catechismes,
composed by the Assembly of divines at West Minster. We earnestly beg of our
Antagonists, that they will give instances, in any of these doctrines, (if they
can) that of themselves do tend to licenciousness and profanity? Upon a review
of the whole of our doctrine, in its several parts, we cannot pitch upon one,
except the doctrine of justification by faith only, throw the alone merits and
blood of Christ Jesus, maintained by all protestants, except some, who of late
do assert the interest of good works, as a preexistent condition of a sinners
justification before God, which yet is not directly and positively done, but by
indirect ways and hints, as is to be seen in Mr Gilbert Burnets first
dialogues, Patrick the Pilgrim, and the Author of the whole duty of Man, who
resolve a sinners justification before God, in his serious purpose and
endeavor of good works, at least, as a preexistent condition of it: which is
not only against the doctrine of all protestants till of late (as is to be seen
in their writings) but directly against the great Apostle Paul, in his Epistles
to the Romans and Gallatians; whose arguments in that matter, when our
adversaries have answered them, we shall consider at more length. All the
reasons they give for this charge, from the head, are so fully answered by that
Apostle in the6. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and 2. to the Galatians
toward the close, that we judge it needless to insist any further on this. We
do not charge all of the Prelatical party with this corrupt doctrine; some of
them, particularly doctor Tully, has so clearly and soundly asserted and
vindicat the doctrine of Protestants in this matter, against the exceptions and
arguments of the contrare minded, that he if living deserves thanks from all
the Protestant Churches of Christ, in this and other parts of the Christian
world: A doctrine that has been esteemed fundamental among them, and given as
one great characteristick betwixt us and Papists; yea, it has been looked upon
as the note and sign of the resurgentis aut cadentis ecclesiae, as she holds
to or departs from the same. We are not so antiprelatical, as not to love
truth, wherever we find it, and the assertor thereof for its sake, although
differing from us, in some other things.5. It is thought sufficient ground for
this charge, that some, yea many of the persons that come to and haunt our
meetings, are found not to be conscientious and Christian in their walk, but
flagitious or, in many of their practices, scandalous? We cannot think our
adversaries are serious in this, and do believe as they speak, seeing. (1) This
does fall as heavy, and will, to onlookers, reflect as much, and more, on the
objectors themselves, as on us; whose meetings for worship are found to be the
sinck of all debauched and profaine persons through the Land; can they refuse
this? It is like, the foresight of this forced them to say, in their lybel of
greivances against us, that the abominations mentioned in one Article, were
committed at our meetings, and not by persons present at them; otherwise their
assemblies for worship should have been as chargeab^^ therewith, as ours: but
in this our Antagonists (...) like to the persecutours of the Christians in the
pr^^mitive times, who charged them for having these (...) the like abominations
committed at their assemblies as is to be seen in Church Histories. The Lord
deliver us from, and rebuke the lying Spirit, that is entered into and
possesses many.(2.) But if the presence of wicked and scandalous persons, at
the assemblies of Christians for hearing of the word, and performing of other
acts of worship, be sufficient ground for chargeing the wickedness and
impieties of such on them, as the cause inductive to scandals; will not the
assemblies, that Christ, his Apostles, Ministers and Christians kept in all
ages, be as liable to this charge, as we, who excluded none, but admited all to
the hearing of the word, and some other acts of worship, as is manifest from
Scripture and History? whatever our adversaries will say for clearing of.
Christ Jesus, his Apostles, etc. will acquit us.(3.) Do not men know, that in
preaching of the Gospel to sinners, we should design and labor their
conversion, as much as the edification of the converted? Is not the Gospel,
with which Ministers are entrusted, the mean and power of God to the one, as
well as to the other? And seeing this is our design, as it has been our
practice, so it is our resolution, not to exclude any from our assemblies, how
wicked soever they have been, or are: Truth is, to charge us and our meetings,
with the sins and scandals of those that frequent the same, is to reproach
the Gospel of Christ, and to Father all the wickedness of its hearers on it,
contrare to its grand design, which is to save sinners from sin, and all the
miseries that follow upon it.

SECT. V. Some Reasons, why the Indulgence was not accepted.
IN the next place, we come to the head of the Indulgence, the not allowing of
which, has been represented, as a full evidence of our pivish, wilful and
stiff disposition to unpeacableness and distoyalty: but we hope, when our
carriage, in this matter, is seriously thought upon, and the reasons that
determined us to this refusal, are weighted in the balances of the sanctuary,
this charge will be found light: and we are confident, that upon trial, it will
appear, we are not against, but with all expressions of thankfulness, shall be
ready to intertaine, and receive any liberty for the Gospel its true interest,
and our selves (that is consistent with our known principles) that the
Magistrate shall be pleased to grant us. We look upon it, as an unjust state of
the question, in this matter, which has been offered by some: whether the
Magistrate, jure, may, or have it within the compass of his Magistratical power,
to give liberty, to Ministers and people, for serving and worshipping of God in
his Son Christ Jesus, according to his word; this we do not deny, but
cheerfully grant, that although the exercise of Church power, that is properly
such, be independent on the Magistrate; yet the peacable exercise of it is
truly from him: it belongs to him, no doubt, to encourage, countenance and
protect the Church, against all enemies, and to relieve her of oppression when
under it: to this he is empowered, and oblidged, both as a Magistrate and as a
Christian. Neither is it with us a question, whether the Magistrate may command
Ministers to the duties of then function; nor whether he may exeem them from
the hazard of suffering, to which they are obnoxious by law, for their
nonconformity; nor yet whether he may confine Ministers, simply and
abstractedly considered from our present case (which is only proper to the
Magistrate, and not all to the Church.) All these and much more we yield to the
Magistrate, about persons and matters Ecclesiastical, according to the Word. But
the true state of the question to us, is, whether the Magistrate Jure
Magistratico may of himself and immediately without the Church, and the previous
election of the people, assign and send Ministers to particular Churches, to
take the fixed and pastoral over sight of them; prescribe rules and directions
to them, for the exercise of their Ministry; and confine them to the said
congregations. The question thus stated being complex, and consisting of
several branches, conform to the acts of Council anent the indulgence; we must
of necessity (for giving a just account of the grounds of our dissatisfaction
therewith) speak to them severally, in some assertions with the reasons
subjoyned.

Assertion First, The Magistrate, by virtue of his Magistratical power, cannot
of himself and immediately, assign or send Ministers to particular
congregations, to take the pastoral charge and oversight of them. For 1. We
find not in all the Word of God, any such power, given to, or exercised by the
Magistrate, in the Church: none has yet given any instances of this: If there
be, let them be produced, and we shall acquiesce. All acknowledge the Church
not to be founded on the law of nature, but on positive institution, and
supernatural revelation; and therefore not to be governed in ways and methods
of Men's invention, but in these that are revealed by the Holy Scriptures;
without which there cannot be a Church; so that she owning her being,
constitution, and all to them; there must be some evident proof produced from
these, before we can yield to any such power in the Magistrate: how long shall
we exspect this:(2.) Also, we find the Church in the possession and exercise
of this power, from the times of the Apostles, to the breaking up of the
reformation by Luther, and others in Germany: as is manifest from Scripture and
History. We grant, there was for some time, a considerable debate betwixt the
Pope and the Emperor of Germany, about the investiture of Bishops; which gave
the rise to other Princes claming of the same, and seasing upon it: but what
says this to the mission of Ministers, and application of their Ministry to
particular congregations? For as Prelacy was the invention of men, and the
cause of horrid contentions in Churches and States; so neither it, nor the
practices occasioned thereby, can be any regulating precedent for us: besides,
in all these contests about investiturs, betwixt the Pope and Princes, the
mission of Ministers was never questioned, but always acknowledged, as proper
to the Church, and not to the Magistrate, which will be clear to any that will
be at pains to read Church History.(3.) The sending of Ministers to particular
congregations, is an act of government, purly and formally Ecclesiastical, and
not Civil; and therefore incompetent to the Magistrate: Let any consider it, in
its causes, matter, object and ends, and they shall find it so: for the persons
sent are Ministers; the work they are sent on, is to preach the Gospel and
dispense its ordinances; these they are sent to, are the Churches of Christ;
the end for which they are sent to such, is to gather in and perfect the body
of Christ; this is finis operis. We know of nothing that can besaid against
this; But that it is not purely Ecclesiastic in the efficient cause? Ans. To
this we reply, First, That all use in morals to sustain the validity of the
Arguments, taken from the nature of the act, to the undueness of it to such,
and such causes: for it is by the respect of such acts in morals, to their
matter, objects and ends, that the bounds are determined, and set to them in
their efficient causes; for instance, if the matter, object and ends of an act
be properly civil, it is granted by all, to be undue or incompetent to a
Minister of the Gospel, and so of other acts, in their moral specifical
distinction, by which, in the law of God, they are assigned and made due to
such and such efficients. But Next, Upon this reason, it shall be as lawful for
the Magistrate to ordain, and send persons without ordination, to preach the
Gospel, which is every way absurd.(4.) The sending of Ministers to preach the
Gospel, and to oversee Churches is an act of the potestative mission, (one part
of the keys of the kingdom of God) granted by Christ to his Church, and never
to the Magistrate: from no part of the word can it be made appear, that Christ
has given this power to the Magistrate; we find it given to the Ministers of
the Gospel, Matthew. 16:19. with several other places of Scripture: But, as to
the Magistrate there is altum silentium. But that this sending of Ministers, is
an act of potestative mission, we hope will not readily be denied: of any do;
we ask, whether Ministers go to such congregations, on a special delegation
from Christ, more then to others? If they do, then it must flow from this power
of mist on in the Church; If they go not, on this special delegation, then they
run unsent, and are not the Pastors of these flocks, more then of others; and
consequently they have no obligations upon them to feed these, more then any
other congregation: which is absurd. For, beside the power of preaching and
dispensing of ordinances, there is always a special delegation of the person,
to such and such a people, by which he becomes the Ambassador and messenger
of Christ Jesus, whom they are bound to hear and submit to, as such.(5.) This
act of sending Ministers to congregations, suppons several things, that are
beyond the line and cognition of the Magistrate, as such; as the trial of
Ministers gifts; the knowledge of the spiritual State of the congregation; the
sutablness or unsurablness of Ministers gifts to such and such a people;
ability to judge and cognosce in these, as the matter and ends of this work
require; with many other things, which not being granted to the Magistrate as
such, the work, to which these are necessarily requisite, cannot belong to him:
for every work, to which God calls any, has its proper furniture of gifts and
abilities, without which, none is to look upon themselves as called
thereto.(6.) Some of the great Patrons and zealous Promoters of the Magistrates
power in this, and other things belonging to the Church, yield, that this power
is in, and returns to the Church, when the Magistrate is either heathenish or
heretical, as Vedelius; yea all are constrained to grant it. How rational this
is, and how consistent with their arguments (the force of which is thereby
utterly broken). let any judge: we ask, when this power is granted to be in the
Church, whether it comes from Christ Jesus, or the Magistrate? (For a derive
power it must be:) It cannot be from the Magistrate, who does not willingly part
with any of his power; neither does religion robe the Magistrate of his power,
nor depose him from his regality, and the prerogative thereof; as Protestants
maintain against the Papists: if it be derived and come from Christ (as it
does) we desire to know, what way it is conveyed to her, in this case, and not
in the other, when the Magistrate is Christian? As we find no difference of
cases anent this matter given in the word; so we find the same institutions,
precepts and examples therein, by which the Church is empowered and oblidged,
to exercise this government without the Magistrate, to continue, not only
without any restrictions to times and cases, but without any repail. We hear
nothing from our adversaries, to answer this, but ineptia, foolish rovings. The
truth is, their Arguments conclude, with as great force, against all power of
government in the Church, under persecuting Magistrates, as Christian: for is
there not in this case the erecting of an Empire in an Empire, which our
enemies accoundt (...) anddo not Ministers, and Christians, owe as much
subjection to the Magistrate, in the one case, as in the other?

Assertion 2. That the right and power of Election and calling of Ministers to
particular congregations, is in the congregations themselves, to whom they are
sent, by divine right; and not in the Magistrate: and therefore should not have
been assumed by the Magistrate, and taken thus from them. That this power of
election of Ministers, is not in the Magistrate, either by divine, humane or
Ecclesiastical laws, needs not to be much insisted on, seeing Scripture and
antiquity, for a thousand years after Christ, gives not the least ground for
it. We desire to know from our Antagonists, Prelates and Erastians, from whence
came this power; or who were the givers of it to the Magistrate? When they have
condescended on the orginal derivation of this power, and made it out to be
just, then we shall consider it; which by none of these parties has been yet
done; except by Vedelius: but on such grounds, as give every particular member
of the Church as good clame thereto, as he; as will be evident to any that
considers his Arguments: for Scripture and antiquity they have none. The first
part of the proposition, is that which is most stuck at; The peoples right and
power of election, which is denied by our adversaries: but we thus make it out,
as our Divines have done before us. (1.) From Scripture practice and example,
Acts. x: 15. to the end, Chap. 6: verse. 1. to 9. and 14: verse. 13. where we
have Arguments both from the more to the less, and from the less to the more;
which are acknowledged by all, to be concluding Topics. and much used in the
Scripturs. When our adversaries have the like from Scripture and antiquity, how
use they to insult; but poor we must not be allowed this liberty.(2.) It is
evident from the constant practice, use and custom of the Church, from the
Apostles times; till the Popes of Rome inhansed and swallowed up all power and
privileges; either in taking them a way, or bringing them into an absolute
dependence upon them. For this we appeal to the records and histories of the
Church, yea to the histories of the Pops, PLATINA and others: in many of which,
we shall not only find the uncontrolled use of the peoples election mentioned;
but its right just fled and defended, and many canons of Councels made for its
regulation, and against the encroachments, that were by some made upon it, in a
matter so clear, and granted by the adversary, ^^e need nor spend time. If any
ask us, why we plead antiquity here, and reject it anent Prelacy? Our Answer
is, because we find in this question, as it is stated betwixt us and the
adversaries, antiquity full and clear, which it is not in the other: Let the
State of the question about Prelacy, as it is now agitated betwixt us, be in
every part of it, brought to the pure times of antiquity; and if it can be
evidenced and made out, even as to the sole power of ordination and
jurisdiction, and superiority of some Ministers over other Ministers of the
Gospel; and we shall yield the cause and quietly submit: but in the business of
the peoples right of election, it is beyond all contradiction clear, even in
the confession of our Antagonists.(3) All relations amongst rational creatures
that are not founded on nature, and are free, there is always requisite mutual
consent, from which, as its proper cause and foundation, it does result; as is
to be seen in all sorts of such relations. It is not denied, but yielded by
all, that there is a particular special relation betwixt a Minister and the
Congregation, he in ordinare serves: we desire to know, what is the cause or
foundation of it, if it be not this? All other relations of this kind are
founded upon consent; and why not this?(4.) The good effects that have come to
the Church by the free and voluntar election of the people, where it has been
admited, and in use. confirms us not alittle in this persuasion: we have
obseved in universal experience, that not only a more universal and cheerful
subjection has been given to the Ministry of those, that entered this way into
congregations; but a faithful and able Ministry has been more generally
propagated, to the great advantage of immortal souls: if we may gather the
nature of the tree, by the fruit, we cannot say, this is evil; but truly good.

Assertion 3. It belongs not to the Magistrate to prescribe Rules, and give
Directions to the Ministers of the Gospel, for regulating the exercise of their
Ministry, as is done in this indulgence. Our reasons for this, are (1.) We see
no precept, institution, and example in all the Scriptures, impowering the
Magistrate to this: we hope, none will expect we should receive and subject to a
power, that has no warrant nor foundation in the word; seeing all church power
owes its descent and derivation from it: our Antagonists themselves grant, that
not only the power they ascribe to the Magistrate, is in and from the
Scriptures; but the regulation of its exercise, should be conform thereto; so
that there will be no debat about the consequence. The great Patrons of
Erastianisme plead the instances of David and Solomon's ordering the courses of
the Levits and the priests, and of other things relating to the worship of God,
in the time of the old Testament; but to little purpose: seeing they acted
therein as Prophets, and at the directions and instructions given from God, by
the Prophets; and not as Magistrates; as is clear from the very letter of the
Scriptures, in many places, 2 Chronicles. 29: verse. 25. and 35: verse. 15. with
others: If the Magistrates of our time, did produce such warrant for what they
assume to themselves, and do in this matter, how readily should they be obeyed?
But the Objection of greatest seeming strength, is that of Hezekias practice,
keeping of the passover in the second month 2. Chron. 30, 2. which conform
to the institution Exodus 1^ should have been observed in the first month? Our
Ans. to this is, first, if this practice be pleaded for a leading example to
Magistrates; it will warrant Magistrates to change things institute by God,
which, we hope, all will say is absurd. Obj. It was but the circumstance of
time that he changed? Ans. a command or institution makes circumstances,
determined by it, as unalterable by men, as the substantials of the ordinance
it self: does not this, if it be concludent, empower the Magistrate to change
our Sabbath, from the first to the second, or any other day in the week, as he
pleases? What may not come in at this door? Next, Our satisfying Answer to
this is, that what Hezekiah, the Princes and Congregation did, they did it, at
or by the word of the Lord concerning this alteration, and not of themselves,
as is express verse 12.(2.) As it is usual for commissions given to Ambassadors,
by those that send them, to contain all necessary instructions, for regulating
their carriage, in the discharge of their embassage; so we find in the Word of
God rules, precepts and directions, given to the Ministers of the Gospel, about
the ordering of the worship of God, and the exercise of their Ministry in all
its parts; which not only impowers them for this work, but brings them under as
strait Obligations to observe the same, as the work and maine substantials of
the embassage, on which they are sent: for this let 1 Cor 14. two Epistles to
Timothy with other Scripturs be consulted; and we doubt not but this will be
beyond disput with the unprejudged. If the Erastians could give us such
commands and precepts in the word, for the Magistrate power in this, how would
they triumph, and so they justly might; for they should have no such willing
and cheirful assenters to them then we; if any such thing could be showed.(3.)
This power in the Magistrate would subject Ministers to and bring them, in the
exercise of their ministry, in a dependence on him; the contrare of which we
have proved before, and shall do more after wards: The truth is, we tremble to
think on the consequences of this dependence, for thereby the Magistrate may
suspend the ministry, in these parts and exercises of it, that Christ Jesus
calls them to, in the stated cases of the times, in which they live; as for
instance, when heresies are abounding, and Professors taken with the infection
of that leaven, he may put them on the preaching of doctrines not apposite to
the present case, and discharge them from meddling with doctrines contrare to
the present errors; as our Magistrates have done anent some doctrines in these
times: he may likewise forbid them preaching against, or censuring of these
sins that are reigning in the place and time, in obeying of which, Ministers
shall cross the commands of Christ to them in his word, and bring themselves
under the guilt of the blood of souls. If Churches and Ministers be not, in
the commands, precepts, and institutions of God, exeemed from the power and
impositions of men, what a sad case will they be in?(4.) The Church had and
exercised this power from Scripture times in all ages, till within these
hundereth years. We grant the Magistrate exercised a power about, or anent the
Church; but never came this length: when they did reform, and gave any redress
of corruptions, creept into the administrations of holy things, they did it by
the Church; whom, in her officers, they did convocat, and require to consider
the matter, and to make constitutions about it; but never essayed to do it
immediately, and by themselves; as Church Histories make evident, beyond all
contradiction.(5.) It is the natural right of all moral power, to order and
dispose its own exercise, in and about the Matters that are proper to it; as
might be made to appear by instances of these of the Parental, Marital Powers,
etc and the reason is, partly, because the objects and other circumstances are
so many and various; that it is not possible to prescribe rules, comprehensive
of all particular emergents, relating to their exercise, but must be lest to
the prudence of those invested with them, to do therein, as they see fit and
expedient, in the cases that are before them and partly such are fitest, as
having more knowledge and experience about such things, that belongs to their
power, then any others. We see this yielded to others, and why then not to
Ministers, who may, in rational judgment, be presumed, to have more solid
knowledge and experience, in and about the matters of God, as any?(6.) All
divines (except those called Erastian, who are but of a late edition in the
Church) yea the Prelatical ones, do grant a diatactik power to the Ministry
of the Gospel, about the worship and government of the Church, and the exercise
of their Ministry relating thereto: and till ERASTUS the phistrian arose, it
was beyond controversy among all Church writers, whether Historical or
Polemick; even those, who contended for the Magistrates power, against the
usurpations of the Popes; as is to be seen in their Tractats; from which we
might adduce citations not a few; but fearing they would prove too tedions, if
insetted here, We forbear.

Assertion 4. Albeit we grant, the power of confinement be proper to the
Magistrate, and not at all to the Church (for to him only is the sword g^^ven,
to be used against evil doers;) yet in the complex case, which we had before
us, we durst not approve of the ind^lgence, with such a clause; seeing we had
not (as may be clear to any from what is said above) any other thing, in this
matter, to ingadge us, to an acceptance thereof. For the act of indulgence
confines the Ministers of the whole party: if it had been but some few, that
this confinment reached, we would not have said much to it, although the
sentence had been unjust. But while we considered the present universal
necessity of the Church, and the obligations on us, to use our Ministry, for
answering the same, we could not, with quietness to our consciences justify
nor allow of it as a favor, with such a restraint on our Ministry. If the
confinment had only touched our persons, and personal concerns, we had with all
patience and submission yielded thereto; but a restraint being put on the
exercise of our Ministry, in this necessitous condition of the Church, when
Papists, Quakers and other subverters of truth and godliness, do multiply and
abound, without all crub, we could not close with this indulgence; which, by
virtue of the confinment, puts us out of capacity, for affording that relief
to the Church and immortal souls, which our office binds us to. (2.) As there
are many duties and parts of our Ministerial function, which we cannot perform
and exercise, but in a conjunction with others; so this indulgence cuts off
from all access to the same, and leaves us in much worse case, then we were in
before. Have we not the Gospel of Christ to maintain against its present
adversaries? Are we not bound to propagat the same in the present and
succeeding ages? Do not scandals of all forts abound, to the overthrow of truth
and piety? and does not the care and burdine of seeing to and providing against
the evil, that in these times, threaten the ruin of the Church, lie upon us in
our ministerial capacity? And we cannot singly and apart, do what is necessare
in this case, but in a conjunction with one another: no doubt, our subjecting
to this confinment would render us accessory to, and bring us under the guilt
of all these evil and their consequences to this, and the following
generations. Posterity, no question, should have all cause to curse and charge
their blood upon us, which is trembling to think upon. (3.) If we may guess
at, and be ascertained of the ends and designs of men's actions, by the native
effects and consequences of them; it is to us apparent and beyond denial, that
the project and intention of this contrivance, was quietly to ruin and bury
our cause; seeing by this confinment, and other things in this indulgence, all
endeavors toward the succession of a faithful ministry, are cut off, and we
brought unto an immediate dependence on the Magistrate, in the matters of God, and
hindered to propagat the truth, in opposition to its adversaries, in other
parts of the land; being thus shut up into a little corner of the same, and cast
by two's and three's and fours, into congregations; where, for the most part,
there is little or no use for us; If the Apostles and other Ministers of
Christ, in Scripture times, had been thus dealt with, and in policy confined,
as we are; do any think, they would have submitted to, and obeyed such a
confinment, which would have frustrated the ends of their office and work; and
made them guilty of disobedience to their Master, from whom they received
commands, inconsistent with such a sentence? And shall we subject and be
consentient to a deed, that in the design and effects thereof will infallibly
destroy the cause, which, by all sorts of obligations, we are engadged to
maintain and advance to the utmost of our power? God forbid. We are not
ignorant, that the confinment, with a permission to preach and exercise other
parts of our ministry, in the places, to which we were to be confined; was a
piece of policy, invented to cover the too visible encroachment on Church
power, in the first act of Indulgence (which was known afterward to stumble
many) that the matter might be more smoothed, and go the better down; while the
design was the same; which was (as is said) to bring our ministry in
subjection to the Magistrate, in the matters of God; and without noise to
obstruct the spreading of the Gospel, and to ruin our cause; for attaining of
which, we have not yet seen a more succesful like piece of policy, then this of
the indulgence.

Resolveing (as bath been said) to unfold our hearts, and to keep nothing up,
anent what is truly grievous to, and bu^dens our consciences in the commands
and impositions of these times; we shall add other reasons to these, which,
with the former are the grounds of our dissatisfaction with and non-approbation
of this indulgence: as (1.) In the Narrative of the 2. act of indulgence, it is
declared, that this pretended favor is provided for a remedy against the evil
of Conventicles, (by which we understand the assemblies of the Lords people for
hearing of the word, and partaking of other ordinances from faithful Ministers
of the Gospel) which the execution of laws made against the same, has not
suppressed. As this narrative speaks to all, the design of the indulgence; so
it shows, what we are to expect as its consequence, if approven by us, to which
we dar have no accession, directly nor indirectly; for by our allowance, and
submission, we shall not only prove active in hindering the propagation of the
word for the future; but also shall consequentially cond^mne the former
practice of the Lords servants and people, in preaching and hearing of the
word; that has been blessed, and made not a little succesful, to the advantage
of the truth, and the benefit of many souls.(2.) Many by this indulgence were
assigned and sent to other congregations, then these they had formerly served
their Master in, before this revolution in the Church: As we judge the former
relations to particular flocks (over which the Holy Ghost, and not the State,
had made them overseers) to be yet in force, and not dissolved by all the
violence used against us; so we think our approbation of this indulgence, would
not only justify the unjust usurpation, and violence in casting them out; but
likewise would have made void the former, and yet standing relation to these
respective congregations, in which we darre have no hand, but in the way Christ
has appointed, and was formerly used in this Church; seeing it will, no
question, both strengthen the Magistrate, in his unjust encroachments on the
Government of the Church, and be a practical acknowledgement of him, in all he
has done in this matter.(3.) By one clause in the 2. act of indulgence, appeals
are allowed and authorized from the indulged to the Prelates Courts; which does
subject, and directly subordinat them to these, in the exercise of government
and discipline, which is known, to be contrare to our Covenanted and well
grounded principles. The truth is, we look on this, with other particulars in
that indulgence, as a device framed of purpose, for gaining all these ends and
intents upon us, which by violence has been formerly designed against us, for
establishing of Prelacy and Erastianisme.(4.) As some of the Rules are
impracticable, so others of them do not a little reflect upon the practices of
Christ and his Apostles, recorded by the Evangelists, who preached in houses
and fields. If we understand our Christian profession aright, we must take
ourselves bound by many commands and precepts in the word of God, to imitat
Christ and his Apostles, in their performances of the duties of Religion and
righteousness, which are of purpose related in the Scripturs for this effect.
Do we not find from these sacred records, Christ and his Apostles preaching in
houses and fields, as occasions offered, never declining to teach and instruct
the people in these, as the present exigence required, although they had the
opportunity of and access to the Synagogues, which is denied us, as to the
places allowed for publict worship? Do not these practices of Christ and his
Apostles say that, as preaching in houses and fields, is in it self no^ sin
but lawful; (except we resolve to make Christ ^ transgressour) so in the like
cases, and under the like c^lls, we are bound to do in this, as Christ did
before us; who can get this shuned?

Amongst the many designs aimed at, in this indulgence, and in part obtained
by it; we know the deviding and breaking of our party, was a principal one;
which at first actuated, and set on foot this device amongst us; but, we hope,
without the fruit our adversaries exspected to have reaped thereby, to the
advantage of their cause: for, whatever difference there has been, or yet is
amongst us, in our practice, in relation to the indulgence, we are all agreed
in the preceding exceptions against it; and if there had been access for
representing the same to our Rulers, our unanimity and concord in these had
been more discovered, and made known to the world, then it is. There is no
charge with us of our known and professed judgment, about the Government of the
Church, in its true distinction from: and independence on the Magistrate, as is
afterward expressed. What ever was our persuasion in this, represented to the
world in our public confess on of faith, we yet, throw the grace of God,
resolve to cleave to: having never seen or heard of any thing, in all the times
that have gone over our heads, to cause us alter our apprehensions of this
matter in the least. Some (who take hold of all occasions to reproach us) are
pleased to represent some their acceptance of this indulgence, as contradictory
to, and inconsistant with our former professed principles anent Church
Government: yet any that considers what was shortly hinted at, to the Council,
at the receiving of this indulgence; and what was more largely declared by them
to the congregations, at their first entry, will be sufficiently convinced of
our constant adherence to our former principles; which by this acceptance is
not at all changed. It is expected from the lovers of our righteous cause, that
nothing shall be done by them, to ward the furtherance of the evil intents of
this indulgence: but rather an endeavor to counteract and ineffectuat them,
that our opposites may have no benefit therefrom, to the prejudice of the
interests of Christ, for which we contend.

SECT. VI. The nature of Church Government, as distinct from and independent
upon Magistracy, explained.
HAving proceeded thus far, and dispatched the first three things, we proposed
to speak to, in the beginning, we shall now enter on the last, the Supremacy
Ecclesiastical, that is now by law annexed to the crown, established in his
majesty's person and successors, and sensed by law and practice. Let none
wonder, we take this ticklish subject into consideration, and dar adventure, to
give an account of our thoughts of the same, to the world: for we solemnly
profess, that on the exactest enquiry and search, that we have been able to
make about this matter; we find it, as diametrically opposite to our true
Covenanted principles, as Prelacy; and in its effects, we fear, shall prove as
destructive to the Church, and work of Reformation, as any thing that appeared
on the field against it: Times past and present speak much to this, but the
future will say more: the storm, that this Supremacy threatens to this Church
and nation, is such, that it is the part of all that wish well to Zion to pray
inflantly day and night, that it may be graciously averted. The truth is, as we
look upon it, as an high corruption in it self tending to the subversion of the
Churches concerns, in doctrine, worship, and Government; so it lies at the
bottom of our nonconformity to the law, in Church matters; and is not only
one, but a maine reason, why we cannot join in Church assemblies, especially
for Government; which thereby, in our apprehensions, are made nullities. That
our procedour in speaking to this, may be distinct and clear to all, we shall
observe this method. 1. We shall consider and speak to the Government of the
Church, and show what it truly is.2. We shall prove its distinction from, and
independency on the civil Government. And3. Show how far this Government of the
Church is by law lodged in, and exercised by our Rulers, contrare to Scripture
and the practice of the Church, till these hundred years past.

For more light to the whole, we shall premise these preliminary considerations
or propositions, which, we think, will not readily be denied by any. 1. Propos.
it is out of our rode, and inconsistent with our intended brevity, to insist on
the terms GOVERNMENT and CHURCH, and what is usually signified by them; these
we leave to the Critics and all that write on this subject: but all are agreed
in this, that GOVERNMENT is a term importing power and authority; which is
nothing else, but a right to rule others; and an obligation on these invested
therewith to use the same, for attaining the ends of Government: So that
Government makes its acts due and binds them to all these acts, means and
ways, by which Government is enabled to reach its ends. 2. Propos. All created
power and authority is original in God, as the and first chief cause thereof,
and derived from him, as the universal Supreme Monarch, and Governor of all in
heaven or earth; hence it necessarly follows, that, as the power that cannot
prove its descent from God, is not to be admited; so all just powers are
directly subordinat to him as the universal head of all, 3. Propos. that the
Church of Christ, not being founded in nature, but on supernatural revelations,
her Government must wholly depend upon and flow from it, in these things where
it differs from other Governments; so that the All of this Government is by
positive institution and warrant from God supernaturally revealed. 4. Propos.
That Christ Jesus, as Mediator, being made the head of the Church under God;
and thereby her Government fountained in him: all powers in the Church must be
derived from, and subordinat to him, as the Supreme. 5. Propos. Beside the
invisible and internal Government, that Christ Jesus exercises by his Spirit,
on the souls and consciences of his people, (that consists in the inward light
and power of his Spirit guiding and enabling them to that obedience, he
requires of them in his word;) there is likewise a true visible Government of
the Church, institute by him, and visibly exercised in her, in his name, as her
Supreme. 6. Propos. The Government of the Church (as shall be proved
afterward) is not properly, and in linea directa subordinat to the Magistrate,
for 1. It has its derivation from another fountain, Christ Jesus; who being
the Churches Supreme head and governor, all power in her must come from and
depend on him.2. The Magistrate cannot take away, nor change the Government of
the Church, which he may do in Governments and powers subordinat to him: yea,
he cannot impede its exercise, in these entrusted with it; seeing they are under
obligations for it, antecedent and superior to these of the Magistrate. 7.
Propos. That the holy Scriptures, being the word and law of Christ, as King of
his Church, must be the instrument and rule of the Churches Government,
according to which she ought to be ruled, not only in these acts of faith and
obedience in the inner man, but also in the outward. 8. Propos. Although powers
specifically distinct be not subordinat to one another; yet there may be and is
a mutual subordination of persons, invested with these powers, so as the
persons are in different respects superior and inferior to one another; as
Jesse was to David (supposing him to live in his son David's reign;) which
subordination of persons does not take away the destinction of these powers;
nor the mutual subjection, the persons owe to one another: hence we assert,
that as Magistracy does not destroy the Ministry, nor loose the persons
clothed therewith, from the subjection they owe, as Christians, to Ministers,
in the right exercise of their Ministry; so neither does the Ministry destroy
Magistracy, nor untye Ministers, as subjects, from that subjection and
obedience due to Magistrates from their subjects; Ministers are bound to this as
much as any. 9. Propos. As in all Governments, there are somethings that is
intrinsic (although visible) wherein its nature and specific essence does
consist, and somethings accidental and separable from it, that belongs not to
its esse, but BEEN ESSE; so there are in the visible Government of the Church,
somethings essential and intrinsic, (of which afterward) and somethings
accidental and extrinsick, without which it can subsist, even in its exercise.
10. Propos. These things, in and about which, the Government of the Church is
conversant, are of diverse sorts; some are purely spiritual, as the Word,
Ministry, Sacraments, and all Ordinances of divine appointment; Others are of
a mixed nature, partly spiritual and partly civil, as the necessary
circumstances and mods of worship and Government; which, although civil in
their own nature, and common to other actions; yet partly by reason of the
general divine appointments, impowering the Church to dispose and order these;
partly by reason of their necessary connection with things purely spiritual,
are truly Ecclesiastic, and become a part of the object of the proper power
of Church Government, called by all Divines DIATACTICK: Some are properly and
purely civil, in their own nature and immediate ends; as Churches, Stipends,
Manses, Glybs, etc. which, although they be by general precepts secured to the
Church, and belonging to her; yet they are formally civil, and come directly
under the Magistrates power, as other civil rights and proprieties do, about
which he does execute the judgment of truth and peace. 11. Propos. It is to be
adverted, that there is a twofold subordination of powers in Government; one in
LINE A DIRECT A; and another in LINE A OBLIQU A: in the first subordination,
the power subordinated is derived from, and comprehended in the Supreme, and
may be impeded, suspended or reguated in its exercise, yea totally dissolved by
it; and when exercised, it is in the name and authority of the Supreme, and
wholly dependant, in its regulation, on it; so that both the power as such, the
person entrusted therewith, and its exercise, is subjected to the Supreme. In
the second kind of subordination, the subordinated power, or rather the person
in its exercise, is only the object of some acts of another power; but the
power is not derived from it, nor JURE, impedible or regulable by it: It is in
this last sort of subordination, that Magistrates and Ministers are subordinated
to one another, without all subordination of the powers, in their exercise; for
as Magistrates may, yea should command Ministers, when negligent, to the duties
of their function; so Ministers ought, in Christ's name, to command Christian
Magistrates to do the duties belonging to their office; and to rebuke them
authoritatively, when found acting contrare thereto. 12. Propos. These
subjected to created powers, whether Magistratical or Ministerial, being under
the supreme, absolure and universal Soveraignity of God, have a power of
judgment and discretion granted to them, for cognoscing on the commands of
their superiors, as to their justice or injustice, or their consistency with,
or repugnancy to the commands of God; by which they are to walk in giving or
not giving obedience to their superiors.

The way being thus paved, our next work is, to show, what we judge to be the
Government of the visible Church, which we shall do in these Conclusions.
Conclus. 1. The Government of the visible Church largely considered, is either
Supreme or Subordinat: to the Supreme belongs the legistative power, as the
making and enacting of laws, instituting of ordinances, appointing and
impowering of officers; and to be the fountain of all power in the Church.
This we assert to be only in Christ Jesus; and visible in his word, ordinances,
officers, and the conveyance of all Church power: in this, none share with him
either Magistrates o^ Ministers. Conclus.2. The subordinat power of Government
in the Church, is in her officers, that Christ has appointed and called
thereto; which power, is only and immediately from Christ, and exercised in his
name, over all in the Church, which distinction of Church Government makes not
different Governments in the head and members; it being one and the same
Government, truly Monarchical, not Aristocratical, nor Democratical. Concl.3.
This derived and subordinat power in Church officers, when considered with
respect to its matter, in and about which it is exerced, is diverse: Schoolmen
and Divines distinguish it, into the power of Order and Jurisdiction; but for
explications sake, and avoiding of all ambiguity, we shall consider it, in the
variety of its objects or matter; and its diverse acts about the same.

As (1.) To it belongs the dispensing of the ordinances of worship, in the
publict assemblies of the Church, in preaching of the word, praying to (as the
mouth of the assembly) and praising of God: in these they act, as the
Authorized servants of Christ, in performing and directing of the worship of
God in the Church.(2.) The convocating of the Assemblies of the Church, for
these divine and holy exercises; on which all in the Church are bound by divine
precepts to attend* as the institute means of worship, conversion, and
edification.(3.) The receiving, ordering, and distributing of the Charitable
contributions of the Church, for maintaining of the poor, and doing of other
pious works.(4. Trying, receiving, and admiting of members into the Church,
confirming and sealing of the same by Baptism.(5.) Administering the great
ordinance of the Lords supper, to the worthy and obedient, conform to the
institution of it in the word.(6. Ejecting and excluding the impenitent and
obstinatly scandalous (after due trial and conviction) whether in doctrine or
manners, from the Sacraments, and Comunion with the Church in these.(7.)
Trying, calling, and ordaning of persons fitted for and willing to engadge in
the Ministry; according to the rules of the word.(8.) Deposing and
exau^orating of Ministers from the Ministry, who, by heresy or scandals,
declare themselves unworthy of, and unfit for the same.(9.) Trying, and
censuring of scandals, in persons found guilty of them (after due conviction)
for their recovery, and keeping of the Church pure.(10.) Associating into
stated and fixed meetings, for carrying on, and doing of the former and
subsequent work, whether more general or particular, in their due and allowed
subordination.(11.) Trying and judging of doctrines, whether sound or
heretical, according to the rule of the word of Christ, and censuring of
persons found unsound in the faith.(12.) Disposing and ordering the necessary
circumstances of worship and Government, for decency and order, and the
avoiding of confusion.(13.) Resolving of doubts and cases of conscience,
incident to the Church, on any occasion or emergent.(14.) Indicting of days of
publict solemn fasts and humiliation, or of thanksgiving, as the dispensations
of judgment and mercy call to the same, etc.

Conclus. 4. This Government of the Church, as it is in the hands of Church
officers, and exercised by them, is purely Ministerial, without all dominion in
them; and only executive in applying the will of Christ to the members of the
Church, as they are found conform or disconform to the same. Concl. 5. This
subordinat power in Church officers is only declarative and nuncupative, and
not properly decisive; they have not power to determine what shall be true or
false doctrine, sin or duty; and what censure shall be inflicted on persons
heretical or scandalous; but only to declare and apply the will of Christ, and
what he has determined anent these in his word. This power suppons its object,
and does not make it. Conel. 6. It is wholly limited, regulated by, and
restricted to the word and law of Christ, as its basis and rule, beyond which
it cannot go; and if it do, its acts are nullities and not obligatory on any.
Concl. 7. It is purely spiritual, in its matter, manner and ends; and not at all
civil: it essentially respects the inner man, and wholly labors (in the ways
appointed) the saving, edifying and perfecting of it. Concl. 8. This power is
not properly coercive, coactive, and compulsive; but only exclusive: that is,
if it be not obeyed by them, about whom it is exerced it does debar them
from, and deny them the benefits, that are offered to all, and promised to the
obedient. Concl. 9. This power, in the hands of the Church officers, is truly
Christ's, and when acted in his name, conform to his laws, is the exercise of
his Supreme dominion in and over the Church; By which he truly and visioly
reigns over all in her: so that obedience to this power, is obedience to
Christ, as King of his Church; and the contr^re is high rebellion against him.
Concl. 10. Although this power be only Ministerial, and declarative of the will
of Christ; yet it is authoritative, and binding on all the Church, without
exception of persons; and that on a double account, first on the account of
divine commands enjoining submission and obedience to its exercise, in the
persons of those invested therewith; and also on the account of its respect to,
and derivation from Christ, whose power and ordinance it is; and whom, in its
exercise, it does represent to all. Concl. 11. This power is exercised, either
singly and a part by every officer (according to the nature and measure of
their power;) or in conjunction with one another, conform to the precepts of
the word, and practices of the Church in Scripture times. Although every
officer of the Church in their several orders, have the whole power belonging
intrinsice to it; yet there are some acts thereof, they cannot exerce, but in a
conjunction with others, as ordaining of persons for the Ministry, Trying and
censuring of scandalous and heretical Professors or Ministers, etc. for which
there must be fixed meetings of officers, general and particular. Concl. 12.
The ordiner officers of the Church (the extraordinar^ being ceased) are of
three orders, Teachers and Pastors; Ruling elders; and Deacons. These we find
to be of divine institution, and no others: Many others have been brought into,
and obtruded on the Church, but all of humane, or rather of diabolical
invention; as, alace, their effects have sadly made out to the Church of God,
in former and present times. In every one of these divine orders. we find no
institute superiority, in the same order, of one above others; as a Pastor of
Pastors; or an Elder of Elders; and a Deacon of Deacons: These who have assumed
and exercised this superiority we cannot own, as the Officers of Christ, nor
subject to them, as such, till they prove their institution and mission from
him; which yet they have not done. The outmost essey has been for Prelacy or a
Bishop, who is pleaded to be a Pastor of Pastors having the oversight of them
and their flocks; but nothing attempted for making out the divine right of
Primats, Archbishops, Archpresbyters, Archdeacons, etc.

This is that lowly and humble Government of the Church, that Christ has
institute in his word, and put in the hands of his Officers, commanding them to
exercise and dispense the same to all in his house, under high pains: of which
in the second place we assert these two. 1. That it is distinct and
specifically different from the civil government of the Magistrate. And2. That
it is independent on it. These two conclusions we now undertake to prove,
against the Erastians of our time, who assert, that when the Church comes to be
embodyed with the Commonwealth, her Government becomes one with the Government
of the State, and does not differ from it.

In opposition to these, we affirm, that when a Nation, State or Kingdom
turns Christian, in its Rulers and Subjects, the Government of the Church
remains specifically different and distinct from the Government of that State
or Kingdom; as it was before its conversion to Christianity. The reasons
persuading us of this, are 1. The Government of the Kingdom, that is not of
this world, is distinct and different from the Government of the Kingdoms that
are of this world? But so it is, that the Government of the Church is the
Government of a Kingdom, that is not of this world. Therefore the Government
of the Church is distinct and different from the Government of the civil
Magistrate, that is, the Government of Kingdoms that are of this world. This
Argument leans on these three. 1. That the Church is a Kingdom,2. That she
has a Government; And3. That she is not of this world, although in it. All
which are beyond disput clear from the Scriptures. All that our adversaries say
to this, is, that the visible Church of Christ, is not properly, but
metaphorically called a Kingdom: But how evident is the contrare? for is not
Christ Jesus the Churches visible Head and King? Is she not ruled by his
visible Laws, Ordinances and Officers, that are properly and truly such? and
are not all these from above, and not of this world?

Argum, 2. That Government whose supreme Head, Laws, Ordinances and Officers
are specifically different from the Head, Laws, Ordinances, and Officers of
the civil Magistrate, must be distinct from it: But so it is that the head,
laws, ordinances and Officers of the Church are distinct from the laws, etc.
of the civil Magistrate: Therefore, etc. The reason of the first proposition is
clear; for that which makes one Government differ from another, is different
heads, laws, Ordinances and Officers: where these are either numerically or
specifically different, the Government is different accordingly: it being
comprehended in all these: but that the supreme head, laws, ordinances, and
Officeis of the Church are specifically different, from these of the civil
Government, who will deny it, that professes himself a Christian? Obj. But all
these come under the inspection of the Magistrate, when he turns Christian. Ans.
1. Either these continue in the Church, under the Magistrates Government, what
they were before; or they do not: if they do, the Argument holds, and proves
the Government of the Church, to be distinct from that of the Magistrates, when
Christian: If they do not continue, we ask from whence come* this alteration,
and how will they prove it? Nothing here from our adversaries, but Altum
silentium, or nugae, destitute of all reason. But, 2. The term INSPECTION, or
OVERSIGHT, is am biguous; if by it we mean the countenancing, protecting, and
encouraging of this Government of the Church, we yield ^t: but what says that
to the confounding of the Governments; or making the Government of the Church,
the Magistrates: if by inspection we understand, the devolving of the Government
of the Church on the Magistrate, as the fountain of it; the ordering and
disposing of its exercise, the changing thereof at pleasure, in whole or in
part: this we deny, and long have we looked for proof; but have hitherto met
with none.

Arg. 3. The Government of the Church formerly deliniated is incomp^table with
the civil Magistrates; therefore it is distinct from his Government. We hope,
none will refuse this consequence. The antecedent is thus proven. (1.) The
subordinat Government of the Church is purely Ministerial, not dominative or
imperial; it is only declarative, and not decisive, not coactive and
compulsive; it is exercised in Christ's Name, and in his stead, and is the
representative of his special presence in his Church: these are incompatible
with the Government of the Magistrate, whose power is Supreme, Magisterial, and
Imperial, coactive and compulsive; and exercised in his own name, etc.(2.) The
Magistrate cannot, yea may not exercise the Government of the Church, being
disenabled thereto* by the commands and institutions of Christ, who has laid
the burden thereof on others, and not on him. The most grant, the Magistrate
himself may not exercise some parts of this Government, as ordaining of persons
for the Ministry, excommunicating, etc. and why he may do other parts and acts
belonging to it, and not these, We desire proof: all our antagonists arguments
in this conclude for the whole. Obj. But some Magistrates have exercised both
powers, as Moses, Samuel, David, Solomon, etc. Ans. These were both Magistrates
and Prophets; and it is evident from the Scripture, that what they did either
in constituting or in exercising of the Government of the Church, they did it
as Prophets, and not as Magistrates: we find Magistrates, that were not Prophets,
attempting it, and reprehended for so doing, as Saul, Uzziah: which says, that
it did not belong to their Magistratical Office.

Arg. 4. That Government that is founded upon and regulated by another rule and
instrument, then the law of the civil Magistrate, is distinct from his
Government: But the Government of the Church is founded upon, and ruled by
another law or rule, then the Magistrates; the law and word of Christ:
therefore, etc. the first proposition is clear, for the Government of the
Magistrate does flow from and is regulated by his own laws, of which he is the
sole fountain:) The second, we suppose, is undeniable among Christians, who
acknowledge the Scriptures for a rule of Doctrine, Worship and Government to
the Church of Christ. Obj But there are somethings necessare to the Government
of the Church, not contained in the Scriptures? Ans. This we deny. For 1. What
the Scriptures contain, anent the Government of the Church (if reduced to
practice) is able to attain its ends, and more is not necessary: Let the
Church have these, and the work will be done: we make and feign necessitles,
but no more is necessar to the ends of the Church Government, then what is
determined by the Scriptures anent it.(2.) The ability of the Churches
Government, for reaching its ends, lies not in the innate sufficiency of its
instituted means; but in the Spirit of Christ, working with, in, and by them;
by which low, weak and despicable ways, Christ carries on the salvation of his
people, that the excellency of the power may be of him, and not of us.(3.) The
Scriptures being a full and perfect rule for all matters of faith and obedience,
what it contains of, and anent the Government of the Church, must be perfect
and sufficient: sure we are, the Churches Government is a good work, and its
exercise, acts of obedience to Christ Jesus; anent which it is said I. Tim. 3.
The Scripturs are able to make the Man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to
every good work.(4.) We enquire, when the Church is without a Christian
Magistrate, and under the feet of a heathenish persecuting one (in which case
our opposits grant her a Government distinct from, and independent on the
Magistrate) whether the Government exercised in her, be able to attain its
ends. If it be (as the experience of the Church in this case puts beyond doubt)
why may it not do the same, under a Christian Magistrate?

Arg. 5. That Goverement that is exercised in the name of another distinct
Supreme Head, besides the Magistrate, is distinct from the Government of the
civil Magistrate. But the Government of the Church is exerced in the name and
authority of another Supreme head, not subordinat to the Magistrate. Therefore,
etc. What can be said to the first proposition, we understand not; for all
Governments one with, and subordinat to the Magistrate, are exercised in his
name and authority: But this Government of the Church is exercised in her, in
the name of Christ Jesus, by his Officers, as is clear from the word.

Arg. 6. The designations, denominations and relations, in and with which the
Church is represented in the Scriptures, do also confirm this truth; she is
called the Body of Christ, the Kingdom of Heaven, the City of God, the House
of the living God, the new Jerusalem. As all these do necessarily import a
Government in the Church; so they insinuat the same to be different from all
other Governments: Which we may mould into this Argument. That society which is
the body of Christ, etc. must have a Government distinct from the Government of
the civil Magistrate: But the Church is that society, that is only the body of
Christ, etc. Therefore, etc. Obj. But all these are said only of the invisible
Church? Ans. But the contrare is clear from those Scriptures, where these
Epithets are given to the Church, 1. Cor. 12.1, Tim. 3.15.

Arg. 7. That Government whose immediate and essential ends are specifically
different, from the immediate and essential ends of the Magistrates Government,
is distinct from the Government of the Magistrate: But here it is so: the
essential and immediate ends of Church Government, are different from the
essential and immediate end of Magistracy; as will be clear to any that compares
them together; The ends of Church Government are the saveing of the foul, the
conversion and edification of sinners, etc. The end^ of Magistracy, are, the
outward publict peace and prosperity of the common wealth, the execution of
justice in the maintaining and preserving of propriety, etc. with these the
Churches government does not meddle, nor intend them, of it self Obj. The
Magistrate ought to intend, and endeavor the spiritual happiness and welfare
of his subjects? Ans. We grant this, but as all others ought to do it; for
every one in their station are bound to design and labor the eternal
salvation of these under their charge; this being a common end, that all
Christians, in their several capacities, should seek after, in their love to
one another: the first proposition is evident, because the specificall
distinction betwixt powers, habits and acts, is taken from their Objects and
immediate proper ends; Where these differ, they are by all Philosophers
constitute into different species's.

In the next place we assert. That as the government of the Church does
specifically differ from the government of the Magistrate; so it is independent
thereon, and not directly subordinat thereto. A truth (how much soever it be
decryed) we are not shamed of, nor affrayed to profess and maintain: and
whosoever will lay aside prejudice and earthly interests, and consider these
reasons with us, will be forced to acknowledge it.

Arg. 1. The Magistrate is not the fountain of Church power; it has not its
derivation from him; and therefore is not directly subordinat to him: The
consequence is founded on this truth, granted by all Lawyers and Divines, that
all power directly subordinat to, and dependant on the Magistrate, is derived
from him as the fountain thereof: the antecedent we prove thus. (1.) The
Magistrate as a Magistrate is not a member of the Church, but as a Professor of
Christianity, which intitles others to this privilege, as much as him;
Therefore he cannot be the fountain of Church power as such; for whoever is
the fountain of power to any society, is a member, yea the noblest member of
it; Obj. But as a christian Magistrate he is a member of the Church? Ans. 1.
What then? will this prove him to be the fountain of Church power? so might
Christian Husbands, Parents, etc. argue as justly for this clame: the truth is,
he being only a member of the Church, as a Christian, and not as a Magistrate,
Magistracy gives him no more privilege, then any other power, civil or
natural, when the person tuines Christian; for the benefit of membership goes
on grounds and reasons common to all Christians, and contains no speciality to
one more then to another. If any think Magistracy does, they shall do well to
prove it, which none has yet offered to do. 2. If men understood well, what it
is to be a Christian, a disciple and member of Christ's Church, they would
quickly see its inconsistency with the said profession, does not persons,
turning Christians, profese subjection to Christ, his Laws, Ordinances and
Servants? which is repugnant to the fountain of the Church power.(2.) He may
not exercise Church power; Therefore is not the fountain of it: all yield,
that these who are the fountain of power to others may exercise it themselves,
it being in them, and others acting, as their delegates, in its exercise: that
the Magistrate may not exercise Church power, is clear; for Church power, being
by positive institution from Christ, they that exercise it must have a
commission from him, which none has prodduced for the Magistrate: Erastus
asserteth it, but without all proof, of which it is so destitute, that the
most of his followers have left him in this assertion.

Arg. 2. All Church power is lodged in and immediately descended from Christ
Jesus, as the Supreme Head and Ruler of the Church, and Superior to the
Magistrate: Therefore it is not subordinat to the Magistrate: The reason of the
consequence is clear, for it is a repugnancy in a power to be immediately
subordinat to two Supreme powers, in one and the same respects; especially
where the one is superior to the other: The antecedent is manifest, for Christ
is only head of the Church; all power in her is institute by him; exerced in
his name; astricted to, and regulated by his word; and accomptable to him. All
notes of power immediately descended from him. Obj. But the Christian Magistrate,
as Christ's substitute and vicegerent, is under him, the nearest and immediate
fountain of Church power; for subordinata non pugnant? Ans. Long has the Pope
of Rome conrended for this, and on grounds more plausible, then these, on which
the Magistrate goes. But Protestant Divines answer to the Papists on this head,
furnish us with irrefragable answers to the Magistrates clame; which we desire
our adversaries would consider and answer at their own leisure: we find not
the Magistrate enrolled among the officers of the Church, far less substitute
for Christ's vicegerent; if there be any Scripture for this, bring it forth? We
know of none as yet alleged by our adversaries; but what will plead as
strongly, for the heathenish Magistrate, as for the Christian: And if they do,
what traitors were the Apostles, Ministers and Christians of the primitive
times, that did not acknowledge the heathenish Magistrates for their head in
the Church; but resisted and disobeyed their laws and edicts against them, for
crying up of another King, in the matters of their Christian Profession.

Arg. 3. All Church power was institute by Christ, in an immediate subordination
to himself; without any acknowledgment of, or dependence on the Magistrate:
Therefore it is not dependant upon, nor subordinat to him: The antecedent is
clear from the History of the New Testament, where we find, that Christ molded
and constituted the Church by his Apostles, and furnished her with a Government
and officers, to be exercised in his name; and all this he did without
consulring, or advising with the Magistrate, or suspending of her upon him; the
Magistrate all this time resisting and letting himself, for crushing of this
Church and Kingdom of Christ; which he erected in the midst of their
Kingdoms, making use of their rage and violence to establish and propagat it,
for some Hundreds of years. All this is so evident, that our adversaries are
not able to refuse it; what is there then to hinder the consequence, that we
draw from this deed of Christ? If our opposites in this matter could show us,
that the Church had no government institute by Christ; nor exercised any, all
the time that the Magistrate thus opposed himself to her; or that Christ had
declared his will, that she should be subjected to the Magistrate in her
Government, when he should become Christian; they would soon end this strife:
but nothing can we learn from them to this purpose.

Arg. 4. As this Government was institute by Christ and his Apostles; so it was
exerced in his name in the Church, without dependence on the Magistrate, till
Constantine the great's time; and from thence down ward, till the Reformation
of Religion brack up in Germany: till which time, it was never questioned by
any, until Erastus the Physician arose, who labored not only to subject the
Church to the Magistrate, in all her concearnes as such; but denied all
Government to her by divine institution, that is distinct from the Government
of the Magistrate; contrare to full and clear Scripture, which he most
insolently and wickedly endeavors to wrest and pervert. So then if the
Government of the Church was in Scripture times, and downwards, till within
these hundred years, exercised without dependence on the Magistrate, both
heathenish and Christian; then it must yet be independent on, and not directly
subordinat to him. Here our Antagonists are put to strange shifts; The first
three hundred years, they must grant; and may we not take this for a yielding
of the cause? Scripture and antiquity has been held for a sufficient plea, for
matters of doctrine and practice: debates in Polemical divinity has run on
these two heads; and whoever made out their assertions from these, have been
esteemed to carry the cause: all that our adversaries have to say to this, are
these two. 1. That the Government exercised in the Church was not by divine
institution and precepts; but by confederation of Churches and officers. To
this we reply. 1. If the Epistles to Timothy, to the seven Churches in Asia.
Revel.2. and 3. Chapters; with other places of Scripture, used by our Divines,
in this matter, prove not the contrary, they have no sense: We beg of our
adversaries, they will, for saving us a labor, answer Mr. Gillespies Arguments
from Scripture, in the second part of his Aarons Rod blossoming.2. Besides they
are not able to make out what they assert, to wit, that the Church did exercise
her Government in these times, by confederation and mutual consent; and not by
institution and command: for as there is nothing in Scripture and pure
antiquity for this; So the Churches being gathered and constitute by the
Apostles, we presume, they continued in the constitutions, which the Apostles
left, according to the precepts and rules they gave them; to which we find, in
the word and Church History, their practice conform. When the persecutions of
the Church ceased, upon the Magistrates turning Christian, we find her
continuing, in the exercise of the former Government, (but with the addition of
some corruptions, which grew to a sad hight afterward, throw the excessive
munificence and bounty of Constantine the great, the first Christian Emperor)
and exercising the same^, as formerly; as is clear from History; that speaks of
these times. Here our adversaries speak of some instances of the power, the
Magistrate did exerce in the Church; as convocating of Synods, laboring in the
peace of the Church, lorely rent at sometimes, through lad heresies and
schisms; And that saying of Constantines repeated by them, ad nauseam: vos
estis Episcopi ad intra, Ego ad extra. But how is our Antagonists conclusion
made out by all these? will it follow, that because the Magistrate did convocat
Synods, its Government is derived from, and subordinat to him? No ways, for
(1.) Albeit the Magistrate have a power to convocat the officers of the Church,
anent matters relating to his own conscience and duty, whether about Church or
State; yet this is not privative of the Churches power to convocat her own
assemblies, either for worship or government; as we find she did in the
primitive times, not only without but against his consent; yea when the
Magistrate became Christian, she retained and exercised this power in assembling
into several Synods, without the Magistrate. It is true, we do not read of
general Synods assembled, after this, but by the Magistrate, till the Pope of
Rome, claimed this power, and usurped therein on the Church and Magistrate, as
he did in all other things, but the vastness of the Empire, and large extent of
the Church (which exceeded its bounds) made this in point of prudence
necessare, for without the Magistrate, it could not easily be done. But(2.)
Convocating of others, is not always, in its self, and infallible sign of a
superior power and dominion over judicatories convocated; as in limited
Monarchies, and not absolute, where the Supreme power is lodged in the King and
States of the Kingdom; although the King have the power of conve^ning the
States; yet they share wi^h him, in the leg stative and executive power, while
in being: therefore the illation is bad and not concludent.(4) What imaginable
advantage-can accrue, to our adversaries assertion, by that saying of
Constantines, formerly cited? We grant^ the Magistrate is the overseer of things
without the Church; but this will not prove, that the government of the Church,
is in and from his hands, and subordinat to him; they must first make it appear
by good reason, that ner Government is ad extra, which they have not yet done,
nor never will; for although it be visible in its institution and exercise; yet
it is as intrinsinck to, and within her, as her doctrine and worship; which by
this sense, will be as much derived from and subjected to the Magistrate, as her
Government; seeing the one is as visible in its dispensation, as the other.

Arg. 5. The Magistrate may not, yea cannot jure impede and hinder the exercise
of the Churches government: therefore it is not derived from, nor subjected to
him: the reason of this consequence is, what ever power is derived from the
Magistrate, and subordinated directly to him, he may suspend, hinder its
exercise, yea he may totally remove and annihilat it: this is yielded by all,
and taken for a sure Maxim in Politics: but the Magistrate may not do this, in
the Government of the Church; and that because it is of divine institution, and
the persons entrusted with, and called to its ^xercise, are under the
obligations of divine precepts and commands for it, which the Magistrate cannot
hinder, nor by any deed or command of his, make void. These that deny this
divine institution of Church Government, we refer to the forecited book; where
it is strongly pleaded and made out from clear and express Scriptures in the
New Testament. Likewise as he cannot impede its exercise, so he may not nullify
its sentences, by himself, which he may do in the sentences passed by all
powers, derived from and subordinat to himself.

Arg. 6. The Christian Magistrate, is by virtue of his Christian Profession,
bound to subject himself to the acts and exercise of Church Government, in the
hand of Church Officers; and is as much obleidged to yield thereto, as any
other: Therefore Church power is not directly subordinat to him. The antecedent
is clear; for all are commanded submission and obedience to Church Officers, in
the exercise of their power, in watching, overseeing, and ruleing of the Church
Heb. 13.7, 17. to which exercise of their power, we find Magistrates in the
word submitting, as UZZIA, who was by the priests, confor me to the law,
separated and secluded from the holy things of God, and communion with the
Church in these; yea, it is given for the maine cause of all that heavy wrath
and judgment, that came on Zedekiah 2. Chron. 36.12. that he humbled not
himself before Jeremiah, the Prophet, speaking the word of the Lord to him,
Obj. But this subjection in Magistrates to Church Officers, is properly to
Christ, and not to them? Ans. we confess, the subjection is primarily and
chiefly to Christ Jesus, whom such, in the exercise of their Office, do
represent; yet the subjection is to them too, whom all, without exception of
any in the Church, are commanded to receive, hear and obey: so that in the
dispensation of holy things, they are superior to all in the Church,
Magistrates and others, as their constitut Rulers, Overseers, Governors and
Watch men, whom they ought to obey; when acting in their Office, agreeable to
the law of Christ: which obedience is not CATACHRESTICAL or ABUSIVE (as
VIDELIUS speaks) in the Magistrate, but proper and really, a debt they owe to
the Ministers of the Gospel dispensing holy things, as much as any other member
of the Church; their obligation to it being of the same kind and nature, with
the obligation of others. If any think other-wayes, let them produce their
reasons and Scriptures. 2. If the fiery and zealous promotters of the
Magistrates power, in and over the Church of God, did consider the true and real
prejudice they do to Magistrates, by exeeming them from that subjection, that
they, with all others, owe to Church Officers, they would (if there be any
sense of Religion and its advantages remaining with men) hold their hand; and
should have little thanks from Magistrates, for their preposterous zeal, who, by
their opinions in this matter, do really exclude Magistrates from the Communion
of the Church, and the benefit of the ordinance of Church Government, which in
its design and effects is for saving of the soul, as well as all other
ordinances. Other Arguments might be adduced, as the want of power in the
Magistrate to alter and change the Government of the Church; or to nullify its
just sentences passed, etc.

SECT. VII. The sinfulness of the Ecclesiastic Supreamacy manifested.
BUt judging these sufficient to the conviction o^ the unprejudged; we come to
the other part of ou^ task which is to show, that this visible intrinsic
government of the Church is assumed by, and given to our Rulers, in the present
standing laws of the Kingdom; which we shall make out from the acts of
Parliament; particularly act of restitution. Parl. 1. Sess. 2. Act. 1. act
anent the National Synod Parl. 1. Sess. 3. Act. 4. act against Conventicles
Parl. 2. Sess. 5. act against Keepers of Conventicles and withdrawers etc.
Parl. 2. Sess. 3. Act. 17. act against unlawful ordinations Parl. 2. Sess. 3.
with others of the like nature. But, before we enter on the probation of this,
it will be necessare, for clearing our way to it, to consider alittle two
things, in the beginning of the narrative of the act of restitution, repeated
in several acts: where, first, the Government of the Church is called the
external Government of the same: the term, EXTERNAL, being Notourly ambiguous,
should have been explained, and all not left to guess at its meaning: EXTERNAL
is by some opposed to the internal invisible Government of Christ on the souls
of his people; and so by it they understand, the visible intrinsic Government
of the visible Church: that this is meant by the term EXTERNAL GOVERNMENT, in
this and other acts, the following Arguments undertake to make out: but some
others oppose the term EXTERNAL GOVERNMENT, to this intrinsic visible
Government of the Church, formerly described and asserted to be distinct from,
and independent on the Mastrat; and by it they do understand, these humane
adjuncts and accidents, that are civil in themselves, and not made sacred by
divine institution: some plead this to be the sense of these terms, in the acts
of Parlt; but how groundlesly let our subsequent reasons determine. Secondly,
It is there said, that the ordering and disposing of the external government of
the Church belongs to the Crown, etc. it is hard to sense this; for ordering
and disposing, when done by persons in authority, is a part of government in it
self; and if it be so, the Phrase is equivalent to this, the governing of the
external government of the Church: which is a strange sort of speech, as if a
government needed a government to govern it: What if this were said of the
government of the government of the State? Would it not be reputed non sense?
But the truth is, all governments do necessarily imply a power to dispose and
order all things relating to it, as a part of the same; and without which it
were imperfect; and it is without disput evident from the experience of the
Church under heathenish Magistrates; that the government of the Church had this,
which by this act is taken from her. Next, we ask, whether this ordering and
diposing be an act of the Ecclesiastic or civil government? If it be of the
Ecclesiastic, it is again nonsense, at the best; and is as much as if it had
been said, the Ecclesiastical governing of the Ecclesiastical government of the
Church; a perfect tautology, But if it be an act of the civil government; how
comes it, that in this and other acts of Parliament, it is called the Kings
Ecclesiastical Government, in opposition to the civil? Obj. It is only
objectively so called. Ans. Then it is properly and formally civil, the phrase,
objectively Ecclesiastical being CATACHRESTICAL and ABUSIVE; a very improper
speech; yea as improper, as if we should call Church power or Government, in
the hands of Church officers, objectively civil, or civil. Thirdly, In the last
place we desire to know, whether this ordering or disposing of the Government
of the Church be necessary, or not? If it be not necessary, why is the Church
troubled with it? If it be, we ask again, when it was exercised by the Church,
whether it was an act of civil or Church Government? It could not be of the
civil; for the Church had none under persecuting Magistrates; if it was an act
of the Ecclesiastical or Church Government; then it was purely and formally
such; and not truly civil, although exercised about things civil in their own
nature, and seeing it was so, how comes it to be the Magistrates now? To any
considerat and unbyaffed reader, it will be manifest, that these words or
expressions come from minds, designing the enhansing of the intrinsic vis^^le
Government of the Church, and withal laboring to cover it; but all in vain.

Now that the Ecclesiastical Government of the Church, formally and
intrinsically such, is assumed by, and given to the Magistrate, in the present
standing laws, will be apparent to any that consider these things, in the
forecited acts of Parliament. (1.) That Church officers, in the exercise of
Church government, in their Church assemblies or judicatories, are put in
dependence upon, and subordinated to the King, as Supreme to them therein: this
makes the King the fountain of Church power, and the Church officers to derive
and hold their power of him; which makes our King the proper Head of the
Church, and substituts him in Christ's room to her.(2.) The government of the
Church, thus subjected to and dependant on the King as Supreme, is, in the act
of restitution, extended to and made to take in ordination, acts of discipline,
inflicting of Church censures; yea to all causes and matters formally
Ecclesiastical; to all, about which Church power is exerced, he is made the
supreme.(3.) All Church power and jurisdiction, as it was exercised in this
Church (before the late introduction of prelacy) without this derivation from
and subordination to the Magistrate, is rescinded and annulled; certainly in
these times, the Magistrate had and did exercise a power about Church matters;
as is to be seen in the laws then made in their behalf; but this does not now
content, without this supremacy; which imports another power acclamed by the
Magistrate now, that was not then.(4.) This supremacy, and (as it is called) the
Royal prerogative of the Crown, is given for the maine reason of the change
made in the Government of the Church, in overturning and casting out of the
true government, that then was, and bringing in another in its stead, without
the authority and concurrence of the Church: a fair opened door, for bringing
in the like alteration and change in doctrine and worship, when there is access
to it.(5.) Prelacy by this act is restored, not only to the former height it
was at, and had attained by law and practice, before its last ejection out of
this Church; but also to all that ever it was, even in the times of popery;
which when considered, in the constitution and privileges it then had, was an
humane Office founded on the Supremacy of the Pope; but now, by this law, on
the Magistrate: which says, that although the persons be changed, yet the
Supremacy is the same.(6.) In the act anent the National Synod, the nomination
and election of persons, by who^n the government of the Church is to be
exercised, under the King, is asserted to be the Kings, by virtue of his royal
prerogative and supremacy, in causes Ecclesiastical; so that the constitution
of Church judicatories is made dependant upon him: a thing never heard of nor
practiced in this or any other Church, till of late.(7.) The right, being and
constitution of the National Synod of this Church, is wholly dependant upon,
and derived from this law; So as it is no Synod of this Church, that is not
gathered, and constitute conform to it; although a Synod in this Church should
have all, that made Synods lawful, and their acts obligatory, in former
times.(8.) The particular constitution of this National Synod, as to its
members, (which in this act are nominated and regulated thereby, for all future
times) is determined for its' times and places of meeting, and put wholly in
the Kings hand, and asserted to be his right, by virtue of his Supremacy over
this Church: It is no Synod that is not thus convocated.(9.) The matters to be
handled, debated, and concluded in this Synod (a thing always judged
intrinsic to the Church) comes only from the King, and are to be proposed from
him, by the Arch-prelat of Saint Andrews and no other: a fearful restraining of
the divine liberty of the Ministers of the Gospel, who may not speak of matters
of doctrine and manners, (although necessary for the times) contrare to the
freedom, that is commanded them by their master, anent these.(10.) The King's,
or his Commissioners presence is made essential to the constitution, and of
binding force to this national Synod: It is no Synod, although constitute
after the pattern of Church Synods, in the primitive times; if it want
this.(11.) No matter debated and concluded by the Majority of this Synod, is
obligatory on this Church, and its members, if not approven and allowed by the
King or his Commissioner. This suspends the intrinsic obligation of Synods on
the King; so that no canon, act or constitution, do bind the members of the
Church, if he assent not: As this secures the Count, in their carnal liberties
and sinful ways; so it shuts the door on all endeavors of reformation by the
Church, when Princes are vicious.(12.) In the act asserting the Kings Supremacy
Ecclesiastic, the King and his successors are enabled and empowered to meddle
with all matters and meetings Ecclesiastic, which brings the doctrine and
worship within his verge, and subjects the same to him, as much as the
government.(13.) They are empowered to enact and emit constitutions, acts, and
orders, anent matters and meetings Ecclesiastic, as they please and think fit,
and are not, in the making of these, astricted to any rule, but their pleasure,
O HORRENDUM!(14.) All these acts and orders they may statute, independent on
the Church, Parliament, or any other, by their sole authority, never granted to
any of his predecessors before.(15.) These acts and constitutions insert in
the book of Council, and duly published, are declared and made to be of full
force and obligation to this Church and her members. No need of Synod^ here*
which by this are wholly subverted.(16.) All former laws, acts and clauses of
them, contrare to and inconsistent with this, are made void, cassed, annulled;
which takes away the Protestant Religion, the Word of God as the rule, the
concurrence of the Church in the assistance of the constitutions
Ecclesiastical, that was provided and secured by former acts of Parliament: a
wide door for Popery.(17.) In the act against unlawful Ordinations (as they
call them) the Ordination of persons to the Ministry, by Ministers of Christ
Jesus, that have not conformed to Prelacy, (which was held unquestionable and
valid for its substance by all, till this late gang of Prelates arose, in which
they are degenerat from their predecessors) is, by the sole authority of the
Magistrate, made void; and all Ministerial acts, and Church benefits depending
thereon, declared to be null. An act that unchristians and condemns all the
reformed Churches, making their Churches no Ministerial political Churches, and
all Ordinances, dispensed in them, nullities: which their practice at this time
in England does confirm; while Romish Priests turning Protestants, are,
without ordination, made capable, and advanced to Church places and
preferments, of which the Protestant Ministers of other Churches, conforming to
Prelacy, are dented, till they be reordained. Other mediums contained in other
acts of Parliaments, for fixing of the preceding conclusions, we pass; having
hinted at some of them above; judging these sufficient, for the conviction of
the uninteressed and unprejudged; who through the power of lust and earthly
interest, have not cast off the light of the word, but keeps in subjection to
it.

We shall in the last place answer some objections; in which, we have to do
with two sorts of persons; first, the high flowne Erastians of our times, who
will admit of no government in the Church, but that which is in and from the
Magistrate whose design, (as is evident from the act asserting the Kings
Supremacy) is, to take all Government out of the Churches hands; and to put it
on the King and his Council, to be only exercised by them: which, throw the
dislike of Prelacy, is not sufficiently lamented, laid to heart, nor resisted
by many, as its dangerous consequences, to all the concerns of the Church, do
require. Besides these, there are who, (upon what principle is not yet known,)
think that the Supremacy, as it is now asserted by law, is not formally
Ecclesiastical, but only objectively so; which is strange: some of the
objections of the first sort, we have met with, as we went along the former
heads; we know of no other, besides these, of any considerable strength; but
one.

Obj. That the Magistrate being the keeper of both tables of the law; of the
table of Religion, as well as of the table of Righteousness; ought to have a
care of Religion, and has power given him to exercise it about the same?
An^wer, This being the Achilles of the Erastians, and semi Erastians; of
VIDELIUS in particular; We shall return these answers to it; and show it
cannot bear their conclusion. 1. Whatever power the Christian Magistrate can
clame by this, the heathenish Magistrate has the same; he is by his
Magistratical office constitute, in actu primo, a Keeper of both tables; as is
evident from, Romans 13: 1, 2. If he do not exercise it, it comes not from any
defect of power in his office, or the institution of it; but from his blindness
and unbeleef, which indisposes him to answer his trust, and to do the work of
his office; to which, upon the revelation of the Gospel, he is bound: and seeing
it is so, either the Church, in exercising of her Government independantly on
heathenish Magistrates, usurped on his office and power; which the adversary
dare no say: Or else the Christian Magistrate has no more power in and over the
Church, then the other had: and therefore the Church, in exercising her power
under the Christian Magistrate, does not usurp upon him, more then on the
other.2. The Ministers of the Gospel are, by virtue of their office, Keepers of
both tables of the law, of the table of Righteousness, as well as of the table
of Religion: will it from thence follow, that they may meddle with the
Magistrates office, and assume its exercise; or that the same does depend on
them? No ways: and yet the consequence is as good in the one as in the other:
by the same medium we shall prove Ministers, have as good right and power to
manage the affairs of the State; as the Magistrate has (in our adversaries
sense) to manage the affairs of the Church. We know they will reject the
consequence with disdain, as to Ministers, and ask for our proof, for which,
we grant, they have just cause* so we deny the consequence as to the Magistrate,
for which they have not given us yet any colorable proof; but dictator-like
assert it. The truth is, every man in his capacity is a Keeper of both tables
of the law; but in doing of it, is to hold within the compass of his station,
the nature, and limits of the power granted him; and is not to invade the
office and power of others, nor the work proper thereto: as is evident from
multitude of precepts in the Word of God. So if Ministers, notwithstanding
their being Keepers of the tables of the law, may not invade the Magistrates
office and power* So neither may Magistrates invade the Ministerial office and
power.3. The acts and ways of the Magistrates keeping of the tables of the law,
should answer, and be agreeable to the nature, extent, and limits of his office
and power; within the verge of which, he is to walk, as all others are to do in
theirs: As Ministers are to keep both the tables of the law by preaching the
word, dispensing of Ordinances, and exercising of discipline, according to the
rules of the word; to which they are empowered by the institutions and commands
of Christ, without dependence on the Magistrate; so the Magistrate is to keep
them likewise, by commanding all to their several duties, protecting them
therein by the sword, which is given him for that end; executing of justice in
punishing of evil doers, and rewarding the good, etc. but is not to meddle with
the Government of the Church, in whole or in part* but to see that it be done
by these, whom Christ has called to and entrusted with it.

It is objected by others, that it is not the intrinsic visible and internal
Government of the Church, that the Magistrate assumes, in the acts of
Parliament; it is only the external Government, that is expressly so called,
in the act of restitution? Ans. This is materially Answered above; but that we
may be distinct, there are two things belonging to the Church. (1.) The outward
and external adjuncts or accidents; As the Biotica or Mundana, Stipends, Manse
Glybs, outward liberty and peace, etc.(2.) The proper and true objects of
Church Government or power, that are intrinsic to it, although visible; as the
Word, Ordinances, Ministry and necessary circumstances etc. It is not the
first of these, but the second that the act of restitution with other acts do
truly mean, as is undoubtedly made out by the former arguments; as
particularly the first three: that it is the Church judicatories; the matters
handled in and by them, proper thereto, that constituts the King Supreme; these
being essential and intrinsic to the Government of the Church, in its several
parts: he that is made supreme to these, is made supreme to the Church, and all
that appertain to her.

Obj. 2. But it is only the ordering and disposeing of the Government, that is
declared to belong to the King. Ans. It is so said in that act, but it is
evident from the matter and frame of it, that it is the Government in whole that
is truly meant and intended, as is formerly proven. But 2. Ordering and
disposing of things, proper and specific to any Government, is a part of the
Government it self; and to whom the Government belongs, the ordering of it
belongs likewise: by the same reasons that any shall undertake to prove, that
the ordering and disposeing of the civil Government belongs to the Magistrate;
we shall prove the ordering and disposing of the Churches Government does
belong to Church Officers: ^no Government can be perfect without it, or able to
attain its ends, and therefore must necessarily be employed in, and intrinsic
to it.

Obj. 3. But there are some acts of Church power the Magistrate may do, as
convocating of Synods, determining of circumstances, indicting of publict fasts
and thanksgivings? Ans As we deny all formal Church power to the Magistrate, and
all acts formally proceeding therefrom; so we grant there are acts, First, some
common as prayer, rebuking, instructing of others, and others of the like
nature: which, when they come from a Church Officer, are authoritative and acts
of Church power; that are yet performable by others, in their stations, and (so
to speak) are charitative. 2. Some are proper and only belongs to Church
Officers, as preaching of the Gospel, dispensing of the Sacraments, exercise of
Church discipline, etc. We do not deny, but chierfully grant (wishing with all
our hearts, there were many such Magistrates in the Church) that the Magistrate
ought to rebuke, to exhort, admonish, instruct and pray, etc. As all others in
their stations and offices should do; but from thence it will not follow, that
he may exercise formal acts of Church power, more then others; or that the
Church power is dependant on him: the Consequence is wide. But to the
particular instances; as, that of convocating of Synods or any Church
judicatory, we say, it is within the verge of his power, as a Magistrate, who
may and ought to command all within his dominions, to their several duties, and
Ministers among others, as they ought to do to him, so the Magistrates
convocating of Ministers, is but a putting of them to their duty, which in the
Magistrate is no act of Church power; but an act of his office he owes to all.
2. This act or deed of the Magistrate, is not privative of the same in the
Officers of the Church, who may and ought come together of themselves, as the
necessities of the Church requires. On the by, it is an evil consequence; the
Magistrate may gather Synods; therefore Ministers may not do it: It is like to
this, others may rebuke, admonish, etc. Therefore Ministers may not do it. For
although the Magistrate have an imperative power, over all; yet it is not
privative of any power in others, that is proper to their station and office.
(2.) As for the determining of the circumstances in Government, we reply, there
are two sorts of circumstances relateing to these, first some extrinsick, and
not in themselves simply necessare, although convenient; as Churches of such
and such forms, pulpets, ornaments, etc. These, being in their natural use
civil, belong to the Magistrate, and are directly under his power, to order and
dispose, Next 2. There are some circumstances intrinsic to the actions of
worship and Government, and so connected therewith, in that degree of
necessity, that they cannot be performed without them; and come within the
compass of divine commands, on which, the morality of individual actions, as to
their goodness and evil, pro hic and nunc does depend; as such and such persons,
doctrines, times, places, helps, etc. which all moralists and divines make to
specify all humane actions, as to their morality in individuo. Of these we
assert, that the determination of them, as they respect worship and Government,
and are connected with them, belongs to the Officers of the Church, and not to
the Magistrate: we have given some reasons for this before, as 1. we see
commands given to the Church about them, and not to the Magistrate; 1. Cor.
14.2. If the determination of these were in the Magistrates power, it should be
likewise in his power, to hinder, impede and obstruct all right worship and
Government, in its exercise, at his pleasure for whoever has these things in
his power, without which, the actions of worship and Government cannot be
performed, has the actions in his power to hinder or not.3. The consequences
of granting this to the Magistrate are mischeivous: for by this, if he do not
wholly hinder the exercise of the Ministerial office and power; yet he may
restrict and limit it so, as to bring them under dreadful unfaithfulness in
their Ministry or office; he may bind them up from preaching such and such
doctrines, that, at such and such times and in such cases, God calls them to
preach. As for the (3.) Instance, for indicting of days for solemn fasting
and humiliation or of thanksgiving; we say, that we reckon it among these
common duties of Religion, that every Chirstian, in his station, is bound by
the command of God to observe; and according to the extent of their power to
see them observed by others under them, when the dispensations of mercy and
judgment calls them to these; as is clear from the precepts and examples we have
in the word; so that all Christians, in their several capacities, offices*
powers and extent of the same, have the power of indicting and keeping of such
times and days; as Masters in families, pastors in congregations, or in their
associations, and Magistrates, etc. From this it will not follow, that
Magistrates, Masters of Families, etc. their indicting of such days for divine
exercises, is an act of Church power; although it be such in the Officers of
the Church, and as it comes from them: no more then others rebuking, exhorting,
etc. is an act of Church authority and power, although it be so from them. 2.
That it only belongs to the Magistrate to indict days of publict fastings, or
of thanksgiving, and not to the pastors of the Church* where has our
antagonists learned this? We grant the Magistrate participats with others in
this power; but the nature of these duties, the precepts, and examples of the
word, impowers others in their capacities, as much as him: it were easy to make
this out. We acknowledge, for the more harmony in this publict work, and
convenient following of it, with benefit and advantage to Church and State, it
were expedient, that Magistrates and Ministers did previously consult, and agree
about publict fasts and thanksgiving: but to affirm this, to the privation of
the power and obligations, laid on others anent it; is not only an encroachment
on the divine rights of others, but a loosing of these bonds, with which God
has tied them; and what is this but to fight against God in the persons of
his Creaturs.

Obj. 4. Seeing Ministers are bound to give an account to the Magistrate, when
required, of what they do, in the Government of the Church; will it not follow,
they are subordinat to him in so far, in its exercise? Ans. No ways; for (1.)
They stand oblidged to do the like to all others, over whom they are set, and
do rule; when their carriage in the Ministry is stumbling and offensive to
them; to which they are oblidged, both by general and particular precepts; and
yet it will not follow, that in their Ministry they are subordinat to such.(2.)
The Magistrate, by virtue of his professed subjection to Christ, is bound to
give an account of his actings in his Government to Ministers and others, when
he proves scandalous and offensive: which many of them have done. To this they
are obliedged, both on the account of their promised subjection to the word,
its ordinances; and Christ's servants, dispensing the same; and likewise on the
account of Charity and love, that binds all, not only to endeavor the
preventing, but removing of offenses, when given; to which the Magistrate is as
incident, in his capacity, as others; as alas sad experience puts beyond debate!

Obj. 5. But as the Government of the Church* and its exercise, is the object
of the Magistrates power and its acts; does he not act about those imperially,
and Architectonice? And if it be so, is he not Supreme to and above the
Ministers of the Church, and they subordinat to him? Ans. This is the objection
of the greatest seeming strength; but on a serious consideration of it, its
weakness will soon appear. We yield, without any advantage to our enemies
cause, that what the Magistrate does as such, about Church matters and officers,
he does it imperially and with dominion, and (as they use to speak)
Architectonice: but what then? It proves the persons to be subordinat to the
Magistrate in these his acts; but not the power in its exercise; nor the matters
about which it is exercised, for (1.) The Magistrate, when he by his irreligious
and unjust carriage in his office, or other ways, becomes notoriously
scandalous to the Church, is liable to Ministerial admonitions, rebukes,
seclusions from the Sacraments, etc. And is thereby subordinat to Church power,
or the Ministers of Christ in exercing it about him; and yet the Magistratical
power, and its exercise, is not subject to them, whatever resistance our
opposits make to this mutual subordination of the persons of Magistrates and
Ministers: yet they must either deny the Christian Magistrates the benefits of
the Gospel and its ordinances, dispensed by Ministers; or else yield this truth.
Is it not clear in other powers or relations? as suppone, one is both a
Magistrate and a Son, is there not here a reciprocal subordination and
superiority of persons with a coordination of powers, as is hinted above? We
plead no more for the Ministers of the Gospel, and the Government of the Church
committed to them. We grant a great difference in other respects, betwixt the
Magistrate and Ministers; they act as mere servants, without all dominion in
them; He with dominion and Magistratical authority over the persons of
Ministers: yet for all this the powers are coordinat, and in their exercise not
directly subject to one another.(2.) These powers, their exercise, and
respective objects becoming reciprocally the object of one another (as the
Ministry and its objects being one part of the Magistrates power, the Magistrate
and the objects of his power, being likewise a part of the object about which
Ministers exercise their power) under different formalities and specifications,
there arises or results, not only a sweet harmony, and a mutual subserviency to
one another, in advancing of their respective ends; but likewise an indirect
subordination to one another, in the exercise of their powers, without any
dependence of these powers upon one another. But this subordination is only of
the persons, and not of the powers: which by being the mutual objects of one
another powers, does not subject the power, and its exercise, but only the
persons; for any thing or power becoming the object of another, does not
subordinat it to that power; the Word, Ordinances, etc. are not, by being the
object either of the Ministerial or the Magistratical power, subordinated or
subject thereto; so that the Ministerial power, its exercise, and the matters
about which it converses, are not by being the object of the Magistrates power
subordinated to it. This breaks the force of our adversaries Argument which
lies mainly in this.

Obj. 6. It is only this sort of Supremacy and subordination, that the act of
restitution does mean? Ans. It is not so, as is clear from the words and frame
of the acts; for it is the Church assemblies, their proper matters, their
constitution, the intrinsic obligation of their conclusions, that are
subordinated to the Magistrate; so that all is nothing without him.

Obj. 7. All Divines, even the Presbyterians and independents in the Church of
England, grant the Magistrate to be Supreme in all causes, and over all persons
Ecclesiastical; none of them scruple to take the oath of Supremacy, as it is
established by law in that Kingdom? Ans. All Divines do not grant this, as is
to be seen in the writings of many; and for any thing we know, it is not
yielded by the Presbyterian, and Independants, in the sense controverted among
us; neither can it, seeing it quyt overthrows, all Church Government, in its
distinction from and independency on the civil Government of the Magistrate,
which is contrare to the known principles both of Presbyterians and
Independants; and if the Prelates themselves durst speak their mind, conform
to their own principles, they would not in this differ from us (as Thorndike
more free and engenuous then the rest of his party does declame and cry out
against the oath of Supremacy, as the great crying sin of the Church of
England,) but to an excess, would assert all, and much more, then we do, in
this matter, were it not for fear of offending the Magistrate, on whom now they
wholly depend, and whose Creaturs they only are^; which has in our times
reconciled the Prelatical and Erastian principles, at least in appearance, that
are most contrare to and distant from one another, yea more then theirs and
ours. And although the Presbyterians and Independants, in the Church of
England, do take the oath of Supremacy, yet it is with such explications,
allowed and assented to by the Magistrate, that give it a sound sense, which was
stumbled and scrupled at both in Queen Elizabeth and King James times, till its
sense was explicat, and allowed; as is to be seen in the instructions given to
justices of the peace, by Queen Elizabeth, for administrating the said oath;
and Bishop Ushers explanation of it, approven by King James: In which sense it
is understood and taken to this day among them. But to understand this matter
aright, and to avoid the labyrinth of generalities and ambiguities, with which,
some divines perplex and intricat it; it would be considered. 1. That there is
a two fold proper supremacy, one civil, and another Ecclesiastical, about
Church power, meetings and matters.2. There are two Kinds of Causes, of those
they call Ecclesiastical; some that are only extrinsically such, but in their
nature, immediate ends and use; civil, that, for their more remote ends and
respects to things truly and properly sacred, are called Ecclesiastical, as
laws made for the Church and her concerns, outward liberty and peace, external
rewards and punishments, etc. Again some causes Ecclesiastical are
intrinsically and formally such, as who shall preach the Gospel, and be
invested with the Ministry, or who shall be deposed from it, who shall be
rebuked, admonished and excommunicated; or received and admitted into the
Church, etc.3. The term CAUSES is not here to be understood in a physical, but
moral and juridical sense; that is, for questions to be decided by those, who
are empowered, either by God or men, to this work.4. Causes or questions, as
they are the object of power and its exercise, are either proper and immediate;
or else improper and remote. Hence we say. 1. That the Magistrate is Supreme
Governor in all things or causes, properly civil, relating to causes and
persons Ecclesiastical: the judicial cognition and definitive judgment of these
belong to him, and not to the Church: in this sense we admit the oath of
Supremacy, and declared ourselves willing to take it, which was refused us.2.
That the Magistrate is not the supreme Governor in Causes, and over persons
formally Ecclesiastical* This we assert belongs to Christ Jesus only, and not
to the Magistrate, as has been proven above. This is the supremacy, we deny to
the Magistrate, and for which we have declined to take the oath anent it, that
is now established law, being persuaded (for the reasons formerly given) that
this is the supremacy granted by law; and understood in this oath. But3. That
causes and persons formally Ecclesiastical, are not the proper and immediate
object of the Magistrates power, but only improper and remote, and the reason
is, because in the execution of Christ's law given to the Church, the judicial
cognition and definitive judgment about these belongs not to the Magistrate, but
to the Ministers of the word; as for instance, it is not the Magistrates part to
cognosce and determine, who is to be received into the Church, and who not;
this is proper to the Ministers of the Gospel: and so of other causes and
questions of the like nature. Obj. Then the Magistrate, in protecting,
countenancing and furthering of the Churches acts and sentences by the sword,
must be a blind executer of them! Ans. This must be said out of envy and
malice; for (1.) the Church is the executer of her own acts and sentences, and
not the Magistrate, who only puts to execution his own laws, that he is
pleased to enact on her behalf.(2.) It is known to all, that we grant to the
Magistrate, (and to all in the Church,) a discretive judgment to cognosce on the
Churches acts and sentences; and if he find them not to be just, he has a
definitive judgment, anent the execution of his own Laws made about them: for
the obligation that arises from Churches acts and sentences on all in the
Church, to the obeying and furthering of them, is only conditional, and not
absolute; that is, none is bound to obey and advance the Churches sentences,
except their matter be just and righteous, which must be first known before they
find themselves obliged to this. But here the immediate object of the
Magistrates power and its exercise, about Church acts and sentences, is properly
civil, and not Ecclesiastical, to wit, whether he will execute his own law or
not. These things are easy and plain, and if ambition and worldly interests
had not determined many to the contrare, there would be little controversy
about them.

Obj: 8. The Magistrates power and its exercise about Church matters and
meetings, being independent on the Church; what he does in relation to Church
concerns, determinations and sentences, he may do it antecedent to these,
without the Church. Ans. We deny the consequence to be universally true: for
some of the Magistrates sentences about Church matters and meetings do
necessarly suppone, the Churches sentences and acts, for their object; as these
of ordination, excommunication: acts of regulation etc. must necessarly pass,
before the Magistrate can reach the persons and things, to which they are
applied: for instance, before the Magistrate can do justice to a Minister in
his maintenance, he must first be ordained, and by it have right thereto, on
the Churches act of ordination; which must first be known to the Magistrate, and
by him given as the ground or reason of his sentence, for the Ministers legal
right to enjoy and use the provided and allowed maintenance; and so of many
others. We grant, in some cases and things, a power to the Magistrate about
Church matters and meetings, which he may exercise, antecedent to the exercise
of Church power; he may, yea, no doubt, he ought to command Ministers when
negligent, to their work or duty, without a Church sentence, yea contrare to
it: but to say, that the exercise of his power, in many things and cases, is
not necessarly subsequent to the acts and exercise of Church power, is most
absurd, and abhorrent to all right reason; seeing there are many things that the
Magistrate ought to do to and for the Church, that necessarly suppone, not only
the being, but the exercise of Church power, without which the Magistrate cannot
do: how shall he punish contumacious, heretical and excommunicat persons till
they be first dealt with by the Church, conform to the rules of the word, and
declared to be such, etc. The reason of the consequence is weak; for all
created power suppones its object, and in its exercise must be subsequent and
posteriour to it; which is not inconsistent with the independency of any power
on another; as is to be seen in the instance of the marital power, and others;
the power of the Magistrate about it presupponeth the conjugal relation, and its
acts, before it can put the laws in execution, anent it, in application to the
persons under that relation. The design of this objection is obvious, which
is, to evert all Church Government, the necessity and use of it: but before it
have its full intended force, it must first be proven, that Church power and
its acts are competent to the Magistrate, and may be done by him; as that he may
ordain, depose, receive into, and cast out of the Church, preach the word,
dispense all ordinances, etc. which no Erastian has yet done; for if these be
incompetent to the Magistrate, and are to be done by others, the former
conclusion will hold.

Conclus. Having thus, with all Christian ingenuity and plainness in the words
of truth and sobernes, discovered our hearts anent the foregoeing particulars:
we expect that much charity and justice from all, (even our Antagonists) that
before they give out their censors, they will seriously consider, what is said,
and in the balances of Scripture and true reason, impartially ponderat the
reasons and grounds of our judgment and practice: least, in stead of fighting
against us, they happily be found to fight against God; for seeing the grounds,
on which we build, are of common obligation on all Christians, and on which,
our Christian profession leans; none can refuse our conclusions, but they must
either contradict and shake the foundations of the said profession; or else show
their inconsequence, and inconsistancy with these: we have not insisted on, nor
much made use of particular places of Scripture, nor wrangled (as many in their
debaits do) about the sense and application of these, nor laid the stress of
our arguments from antiquity on citations from particular fathers and
historians; but on the series and thread of these ancient records; to which we
appeal, anent the matters debated in the preceding discourse: as any, that
deals heartily and impartially, will, on trial, find. The issue of our
adversaries arguments, in the defense of the Antitheses, resolving in these
three, the imperfection of the Scriptures; the manifest and violent perverting
and wresting of them; the professed and open contradicting of their authority,
by Hobs Leviathan, and others more gross, (if grosser can be) do sufficiently
declare, what the tendency of the contrare opinion is, and what we may expect,
will be the result of the same, if things continue, for sometime, in their
present channel. All Protestants, before these debats entered on the field,
esteemed the perfection of the Scriptures, the chief and principal foundation
of the reformed protestant Religion; and builded thereon their doctrins, in
opposition to popery: which, the patrones of prelacy do now strick at, and
labor to shake, in denying their sufficiency or perfection, in matters of
obedience or practice; whereby they break the force of all the arguments, that
the Protestants used against the Papists, for the fullness and perfection of the
holy Scriptures: and the truth is, prelacy cannot be maintained without this
assertion; as is to be seen in the most eminent assertors of it: for if we hold
the Scriptures to be a perfect and full rule of faith and manners, and not to
be receded from, in matters of doctrine, worship and Government; the prelacy
controverted, having so little evidence from them, it cannot stand, and if this
sufficient regulation of the Scripturs be refused, what a wide door is opened
to humane inventions; and what may not men bring in at it, to the corrupting
and polluting of all the Churches concerns? We grant, the admitting of the
Scriptures, for a pairt of the Churches Canon and rule, seems to draw a bar on
much of the Romish trash, (which is condemned thereby;) but does not the
prelates boldness, in violenting and forceing of them, in answering of our
arguments, and maintaining of their concepts, remove this bar, and lay the
door open, for what they will for howbeit the Scripture speaks, against the
worshipping of Creatures, Images, Angels and Men, and charge these practices
with idolatry: yet Thorndike, and most of the now prelatical gang, purge the
popish mass, the worshipping of the host, of the virgin Mary, Images and
Saints, from idolatry and superstition. How impudently bold are the Erastians,
in wresting the Scriptures, used by their antagonists; in which they are not
inferior to the Socinians, and the most noted heretics of the Church; but we
must say, with less show of reason; as will be evident to any, that will
compare them together in their comments. What security can the Church promise
her self from these men's principles and ways, who build their conclusions, on
such foundations, which if once admitted overturns all? But alas! when to
enlarge the Magistrates power, and to give support to their wild assertions
about it, the divine authority and doctrins of the Holy Scriptures are boldly
contradicted; and all Religion ultimatly resolved into the Magistrates
Conscience and Laws; as Hobs Leviathan, Parker and others, undertake to make
out, against the foundations and superstructu^s of our Religion, are they not
thus pulled done to uphold the Magistrate, and to extend an immense power in
him? but, we hope, to the external shame, confusion and ruin of the cause for
which they contend. How much do we find that saying of Paul's 2. Timoth 3.13.
verified in these men, evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived? but our confidence is, that their folly being
made manefest to all men, they shall proceed no further: for the cause which
they oppose is Gods, and that which he must own and plead; seeing the Royal
prerogative of his absolute Soveraignity and Supremacy, are intrinched upon,
and struck at ^^y his Creatures, the worms of the earth; who, contrare to
their indebted and professed subjection to him, assault his throan, and invade
the regalities of his high and glorious Crown, which he will uphold. OH that
all, ingadged in this war against the Lord and his anointed, would read and
consider the Second Psalm, and yet hearken to what is there foretold anent the
issue of it, which will be sad and heavy to them, that obstinatly set
themselves in opposition to Christ and his Kingdom. Let none, that side with
Christ in this quarrel, be affrayed or ashamed, to appear in its defense
against all sorts of opponents; for as we have the full light and evidence of
the Word of God, to justify its righteousness, from the reproaches of men: So
we have the righteous and Almighty God to take our part, who, on the account of
his justice and Supreme dominion, is ingadged to own them, that own him in
this cause. In contending for these, we contend not for honors, dignities and
the riches of this world; but only for the Laws, Ordinances, and Servants of
Christ Jesus, and that obedience and subjection to him in them, that he
requires of all in his word; yea for the Royal dignities, and supereminent
prerogatives of his righteous and glorious Crown, which the Father has placed
on his head; giving him a name above all names, that, in the name of this
JESUS, all knees should bow, yea shall bow. Who needs to be affrayed, who own
such a King, and have him on their side, who in his own person overcame and
Triumphed over all his enemies; and yet again will do so, in the persons of
his weak, contemned and persecuted servants and people. The Lord build up the
walls of Jerusalem, and make her a peacable habitation. Amen.


