MY LORD,
I Thought it my bound Duty to return your Lordship Thanks for the great Care
you have taken in preserving the Peace and Prosperity of this City, and for
your Loyalty to my late Sovereign Lord the King and His Brother. My Lord, I
shall always Admire you, and more especially the late Aldermen your Brethren;
And as for Sir John Moors, he shall never be forgotten, for the great Care and
Pains he took, and no Magistrate was ever so Abused, yet tho he had Power, he
Revenged it not: And as for Sir William Pritchard, he carried himself both
Prudent and Wise. And as for the late Sheriffs, I think They were as Worthy
Civil Gentlemen as any that could Serve the City. And as for the People, none
more inclined to Love their own Prince than they, but not willing to be in
Subjection to another, and surely that is no Crime; for if it be a Crime, how
highly guilty am I, that have always Loved my Sovereign Lord and no other: For
how entirely did I Love my late Sovereign? For there was nothing in the World I
loved above Him, but God. O! That I had Died, that He might have Lived, then
you would not have been exposed to the Flouts, Mocks, and Derisions of your
Adversaries; but it is the Wisdom of God to suffer it to be so, for all our
Trials, and I do not doubt but your Loyalty will remain to the end, that you
may obtain the Crown of your Reward: But, my Lord, you know that Loyalty
without Piety toward God, will avail nothing in the day of His Anger. Therefore
I humbly beseech your Lordship, and the Aldermen your Brethren, and all the
Loyal Men of this City, that they should be as Zealous for Gods Glory and His
Truth, as they have been for the Kings Interest, and then I do not doubt but
that God Almighty will accept of your Endeavors, and you may obtain that
everlasting Name of being Good Servants to God, and Good Subjects to your
Prince; although the Afflictions of Joseph be forgotten, and the Loyalty of the
Church of England despised, and Her Adversaries Triumphing over Her, saying,
Take down Her Hedges, that the Wild Boars of the Forest may devour Her. O! who
would have thought that my Sovereign that I Loved so well, and Pleaded His
Cause in all Things, and before all Persons, whom I admire above all Princes
for His Wisdom and Goodness, should now Expose us! Therefore I Will put no
Confidence in Princes, nor in the Sons of Men, but in God alone, who is able to
Preserve us; and I shall always pray for my Sovereign Lord, that God would keep
and preserve Him from that that is Hurtful to Princes. For I have been
Concerned for the Peace of this Nation above these Twenty Years, and it was
Love to God that made me Love the King, and Love to the King that made me Love
the People; And when any Pronounced any Judgments against this Nation for the
Sins of the People, it troubled me, therefore I humbled my self with Fasting,
to Implore the Almighty, that the Judgments might be prevented, but I find that
many People mocks at his Judgments, and do not forsake their Sins, as if they
delighted to provoke the Most High to destroy them. Indeed when I first
undertook the Quarrel, they blamed me infinitely for it, saying, They were, not
worthy of it, but I mattered it not, for I knew God did not delight in the
Destruction of any; and let them be how they would toward me, yet my Love was
so toward them, that I did not matter what they said, for I Loved my Sovereign,
therefore I was not willing to have His Kingdom destroyed, or His Throne
uneasy; and indeed the Lord has been very Good to me, for He has given me
Favor before the Eyes of all sorts of People; yet not with standing I am very
sensible, I have a great many Enemies, that would have destroyed me a great
while ago, it my Sovereign had not been as an Angel to preserve me, tho I must
needs say the Roman Catholics, has been very Civil to me, but it is in hopes
to make me a Prosilite, but it is a question whether their Love will last any
longer than their Hopes; therefore I am very sorry for them, that they should
think that none can be Saved but what owns Rome, when we all have but one God,
one Savior and one Holy Spirit, and yet that we must be counted Heretical and
Damned, it must proceed from Ignorance or Malice; yet I am persuaded, there is
many Roman Catholics that Loves me, and I wish them Well; and for many
Dissentors, I do not question but they Love me likewise, tho they thought me to
be Popishly Inclined, but I never was, and I hope in God never shall be; And as
for the Churchmen, they have a great Reason to Love me, because I could
Sacrifice my Life for them all, for their Good is my Good, and their
Unhappiness is my Unhappiness, and I delight greatly in having them Happy.
Therefore God requires that should be Just, and then Merciful, and to abound in
all Good Works, for Christ says, By this all Men know you are my Disciples, if
you keep my Commandments. To Love one another, and to Pray for the King, and to
yield Obedience to Him in all Things that is agreeable to Gods Commands. And if
our Dissenting Brethren had done this, there would have been no Contention
amongst us; but Offenses will come, but Woe to them by whom they come: They
have Condemned their Brethren for being Fools, I wish that they may not be
condemned with the same Judgment as they have condemned others. And so I rest,

Your Lordships Humble Servant and Souls Well-wisher ELINOR JAMES.


