A LETTER FROM THE KING of POLAND To His QUEEN; In which is Many Particulars
relating to the VICTORIES Obtained against the Turks; WITH A Prayer of the
TURKS Against The CHRISTIANS.

Translated from the Cologn Gazett, OCTOBER. 19. 1683,

DVBLIN, Reprinted M.DC.LXXXIII.

A Letter from the King of Poland, to his Queen, in which is incerted many
particulars relating to the Victories obtained against the Turks etc.
THe Immortal God to whom honor and Glory be ascribed for ever has blessed us
with so signal a victory as scarce the memory of man can equal. The enemy was
not only content to raise the seige of Vienna and leave us masters of the
field, But also of all their Cannon and Tents with inestimable treasure and
climbed over mountains of carcases made by their own bodies in the flight my
eyes were never blessed before with so delightful a prospect as to see my
Soldiers follow here a great drove of their sheep and oxen and there is a much
greater herd of Turkish Captives, nor my Ears charmed with so pleasing music,
as the howlings and dying groans of these miserable wretches, so great was
their have that the Prime Vizier almost alone and forsaken of all was forct
with out the ceremony of his Turband to take his flight, But yet he left me
Heir to to his tent, and riches which were shown by a Renegado of his own
Retinue,

I have presented the Turkish Standard to his holiness who was instrumental no
less by his money, then his prayers, to their overthrow, the Prime Visiers horse
with all his trapings, I reserved for my self. And tho he was so fortunate in
his flight to escape us, yet his Caymeram or Lieutenant General with some of
his most considerable Bassas fell by our swords, But the approaching night put
a stop to our pursuit and their slaughter, those Janazeries which were left
behind in the Mines and Trenches we thought not worth the dulling of our swords
therefore we made but one funeral Pile for them* all and burnt them.

In that Action there were about thirty thousand Turks killed, besides Tartars,
and 100000 Tents taken. Our Soldiers, and the Burghers of Vienna were two
whole nights, and one day in Rifling their Tents and Bodies; and I believe a
week would scarce suffice to finish it.

The rarities which were found in the Prime Visiers tent were no less numerous
then strange and surprising, as very curious Parets and some birds of paradise
with all his Baners and fountains, and some Ostriges which he chose rather to
kill then let them fall alive into our hands nay his despair and Jeloussy
transported him so far as to destroy his very Women for the same reason.

The whole Army attributes the glory of this victory to God and us, and all the
princes of the Empire with the great officers as the Duke of Bavarea and
Lorrain, Prince Waldock etc. were so far transported with my valor and success
that their thanks and praises were more numerous then was their fears before,
and Count Staremberg the Governor saluted me with the title of his mighty
deliverer the common people in my going to and from the Churches Paid their
veneration even to my very garments and and made their cries and acclamations
reach the sky, of long live the King of Poland.

In the Battle we lost some of our Friends as Prince Halicki and the Treasurer
of our Household, the Reverend Marinus Daniano heapt on me his prayers and
blessings and told me he saw a white Dove flutring over the Army which i^ looked
upon as an happy Augure of our Victory.

We are now on our march toward Hungary taking the advantage of their
distraction, to defeat the remainder of their scattered troops and surprise
Gran^ or New-h^usel. I have all the Princes of the Empire my Companions in this
Enterprise who tell me they are ready to follow such a Leader, not only into
Hungary, but to the end of the World.

The Prime Vizier being unable to put a stop to their pursuit told his Eldest
Son Mahomet Han, that he must now bid adieu to all his Greatness, and never
expect to be in saftey whilst there lies one stone upon another in the walls of
Vienna. But withal bid him hasten to the Grand-Seignior and demand a speedy
succor, to whom his Son replied that he knew him too well for that, and there
was nothing for them now to rely on but their flight.

I am just now a going to take Horse and all my way for two Hungarian miles
together are so strewed with the carcases of men, horses and camels that the
stench of them would be insupportable to any but a Soldier.

I have sent several dispatches to foreign princes to give notice of this
action, but the King of France was forgotten.

I rejoice to see our son Alexander of so clear and undaunted Courage who
always stuck to me in my most iminent dangers and made the first onset on a
body of Turkish Spalies with that courage that he put them soon to flight and
received the applause of the whole Army, He has contracted a very intimate
friendship with the Young Duke of Bavaria with whom he equally divided the
spoil, this Prince has been very assidious in his services to me therefore I
have presented him 3 of my horses, the Bassa of Egypts tent and standars, and
ten pieces of cannon, to his sister the Dauphiness a Locket of Diamond yet
there remains such heaps of their colors and semiters in our possession as are
not to be numbered.

All my country men marched with the same bravely to the relief of Vienna. a^
the soldiers of Godfrey of Bullein did to the Holy land, and the miraculou^
cross that you presented me with which was his companion in that expedition* I
believe contributed no less to our victory.

Thanks be to heaven now the half moon Triumphs no longer o'r the cross and
it was thrown down from St, Stephens steeple in Vienna whom had ore top^ so long,
imediatly on the defeat, Neither have the Turks any occasion to upbraid us with
their blasphemous Mahometans proverb. Ye christians where is your God.

The Turks Prayer against the Christians.
ETernal God and Creator of all things and thou O Mahomet his Sacred and Divine
Prophet we beseech thee set us not dread the Christians, who are mean and silly
to rely on a Crucified God: By the power of thy right hand so strengthen ours
that we may surround this foolish people on every side and utterly destroy
them, at length fulfill our prayers and put these Miscreants into our hands
that we establish thy throne for ever in Mecha and sacrifice all those Enemies
of our Most holy Religion at thy Tomb, Blow us with thy Mighty breath like
swarms of flies into their quarters and let the eyes of these Infidels be
dazelled with the Luster of our Moons, Consume them with thy fiery darts and
blind them with the dust which they themselves have raised: Destroy them all in
thine Anger, break all their bones in pieces, and consume the flesh and blood
of those who despise thy Sacrifice and hang the Sacred light of Circumcision on
the Cross,, wash them with showers of many waters, who are so stupid to worship
Gods they know not and make their Christ a Son to that God who never begot him.
Hasten therefore their destruction we humbly entreat thee and blot out their
Name and Religion, which they glory so much in, from off the face of the Earth,
that they may be no more, who contemn and mock at thy Law.

Amen.
FINIS.

