A VINDICATION Of that Part of SPIRA's Despair Revived Which is Challenged by
the ANABAPTISTS And Shamefully Callumniated By JOHN WELLS, a Baptist Preacher.

Wherein also some Things are Handled RELATING TO Infant Baptism, AND DIPPING
in BAPTISM, Particularly it is Evinced, That Dipping is not Essential to the
Sacrament of Baptism.

By THOMAS JAMES, Author of Spira's Despair Revived

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey, 1695.

To those Inhabitants of Ashford and the adjacent Parishes, who attend upon my
Ministry.
Beloved Christians;
THE Dedication of these few Sheets of my Vindicatio^ is due to you; and it
would be a Crime to prefix any ^ther Name or Names: You are concerned with me
in the Matters here spoken to; and your Concern is little le^^ than that of my
own; yea upon some Accounts it is evident^^ greater: You have also some
knowledge of these things; yea some of you do know the truth of what I write,
to your exceedin^ great grief and sorrow. This Neighborhood has of a long
tim^ been the Seat of many Anabaptists; and the Stirs they have mad^ have not
been small; witness that Disputation held in the Paris^ Church July 27. 1649.
between Fisher and several Ministers, before some thousands of Hearers (about
three Thousand, as the Printed Relation tells us it was guessed) and a late
one b^tween them and my Predecessor; and they have not come short (...) my
time, having urged me to the same, though I have answere^ them only with
contempt of their Challenge.

The Reflection I made touching their troubling weak and unst^ble Souls, and
their Practices of this kind, are Matters well know^ to many of you: Every Day
discovers how restless they are (...) turn some or other of you away from the
Faith you profess, an^ to make you renounce your first Baptism. Upon these
Account (...) judge it a part of my Ministry, which I have received in the
Lord, to watch over you, and to preserve you from those Seducer^ and if I
should not take all occasions to warn, to exhort, and i^struct you, I am afraid
I should not fulfill the same. Beware of them therefore, and be not terrified
and dismayed at their bold and desperate Speeches, cavilling at, and condemning
Infant-Bap^ism as a new Doctrine, a Scriptureless thing, as Antichristian;
which yet was practiced many hundred of Years before the Name of Anabaptists,
or Baptists (being taken for a Society of People opposing Infant Baptism) was
ever known in the World, and long before the Man of Sin was ever revealed. But
why should ^ou be afraid to have your Children baptized, when Christ showed his
Love to those Lambs, by taking them in his Arms and blessing them; and the Holy
Ghost makes no difference be^ween them and the oldest Disciples, calling them
Holy, and saying, the Promises equally belong to them; and God to where in all
his Word forbids you to dedicate them in Baptism, or refuses them? Let them
show you that Scripture, if they can, which forbids Children to be baptized.
What, has God less love for your Children than for those of his old People the
Jews? Is his Mercy clean gone from our ^hildren? Is he not the God of the
Christians also? Yes ve^ily the same God in Covenant; for he is a God keeping
Covenant and Mercy with his People; whose People we are if we be^ieve on Jesus
Christ his Son; and we are Children of Abra^am, to whom Circumcision was given
as a Seal of the Covenant ^od made with him and his Seed; to which Baptism now
answers; Christ changing the two old Sacraments, Circumcision and the Passo^er,
into Baptism and the Lord's Supper, the Subjects of them ^ho were to receive
Spiritual Benefit and Privilege thereby ^eing still the same. Many things I
know they have written to ^isprove this; but I seriously profess, that their
Distinctions and ^ub distinctions about Circumcision being a Seal to Abraham,
and ^ot to his Seed; the two Covenants God made with him, etc. ^^re so handled
by them in some of their Books scattered among us, that I can hardly understand
them, and wonder how they could render ^^ich plain Matters so intricate. But
until they can show you ^ow God makes a difference between Children under the
Law and the Gospel, taking theirs in, and leaving ours out, why should yo^ keep
your Children back from the privilege of so blessed a Sacrament, or seek a new
Baptism for your selves? As for the point of Dipping, can you, dare you lay the
stress of the Efficacy of a Sacrament wholly upon the quantity of Water, as
though the application of more, or in another way than Sprinkling or pouring^
could profit you so exceedingly? Or, must you needs be adult, and profess yo^
Faith, as though the Virtue of the Sacrament did wholly consist in what you do,
and nothing in the Grace of God (...) Cannot God bless his own Ordinance to
Infants? Beware, I be^seech you, least you should provoke God, by limiting him
after thi^ manner, and scandalize your Brethren, and all the Reformed Churches
of Christ, even the purest of them (as that of the Wa^denses, now commonly
called Vaudois, who were never tainte^ with any Corruption of Antichrist, but
certainly the most pur^ and Apostolical in the World) who baptize Infants, and
generall^ apply the Element of Baptism some other way than by dipping as by
pouring it on, sprinkling, etc. But, I pray, what do yo^ see in these Men that
you should think the Word of God came only to them? What Power and
Demonstration of the Spirit is ther^ in their Preaching? What Holiness and
Exemplariness in the^^ Lives more than others, to convince you that they are
the Peop^^ of God above others? I do not go about to set you against their
Persons, or Societies, and therefore say nothing that may tend to the^^
Reproach, but I am showing you how vain it is to believe eve^^ Word they say,
to prevent your being ensnared by their confident boasting of things they are
never able to prove. Let me speak (...) some of you in the Words of the
Apostle; Be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine by the^ slight of Men, and cunning craftiness, whereby the he
in wait to deceive: And I do earnestly exhort you all, to a^tend to that Gospel
Precept, If it be possible, as much as ^^th (...) you, live peaceably with all
Men; live peaceably even wi^^ these Men; as they are Neighbors live in love;
let not the^ Questions and Strivings about Matters of this or any other natu^^
imbitter your Spirits, and provoke you to speak unadvisedly, much less to be
guilty of any Misbehaviour in your Actions; rather pity them, and pray for
them: They are their own Enemies-many ways, especially their Childrens, whom
they debarr of many blessed Privileges; therefore pray for them, and be at
peace with them: The strange Divisions of the Land of our Nativity is a
sorrowful Consideration to all that fear God, and are by no means unnecessarily
to be widened: I could upon this account be content most gladly to be silent;
but my own defense, and your security, will excuse my Undertaking: But truly I
had rather appear among you in the Pulpit than in Print; and had rather speak
five Words to Edification than ten thousand in a way of endless Controversy.
As for you, my Brethren, believe the Promises, observe the Institutions, and
obey the Words and Commandments of our Lord Jesus Christ, and keep your selves
pure, that none may be able to speak evil of you, or to reproach your good
Conversation; this will give you Peace, and end in your everlasting Happiness.
For this I make my Prayers to God for you; as also that he would stablish,
strengthen, settle you; hoping to approve my self a faithful Minister of Christ
unto you in all things, desiring and endeavoring your eternal Salvation, as I
am

Your Friend and Servant in the Work of the Ministry, THOMAS JAMES.
From my Study, June 25, 1695.
A VINDICATION, etc.
ON May 21. I received a Letter with a printed Book enclosed, being entitled,
A Reply to that part of Spira's Despair Revived, in which the Baptists in
general are concerned; but more especially those at Ashford in Kent. etc. Upon
reading of the same, I find it such as may, if unanswered, turn to my great
Disgrace and Contempt; yea, and not only so, but it may be a means to
invalidate that Evidence which I have brought in that Spira revived for the
Truths of the blessed Gospel, witnessing against the Atheistical Principles of
this Age: And yet further, this shameful Reply (for so it shall quickly be
detected) is dedicated to the Honorable Lord Wharton, seeking Patronage from
so great and worthy a Person, and so abusing of his Name. These things have
such weight with them, besides what else I shall offer toward the Conclusion,
that though some are for my silence altogether (it being hardly worth while to
answer such ignorant and clamorous Persons, my own integrity, through the Grace
of God, being well known, and no ways obnoxious to their Slanders, being not
likely, I mean, to suffer any dimution in my Credit and Reputation here upon)
yet I cannot forbear, being so nearly concerned, and especially for the Truth's
sake, to write a few Lines, and publish a short Answer in order to so just and
necessary a Vindication. Now, that I may not be tedious, being indeed under a
Temptation thereto, writing in so just a Cause, in defense of the Truth and my
Credit, which are exposed in a shameful manner by that Reply, I will confine my
Pen with in these narrow Bounds, to write but of three things; one concerning
the Person who makes the Reply, and the manner of it; th^^ next concerning the
Charge which is brought against what I formerly published in that Spira, so far
as it respected the Anabaptists which consists of two parts; one concerning the
poor Melancholy distracted Man, R. M. and his tragical end; which gave me
occasion to reflect on the Anabaptists, as those that did him some wrong,
troubling him with their Notions about the necessity of Rebap^^zation (or being
Dipped) which proved injurious to him in his weakness and strange confusion of
Mind: The other concerning what I have written of their practicing the like
upon many others in much like Cases, troubling the weak and unsettled
Christians, eagerly urging them to be dipped, and, as I said, making it a Salve
for every Sore. In doing this I will consider the most material Passages in
that Piece, laying open the Ignorance and Injustice of the Publisher, the
several Slanders, Falsehoods, and such other things as make it appear to the
World, that what I wrote of the Anabaptists, so far as I had knowledge of them,
was true and sincere; and that their Reply is a mere Slander, and bold and
impudent Denial and Contradiction; whereas they have nothing to object in Truth
and Sobriety. The first thing which I consider, and is very material, is the
Person who makes the Reply, and goes about to lay grievous Matters to my
Charge, as though I had wickedly forged all I have written against the
Anabaptists. In the Conclusion (p. 23.) he writes thus of himself and the
Matter: Sir, I am a Stranger to you, N. B. and to the whole Matter, any
otherwise than as I meet it in your Book (and some Friends ^ear you gives some
Account) which has loaded us with a greater weight ^han is fit to be born. Now
surely this is a strange thing, and most unrighteous, unjust, and, it may be,
unparalleled, for a Person who owns himself a perfect Stranger to me (as indeed
he was, and is) upon the reporting a Matter to him, to Write and Print at ^his
rate against me. What, a Stranger to the whole Matter, and yet to Print at this
confident rate, aspersing, and slandring me for what I have written; and yet he
knows not but it may be all true; as indeed it is, and will be made appear? But
Mr. Wells, (for I think he that is a Preacher, and is entrusted to Print on the
behalf of his Brethren, may deserve this Title; though what he is, or his
Quality or Calling I know not) was told what I had written was all false; and
of this some Friends gave him an account: What then, is Mr. Wells's Pen become
Mercenary? And will he be a Champion for his Friends, right or wrong, though
perchance he fight against the Truth? How is it otherwise than so, seeing he
knew not the contrary, never hearing but one side? but surely Charity should
have believed better, and ^oped better of a Man of whom he knew nothing; and I
have reason to think that no Crime was laid to my Charge by his Friends (and
mine Adversaries) save only, I charged them thus and thus; and I cannot else
imagine how he comes to give me that honest Title of Worthy Sir. Strange, that
he should Print against me, and declare peremptorily to the World, that I was
guilty of all the Evil he says of me, and not first vouchsafe to send a few
Lines, and enquire whether I could make any defense for my self, or had any
thing to say before he passed Sentence, and openly condemned me: What, did he
think I had nothing indeed to say, not one Word; no Evidences to be produced,
nor any Proofs of what I had alleged? That good old Sentence, Audi alteram
partem, which was ever esteemed so necessary a Rule in Judgment, is quite laid
aside, and not at all regarded; it seems Mr. Wells never thought of it, and, to
speak the truth, I vehemently suspect he never knew it. Should a Judge sentence
a Man upon report only of his Accusers, never examining him, nor hearing what
he had to say for himself, it would, no doubt, be construed the greatest piece
of Injustice and Cruelty: Such as that of King James the First; who coming out
of Scotland to London to take the Crown of England, first discovered his
Disposition to Arbitrary Government, says my Author at Newark; for being told
that one had cut a Purse in Newark, the King, without any legal Process, or the
defense of the Party, signed a Warrant to the Sheriff of Lincolnshire to hang
him, which was executed accordingly: And this, says he, was a Blot in the
Scutcheon of King James the First. The Romans were so just as never to put any
Man to death in this manner. This is indeed against the very Light of Nature,
to judge and condemn upon mere Reports, without hearing the other side. Not
only Life, but a good Name are too precious to be cast away at this rate. One
would think that Mr. Well's never went to a Latin School, or was read in such
Authors, or how could he but have called to mind that Golden Sentence of
Seneca, Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera, Aequam licet statuerit, haud
aequus fuerit? Had his Sentence been just, yet without hearing first what I had
to say for my self, it had been unjust from him. But still they were some
Friends gave him this Account. Were his Friends therefore Infallible? Could
they not possibly misinform him? What an implicit Faith was this? How just
like the Proceedings of the Spanish Inquisition? The Tribunal erected de
propaganda fide! wherein the Accusers are examined in secret; and the poor
Prisoner is a Stranger to all that passes, till they begin to thunder against
him, and proceed to torture, and Sentence, and Execution. But might not these
Men, my Accusers to Mr. Wells, after so many Months running to and fro, and
stirring in the matter, at last give in some false Evidence? I am sure they
did, and that notoriously, as I will evince by and by; and I will persuade my
self, having so much Charity for him, that Mr. Wells will own it. Had but the
Letter he had sent me with his Book, been sent but some Months before, his
pains and trouble might have been spared, and his Credit saved; whereas now, he
has brought himself into a Snare, to gratify his Friends, who imposed upon
his Credulity, so that he Prints gross Falsehoods, never seeking to clear the
matters to himself, before he set Pen to Paper. How vain was it for him to
write thus to me in his private Letter; Worthy Sir, Its very unpleasant to me
to be troublesome to any, but I cannot well avoid giving you the trouble of
these Lines. Alas! the trouble of reading a Letter is not much; but surely it
would trouble any Christian to be thus slandered in Print; especially when
writing a few Lines a little sooner, and taking that small trouble, might have
prevented so great Calumnies: What was this but to shoot secretly at me, and
also to wound me openly, and then to desire me not to be troubled, because he
is so kind to tell me what he has done? Like those rude Persons, who cry, By
your leave, Sir, when they have first showed you some Incivility, or done a Man
some diskindness. But then he desires me not to take unkindly what he has
Printed; for, says he, I have been as tender of you as the matter will bear;
but if you suppose* me to be mistaken, assign wherein, and I shall, God,
willing, labor to give you satisfaction, etc. Great Tenderness indeed! and a
wonderful Care not to grieve me with what was Printed: But wherein does it
appear? Resolved, it seems, he was, or his Friends rather (for he says in his
Reply, p. last, He was sure he did it unwillingly) or both were so resolved and
eager to expose me in Print. But what satisfaction shall I now have? Will Mr.
Wells confess his Fault as publicly, and declare himself in an Error? yea,
that he has wronged an innocent Person, and a Stranger? That he has traduced
me in a very shameful manner? That he has acted most unadvisedly, Hand, over
Head, as we say) and very Unchristianly, not seeking out the Truth, as he
ought, and easily might, before he past Sentence, and condemned me openly?
Truly, at the first of my Books coming forth, and the Noise and Speeches of the
Anabaptists about me, threatening grievously, I did expect something in Print
(for what do they not dare to do of this nature, yea and delight in it also?)
but when it had lain by so many Months, I was a little surprised to find it
done; but especially to be managed by a Stranger, whose Name I know not, I ever
heard before, I read it in his Letters; Nay, I find, by their own Confession,
he is a Stranger to those very Men (some at least, by the Confession of one of
them to me) who set him on Work (i. e) him, or any body else could be procured.
If my Neighbors could not write themselves (and yet three of them are
Teachers, and one has been offering at it, scribbling out many Sheets in the
point of Controversy) nor find a Man nearer than London, yet surely he should
have considered better with himself, and not have been so hardy, as to have
written in a Case wherein he knew not one thing or other; not the Person
accused, nor what defense he could make, and how he could justify himself, and
make good his Charge, only being informed by those whose Interest it was to
blast what I had written. When the Apostle Paul had heard of the Disorders in
the Church of Corinth, How does he write to them about it (...) Why thus; When
ye come together in the Church, I hear that there b^ divisions among you; and I
partly believe it: He partly believed what he only heard by report; but Mr.
Wells roundly takes up the matter reported to him by his Friends against me,
and believes every Word which the wise Man brands for Simplicity: The Simple,
says he, believes every Word. Ah! Mr. Wells, had you acted more charitably,
and cautiously, you had not discovered your self so fa(...) nor done me this
wrong; your Folly had not been manifested nor had I suffered so much as this
groundless Suspicion of evil doing, which you prompt the World to, as you have
represented m^* But I hope Mr. Wells will pardon me that I bear so hard upon
him For my Vindication does not a little depend upon it, though yet have clear
Proofs to produce also. It was not only Folly and Injustice in Mr. Wells to do
thus; but it may be a sufficient Argumen^ to the World, that what he has
written against me is of n^ value; for they were my Adversaries who gave him
Instruction^ (surely it was so, and he did not write of himself) and he Prin^
only upon hearsay from such as bestirred themselves to throw o^^ the Charge
was laid against them. But now if Mr. Wells thin^ or pretend that I have done
him wrong in all this, as though he ha^ only written to enquire into the truth,
as he says in his Preface* His great end is to find out the Offenders, and
that this is his great Enquiry, let him know that therein he does abuse his
Readers, and suggest Falsehoods in so saying: For his very Title confutes him;
it is this? A brief Reply, etc. wherein the unjust Charge of Mr. Thomas James
against them (i. e. the Baptists) is removed: N. B. is removed: What does this
imply, but that he has cleared the matter fully? proved his Party innocent;
convincing me of Falsehood in all I have written; making me a Slanderer, a Liar,
and what not? But more fully yet, after the Preface to the Reader, in the Title
again, A Brief Reply, etc. wherein he has falsely charged them, N. B. as will
appear in the following Discourse. I pray in what Page or Line is this
Appearance found? Where are the Proofs? Is there any thing showed, but only
confidently said, and a gainsaying of what I had written? Let impartial Readers
judge if Mr. Wells's Book do not center in this, and all he brings be only a
contradicting the matters I published, and averring that I wrote not a Word of
Truth. If his Title had run after this manner, (and he had kept to it) A
Challenge to Mr. J. to prove what he has Printed against the Anabaptists about
Ashford, it had been tolerable; but to talk of making all appear, is like the
rest of his Piece. Thus he stumbles in the Threshold, and that is very ominous
for him; for he falls worse and worse ever after (beginning with a very Foul
Lie, as I shall show by and by, and ending with a Passage that overthrows all
he writes.) Just so it is with his dealing with the Text of Scripture; a Text
in the very next place, which he ^ets before the main Work (I hope he handles
his Texts to more purpose before his Congregation,) Prove. 18. 17. He that is
first in his own Cause, seems just; but his Neighbor comes and search^th
him. A mighty search! and because my Neighbors gave him ^ome Account, very pat
to the case in hand no doubt: But for the ^earch, if Mr. Wells had come to
Ashford, he might have searched ^ut somewhat, enough I am sure to have stopped
his hand; but ^o search this matter at London was ridiculous. He searched, it
^eems, with his Friend's Eyes, and Ears; and so he finds just as ^uch as they
of the matter, (i. e.) whatever they would have. What, a stranger to the whole
matter, and yet search it out! For ^ame, Mr. Wells write to be believed; I
thought hearing a Re^ort was not searching: At this rate we may search out many
things (...) these times of War, with a great deal of ease, what is done in
^landers, France, Spain, Turkey, and where not? But if you trust Reports, you
may be miserably deceived, though the News be told as confidently as your
Friends could tell you this matter: One cries Victory, and makes Bonfires, and
sings Te Deum; and yet it may be comes off with the loss: Another says nothing
was done; and it may be it was a great Action: I think when we search to know
the truth, we do more than hear what Parties in the Case say, and interested
Persons say of it: Not that I think it is impossible to know the truth by one
Party, and examining Witnesses on one side; but when Life or Credit are at
Stake, it is highly unjust to go this way, to believe all that is said, and
then boldly tell the World in Print, I have searched out the whole matter, and
he is a Slanderer, etc. There is one thing further concerning Mr. Wells's
Carriage, which I observe, and then dismiss this Head (sc.) how unchristianly,
how uncharitably he carried it. Why should he, being a stranger to me, and the
whole matter, believe his Ashford Friends against me altogether, when he saw my
Design in writing that little Piece was good; and that wherein I reflected on
their Carriage, it was done so heartily, as though I were unwilling to say what
I said out of a respect to them? Let the Reader consider it, if I did not write
heartily, and expressed the matter with moderation. These are the Words I began
the Reflection with; It Is beside my purpose to make Reflections upon Persons of
any Opinion or Persuasion in Religion, besides Atheists, who are its avowed
Enemies. The Anabaptists (or Baptists, as they rather choose to call themselves)
are Men to whom I bear no such Grudge, or Envy, as to bring up any evil Report
upon them, as a Calumny or unjust Accusation: God forbid, that while I am
writing for Christianity, I should act so contrary to one of its Principles, as
to do thus: They are Christians, and will, I doubt not, espouse this Cause of
our Lord with my self; and there are some of them my worthy good Friends,
pious, judicious Persons; but this I must publish upon this sad occasion; and I
pray God the Guilty would consider it, etc. If this were not Courteous, Candid,
Charitable, what is? Yea, Mr. Wells does own it sometimes, though he forgets
what he writ at other times; for he calls it Flattery, and a mere Pretense, p.
16, 17. which shows what he could not but think of it, that it was very fair,
only he judges my Heart, and acts uncharitably, rendering me Evil for Good: For
I seriously protest, I wrote this out of good Will, and not fawningly. But
because this is the proper place, I cannot but take notice of his Ignorance
also, in quarrelling, and thinking to fasten a Reproach upon me for pretending
Christian Friendship to the Anabaptists, and stiling them my pious and
judicious Friends, and yet at the same time publishing such matters against
them; this he observes, p. 16, 17. once and again. Now this, I say, is gross
Ignorance in Mr. Wells, or worse, that he could not, or would not distinguish
and see the difference I made between some and others of the Anabaptists,
between the Innocent and Guilty, and those who were my Friends and others. I
said plainly thus, They are Christians, etc. and then I declare of some of them
thus; And there are some of them my worthy good Friends, pious, and judicious
Persons then; and I pray God the guilty would consider it: Now all this he
jumbles together, and makes all the Anabaptists my worthy, pious, and judicious
Friends; and then Wonders that I dealt so by them, as to accuse them thus; and
is not this tragical, says he, to cut the Throat of your Friends Reputation?
But surely Mr. Wells is no Logician, or the meanest ever known, who cannot
distinguish, nor perceive a difference in so plain a Case, not to apprehend
that some has others for its opposite; yea, that some imports a few out of
many in such Sentences as these: But whether he knew it or no, he has happened
upon an unlucky Fallacy in Logic (which is his natural Logic it seems, and I
would not have him proud of it) to compound what should be divided, to huddle
all together, and so to impose a wrong Sense; whereas it is true taken
distinctly and apart as it ^ought: And what is more common than to speak of a
Multitude, and not to mean every individual of them. What will he think of St.
Paul when he affirmed that to be true of the Cretians, which one of their own
Poets had written of them: The Cretians are always Liars, evil Beasts, slow
Bellies ((...). Epimenides.) This Witness is true, says he. What, every Man,
Woman and Child in Crete Liars, beastly, and slothful, Pagans and Christians
too? No sure, but it was vitium gentis, an Epidemical Evil, a Fault they were
too much guilty of: As if I should say, The Patriarchs were guilty of Poligamy;
yet not all therefore, not Isaac, etc. But what would Mr. Wells think at this
rate of that place were it is said, the Disciples had indignation at the
Ointment pour^d on Christ's Head? Would he condemn them all for Judas, of whom
it is written? and calumniate the Holy Text, as Je(...)me tells us some did in
his Days (Nescientes tropum qui vocatur (...), quo and pro uno omnes, and pro
multis unus appellari soleat) not knowing it was a figurative Expression.
However, to satisfy him and his Friends, I will explain my self, and declare
my own Sense, though it be plain enough I called all of them Christians, and
some my Friends, and some guilty; I count the Anabaptists in general
Christians, but some few of them I called my Friends, pious and judicious
Persons; But I will assure him, those whose Practices I have known about
Ashford, and written against, I account none of this sort; and whoever acts in
like manner, as far as I have Knowledge thereof, shall for ever be discharged
by me of that Character, pious and judicious. But it is time to leave Mr. Wells
himself. Come we now to the matters of Fact: And here he urges wonderfully, to
assign the Person or Persons guilty of what I charge the Baptists with: Thus in
the Epistle Dedicatory, in the Letter to me Printed before the Body of the
Reply, and in the Reply it self, at every turn he urges this; and if I should
fail herein he commends it to my Lord Wharton to see that public satisfaction
be given; and to my Church to take a Course with me. But now, what if the Case
do not require all this? what if it be not necessary or convenient? What, must
a Minister tell the Anabaptists, and all the World, what every one in trouble
discovered to him? Must he publish the Names of every one concerned? It may be
an Husband or Wife is concerned, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants,
and the Circumstances are such that it is no ways fit or meet to name or assign
Persons; possibly it may breed Variance and Strife, and promote great Disorders
in Families, and in the Neighborhood: It may be some Nabals are concerned,
some Shimei's, who would trouble their own Houses, and fill the Town with
Raillery. May not a Minister spare Names in such a Case, but he must be cried
down for one that spreads Slanders? But it seems Mr. Wells and his Friends care
not what becomes of any Person, nor consider what is meet and fit, what
mischief they pull down upon others Heads, so they may but salve their own
Credit, as they would persuade themselves: But, I doubt not, the World will
judge this an extravagant Request, to urge the Printing the Names of private
Persons: And indeed I cannot conceive what good it will do those who know not
these Parts, to read the Names of strange Places and Persons, which will sound
as harsh as Greek and Hebrew perchance to Mr. Wells. As for those of their own
Party who did these evil things, I am sensible they have their Evasions to cast
off the Reproach, (and it is likely they lie upon the catch) such an one is
none of them; such an one they own not; though it may be a Teacher, or an old
Anabaptist, Persons certainly dipped, and Baptists, or nothing. But so it is,
many times they shift the matter off thus; and, as the Historian said of some
Enemies, Difficilius est invenies quam vincere. But is not this crying out for
assigning Persons a mere Artifice, to be so impatient of this kind of proof,
and so long a time lapsed since the matter was first published; and since (...)
concerned to give their Testimony are their own Friends? And who will doubt but
that by this time they are taught their Lesson, to speak but sparingly, not the
whole Truth, or so fully as to prejudice their own Cause? But I do but show how
vain it is for Mr. Wells to urge this assigning Persons; they need not
encourage themselves to hope to escape by this Stratagem: Proofs I have to
produce sufficient and abundant, and yet will be sparing of Names, even of the
most Criminal.

First, As for the Case of that poor melancholy Man, R. M. who made that
Tragical Exit. The Case, as far as I am conscerned, was this: One of the same
Name, and of his Kindred, desired me to go and visit him upon the account of
his deplorable Condition; and he importuned me not a little, using this as a
special Argument, That he was continually assaulted by the Anabaptists, who in
this weakness of Body and Mind were like to work their Will upon him. Upon this
I went once (and never more) and my Carriage was as I Printed in the Narrative
of his Condition; and in discoursing with me, he did declare himself in such a
manner, tht I was satisfied that the Opinion of the Anabaptists about
Rebaptization was a great trouble and vexation to him. It is now several Years
since my being with him at that time (about five Years since, his Death was
about four Years and an half, and his Trouble lasted about three quarters of a
Year, as I have learnt from his Sister, a Baptist, who lived all the time with
him;) and so I think no wise Man will expect I should be positive as to the
Words of our Discourse; truly my Memory is not so happy; yea, I am sorry the
matter is so far gone from me; for I am sure he spoke so much as made that
clear to me, which was a Motive to carry me to him. (sc.) that he was troubled
about the Anabaptists Doctrine of Dipping; and that his Infant Baptism was
null; and that he must be rebaptized. Now, what if I could not find out one
Baptist had been with him? Can it be thought when his Sister who kept his House
was one of them, that in all his Trouble none came near him? No, not when he
had followed them formerly, and now in his Trouble returned to hear them again,
as Mr. Wells tells us, p. 15. and his own Sisters owned to me. Surely what I
learned from himself was a thousand Witnesses to me, and what was clear enough
by other Circumstances. But see how it pleases God to put them to shame, and
to condemn them out of their own Mouth. One of their Teachers (one of the three
who was with me upon the Account of my Book, did own to us, that he was with
him the same Day, or the very next, after my being there, and that he
discoursed with him of these matters, and that he urged Believers Baptism to
him (meaning Dipping upon Profession of Faith.) Now supposing no more Evidence
could be produced; yet upon this alone, how shameful was it for Mr. Wells to
publish thus, p. 11. First, We observe, that you were the only Man that
visited, discoursed, and advised this poor Man in his deplorable Estate; and p.
11. Mr. James was the Man chiefly concerned with him in his Hurry and Trouble
of Mind; but to the end he may not be thought remiss, and the better to seem
clear, he finds out some to be mentioned, that, he says, did so much wrong. O
shameful! Was ever any matter turned so foully against another? What, when I was
desired to visit him by one of his Kindred, pitying his Condition; when a
Minister was carried to visit a poor disturbed Man, must he therefore suffer in
his Reputation; and have the Odium of all cast upon him? But, alas! it is too
plain for them, that he was wounded by the Anabaptists; and I found him with an
Arrow shot in, sticking fast, and tormenting him; and to keep him in their
Bonds, one of their Teachers, as himself owned, and is certain, is with him the
same Day (for so the Woman, his Baptist Sister is positive, though he were not)
urging Believers Baptism: whether he were there accidentally or not, or upon
design, I know not; but there he was, and discoursed; and advised him. Yea,
further, at another time, as the Woman confessed to me in presence of a
Gentleman who accompanied me to her House, June 12. there was one F -- another
Teacher among them, who visited him, and had private Discourse with him about
an hour which F --;says another Sister, he was carried to hear preach, and
showed some uneasiness as he went, and, as she judged, she was dissatisfied;
but one of the Neighbors, a Baptist, and his Sister, she found going along
with him; which Neighbor had been at the House, and, she doubts not, brought
him thither; and out of pity to him in his condition she went along with him
also, and heard the same Man. Yet Mr. Wells says, We observe, that you were
the only Man that visited, discoursed, and advised this poor Man in his
deplorable Estate: What will the World think of this? What can they? To begin
his Reply thus, First, We observe: Truly, if you observe at this rate, you may
observe First, Secondly, Thirdly, and infinitely, even as far as you please, or
can invent. But, Mr. Wells, did you observe this at London by your self, or
did your Ashford Friends give you these Instructions? If you did it alone, it
was a wonderful Observation indeed; you had better Eyes than Lynceus, and more
surely than Argus; but if your Friends gave you this Instruction, it was so
much the worse: For one of them, (as another confessed to me) whose Hand was to
the Letter to get a Reply set forth, was one who confessed that he was with the
Man in his Trouble, and discoursed, and advised him: So then here are two of
your Teachers found to be with him; and who will not think but there were
others also of your opinion in the space of about nine Months of his illness?
But, again, I pray, Mr. Wells, how was I conversant with him, as you write, p.
14. when I never spoke to him but that one time in my life? Never but once in
his Company, so as to be able to discourse with him? I had thought, to be
conversant, had implied a Familiarity and frequenting a Persons Company; so
that this is no good English, and that is the best Interpretation of it, or I
know not how to excuse the same from a Falsehood.

But I begin to grow weary of tracing our these Slanders, and Untruths; I will
take notice only of one thing more (about the Case of this R. M.) and dismiss
this Head: And really it is a sad thing, to consider how these Men strive and
struggle, and are restless till they entangle themselves, and Write and Print
at that rate that does ill become Christians, whom I was willing, and desire
yet to own as such. Pray, Reader, now observe what follows in these Words, p.
15. Mr. James bestirs himself to persuade him, that his Infant Baptism was true
Baptism, N. B. and to go to Town to board, and make use of a Physician of his
own way, and to bear him; which was done: But the poor Man grew weary, not
liking the means that was used. And it seems, and as he told his Sister, that
they were in a consult what to do about him (one day) and, unexpected to them,
he overheard them; and one said, he was in love; and another said, he had not
a Dram of true Grace; but he, hearing this, it made an addition to his weak
disturbed Head, N. B. and gets away, and relates the matter to his Sister, and
so waxes worse and worse, till at last he ends his Life. For my part, when I
read and consider this I am amazed; so many Lies in one Story! Such Falsehoods
sent forth so barefaced! If my Neighbors gave these Instructions to their
Brother Wells, they are what I never took them to be; if he Printed it of
himself, it is little better in him. Did I design a large Answer, here is a
large Field for it, and matter enough for one of no great Parts to work upon,
enough to wind and toss, and for ever shame Mr. Wells, and all his Friends who
have acted in this Business: Surely some body owed them an ill turn, and
secretly wrought it this way. But however it were, and though my Neighbors
might deserve most, yet I must keep to Mr. Wells only; and truly he has
discovered himself all along to be an unaccountable Writer: Once before, he
observed that I was the only Man was with R. M. during his trouble of mind;
this he saw, it seems, at London; there he could tell who went in and out, and
discoursed him; and here he saw him at Board at Ashford; which no Creature in
Ashford ever saw, no, not any of his Anabaptist Friends; since Mr. Wells sent
out this strange Relation, we have asked his Friends here, and they are
ignorant of the matter: When I discoursed his Sister, the Baptist, who was his
Housekeeper, she only said, she thinks he was one Night at Ashford at his
Cousins, R. M. (the Person who carried me over to visit him) and her Son who
went with him, will say, he was: But the Family deny it, and all say it was no
such thing, and are certain he never lodged there one Night, he dined indeed
one Day there (as they tell me) and went up into a Chamber, and lay down on a
Bed to refresh him; but never lay one Night in their House. But suppose it,
that he were one Night in Town; What is this to Boarding, and being there a
time, consisting of some Days at least; and getting away from thence, as though
he were under some Confinement in the use of Means for his Recovery? Well, it
seems Mr. Wells is good at Invention, and that is a notable part of an Orator;
but it is just as his natural Logic I observed before: I dare say, no Master
of Rhetoric did ever teach him to invent after this manner: Aristotle, Cicero,
Quintilian, etc* would have been ashamed of it, though they were Heathens: And
though we may sometimes conceal Truth, and this we have Presidents in Scripture
for, yet neither the Light of Nature, nor the written Word, will allow us to
forge after this manner. But who made this Officious Lie I know not, only this
I observe, that because they would Print somewhat, and had little to go upon
(nothing in truth) therefore they have set up all this Sail, and run themselves
a ground. Mr. James bestirs himself, says he; strange, that one Visit, and but
a very short one, should be a bestirring a Man's self, when it was but a few
Miles off, and the Man lay so long in trouble, that I might have been there
many scores of times for one, or as often as some of my Adversaries take occasion
to talk with those they hope to bring over to their Opinion. But what did I
persuade him him to? Why, to go to Town to board: Just as much as to go to
London (or elsewhere) to be dipped by Mr. Wells; of whose Name, at that time, I
know not that I had ever heard: And, how should any know that I persuaded him
to such a thing as this? My Friend with me, who heard all our Discourse, is a
perfect Stranger to it; and his Sister declares, she heard nothing of all we
said. But now, least I do them wrong, and give not the true sense and meaning
of the Words; and to do Mr. Wells wrong, (though indeed it would prove well for
him if he had only written false English, and mistook in the Sense) I appeal to
all Englishmen, and desire every Reader to say, if this be not the true meaning
of the Words, That I persuaded the Man (R. M) to go to Town to Board, and make
use of a Physician of my own way, which was done (i. e. the Man took my
Counsel, and came to Ashford to board) and while he was here, after sometime
(longer or shorter it matters not, so it be allowed to be but some Days, for so
he writes, of one Day) while they were consulting together (surely he means the
Physician and my self; for he mentioned no other before, and his Sense carries
it this way) he heard them say thus and thus; and so he gets away. Now if I
have given his Sense right, and understand his English; which surely is even
so, if Mr. Wells write intelligibly, then here is a wild Romance, and a Tale
told, and a foul pack of Lies, and all to make me ridiculous. But I would fain
know, who of all Ashford Town can say, that ever R. M. was here at Board,
during his Melancholy? What Anabaptist can stand forth, and help Mr. Wells, or
his Friends, out of this Mire? In whose House did he board or lodge? As for my
own part, I protest I do not know, nor can I call to mind that ever I saw that
poor Man but once at his own House, and once or twice while I was in the
Pulpit: But that the Doctor and my self should ever discourse of him thus, and
he near enough to over-hear us, is too like some other Passages in the Reply.
Yea, if they would turn it upon his Cousin R. M. and his Wife, that they said
so, and talked so foolishly (as I find they harp upon it) yet that will not
serve their turn; for they not only deny it, but Mr. Wells has written and
Printed it (as I think I have showed) quite otherwise. Well; upon this
wonderful Relation, he gravely proceeds: Now if this be so, then all this stir
to bespatter the Baptists, is to clear your self: But you are the more
entangled, and are taken in the Snare you laid; and I could wish there had been
no occasion to discover it. Discover it! A wonderful discovery indeed. I am
persuaded when this Vindication comes forth, Mr. Wells will wish indeed, with
all his Heart, there had not one been Word written by him, and that his Friends
had been tongue-tied when they told him such a Story. Are these the Bonds and
Fetters Mr. Wells and his Friends have put upon me? And do they think to bring
me forth and expose me thus to make them Sport? Alas! I can as easily break
them as Sampson did his Withs and Cords; and I am certain they themselves have
pulled down an House upon their Heads. For shame let Mr. Wells write a
Retractation, though it be but for the sake of this single Story; and seeing it
is resolved, that he or some other shall answer again, write what I will, as
one of them told me (it seems they are greatly in love with Printing, and are
proud of appearing such able Persons) by all means let them clear this foul
matter, but let them take care least their stirring too far make it worse.

But it is high time to come to other things; and that, in the last place, to
answer the Accusations brought against me, as though I had slandered the
Baptists, in representing them as Persons wh^ are industrious to make
Proselytes, and in urging Dipping, so a^ to make it a Salve for every Sore.
It Is needless to set down the Reply made to this Charge; and I am really afraid
I shall tire m^ Reader in leading him up and down after Mr. Wells's defense
(...) his Friends and Party: Though for brevity I repeat not his Word^ yet I
will do him no wrong (if I should it would appear, and not be to my advantage;)
but I propound the Case plainly, and answer it home. These are the things then
he quarrels with me for, having reflected on the Anabaptists as industrious to
make Proselytes; and urging Dipping, as though all Religion did consist in
going down into the Water; and, in short, he challenges me to assign the
guilty, or else, he says, p. 21. It must be concluded, you cannot? and then in
what a shameful Case will you appear? Now, as to my assigning the Criminals, I
have already said a little in answer thereto; it is not always fit and meet,
nor is it material: Cui bono? To what good would it be? I have named some to
their Teachers, and instead of taking a course with them, they thought to take
a course with me, and promised one Mr. Wells to print against me for justifying
my Charge, and to tell the World confidently all was a Slander. What should I
name any Persons to the World, when they have been named publicly enough, and
they take no notice, (not at least to be openly known of) but shut their Eyes,
and stop their Ears, and run upon me, and cry out, That I will give no Proofs
or Satisfaction? I appeal to those few present at that time, when they attended
me (to use Mr. Well's own Words, (p. 9.) after the publishing my Book, I
appeal, I say, to the Consciences of their Three Teachers, whether I did not
name several guilty of the things I laid to their Charge. But to clear all at
once, and to satisfy their longing desires (so far as is any ways meet and
^it) of assigning Persons, both those who were troubled and almost distracted
by the Anabaptists urging it upon them to be Dipped, as ever they hoped to go
to Heaven, and be saved; and those who did trouble them, laying this mighty
stress upon Dipping. I say, to put an end to all, that I may clear my self, and
show how able I am every way to vindicate my self from the foul Slanders cast
on me, and to make my Charge good to a tittle; let Mr. Wells know that I have
several Depositions of Persons by me, which fully prove the matter in Hand,
subscribed freely, and which will be readi^y attested, and solemnly, upon just
occasion. Behold one in Form, ^s I have it by me with so me others.

I, N. N. do own and testify, That N. N. has diverse times, and to my great
Vexation and disquietude, urged me to be Dipped; setting forth the absolute
necessity thereof to Salvation; inveighing against those who practiced Infant
Baptism, as Antichristian, and urging me to be Dipped, as ever I expected to
enter into the Kingdom of God.

Witness my Hand,

N. N.

But, alas! should I go about to lay open the Practices of the Anabaptists
(about us) and reveal what many poor weak Christians have told me, with great
bitterness of Spirit, how burdensome their very Life was to them by reason of
their importunate Solicitations to bring them to be dipped, and their
Desperate Speeches striking an Horror into their Minds, vexing their Souls
continually, it would, I doubt, sound very strange to many Readers: But so it
is in truth; and yet, forsooth, these Persons would fain be counted innocent,
and cry out of the wrong I have done them. One instance I cannot but produce,
and that a little largely, it being so material; and I am glad (as the Case is)
to take the opportunity to let the World know it, and judge thereof. And
because Mr. Wells has sprinkled here and there a little of the point of
Controversy, and his Ashford Friends make advantage of his Reply (such as it
is) to scatter their Books among us (and surely the like was never known: for
to this Book of his they have tacked another (stitched them together) yea, and
more than so, at the end of his Reply there are these few Lines Printed to
couple them together; And, as to the point of Baptism, we refer that to the
following Treatise, formerly written by another Hand, entitled, The Reason
why, etc. Good Mr. Wells, why did you not send me a perfect Copy? But I suppose
you thought I should hardly be caught with your Chaff, and therefore a few
Books were provided for my self, and such as could better judge what was
written; Truly this was civilly done, not to trouble me with any more Books
than your own; and now it seems I have nothing to do to answer any thing but
your Reply; this is a kindness I acknowledge (I say) because Mr. Wells has
scattered up and down somewhat of Controversy, I think it convenient to give a
touch or two to the same, to prevent Mistakes and Error, and to send forth an
Antidote for others, as well as a Vindication for my self. The instance by
which I take occasion to write this, was this: A Woman aged near Forty Years
came to me to be baptized: Upon instructing her in the Principles of Christian
Religion, and her answering to such Questions about the same, as seemed to me
necessary, (first having consulted the Practice of other Churches in like
Cases) and professing her Faith and Repentance, I baptized her on a Lord's Day
in the Evening before the Communicants: Now, quickly upon her being so
baptized, the matter being noised abroad, she was set upon by the Anabaptists,
even as I have represented the too common Practice of some of them; and one of
them in their Communion (which they cannot disown) did exceedingly perplex this
poor Woman with Questions and Cavillings, asking her what Faith she had in what
was done, and speaking against it as no Baptism, seeing she was not dipped:
This really disturbed her, so that she lamented it to me; not that she was
unsettled, or believed them, but because they followed her with such Discourses,
giving her no rest: Yea, at the very time of writing this (which is now about
two Years since her being so baptized) the Design is carried on very busily to
proselite her: She declares to me, how she is continually disquieted by that
Party; she now tells it me with Tears, that she is wearied by them, and has
desired them to let her rest, being well satisfied in her Baptism. But that
which is yet more considerable, is this: At the time when those three Teachers
were with me about about my Book, among others whom they pressed me to name,
and instance in, I named this Woman, and represented the Evil of this Practice,
in going about thus to disquiet a poor weak Woman, who was baptized so
authentickly (as one would think all Christians should allow) being an adult
Person, having professed her Faith and Repentance before the Administration of
the Sacrament. Hereupon one of them had the confidence to tell me, it was
indeed no Baptism. Monstrous Doctrine! What will become of Christians at this
rate? and what hope can Millions have, to whom it has been applied in any
other way than that of the Baptists? What, can a Mode destroy the Essence of
the Ordinance? and shall the Application of Water in a less quantity render it
altogether ineffectual, and destroy its end and efficacy? When the Name of the
true God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is put upon the Person; and the true
Element of Water is used; and the principal end of its application signified,
which is washing the Soul with Christ's Blood, and purifying it by the blessed
Spirit; and all is done by a Minister ordained to that Office: Is not this
Baptism? O, but she was not dipped, and that is Baptism, and that only. Poor,
ignorant, confident Men, thus to cavil! The Word (...), chosen by Christ, and
the Holy Ghost, does signify to wash, as well as to dip; it signifies a
washing with Water, not only a total immersion, but a partial; not only a
Dipping, but other applications of Water to wash: Yea, it is certain, that some
of those diverse Washings under the Law, spoken of by the Apostle, Heb. 9. 10.
(which he calls (...).) were not total immersions, but partial, of one part
of the Body, and another; and even Sprinklings, as at the Consecration of the
Levites, Numb. 8. 5, 6, 7. and at the cleansing o^ a Leprous Person, Levit. 14.
7. From the Apostle I will lear^ the meaning of this Word, rather than from any
Baptist. But Mr. Wells, with his Learning would teach us thus, p. 12. You
cannot be ignorant but that Baptiso is to dip, and is allowed, and approved to
be so by the Lexicons, Dictionaries, and all approved Authors that are
Orthodox; ('It Is well he did not say only to Dip for then I know what he had
said,) and it is rare to find a Schola^ so weak as not for to allow it. Truly
it is rare to find a Baptist though he cannot read one Word of Greek, or
understand Latin, and yet not to talk and write of the Sense of (...) as though
they had consulted Lexicons, Dictionaries, and wha^ not? But is not this a fine
begging of the Question? Wh^ ever denied Dipping to be Baptizing? But Mr.
Wells's Friend^ at Ashford might be ashamed to say, that no other application
o^ Water is Baptizing; and that this Woman was not Baptized For, I pray, what
learned Man ever rendered the Word (...) only to Dip, exclusively to all other
significations? I have no^ searched (as before-times) Lexicons and
Dictionaries, and fin^ the Word rendered indeed to Dip, but also to Wash, yea,
an^ to Sprinkle; there comes in an Item, lavo, abluo: And surely (...) is a
significant Word, as well as Imprimis: Every Tradesman knows this. Indeed at
the rate some Baptists writ and report the Words of the Learned, they would
persuade silly People all the learned Men were almost Anabaptists; yea, and
((...)) Self-condemned, being as they are in Opinion, though of a contrary
Practice. They make some speak a few Words, and say (...) is to Dip, to plunge
in Water; but then, as it were, stop their Mouths, and cry hold; whereas good
Men, might they go on, they would add, to Wash, to pour on Water, to Sprinkle:
And their Quotations are much of this kind, very deceitful, per saltum, and
keeping back a material part, and so making them to speak very favorably for
them; the very thing we are upon proves this, Mr. Wells says, Baptiso is to
Dip, as Lexicons, etc. say, as though that were all, and it is needless to make
a Digression to show it by their Quotations of Zanchy, Piscater, Calvin, Poole,
etc. But I would fain know, who can prove our Lord Jesus Christ himself was
Dipped, or Plunged in his Baptism; or that any of those Baptized ones spoken of
in the New Testament, were so Dipped or Plunged? Not a Word that ever I yet
read did prove, I say, soundly prove it: Probability is no proof of this
Degree; Opinion is not Faith. An immersion there might be, and yet not a total
one; or, it may be some other application, as by pouring on of Water. That
Baptism was often performed of old by Dipping, I gainsay not; but that there were
other ways, is certain also. Pray let Mr. Wells construe these Words. Fundere
aquam, infundere, and sometimes Javare, abluere, found oftentimes in the
Writings of the Ancients; yea, and sometimes Aspergere, for Baptizing? Also let
him unriddle, how they Baptized some in Prisons, and in their Beds, sick of
Feavours, in Sweats, etc. as Augustine tells us at large of a Friend of his? If
this were not done by some other way than by Dipping the whole Body, let Mr.
Wells declare how that could be. But shall we call in question at this day the
Baptism of all those in former Ages who were not Dipped? and strike so many
Saints and Martyrs out of the Roll of the Baptized, who are now in Heaven? An
horrible boldness to speak at this rate! But let them take heed; for how, as I
said, can they prove our Lord himself was so Dipped? I am sure one ancient
Writer was of another mind, (and surely he was not alone) even Aurelius
Prudentius, who sings thus of it (being a famous Christian Poet flourishing
about thirteen hundred Years since) Perfundit fluvio pastus Baptista locustis.
i. e. John the Baptist poured some of the Water of the River on him; our
Baptist would teach him to say, Immergit fluvio, etc. but it seems he knew
better, or at least thought otherwise: And Bernard (a later Writer by far, and
yet not very late neither, for he lived about five hundred Years ago; and has
the Honor, if I mistake not, to be called by some, the last of the Fathers)
has this notable Expression, Infundit aquam capiti creatoris
creatura-nobilior, and Dei verticem mortalis dextra contrectat and contingit;
i. e. John the Baptist, that noble Creature, poured Water on the Head of the
Creator, and the Right Hand of a Man touched and handled the Head of God. I do
not produce these Testimonies, as though I would maintain that our Lord Jesus
was not Dipped but only to show the boldness of those Persons, who cavil at the
Baptism of all such as are not plunged in Water, and do, by crying up Dipped or
Damned, trouble the weak, and drive them into a dangerous Melancholy. Yea, what
if the Eunuch went down into the Water, Acts 8. 38. or Christ came up out of
the Water, Matthew. 3. 16, Mark. 1. 10. (though by the way (...) is only, he came
up from the Water, not out of it) What does this prove? Dipping a total
immersion? Surely they that say this may say any thing. But now we are speaking
of Baptism, I cannot but take notice of Mr. Wells's Confidence, to call Infant
Baptism a Scriptureless Notion, p. 14. and p. 13, 14. he says, Sprinkling of
Infants is a new Doctrine, a Scriptueless thing, that is not to be found from
the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelations: What, a new Doctrine?
Let the famous Calvin, be heard, whom I choose to quote, because I have see^ him
quoted in their Books as one that wrote for their Opinion It Is in that Chapter,
which he calls his Appendix to the form of Baptism, written on purpose against
the Anabaptists, as the Title and the first Words declare: The Title this,
Poedobaptismum cu^ Christi institutione, and signi natura optime congruere (i.
e.) Infan^ Baptism's agreement with Christ's Institution, and the nature of the
Sign. The first Words are these, Quoniam autem hoc s^culo phrenetici quidum
Spiritus ob Poedobaptismum graves excitarunt i^ Ecclesia turbas, etc. (i. e.)
Whereas in this Age some phrensical (or enthusiastical) Persons have raised
great stirs in the Church about Infant Baptism, and do not cease at this day to
cause the same Tumults, I cannot but subjoin this Appendix to restrain their
Fury. Now the Passage I would quote out of this notable Chapter, is this: Quod
autem apud simplicem vulgum disseminaret, longam annorum seriem post Christi
resurrectionem praeteriisse, quibus incognitus erat Poedobaptismus; in eo
Foedissime Mentiuntur: Siquidem nullus est scriptor tam vetustus, qui non ejus
originem ad Apostolorum seculum pro certo referat (i. e.) Whereas they talk up
and down among the silly people, that it was many Ages after Christ's
Resurrection before Infant Baptism was known, in that they tell a most foul
Lie; forasmuch as there is no Writer so ancient, who does not for certain refer
the Original thereof to the Apostles Age. But why does Mr. Wells tell us of
Genesis, and the Old Testament? Who thinks Baptism was the Sacrament then in
use? But verily he has laid himself open by this unwary Expression: For I can
tell him of a multitude of Children Baptized within that time (and that by
Sprinkling also, through the dropping of the Cloud and the dashing of the
Waters, as many Learned doubt not) and prove it out of Holy Scripture. Let him
read 1 Cor. 10. 2. and see if the Apostle do not say, That all the Congregation
of Israel which passed through the Red Sea, were baptized unto Moses in the
Cloud, and in the Sea; the word is (...); which I leave to Mr. Wells to
interpret. Were there not many Children, thousands of them, when the Men alone
were above six hundred thousand? Children of all Ages undoubtedly? Though Paul
calls them all Fathers in the first Verse, yet I suppose that must be taken in
this Sense, that as the Children came to Age, they also were all Fathers in
Israel, their Forefathers: Yea, and this was typical in some Sense of our
Sacrament of Baptism, as he shows in the next Verses, that their drinking of
the Water of the Rock, was of the Lord's Supper: But why is Mr. Wells so
over-confident? It is a dangerous case, sure, to declare against Infant Baptism
at this ^ate, as a new Doctrine, when Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Origin, and those Ancients who lived in the very next Age to the Apostles,
speak plainly of it, as a Practice in their Days, and write of it as no other
than Apostolical: Or why is he so confident to call it a Scriptureless thing;
when several Households are said (...) Scripture to be Baptized; and all the
strength of the Anabaptists can never make it clear there were no Children in
them? But surely if Families might be without them, yet there must be Children
in Nations, and they were to be made Disciples and Baptized by Christ's
Commission to his Gospel Ministry: But we do not lay our stress on these
things, and build only on Probabilities. No, but we are sure, that Infants are
the Subjects of Baptism, because they were of old of Circumcision; the Church
of the Old and the New Testament being one, only the Seals of the Covenant
altered; washing being a more gentle way of initiating, than cutting of the
Flesh: If we had not this Privilege under the Gospel to have our Children
visibly entered and taken into God's Church, the Jews were really in a far
better State than we, unless we will despise God's Sacraments and Ordinances,
and care not whither our Children partake of them, or go without them: Yea,
it is certain, we are concerned in God's Covenant, which he made with Abraham
and his Seed, as the Holy Ghost witnesses in diverse places, and have the same
Spiritual Privileges: Nisi forte arbitramur, Christum suo adventu Patris
gratiam imminuisse aut decurtasse, quod ex ecrabili blasphemia non vacat; as
says Calvin in the former place; (i. e.) unless we think that Christ by his
coming cut short his Father's Love and Grace, which thought cannot be excused
from Blasphemy it self. But where is the Repeal of that Privilege? Where is it
said, I did indeed receive their Children, but as for yours I will not be so
gracious to them? Alas! Christ declares quite the contrary: He showed his Love
to little Children both by Words and Actions: And that good Shepherd who marked
his Lambs of old as well as his Sheep, would have them now washed alike in the
Laver of Regeneration. But I must remember I write a Vindication, and it is not
my work to meddle with the Questions in debate between us; only I have touched
at these things, being led to them by Mr. Wells, and to show the Vanity and
strange Confidence of these Men in these matters; it being that whereby they
take the unwary and undiscerning Souls.

But I grow weary of writing; and indeed this is the great Mischief Mr. Wells
has done me; he has created me some Trouble, and many Thoughts, whereas my
Hands are full enough of Work, the Work of my Ministry; not being so happy as
many of them, to mind a Flock, and a Family, and a Trade also, and yet find
time for Disputing, Printing, and what not, upon every little pretense? Were it
not that I were afraid least I should betray the Truth, and the Souls of some
poor People, who, it may be, expect this, as well as stand in need of it, I
could be very well content to be silent; but forasmuch as I am set for a
defense of the Gospel, I cannot let such matters pass without taking some
pains, in a case where so many round me are so deeply concerned: Not so much
that I need to fear my self as others; I think nothing has befallen me, but
what has happened to other Ministers of the Gospel far above me. I did but
touch them, and they have kicked against me, and made a sad noise. But, thanks
be to God, they have prevailed but little hitherto, in those endeavors they
have used to make Proselytes; of which I had reason to complain, and did
seriously warn them. In six Years I have lost but one of my Flock, and that a
young Man, who was but a little while under my Care, and so suddenly gone, that
I was scarce aware of it before his Departure: It was but once I had
opportunity to speak to him before his being Dipped, and then he utterly
refused my Offer to Discourse with those Anabaptists in his presence for his
sake, who had perverted him; nay, nor would he be brought to read a little
Piece I would have put into his Hands, but rashly he would be Dipped, and
renounce his first Baptism: And who could have stopped so resolute a Person?
Misguided Zeal did strangely transport him, and since his Dipping he has done
me some wrong by misrepresenting some things I had said of Baptism; but I
forgive him. Surely Mr. Wells has lost his Wit (and that is pity indeed, he
shows so little all along) in that Expression, p. 17. Alas! it is to be
supposed you have lost some of your Disciples (which) makes you so peevish,
pettish, froward, and unkind to your Friends. No, Mr. Wells, not some, but one;
and my place is not thinn'd, but much otherwise; yea, rather than fail, your
Friends (it seems) have a strong desire of doing me that Honor to be my
Hearers: One of them who lived and dyed of your Communion, a zealous Person in
your way, has often spoke to me and others of being my Hearer most gladly, but
refrained lest it should give Offense: And another, who it seems (as one of
your Teachers told me) had been inclined to your Opinion many Years, yet having
been my Hearer for some time, after her being Dipped lamented it with Tears,
that she must leave such Preaching. Truly in this I am become a Fool, in
glorying, but ye have compelled me.

One thing more, and I conclude: Whereas Mr. Wells makes a Challenge to dispute
with me, in his Reply, especially in his private Letter, I am afraid it would
be but a spending time idly, to argue with that Man, who knows not how to put
the Questions fairly he would dispute upon: His second Offer is this, Secondly,
We are ready to try the Cause, whether Dipping or Sprinkling be most ancient?
But what, I pray, would this come to? Who speaks against the Antiquity of
Dipping? But was it a total immersion, a Dipping the whole Person, certainly,
infallibly, without Guesses, Conjectures, and Probabilities? Yea, but what if
so? If Christ give his Churches liberty to Baptize by pouring on Water, or
other Application (as the Word will bear, as Mr. Wells may see in Lexicons, if
he can read and understand them) then this Question is merely trifling. Dipping
there might be in Christ's time, yea, and that the best way of Baptizing, but
yet not the only necessary way; not absolutely so; if in case of Necessity and
Mercy Men might break the Sabbath, (...)
and be blameless; or on the same Account they might eat the Passover on
another Month and Day then God instituted it; surely then, in case Dipping were
used of old, yet it is not of that absolute necessity as our Baptists pretend,
but in Case of Weakness, etc. may be dispensed with; and where we have our
Liberty, why should we not make use of it? But then his fourth Assertion is
more frivolous: Fourthly, We are ready to prove, That Dipping is Baptizing, and
that it is according to Christ's Institution. This indeed will require no great
proof, and Mr. Wells may manage it, no doubt; but the Question is, whether a
total immersion, Dipping all the Body, be the only Baptism of Christ, and
nothing less, nothing else; whither it be exclusive of any other Application of
Water; and this we deny; let who can prove it. Only the third Question is of
any Moment, Thirdly, Whether the Sprinkling of Infants be the Baptism of
Christ? this he roundly denies; and this comprehends both the Subject and
manner of Application of the Water; so that it is all in one, and must be
divided to be rightly handled. But I think it will not be worth while to
dispute with Mr. Wells, of whom I do not know, nor does he make it appear, that
he has the least Learning that might be a means to keep him in Order, and
repress Clamorousness and Confidence. But if Mr. Wells have so much leisure,
and his Zeal be so great as to bring him to Ashford, and my Circumstances
fairly permit it, I will not say but I may meet him upon this Score; I do not
think to hide my Head, but to give him an Answer: But still I must profess, I
am yet afraid of this, and cannot but persuade my self, that if it should come
to a Trial, Mr. Wells would argue much after the same manner he writes (i. e.)
poorly, and foully; not handsomely nor honestly, being over-confident of what he
has no ground for; and so he would create abundance of trouble to me, and
perplex the matter he takes in hand.

Upon the whole, I do forgive Mr. Wells the wrong he has done me, only
desiring him, not to act so rashly for the future, judging in a Cause, and
condemning a Person he is wholly a stranger to. As for my Neighbors, who
stirred him up, and were so eager for some body to Print against me, and gave
such false Witness, I freely forgive them also; only desiring them to mind
their own Business and to be quiet; above all, to beware how they be concerned
in Printing, least they prejudice their own Cause, and bring Shame and Disgrace
upon themselves and their Brethren also.

POSTSCRIPT.
COnsidering whom I have to deal with, and for whose sake, in a special manner,
I do write, in all likelihood I have been so short, that I have been too
obscure. It may be some through ignorance may think Mr. Wells's Reply is not
fully answered; and others through a design may pretend and boast the same,
asserting, That many considerable Passages in his Book are passed over in a
deep silence; And this they may falsely interpret, as though I purposely let
them alone, not being willing to take notice of them, because not able to
answer them: Therefore, to prevent and remedy all this, take an Answer, but
very short, to those places hitherto omitted in the former Vindication (which I
was willing to make one continued Discourse) an Answer just enough to serve the
turn; and in this I will follow my Opponent, and answer orderly.

In the Epistle to the Reader (near the end) there is a very Sarcastical
Passage, reflecting upon the Presbyterians in general: But though it be hard,
yet being nothing to our purpose, only a piece of Raillery, which it would be
easy, but unchristian, to retaliate, let it pass; only I am sorry that Mr.
Wells, who (as it seems by his private Letter to me) is an old Man, and who in
his Reply shows a great desire of Moderation, should make such a Blot in the
beginning.

In the beginning of the Letter to me. Worthy Sir, Whatever your Ends and Aims
were in setting forth those Tragical instances in your Book, we cannot but take
notice, that some part of your matter was to ridicule, and represent the
Anabaptists to the World, as a very weak insipid People, and yet crafty and
industrious to catch Men in despair, to make a Party.

As for my Ends and Aims, in setting forth that Book, they were good, even such
as I expressed, to bear my Testimony against the Atheism of this Age, and to
employ some part of the Talent God had given me that way. What need you say,
Whatever they were, when I declared they were such as these? But my design was
far from ridiculing the Anabaptists in such a manner as Mr. Wells sets it
forth: It was indeed to warn and advise them; and who cannot see how it came
in? Who will think, or suspect I wrote that Piece to reproach the Anabaptists?
No, it was far from my Heart and Thoughts; but in writing, this came in, and it
seemed to me not amiss to make use of it, hoping it might do good, and might be
serviceable to good ends, not to Cavillings, and Contradictions as it proves:
But the Success I leave to God.

It Is very hard and unkind to bespatter us all with the miscarriage of a
Person, or Persons (if any such be.)

How little need there is of this Reflection may appear by what I have written
in my Vindication. Surely none will think me so weak (or malicious, which Yet I
am sorry Mr. Wells ever and anon suggests) as to charge this Evil upon every
individual Baptist in England, or the whole World, who are far enough out of my
knowledge: My Words import no such thing, as I have cleared them, and showed it
was his Ignorance so to take them. But why that Parenthesis (if any fuch be?)
Verily I had not written so, if I had not known it, or could not have proved
it: But if Mr. Wells would not believe me, it was uncivilly done in him to go
about to persuade the World to do the like.

We desire you to assign the guilty, that we may clear our selves of that foul
Scandal, or else we prefume all is a Fiction of your own Brain, and with a
malicious design to bespatter and abuse us.

For assigning the guilty I have already answered at large, and done enough
toward that (I doubt not) to clear my self, that it was no Fiction of mine,
much less a malicious design: But is not this very? unchristian in Mr. Wells to
surmize thus, and suggest such foul things as these ever and anon? even such as
one would not suspect of any who are not very obnoxious upon some evil account
or other? What, to forge such matters as these? To lay a malicious design to
abuse a Party? This is sad indeed: I am sorry Mr. Wells could harbor such
thoughts of me, and Print them too; but the best of it is, he had no reason,
unless he were confident that all his Friends and Society, were pure and
infallible.

Mr. James was the Man chiefly concerned with him (i. e. R. M.) in his hurry
and trouble of mind; but to the end he may not be thought remiss, and the
better to seem clear, he finds out some to be mentioned that he says did so
much wrong. And to the same purpose: Upon your ill Success you raise a clamor
upon others to clear you; and having dug a Pit for them, fall in your self,
and must be exposed to open shame and reproach.

The former Answer may serve very well for this. For it is all of one piece;
still unchristian, uncharitable, surmising and judging my Heart, and
mis-judging. Truly this is a very false and wicked Aspersion; and it is strange
to me that a Man should dare to hint such a thing as this, which surely he
could not expect that any Reader (but deeply prejudiced) should believe, and
not rather abhor his Suggestion. I pray what was there that I should seek
occasion to clear my self, or find out some to take off any reproach might fall
upon me? I was desired by a Kinsman of R. M. to visit him, and to obviate (what
I could) the designs of some Anabaptists; What hurt, I pray, in my consenting
and going thereupon? Or what need I to fear any shame if he did not hearken to
my Advice and comply therewith (Yea, how knows Mr. Wells but he did?) But I was
so far from looking after this, that after that one Visit I never spoke more to
him. How vainly and wickedly then does Mr. Wells suggest such Slanders? Indeed
he takes a liberty to write almost any thing in this matter.

Secondly, You do say, they presently sat in with him; and told him his way to
have Peace and Comfort was to be Dipped: Now this Mr. James does particularly
charge upon them, and therefore (...) must hear or see this done, or else he
has published he knows no^ what.

No Man, I think, will understand me that I said they told him in totidem
verbis, but in sensu, that they persuaded him to this (...) a way to peace and
comfort. Now this I did hear, though no^ spoken to him, yet by a Kinsman of
his, who, as I said, used (...) as a special Argument to induce me to visit
him; yea, and (...) heard so much from his own Mouth that satisfied me, that it
was even so: and I have proved it (a posteriori) in the former Vindication,
that there were some who did act thus, advising him about Dipping as the way to
Peace (for surely they did it not to trouble him, as I told K. L. when he owned
his discoursing with him, and advising him upon that Head.)

But that Dipping should be a new Doctrine in your esteem, seems strange to us,
or that any that pretends to be a Minister of the Gospel (and especially a
Scholar) should so affirm.

The Dipping those already Baptized (or if you will, such as were Baptized in
Infancy) is indeed a new Doctrine, and that is the Case before us. Which of the
Ancients did ever do this? Who ever pleaded for it till of yesterday? Of very
late Years? Let this be showed by any of the Baptists. Though Dipping be a
Baptizing, yet Dipping those already Baptized (though but in Infancy, or by
pouring on of Water) is a new Doctrine. Where was this practiced in Primitive
times? In what Volume do we read it? Indeed one or two (and I never saw more
quoted) were against Baptizing in Infancy (but for other Reasons than our
Baptists) some even deferring it to a Deathbed; but not one that I have met
with did declare, that if a Child were Baptized it was nothing, and the Person
must be rebatized, when adult professing Faith and Repentance.

Its very probable Mr. James might very much puzzle his weak disturbed Head, if
he pressed him to believe his new Doctrine of Sprinkling Infants, or that his
Infant Baptism would yield him any spiritual Profit or Comfort.

It was not my Work to press him thus, only I told him, it was no time now to
think of new Baptism, and being Dipped: I applied other Remedies than Mr. Wells
suggests; but I thought it proper (as the Case stood) to show him that it was
no ways necessary to have his Thoughts working at this time about Dipping, but
to rest where he was as to that point, and to call upon God, and resist the
Devil, etc.

But was this solid and suitable to his Malady, to instruct him, and make him
believe his Infant Baptism was comfortable and profitable to him?

I pray how does Mr. Wells know that I did thus? What trifling is it to Write
and Print at this rate? Is this a Reply? To whom, or to what? If he had matter
enough to write, surely he would have spared such Passages. Just before he
said, if he pressed him, and in the next Page, if he alleged this; but here he
takes it for granted, that I took this Course, and then says, But was this
solid, etc. Thus Mr. Wells is of and on, and knows not what to write: But then
he goes on boldly on this Presumption, adding within a few Lines,

And thus he was hurried in his Mind, and suffered (it is probable) not a
little by that blind Zeal of yours, or Scriptureless Notion.

It is probable I hope to none but Mr. Wells: And who but he would look upon
what I did as acted with blind Zeal, when I did not run before I was sent; nor
sought occasion, but was invited, and importuried, and then how could I do less
out of respect to my Office, as a Minister of Jesus Christ? I went not with a
design to make a Proselyte (as Mr. Wells hints, p. 10. saying, You could not
prosclyte him) yet if Mr. Wells's Friends had not been with him presently after
me, it is probable my Advice might have done more good; but now it is in vain to
guess at it (...) for if I did him any good; it seems they quickly marred it.

If that Salve of Sprinkling in his Infancy were applied to him for his
Spiritual Sore, it might very well distract him.

What if it were not applied? then here is just nothing said, a Reply to no
purpose. But what a dreadful consequence does Mr. Wells draw from thence
(supposing it were so) then it might very well distract him: A dreadful
Reflection indeed a terrible Charge against Infant Baptism. For my part, I
reflected only upon the unadvised Carriage of some Baptists, and their rash
Zeal to promote their Opinion, and to make Proselytes; their indirect and evil
Practices; their bold and bitter Speeches; but I should have been ashamed to
have branded their Doctrine thus Where Mr. Wells's Moderation is I know not; it
does not appear in his Reply. But I hope he does not mean a perfect
Distraction, but only a little hurry of mind, and that his next Words are
exegetical, and lessen the Sense, as it follows, and he n^ suffer a little by
such inconsiderate and blind Zeal: Let it b^ so taken, even in the best Sense;
for the other is very foul an^ gross.

And that the World may be sure to know who you mean, you repeat the name
Anabaptists, as you falsely put upon them, and say, wh^ they rather chose to
call themselves Baptists.

Good Mr. Wells, how did you read this? Methinks you read as badly as you writ:
How could you say I repeated the Name Anabaptists? What, did you mistake
Atheists in the Lines before for Anabaptists? For I never repeated this Word:
Read Anabaptist twice if you can; and surely Anabaptist and Baptist are not one
and the same Name; for you write your self a Baptist, yet say I falsely put the
Name Anabaptist upon you. But why falsely put upon you? It Is the proper Name of
those of your Opinion, though it may be you like it not; and if we call you
Baptists it is a Favor, which Favor I was willing to show you (I mean those
of your Opinion) but you acknowledge it not; but are angry; yea, if we call you
not Anabaptists, we do in a sort disown our own Baptism and Principles about
that point: For we say (and doubt not we are able to prove it) that Infants are
truly Baptized, as well as the Adult: But you Baptize such as were so Baptized
in Infancy, and therefore are Anabaptists, and the Name truly agrees to you,
which signifies Rebaptizers. For my part I am not for long and hard Names
(Sesquipedalia verba) or else I had used that Name of Ca^apaedobaptists; but I
judged the other both proper, and best known; and I do not see why it should be
a matter of Offense to you to use it; I am sure it is of no great Moment;
however I used these two promiscuously (Anabaptist and Baptist) not designing
to reproach you by the Name (no nor any otherwise seeking occasision so to do,
as you have too often suggested) but only to write most properly; which is
according to common speech, and as may be best understood.

FINIS.
Reader,
I Would desire thee to be so Candid, as to correct the Faults thou may find,
and not to censure me too hardly for the ^ame; for I could not be present at
the Press; and I am sensible, that as I have suffered in this kind already, so
I may still suffer, notwithstanding all the Care and Precaution I have used.

BOOKS Printed for John John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey.
MR. Lorimer's Apology for the Ministers who subscribed only unto the Stating
of the Truths and Errors in Mr. Williams's Book, in Answer to Mr. Tr^^ls's
Letter to a Minister in the Country. 4 to.

An Answer of Mr. Giles Firmin to Mr. Grantham, about Infant Baptism. 4 to.

Some Remarks upon two Anabaptist Pamphlets. By Giles Firmin. 4 to.

Mr. Firmin's Review of Richard Davis his Vindication. 4 to.

A Proposal to perform Music, in perfect and Mathematical Proportions. By Tho.
Salmon, Rector of Mepsal in Bedfordshire. Approved by both the Mathematick
Professors of the University of Oxford; with large Remarks. By John Wallis, P.
D. 4 to.

Mr. Stephens's Sermon before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, at St.
Mary le Bew. Jan. 30. 1693.

Mr. Shower's Winter Meditations: Or, a Sermon concerning Frost, and Snow, and
Winds, etc. and the Wonders of God therein. 4 to.

Mr. Slater's Thanksgiving Sermon, October. 27. 1692. 4 to.

-- His Sermons at the Funerals of Mr. John Reynolds, and Mr. Fincher,
Ministers of the Gospel. 4 to.

The Jesuits Catechism. 4 to.

Dr. Burton's Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance, and seeking first the
Kingdom of God. Published with a Preface, by Dr. John Tillotson, late
Archbishop of Canterbury. 8 vo.

Remarks on a late Discourse of William Lord Bishop of Derry, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God: Also a Defense of the said Remarke
against his Lordship's Admonition. By J. Boyse. 8 vo.

The Works of the Right Honorable Henry, late Lord D^^amere, and Earl of
Warington; consisting in Thirty two Original Manuscripts under his Lordship's
own Hand. 8 vo.

Bishop Wilkins's Discourses of the Gift of Prayer, and Preaching; the better
much enlarged. By the Bishop of Norwich, and Dr. Williams. 8 vo.

Mr. Samuel Slater's Earnest Gall to Family Religion; being the Substance of
Eighteen Sermons. 8 vo.

Mr. Addy's Stenographia: Or, the Art of Short Writing completed, in a fa^
more Compendious way than any yet extant. 8 vo.

The London Dispensatory reduced to the Practice of the London Physicians:
Wherein are contained the Medicines, both Galencial and Chemical, tha^ are now
in use: Those out of use omitted; and those in use, and not in the Latin Copy,
here added. By John Peachey of the College of Physicians in London. 12 o.

Mr. Hamond's Sermon at Mr. Steel's Funeral. 8 vo.

History of the Conquest of Florida 8 vo.

Mr. A^kins's English G^ammar: Or, the English Tongue reduced to Grammatical
Rules. Compored for the use of English Schools. 8 vo.

Mr. John S(...)r's Discourse of Temp^ing Christ. 12 o.

-- His Discourse of Family Religion, in Three Letters. 12 o.

Mr. Daniel Burgess's Discourse of the Death, Rest, Resurrection, and Blessed
Portion of the Saints. 12 o

Mr. George Hamond's, and Mr Matthew Parker's Discourses of Family Worship.
Written at the Request of the united Ministers of London. 12 o.

Miscellana Sacra: Containing Scriptural Meditations, Divine Breathings,
occasional Reflections, and Sacred Poems 12 o.

Monro's Iustitutio Grammaticae. 8 vo.

Sir Jonas More's Mathematical Compendium. The Third Edition 12 o.

Mr. William Scoffin's help to true Spelling and Reading: Or, a very easy
Method for the teaching Children, or elder Persons, rightly to Spell, and
exactly to Read English, etc. 8 vo.

The Triumphs of Grace: Or, the last Words, and edifying Death of the Lady
Margart De la Musse, a Noble French Lady, aged but Sixteen Years, in May 1681
12o.

The Map of Man's Misery: Or, the Poor Man's Pocket-Pook: Being a perpetual
Almanac of Spiritual Meditations: Containing many useful Instructions,
Meditations and Prayers, etc 12o.

Man's whole Duty, and God's wonderful Entreaty of him thereunto. By Mr. Dan.
Burges. 12o.

Advice to Parents and Children. By Mr. Daniel Burges 12o.

Mr. Gibbons's Sermon of Justification 4 to.

Scala Naturae: Or, a Treatise proving both from Nature and Scripture, the
Existence of good Genii, or Guardian Angels. 12o.

Graaf de Succo, Pancreatico: Or, a Physical and Anatomical Treatise of the
Nature and Office of the Pancreatick Juice. 8 vo.

Dr. Packs Praxis Catholica: Or, the Countryman's Universal Remedy: Wherein is
plainly and briefly laid down, the Nature, Matter, Manner, Place, and Cure of
most Diseases incident to the Body of Man. 8vo.

English Military Discipline: Or, the Way and Method of Exercising Horse and
Foot, according to the Practice of this present time: With a Treatise of all
sorts of Arms, and Engines of War, etc. 8 vo.

Orbis Imperantis Tabelle Geographico-Historico-Genealogico-Chronologiae, etc.
Curiously engraven on Copper Plates. 8 vo.

Clavi's Grammatica: Or, the Ready way to the Latin Tongue: Containing most
plain Demonstrations for the regular Translating English into Latin; fitted to
help such as begin to attain the Latin Tongue. By F. B. 8 vo.


