Prichard Mayor.

Cur. Special. tent. die Dominico viio die Januarii, 1682. Annoque Regis Caroli
secundi Angliae, etc. xxxiiiio.

THis Court does desire Mr. James to print his Sermon lately preached at the
Guildhall-Chappel before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON Preached at Guildhall-Chappel, December. 24. 1682. BEFORE The Right
Honorable THE Lord Mayor, etc.

By JOHN JAMES, M. A. Rector of Latimers in the County of Bucks.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

To the Right Honorable Sir Will. Prichard Knight, LORD MAYOR of the City of
LONDON.
Right Honorable,
AMong the many that justly admire your Lordships Worth, and seriously bless
God for the Happiness of London, in that the management of the Affairs of so
great a Body, next under our Sovereign Lord the King, is committed into the
hands of a Person of such known Integrity and eminent Loyalty, the Author of
this Discourse does cheerfully and heartily profess himself to be one.

That this Discourse was acceptable to your Lordship when delivered in the
Pulpit, I must needs impute to that Candor and Goodness which seems innate and
connatural to your Lordships disposition, as is readily acknowledged by all
that have but the least knowledge of your Lordships Wisdom and Prudence, so
conspicuous in the good conduct and auspicious government of that great City:
for though the Matter of it be incomparably great, yet the Manner of handling
it falls infinitely short of the worth and excellency of so divine a Subject,
which ought to be highly esteemed by all Christians, and had in everlasting
remembrance by the Sons of Men.

For 'twas a design highly becoming the Son of God, to oppose the Devil, that
grand Enemy of all Goodness, and to confront the powers of Darkness; to deliver
Men from the dominion of Sin, and to secure them from the Vengeance of Almighty
God. Indeed, a design of this nature required a Person of such excellent and
extraordinary Worth, such divine Wisdom, and infinite Power, such exact
Holiness, and Almighty Goodness, to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to
bring everlasting Righteousness into the World.

And if the World had not been strangely infatuated when the Son of God became
Man, neither the Jews would have required a Sign, nor the Greeks sought after
Wisdom, when he did so miraculously manifest his power to the ruin and
destruction of the Devil, the most malicious and implacable Enemy of Mankind;
whose insulting Tyranny was far more severe and arbitrary over the Jews, than
the cruellest opposition of the Roman Empire; and his Policy infinitely above
the Philosophical Wits and Reasonings of the Gentiles: that if the one had not
trusted too much to their humane Wisdom, and the other longed too
affectionately for a temporal deliverance, and a secular happiness, they must
needs have celebrated the Nativity of the Son of God with the most solemn
Hallelujahs and Hosanna's, have admired him as the great Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God, who was made Man, that he might become unto men Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.

But the Men of this Generation are most of all without excuse, that believe
him to be the Son of God, and his coming into the World on purpose to destroy
the Works of the Devil, and to take away the Sins of the World, and shall yet
remain in slavery and subjection to the God of this World; and so do despite to
the Holy One of God, and deny the Lord that bought them.

I hope therefore no eye will look with envy upon this Discourse, wherein no
Dispute is commenced, no Controversy promoted, but with the great Impostor and
deceiver of Souls; against whom every Christian ought to employ his utmost
knowledge and skill, and exert his greatest vigor and zeal, being by the
solemnity of an Oath, the Sacrament of Baptism, engaged thereto.

And since this was the grand design of Christ's coming into the World, I
conceived an Argument of this nature very proper and seasonable at this time,
wherein we were to celebrate the Nativity of Christ, the Incarnation of the Son
of God.

And because your Lordship has commanded that this Discourse, whatever it be,
should become public (which else had remained as private as the Author) as I
have ever esteemed Obedience the best Sacrifice, and a ready submission to the
pleasure of our Governors in all things lawful, a most excellent Duty, and
extremely becoming all Christian Professors; so in compliance with your
Lordships Command, it is now sent forth into the World: and I hope, under the
Patronage of so honorable a Person, may be received with the like kindness and
good affection, as it was by your Lordship.

And God grant that by the influence of his Grace it may be some way useful to
those that read it, to carry on that great end and design for which it is
intended; I mean, to encourage men against the Wiles and Temptations of the
Devil; and to persuade them to the works of Righteousness and Goodness, of
Piety and Devotion, of Justice and Charity, of Humility and Obedience, of
Sobriety and Temperance.

God Almighty direct and assist your Lordship in the management of those great
Affairs committed to your charge, and continue you long in that famous City, to
the Glory of his Name, the Credit of true Religion, the Honor of our
Sovereign, and the happiness of the People at present under your Government;
that you may reap in this World satisfaction of Mind in the discharge of a good
Conscience; and in the World to come, everlasting Life: Which is the hearty
Prayer of him who is,

MY LORD, Jan. 1. 1682/1. Your Lordship's Very humble and most Obedient
Servant, John James.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, etc. December. 24. 1682.
1 JOHN 3.8. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the devil.


NO sooner were the Apostate Angels banished the Court of Heaven, and by the
just Judgment of God cast into the bottomless Pit to undergo the vengeance of
eternal fire, but the sense of their torments exasperated their malice, and
caused them to envy the felicity of Man; which stayed not long within the
breasts of those accursed Spirits, but like a sudden and unexpected Flood that
overflows its banks, and breaks down all resistance, they were restless in
contriving the misery of their fellow creatures, and active as the flames of
fire, till they had accomplished this their horrid design in tempting Man to
apostatize from his Maker, that his Posterity might become obnoxious to the
same everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels.

And such was the unwearied activity, together with the subtilty of that
cunning Serpent, that his hellish Plot soon took effect, in seducing our first
Parents to hearken too attentively to his Enchantments, and through his
treacherous suggestions, to question the truth of what God had spoken, and soon
after to violate what he had commanded. And when this first Stratagem too
fatally succeeded in the world, and to the ruin of man directly answered the
design and expectation of the Devil, it inspired a new life into that old
Serpent, and encouraged him with the greater vigor to range up and down the
world, seeking whom he might devour and destroy; that he has long since usurpt
a principality and dominion over the Souls of men, and to this day continues
the Prince of the power of the Air, nay, the God of this World, working in the
Children of disobedience, and leading them captive at his will.

But the All-compassionate God pitying the Shipwrackt condition of Man, did
not, as in justice he might, totally abhor, and eternally reject him: for since
by his fall he had divested himself of his primitive Integrity, proved a Rebel
to his Lord and Maker, listed himself into the service of the Devil, and so
stood at open defiance with Heaven it self; God Almighty, by the most signal
instance of Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, has at once manifested his
unspeakable Love to Mankind, and his implacable Enmity to those accursed
Spirits, by sending his Son into the World, as the Captain of man's Salvation;
who solemnly proclaimed open War with the Devil, bid defiance to him at his
entrance into the World, and by Almighty power will overcome his aspiring Pride
and desperate Malice, rescue men from the hands of that roaring Lion, and so at
once demolish his usurped Kingdom, and destroy his works from off the face of
the Earth.

All which, as it was represented to man immediately after his fall, Genesis 3.15.
that the Seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head, and that Promise
frequently renewed in succeeding Ages: so in the fullness of time it was happily
begun by the Incarnation of the Son of God, who came to deliver men from the
tyranny of the Devil, to invest them with the liberty of the Sons of God, and
to bring everlasting Righteousness into the World; is still continued by his
prevalency over the Devil, in confronting his Power, restraining his Malice,
weakening his Interest in the World, and dispossessing those evil Spirits from
the heart of man; and, when time shall be no more, shall be perfectly
accomplished, to the eternal horror, confusion and amazement of the Devil and
his Angels. Which is the just design and proper import of these words: For
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil.

By the works of the Devil is here meant all manner of sin, v. 5. for as he was
the first Author, so he is the continual Promoter of that Corruption which
resides in the breast of men, and that Impiety which reigns in the World. So
that all sin, of what nature or quality soever it be, is the Brat and
Offspring of that diabolical Spirit, the proper effect of his spleen and
malice to mankind, and, in the expression of our Apostle, the works of the
Devil: for, he that commits sin, is of the Devil; for the Devil sinned from
the beginning.

The Son of God is the second person in the blessed Trinity, God coequal and
coeternal with the Father and the Holy Ghost. Who was manifest in the flesh,
became man, dwelt among us, and died for us, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil: i. e. to teach and enable men to deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

That the Son of God was thus manifest to destroy the works of the Devil, will
most evidently appear from the consideration of three very material instances.

1. That the Son of God has used those means, and taken that course, which
does directly tend, and is abundantly able to subvert the power of the Devil.
2. That in many remarkable instances he has already supplanted his Power in
the World. 3. That he will certainly obtain a most perfect Victory over the
Devil, before he resign up his Commission to his Father.
I. The Son of God has used those means, and taken that course which does
directly tend, and is abundantly able to subvert the power of the Devil. The
truth of which Proposition will be fully illustrated, from the consideration of
four things.

1. From the whole course and frame of his Life, whilst manifest in the World;
wherein he was so far from complying with, that he did utterly discountenance
the works of the Devil. The Generation of Mankind, according to the course of
Nature, is too much attended with the heat of Lust, and the propagation of
Original Corruption into the Embryo at its first conception: therefore the
ever-blessed Jesus coming into the World, was conceived by a most stupendous
and admirable manner; the power of the Holy Ghost overshadowing a pure Virgin,
that she became great with Child of the Son of God; and when the number of her
months were accomplished, she brought him forth into the World as richly
adorned with divine and supernatural Graces, as he was poor in respect of
outward appearance. When his Infancy was past, that he came to the use of
Reason and Understanding, a time wherein other men begin to discover the
natural corruption of their hearts, by their actual rebellion against God, the
Son of God (truly so called from his divinelike nature and holy life, as well
as his miraculous and happy birth) begins his Conversation with an even and a
regular Piety, free from those sinful passions, though attended with the
natural infirmities which mankind labors under; and accordingly regulates them
according to the Laws of Nature, and the Pleasure of his heavenly Father. His
Charity was truly Christian and diffusive, such as extended to all orders and
degrees of men. His meek and sweet disposition, with his humble and modest
Spirit, such as appears in Infants before they can discern between good and
evil. His conversing with men was free and familiar, easy and unaffected. His
dutiful respects toward his Friends and Relations, transcending that of the
most ingenuous disposition, though cultivated by the early advantages of a
pious Education. Neither did he suffer his Religion to decline, as some men do,
when their years increase; but as he multiplied days, and grew in stature, he
increased in wisdom and favor with God and man, Luke 2.52.

He was careful to omit no duty, and so desirous to give no offense; that where
he might lawfully conform to the Customs of his Nation and Kindred, he did not
with a morose and churlish disposition (like the men of our Age) depart from
them, but with great freedom, and a cheerful spirit, comply with and conform to
them: Witness his Circumcision the eighth day, his being baptized by John, his
paying Tribute, etc. But where the sacred Bonds of Religion required and
commanded his obedience, neither the violent assaults of Satan, Mat. 16.22, 23
nor the courteous compellations of Friends, could constrain him to violate the
dearest Heaven. He esteemed Obedience the best Sacrifice to his Father, and
preferred the service of God before the love and kindness of his dearest
Friends; Heb. 10.7.
choosing rather to die, than to sin against God.

For when his Enemies were most furiously enraged against him, and consulted to
put him to death, he makes no evasion, nor unjust excuses; he denies not the
truth, nor distrusts his Father; but committing his Case to the providence of
God, Mat. c. 26. c. 29.
he meekly endures their affronts and injuries; and when their malice was so
great as to put him to death, he patiently bears their indignation, their fury,
and their wrath, like a good man and a glorious Martyr, praying for his Enemies
till he gave up the Ghost.

Behold here a Mirror of Piety, the Wonder of the world for his Devotion and
Charity! Was there any action of his life, or the least circumstance attending
his actions, that might justly bear the charge of sin? None certainly: for from
his birth to his death, he was a most virulent Enemy to that wicked One, and a
perfect hater of his works. The Devils themselves confess he was the holy One
of God: His most malicious Enemies could not but say he did all things well:
Mark 5.7.
Pilate that sat in Judgment upon him, could find no evil in him; and
therefore according to his Wife's admonition, Mat. 27.19, 23, 24.
proclaims him before a full Assembly of Scribes and Elders, to be a just
person.

So that his whole Life was but one continued Series of actions perfectly
designed against that wicked One. His Baptism was his solemn inauguration into
this Office. His Conversation the most plain and easy, Mat. 11.28, 29.
the most full and comprehensive, the most encouraging and authentic Pattern
for his Followers to imitate in their Christian course of life, in defiance to
that grand Impostor; that while they behold him as the Captain of their
Salvation, despising the World, confronting the Devil, bearing Afflictions with
patience, Persecutions with cheerfulness, resisting and overcoming Temptations,
forgiving and loving his Enemies, willing to live so long as God pleased, yet
ready to die the most ignominious accursed death, since it was the determinate
counsel of God: Whilst his Disciples thus consider his regular Piety, his
undaunted Courage, they may learn to do likewise; and in opposition to the
Prince of Darkness, be encouraged to do, to suffer, and to be, whatever God
shall be pleased to call them to.

'Twas Plato's opinion, as Tully reports, that if Virtue could but admit
herself to view, she would appear so amiable in the eyes of all men, that Vice
in the most costly dress and gorgeous array would appear most contemptible and
bare, if compared with her. If incorporated Virtue in the Philosophers judgment
would be so attractive of men's affections, certainly the unspotted innocence of
an incarnate Deity should be much more powerful to invite and persuade his
Followers to the love and practice of Piety and Goodness, than the former
conceit would be to engage men to the love and practice of Virtue: So that if
men would consider that grand Exemplar of Piety, the life of the holy Jesus,
his Example must needs inspirit their minds with the most active diligence, and
undaunted courage, to fight manfully under his Banner, ^eb. 12.1, 2, 3.
as the Captain of their Salvation, against the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, to run with patience the race that is set before them, and to continue
in that spiritual Combat his faithful Servants and Soldiers unto their life's
end.

2. From some remarkable actions of his Life, and especially the bitter
passions of his Death, whereby he has given a fatal blow to the power and
designs of the Devil. The Son of God is not to be considered only as a mere
man, though just and innocent, but in reference also to that grand undertaking,
[The Redemption of the World from its slavery to Sin and subjection to Satan],
the Savior of the World, the Redeemer of Mankind: His very Birth struck a
terror to those evil Spirits; his Life shone with so glorious a light, that it
confounded the Kingdom of Darkness: But the most signal Conquest he obtained
over Death, Ephesians 2.13, etc.
and the Devil that had the power of it, was by his meritorious Death and
powerful Resurrection.

For when the Jews had crucified the Lord of Life, and laid him full low, even
in the dust, that they began to triumph and applaud themselves in their
supposed Victory, the Devils also rejoiced, as if they had vanquished the power
of God. How miraculously did the Counsels of Heaven defeat the carnal policy of
men, and the malicious designs of the Devil too! That death which they
executed upon the Lord's Anointed, was converted to their own destruction, and,
contrary to the Devils expectation, most happily proved the greatest Engine to
rout his Forces, and destroy his Kingdom. For can God die? or his holy One see
corruption? No; the price of man's Redemption being paid by the Sufferings of
the Son of God, Romans 6.9, 10
he broke through the powers of the Grave; and in despite of the Devil, Hell,
and Death, arose a mighty Conqueror over them all; and as a Trophey of
Victory, led captivity captive, and treated them as he pleased: And when he had
given sufficient demonstration of his Resurrection, Acts 1.9.
he ascended gloriously into Heaven, from whence immediately he sent down the
Holy Ghost upon his Disciples, and prevalently interceding with his Father,
received power and authority to demolish the Kingdom of Satan, Ephesians. 2.19, 20,
21, 22.
and by delivering men from his insulting Tyranny, to constitute a Kingdom of
his own; and to preserve and keep it from the furious assaults of the Devil, by
the power of his Providence, and the conduct of his Spirit. And now he is set
down at the right hand of God, he continues for ever; and having an
unchangeable Priesthood, is able to save his Church and People to the utmost,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.24, 25. By which,
and other such remarkable passages, preceding, accompanying, and following his
death, he has obtained a considerable interest in the very Forts and Dwellings
of the Prince of this World, by turning many souls from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God.

3. From the grand intent and design of his Doctrine, which is most aptly
contrived to destroy the works of the Devil, to deliver men from the power and
dominion of sin, and to direct and encourage them to Righteousness and true
Holiness. For,

First. The Christian Religion delivers the strictest Precepts for the rule of
good living, with the greatest Majesty and Authority conceivable. In general,
it commands men to love the Lord their God with all their heart, Mat. 22.37,
38, 39.
and with all their soul, and with all their mind, and their neighbors as
themselves; Mat. 7.12.
to do as they would be done unto; to reject the Devil, and despise the World:
to avoid every occasion of sin, Jam. 4.7. 1 John 2.15. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
and appearance of evil; and whatever things are true, whatever things are
honest, whatever things are just, whatever things are pure, whatever things are
lovely, whatever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, seriously to think of these things, and faithfully to do
them, Phil. 4.8, 9.

More particularly, Heb. 11.3. 1 Timothy 6.15, 16
it requires men to acknowledge one God the Creator and Governors of the
World, to conceive him as an infinite and incomprehensible Being, to testify
the inward reverence and devotion of their hearts, Romans 12.1, 2.
by the most ready and universal obedience to his Will; to love him for his
Goodness; to stand in awe of his Justice and his Power; 1 John 4.8. Mat. 10.28.
Mat. 6.25. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Joh. 4.24.
to depend upon his Providence for their protection, and to express their
thankfulness for the receipt of his Mercies: to be serious in all parts of his
Worship; to live always as in his presence; and to manifest their respect to
God, by their reverend behavior to every thing that is appropriate to his
service, or participates of his nature: Faithfully to believe all divine
Revelations; humbly to submit to all the dispensations of his Providence, and
sincerely to observe all the manifestations of his Will and Pleasure: To
believe on the Son of God as the Savior of the World, the great Doctor and
Governor of the Church, Mat. 1.21. Jam. 4.12. 1 Timothy 2.5.
and the alone Mediator between God Man.

It prescribes the particular Offices, engaging men to a due regulation of all
their thoughts, words, and deeds, that do immediately respect their own
persons. Luke 21.34.
It directs them to Temperance and Moderation in eating and drinking, in
sleeping and recreation; to Chastity and Purity both in the married and
unmarried estate; to Humility and Modesty in the disposition and carriage of
men: Acts 24.16.
To restrain every unruly Passion within the bounds of Reason, and to regulate
every the most lawful Affection according to the rules of Religion: To guide
and manage their Behavior with sobriety and understanding, and to order their
Discourse with gravity and discretion.

It lays down also the most excellent Rules of Charity and Justice toward their
Neighbors, obliging every man to the greatest Sincerity, Uprightness, and
Integrity to each other; Mat. 5.23, 24, 25. Romans 13.7.
to an universal Innocence and Harmlesness in all actions; to make Compensation
where Offenses have been committed; to carry a due Respect and Reverence,
proper to the several Orders and Degrees of men; to observe all the positive
Acts of Justice, distributive and commutative, according to the Offices of that
Calling wherein divine Providence has disposed man's Station; and to observe
all the duties of Love and Charity, which the necessities of others require,
Gal. 6.10.
and the abilities of men do qualify them for. In a word, the Christian
Profession is so pure, so undefiled a Religion, that it prohibits the least
impurity, and gives no license to the smallest sin: for, the grace of God that
brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

Secondly. It propounds the most convincing Arguments to encourage men against
the Wiles and Temptations of the Devil, and to persuade them to the sincere and
constant practice of Virtue and Goodness. It threatens the Wicked with the
Wrath and Indignation of God at present; and promises to the Virtuous and
Good, the Providence of God, as his infinite Wisdom shall judge most expedient
for them. But because it is manifest God does not call Mankind to an account in
this World, nor deal with them in strict Justice according to their deserts,
(for his external Dispensations are very promiscuous both to the Good and Bad)
therefore the Gospel does seriously present to the consideration of men, an
infallible certainty of a Judgment to come, when God shall render to every man
according to his works, Acts 17.31. 2 Pet. 3.10. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. Mat. 25.30. ad
fin.
2 Cor 5.10. It informs us of the nature of the Judge, the dreadful preparation
for his coming to Judgment, the terrible appearance of his Majesty, the great
proceedings of that day, and the irreversible Sentence past upon all concerned
in it; that we may be confidently assured there are Rewards in store for every
man, that the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him, and the righteousness
of the righteous shall be upon him. It represents the greatest fullness and
exuberancy of divine Love: Romans 2.7, 8, 9, 10.
Life and Immortality to the Virtuous and Good; but the utmost severity of
divine Justice, Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, to the Vicious
and Bad.

It assures to all that live according to the Rules of that holy Institution,
eternal and solid Bliss both in Body and Soul: that the one, which was
corruptible, shall put on incorruption; which was sown in dishonor, shall be
raised in glory; which was sown in weakness, shall be raised in power, 2 Cor.
15.42, 43. And the faculties of the other so eminently transformed, that the
Understanding, which now sees the most perspicuous things but darkly and
through a Glass, shall be endued with the greatest measure of knowledge, and
entertained with the clearest sight of the divine nature, to behold with
infinite satisfaction the glorious attributes of God, and the wonderful
Counsels and effects of them all, in his works of Providence toward his several
Creatures. The Will and Affections shall be perfectly transformed into the
divine likeness; that Anger, Envy, Hatred, and such troublesome Passions, shall
be utterly abolished; Desire shall be sped into Fruition, and Hope shall be
swallowed up in Victory; and those delightful and ravishing affections of Love
and Joy, shall survive and remain to the eternal consolation of Soul and Body.

But it threatens the Wicked that they shall be turned into hell, and all the
people that forget God, Mark 9.24 26.
where are Flames so quick and scorching, that they shall seize upon Soul and
Body; Torments that shall always be beginning, never ending; which the damned
themselves by their Malice shall increase, and by the gnashing of their Teeth
shall help to be their own Executioners. So that those who comply with the
Wiles and Temptations of the Devil, must expect a certain fearful looking for
of judgment, and fiery indignation which shall devour them, Heb. 10.27. but
those who resist that evil Spirit, and seriously renounce his works, may expect
that glorious recompense of reward which God has prepared for those that love
and serve him, Heb. 11.39, 40.

Thirdly. To this purpose, that divine Economy, which according to the
Sanctions of the Gospel is administered in the Christian Church, was instituted
by the Son of God. That the Ministers of the Gospel, as opportunity serves, and
necessity requires, administer the sacred Rites of the Christian Religion in
the Church of God, Mat. 28.19.
by baptizing such as are duly disposed for that solemn Ordinance; that thereby
they may be listed into the service of Christ, and by that religious Sacrament
be obliged to fight manfully under his Banner against the World, Luke 22.19, 20
the Flesh, and the Devil: And distribute the Holy Communion to those pious and
humble Souls, that are religiously disposed to celebrate the honor of God in
that sacred Institution; that they may be encouraged to quench the fiery darts
of the devil, and have grace to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly
fear.

To them it is commanded to solemnize the Worship of God in public, Mat. 10.12,
13 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
either as Priests to wait at the Altar of the Lord, to intercede with his
Majesty in the behalf of his people, and to present in their stead Prayers and
Supplications, and Thanksgivings to him; or as Ambassadors to treat with the
People in the business of Religion, Mat. 28.20. 2 Cor. 5.20.
and reveal the Will of God unto them; to explain and confirm to their
Understandings the Principles of Christianity, to represent to their Judgment
and Reason, the vileness of sin, and the reasonableness of Gods service; that
men may be reclaimed from their sinful and wicked ways, and become a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God.

But when sinners are obstinate and hard to be entreated, the Censures of the
Church are put into their hands, to exercise the power of the Keys in punishing
the pertinacious, and casting them out of the Church, that they may be brought
to a just and lively apprehension of their sins; and from the Judgment of God
executed upon them by his Ministers in the Church, be persuaded to reform and
amend their lives, that they may not fall into the hands of divine Justice in
the World to come; and so upon sufficient Evidence of their Repentance, receive
Absolution, be dissolved from the Bonds of Satan, and admitted into the bosom
of the Church again. For this power our Lord and Master committed to his
Apostles, and in them to the succeeding Governors of the Church, Mat. 18.18.
Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye
shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Which Commission was renewed
again after his Resurrection, when he breathed on them the Holy Ghost, Joh.
20.22, 23.

These are the principal means delivered in the Gospel, and instituted by the
Son of God, to deliver men from the dominion of sin and Satan; and thereby to
destroy the works of the Devil, by taking men off from the love and practice of
sin.

4. From the mission and descent of the Holy Ghost into the World; where divine
Inspiration is in two respects very remarkable: to take away and the sins of
the World, and to promote the service and honor of God.

First. By enduing the Son of God and his holy Apostles with power from above,
whereby they were enabled to confirm and ratify the truth of the Christian
Doctrine by the working of Miracles. If Christ had not done those works which
no other person did, he would not, for in truth he could not, have obliged
mankind to believe and obey it: which is the proper import and meaning of our
Savior's expression, Joh. 15.24. 'Twas therefore extremely necessary that he
should manifest the Divinity of his person, and confirm the truth of the
Gospel, by such signal Testimonies as were uncontrolable: And such was his
infinite Wisdom and Power, that while he was conversant among men, he gave the
World all the satisfaction that was possible, that he came from God; when he
wrought such miraculous works as were never heard of from the beginning of the
World, presented them boldly to all Spectators, and committed the trial of
their reality to the test of their senses; which was an infallible evidence
that the spirit of the Lord was upon him, and the power of God had overshadowed
him. Heb. 9.14. Romans 8.11.
But because he was mightily declared to be the Son of God by his resurrection
from the dead, as through the eternal spirit he offered himself to God; so by
the mighty assistance of the same holy Spirit, he arose again from the dead,
and continues alive for ever.

And because he committed the promulgation of the Gospel to his Apostles, whom
he sent as Ambassadors to preach Salvation to the World, and exhort sinners to
be reconciled to God; the powers of the Holy Ghost was indispensably requisite
to inform their Understandings with the Mind of God, to reveal the sacred
Mysteries of Religion clearly to their apprehensions, that they be assured of
their heavenly Call to the divine Employment: therefore they had apparitions of
Angels, and received the Bath-col, voices from Heaven. So St. Paul by a most
miraculous Light from Heaven, is stricken down to the Earth, and called to the
Apostleship, Acts 9. Hereupon he became so serious and earnest to assert both
his Calling and Gospel to descend from Heaven, Gal. 1.1. Paul an Apostle, not
of men, neither by men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. They had
extatical Visions; Peter was in a Trance, Paul wrapped up to the third Heavens:
They had monitory Dreams and Impulses from the Spirit; by all which, they had a
full assurance of the Divinity of their Message, and the truth of their Call to
the Apostleship.

But 'twas equally necessary, for the Conviction of the Unbelieving World, that
they should confirm the divine Authority of these things, by sufficient
external Arguments: therefore they were endued with the gift of Tongues, and
the power of working Miracles; when according to the promise of our Lord, the
Holy Ghost descended from Heaven upon a full Assembly, as they were met
together to solemnize the Worship of God, Acts 2. that they began to speak with
other Tongues, and to utter diverse sorts of Languages, insomuch that their
Auditors admired the marvelous works of God, when they heard the Servants of
Christ speaking every one in their own Tongue. Thus they were qualified by an
extraordinary Inspiration, to teach all Nations, and to preach the Gospel
throughout the whole World. And as they had diversity of Gifts, and different
Administrations, so they were enabled by the power of the Holy Ghost to work
Miracles, 2 Cor. 12, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and in the Name of Christ to do even what they list. To them was given the
power of healing all manner of Diseases, the raising the Dead to life. But one
great and signal Gift they received, which to the highth of admiration they
manifested to the World; the frequent effusion of the Spirit upon themselves,
the communicating of it to others by praying, preaching, and laying on of
hands, whereby evil Spirits became subject to them, that they prevailed over
the Devil and his deluding Oracles, whose Tongues they silenced, whose
Forgeries they discovered, whose Favorites they strangely and in a moment
struck dead, and restrained the malice and fury of Lucifer himself.

Were these the effects of any other power than the Spirit of the Lord? Was it
ever heard that a mere Mortal was able to do the like? to alter the course of
Nature, and produce effects directly contrary to the production of natural
causes? Is it within the power of the Mighty? or can the Devils themselves
bring it to pass? No: It requires an Omnipotent arm; no less than that which
created the World, and settled the particular Beings therein: to change their
courses, to alter their natures, to work not only with slender and unlikely
means, but without and against all probable methods, certainly none but the
Spirit of the Almighty can do thus. When therefore the power of working
Miracles is the alone work of a Deity, and such remarkable instances were
plainly manifest by Christ and his Apostles, to discover the Divinity, and
procure the belief of his Doctrine; it is a plain Argument, that that
extraordinary power with which they were invested, was on purpose designed to
discard the Devil, and confront his Power; because that Doctrine which was
confirmed by them, is directly contrary to the designs and projects of that
evil Spirit.

Secondly. By its continual influence upon the Understanding and Wills of men,
to enable them to resist the Devil, and overcome his Temptations. Though the
Doctrine of the Gospel had such an undeniable Evidence as the Power of
Miracles, to ascertain the truth and verity of it, that one would think no man,
which believes the matter of fact, that such miracles were wrought, should
doubt of the truth, or question the divine Authority of the Christian Religion,
and consequently would soon resign up their Understanding to the obedience of
Faith, to be governed by the Laws of that divine Institution: yet he that
considers how little men regard the Authority of that divine Testimony, and
consider the excellency of the Gospel discovery, and how careless men are to be
strict and serious in their Conversations, and how soon debauched by the most
easy Temptation, who profess to believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, and
assent to his Doctrine as infallibly true, will soon perceive the necessity of
some supernatural assistance, to bring the hearts of men to the love, and their
lives to the practice of all necessary truths contained therein, over and above
that miraculous diffusion at the first delivery and preaching of it.

And blessed be the Name of God, such is the large and plentiful effusion of
divine Grace now under the dispensation of the Gospel, that it is always ready
at hand to assist the spirits of men, in all religious purposes and holy
undertakings, Joh. 14.26.16. And in several places of the Gospel, the Spirit is
promised to the devout and humble petitions of honest Christians, Luke 11.13.
Joh. 16.23.26. So that the most degenerate Soul that does but seriously apply
his mind to fear God and keep his Commandments, will find such continual
assistance from the blessed spirit of Grace, as will enable him to mortify his
own Corruption, to quench the fiery darts of the Devil, to vanquish all
oppositions in the way to Goodness, and with ease and pleasure to do the Will
of God.

For this very purpose the Son of God intercedes with his Father, and presents
our Prayers to the Throne of Grace by virtue of his own intercession, that the
Promise of the Holy Ghost may be continued to his Church to the end of the
world, to sanctify the hearts of his People, and to fill their Souls with all
those graces that accompany Salvation; to enlighten the Understanding, to
convince the Judgment, to awaken the Consciences of men, that they may believe
and consider the great and weighty Principles of Religion, and be preserved
from all false Doctrine, Heresies, and Schisms: to press upon their
consideration the folly and unreasonableness of sin, with the dreadful
consequences of a wicked life; the excellency of true Religion and Goodness,
with the blessed effects of a virtuous Conversation, that men may be persuaded
to depart from evil, and do good: to remove the obstinacy and perverseness that
is natural to fallen man, that their Spirits may become pliable and submissive
to the providential dealings of God, respective and obedient to the Laws and
Constitutions of Heaven, and entirely devoted to his Will and Pleasure: to
confirm their Faith, increase their Integrity; to assist them against
Temptations; to support them with patience under afflictions; to complete their
Charity, to perfect their Repentance, and to enable them by Promises,
Encouragements, and Gifts, to suffer for the Lord Jesus, and the profession of
the Gospel, if called to it. All this and much more is the Promise of the
Father, to purchase of the Son of God, and the gift of them both to give the
holy Spirit to the Church, first to sanctify and make it good, Gal. 5.22. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
then to preserve it spotless and unblamable to the coming of the Lord.

These are the principal means invented by the Wisdom of God to take away the
sins of the world, to destroy the works of the devil; and in infinite mercy
presented to mankind by his only begotten Son, to deliver them from the power
of darkness, and by turning them away from their iniquities, to translate them
into the kingdom of his dear Son. And what can the wit of man conceive, what
does the weakness of men want as farther needful to promote and carry on this
blessed and glorious design? What could God have done more to subvert the
power of the Devil, and to reconcile Mankind to himself?

If he had raised up some mighty Prophet in the World, and furnished him with
the Inspiration of the Almighty, that he had spoken as one having Authority,
and commended his Message to us in the Name of the Lord; we should certainly
have received him in the Name of a Prophet: or if an Angel had descended from
Heaven, and appeared visibly to us Mortals, and delivered his Embassage to us
in a Seraphick manner, and backed it with Reasons clear as his Angelical nature;
we should certainly have admired the goodness of God, and acknowledged our
selves obliged to so gracious a Dispensation. But that God himself should
descend from those Regions above into this dark and dismal World, become one
like us, one of us, and so in a way agreeable to our humane capacities, deliver
us the Records of Heaven, tell us the terms on which our Eternity depends,
assure us upon his undoubted Veracity, that upon our obedience or disobedience
to them, Heaven or Hell, Life or Death are ascertained to us; that he should
delineate to our very eyes in plain and legible Characters, the excellency of
his Doctrine by the Piety and Innocence of his Life, and so recommend his
Precepts to our practice by his own Example set before us; that he should
convince and assure us of the Divinity of his Person and Doctrine, by many and
undeniable Miracles; that he should seal the truth of what he delivered by his
own blood; offer up his Life a Sacrifice to death, to procure life to the
sinful World; that by his divine power he should rise out of the Grave,
gloriously ascend to Heaven, intercede with his Father on our behalf, and from
thence send us another Comforter, even the spirit of Truth, which should inform
our minds with the knowledge of all necessary truths, and bring us to the love
and practice of all Christian Virtues and Graces: Certainly this method is
abundantly able to destroy the works of the Devil, and the prevail with sinners
to lead godly and pious lives. Which will most evidently appear, if we proceed
to consider the second Argument to illustrate the truth of the Apostles
Assertion.

II. The Son of God has in many remarkable instances already supplanted the
Power of the Devil, in delivering many Souls from the tyranny and dominion of
that insulting Enemy, notwithstanding the great disadvantages and
discouragements that the Christian Religion has met with in the World both
from Jews and Gentiles, from the first plantation of the Gospel until now.

For though the Jews were circumcised the eighth day, and in their Childhood
kept in cruel bondage under their Parents and Masters, who constrained them to
learn the Law of Moses; and when they came to riper years, were taught by the
Scribes and Pharisees, who sat in Moses Chair, that their Religion was
eternal, and the Economy thereof never to be altered; and therefore were bound
to reject any person that should broach any other Doctrine, to discard him from
their Synagogues, to stop his mouth that he might not speak, and their ears
that they might not hear. And it is notorious that the Gentiles were no less
fortified in their Heathen Rites, and superstitious Customs, every Nation
having their respective Deities, whom they constantly adored and offered
Sacrifice to; and some of them so careful to secure the honor of their Gods,
and all under their Authority in their Idolatrous observances, that as
Melanchton notes in his Epistle to his Comment upon the Romans, every Athenian
made a Vow at his admission to the Liberties and Franchises of the City, se
pugnare pro diis, solum, and cum aliis, not only to fight valiantly in the
front of an Army, to defend and vindicate their Gods, but, like the Roman
Scaeva, to withstand whole Legions.

Add to all this, the Opposition that was to be expected without, the Scoffs
and Jears that Christians must expect from their Neighbors, the Censures of
their Laws, and the displeasure of their Governors; the meanness of Christ,
and the unworthiness of his Apostles, the poverty and weakness of them both;
that they were utterly unable to supply the wants of their Disciples, or defend
them from the malice and cruelty of their Enemies. But above all, consider the
corruption of their hearts, and the contrariety of the Gospel to their former
course of life, forbidding the least Impurity, and threatening vengeance
against the smallest sin which they poor wretches were wholly immersed in; and
in honor of their Gods, were not only taught to practice, but commanded to
observe.

And yet notwithstanding such great contradictions, the Gospel of Christ, which
is the power of God to salvation, constrained both Jews and Gentiles with a
holy violence to break asunder their unlawful Oaths, to disclaim their former
Religions, to fly from the snares and delusions of the Devil, and to become
Proselytes to the Religion of Jesus.

For when that glorious Light the Sun of Righteousness appeared in the World,
the beams of his Majesty were immediately dispersed over the face of the Earth,
and his Glory in a short time dispelled that hideous darkness which had
overspread the World, and brought Life and Immortality to light. For so the
Evangelist tells us, that by the miraculous instinct and conduct of a Star, the
news of his birth was revealed to the furthermost parts of the Earth, as soon
as ever he was born; and the Princes thereof came to pay their Adoration to
him, and when they saw him, fell down and worshipped him, Mat. 2. And when he
entered upon his Prophetic Office, though he did not cry, nor lift up, nor
cause his voice to be heard in the streets, yet the Children of men slockt in
abundance to hear him, deservedly counting it their greatest honor to become
the Disciples of so glorious a Master. So great Worth they saw in his Person,
and such Excellency in his Doctrine; such glorious Rewards he propounded to
them, and such intolerable miseries he warned them to fly from, that they made
have to deliver themselves from the bonds of sin, by which they were detained
Captives to the will of the Devil, and without delay became the Followers of
Christ, glorying in nothing more, than in being Christians.

And as our Lord himself did so miraculously rescue the Souls of men from their
subjection to Sin and Satan, so that life and vigor which continually attends
the dispensation of the Gospel, has been illustriously manifest in opposition
to all the Powers of Darkness, and the Malice of Hell it self. For as his
Apostles went up and down preaching the Gospel, the Lord added to the Church
daily such as should be saved: Three thousand Souls became Converts to the
Christian Faith at one Sermon of St. Peter's, Acts 2.41. In the Roman Empire
and the Province of Judea, multitudes, multitudes thronged into the Kingdom of
Christ; and not only the weak and impotent people, but the great ones, and
wise men of the Earth, cheerfully embraced this divine Religion, accounting
their Strength weakness, and their Wisdom folly, until then. Cornelius a
Centurion became a Proselyte to it; Nero's Family had some Saints; Sergius
Paulus a Proconsul, and Dionysius the famous Areopagite at Athens, became
Converts to the Christian Faith. And the Histories of the Church present us
with many and many excellent Persons of great esteem for their admirable
Learning, and vast Endowments, who in a short space of time voluntarily forsook
the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and sincerely devoting themselves
to the service of Christ, were deservedly famous in their Generations for Piety
and Devotions. Which very Argument Arnobius insists upon when he reasoned with
the Heathen to persuade them to receive the Faith of Christ; that men of the
greatest Wits and Parts, Tam magnis Ingeniis paediti Oratores, Grammatici,
Rhetores Consulti Juris ac Medici, Philosophy etiam secreta rimantes
Magisteria hec expetunt, spretis quibus paulo ante fidebant, etc. Arnob. cont.
Gent. l. 2. p. 44.
Orators, Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Lawyers, Physicians, and Philosophers,
forsook their former Sentiments, and adhered to the Doctrine of Christ.

Nay, so mightily prevailed the Word of God, in despite of the Devil and all
the Powers of Darkness, that within an Age or two after the Incarnation of the
Son of God, his dominion was as large as the World, and extended over the
Territories of the whole Earth. Hesterni sumus, Apol. C. 36. c. 1.
and vestra omnia implevimus, etc. says Tertullian, For the Temple of
Jerusalem was utterly destroyed, and the daily Sacrifice perfectly ceased: and
such the Reformation in the Gentile World, that the Devils forsook their
ancient Habitations, and trembled, Eus. Ecc. Hist. l. 2. c. 3. l. 3. c. 8.
wherever the noise of the Gospel sounded; their clamorous Oracles soon became
dumb, and their principal Deities mute as a Child; their great Gods forsook
their beloved Temples; and though some were chained, yet they were constrained
to run away.

Nay, so bold and confident were the Primitive Christians in their Apologies
before their Persecutors, that they challenged the Governors and Rulers, Tert.
Apol. c. 23, 22.
before whom they appeared, to bring any persons possessed with evil Spirits,
or grieved with any other Infirmities, and if they did not in the Name of
Christ restore the one sound to his health, and the other to an entire mind,
they would be content to die the most ignominious accursed death. Nay, Lact. de
falls. Sap. l. 2. c. 25, 26
to discover the excellency and virtue of the Christian Religion, they were
bold to say, that by the Administration of the Gospel they would undertake to
convince the most obstinate, to convert the most obdurate sinner, and to
transform the most diabolical and hellish nature into a divine and heavenly
temper; verifying hereby those lofty Expressions of the Apostle, that the Word
of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, Heb. 4.12.
Mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge
of God, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

And to this very day the Son of God has rode in triumph over the Devil, not
only by teaching men to deny all ungoaliness and worldly lusts, to live
soverly, righteously, and godly in this present world; but by redeeming them
actually from all iniquity, and purifying to himself a peculiar people zealous
of good works. Thus it was prophesied of the Messiah, Isai. 61.1. and fulfilled
by him when he appeared in the World, as he himself testifies: The spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because he has appointed me to preach the Gospel to the
poor; he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering of sight to the blind; to set at liberty them that are
bound, and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, Luke 4.18, 19. In a word,
the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets,
the noble Army of Martyrs, and all the Saints of God that have departed this
life in his Faith and Fear, and now make up that part of the Church Triumphant
in the Kingdom of Heaven, waiting for the accomplishment of our Victory, and
the perfecting of the Body of Christ, have been redeemed by the Blood of the
Son of God, delivered by him from the snares of Death and the power of the
Devil, and are now sat down with the Lamb of God in the highest Heavens.

III. The Son of God will most certainly obtain a perfect Victory over the
Devil, before he resign up his Commission to his Father; as from all eternity
he was foreordained, and in the fullness of time solemnly inaugurated into this
Office. As to this very day he has been faithful in the administration of it
to the destruction of Satan's Kingdom; so he will undoubtedly continue till he
has accomplished the number of his Elect, 1 Cor. 15.28.
completed the body of the Church Triumphant, and subdued the Power and
Authority of his Enemies. So that though the Devil disturb the Peace of the
Church, and make his rendezvous in the World, seeking whom he might devour and
destroy; yet the Son of God, who in his Resurrection led captivity captive, and
to this day has gone on conquering and to conquer, will still proceed in this
victorious manner, till he has perfectly routed the Devil and his Angels, and
his place be found no more on the Earth, as it is prophesied by St. John, Rev.
12. For at the last and dreadful day, there shall be a general conflagration in
the World, to consume the Wickedness thereof; when the Devil and his Angels
shall be constrained to appear before this glorious Prince, and receive their
final doom which was denounced upon them when they were cast out of Heaven, to
be thrust into the bottomless Pit with all their accursed Crew, to be tormented
day and night, and to dwell in everlasting burnings; when the great Redeemer of
the World, the Captain of man's Salvation, shall gloriously ascend to the
Kingdom of his Father, and in triumphant Chariots carry up with him an
innumerable company of blessed Saints, who shall sit down with him in his
Fathers Kingdom, and reign as Kings and Queens for evermore.

We have hitherto considered the truth of the Proposition delivered in the
Text, That it was the grand design and purpose of the Son of God to destroy
the works of the Devil; that he was manifest in the World to deliver Man from
his Power and Dominion; to teach and enable them to walk in the ways of Virtue
and Goodness. From which Argument, it is just and obvious to infer three things.

1. From hence men may learn whether they be indeed the Servants of God, and
Disciples of Christ; or the Slaves and Vassals of the Devil. It Is the continual
Employment of that accursed Spirit, to lay Snares in our way to Heaven, to
tempt and entice Souls to the practice of sin, and thereby to ascertain their
eternal Ruin: On the other side, it is the constant endeavor of our blessed
Savior, to deliver men from their evil ways, to incline their hearts to the
Love, and their lives to the Practice of all manner of Goodness; thereby to
reconcile them unto God, and to save them in the day of the Lord. Flatter not
your selves then in a business of so great concernment. Our Apostle lays down a
plain Rule from this Doctrine: He that does righteousness, is righteous, even
as Christ is righteous v. 7. He that commits sin, is of the Devil, v. 8.
Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, v. 9. And, in this the children
of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil; whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God, v. 10. Let men pretend what they will, a sinful
and wicked life is a plain Mark and Character of one that belongs to the Devil:
as on the contrary, a virtuous and godly Conversation is the only sign of a
Child of Grace, the only certain evidence of a good Christian.

That man who in the general course of his life carries a sincere respect to
the Commandments of God, and in good earnest studies to conform his actions to
his holy Laws; that carefully avoids the occasions of evil, and seriously
resists the Wiles and Temptations of the Devil; that despises not any Precept
of the Gospel, because the matter of it may seem small and inconsiderable; nor
refuses the severest duty, because of the pains and trouble it may put him to:
Such a man is the honest upright Christian, a true Disciple and Sevant to the
Son of God; notwithstanding his infirmities and frailties, which through
Inadvertency, Surprise, or a violent Temptation, he may sometimes commit; which
as it is impossible for the best man in this imperfect State to secure and
fortify himself against, so the Mercies of God in the dispensation of the
Gospel, does graciously pardon, and through the Merits of Christ, readily pass
them over.

But he that commits sin, is of the Devil; He that casts off the fear of God
from his eyes, and lives in a constant course of a wicked life; that complies
with the Temptations of the Devil, but is careless and indifferent in the
Profession and Practice of Religion; that habituates himself to the practice of
any one known sin, or the neglect of any necessary Christian duty; though he be
not arrived to the highth of wickedness, but make some show and appearance of
Religion, by prosessing the Christian Faith, frequenting the public Offices of
Religion, and exercising the material parts of some Virtues and Graces; yet if
his Obedience be not uniform and entire according to the scope and tenor of
the Gospel, he is certainly in a state of sin and iniquity; and whatever his
Profession or Confidence be, without controversy a Child of the Devil: for St.
James tells us, that true Christian Wisdom must show itself without partiality
without hypocrisy: and the same Apostle confidently assures us, that whosoever
shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. Jam.
3.18. ^ 2.10.

2. This Argument is an excellent Criterion to judge of the truth of Doctrines,
which are delivered as the Doctrines of Christ, whether they be so or no. Our
Apostle gives us an admonition and direction to this purpose, 1 Jo. 4.1, 2, 3.
Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they be of God.
Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus is come in the flesh; that is, every
Doctrine which is consonant with the Incarnation of the Son of God, and the
design of his being manifest in the world, is of God; for God manifested in the
flesh, is a great Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.15. and St. Paul calls the
Christian Faith, the truth which is after Godliness, Tit. 1.1.

But every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus is come in the flesh; that is,
every Doctrine which is contrary to the design of his Incarnation, that is apt
to hinder a good life, or invalidate the necessity of it, cannot be from God.
Whatever Doctrine gives license or connivance to sin, must needs proceed from
the Devil, that enemy of all goodness, though the Author pretend to an
Infallible Spirit, like the Church of Rome; or to Divine Inspiration, like our
Modern Enthusiasts.

Yet in the Church of Rome such Doctrines as these are solemnly constituted, as
Essential parts of the Christian Religion, and imposed upon the Christian
world, with the same authority, as the most Fundamental Articles of the
Christian Faith: Thus the Sacrament of Penance, joined with Confession, is
represented as sufficient to Salvation; The Doctrine of Purgatory, which
supposes an expiation of sin (by the Prayers of the living) after death:
Prayers in an unknown Tongue: The prohibition of the Scriptures without license
to the people: The dispensing of Indulgences; the Popes Supremacy and
Infallibility; and others of the same nature, are imposed with the same
Authority, and received with the same Veneration and Piety, as the belief of
Deity, the Redemption of the world by the Son of God, and the Rewards of
another Life. It Is needless, and would be too tedious, to consider them
particularly; but what man of common sense and understanding, is not able to
see, that these Doctrines are directly, and of their own nature, great
impediments and obstructions of a good life, and therefore are not of God?

To the same ill purpose tend those frequent discourses of the Absolute Decrees
of God, the irresistibility of Divine Grace, together with the weak and
imperfect description of Faith, with the strange Metaphorical expressions by
which those Doctrines are unhappily represented to the world; with Doctrines of
like affinity confidently vented and spread abroad by the too curious and bold
discoverers of hidden and unrevealed Mysteries. For that Faith that does not
engage men to become new Creatures, and to keep the Commandments of God, can
never justify, much less save them; and that Grace which shall infallibly work
to convert men, however disposed, may make men careless and oscitant to the
duties of Religion, but does neither require nor encourage their care and
industry; and those decrees which have irrevocably and absolutely sentenced men
to Heaven or Hell from all Eternity, may pamper some with presumption, drive
others to despair, but can have no efficacy to persuade men to work out their
Salvation with fear and trembling. And therefore those persons that have
imbibed these opinions, ought to have a great care to keep their Hearts sounder
than their Heads; that they may be good, though they apprehend no rational
necessity why they should be so. But if such men be good upon false and
pernicious Principles, (as I make no question but many such erroneous persons
are) what eminent Lights might they be in the Church of God, for sanctity and
holiness of life, if they would suffer right Reason, and the acknowledged
Principles of Religion to supplant their Erroneous Opinions, and be persuaded
to embrace the truth as it is in Jesus!

Lastly, the consideration of this Doctrine should be a prevalent and most
effectual Argument to persuade those that believe the truth and purport of it,
to leave off their sins, and to lead Religious and godly lives. We acknowledge
our selves Christians, and thereby profess to believe the Doctrine of Christ,
to live in obedience to his commands, and in the stricter imitation of his holy
life: let us then look unto Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation, that we may
prosecute that great and glorious end, for which he came into the world, became
Emmanuel, God with, and incarnate among us. That he was manifest in the flesh
to destroy the works of the devil, has been in some measure represented to
your consideration, both from his holy life, and meritorious death, the design
and tendency of his Doctrine, the mission and dispensation of the Holy Ghost,
the many signal and eminent victories over the Devil throughout the world, in
rescuing many Souls from the tyranny of the Devil, and the powers of darkness,
and giving them power to become the Sons of God. You therefore that call your
selves by that worthy name of Christians, consider the high Priest of your
profession, and the great obligation that lies upon you to walk worthy of your
calling, and to live as becomes the Gospel, by renouncing the Devil and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of
the flesh; that as you profess to believe the Articles of the Christian Faith,
ye may keep Gods holy will and Commandments all the days of your life: That
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, ye may be
partakers of the Divine Nature; and as the Apostle exhorts, give all diligence
to add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to
godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity, and that these
things may be in you and abound: 2 Pet. 1.4. etc. This our Baptismal Covenant
obliges us to; this the Sacrament of the Lords Supper would enable us to
effect; this the principles of our Christian profession require; this the
precepts of our most holy Religion commands; for this the blessed promise of
Gods Grace is tendered to Mankind in the dispensation of the Gospel; this the
blessed hope of Eternal Glory should encourage us to, and the dreadful
apprehension of everlasting damnation should make us afraid to neglect.

And if hitherto we have been so desperately mad, to continue in slavery and
subjection to the Devil, and thereby to stand at open defiance, and direct
hostility with the Son of God: Let us not persist a moment longer in so
wretched, so miserable a condition; but immediately break off our League with
Satan, and become the servants and worshippers of the only true God, and of his
Son Jesus Christ, whom he has sent. For though our case be very bad, whilst
inslaved to the Tyranny of the Devil; yet since we enjoy the Gospel, that word
of Everlasting life; no man ought to conclude, that his condition is desperate.
For now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. This is
a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into
the world to save the chiefest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. So that the Son of God
is willing to save us from our sins, and the malice of the Devil too, if we be
willing to leave off our sins, and to serve him in holiness and righteousness:
we may yet be turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, and so be rescued from the slavery of the Devil and our lusts, into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

But at this time especially, in which we are to Commemorate the Incarnation of
the Son of God, who came to visit us in great humility, and in infinite mercy
to deliver us from the power of the Devil, we should seriously resolve to
banish sin from our hearts and lives, that the Son of God may take possession
of our Souls; and dwelling in our Spirits by Faith, we may bring forth the
fruits of Piety and Charity, and all other Christian Virtues and Graces, to the
praise and honor of his blessed Name; that in the last day, when he shall come
again in his glorious Majesty to judge both the quick and the dead, we may rise
to the life immortal, through him who lives and reigns, with the Father, and
the Holy Ghost, now and for ever. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

