THE Damning Nature of Rebellion: Or, The Universal Unlawfulness of Resistance
Under pain of Damnation, in the saddest sens ASSERTED IN A SERMON Preached at
the Cathedral of Norwich, May 29. 1685.

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY DAY Of the Birth of His Late MAJESTY CHARLES II.

And of the Happy Restoration both of Him and of the Government from the Great
Rebellion.

By William Jegon, late Fellow of Kings-College in Cambridge, and Rector of
Swanton Morley in Norfolk.

LONDON: Printed for Will. Oliver, Bookseller in Norwich, 1685.

Imprimatur.

Aug. 27. 1685.

C. Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

To the Right Worshipful FRANCIS GARDENER, Esquire MAYOR of the City of Norwich,
And one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of NORFOLK.
WORTHY SIR,
THAT the Publication of this Discourse is entirely owing to your earnest
solicitation, I can safely avow to the World, having by me sufficient evidence
of it, I mean your Letter, which, if it were allowable to produce it, would
evince more than I appeal to it for, even that I could not without incurring
the imputation of rudeness, or at least affected modesty, decline your request;
but I can further Appeal to you, and am secure of your attestation, that I
consented to it with this condition, that our worthy Diocesans approbation
should be first obtained, which you readily undertook, and have it seems
effected: And this is what I had to say concerning the Publication. As to the
substance of the Discourse I have little else to say but that I am sure it is
honest, and I have this convincing evidence of it, that you yourself approved
it, whose invincible Loyalty is so well known, and known to be so well grounded.

Whether it may do that service you conceive, whatever I wish, I am sure I have
too much cause to fear, when after so many excellent Discourses Published to
the same purpose, to prove the absolute Unlawfulness of Resistance, and proving
it to all the purposes of Conviction, we find persons at this time of day the
most notoriously guilty of it, that will not at their last dying moments be
induced to own it or repent of it, which may serve for a confirming evidence of
what I urge toward the conclusion of my Discourse, that this sin of Resistance
is seldom at all, and seldomer truly repented of, and therefore the more to be
dreaded as, if not certainly, yet too too probably exposing to Damnation in the
saddest sense.

But if it may contribute in any the least measure to those Ends you may
conceive, and wish it may, and, it seems, hope it will, those excellent Ends
you yourself with so much zeal and constancy, with such unwearied diligence
pursue, even the service of our Sovereign and the security of the Government, I
shall think myself happy, and thankfully acknowledge it: But however the event
be, which is uncertain, if you will please to interest yourself in it, by
accepting this Discourse, whereof you occasioned the Publication, you will very
certainly and sufficiently oblige,

Swan^on Morley, Aug. 10. 1685. SIR, Your most Humble Servant, WILLIAM JEGON.

ROMANS XIII. 2. They that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.


It Is true, we have lost, to the great and general grief of all good People,
the principal subject of this days Anniversary Solemnity, our Late Excellent
Sovereign, who was this day wonderfully born, and this day more wonderfully
restored, or rather (if I may so say) newborn to his People; we have lost him
indeed, and such is our loss, so very great and so justly deplorable, that I
could almost be tempted to laments on this very day of public festivity and
rejoicing: And I presume I might very excusably give way to them, were it not
that this loss is so happily repaired, as there may seem to have passed rather
an exchange than a loss, and an exchange rather of Names than Persons. The
Tempers, the Virtue, and the very souls of the two Royal Brothers being so
like, so undistinguishable, that we are scarce sensible even of a change, but
think, or may think that both the Brothers live as formerly, and, as formerly,
act with one soul still.

But be it that we have lost the main and principal subject of this days Annual
Joy, yet have we not wholly lost the ground of it; for this day is Sacred and
Memorable, not only for the birth of our late Sovereign, but (as we all know)
for his Restoration too: Nor his alone, but the whole Nations Happiness and
the Churches Honor, I had almost said her very Being; for she lay so long time
buried in the dust and rubbish of Anarchy and Confusion, that she seemed almost
forgotten, as though she had never been; and therefore her Restoration might
not improperly be styled her Resurrection. But however that be, and whatever
the Church of England is for outward splendor and beauty of Holiness, all is
the effect of this days Mercy, which ought therefore to be ever sacred and
memorable with us, as it is ordered to be by public Authority. And though indeed
we have of late had too much cause, (such was the will of Heaven) to mourn, yet
still this day is sacred to festivity on the whole Nations account, but
especially on the Churches; and we ought to rejoice accordingly, and humbly and
heartily bless and praise Almighty God on her behalf, and devoutly and
earnestly pray for the continuance of that happiness she was this day restored
to, that Peace may still be within her Walls, and plenteousness within her
Palaces: And this is a Duty incumbent upon all her Children at all times,
especially now on this memorable day, and it is to be hoped we shall be all
accordingly affected to the suiting both our hearts and offices to the Grand
occasion.

But then we may be allowed to remember, as well from what a wretched state of
misery and confusion, as to what a glorious state of happiness and peace we of
this Church and Nation were by this days mercy advanced, and withal what
Principles were set on foot, and what Practices made use of to bring us to that
wretched state, and accordingly to endeavor the refutation of those, and, as
far as in us lies, the prevention of these for the future.

And as to the Church which was most concerned in them, notwithstanding what
was hinted of her resurrection this day by way of allusion, it is to be
considered she is not yet Triumphant (God knows*) but too plainly Militant
still, and under Persecution from the Tongues and Pens of perverse men, her
Adversaries on either side of her; and both so constant in their malicious
opposition to her, that she seems indeed (as she has been represented) the
very transcript of her Savior suffering between two Malefactors, with this
difference still, that both revile her, and but one her Savior.

For on the one hand she is taxed with plain Protestantism, or professing the
true reformed Religion, on the other with pretended Popery: Her Enemies on that
side brand her for Schismatical, on this for Antichristian: By those she is
twitted with Novelty, by these with Antiquity as high up as the first working
of the mystery of Iniquity, whenever it was.

But the misery is, and it is really pittyable, that all her protesting,
renouncing and abjuring Popery, will not suffice to clear her of it: Not all
her Vindications and repeated Victories by her invincible Champions over all
her Adversaries of the Roman Communion, can either convince or satisfy, or at
least silence her domestic Opposers, but still she is exclaimed against as
Popish, plainly Popish in her Government, in her Liturgies, and in her
Ceremonies: Yea, her Ministers, how formidable soever, as Adversaries to the
Church of Rome or Bulwark to their own, and by the ingenuous of that Church
reputed rather not Catholics than Heretics, as the rest style them, are yet
at home, by her true Protestant sticklers, loudly represented as Papists in
Masquerade, if not plainly and openly Popish.

As for her Doctrine, it is, as Reformed, wholly opposed to Popery, and
therefore sure by no means censurable as Popish: Well, I meddle not with other
points of her Doctrine now, but I am very sure it can never be thought either
Popish or Phanatical in the point of Obedience to the Higher Powers, which is
the subject of my Text: For this she as clearly asserts, as firmly establishes,
and faithfully and constantly practiced as ever was done in any of the purest
and best Ages of Christianity.

And to give some little hints of her opposition both to Popery and Phanaticism
in this point: She does not derive her Sovereign's Authority either from the
Pope immediately, or from the People: She does not subject him to a Conclave or
a Consistory, or a High Court of Justice: She does not allow him to be
sentenced and deposed by a General Council or a General Assembly: To be cut off
by a Knife, nor yet by an Axe: To be posted out of the World by Powder in
Barrels, or Powder and somewhat else in Blunderbusses: Nay, she does not allow
him to be so much as resisted upon any pretense whatsoever, without danger of
Damnation in the saddest sense.

I need not tell you at this time of day that there have been Doctrines
currently vented, and practices set on foot exactly agreeing to them, but both
as directly opposite to the Doctrine of our Church; yea, and of the whole
Church of Christ too, for a thousand years at least, as any thing can possibly
be: It may therefore seem very seasonable, upon such an occasional meeting as
this, to enquire what the Scripture asserts in the Case, and see whether it
does not fully authorize the Doctrine of our Church, and condemn the contrary:
Accordingly I have chosen a Text, the clearest and severest against Resisting,
of any in the whole Bible, They that resist, shall receive to themselves
Damnation.

It has been observed from sundry of the Ancients, that in the Infancy of
Christianity, there was a rumor spread (which is supposed to have taken its
rise from Judas of Galilee, mentioned, Act. 5.37.) that the Gospel was designed
to undermine Kingdoms and Commonwealths; as if indeed the design of our
Saviors first coming were the same with that which is reserved for his second,
1 Cor. 15.24.
To put down all rule, and all authority, and power: And that for this reason
our Savior himself, and his Apostles, did so frequently and so earnestly
inculcate the Doctrine of Obedience to the Higher Powers, that the Religion
might not incur an odium.

I say nothing now to the reason alleged, but that both our Savior himself
and his Apostles did actually inculcate so the said Doctrine, is obvious to all
that are never so little conversant in the Sacred Writings; and were there no
other Instances to be produced thence, yet this place of Sr. Paul, from whence
I have my Text, is so plain and pregnant, so full and comprehensive, as there
needs no more to inform and satisfy the consciences of those who are willing
to know their Duty, and do not seek for cavil or subterfuge rather than
satisfaction.

And so fully has this place been canvas'd and discussed, the Point so amply
debated, and the Case so c^early stated from hence, that there can be no
pretense of ignorance but what is more or less wilful, and let us take a
cursory view of the context, which begins thus:

Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, that is, to the supreme
Authority of a Nation in whomsoever vested, as is unanimously agreed on by all
unprejudiced men of sense and learning, and clearly determined by the context
following; the word (...), Powers, being afterward explained by (...), Rulers,
Ver. 3. and (...), the Ministers of God, Ver. 4. and (...) being ordinarily
used both by Classic Authors, and by St. Peter himself for supreme, and so
rendered by our Translators, 1 Pet. 2.13.

To these Higher or Supreme Powers, the Apostle requires expressly that every
soul be subject: And here it is pertinently remarked by Origin, that the Apostle
has put his injunction in a term the most general and comprehensive that could
be, and yet particularly applicable to every individual, let every soul be
subject, as obliging all that have but a common soul or spirit.

And our Church Homilies are very particular too, and no less pertinent in
their remark upon this place. Homily of Obedience, page 64. Ed. 1673.
We ought diligently to obey St. Paul, that dear and chosen Apostle of Christ,
even as we would obey our Savior Christ himself if he were here present; and
let us learn of him, that all persons having souls (he excepteth none, nor
exempteth none, neither Priest, Apostle, nor Prophet, says St. Chrysostom And
he says it indeed yet more particularly: And to the same purpose Theodoret,
and long after both, St. Bernard.
) do owe of bounden Duty, and even in conscience, Obedience, Submission and
Subjection to the Higher Powers which be set in Authority by God: Forasmuch as
they be God's Lieutenants, God's Presidents, God's Commissioners, God's Judges,
ordained of God himself, of whom alone they have all their Power and all their
Authority; and the same St. Paul threatens no less pain than everlasting
damnation to all disobedient Persons, to all resisters against this general and
common Authority: Forasmuch as they resist not man but God, not man's device
and invention, but God's Wisdom, God's Order, Power and Authority.

This is sufficiently plain, and this must be granted the standing sense of the
Church of England touching this place of the Apostle, because these Homilies,
and the Doctrine contained in them, are established by public Authority.

And the same in substance was the current sense of the whole Church of Christ
in the first and purest Ages of it, and generally of the Churches of the
Reformation.

But to proceed, the Apostle adds, as the ground or reason of this universal
subjection to the Higher Powers, that there is no Power but of God: The Powers
that be (or the Powers then in being, for so some understand (...), and so
Nero's Power who was then regnant) are ordained of God. Can any thing possibly
be more plain than this for the Divine Institution of Sovereignty? a thing so
plain indeed, not only from this and sundry other places of Holy Writ, but from
natural reason too, that one of the Ancients affirms, Orosius.
they who have not read the Scriptures do think it (as very many Learned
Heathens have declared they did) and they who have read them do know it. And in
no one point of Christian Doctrine have the Ancient Sages of our Religion, the
Primitive Fathers, more unanimously agreed, as the Unlearned as well as the
Learned know at this time of day: And all the Churches of the Reformation are
clear for it, as appears from their Confessions. And for our own Church, yea,
and State too, for I may safely join them together in this, they are as express
for it as the plainest words can show them to be:

The Common Lawyers agreeing in it with the Casuists, and the Statutes as
plainly and fully asserting it as the Canons.

But if there were nothing else to prove it, yet the Power of the Sword, or the
Power of Life and Death, which is an essential branch of Sovereignty,
undeniably evinces it to be originally from God, who alone could give the said
Power; and I would fain see it proved, that the King-creating People ever had
this Power: And if they never had it themselves, how they could impart it is
somewhat mysterious.

But notwithstanding so general and unanimous a consent both of Churches and
Persons, as well Ancient as Modern, in a point so very plain from the Apostle,
and in a manner self-evident, great numbers in the Church of Rome, and the
Jesuits especially, assert the contrary, and therein are followed by the
generality of our Seperatists, That all supreme Power is originally and
radically seated in the People, and that if Kings fail of their Duty, the
People may supply it; at least in some Cases may do it of themselves: That
Kings are accountable to the People as their Superiors, and not only censurable
and punishable, but as they are pleased to express it, Dethronable.

I shall not stand to dispute the Point with them now, but bating the
invincible evidence to the contrary of this from the Power of the Sword,
wherewith Sovereign Princes are invested, I shall only put this Query, Whether
more deference in point of credit and authority be due to St. Paul, and the
most eminent Divines of the Church of Christ in all Ages, and these backed with
the concurrent sense of all sober Heathens, or to the Romish and Protestant
Jesuits in this point, and without more ado I shall leave it to you

I have hitherto insisted upon the Context, and shown how it has been (as St.
Peter signified of old, concerning some other passages of our Apostle) wrested
by (the unlearned and unstable shall I say? yea, rather by) the malicious and
seditious to their own destruction, eternal, it is to be feared; and how justly
to be feared, will appear by enquirng into the Words I have chosen for my Text,
which are as plain and express against resisting, as the Context for obeying
the Higher Powers, They that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.

Which Words, as they stand in our Translation, are plain indeed, but as they
are in the Original, they are more liable to cavil and exception, and then it is
not to be expected they should escape it, when there have been, in sundry Ages,
so many whose Interest it was to make it, in order to the success (I mean) of
their wicked Attempts.

To the Term of resisting there is not much exception made, for though it may
sometimes signify no more than to act contrary to the Command of the Higher
Powers, yet it cannot bear that signification in my Text, because the Higher
Powers may possibly command that which we are obliged, by a Power Superior to
theirs, to act contrary to, as if they Command any thing repugnant to the
express Word of God, then as St. Peter has determined the case, and as it is
universally agreed on, we ought to obey God, and not Man; not any Human Power
whatsoever, but to act contrary to their Command: And that, for certain, is not
to incur Damnation in the saddest sense, of which the word, (...) here is
confessedly capable. But to resist (as the very Words used by the Apostle here
plainly import) is to use hostile violence, or forcibly to withstand, and that
is to incur Damnation, according to our rendering the word (...), which the
Apostle uses in the Text; but whether the word does really import here
Damnation in the saddest sense, that is, eternal Condemnation from God, or only
some Temporal Mulct or Punishment from the Magistrate, Whether it be unto
Death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment, has
been, and still is, made a Question: And truly I have not seen any
determination of it so clear, Author Anonymus.
as it seems to me capable of. A learned man, of the late times, has told us
indeed, That the Analogy of the place will sufficiently evince the Point, that
this word, (...), is like a sword with two edges, fitted not only to kill the
Body, but to destroy the Soul also; that it threatens punishment from the
Magistrate, is very true, but not all: Ye must needs be subject, not only for
Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. You are exhorted not to Rebel, because you
may be Hanged: But lest confidence in Numbers should answer this Objection, a
stronger motive is used, You shall certainly be Damned. It is probable you may
take the Gallows in your way, but, however, Hell will be the end: Yea, though
you escape a shameful Death, yet you have forfeited eternal Life.

It may be so, as this Author says, and indeed it is too probable, but he has
not clearly evinced it.

Some have gone further, and said much more, but I conceive not all that might
be said upon it: And of late, in popular Discourses, it has been rather taken
for granted, than designedly proved. I humbly offer, therefore, the result of
my Meditations upon the Point, and upon the Text, and I shall do it in this
method.

1. I shall endeavor to prove, that (...), in this place, does really signify
Damnation in the saddest sense, that is, eternal Condemnation from God, though
not excluding the other more gentle sense of Temporal Punishment from the
Magistrate.

2. I shall show that there is nothing to take off the force of this
intermination, no just case of exception against the rule of my Text, no
pretense allowable; but for Subjects to resist, I mean, forcibly to resist
their Lawful Sovereign, is absolutely and universally to incur Damnation, and
nothing to atone for the Crime, in the sight of God, or to prevent the
Punishment threatened here, but Repentance. And this is all I can think
necessary to insist upon from the Words, saving only some little matter by way
of Application.

I begin with the first, that (...), in this place, does realy signify
Damnation in the saddest sense.

Now, it is granted, the Word does signify, in Scripture, sometimes Human
Judgment, sometimes Capital Punishment, or the Sentence of Death inflicted upon
Malefactors: But then it must be granted too, that, in many more places of
Scripture, it signifies Divine and Eternal Punishment, or Damnation in the
saddest sense: And that not only where it is joined with other words, that
plainly point and direct to that sense, but where it stands by it self alone,
without any additional note or point of direction: And this has been showed at
large by learned men, Particularly Dr. Hammond, in loc. and alibi. and Dr.
Falkener, Christian Loyalty. Part 2.
and so need not be stood upon now.

But this being taken for granted, that more generally the Scripture uses the
Word for Damnation in the saddest sense, the only question is, Whether so here
in my Text, or no? I do not say excluding, but implying the other sense too of
Temporal Punishment from the Magistrate.

There is, indeed, another remarkable place where the Word is used, but in what
sense, is alike questioned; and that is, 1 Cor. 11.29. where it is applied to
Unworthy Communicants: He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks (...), we read, Damnation to himself: But whatever the real sense of
(...) be there, it has been very pertinently observed, that in the late unhappy
times, when the question was most stiffly canvass'd about the sense of my Text,
most of those who were hottest for the gentler sense in the place of my Text,
as making for their Interest who were actually in Arms against their Sovereign,
and little feared any Temporal Punishment, were as hot for the sadder sense of
the same Word in that other place to the Corinthians: And the result was, that
effectual care was taken men should not incur Damnation for Communicating
unworthily, by keeping them from Communicating at all, for several years
together.

But then, that men might not be as much deterred from resisting, or taking up
Arms against the King, or continuing in them, by any fear or apprehension of
(...), signifying Damnation indeed in this place of my Text; it was eagerly
contended for the gentler sense to be affixed to this place, that (...) here
should signify only some Temporal Punishment, which the King might inflict, if
he happened to Conquer his Rebels up in Arms against him: And if it should come
to that once, then men were to look to themselves, and escape as well as they
could.

Then resisting, or taking up Arms, Against the King.
would be plain downright Rebellion, and of a most horrid nature, but not
'till then, according to Cromwell's Doctrine, who, in the midst of the late War,
declared, (it seems) That if he and his Party prevailed, their opposers would
be accounted the grandest Traitors, to the State, that ever were: But if the
King should prevail, their undertaking would be judged the most horrid and
black Rebellion that ever the Sun beheld. Then have a care of Attainders and
Executions, of Gibbets or Axes, Confiscations or Imprisonments; but no beware
of Damnation all this while: No, that was no part of their care or fear, and,
indeed, Why should it? If taking up Arms against their Sovereign, were neither
threatened, nor like to be attended with any worse consequence, than only some
Temporal Mulct or Punishment, which were certain to be avoided by Conquest, if
that were the issue: Or, if the worst should happen, it were more than possible
to be avoided by flight or concealment, or perhaps by the clemency of the
Conqueror, or at least the number of Resisters would secure the far greatest
part from the utmost severities.

And when there was so many starting holes, so many, ( possible, shall I say?
nay,) probable ways of escaping this (...) of the Apostle, in their sense of
it, who would needs have it import only some Temporal Punishment from the
Magistrate, Why should they fear resisting or taking up Arms, or continuing in
them, and not rather go on to fight manfully the Lords Battles, and help him
against the mighty; when they were so far from incurring Damnation for it, that
they were plainly accursed if they did not, as they were frequently and roundly
told from that Jer. 48 10.
place of the Prophet, wretchedly mis-applied: Cursed is he that does the work
of the Lord deceitfully, or negligently, and cursed is he that keeps back his
sword from blood?

But, to recollect my self, though what has been now said cannot favor much of
digression, because the Tenets and Practices specified, are plain natural
results from the premises laid down: For if to resist be not to incur Damnation
in the saddest sense, but barely and simply some Temporal Mulct or Punishment
from the Magistrate, and that too not certain, not inevitable, and far from
that, What should hinder resisting at any time upon a prospect of Conquest, or
at least a considerable advantage?

But, God be thanked, the case is not altogether so clear for them, for it is
certainly possible, that (...), in this place, may signify Damnation in the
saddest sense, as it does confessedly in sundry other places of Holy Writ; and,
if it were only so, Resisters cannot be altogether secure.

But not to rest here, I shall forthwith betake me to the clearing my first
Proposition, that (...), in this place of my Text, does really signify
Damnation in the saddest sense: And this I shall show,

1. From the Context or the Analogy of the place.

2. From the current sense of the most approved Expositors; and,

3. From parallel places of Holy-Writ, which represent Resisting as a Crime of
a most gross horrid Nature, and consequently, damning in the sight God.

1. I shall show it from the Context or the Analogy of the place.

And here, 1. Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, is plainly the
Precept established upon this Penalty, whatever it be that (...) imports; and
we are pretty well agreed about the Notion of the Higher Powers: However, I
have proved already that it signifies the supreme Authority of a Nation, in
whomsoever vested. That we be subject to this Authority, is an Apostolical
Precept; and our Blessed Savior has expressly given the same Authority to his
Apostles Doctrine, as to his own delivered by himself, and commanded them to be
received with the same deference of belief and submission, as what they deliver
in point of Doctrine or Precept as himself: He that receives you, receives
me, and he that receives me, receives him that sent me, St. Matt. 10.40. And,
as it was intimated before, as the sense of the Church of England, we ought to
obey St. Paul, even as we would obey Christ himself: And sure, from what has
been said, it is plain we ought. Whatever then the Apostles deliver, as the
Doctrine of Christ, is Gospel as much as any thing Recorded by the four
Evangelists: And the Apostle is very plain for this, That all who obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. Subjection to the Higher Powers is here expressly
enjoined by the Apostle, and consequently is a Gospel Precept: And
notwithstanding Mr. Baxter's nicety of a Resistance not contrary to subjection,
certainly all forcible Resistance, which is plainly the Apostles meaning here,
is sufficiently contrary to subjection. Now, whether to resist the Higher
Powers, and consequently to disobey the Gospel, be not to incur everlasting
Destruction, or Damnation in the saddest sense, I leave to be considered.

Again, 2. All Power, and by a necessary consequence the Higher Powers, are of
Divine Institution: This is expressly asserted by the Apostle here, There is no
Power but of God: the Powers that be, are ordained of God: And thence he
infers, That whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God.
Now, whether to resist a plain Ordinance of God, an institution founded and
established by Divine Authority, if we will take the Apostles word for it, be
not to offer contempt to the sacred Authority of God himself, and so to incur
his final dispeasure, and consequently Damnation in the saddest sense, without
Repentance, I leave again to be considered.

3. The Apostle adds here, Verse. 5. of this Chap. Ye must be subject, not only
for wrath, but also for conscience sake: Here by wrath, all the World
understands Temporal Punishment: And, as Dr. Hammond hereupon urges, if that
were all that is meant by (...) in the Text, it could not be true, much less
concluded thence, that men must be subject, not only for wrath; but if we must
needs be subject, and by, at least, an equal necessity, not resist, not only
for wrath, or for fear of Temporal Punishment, then he that does actually
resist, shall receive or incur more than a Temporal Punishment, even all the
consequence of a mounded, grieved conscience, which, when it accuses, binds
over to eternal wrath, or Damnation in the saddest sense, without repentance,
as no man doubts, that pretends any acquaintance with the Christian Doctrine.
If therefore we will allow the Apostle to speak sense here, we must grant there
lies on us, from these words, a necessity of subjection, and consequently of
not resisting for some higher and further reason, than only a fear of temporal
punishment; and what that can be other than eternal, or Damnation in the
saddest sense, I leave again to be considered.

But here it is urged bo way of Objection, and that from the Context too, that
(...), in this place, must signify only some Temporal Punishment from the
Higher Powers, because it follows immediately, Rulers are not a terror to good
Works, but to the evil.

By the way, their Objection plainly implies, that to resist is an evil Work,
or else it were not punishable by the Magistrate; and as such it is, as all
other evil Works are, not only a ground of Temporal Punishment, but exposes Men
to Eternal, without Repentance.

But to answer directly to the Objection; 1. It is not denied, but Resistance
is a matter which the Magistrate is concerned to punish; and they that actually
resist him, may secure themselves: he will punish them for it, if it be in his
power, and he be not some way appeased, or otherwise prevented. But who can
persuade himself, that the Blessed Apostle, by the Spirit of God directing him,
should threaten so great a Crime as Resisting, which is no better than
Rebellion, and that is as the sin of witchcraft, with an award which is common
to it, with the meanest offenses in the World? nay, that the Great and Learned
Apostle should argue against resisting from so poor a Topic, as fear of
Temporal Punishment only, seems to me so jejune and flat, as is infinitely
below his Character, as the great Doctor of the Gentiles: He needed not his
Education at the feet of Gamaliel, much less his Infallibility as an Apostle to
dictate this, for certainly Nokes or a Styles, a Cade or a Kett, or any of the
Rabble of Resisters, need not be told that they incur a Temporal Punishment
from the Magistrate, if they be subdued and taken in the Act of Resisting, or
deprehended in the Attempt or Design of it. But if they happen to subdue or awe
the Magistrate, or some way or other to escape, as it is odds but they may, at
least the more inconsiderable among them, What signifies the intermination of
the Magistrates Anger, and the consequence of it, some Temporal Punishment, to
deter them from resisting?

2. Again, If fear of Temporal Punishment were the sum of the Apostles Argument
in this place, Why should he particularly apply it to the instance of
resisting? the supreme Magistrate might be said indeed not to bear the sword
altogether in vain, if he did bear it only against Treason, Rebellion, and such
like violations of Majesty, as immediately concern his own Person: But
certainly he could not be said to bear it to any great purposes of advantage to
the Commonwealth, or Community of his Subjects, if he did not bear it against
other Criminals and Malefactors as well as against Resisters or Traitors, and
if equally against all, Why the Apostle should alledg the fear or danger of it
against Resisters only? if that were all he meant, I am very much to seek; and
therefore, methinks, for the honor of the Apostle, Christians should not
presume to father so trifling an Argument upon him, as that if any resist the
Higher Powers, they shall receive a Temporal Punishment: If we understand the
merit here, and not the event, that resisters deserve a Temporal Punishment,
it is very true indeed, but to no great purpose of deterring them: If the event,
it will not always hold, for certain, it will not in the ca^e of a prosperous
Rebellion, or flight, or concealment, or some other way of avoidance.

And now to sum up what has been said upon this first Argument taken from the
Context; Seeing, 1. It is an Apostolical, and consequently a Gospel Precept,
That we be subject to the Higher Powers; and to resist them, in the plain sense
of my Text, must be granted not to be subject, and not to be subject, is not to
obey the Gospel, and not to obey the Gospel, is, to incur everlasting
Destruction, without Repentance.

Seeing in the second place, that to resist the Higher Powers is evidently to
resist the Ordinance of God, and that is to offer contempt to the sacred
Authority of God himself, and that can be no less than to incur his final
displeasure, and consequently, Damnation in the saddest sense, without
Repentance still.

3. Seeing we must needs be subject, and, by consequence, not resist, not only
for wrath, or for fear of Temporal Punishment, it must be for some other
reason, or on some further account, and that is, plainly, for fear of wounding
our Consciences, which will certainly expose us to the wrath eternal, without
Repentance.

4. And lastly, Seeing it were exceedingly below the Apostle to argue against
Resisting, from so poor a Topic, as fear of Temporal Punishment only, which
all the World knows will certainly attend the Crime of Resisting, if not some
way or other prevented, and which might as well be urged against any other
instance of offending the Laws. I shall not make my own reference, but leave it
as before to be considered, whether the Apostle can reasonably be supposed to
intend by the word (...), in this place, any thing less that eternal Damnation,
without Repentance, as the punishment of Resisting.

And so I proceed to my second medium, by which I proposed to prove this, and
that is the current sense of the most approved Expositors.

And here I might urge what I find asserted to my hand, that not one Writer for
a thousand years, of any credit in the Church, did ever doubt or question the
Doctrine of Obedience to the Higher Powers, as it is maintained by the Church of
England, or the unlawfulness of resisting them, upon any pretense whatever: And
why? but because the Holy Scripture so frequently, and particularly St. Paul,
here in this Chapter has so plainly stated it, made it so clear and manifest,
and so formidably threatened the oppugners of it. And for the practice of the
Primitive Christians in all parts of the Word (which is incomparably the best
Comment upon the Scriptures of the New Testament) it is very certain they were
universally subject to their Governors, in omnibus licitis, and never resisted
them, whatever ground or pretense they might have for it; and this, indeed, is
almost as universally acknowledged that they did not actually resist: Their
Reasons we shall after enquire into. But take we this by the way, in St.
Austin's words; Their Demeanor was perpetually and invincibly Loyal toward
their Temporal Governors, without any the least Resistance, propter Dominum
eternum, for fear of offending their great and eternal Sovereign, the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and thereby incurring his final displeasure, the effects
whereof are intolerable and eternal, and altogether unavoidable, but only by
Repentance.

But to be more particular, with reference to the Argument in hand.

Among the Ancients, St. Chrysostom, and those who followed by way of
expounding the Scriptures nearest the Letter, for the rest, almost all before
him, were mostly given to Allegorical Expositions: St. Chrysostom, I say, and
his followers, as Theophylact and Oecumenius, I may add Photius too, for so
much as remains of his Comments, are generally accounted the best Commentators.
St. Chrysostom (says a Dr. Cave his Life St. Chrystom.
Learned Man of our own Church) had so happy a Talent in expounding the
Scripture, in the most obvious and litteral sense, that, as an Ancient Writer
assures us, his judgment herein was accounted the common standard of the
Church, and out-weigh'd the Expositions of all the other Fathers: Now he and
his followers, with one consent, declare plainly, if not expressly too, for the
sadder sense of (...) in this place. St. Chrysostom's (...), no light, but very
severe vengeance, and that from God, who is (...), a severe avenger of all such
as contemn these Higher Powers, and thereby, (...), exceedingly provoke God, is
sufficiently clear for my purpose; and so Theophylact, (...), he that resists
shall be punished by God himself: And to the same purpose, Photius in
Oecumenius (whom I may therefore cite as one) expressly interprets the word
(...) here, by (...), Condemnation from God. I deny not but all these, how much
soever they are for the sadder sense of (...) here, do withal include the other
sense too of Temporal Punishment from the Magistrate; which I know none that
offers to exclude, though I think it not very necessary to be urgent for it, or
lay any great stress upon it, because so likely to follow in all cases of
Resisting that are improsperous, and do not prevail upon the Legal established
Authoity.

But be it that the Apostle implied, in the word (...) here, a Temporal
Punishment from the Magistrate, so it be granted, as it is by these Ancients
expressly, that he meant by it, and that chiefly too, eternal Damnation from God.

And with these of the Greek Church, agree St. Ambrose and St. Austin for the
Latin. St. Ambrose upon those words, Ye must needs be subject, not only for
wrath, id est, ultionem presentem; that is, says he, for fear of present or
temporal vengeance, sed and propter futurum judicium, but also for fear of the
judgment to come, quia si hic evascerint, illic eos poena expectat ubi ipsa
accusante conscientia punientur: For however, says he, they escape here, yet
there their own conscience will be their accuser, and God himself their avenger.

And St. Austin says, Ep. 1^
concerning Resisters, that besides what they may suffer from men, apud Deum
fortem non habebunt, they shall have no part with God; and elsewhere he reckons
it very clear and manifest: Patet (says he) mortale peccatum esse potestati
civili resistere, it is evident, that to resist the Civil Power is a Mortal Sin:
And by Mortal, we know he means a Sin of a damning nature, that fearfully
exposes to the wrath and indignation of Almighty God.

And with these consents St. Bernard too, though living in an Age when the
Papal Power had not a little encroach'd upon the Imperial, but much corrupted
the Christian Doctrine in point of Obedience to the Higher Power: Yet he, even
in that Age, asserted it damnable in the saddest sense to resist, and that from
this place of the Apostle in my Text Ep. 1^ and 221. Ludovic Regem.
.

And to come down to those of the Reformation, the generality of them are
clear, if not for the sadder sense of (...) here, yet, which is all one, for
the damning nature of Resistance; even Paraeus, who has been censured for some
unadvised expressions in the Case, is very clear and right with others in his
Comment upon my Text, not only affiring that (...) here may be taken in either
sense, of Temporal or Eternal Punishment: But that however Resisters may escape
the hands of Men, yet, Certe a Deo, from God they are sure of a severe award.

And to Contract, the most eminent Divines of the Reformation, though they
meddle not with the word (...) in my Text, yet they agree in the substance of
it, generally asserting it damnable to resist; and none, or very few of those
that call themselves Protestant Divines, are Dissenters in this, but only those
of the Kirk of Scotland, and their Brethren here, the Presbyterians and
Phanaticks.

As for the sense of the Church of England, and all her Divines, or true and
regular Sons, as well as Fathers in the case, it is so plain and clear, and so
very well known that, it were an inexcusable impertinence to insist
particularly upon it at this time of day.

And now being compassed with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, having such a
concurrent stream of Expositors and others on my side, I hope I may venture to
assert, from the importance of the word (...) in my Text, that it is a sin of a
damning nature to resist the Higher Powers.

But I shall add to the Confirmation of it, from my third proposed Topic, and
that is, from parallel places of Holy Writ, which represent resisting as a
Crime of a most horrid nature, or at least a very great sin against God, and
consequently of a damning nature.

I instance, 1. In that very remarkable expression of Moses to Korah and his
Company, when they associated themselves together against him, and were not far
from taking up Arms, but certainly so far resisted him, as openly to oppose his
Authority, as an encroachment upon them. Ye are gathered together, says he to
Korah the Ringleader, thou and all thy Company are gathered together against
the Lord, Numb. 16.11.

They were not so senseless as to gather together intentionally against the
Lord; no, but they were gathered together against Moses, their supreme Civil
Governor appointed so by God, against Aaron the chief in the Ecclesiastical
Administration: And this Moses calls their gathering together against the Lord.
And, as Archbishop Usher observes, even Women did see plainly that in opposing
Moses and Aaron in such a manner, they opposed God himself, the ordainer of
their Authority, for so the Daughters of Zelophehad, Mumb. 27.3.

But for a full Confirmation of it, God himself attested it in such a manner,
as sufficiently showed his extreme indignation against it, and consigned, to
all succeeding Ages, his utter abhorrence and detestation of Resisting, as a
Crime of a most highly dreadful, and consequently damning nature; and
certainly, (as one observes) that some have smarted for it eternally, is for
ever enough to convince us, that God is highly dispeased with every one that
thrusts himself into the guilt of it. But of these first Resisters, the Text
tells us, That they went down alive into the Pit, according to our Translation;
but the Margin reads into Hell, which Optatus Contr^ Parmen
understands literally, Tartareo carcere subito clausi: For certain to such as
follow their steps, St. Jude says, Is reserved the blackness of darkness for
ever, St. Jude 13. and St. Peter says the same, 2 Pet. 2.17.

2. But a second Instance is that of Samuel, who telling the People that had
been importunate with him for a King to be set over them, after the manner of
their Neighboring Nations, when indeed they were under a Theocracy, God
himself being immediately their King: Samuel, I say, telling them the manner of
a King, in such Instances as some will have to savor of an Arbitrary Power,
though others reckon them only the necessary burdens and charges of Government.
However that be, the Prophet adds, that when they had once subjected themselves
to that Power, and felt themselves aggrieved by it, they should cry out in that
day, because of their King they had chosen them, and the Lord would not hear
them in that day; it seems they should have nothing left them, even in case of
real grievance, but recourse to God, and that would prove, in their case,
ineffectual too, God would not hear them. But how if they should take upon them
to redress their grievances themselves, by resisting and taking up Arms against
their King? Why! it would only be directly and daringly to entrench upon God's
Prerogative of Vengeance: But of that I leave you to conceive the issue.

3. But we have yet a plainer instance of the criminal nature of Resisting. 1 Samuel 26, where David having opportunity, which alone is oftentimes incentive
enough in such cases, and absolute Power to have destroyed the King his Enemy,
when it is certain he could as easily have taken away Readiness Life as his Spear,
and we may suppose him prompted to it by two powerful motives, Interest and
Revenge. And whatever there might be of guilt in it, Abishai offered to take
that upon himself by perpetrating the fact, and laying violent hands upon Saul:
Yet David would by no means suffer it, but urged this remarkable Query against
it; Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's Anointed and be
guiltless? But before whom should David have been guilty? Or to whom
accountable, if he had consented? for he was (as I may say) Heir apparent to
the Crown by Divine Designation: And was not the King his implacable Enemy,
that had persecuted him with the utmost of malice and virulency, against Law
and against Reason? and had not God (as Abishai urged to him) delivered his
Enemy into his hand, by casting all his Army into a deep sleep? and had cut
them off, and the King with them, Who should have called David to an account
for it?

Why truly nothing of all this was in the least to be feared in the Case: And
yet David was infinitely afraid of stretching forth his hand against the Lords
Anointed, or suffering another to do it, because of the guilt attending it in
the sight of God.

No! Homily of Obedience Part. II.
As the sense of the Church of England is in her Homilies, concerning this very
instance, David durst not for fear of offending God and his own Conscience
(though he had occasion and opportunity for it) once lay his hand upon God's High
Officer, The King.
whom he did know to be a Person reserved and kept for his Office-sake only to
God's Punishment and Judgment. And from this instance of David's invincible
Loyalty, so clear and manifest, so abundantly evident (one would think) beyond
contradiction, the Homily aforesaid infers, that it is an intolerable
ignorance, madness and wickedness, for Subjects to make any Murmuring,
Rebellion, Resistance, or Withstanding, Commotion or Insurrection against their
most Dear and most Dread Sovereign Lord and King, ordained of God's Goodness
for their Commodity, Peace and Quietness.

And if we may judge of the Criminal nature of Resisting, by God's severe
proceedings against the Authors of it, What can we think, but that it is
infinitely odious in his sight?

When the first and most remarkable instance of it he punished by an
astonishing Miracle, the Earth opening and swallowing up all the Resisters: And
though it is true, nothing of this did ever happen again, yet that it did so once,
is enough to assure us of God's eternal detestation of the Crime.

And in the next remarkable instance, I mean that of Absalom, so strangely
infatuating the Counsels of the most politic, and so amazingly bringing the
miserable Ringleader to his end, by making the Hair of his Head instrumental to
his ruin, and cutting him off thus in the very act of his Crime,
notwithstanding all the care his Royal Father took to prevent it: Sure if we
reflect seriously upon God's severe displeasure, so signally evinced by such
astonishing instances of it, we cannot, with any shadow of reason, imagine that
Resisting should be so light and trivial a matter, as some would fain have it
from their fancied importance of the word (...) in my Text.

And now, I would fain persuade my self, I have made it seem very probable, at
least, that (...) in this place of my Text, does really signify Damnation in
the saddest sense, by what I have urged, 1. From the Context, which I am sure
very strongly inclines to it, if I must not say absolutely clears it. From the
concurrent sense of the most approved Expositors, as well Ancient as Modern:
And, 3. From parallel places of Holy Writ, which very plainly show, that
Resisting is a sin exceedingly displeasing, or rather detestable in the sight
of God, and consequently, I may say, of a damning nature. I am sure our Church
is very clear for the damning nature of it, ^omily against Re^ellion, ^ag. 379.
declaring in express terms, that eternal Damnation is prepared for all
impenitent Rebels in Hell with Satan, the first founder of Rebellion, and grand
Captain of all Rebels: And it is plain, that all Resisters with Her are Rebels.
And the first Council that ever made any Canons against Resisting, was the
fourth Council of Toledo in Spain, Anno 633. for there never was any occasion
for the Churches provision against it before that, say some: For certain there
was not, for the first three hundred and forty years, if not much longer. But
that Council is very severe against the Authors and Abettors of the Crime, not
only Excommunicating and Anathematizing them, but adjudging them to be damned
in God's future Judgment, and to have their part with Judas Iscariot: And this
Sentence was confirmed in the Fifth Council that followed there, and the same
was done in the Council of Calcuth.

But after all, supposing it could not be made so clear as it may seem to be,
that (...) signifies in this place of my Text, eternal Damnation, without
Repentance, yet what assurance can be given to any Christian, that makes the
least doubt or scruple whether it does not, when it cannot be denied but the
word is capable of that sense?

I cannot conceive any other way of satisfying the doubt, or silencing the
scruple, but one of these two; either a plain Demonstration, or a new
Revelation to the contrary.

As for the former of these, the matter is not capable of it: For who can
pretend to Demonstrate, or (to use a term of greater Latitude) undeniably
convince any man living, that the Apostle in this place, and by this word, did
not mean Damnation in the saddest sense?

And for the other way of a new Revelation, however the Person pretending to it
may satisfy himself, he cannot another, of the truth of his Revelation without
a Miracle, or somewhat equivalent to attest it: And without that, what security
can he give that he does not incur that Anathema of the Apostle, against Angel
or Man that should Preach another Gospel, or the contrary to that he had
Preached? Gal. 1.8, 9.

And without such Conviction, as either that of Demonstration, or a new
Revelation sufficiently attested, what infinite hazard is it for a Christian to
venture upon the guilt of Resisting, which, it is more than possible, for
certain may be attended with Damnation in the saddest sense? I am pretty sure
there is no absolute security against it, in case of actual Resisting, but
Repentance only: And that must be granted infinitely hazardous in a War,
especially if the War be sinful.

And for a Person to be taken away suddenly by death, in the very act of
Resisting, as it is possible, yea, probable; nay, let me add, it is very great
odds but he may, if engaged in it, and at his first appearance before the grand
Tribunal, hear the Holy Spirit, or his Amanuensis St. Paul, avouch, that by
(...), in this place, was truly meant Damnation in the saddest sense, is
infinitely astonishing, and much too dreadful in Theory, ever to be hazarded in
Practice by rational Christians, that does indeed believe, and has any
tolerable apprehension of Damnation.

Well! but supposing the worst, Is there nothing to take off the force of this
intermination? No lawful ground of resisting the Higher Powers?

No, not any, as I come to show, according to my second Proposal; namely, that
there is no just case of exception against the rule of my Text, no pretense
allowable: But for Subjects to resist, I mean, forcibly to resist their Lawful
Sovereign, is absolutely and universally to incur Damnation, and nothing to
atone for the crime in the sight of God, or to prevent the Punishment threatened
here, but Repentance.

I confess this assertion cannot but seem a little strange, when there have
been so many cases of exception made against this general Rule, so many
pretenses set on foot, and reckoned allowable, so many starting holes found out.

But I am sure I have very good Authority for what I say, our Laws and Statutes
as well as Canons, and the declared Doctrine of our Church being clear on my
side: And this methinks should seem, in all reason, abundantly sufficient to
any professed Member of our Church, who must necessarily renounce such his
Membership, and cease to be of the Church of England, before he can allow
himself the liberty of resisting.

As for our Laws, that of the 25 of Edw. 3. and those of the 13 and 14 of
Charles the second, declare it universally unlawful to make or levy any war
against the King, without the allowance of any case or pretense whatsoever; and
the same is expressly required to be acknowledged by all the Clergy in the Act
of Uniformity; and the same in substance is required of all Civil and Military
Officers.

Our Canons declare expressly against all taking up of Arms, whether offensive
or defensive, without the Royal Authority, much more against it, upon any
pretense whatsoever, under pain of Damnation, for which they cite the words of
my Text, as very plain in their sense. The first of the Canons of 1640.


Our Homilies teach us, God has shown that he allows neither the Dignity of
any Person, nor the Multitude of any People, nor the Weight of any Cause, as
sufficient for the which Subjects may move Rebellion against their Princes.
Homily against Rebellion, p. 368.


It were endless to cite particular Writers of our Church to this purpose; but
by what has been said, so clear is the Doctrine of our Church in the point, as
some have made this remark upon it, That since the Reformation it is now again
current Episcopal Doctrine, as it was always Apostolical, That Subjects ought
by no means to resist, nor can be disobliged from their Obedience to their
Sovereigns, upon any pretense whatsoever.

It being then so clearly the Doctrine of the Church of England, and that
confirmed or backed by the Civil Sanction, and so the avowed sense of all the
Authority of the Nation; is it not prodigiously strange to hear it excepted
against, not only by Englishmen, but, what is much more, by pretended Members
of the Church of England, as we have had, some few years past, sufficient
evidence?

Well! but does the Church of England agree in the point with the Church of
Christ in the primitive and purest ages of it? or with other Churches of the
Reformation?

That it does perfectly agree with the primitive Church in the point, has been
so frequently, so plainly, and so convincingly proved, that the Oppugners of it
have been forced to have recourse either to downright Slandering and Lying, or
else to Enthusiasm.

To the first, affirming, contrary to the faith of ancient and approved
Histories, and all accounts of those times, that the Doctrine of Non-resistance
then generally maintained, and the practice of Christians exactly suited
thereto, was grounded upon nothing else but weakness, or want of strength: they
did not resist quia deerant vires, as Bellarmine leads the Dance, and it is
incredible how he is followed.

But in answer to it, 1. admitting, but by no means granting, that want of
strength or forces was one ground of their constant Loyalty, without the least
attempt of resisting; yet what an abominable slander is it to say, (which yet
is said) that it was the only ground of it, when their Apologists and other
eminent Writers, lay down unalterable reasons why they would not, did not,
durst not resist, even because they thought themselves obliged to suffer any
thing from the Government, rather than resist, by the most sacred and
indispensable Laws of their Religion, as has been very often, and of late
abundantly made appear. Want of strength then was not the only ground of their
not resisting, as some have shamefully slandered them: And no wonder, when
others have not stuck to speak as slanderously of the Apostles themselves, as
if their end in prescribing Subjection and Obedience at first, were only to
flatter the Emperors, and curry favor with them, as Salmeron had the
impudence to affirm.

But, 2. that want of strength or forces was any ground or reason at all of
their not resisting, is so far from truth, that there never was a more silly
groundless falsity invented, as has been invincibly made appear to the meanest
capacities, and therefore I shall the less need to insist upon it. But I beg
leave to urge two things with reference to it: The one is an instance not so
commonly taken notice of, and that is this; In the Reign of Adrian the Jews
almost universally, but especially about Egypt and Cyrene, rebelled against the
Emperor, and appeared in Arms under Barchochebas their Leader, to the number
of some hundred thousands; and much about the same time, as may be gathered
from Eusebius, there was a Persecution on foot against the Christians, which
might have prompted them to join with those Jewish Rebels; and that they might
have joined with them if they would, is too certain, when they were used with
at least as much cruelty and savageness by the Rebels, merely because they
would not join with them, as ever they had been by any of their Persecutors,
and yet they could never be drawn, by arts or arguments, by persuasion or
force, to associate with the Rebels. And this instance seems to me so plain and
home to the purpose, that I shall only make this remark upon it, That those of
the Church of England in the late Times were not the first Martyrs or
Confessors purely for Loyalty, these primitive Christians being their
Precedents, and leading them the way.

The other thing I have to urge in the case, is this; Bellarmine and his
followers, in very great numbers affirm, That the primitive Christians wanted
strength or forces to resist: but Tertullian, who lived in those times, says,
They filled all places but the Temples, and were of all the standing Offices
almost in the whole Empire. And St. Cyprian, not long after him, affirms, That
they were vastly numerous and copious; that is, as the word seems to import,
they were of the Militia or Soldiery too. And it is undeniably evident, that
almost all Julian's Army when he died were Christians, as the Ecclesiastical
Historians all with one mouth assert. Now, whether you will believe Tertullian
and St. Cyprian, and so many ancient Historians, or Bellarmine and his
followers, is left to your choice.

But the prettiest that has been said upon this case of resistance, and St.
Paul's Doctrine about it, is this, that Paul intended his Doctrine of
Non-resistance purely with respect to the men he wrote to, of that Age it is
meant, and no otherwise than as if a man should write to the Christians at
present under the Turks Dominion, confessedly poor, and unable indeed to resist
him; would he not write as Paul did? No question but this learned Author fully
knew the Apostle's mind: nay, and had consulted him personally upon the point,
when he so confidently adds, That if Paul were alive, and saw wicked Kings
reigning in Christian Commonwealths, he would leave them to their Subjects to
be punished by them without blame. Whither are we rapt now? into the third
Heavens, there to consult Paul? But I told you recourse was to be had of
necessity either to downright standering and lying, or else to Enthusiasm; and
here seems to be somewhat of both.

But this was the familiar mode of the late Times to pretend Revelation: So
John Goodwin; Now that Antichrist is apparently come to his full Power and
Authority, that which was not known before, but kept concealed from the
Churches of Christ, is fully manifest, that Christians may lawfully, in a
lawful way, (that is when they may lawfully) stand up to defend themselves, in
case they be able, against any unlawful assaults, by what assailants, or by
what pretended Authority soever, made upon them. And another, The lawfulness of
Rebellion is now discovered to God's Church as the necessary means to ruin
Antichrist: So Buroughs cants after Goodwin. But a more blunt Enthusiast has
told us roundly, That ^t was God's will the primitive Christians should confirm
the truth by sufferings, but now that it is confirmed, his will is that we
should defend the truth by action, in destroying Tyrants. Boldly said indeed,
and methinks this Gentleman seems more intimately acquainted with God himself,
than the former was with St. Paul, as knowing God's secret will, for we know of
nothing he has revealed but the contrary to this as his will in the case.

But to leave Enthusiasts as past conviction, and to have as little regard to
those others who have the impudence to oppose a known certain truth, as clear
as any thing of that nature can possibly be, with mere shams, I say the
Doctrine of the Primitive Church is plain and manifest against all Resisting
upon any pretense whatsoever, so plain and clear, that as was before observed,
not one writer for a thousand years of any Credit in the Church did ever
question it; And Sigebert reckoned the contrary doctrine a novelty at least, if
not a plain Heresy, and justly imputes the original of it to Pope Hildebrand,
as not crept into the World before him.

As for the Churches of the Reformation, they are no less plain and clear
against all resisting, as any man may satisfy himself from their general
confessions, and from the writings of particular members of them: I shall only
urge the Authority of Erasmus, who though he lived and died in the Communion of
the Church of Rome, yet was for a Reformation, and according to some the
occasion of it; and I the rather insist upon his Authority, because his
Comments are recommended by our own Reformers, and ordered to be had in all our
Churches: Now he in his Comment upon St. Luke 22. affirms, there is no Heresy
more pernicious than this of the lawfulness of resisting: the Precepts of
Christ decrying it, his whole life being opposite to it, the Apostolical
Doctrine testifying against it, it being rejected also by so many thousand
Martyrs, and contradicted by the Ancient Interpreters: I may add, by all
impartial writers of the Reformation.

And this sure cannot but seem abundantly sufficient to all unprejudiced minds,
that sincerely desire to know the truth, and are willing to be convinced of it.

Let me have leave to add this, as which makes very much for my Assertion of
the absolute unlawfulness of resisting, that the Cases of Exception are so very
wild and extravagant: and but two of them are worth taking notice of. As for
the Additional ones of Grotius, it is said, he was young when he made them, and
it is plain he was to serve an argument, having his Countrymen to defend.

As for that of Religion, which some insist on, as not only a reasonable, but
the very best ground of resisting, it is the most senseless imposition upon the
common reason of mankind that can well be imagined, to pretend it: for who
knows not that our Religion can never be lost or taken from us by all the
Powers of Earth and Hell combined together against us, without our own consent.
But what do I talk of Religion in the Case? that is commonly no more than the
surface or shell; it is Ambition, or Interest, or Revenge is the Kernel or
Substance, for without such mixtures, Religion (as a Learned Gentleman observes
Sir William Temple, p. 57.
) works no violent effects, but produces rather examples of constant suffering
than of desperate actions. To pretend Religion therefore as a ground of
resisting, is only to make appear our hypocrisy: which Harry Martin honestly
disclaimed when he cried out in the house against snivelling for Religion, as
the ground of resisting the King: We have fought (says he) all this while for
Liberty, and are we now whining about Religion? And one Colonel Purefoy, like
another Peribonius, was much more ingenious, declaring plainly after the King
was beheaded, that it was no more than what he had desired, and designed to
contribute to, forty years before.

But still, as I said, there are two cases of exception insisted on, as of some
validity. 1. If a Prince shall undertake to alienate his Kingdom, or sell it,
or give it up into the hands of another Sovereign, against the mind of his
Subjects. A very pretty supposition, but only that it is so very unreasonable,
as not to be supposed by all the rules of commom prudence or charity: besides,
that it may be always pretended, if once suffered to pass, and where are we
then? Why then we are at the old pass of undermining the Thames: that is of
having any the most ridiculous and incredible stories obtruded upon us, and we
must believe them for the good of the Commonwealth, which otherwise would be
in mighty danger. Well! but there is another case of exception, rather more
unreasonable than the former, and yet, at the least, as likely to be always
pretended, and that is: If a Prince shall undertake to destroy his whole
Kingdom, or any considerable part of it.

The former of these, besides, that it very reverendly supposes the Prince
either a fool or a madman, is little better than nonsense, and next to
impossible at least. But the latter, that a Prince should destroy a
considerable part of his Subjects, was plainly the case of the Primitive
Christians, who were certainly both for number and quality, but especially, for
number, a very considerable part of the Roman Empire, pars major Civitatis
cujusque (says Tertullian) the greater part of every City: and according to
Grotius, metuenda plane multitudo in plain English formidable for their
numbers: yet they were not only designed to utter destruction, but actually
destroyed in vast infinite numbers, by the express order of their several
Emperors, and that with the utmost cruelty and savageness, contrary to all the
rules of nature, reason, and humanity. And yet, still among these, qui ipsorum
saevitiae arma opponeret inventus est nemo (says Grotius) and it has been
sufficiently showed already: not one was found that would oppose their Cruelty
by force of Arms. Not one? Yes, says Blondel, I have found two instances to the
contrary. And the truth is, he has two instances, but they are both wondrous
odd: As that of a company of drunken Villagers, very probably Pagans too,
rescuing Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria from the hands of his Prosecutors, who
were but private Soldiers neither: and the Armenians resisting Maximin who was
not their Sovereign. Which only show the good man's earnest desire to have them
pertinent, whether they will be so or no.

But after all, there are Scripture instances produced to the contrary of this
Assertion, that it is absolutely unlawful to resist.

And it is true, there are Scripture instances alleged, but no otherwise than
as Texts of Scripture are by some quoted, only to make a flourish withal, and
fill up a margin, or to seem proofs, though hardly the shadow of them.

And as for these instances out of Scripture, they have been considered, and
sufficiently proved to be either impertinent as some, or extraordinary as
others, or lastly wicked, and so not to be brought into example. And they do
but only show how hard the Oppugners of this Doctrine are put to it, when they
can produce no better for their purpose.

And now to come home to our selves, and very briefly to apply what has been
said. The charge here against Resisting is Universal, and there is no
limitation of it in the whole Scripture, none in the old Testament, much less
in the new, and least of all in this Chapter where the rule is laid: and
besides, the context or the Analogy of the place, the consent of sundry, the
most eminent and learned expositours both ancient and modern, and the practice
of the best Christians in all ages have been shown very clear for the absolute
unlawfulness of resisting upon what pretense soever under pain of Damnation.
And sure, if to resist the higher powers be (as the Apostle asserts in general)
to resist the Ordinance of God, it is eo nomine, in that respect alone so far
from lawful in any case, or upon any pretense whatsoever, that it is infallibly
always a sin of a most provoking nature, and as such it is here threatened, as
far as I can possibly conceive or understand with Damnation in the saddest
sense. And let me say Damnation is not to be trifled with, nor the Apostle's
fearful threat here eluded by slights and pretenses; but be these what they
will, if upon them we resist, we must cease to be Christians, cease to be of
the Church of England, and cease to be in a saveable condition, unless a very
great and solemn Repentance intervene.

But for that, besides, that it is always infinitely hazardous in case of
resisting, such is the criminal nature of resisting, that the Scripture
compares it to Witchcraft, and indeed it too nearly resembles the sin of
Witchcraft in this respect, (not that it admits not of Repentance, for I will
not say so of its parallel, but) that it is seldom at all, and seldomer truly
repented of; and for this I shall seek no further than our own age and memory:
with what a wild Enthusiasm did the Usurper Cromwell go to his own place? What
an opinion had he of his Saintship to the very last? as if he were one of those
that needed no Repentance. When his end apparently drew near, he would not be
persuaded of it, but still fancied to himself that God had some further work in
reserve for him. And his Brethren in iniquity and blood, the Regicides that
were executed, with what height of Fanaticism went they out of the World? how
far from the least show of Repentance? And oh blessed God! how few public
Recantations have we seen, notwithstanding so very many were engaged in the
Great Rebellion?

But they were, they were the Saints; and as such I leave them, to bespeak your
utter abhorrence and detestation of a Crime, which by what has been said may
reasonably be concluded, or at least justly feared, to be of a most horrid
nature, exposing to Damnation in the saddest sense. And let us consider the
fearful issues of Damnation, and the infinite uncertainty of Repentance, which
alone can prevent them in case of resisting. And as we would not lose our part
with God, our share in the Joys and Glories of Jesus, our habitation in the
Heavens with Angels and Saints in unspeakable happiness to eternal ages, which
is the first sad part of Damnation. And then for the other, as we would not be
given up to the insupportable amazements of a sad Eternity, and dwell with a
Worm that dies not, in a Fire that is not quenched, amidst Devils and damned
Spirits for ever; let us beware of resisting the Higher Powers, which is a
crime that exposes to all this, and more. But let us heartily bless Almighty
God that we had no share in the great Rebellion, no hand in the Thirtieth of
January, nothing to do but to bewail our own sins as accessory, and the sins of
others as instrumental in it.

And for the mercy of this Auspicious Day to the Church still flourishing,
though the Prince for whose Birth and Return it was so memorable, be gone; and
may it flourish still, as we have just ground to hope it will, under his
excellent Parallel, our present gracious Sovereign, whom God long preserve. I
say, for the mercy of this Auspicious Day, let us be sure to render now and
ever, as is both now and ever abundantly due, to God the Father, God the Son,
and God the Holy Ghost, all possible Praise, Honor, and Thanksgiving, Amen.

FINIS.

