A LETTER FROM AN IGNORAMUS TO HIS CORRESPONDENT.
December 6th. 1682. Honored Sir!
I Make no doubt, but you have the News of the Commitment of Mr. John Wilmer,
Citizen and Common-Council-man of London, to the Tower, among others; and no
less Crime laid to his charge than High Treason, for conspiring the Death of
the King, and to deprive him of his Imperial Crown and Dignity, which are the
Words specified in the Warrant directed to the Lieutenant of the Tower; where
he was confined close for near six weeks, and suffered not to see or speak to
any Friend or Relation, other than his Wife; who with great Labor and Trouble
obtained the favor to be confined with him. After the time abovesaid, by
Friends Liberty was obtained for him to walk in the Tower for his Healths sake;
and in that state he was farther a Prisoner nine weeks odd days, which makes in
all fifteen weeks; during which time he was not permitted the use of Pen, Ink,
or Paper: at the end of which, he with others was by Habeas Corpus carried up
to the Kings Bench, and there was admitted to Bail, to appear the next Term;
his Bail and himself entering into a Recognizance of 9000 l. In all this time
there has not been the least Prosecution, neither saw he, or knows any person
that has sworn against him. The day he was taken up, he had a violent Ague and
Fever upon him, which seized him near a week before; but on the day of his
caption, a vehement vomiting and looseness also seized him to such a degree,
that his Apothecary and Friends about him, did dispond of his Life. In this
Condition he had notice, near an hour before the Messengers came to his house,
that they were waiting for him; so that with help of Friends, he got on his
Clothes, and his Vomiting and Looseness left him; yet so weak, that his Friends
concluded him in great Danger of his Life, as he was; but if the Messengers
removed him, they concluded it would certainly destroy him. And notwithstanding
his Apothecary would have made Qath of this before a Magistrate; yet nothing
would avail, but away they hurried him into a Coach near Charing Cross, to the
Messengers house, one Mr. Atterbury's, where he was kept from that afternoon
(which was Saturday) until Monday morning; and then was hurried to
Hampton Court, where the Council sat; and without seeing the face of any
Accuser, was by Warrant from the Council, committed to the Tower, where he lay
as abovesaid; and notwithstanding his ilness, could not be admitted in fourteen
days time after, in the Tower, to have either Doctor or Apothecary to come to
him; but God who is always good, was very Gracious to him, and was better than
all Means and Helps; for he healed him, and helped him up, even to a Miracle.

Thus have I given you in brief, the state of his Case hitherto; now it is
possible, being at this distance, you may be desirous to know the Reason of
this Imprisonment; for the old Proverb is, There is no smoke, but there is some
fire; but I may truly say, this Proverb does not always hold true; I am sure it
does not in his Case, as I have often heard him say, and will be proved as far
as Negatives can prove it, if ever it comes to that. I shall as briefly as I
can, give you the Conjectures of the Town, both as to his Confinement, and the
rest of the Protestants. A more certain account you may expect, when we have a
Parliament, and not until then; and when that will be, God and the King only
knows.

The Common Enemy to all Protestants (the Papists) you know, are always at work
to bring about our Ruin and Confusion; and they have ever since the
Reformation been contriving of it; but God has hitherto disappointed them, and
I trust he will still. But since the plain Discovery of their General Plot in
1678. which has been owned by the King, and four successive Parliaments, and
so many of the Party taken into Custody, and some executed, and most of the
rest being by the Parliament looked upon as Confederates with them: They looked
upon themselves as quite lost; and the most favor they could expect, was to
have Liberty to stay here with the loss of their Estates; and some of the chief
Heads of them to suffer as Traitors, and so be utterly incapacitated to disturb
the Government any more. But the Jesuits their chief Counselors and
Politicians, were loath to give up so fair a Game; therefore presently they set
their Wits to work to prevent the further Discovery of this their Real Plot, by
forging Sham-Plots; of which by their means, and the Devils helping of them, we
have had of one kind or another, I think, no less than a dozen; and I think
this their last was more dangerous to us of this Nation, than all the rest; and
I take this last to be thus: That their Design was laid two ways, that either
might serve their turn. The Plot by them laid, was to be a Protestant Plot; and
the persons to carry it on, and be engaged in it, was this City, and the last
House of Commons at Oxford. The matter to be sworn what these were engaged to
do, was, That if the King would not pass such Acts as they would have him, then
that they should seize upon his Person, and keep him in Custody until such time
as he should do it. The Witnesses to prove this plot, are some of the same,
both English and Irish, that proved the Popish Plot; which by their great
poverty with frowns here, and not seeing any likelihood of a Parliament, have
by the working of the Jesuits, and their Friends, been suborned to retract
their Evidence of the Popish Plot, and to swear this Protestant Plot; which if
it took effect, they doubted not, but at least to gain an Act of Oblivion, if
it did not gain their first purpose, even to do all their Work. Now they bring
their Plot on the Stage, and first swear against my Lord Howard of Escrieck,
and he is committed to the Tower; the next against my Lord Shaftsbury, as the
head of the Party; then against one Stephen College; after him, John Rowse and
Edward Whitaker; all these were committed to the Tower.

It was now time to begin Prosecution of some of these, to see what Execution
that would do, before any further Attempt should be made in taking up more. The
first they begun with, was my Lord Howard of Escrick, and preferred an
Indictment against him before a Grand Jury of Middlesex, the Jury consisting of
nineteen; the Witnesses to swear against him, were Mrs. Fitzharris, the Wife of
Edward Fitzharris, (a grand Irish Papist, and then under Condemnation for High
Treason) and Mrs. Fitzharris her Maid, or Strumpet, going by the name of
Terresia Peacock. These swore, as I am informed, much to the heads as above.

There were brought in to gloss the business, two persons more; but they swore
nothing of significancy; but upon the cross interrogating them, the Jury found
out the falsity of their Testimony; so that upon their Debates, fifteen of the
nineteen were for bringing in the Bill Ignoramus. But in regard the Foreman,
Sir Charles Lee, with the other, did not agree, they deferred the further
Debate of it until the morrow, when they were to give in their Bills and
Presentiments to the Kings Bench, being the last day of the Term; but the Clerk,
that attended them with some others, got the Bill away before it was signed and
made a Record, that the morrow the Jury could not have it; whereupon they made
their Complaints to the Judges, and gave in their verbal Judgment of the said
Indictment to be Ignoramus, and desired it might be recorded; so was an end of
that Term, and no further prosecution against my Lord Howard then, nor since.

The next attempt was against Stephen College, called the Protestant Joyner;
by preferring a Bill of Indictment against him for a Plot, and High Treason, as
in manner aforesaid, at the General Quarter Sessions of Peace and Jail-delivery
for London and Middlesex, at the Old Baily. The said Bill being presented to
the Grand Jury for the City, where were nineteen persons, whereof John Wilmer
was Foreman: to this Indictment there comes a great number of Witnesses, at
least six, and these must give their testimony in open Court; and it is believed
the Design was thereby to awe the Jury, and if possible, to lay on them a
necessity to find the Bill; in regard the number of Witnesses was great, and
the things they swore were so dreadful to most of the Auditors, that it was
feared they would have sworn the house upon our heads. But after the Jury had
heard them in Court, and went into their Chamber and called in the Witnesses
one by one, and cross examined them, they had such sufficient satisfaction,
that upon the (...) the whole nineteen agreed in Judgment to bring in the Bill
Ignoramus.

This greatly madded the Popish party and the Witnesses, or some of their
Gang^, to make the Foreman amends for his former kindness to them, and to stop
the publishing at Oxford his knowledge of them, and of their Design, which they
acquainted him with; and in revenge for his being an Ignoramus-man, as the
Papists call him, and all the rest of the Jurors, they now swear Treason
against him, whereby he is committed to the Tower, and lies as aforesaid, so
that he is prevented from further doing them mischief in hindering them from
going on in their Design. Afterward they go down to Oxford, where a Jury is
pitched upon to find the second Bill against College, for words, but not a
Plot. For your full information in that Affair, I refer you to Colledg's Trial.
Since his death, has a Bill been preferred at the Old Baily, against John
Rowse, who they would pretend was to be a kind of Paymaster in this Protestant
Plot; but this Rowse, though it may be an honest man, is a person of mean
account for so great a Character as that. Many Witnesses swore against him, I
think about eight, and were all examined in open Court, and cross-examined
there also, a thing not known in our days, and believe are few presidents of
like nature in former Ages; but upon the whole, the Jury acquitted themselves
to their own satisfaction, as to bring in the Bill Ignoramus, which was also to
the satisfaction of the greatest part of the Court; so Rowse upon the last day
of the Sessions, was admitted to bail, and discharged the next. The Foreman of
this Jury, was Deputy (...) Denew. Now the next, a Bill of Indictment was
presented against my Lord Shaftsbury upon a special Commission to the City and
County, and brought in before the Grand Jury for the aforesaid City, where were
about such a parcel of Witnesses as against Rowse; and were all examined, and
cross-examined in open Court. The Jury were of the most eminent Citizens of
London; four of them were members in the last Parliament: the Foreman was Sir
Samuel Barnadiston, Knight; and this Bill also was brought in Ignoramus; and
for your further satisfaction why they did so in this matter, I refer you to
the printed Narrative of the Examination of the Witnesses by the Jury, which I
doubt not, but you have seen. And thus far have the Papists labored to beget a
Protestant Plot, had the first or second Jury found the Bill, so that the
Witnesses had been passed for Boni and Legales Homines, God knows where it had
stopped; but now as they have failed in a Protestant Plot, they hope they have
gained the other point of Shamming the Popish Plot, by invalidating the
testimony of so many Witnesses as swore the Popish Plot, before we believed
them; now to swear a Protestant one, without being believed. By which means
they hope neither these, nor any of the rest as have swore a Popish Plot,
should be credited against them, seeing we will not believe a Plot contrived by
our selves against our selves, and know not of our selves; and the Papists, our
dear friends, were so kind to find it out for us; so that now we must leave the
further Examination of both one and the other, to a Parliament; and the Papists
hope they have so ordered Matters, as not to need to fear a Parliament for some
time; but now having failed in their Protestant Plot, to go to their old Game
again, and find out some other trick to do the Feat with; and most thinking men
are of the Judgment, their next work (seeing their Shams will not do) will be
to set the Protestants together by the ears among themselves, Conformist
against Nonconformist, like two Dogs fighting for a bone, that we may be
weakened thereby, and then they to strike in on one side, and destroy us at once
by the help and assistance of the French King; who only waits for, and
wants such an opportunity. But I hope God will give us more Christian Wisdom,
than to expose our selves to the mercy of the French, though the Most Christian
King; and for all the tugging and struggling of the Papists, to keep off the day
of Judgment, as they look upon a Parliament to be. God can incline the heart of
the King to call one sooner than they may desire. Thus, as brief as I can, I
have given you the sum and substance of our Friend's being in the Tower, and
the Worlds Reasons for it; and I believe, for matter of Fact, it is very near
the truth. God send my next may bring you the Good News of our King and his
Parliament meeting lovingly together, that all Faults may be mended, and the
Nation happily settled, is the hearty desire of him that truly loves his King
and Country, and as far as shall consist with their welfare, is Yours to
command,

W. J.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1682.


