A SERMON PREACHED AT HARLEY in SHROPSHIRE, DECEMBER 2. 1697. BEING THE Day of
Public Thanksgiving For the PEACE; AND FOR His Majesty's Safe Return.

By BEN. JENKS, Rector of Harley, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl
of Bradford.

LONDON: Printed for Will. Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church; and
Benj. Cook, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. MDCXCVII.

TO THE PUBLISHER.
SIR,
YOU show the Power that you have with me, To put me upon exposing my Weakness
more than once or twice: And, for ought I know, in a greater measure now than
formerly: This being such a Sudden Production, upon a Subject that never
Exercised my Thoughts before; Peradventure it may not obtain my own Pardon a
while hence. Yet I was the more inclinable to Comply with your Request for my
Notes, Because through your means, I had my Hand in so early, just as his most
Excellent Majesty was Ascending the Throne: For which Zeal and Forwardness,
some have not yet Forgot to look as much Awry at me, as Eliab did at his
Brother David, 1 Samuel 17.28. And now that King WILLIAM's Throne is so
established by this Glorious Peace, to Rejoice the Souls of his Friends, and to
strike Despair into the Hearts of his Enemies; If you will make these
Overflowings of my Joy and Gladness for so rich a Blessing to our Church and
Nation, more Diffusive than the narrow Bounds wherein I am concerned, The mean
defective Sermon may come Behind, as a little Servitor, to Wait upon those Many
much more Worthy, that are like to be Published upon such a great and Joyful
Occasion. I leave you and your Friends to do as you please, by it and

Your -- B. J.

ISAIAH LII. 7. How Beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of him that
brings good Tidings, that publishes Peace, that brings Good Tidings of
Good, that publishes Salvation, that says unto Zion, Thy God Reigns!


GOOD News in bad Times is double Refreshment. And after we have long been
Complaining of the Times, Now that we are called to Rejoice in the News; After
we have been Tired out with a tedious War, to be Eased at last: This is so
Grateful and Pleasant to every one who has any Concern for his own, or his
Country's Welfare; That the Messengers of such Glad Tidings, who use to be
received with Transports of Joy, may look to be Caressed with all the
Demonstrations of good Welcome. And therefore I need not beg your patient
Audience, Beloved, when I can promise my self your Eager Attention: Now that we
are to give Thanks for the Accomplishment of somewhat here Prophesied; And the
Tidings of Good, the Publications of Peace, foretold to the Church, are come to
our Land* What we have so long Desired, The God of all grace has let us Live to
see it Effected; Even Peace in our Time, after so many Burdens and Mischiefs of
War, and a happy Close of the Bloody Scene; Upon Terms of Honor to our
Government, and terms of Security to our Church: Upon a mighty Stoop on the
Adverse Side, and a total Exclusion of the Popish Interest, that Alarmed our
Fears. Now that the biggest of our Enemies abroad have publicly Owned him for
King of this Realm, whom the little Bigots at Home have all this while stood
out against; Animated with hopes of Help from that Foreign Power, which has
shaken them off, and left the Forlorn Cause to shift for it self: The Throne is
no longer threatened now with an Invasion from that Quarter, whence the Struggle
was so hard, not only to Change our Laws, but to Extirpate our Religion. And to
have our most Desired Prince come back in Safety from (we hope) the Last
Expedition of this kind; To have our Easy Government firm upon the ancient
Basis of its Limited Monarchy: Our Religion Preserved and Protected, and our
Peace Restored and Ratified; This is Reviving indeed, even as Life from the
Dead, to a drooping Nation. And such is the Matter of Joy and Praise, wherein
we are called to take our share at this time.

But as great as ever the present Gladness of our Land is, The Text will lead
us up to a higher Rejoicing yet, for a greater Salvation than any that can be
Consummated in this World; and for a Peace and Amity beyond and above the
strictest League and dearest Friendship with all the Creatures upon Earth. For
under Israel's Deliverance here out of Babylon, is figured the Glory and
Prosperity of the Church, Delivered by our Lord Jesus. And the Text is a joyful
Exclamation upon the Blessed Occasion; Showing how Acceptable to the People of
God, that Wait for his Salvation, is the Church's Welfare, and Peace upon
Israel. For then is the Joy of the Church most Glorious, When Darkness and
Wickedness are most Cashiered; When not only Peace and a Worldly Happiness, but
Truth and Holiness do Prevail and Flourish. How Beautiful upon the Mountains,
etc.

Mount Zion supported the famous Temple, representing all the Church: And
Jerusalem, in which it stood, being surrounded with Hills, The Prophet here in
a Rapture breaks out, as if he had seen a Messenger coming upon those High
Places, to bring Tidings of Joy, to the City of God. For on the adjacent Hills,
in the Cliffs and Rocks, they had Watchmen, upon any Discovery of Danger or
Prosperity, to give Signals; whereupon Posts were dispatched, to haste away
over the Hills, and tell the News. And their Feet here, (denoting their Advent,
or their Haste) are called Beautiful; To show how Welcome they were, coming
upon a Joyful Errand. Though the Feet, in a Messenger use to be least Comely,
as covered over with Dust or Dirt: Yet so Grateful are they, when bringing us
News to our Wishes, that we count 'em all over Lovely; and are ready to kiss
the Feet of them that come to us with the Glad Tidings of great Joy. And O what
greater Good than that designed here in this Text under the names of Peace and
Salvation, with the Publication of both to Zion; and both comprised in this
Message to be told her, Thy God Reigns!

He does indeed Reign always; Though the Heathen Rage, and people imagine Vain
things; and though Kings and Rulers of the Earth Consult and Bandy against him
and his Christ; Even when things go most Cross and Disorderly, still he holds
the Reins of the World's Government: and it is his Permission and Pleasure,
there should be Misconduct sometimes, and Havoc made even upon the Sheep of
his Pasture; for Wise and holy Ends, known to Himself. And at such times of
Confusion and Trouble to Israel, God stands by, as if he left ill Men to do
what they would, and Carry all before 'em; As if he withdrew, and had nothing
to do in the matter.

For there is a Kingdom of Satan and of Antichrist; and the Enemies of our Lord
have their Allotted Time, to Reign as Lords of the World. But God be thanked,
It is but a Short Time, till they shall be made his Footstool; and brought
under the narrowest Restraint, and Everlasting Contempt. Yea, even in the mean
time, He Rules in the Very midst of his Enemies; whom he has in Invisible
Chains, and makes even their Serpentine Enmity, as the Rod of his Anger, and
the Staff of his Indignation; to serve the purposes of his Glory: Though they
neither know nor mean any such thing as the Execution of his Pleasure.

But when again he Reveals his Arm to Break the Opposer's Forces, To Gather his
dispersed Flock, and to Raise up his dejected People; Then he is said to Reign
in especial manner. Then he eminently Discovers his Supremacy, and his
Overruling Hand, to take the Immediate Care of his Own; To Cultivate his Vine,
and to make Jerusalem a Praise in the whole Earth; Rescuing his Servants out of
the hands of Ill Masters, to Keep and Bless, to Guide and Prosper them Himself.
Now this the Lord did in the Deliverance of Israel here foretold, out of their
Captivity: This he did in the greater Deliverance, wrought by our Blessed
Savior's Coming into the World: This he has done in many Deliverances of his
Church, since that time; whereof we of this Church have had frequent and
Remarkable Experience: (O how much is yet fresh and Lively in our Remembrance!)
And this he will do yet more Wonderfully, than all, in the Later days, toward
the End of Time; when he shall come to Accomplish all the precious Promises,
that raise the Hopes of Believers: When Righteousness and Light and Love shall
there Prosper and Reign; Where now Ignorance and Ungodliness and Discord bear
Sway and Abound. O Blessed Time! Enough to excite all that wish well to Sion,
to Pray as our Church teaches us, and beseech God to Hasten his Kingdom.

Thus the Text looking further than the Business of this Day, I must not
Vnderlook the great Design of such a place; any more than I must Overlook the
Occasion of our present Meeting. This is now Joyful to us all: And if the other
be not so too, The fault is our own; that we are in no better Temper, to Resent
the Spiritual Mercies of God; and to Praise him for his Christ, and for his
Gospel, and all things conducing to help us on to his Heavenly Kingdom; As well
as to give him Thanks for the Temporal Good of this World; and for some Easier
and Better Time, that we hope to have in it. For this, without the other, will
do us no real Kindness at all, nor make us any thing happier at the Last. And,
alas, Sirs, How can the Rebels against God, ever be Hearty in their Thanks to
him? O what Sense is there in it, for such as do nothing but Confront and
Resist his Word, to come into the Assemblies of those that meet for his
Worship! For such as make the Dishonouring of God even their Business, to make
any pretenses of giving him the Glory due to his Name! And if that which should
Heighten the Joy of this Day, do (in their esteem) but serve to cast a Damp
upon it; I cannot help this: Unless I should handle the Word of God
Deceitfully, to Preach Peace where there is none; Or to Flatter and Collogue
with those, who will still be the Enemies of our Peace, because the Enemies of
our God. They that Scorn the very Gospel of Peace, and Stomach such as bring
those Gladdest of all Tidings, are fitter for another Service, than religiously
to Observe a Thanksgiving-Day, in a Christian Congregation, among the Followers
of Jesus. O that they were but once Fallen out with their scandalous Sins, and
better Friends to their own Souls! And then they might ^ear of Peace with God,
and come to see the Joy of his Salvation.

But I will speak First of that which now lies uppermost upon all our Thoughts;
The Good Tidings of Good things, in the Publication of That Peace, which we are
at this time to Thank the Lord our God for sending us, by the hands of his
Chosen Messenger, whom he raised up, and has Preserved and Prosper'd, to bring
us at last so great a Blessing. And instead of Grumbling that we had it no
Sooner, when our own Sins kept it from us so Long; O how should we Admire and
Magnify the Gracious God, that we have at all, the Comfortable Privilege;
which, he knows, is none of our Desert, but the mere Gift of his own Mercy!

Now the Good of this Peace, and wherein we are the Better for it, The joyous
Consequences will best Inform us: But to raise our Thankfulness at this time to
some higher Pitch, I will offer a few faint Strokes at the Lovely Picture; in
showing both the Uneasiness from which it frees us; and also the Advantages
which it brings us.

1. The Uneasiness which this Peace frees us from. Though all the Burden of
Taxes be not presently Removed; yet we have the fair Prospect of Mitigation;
and good ground to Hope, That we may soon find the Load made Lighter; and that
the Effect will cease, when the Cause is taken away. But O how great is the
Ease to our Minds, to be delivered from the Danger and Dread of our Enemies!
From a Potent Enemy at our Doors, that was the Back to all our Enemies within
Doors; which made 'em so Brisk and Daring, to Affront the Highest Authority;
and Threaten the faithful Subjects to Suffer even for their Fidelity. But now
the Horns of those Malcontents, that were but Short before, are quite Cut off;
that which Fed them, being subtracted from them. And the Peace may prove the
best Physic to Purge out these Malignant Humors, that have made them so
Troublesome hitherto. Now their Hopes from Abroad must give up the Ghost, and
all their Expectation perish. While we have the satisfaction to see their
wretched Cause Crushed and Ruined; and themselves put out of Capacity, to give
us the Vexation, and to do us the Mischief which so fain they would.

It Is a painful State, to live in perpetual Concern and Fear of Subtle,
Mighty, and Malicious Foes, Lying in Wait to Invade and Overrun us; and not
only to fetch out such large Gaps, as have been made in our Estates, to
Maintain the Charge of the War; But to sweep away all from us, and not suffer
our selves neither to Survive and stay behind. To have our Thoughts still on
the Stretch, and our Minds Racked with continual Devices, how to Offend our
Enemies, or Defend our selves, is such an Irksome Life, as is enough to make us
Weary of Living: When we go so Galled under the Sharps, the Cares, and Frights,
that surround and grate upon us; To Fear continually, because of the Fury of
the Oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy, Isa. 51.13. And this was spoke
for the Consolation of a people harassed and wearied with the Plagues of War,
Mich. 4.4. That they should sit every man under his Vine, and every man under
his Figtree, and none should make 'em Afraid. Our Fear was of Invaders, to take
away not only our Laws, our Liberties and Properties, but our Religion and our
Lives. We went in Jeopardy of New Lords, that would have left us no Choice, but
Popery or Martyrdom. But the present League has rid our Breasts of those
Apprehensions: Because it Secludes him that pretends a Right to Enslave us; and
Enervates his Hopes of playing an After-Game. And this very Ease to our Minds,
Beloved, Is it not better than Thousands of Gold and Silver? To have our
Affairs put in such a Settled Posture, that we are not like to Outlive the
blessed Advantages which we have for our Souls; That we do not go with our
Lives in our hands; and that which should be Dearer to us all than our Lives,
Tottering and ready to tumble down; That the Noises of Guns and Drums and
Trumpets, which were like the hideous Shrieks of the Dying, or as hollow
Groans, and astonishing Roarings from the Dead; Are become now Music in our
ears, and only the Symbols and Expresses of our Festivity and Rejoicing: This
is a Change, whereof we cannot but be Glad: And O that we may acknowledge it,
with such a Grateful Sense as we ought, to the Lord our God! O that we may
abound in his Praise, who has Eased us of our Fear! And be only in Fear now of
wronging the Mercy, by which we have been so sweetly Relieved, and so greatly
Obliged.

2. The Advantages which this Peace brings us, are for both Worlds; And (1.)
For the Present. You are at Liberty now, My Brethren, to Enjoy your Own, And
may look upon it as Yours, and take Encouragement to Till your Lands, and
follow your Trades; As hoping that you shall inherit the Benefit; and not
Labor only for Others; nor have the Bread which you have Earned, Snatched out
of your Mouths; But see Peace, as the Root, producing the Fruits of Plenty: For
making Peace in our Borders, is a Means to fill us with the finest of the
Wheat, Psalm. 147.14. And after Peace be within thy Walls, follows, Prosperity
be within thy Palaces, Psalm. 122.7. When every one may pursue their Occasions
without Disturbance; And not be taken off, for the Defense of their Country,
nor Plundered by Soldiers, nor fall a Prey to Pirates, nor be Eaten up by the
Enemies, that lay all Desolate. For what a sad and fearful Community of Goods
is made by War, that leaves no Property, but what can be maintained by the
Longest Sword, and the Strongest Arm! But Peace sets a Fence about your
Possessions, and makes better Intrenchments and Fortifications in your Defense,
than what can be raised by the biggest Armies, and multitudes of Pioneers. Now
Seas are Open, and Commerce on the Wheels; and Men put in Heart, to use their
Hands, and bestir themselves with Courage and Alacrity; in promoting their
Concerns, and Polishing themselves, and all their Appurtenances, as a
Prosperous and Happy People. Thus for the Present World. And

2. Peace gives great Advantages, (if it be well used) for the World to come;
To make Religion, as well as Trading, Thrive and Flourish; To give Rulers
Leisure and Opportunity, better to Inspect and Regulate their People at Home,
when their Thoughts and themselves are not so Engaged and taken up Abroad; To
set themselves against the Intestine Domestic Enemies, The Atheism and
Impiety, The Profaneness and Debauchery, that occasion such Pangs and
Convulsions in the Bowels of the Nation; And threaten us with Worse things yet
from an Angry God, than any have befallen us from the hands of Man. And truly,
if there be no Healing here, there will be yet no Remedy, but our Portion,
after all, must be Misery. If we cannot forbear to Fight with Him, that makes
our Enemies at Peace with us; If we must still, in our Oaths and Curses, and
all our Ungodly Provoking Carriage, Let fly at Heaven, after we have got the
Peace on Earth; and turn the richest Blessing all to Pride and Wantonness, to
Luxury and Riot; and requite the Lord that has done all for us, only with
Drinking the Deeper, and Swearing the Faster; Will the Righteous and Jealous
God Endure it? And will he not be Avenged on such a People as this? Let 'em be
never so Frolic and Jocund at the Peace, alas, There Is no Peace to them. They
are quite out, and all to Pieces with the God of Heaven: And instead of any
Healing, they do but make the matter still worse and worse; And all their
present Quiet and Prosperity, is but a little Calm and Sunshine, before the
most dreadful Storm; Fire and Brimstone, a horrible Tempest, and the Blackness
of Darkness, which they must Endure for ever.

But it is to another End, that God sends us Peace, Beloved, To engage us to be
Better; and not Embolden us to go all to Naught. The Design of Heaven, in
Saving us from our Enemies, and from the hands of them that Hate us, You have
often heard from Luke I. 71, 74, 75. That we might Serve our Lord, without
Fear, (of them) In Holiness and Righteousness before him, all the days of our
Life: That we should Resent his Kindness in Grateful Hearts, and Sing his
Praise, and cheerfully Devote our selves to his Worship; And set it in our
Hearts to Live Holily unto him, that has so abundantly Obliged us; Thus showing
the good* Use we make of his Benefits, That we do not Forget what he has done,
and what we have to do; and that we dare not Rebel against him, with his own
Indulgence to us; But Abhor so foully to Misbehave our selves toward him, after
all the sweet Engagements his Love has laid upon us.

And O what Encouragement have we now to Serve our God in the Gladness of our
Hearts, when he has Raised our Sinking State, and so Secured our Hazardous
Effects! when he has a new Confirmed to us the Charter of all our dear
Enjoyments, and answered us even in the Wishes of our Hearts! When he has given
us the thing that we Longed for, and Blessed his People with Peace; When the
Dread is removed that Chilled our Spirits, and Shrunk up the Powers of our
Souls; When our Minds are at Rest, and an overflowing Tide of Joy Dilates and
enlarges our Hearts! Then we have the inviting Opportunity set before us, to
serve our Lord with Gladness; and to make a worthy Progress in his Holy ways;
when we have nothing to Interrupt and Annoy us; no Concern of Invading Armies
to fill our Heads, and Distract our Thoughts: Then, not only the Obligation is
laid upon our Ingenuity, to express our Thankfulness to the Lord of Love, in
ways meet for his Acceptance; But a Price is also put into our hands, to be
Improved for the Glory of our great Deliverer; that we should cheerfully Abound
in his Work, and addict our selves to advance the Interests of his Kingdom,
together with our own Salvation; And in Living to his Praise, Finish our course
with Joy. And thus we may make the present Peace Subservient to our future
Bliss.

But one Consideration more we have to heighten our Pleasure in this Peace, and
our Thankfulness for it; That the God of Peace sends it to us by the Royal
Hands of such a Great and Worthy Messenger; The only Person upon Earth, whom he
Inspired with Compassion and Fortitude and Resolution sufficient, to Hazard his
Life, and all that he had in the World for our Relief. O how Beautiful were his
Feet, coming to our Land, just as we lay upon the Block, under the Sacrificing
Knife! Then we received him even as an Angel of God, and thought we could never
enough Admire the Glorious Instrument of such a Seasonable and Blessed
Deliverance. And though the Difficulty of our Affairs was such, as Engaged him
to go with the Sword in his Hand, for these thrice Three Years now past: Yet
has he Convinced the World, that the War he waged was not for War's sake; but
to bring the Enemies at last to this Honorable Peace. And hereby he has given
a Demonstration to all Men, of his Wise Conduct, and his mighty Interest, and
Heaven's Blessing upon both; to accomplish the thing which looked so Improbable
to come to pass.

And now that God has given him his Quietus from the Toil and Fatigue of Arms,
and Restored him to us in Safety, according to our Prayers, To give Rest to his
People, and Dismiss 'em from the Military Attendance; To mind every one the
Concerns of his own private Good, and to rejoice altogether in the Public
Gladness of the Nation; O how Beautiful are the Feet of such a Messenger of
Peace, upon the Mountains of such Hazards as he has gone over, and such seeming
Impossibilities in the way, that he has Surmounted; and all the Pains that he
has been at to make us Easy! Blessed be God, that has brought him back, not
only Safe, but in Peace; and the Restorer of Peace to us; The Repairer of our
Breaches, The Assertor of our Rights, The Preserver of our Liberties, and,
under God, The Defender of our Faith and Life!

O may the same God Inspirit and Enable him, to do yet a Greater Work among us!
After all the Renown of his Signalized Valor in the Field, That he may show
the best of Courage at Home, A holy Zeal for Him, by whom Kings do Reign; In
Mawling and breaking to pieces, The Leviathans, the Serpents, the wild Boars
and Bears, All the Herd of various Bruits and Beasts of the people, that
Combine and make Insurrections, to Assault our holy Christianity; some to
Poison the Very Fountains of Life and Salvation, To Unhinge all the Doctrine of
the Gospel, and Ridicule the Faith of Jesus, as an idle Fancy: And more of 'em
to Trample down all Godly, Righteous, and Sober Conversation; To strike at the
Holy One himself, and make a Party to Strengthen the hands of the Wicked, and
to Out brave all serious Piety, and set up a Licentious Heathenish Practice in
its Room. O! here is a Courage worthy the Man of God's Right Hand, the most
Puissant King, and all the Powers Ordained of God; to be shown, in Taming,
Reducing or Suppressing these Monsters of Mankind, these Rampant Bruits, and
Incarnate Fiends; The Blasphemous Swearers, The Beastly Drunkards, The Lewd
Epicures, The Lawless Libertines, The Roaring Crew, that set God and his holy
Religion at Defiance. O how much would it add to the Joy and Triumphs of this
Day, (As to hear of all our Protestant Brethren Abroad Sharing with us therein,
So) to see a Mighty Victory here; and such Wickedness of the Wicked brought to
an End; Such daring Impiety, and notorious Immorality driven to Confusion, and
Banished the Nation! And to see those Pious and Amiable Societies, (Erected and
Engaged, by Voluntary Stipulations among themselves, to promote the Reformation
of Manners,) that in some Places have done very great and Worthy things
already, Encouraged and Strengthened, every where, to do still more and Better!

We will hope, That so Excellent a Prince as God has Raised up, and Empowered
to do such Wonders for his Church and People, will not be wanting here; Now
especially, that he has a Vacation from the Foreign Expeditions; and by his
Residence amongst us, will have fairer Opportunities, to turn and Exert his
Courage, where it is most Needful to be shown: And (as Joshua exhorted the
Elders and Heads and Judges and Officers of Israel, Chap. 23.6.) Be very
Courageous to promote mote all Holy Obedience to the Will and Commands of God.
And they must be Valiant indeed, that dare Appear for God, and his
Gospel Truth, and holy Cause, in the face of an Atheistical and Licentious Age.
This is a Courage highly Necessary to Stem the Tide, and common Course of this
present Evil World. A Courage that will, (it is true) make him Formidable to the
Evildoers: But those very Feet which Tread them down, will be more Beautiful
still in the eyes of all Enlightened Souls. Yea such Contending with the Wicked,
is the way of making Peace with Heaven: And by this means he will bring us
Tidings of a better Peace yet than the present. Of which I am next to speak.

And I have prevented my Self, for saying much upon this Head; by my Late
Discourses here of the Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. A Peace
that takes up the Offensive Matters, and ends the Quarrel between the Holy God
and Sinful man. But the terms of this Peace, are not in any Writings of the
Moralists, No, nor in the Law of Moses, to be found. It Is only the Gospel of
our Lord that Acquaints us with the Articles of our Peace; This Peace with God
through the Faith of Jesus, The great Plenipotentiary of Heaven, Sent not only
to Treat with us, but to Effect the Blessed Peace for us. And O how Beautiful
are his Feet, that bring Rest to the Laboring and heavy-Laden Souls! To all
that Believe how Precious is He, and Altogether Lovely! Though Jews, and some
among ourselves, that Name the Name of Christ, (But are little better Friends,
and can deal even as Jewishly with him) See no Form or Comeliness or Beauty in
him, for which they should Desire him; Yet never a true Christian in the World,
that does not account all things as Loss, for the excellency of the Knowledge
of Christ Jesus his Lord. Such have all their Rejoicing in him; but no
Considence in the Flesh. Phil. 3.3. No, They dare not Trust to that for their
Peace, which can never procure their Pardon. But when Christ is our Peace. Ephesians.
2. 14. and has made Peace through the Blood of his Cross. Col. 1.20. It Is only
that Blood which Satisfies for their Sins, which can Pacify their Consciences.
And when our Lord has told us, Joh. 16. last ver. In me you shall have Peace:
They are wretched Christians, and miserable Comforters, that would Seduce us,
to go and Seek it elsewhere, and drive us out of this Best and only Refuge for
the Distressed Soul; Even the Righteousness and Satisfaction, The Merits and
Intercession of our great Redeemer; Which is all the Hope and Support, The sure
Hold and Everlasting Consolation of all that Understand themselves, and the
Gospel way of finding Rest for their Souls! And whoever would know the things
of their Peace, e're they be Hid from their eyes; They must quit all other
Pleas and Confidences in the World; and be glad to cast Anchor here, and Trust
their All in this Bottom. For he that Believes not, (whatever else he does)
The Wrath of God abides on him. But whosoever Believes on the Name of the Son
of God, shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life. Joh 3.16. and last Verse.
It Is only by the Merit of his Blood, that we have our Pardon: and therefore
only by Faith in the same Blood, that we can have our Peace. It Is this Heavenly
Balm alone that can Cure the Diseased Mind. And this is ((...),) the Glad
Tidings of the Gospel; To Preach Peace by Jesus Christ the Lord of all. Acts
10.36. By him is Preached the Forgiveness of Sins: and by him all that Believe
are Justified from all things, from which they could not be Justified by the
Law of Moses. Acts 13.38, and 39.

And this it is that makes him so Dear and Precious to all Believers; And his
Feet, even upon Mount Calvary, (White and Red with his Innocence and
Sufferings) So Beautiful in their eyes: Because they Trod the Winepress of Gods
Wrath alone; and bore all that, which else must have fallen on the Sinners
themselves, to Sink 'em for ever. And this also makes even the Inferior
Ministers, sent by this great Messenger of Heaven, so Welcome to all his
Faithful People: Because they come upon the like Errand, To Proclaim their
Peace with God, through Faith in his Blood. For to the Ministers of Christ S.
Paul applies this very Text; Romans 10.15. How Beautiful are the Feet of them
that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring Glad Tidings of Good things! Their
Feet (importing their Divine Mission, and their Fervor in delivering the Will
of their Lord) are commended here, not so much for their Strength or
Nimbleness, as their Beauty: Because they Draw Men to the Faith of Christ, not
with Dread or Force; but with the Sanctity of Life, the Sweetness of
Persuasion, and the Power of their Doctrine. And they come upon the Mountains
too; Through great Opposition in the way of their Ministry; where so many
withstand 'em; and the Devil often raises Persecution against 'em. Yet nothing
shall stop 'em; But they will Publish the Gospel to all, and lay the Salvation
of their Lord in Common: That every one whom they can possibly prevail with,
may enjoy the Blessed Benefit. And therefore to the Faithful none are so
Gracious and Amiable: None whom they more Admire, or have a greater Veneration
and Affection for. They Receive 'em as the Ambassadors of the King of Glory:
and cry, like the Damsel, Acts 16.17. These men are the Servants of the most
High God, who show to us the way of Salvation. ^o high an Honor and singular
Kindness have they for 'em, They could, (as the A postle speaks, Gal. 4.15. if
possible) even pluck out their own Eyes, to give 'em to their Preachers, Yea
for their Lives, (like Priscilla and Aquila, Romans 16.3.) they could lay down
their own Necks. So Surprising, so Joyful is the News of Everlasting Salvation
by Jesus Christ to poor Sensible Sinners; That they think they can never
sufficiently express their Gratitude, their Respects, their Cordial Inclination
to the Dear Messengers of it.

But Wicked and Worldly men are not so fond of 'em. They give 'em but a very
Cold Reception, if not the Rough Handling; and would more Thank 'em to be
Quiet, than to Deliver their Message. They Despise 'em, as Impertinent
Busy-bodies; Yea they Resist 'em, as the Troublers of Israel. And whoever will
adventure to do as God commands him, that is, Cry aloud, and not Spare: Must
expect to be called, A man of Strife and Contention; Though he be never so Fair
in his Carriage, and have no personal Quarrel with any one in the World. They
Except not only against our Preaching, but our very Calling; as Supervaneous,
and a Nuisance to the World. And indeed one that meant to be Faithful in it,
would never meddle with the Thankless Office, among such Ill-willers to the
Lord's Messengers; But choose rather to be a contemptible Dunghil-raker, than a
Conscientious Impartial Minister; To be Scorned and Huff'd by Lordly Sinners,
and nothing but Maligned and struck at by the Conscious Offenders: Were we not
assured, That our Judgment were with the Lord, and our Work with our God: And
did we not hope for infinitely better Rewards, than their Good Graces; Who can
Quarrel the very Message of Peace; Because it does not include a Peace for them
with all their Sins: Because it Rouzes their Worldly Nests; and will not suffer
'em here to set up their Rest; Nor Bolster 'em up in all the Profaneness and
Libertinism, wherein they are Resolved to Persist. The very Gospel it self is
an Offense; and then no wonder, if its Ministers be an Eyesore to 'em. A Lewd
Ungodly Sinner thinks he has not a worse Enemy, than a Sound and Zealous
Preacher. No, for such do find him out, and put him to Shame, and fill him with
Dread. They are his Disturbers, his Tormentors: He cannot Love, He does not
like 'em. He could wish 'em all utterly Silenced. His Conscience cannot Sleep
for their Barking. Away with 'em; They put him out of Patience; They drive him
even to his Wits end. Their Message, how Sweet and Relishing soever to some,
it is to him nothing but the Burden of the Lord; All Briars and Thorns. A heavy
Doleful Story, too Grievous for him to Bear it. He Complains, as the Man did of
the Delphick Oracle, You never give a Comfortable Answer. But the Oracle
replied, You never come to me till your Case is past Remedy. And may not
Christ's Ministers so tell the Agrieved Sinner? You run your Soul upon
Desperate Streights; and still keep up your Rebellion against Heaven: And then
you are angry, That we will not Preach Peace, and Prophecy none but Smooth
things; when alas, No such things belong to you. And then is it your Ministers
Fault or Yours, if nothing but Speaking Lies will Please you, and that which
Obliges all the Generation of God's Children, Offends you? If you will Outrun
your own Mercies, and nothing but make Rods for your selves, O how can we help
your Trouble? We would be as Glad to Speak Peace, as you to Hear it: For that
is our Message; and it Grieves us, when we cannot give you a Share in it. But
yet we dare not Speak it, where the Lord has not Spoken it; Yea where he has
Forbidden it, and Threatened us, with Woe to us, If we Harden the Wicked, and
Strengthen him in his Wickedness, by Promising him Life.

But Reason as we will, The prejudicate Caviller alleges Reason, for Refusing
the Messengers that come to him in the name of the Lord. Their Feet are Dirty,
and far from Lovely. Their Affections are Earthly, and all for the World: And
their Conversations are Disorderly, or at best no more than Ordinary.

Such is our Accusation; And we are sorry, That there is too much Truth in the
Charge. We Confess it; We Bewail it; We beg Pity and Pardon from God and Man
for it. We have the Treasure in Earthen Vessels; And our Hearts hang too Near
the Ground; And our Lives are too Dissonant from the holy Gospel which we
preach. But then let me tell you, my Brethren, That you may gather Consolation,
even from that, which is the Matter of our Humiliation; That the most High God
is pleased to Speak to you, by men of like Passions with yourselves: Which is a
Favor from the Lord, that his People of old were very Importunate for, Exodus
20.19. They said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: But let not
God speak with us, lest we dye. If then we are no more than Ordinary men, yet
you are to own it, as an Extraordinary Mercy from God, That he will graciously
Vouchsafe to Treat with you by your Peers. And instead of Disdaining us, for
our Weakness; It will beseem you to Thank him for his Kindness; To show you
Hopes of Salvation, on this side that Perfection, which is not Attained even by
those, whom he Sends to Call and invite others to Aspire after it. And where
you cannot see any Recommendation in us; Yet let us find some fair Reception,
for our Commission Sake, for our Message Sake, and for your Souls Sake. Seeing
your Salvation is Concerned in our Application. For we Publish Salvation; and
say unto Zion, Thy God Reigns.

Whether his Salvation shall openly Appear yet before the End of the World, and
his Kingdom Gloriously show it self here upon Earth; We cannot tell: We dare
not Determine. What God can do, We know; (As Improbable as ever things may
look.) But what he will do, To Advance his Church above all, even in the Eye of
this World; We leave in the Secrets of his Council. Who knows, Whether after
all the great Turns of Affairs that we have Seen; there will not yet be a
greater Turn, than ever the World Saw? Whether we may not expect yet a further
Completing of that Prophecy, Isa. 2.2. It shall come to pass in the Last days,
That the Mountain of the Lord's house shall be Established in the Top of the
Mountains, and shall be Exalted above the Hills: And all Nations shall Flow to
it. And as one Effect of that Glorious Change, it is said, Ver. 4. They shall
alter the property of their Martial Instruments, and not Learn War any more.
But Antipathies shall be Reconciled; and the most Noxious Creatures shall not
Hurt nor Destroy in all his Holy Mountain. Chap. 11.9. And he knows in what
Sense that has been, or shall be fulfilled, which the Lord showed to his Chosen
Servant S. John in Vision; Rev. 21.2. The Holy City, New Jerusalem coming down
from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride Adorned for her Husband. The
Glorious things spoken of the City of God (there and in the Prophets) seem to
want a further Accomplishment even in this World, than ever yet has been.
However, we may be bold to take up Solomon's Confidence, Eccles. 8.12. Surely I
know it shall go well with them that Fear God, that Fear before him. So Himself
has bid us Assure 'em; Isa. 3.10. Say ye to the Righteous, It shall be well
with them. And Chap. 32.17, 18. The Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and
the Effect of Righteousness Quietness, and Assurance for ever. And my People
shall dwell in a Peaceable Habitation, and in Sure Dwellings, and in quiet
Resting places. They have, long time, seemed to have the Worst: But in the
Issues of things they shall, for certain, have the Best of it; and be the
Rising People after all; To Reign with Christ, and Sit Enthroned in his
Kingdom. Yea their Advancement, with their Redemption, is drawing Nigh. And
while they Look to the Faithful and True, that has Promised, Waiting for the
Salvation of God; They shall not be Ashamed of their Hope; But find all turning
in their Favor, to make 'em Great and Glorious for ever. For they are the
Temple of the Living God: As God has said, I will Dwell in them, and Walk in
them: And I will be their God, and they shall be my People, 2 Cor. 6.16. Thy
God reigns, Carries all in it. For if he be Ours, we are His. And when he
shows Himself, Like Himself, We shall then be also Like him; And not only Gaze
on, but Share in, his Glory.

For our part, As the best Preparation to this Future Salvation, Let us be in
care to Secure to our selves another Salvation at present: That is, To be Saved
from our Sins, and from the Love and course of this present evil World. O let
us Hearken and Yield to the Gospel of Peace, and take the way that it puts us
upon, to make our Agreement with Heaven; and Close up our Peace with God, in
this day of Grace. And then we may comfortably look for Better things, than any
we are able now to Describe or Imagine. And whatever be the Manner of the
Coming of our Lord's Kingdom, we may be sure, That Come it shall: And when it
Comes, put every Penitent Believing Soul into Possession of such Blessed
Unspeakable Seize, as no Eye has Seen, nor Ear Heard, nor any Heart of
Man can Conceive.

And now that the most High who Rules in the Kingdoms of men, has been pleased
to give us some Preludium of what may be hereafter; and a joyful Specimen of
his Overruling Power, in Fashioning all the Hearts of the Sons of men; and
bringing the most Distant and Divided close together: Now that after all the
Resentments, Preparations, and Hostilities, Jacob and Esau have kindly Met, and
Shaken Hands, and Struck up a Happy Union; And the Gracious Lord has not only
Exceeded our Hopes, but his own Promise; To make our Enemies at Peace with us,
Though our Ways have not been Pleasing to him. O how shall we receive the
Kindness sent from Heaven! And how shall we use the Peace granted on Earth!
Shall we fall into their Absurdity, who are Sullen, and little Pleased, That
God has done us Good against their Wills? Or shall we run into their
Extravagance, who know not how to express their Transports, but in the
Wantonness of Bruits full Fed, or the Wildness of Heathens running Mad? Shall
we go on to Kick at our only Friend? To Grieve his Spirit, that has Eased ours,
and prepare for Battle with him, who has given us Peace? God forbid, We should
so Thank him, for Sparing and Saving us. God forbid, We should show such Cursed
Fruits of all the precious Seed he has Sown amongst us: Like a People not only
Foolish and Unwise, but Incorrigible and Desperate. But if any Goodness will
Oblige us; If the dearest Love and Mercy will Win us; O let that which God,
even our own God, has now done for us, Gain upon us, and Prevail with us; To
throw down the Arms that we have taken up against Heaven, The Known Wilful
Sins, that bid Defiance to our Maker and our Judge: And be Reconciled unto God,
Seek his Peace, Keep in his Love, Live to his Honor, and also in such good
Understanding and fair Agreement with one another; That the God of Peace and
Love may still be with us; and Keep off all Evils from us, and Rejoice over us,
to do Good to us; and never be Weary to Express all his Kindness upon us.

To him let us Lift up our Hearts, and make the Oblation of Ourselves, together
with our Thanks.

Praise waits for thee, O God, in Zion: And in thy Temple should every one
speak of thy Glory. And having entered thy Gates with Thanksgiving, and into thy
Courts with Praise; We desire to Continue the Sacrifice of our Thanks, which is
the due Tribute, that we come hither at this time to pay unto the God of our
Lives, the Lord that has been so Favorable to our Land. For thou, Lord, have
made us Glad through thy Work; we will Triumph in the Works of thy hands. Thou
have been Mindful of us; Thou have been Good to us, and done great things for
us; In making us a way to Escape out of the Fears and Dangers wherein our Sins
involved us; Giving Rest to thy People, and that Peace, which is the matter of
our present Rejoicing before thee. According to thy Name, O Lord, so is thy
Praise, to the Ends of the Earth. And above all the Nations of the Earth, are
we Obliged to Magnify the Distinguishing Mercy of our God, who has showed us
such Mavelous Kindness, in a highly-favour'd Land; Turned away thy Anger and
our Dread, Saved us from the Sword, Bless*d thy People with Peace, and
compassed us about with Songs of Deliverance. Thou art our God, and we will
Praise thee; Thou art our God, and we will Exalt Thee, and give Thanks to thy
Name; and Rejoice in the Riches of thy Grace, and all the Wonders of thy Mercy
to us. O that we may give thee the Glory due to thy Name! That not only our
Tongues may speak of thy Righteousness and thy Salvation; But that our Souls
may be Joyful in the Lord, and our Hearts so fixed, that in them we may make
Melody; and Praise the Lord, with all our Hearts, and Glorify thy Name for
evermore! Yea, as thou have given us Peace; So, we beseech thee, Grant us thy
Grace to Express the Truth of our Thanks, By walking before thee all our days
in the Uprightness of our Hearts: Devoting ourselves, and all we are, and all
that we Have, to Serve and Please our God, Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

To whom, with the Eternal Spirit, proceeding from Thee and thy Son, be
Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Honor, and Power, and Might, ascribed by
us, and by all the Israel of God, World without end. Amen.

FINIS.

