THE CHARGE GIVEN BY THE Ld. Chapter Justice Jefferies, AT THE CITY of BRISTOL,
Monday, September 21. 1685. In his Return from his Western Campaigne.
Gentlemen,
I Am, by the Mercy of God, come to this great and populous City, a City that
boasts both of its Riches and Trade, and may justly indeed claim the next place
to the great and populous Metropolis of this Kingdom. Gentlemen, I find here
are a great many Auditors, who are very intent, as if they expected some formal
or prepared Speech, but assure your selves, we come not to make neither set
Speeches; nor formal Declamations, nor to follow a couple of puffing
Trumpeters; for, Lord, we have seen those things Twenty times before: No, we
come to do the King's business; a King who is so Gracious as to use all the
means possible to discover the Disorders of the Nation, and to search out those
who, indeed, are the very Pest of the Kingdom: To this end, and for this
purpose are we come to this City. But I find a special Commission is an unusual
thing here, and relishes very ill; nay, the very Women storm at it, for fear we
should take the upper hand of them too; for by the by, Gentlemen, I hear it is
much in fashion in this City for the Women to govern and bear sway. But,
Gentlemen, I will not stay you with such needless Stories, I will only mention
some few things that fall within my knowledge; for Points or Matters of Law I
shall not trouble you, but only mind you of some things that lately has
happened, and particularly in this City (for I have the Calendar of this City
in my Pocket); and if I do not express my self in so formal or set a
Declamation (for as I told you, I came not to make Declamations) or in so
smooth Language as you may expect, you must attribute it partly to the pain of
the Stone, under which I labor, and partly to the unevenness of this days
journey.

Gentlemen, I may say, that even some of the youngest amongst us may remember
the late horrid Rebellion, how men, under color of Law, and pretext of
Justice, after they had divested a most Gracious and most Merciful Prince of
all his Royal Power, by the Power of the Sword; they, I say, under color of
Law, and pretext of Justice (which added the more to the Crime, that it was
done under color of such pretended Justice) brought the most Mild and Meekest
Prince (next to our ever Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, if we may but compare
him to a Man) to die a Martyr, the first blessed Martyr, (pardon the
expression; besides our most blessed Jesu, who suffered for us on the Cross, I
say, besides that Blessed Son of God) this, I say, was the first Royal Martyr;
not suffering him to speak for himself, or make his defense; a Liberty which is
given to the vilest Traitor; and this was done (not to descant on the number)
by Forty one. The Rebels not resting here, for Rebellion is like the sin of
Witchcraft, Divested the Lineal, Legal, and Rightful Heir of the Crown, of all
his Power and Prerogative, till the Mighty God of Heaven and Earth, God
Almighty, restored him to his Just Right: And he, as if begot in Mercy, not
only forgave all Offenses, and pardoned voluntarily, even all that had been in
actual Arms against him (excepting those accursed Regicides) but also made it a
Crime for any one that should but remember, or upbraid any of their past Crimes
and Rebellions. Good God! O Jesu! that we should live in such an Age, in which
such a Prince cannot be safe from the seditious contrivances of Pardoned
Rebels! Had we not the Rye Conspiracy, wherein they not only designed to have
Murdered that Most Blessed (for so now we may conclude him to be with God
Almighty) and Gracious King, but also his Most ever Dear and Victorious
Brother? Had we not the Bill of Exclusion, which our most Gracious King told
us, he could not, without a manifest Infringement of the Royal Prerogatives of
the Crown (which are too sacred for us to touch) consent to? Had we not the
Cursed Counsel of Ahitophel? Kings are God's Vicegerents on Earth, and are
indeed God's on Earth, and we Represent them. Now when God Almighty had of his
Infinite Goodness, called this Blessed Prince unto himself, he sends a Prince,
who assures us he will imitate his Royal Brother and Renowned Predecessor in
all things, especially in that of his Clemency and Mercy, and that too upon the
word of a King. A King, I will assure you, that will not be worse than his
Word. Nay (Pardon the Expression) that dare not be worse than his Word. Which
of you all, that had a Father Murdered by another, (and that deliberately too,
under color of Justice, which added to the Crime; and your Brother, nay your
selves thrust out from your Inheritance, and banished from your Country; nay,
that sought your Blood likewise) would not when it was in your power revenge
such Injuries, and ruin such Persecutors. But here our most blessed Prince,
whom God long preserve, has not only forgiven, but will venture his Life for
the Defense of such his Enemies? Has he not ventured his Life already, as far
as any man, for the Honor of these Kingdoms? Nay, I Challenge this City to
show me any one man of it, that perchance may not be worth a Groat, that has
ventured his life so far for the safety of these Kingdoms, as this Royal Prince
has done. Good God! what an Age do we live in! shall not such a Prince be
secure from the Sedition, Rebellion and Plots of Men? He is scarce seated on
his Royal Throne (where God Almighty grant he may long reign) but on the one
hand he is invaded by a Condemned Rebel and Arch traitor, who has received the
just reward of his Rebellion. On the other hand up starts a Poppet Prince, who
seduces the Mobile into Rebellion, into which they are easily bewitched; for I
say, Rebellion is like the sin of Witchcraft; this man who had as little Title
to the Crown as the least of you (for I hope all you are Legitimate) being
overtaken by Justice, and by the goodness of his Prince brought to the
Scaffold, he has the confidence (good God! that men should be so impudent) to
say, That God Almighty did know with what joyfulness he did die, (a Traitor);
having for these two years last past lived in all Incontinency and Rebellion,
notwithstanding the goodness of an Indulgent Prince so often to pardon him; but
it is just like him. Rebellion (as I told you) is like the sin of Witchcraft.
For there was another which I shall not name, because I will not trample on the
dust of the Dead, but you may remember him by the words of his Speech; he tells
you, That he thanks his God that he falls by the Ax, and not by the Fiery
Trial. He had rather (he had as good have said) die a Traitor than a Blessed
Martyr.

Great God of Heaven and Earth! what reason have men to Rebel! But as I told
you, Rebellion is like the sin of Witchcraft; Fear God and Honor the King, is
rejected by People for no other Reason, as I can find, but that it is written
in St. Peter. Gentlemen, I must tell you, I am afraid that this City has too
many of these People in it. And it is your Duty to search them out; for this
City added much to that Ships Loading; there was your Tyly's, your Roe's, and
your Wades-men, started up like Mushrooms, Scoundrel Fellows, mere Sons of
Dunghills; these men must forsooth set up for Liberty and Property. A Fellow
that carries the Sword before Mr. Mayor must be very careful of his Property,
and turn Politician, as if he had as much Property as the Person before whom he
bears the Sword; though perchance not worth a Groat. Gentlemen, I must tell
you, you have still here the Tyly's, the Roe's, and the Wade's: I have brought
a Brush in my Pocket, and I shall be sure to Rub the Dirt where ever it is, or
on whomsoever it sticks. Gentlemen, I shall not stand Complementing with you, I
shall talk with some of you before you and I part: I tell you, I tell you, I
have brought a Besome, and I will sweep every Man's door, whether great or
small. Must I mention Particulars? I hope you will save me that trouble; yet I
will hint a few things to you, that perchance I have heard of. This is a great
City, and the Magistrates wonderful Loyal, and very forward to assist the King
with Men, Money and Provisions, when the Rebels were just at your Gates: I do
believe it would have went very hard with some of you if the Enemy had entered
the City, notwithstanding the Endeavors that was used to accomplish it.
Certainly they had and must have great encouragement from a Party within, or
else why should their Design be on this City. Nay, when the Enemy was within a
Mile of you, that a Ship should be set on fire in the midst of you as a Signal
to the Rebels, and to amuse those within; when if God Almighty had not been
more gracious unto you han you was to your selves; (so that Wind and Tide was
for you), for what I know, the greatest part of this City had perished; and yet
you are willing to believe it was Accident. Certainly here is a great many of
those men which they call Trimmers. A Whig is but a mere Fool to these; for a
Whig is some sort of a subject in comparison of these; for a Trimmer is but a
Cowardly and base spirited Whig; for the Whig is but the Journey-man-Prentice,
that is hired, and set on in the Rebellion, whilst the Trimmer is afraid to
appear in the Cause; he stands at a doubt, and says to himself, I will not
assist the King until I see who has the best of it; And refuses to entertain
the King's Friends for fear the Rebels should get the better of it. These men
stink worse than the worst dirt you have in your City; these men have so little
Religion, that they forget that he that is not for us is against us. Gentlemen,
I tell you, I have the Calendar of this City here in my hand. I have heard of
those that have searched into the very sink of a Conventicle to find out some
sneaking Rascal to hide their Money by night. Come, come, Gentlemen, to be
plain with you, I find the dirt of the Ditch is in your Nostrils. Good God!
where am I, in Bristol! this City it seems claims the Privilege of Hanging and
Drawing amongst themselves; I find you have more need of a Commission once a
Month at least. The very Magistrates which should be the Ministers of Justice,
fall out one with another to that degree, they will scarce Dine with each
other, whilst it is the business of some cunning men that lie behind the
Curtain to raise Divisions amongst them, and set them together by the Ears, and
knock their Logger-heads together; yet I find they can agree for their
Interest. Or if there be but a Kid in the case; for I hear the Trade of
Kid-napping is of much Request in this City, they can discharge a Felon, or a
Traitor, provided they will go to Mr. Alderman's Plantation at the West Indies.
Come, come, I find you stink for want of Rubbing. Gentlemen, what need I mind
you of these things? I hope you will search into them, and inform me. It seems
the Dissenters and Phanaticks fare well amongst you, by reason of the favor of
the Magistrates; for example, if a Dissenter, who is a Notorious and Obstinate
Offender, comes before them to be fined, one Alderman or other stands up and
says, He is a good man (though three parts a Rebel); well then, for the sake of
Mr. Alderman, he shall be fined but 5 s. Then comes anothe, and up stands
another Goodman Alderman, and says, I know him to be an honest man (though
rather worse than the former); Well, for Mr. Alderman's sake he shall be Fined
but half a Crown; so Manus manum frirat, You play the Knave for me now, and I
will play the Knave for you by and by. I am ashamed of these things: And I must
not forget to tell you, that I hear of some differences amongst the Clergy,
those that ought to Preach Peace and Unity to others: Gentlemen, these things
must be looked into. I shall not now trouble you any further, there are several
other things, but I expect to hear of them from you. And if you do not tell me
of some of these things, I shall remind you of them. And I find by the Number
of your Constables, this is a very large City, and it is impossible for one or
two to search into all the corners of it; therefore mind the Constables of
their Duties, and call on them for their Presentiments; for I expect every
Constable to bring in his Presentment, or that you Present him. So Adjourn, etc.

FINIS.
Upon Affidavits read, and other Evidence against Sir William Haymand the
Mayor, Alderman Lawford and others, for Kid-napping, there being Bills
privately preferred to the Grand Jury by John Rumsey, and being found, he made
the Mayor and the Aldermen concerned to go from the Bench to the Bar to plead
to the Informations; using many Expressions, saying of the Mayor, See how the
Kid-napping Rogue looks, etc.


