PEACE AND LOVE, Recommended and Persuaded: IN TWO SERMONS, PREACHED At
BRISTOL, January the 31. 167 4/5

By Tho. Jekyll, A. M. and Vicar of Rowd in the County of Wilts.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Milbourn, for Dorman Newman at the Kings-Arms in the
Poultry, and the Ship and Ankor without the Bridg-Gate on Southwark-side, 1675.

To the READER.
Reader,
IN Obedience to the Commands of a Person, to whom I am beholden for a very
Liberal Education, and a great deal more too, it has been my Usual Custom ever
since I lived in these Parts, to Preach twice every Year at Bristol; and being
there lately, as at other times before upon the like Occasion, I was in a very
rude manner Clamoured against, and both my Sermons Arraigned and Condemned
before either of us came to a Trial: Nay, before I was out of the Church, it
was earnestly pressed by one that Pretends to understand the Law, that I should
be Secured; and so far did his Opinion, for the sake of his Gown, prevail, that
I was sent for before the Mayor, and accused of such Crimes as (had they been
true) would have taken away my Life in the most Ignominous manner, and affixed
a perpetual Odium upon my Name and Memory; but thanks be to God, they are as
much abhorred by me, as they were falsely charged against me; and therefore to
Vindicate my Reputation (which ought to be as dear as Life it self to a Clergy
man) I have ventured to put my self upon the Trial of my Country, by whom,
though I may justly expect to be cast for weakness and insufficiency, yet I
have Reason to hope that I shall be acquit from those Infamous Aspersions that
were cast upon me by mine Accusers: And then (King Reader) for the former, I
heartily beg thine and the Worlds Pardon, and have only this to say for my
self, that nothing but the latter should have forced any thing of mine into the
Press; upon which account I think I am rather to be Pitied then Condemned,
there being but few Persons that would care to have their Private Studies and
Discourses intended only for the Pulpit, exposed unto the public view,
especially too, upon such an Occasion as this, when the Printing must not in
the least differ from the Preaching of them, as I do assure thee these Sermons
of mine do not. Farewell, and live Peaceably,

T. Jekyll.
Rowd, Feb. 18th. 167 4/5
PEACE and LOVE; Recommended and Persuaded.
Heb. 12.14. Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord.


OF all the Doctrines that were ever delivered unto the World, those that are
comprehended within the compass of our Saviors Sermons and Discourses, do
without all Controversy, deserve the highest place in our esteem, and to be
the first of all reduced into our Practice, being of such a Nature as afford
the Obserservers of them not only the greatest satisfaction and delight from
themselves, but do also render them accepted of God, and approved of Men; in
that they tend not only to the making of us Good Men, and Good Christians, but
also good Neighbors, good Magistrates, and good Subjects too; and therefore,
whoever they are, that under the gay Pretenses of Advancing the Glory of God,
and the good of his Church, have learnt to be Ill-natured and Troublesome, let
them know that they have not so learned Christ, who not only sent, but came
himself down from Heaven, that both by Precept and Example he might Teach us
better Principles and Practices: And therefore whoever looks into the Gospel,
that Perfect Law of Liberty, shall soon find that it was never intended to set
men together by the Ears, to give them a License to fall foul upon, and to ruin
one another; and that many times for Trifles and Circumstances, not fit to be
mentioned the same year with our Christian Peace. It Is true our Savior tells
us, Math. 10.34. That He came not to send Peace, but a Sword. But what Sword
was it? Not the Sword of War or Persecution amongst Christians one against
another; not the Sword of Friends, but of Enemies, viz. Those that were Enemies
to Christianity it self; and such too, as no ties of Nature or Humanity could
Reconcile: And therefore since these things are said to happen, not as the
Design, but only as the Consequence of the Gospel; and that Non ex sua natura
sed aliorum vitio, Not of its own Malicious Nature, but rather from the
depraved Dispositions of men: What may we hence conclude, but that we are
strangely Degenerated from the true Gospel Temper, whilst we increase and
foment those Differences and Animosities that are amongst us about matters of
no weight or moment at all? As if our Saviors Prophesying of these things were
a sufficient Warrant for us to bring them to pass! No certainly, that which
falls out per Accidens and praeter Intentionem Christi, can never become Decus
and Officium Christiani; Those evils that he only Prophesied of, but never
intended, can never become our Duty or Privilege to bring about. His Design and
Endeavor was to Reconcile God and Man, Jew and Gentile and and to bring all
the world too (if it were possible) into one Community: He was therefore
Ushered into the World with a Proclamation of Peace; and when he left it, he
Bequeathed a Legacy of Peace; nay all along through the whole course of his
Life, in all the Circumstances of it, from his Cradle to his Grave, we shall
find him so far from sowing any Seeds of Contention, that he would rather lose
his Right, yea, and his Life too, then give the least Occasion of Offense to
any. Its true, there was one sort of War and Contention that he Intended, and
that was a War against our selves, and not our Neighbors; against our Lusts,
and not our Brethren; against our Sins and Corruptions, and not for our Fancies
and Opinions: And in this warfare, he himself becomes our Captain; and whoever
would be accounted a good Soldier of his, must deny himself, and take up his
Cross; that is, he must Mortify all his Earthly members, be Crucified to the
World, and get the World Crucified to him; and then, and not till then, shall
he be able to follow him: And therefore, as the best security of our Christian
Peace, we are required to Engage in this Holy War against our Lusts. Whence
says St. James in the 4th. chap. of his Ep. and v. 1. Come Wars and Fightings
amongst you? Come they not hence, even of your Lusts which War in your Members?
Yes certainly, these blow the coals of all that fire of Contention which has
hitherto flamed so high amongst us: So that were it not for the Covetousness of
some, the Pride and Ambition of others, the Ignorance and Self-conceitedness of
too too many more, all our Differences might easily be Reconciled: If the Pride
and Conceitedness of men's minds were but changed into Meekness and Humility,
and all their Heats and Passions cooled by Patience and Moderation; and if that
necessary Duty of Love and Charity (the Badg and Glory of a Christian) were but
more seen amongst us, we should never have so many Sects and Parties, or at
leastwise, not so much Hatred and Emulation, since that would teach us to bear
with one another Infirmities; and if we cannot all agree in Judgment, to agree
at least in Holiness of Life, which is the best Evidence of the Honesty of any
man's Conscience in matters of Religion. And therefore the Apostle St. Paul (for
I take him to be the Author of this Epistle to the Hebrews) knowing how
destructive all sin and wickedness was to the Peace of the Church, and by
consequence to the very Being of the Church it self, he does in several places
of this, and the rest of his Epistles press Christians to an eager Pursuit
after Holiness, as the chiefest Security of the Churches Peace, 1 Timothy 4.7, 8.
Refuse profane and old Wives Fables, and Exercise thy self rather unto
Godliness; for bodily Exercise profits little, but Godliness is profitable
unto all things, having a promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is
to come; And so 2 Timothy 2.22. Flee youthful Lusts, but follow Righteousness,
Faith, Charity, Peace; they being the greatest hindrances of these; and so
here in the Text, he adds both together in the same Exhortation, Follow Peace
with all men, and Holiness, without which, no man shall see the Lord. In which
words we have an Exhortation, and a Motive to back that Exhortation.

1. Here is an Exhortation to the pursuit of Peace, and to the practice of
Holiness, two things that are of exceeding great worth and vallue, honored and
esteemed of all, though seen in, and practiced but by few. What he here means
by Peace, may be seen from the like expression elsewhere, Romans 14.19. Let us
therefore follow after the things that make for Peace, and things wherewith one
may edify another. That is (as the Context fully proves) Let us not put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in our Brothers way, by wrangling
over-eagerly for those things that may as well be let alone as used; but rather
let us walk more according to Charity, and not for meats and drinks, or other
trifles to destroy him for whom Christ dyed; for says he, v. 17. The Kingdom of
God, is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost, these being the things whereby we may best edify and profit one
another. Therefore says he also, Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as
lies in you, live peaceably with all men, i. e. not only avoid giving of
offense, but taking of it too; therefore says he, v. 17. Recompense no man Evil
for Evil: Though thy Christian Peace be struck at, yet let it not be broken;
rather bear with an Injury then Revenge it, it is the second blow that begets
the Quarrel; therefore be not, by any means overcome of Evil, but overcome Evil
with Good, v. 21. And to this our Apostle adds Holiness, because of its near
Relation to, and necessary dependence upon the former, it being impossible to
enjoy perfect Peace without it: There is no peace, says my God, unto the
Wicked, Isa. 48.22.

2. Here is also a Motive to back that Exhortation: Without which no man shall
see the Lord. Without which, that is, without either, nay without both; for
though the Greek Particle seems to relate unto the latter only, viz. Holiness,
yet they being both of absolute necessity, in order to the obtaining of
Everlasting Salvation, though it be a strain upon Grammar, yet it may, I think,
without any prejudice to sound Doctrine be applied also to the former, viz.
Peace, especially since our Savior has pronounced the same Blessedness unto
both, Math. 5.8, 9. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God.
Where, though the Phrases vary, yet the sense is the same, the sight or
enjoyment of God being only the Inheritance and Privilege of his Children.

No Man shall see the Lord; that is, shall dwell in the sight and presence of
God, shall ever enjoy his favor and love, and that either upon Earth in those
duties of his Worship and Service, in which he is pleased to manifest much of
his Divine Excellencies to holy and good men; or shall not enjoy his
everlasting presence in Heaven, In whose presence there is fullness of joy, and
at whose Right Hand there are pleasures for ever-more: Such as are not only
above others in their ravishing delights, but also infinitely beyond others in
their Everlasting duration and continuance, being such as none can take away or
interrupt. So that from hence, we may with the Apostle observe, That without
true Love and Charity in our hearts toward one another, and without true Piety
in our Lives toward God, its impossible for us ever to be truly happy. And
since the Apostle has said it, it will not misbecome us to examine how far
forth his assertion may be made good; now it will appear to be so, if we
consider, 1. The nature of God himself, who is infinitely merciful and Holy,
and delights in none but those that are so. 2. The nature of true happiness it
self, which consists chiefly in these two things, viz. Peace and Holiness. 3.
The nature of these excellent Duties themselves which are here pressed upon us
in the Text, which are not only the Pre-requisite qualifications in order to
the obtaining of true happiness, but are also a chief part of that happiness it
self.

The Proposition will appear to be true from the nature of God himself; And
here if we do but consider the several circumstances of the humane nature, we
shall soon find that the enjoyment of God is the only thing that can make it
truly happy, and therefore whilst others are seeking for Good elsewhere, the
good man's desire is always toward him. Psalm. 4.6. There be many that say, who
will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us;
Now there is nothing can procure this happiness for any, but only the pursuit and
practice of those things that please him; nor can any thing render us
acceptable in his sight, but only those things that are agreeable to his Nature
and Commands (for you know the only way of pleasing another is, by doing those
things that are answerable to his Mind and Will.) Now there is nothing that God
has more earnestly commanded, nor is there any thing that we can more nearly
resemble him in. than Peace and Holiness. He has sufficiently Demonstrated his
love too, and desire of Peace, in sending of his Son into the World, to be the
Blessed Peacemaker betwixt himself and us. And the Prophet Hab. gives us this
account of his Holiness, Hab. 1.13.
that he is of purer eyes then to behold the least sin: When Moses desired to
see the Glory of God, to gratify his request, God Almighty promised him to
make his goodness pass before him, which accordingly he made good by a
Proclamation both of his Name and Nature; Exo. 33.19.
in which he is Represented as one so far from all Malice and desire of Strife
and Contention, that he passes by infinitely more occasions, than ever he takes
against any, and withal so Holy, that he will not approve of any wickedness in
any body else; and therefore Moses justly styles him Glorious in Holiness, Exo.
15.11.
and upon all occasions makes use of the goodness of the nature of God, as an
Argument to excite the Children of Israel to the like practices, when he would
persuade them to Mercy and Gentleness unto others, he minds them of their
Redemption out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 26. at large, but more particularly, v. 18. Thou
shall remember that thou wast a Bondsman in the Land of Egypt, and the Lord thy
God Redeemed thee thence, therefore I command thee to do this thing: And when
he would persuade them to be Holy, he draws an Argument too from the nature of
God in this particular, Be ye Holy for I am Holy. Levit. 19.2.
And thus our Savior too propounds the nature of God for our pattern and
encouragement; he would have us love our Enemies and show kindness to them,
because God does so; and to be good our selves, because he is so. Math. 5.44,
45, 48. But I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them that curss you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despightfully use you, and
persecute you: And why so? That you may be the Children of your Father which is
in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sends Rain on the just and the unjust; to which therefore he adds, v 48. Be
ye perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. So that
considering the essential goodness of the nature of God, we may soon see how
acceptable a quarrelsome, furious and revengeful Christian is to him. For if he
delight in Acts of kindness and mercy unto all, and is continually doing good
unto his greatest Enemies; nay, and since too, he has commanded us to go and do
likewise, he can never certainly approve of those, whose pride and passions
hurry them on to those Actions that are so directly contrary unto his Nature
and Commands. He has been pleased to compare himself unto a Shepherd, Isa.
40.11. Whose property is to gather the Lambs in his Arms, to carry them in his
Bosom, and gently to lead those that are with young: and then certainly he
will never approve of those who without any respect had to old or young, strong
or weak, scatter and devour his little Flock. So on the other hand considering
the essential Holiness of the Divine nature too, we may easily guess what
welcome a wicked and ungodly Wretch shall find from him at last; For certainly,
he that cannot with the least likeing or approbation behold the least sin, will
never suffer it to dwell with him for ever; Doubtless he that cannot give a
Sinner, as such, a good look, will never give him a gracious Reception. Can two
walk together, Amos 3.3.
says the Prophet Amos, except they be agreed? Light may as soon have
fellowship with Darkness, as Christ with Belial or a merciful and holy God,
with a malicious and profane man: Those that by their wickedness have made a
Covenant with Death, and are at an Agreement with Hell, can never certainly be
in League with Heaven too. St. John tells us, Rev. 21.27.
that the New Jerusalem will not suffer any unclean or abominable thing to
enter into it; and if that place be of such a nature, what is He whose presence
gives it that purity! Certainly God Almighty will never suffer any to dwell
with him hereafter, that have not learned in some measure to be like him here.
Nay, we are told that the happiness of another World consists in our
Resemblance and likeness unto God. 1 John 3.2. We know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him: therefore says he v. 3. He that has this hope,
purifieth himself as he is pure; He purges out the old Leaven of malice and
wickedness, and endeavors to become a new Lump of Peace and Holiness: He
strives to be like unto God in all manner of goodness here, that so he may be
like him in glory hereafter; it being impossible without the one ever to obtain
the other.

Secondly, The proposition will farther appear to be true, if we consider the
nature of true happiness it self: There is nothing can make any man truly
happy, but that which can satisfy all his present desires, and secure him too
against his future fears; For though he have all that heart can wish, yet if
there be any thing he apprehends ever hereafter likely to disturb his joys, it
does very much abate the edge of his appetite, and sower the whole lump of his
enjoyments; therefore says the wise man, Prove. 1.33. Who so hearkneth unto me
shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil; now there is nothing
settles the mind in such perfect Tranquillity, and secures it both from the
sense and fear of evil, as a loving and peaceable disposition does; 1 John 4.18.
perfect love casts out fear with all the Torment that attends it, and covers
no less a multitude of Crosses and Afflictions, than it does of Sins. For
certainly, as amidst the Delights of nature, we can never be truly happy,
unless we think our selves so; so amidst all the Crosses that we can be
exercised withal, a heart well fraught with love, will so far calm and compose
our spirits, that we can never think ourselves miserable; This will so turn
every thing to the best, that all things shall work together for our good.
Whilst on the other hand the passionate and revengeful man disturbs the present
comforts of this life, and exposes himself to all the miseries of another, so
that he does himself more hurt than any body else; nay all things considered,
he is no bodies Foe but his own, since all the mischief he intended another,
Rebounds back again with greater force against himself; so true is that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 7*16. His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his
violent dealing shall come down upon his own Pate. For whilst I see another
person maliciously bent to work my Ruin, what is this but a fair warning for
me to stand upon my Guard and look to my self; by which means I shall have the
Comfort, but he the Torment of finding no occasion against me, whilst thus too
I shall heap fire on his head, and make him blow the Coals himself: For
doubtless there cannot be a greater Torment to the mind than this, since
wherever the man goes, and in whatsoever he does, this Ghost of envy and spleen
so continually haunts him, that he can never be at rest. Whilst on the other
hand the peaceable-minded Christian, who intends and does no evil, neither
feels nor fears any, but in the well grounded hopes of another World freely
enjoys this; nay takes all afflictions, not only patiently, but joyfully too,
not biting, but rather kissing the Rod, because he knows there is Honey at the end
of it, and that these light Afflictions work for him a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory: So that doubtless, if there be any Heaven upon Earth
it is this, especially too when the practice of Holiness accompanies the pursuit
of Peace, and the man has learnt to be good as well as kind; Then he lives and
fares well, yea more Deliciously every day than the Rich Glutton himself; it is
the good Conscience only that makes the merry heart keep a continual Feast. The
good man, says Solomon, Pro. 14.14.
shall be satisfied from himself; the loving disposition of his mind, and the
Innocence of his life, affording him all the satisfaction that his heart can
wish. Nay, though the World frown, and Men and Devils rage and threaten, yet
nothing can alter this happy state; This is a joy that no man takes away, any
more than the Rattling of a storm upon the Tiles can put an end to the mirth
that may be in the House. It was upon this account that Job resolved to hold
fast his integrity, and not let it go; my heart, says he, Job. 27.6. shall not
reproach me so long as I live. It Is true, the wicked and ungodly wretch may
please himself for a time with his wickedness, and be in love with his own
Folly and Extravagance; but yet all his jollity is but like that of Witches in
their Transportations, who feed upon nothing but Air and Fancy, and return from
their Diabolical Entertainments, with tired Carcasses and hungry Bellies; For
even in the midst of all their Laughter the heart is sorrowful, and sure I am,
the end of that mirth is heaviness: Whilst on the other hand, the good man is
not beholden to his Imagination only for his Entertainment, but is really full
and well liking; and has this advantage too beyond the other, that he is made
happy with less trouble, and at an easier Rate than the other is made
miserable: The one must pass through a cruel Purgatory of malice and wickedness
before he can get to Hell, whilst the other in his search after Heaven, finds
in the tranquillity of his mind a pleasant Paradise all the way.

Thirdly, The proposition will more fully appear to be true, if we consider the
nature of these excellent Duties in themselves; it is the privilege which the
true Christian only enjoys above all other persons in the World, that those
things that are his Duty, are both his Interest and his glory too, and at once
contribute both to his present and future welfare. What therefore are all the
Duties of Religion enjoined him here on Earth, but so many accomplishments to
make him fit for Heaven? What are all the Graces of the Gospel, but so many
Jewels to enrich and beautify a Crown of Glory? Why is he bid to deny
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live Righteously, and soberly, and Godly
in this present evil World, but only that thereby he may be capable of an
Inheritance amongst those that are thus Sanctified? To what end are we Required
to be Renewed in the Spirit of our minds after the Image of him that Created
us, but that by our being thus like him, we may be able to see him as he is,
and to enjoy him too? And indeed what is that happiness which the Saints enjoy
in Heaven, but only a privilege of partaking of the Divine nature? What else is
glory but only the highest perfection of Grace? And therefore, if we do but
consider the nature and employment of just men made perfect in Heaven; we shall
find them so exactly Transformed into the Image of God, as if their Converse
with, and Resemblance unto him, made up the happiness and perfection of that
place. It was this, that made the Garden of Eden a pleasant Paradise unto Adam;
And it is this, that makes Heaven it self to be Heaven to the Saints, whilst
they are here on Earth; their purest Gold has some Dross, but there it is
thoroughly Refined, and purified from all; Here the exactest holiness, has
somewhat in it that requires a pardon, but there it is so perfect, that it wants
none; which Innocent, and therefore happy condition, must necessarily produce
an everlasting Peace, and that not only with God, and their own Consciences,
but with all the World besides. The chief part of our Religion, consists in
acts of Piety unto God, and charity unto Men; nay, such stress has the
Scripture laid upon the latter, as without it, wholly to exclude the former. By
this, says our Savior, John 13.35. shall all men know, that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another. And St. John tells us expressly, 1 John 4.20.
That if a man say I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar. Now this
excellent Grace, which is so much our Duty here, makes up the chiefest part of
our happiness hereafter, and does the most of any thing else improve our
natures into an absolute perfection; And therefore that which is in St. Luke's
Phrase, styled Mercy, is in St. Mathews styled Perfection; In the one it is, Be
ye merciful, even as your Heavenly Father is merciful; in the other it is, Be
ye perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect; as may be seen,
by comparing Math. 5.48. with Luke 6.36. thereby teaching us, that we are made
perfect only in Love; And indeed, if we do but consider what the employment of
the Saints in Heaven is, we shall find it to consist wholly in the highest acts
of love that can be, in which they are continually exercised; for there, they
not only contemplate the excellencies of their Maker, and praise and magnify
him, but also show some acts of love unto their fellow creatures here below;
for though they do not become Mediators and Intercessors for them (as some
fondly Dream) yet they Rejoice to meet them in Heaven, and would gladly welcome
their greatest Enemies thither; For if there be joy in Heaven over one Sinner
that Repents, that joy is doubled, when that Penitence is Crowned with
perseverance and eternal life. So that it is not only Religion, but the end of
it too; it is the way that leads to everlasting life, and it is that life it
self. All which considered, our Apostle may well press Peace and Holiness upon
us, above all other things in the World; For if these be the things that the
nearest resemble the nature of God, and by consequence best please him; if
these are the things that not only tend to, but make up and complete our
happiness, what can be more necessary for us to believe and practice; and
therefore certainly we must needs do our selves an unspeakable deal of
mischief, not to follow such excellent Council and Advice, especially too,
since the enjoyments of this life, and our hopes of happiness in another, do so
necessarily depend upon it; All which, since I have, I hope, clearly and fully
proved, that which remains, is to excite you to, and direct you in the practice
of this Duty.

First, Then see here the excellency of the Christian Religion in general, it
requires nothing at our hands, but what tends to the improving of our natures
into an absolute Perfection; all its Laws are wholesome and good, and such as a
wise man would choose to be guided by, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Moses tells the Children of
Israel, that the Observation of those Laws that he taught them, would be their
Wisdom, and their understanding in the sight of the Nations, who would be
ready to give this Character of them, that they were above all others, a wise
and understanding People; And if the Law of God were so excellent then, what is
it now, since it has been improved by the Gospel, and illustrated by our
Saviors admirable exposition upon on it in the Mount? Certainly there is
nothing in the World more sweet and taking, nothing that comes so near the
Reason and the Interest of Mankind; nay, even the severest duties of it, which
seem the most contrary to our natural Tempers and Constitutions, such as are
Meekness and Humility, Repentance and self-denial, Mortification of our Lusts
and passions, and the like, yet even this, if we look well into them, will
appear not only reasonable in themselves, but upon several accounts very much
for our interest and advantage, tending all along to the perfect quiet and
settlement of our minds here, and to our everlasting happiness and peace
hereafter; And as for that peculiar Law of Christianity, which forbids Revenge,
and commands us to love our Enemies, and to forgive Injuries, though it may
seem harsh and grievous at the first; yet no man can think it so, that compares
the restless Torment, and continual slavery of a malicious and revengeful
Spirit, with the delights and sweetness of Love, and the glorious victory of
overcoming evil with good, whereby a man conquers both his Enemy and himself.

2. See here the necessity of these two excellent Duties in particular, viz.
peace and holiness.

1. For that of peace, which the Apostle requires, should be universal; follow
peace with all men; which precept of his, does very well agree with the New
Testament notion, of a Brother, which is indeed every man in the World, as
appears from the parable of the man that fell among Thieves, whereby not only
our kindred and acquaintance, but even strangers, and our very Enemies too are
brought into that Relation, upon which account this becomes as necessary a
duty, as it is an excellent grace, and commends us unto God beyond all other
duties of Religion; nay, it is that which gives being to Religion it self, and
is the very Life and Soul of all true Devotion. For indeed what is Christianity
it self, but the highest Demonstration of the greatest love that ever was? And
why is it so clearly Revealed unto us, but only to excite us to the like
practices one toward another? And therefore at the last day, this is the main
thing that we shall be accountable for; so that if there be any thing more
necessary than other, in order to the obtaining of everlasting Salvation, it
must certainly be this, hatred and malice being of all other things the most
odious in the sight of God, as being so directly contrary to the daily methods
of his providence; yea to his very nature and commands, tearing in pieces not
only his seamless Coat, but his Body, and rendering frustrate the very expense
of his blood, in so much, that he will sooner pass by all our other
Immortalities, than this; which therefore, that we may avoid, there be three
things, which if they were Reduced into our practice, would very much
contribute to our peace.

1. Bearing with one another Infirmities. 2. Dealing by others, as we would
have others deal by us. 3. A sincere and earnest endeavor after holiness: all
which, if they were but laid to heart and practiced, would certainly restore
our peace as at the first, and our prosperity as at the beginning.

1. Bearing with one another Infirmities; Though it be the design of the
Christian Religion, to make us holier than others, and to improve our minds and
practices beyond the common Rate of Men, yet it was never intended to make us
therefore keep our distance, and to stand off from all that are not arrived to
as high a pitch as our selves; no, the higher the true Christian is in Gods
account, the lower he is always in his own; The more experience he has had of
Gods goodness unto him, the more pitiful and courteous he is to others. It was
this that made St. Paul, become all things to all men, that is, so far to
condescend to the weakness, but not the wickedness of any, as to deny himself
that Christian liberty, which otherwise he might have taken, which was doutless
that holy guile wherewith he caught so many, upon which account, he recommends
the same practice unto us, Romans 15.1. we then that are strong, ought to bear
the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves; which advice of his,
is as necessary, as it is excellent, and would well become all Christians in
general, but more especially the Ministers of the Gospel, who should be men of
gentle and peaceable Dispositions, rather composing differences, than fomenting
of them. Therefore says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. The servant of the Lord
must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient, in
meekness, instructing those that oppose themselves; by which proceedings he
shall obtain that which the same Apostle requires in a good Bishop, 1 Timothy 4.7.
A good report of them that are without; by which means not only more Credit,
and Reputation, but more Proselytes and Converts too are to be gained, than by
all the unnatural Methods of force and violence. For I know not what it is in
men's natures, that so inclines them; but certainly most have this principle in
them, that they hate to be forced though it be even to goodness and virtue, and
will discard piety it self, and Heaven too, rather than be threatened thither;
whereas on the other hand the most refractory and stubborn Spirits, whom force
cannot prevail upon, will be supple and pliant, when reproofs and zeal come
clothed with love, when they see Tears shed for them, and their own interest
more looked after by others, than themselves; when they see they are rather
pitied than hated, and are notwithstanding all their obstinacy and wilfulness,
wooed both by God and Men to accept of happiness, and an Heaven. Besides, let
us remember the best of men, whilst they are here on Earth, need a great many
Grains of allowance; The Education, Tempers and Constitutions of men are to be
considered, from whence the greatest part both of their Actions and Opinions
flow. Nay, I am verily persuaded, that many times the Religion of men (at least
their ways of exercising of it) does very much follow the Tempers and
Constitutions of their Bodies. He that is of a melancholy Disposition, and
inclined to thoughtfulness, dreads Gods justice, and is therefore all for
mortification, and the severer duties of Religion, and is doubtless accepted of
God; Another, that is of a more lively Complexion, admires the goodness and
love of God, and from the Influence of that keeps himself innocent and cheerful
too, is sociable and courteous, and by his active stirring, may as much promote
Gods glory as the other, and I doubt not is as well accepted of him; And
therefore for us to be angry with our Brethren for not acting or thinking just
as we do, is as unreasonable, as if we should quarrel with every man that is
not of the same Age and Complexion with our selves; Alas, the minds of men
differ many times as much as their faces, and it often happens, that they may
as well fall out about the one, as about the other; and yet we have lived to
see men divided both in Opinions and Affections too, in so much that
Christianity now (the more's our forrow) is known by nothing more than
differences and jarrs, and our profession is not more adorned by virtues, than
branded by parties, each one stiffly defending his own opinion, though many
times it be so trifling, that it matters not at all whether it be true or
false; nay, though we agree in Fundamentals, yet many times a few Circumstances
make Christians worse Enemies to one another, than they would be to a Turk or a
Jew; and from these arise private grudges against men's persons also, and when
our passions are up, we will look back Twenty or Thirty years to find Crimes to
upbraid them withal; Certainly my Brethren, these things ought not to be so.
Christianity is a more mild and Good-natured thing, and was never intended to
make us Ishmaels, to set every man's hand against his Brother. What, because we
differ in our Opinions, must we therefore bait and worry one another out of our
lives? Doubtless, no Opinion that does not thwart the Fundamentals of Religion
should make a separation, and destroy our Love and Charity; and that, because
we have only probable Arguments for our Opinions, but we have an express
command for our Love; one excellent property of which, is, that it Bears all
things, 2 Cor. 13.4, 7.
suffers long, and is kind: And indeed, if we do but consider the long
suffering of God toward us, how much he bears with us every day, we have all
the reason in the World to make that excellent Character and Property ours, and
as much as may be, to bear with one another; to support, and not devour the
Weak; to strengthen, and not confound the Feeble knees; to raise up, and not to
trample upon those that are down; and by this means we may do more good, than
by all the Violence we can use, since a gentle persuasion accompanied with
kindness, will reach farther than the strongest Argument urged with Hatred and
Ill Nature. Christianity should appear with all the Ornaments of a meek and
quiet Spirit, and show a Love mixed with Sorrow, toward those that are
Strangers or Enemies to it; and this will make them esteem the Love that is
showed them, the Persons that show it, and praise the Religion that moves them
to it, and sooner then any thing else, persuade them to be of it.

2. Another Expedient for Peace, is dealing by others as we would have others
deal by us. When our Savior Christ came into the World and dwelt amongst us,
his design was not only by suffering in our Natures to satisfy Gods justice
for us, but also by his Life and Doctrine to teach us how to live our selves,
how to do our Duty to God and Man too: And therefore for the help of our
memories, and the information of our Understandings, he Epitomizes the whole
Moral Law, and reduces it to this one Duty of Love to God, and to our
Neighbor; and lest any difference should arise concerning our manner of
performing this, he contracts it into this single Precept, namely, Thou shall
Love thy Neighbor as thy self: And lest this too should be mistaken, he
explains it by that which is absolutely the most natural and reasonable
principle in the World, which is, to do as we would be done by, Matthew. 6.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do you even so unto them; for
this is the Law and the Prophets: And indeed this alone is of Universal
Influence in the whole life of a Christian, and will fully direct him, when all
other things fail him. It is not every man that can tell what is Justice or
Right in all cases, but there is no man but can tell how he would have others
deal by him at all times: Therefore we ought to lay aside the bias of
Self-love and Interest, and the rest of our Passions, and put our selves in the
same condition with other men, and then judge if we would be so dealt withal our
selves as we now deal by them; certainly there is no man in the world but would
find an alteration in himself and all his affairs.

If this golden Rule were but observed amongst us, it would secure Peace to the
World, and make all men as happy as it is possible for them to be here; we
should be full of mutual Goodness and Pity, a World of Benefactors, a Society
of Saints and Angels; and instead of becoming Wolves and Beasts of Prey, we
should be as so many Gods to one another. Let us therefore be persuaded to lay
aside our Pride and Arrogance, to attribute no more unto our selves then what is
our due; and withal to Render to all men what belongs to them, to place our
selves in their Circumstances, and then act accordingly; and by this means all
our Differences would be easily Reconciled, at least-wife we should be more
moderate in our Censures, and less violent in our Actions. It was for the sake
of this excellent Precept that Severus the Emperor did much Reverence our
Savior and Christianity it self, and endeavored as much as he could to reduce
it into his own practice, and for the sake of it favored the Christians to
whom at first he was somewhat harsh and rigid; nay, and had built a Temple for
them, if Vlpian the Lawyer, and some others, for some Reasons of State had not
diverted him from it. Let not us then by the Violation of it, disturb our own
Peace and the Churches too, since thus we not only break the Laws of Humane
Society, wound our own Consciences, but cast Dishonor upon Christianity it
self too; but let us rather, as much as in us lies, live by this Rule, and upon
all occasions, ask our selves, Would we that others should deal thus by us?
Would we be contented to be slandred and abused, to be railed at and affronted,
to be cheated and couzned, to be robbed of our good Names, and the comforts of
our Lives? Would we be contented to be driven up and down, from post to pillar,
and to have all advantages taken against us? No certainly, we would not: Let us
not then act any longer so directly contrary to the Reason of Mankind, and to
the design of the Gospel too, lest hereby we be esteemed the common Pests of
the world, Enemies both to God and Man too; and so at last find from the Judge
of all men, the same measure that we have meeted out to others, which is to be
proceeded against with all the violence and severities of justice and wrath. But

3. A sincere and earnest Endeavor after Holiness, would very much contribute
unto our Peace. Whilst Man continued in that happy state in which he was
Created, there was a perfect Peace in Paradise, and this flowed from that
perfect Innocence of his Life and Nature before his Fall; but as soon as ever
he had eaten of the Forbidden Fruit, Sin, the great Makebate of the World, set
him at Variance both with God and himself; sowed Division between the Man and
his Wife, made mortal Enemies of Natural Brothers, and taught the whole
Greation Rebellion against their lawful Prince, and has ever since taught Men
all those Devilish arts of Malice and Revenge, which they are so perfect in at
this day. It Is this cursed Root of bitterness in our Natures, that brings forth
all that damnable fruit of Hatred and Emulation in our lives. Genesis 4.2 Sam.
11.1 King. 21. Esth. 3.3 John.
It was the envy of Cain that made him first Hate, and then Murder his Brother.
It was David's Lust that cost Vriah his life: The Covetousness of Ahab that
made him Murder Naboth: The Pride of Haman that made him thirst after the blood
of the Jews; The Ambition of Diotrephes that disturbed the Churches of Asia;
and if we would but lay our hands upon our hearts, we should find that it is one
Lust or another at the bottom that arms us so unnaturally against one another;
While there is envying, and strife, and divisions amongst you, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.3. Are ye not Carnal, and walk as Men? The Man all the while
getting the better of the Christian; whereas were we but holy and upright, just
and good, we should be more moderate and calm: Did we in our hearts truly fear
God, we should by necessary consequence also love our Brethren; were we truly
sensible of his love and kindness unto us, it would make us more charitable and
loving unto others. Sure I am, if we would but look nearer home, the best of us
may find employment enough for our utmost Malice and Revenge against our own
Lusts; we need not be so severe upon other men, whilst we have so many worse
Enemies in our own Bosoms, against which it would better become us first to
wage war; else as our Savior says, Math. 7.4, 5. How will thou say to thy
Brother, let me pull out the Mote out of thine Eye, when behold a Beam is in
thine own Eye. Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye,
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the Mote out of thy Brothers Eye.
It is upon this account therefore, that our Apostle adds this Duty of Holiness
to that of Peace, which is the second thing to be considered here as necessary
in order to the obtaining of everlasting Salvation.

2. Therefore Secondly, and to conclude; See here the necessity of Holiness,
Without which, says the Apostle, no man shall see the Lord, then which there
cannot be a more powerful motive in the World. Whoever considers the Nature of
the Christian Religion, how suitable all the Precepts of it are to the Reason
and Interest of Man kind; what excellent Promises it makes to excite our hopes
in case of Obedience; what amazing threats it lays down to a waken our fears in
case of Disobedience; whoever, I say, considers these things, cannot but
conclude it the most excellent Religion in the World, and such, as no man in
his Wits but would readily embrace and practice: And yet if we do but look into
the Lives and Conversations of those that have embraced it, we shall find the
generality of them as great Strangers to the practice of it, as those that
never heard of it. What Atheism and Profaneness, what Cursing and Swearing,
what Lying and Perjury, what Drunkenness and Uncleanness; in short, what plenty
of all manner of Wickedness is there every where to be seen, even amongst those
that call themselves Christians? As if the Grace of God, that brings Salvation,
had never appeared; or rather, as if the appearance of it were only to teach us
not to deny, but to own and practice all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts; for
certainly had some amongst us a Dispensation from Heaven, and leave to be as
bad as they would, they could not well be much worse than they are. And yet ask
these Persons in their more serious Intervals, what they think of God, and of
another World, and their hopes of Happiness seem to be as strong as the best,
flattering themselves with I know not what presumptuous thoughts of Gods mercy;
as if he were obliged to bestow it upon them whenever they would vouchsafe to
call for it, or to accept of it. But let these Men know, the Christian Religion
gives no encouragement to any such flattering Hopes and corrupt Practices. Its
true, it promises Eternal Life, but its only unto them that Believe. It offers
Heaven and Happiness, but its only unto them that practice Holiness: It assures
of Peace and Comfort in another Life, but then its only unto them that follow
Peace and Righteousness in this. Since without these, the Apostle assures us,
no Man shall see God, shall ever behold his Face with joy and comfort, shall
ever have the least place in his Favor here, or in his Glory hereafter. It Is
true in one sense, the most Wicked and Ungodly, who have neither Peace nor
Holiness, nor any other good quality besides, shall see God; but it shall be
only to increase their Misery, and add unto their Torment, when they shall see
God, as the Devils do, with fear and horror, and behold him as so far from
Pitying and Relieving of them, that he will rather Laugh at their Calamity,
and mock when their fear comes. Which sole consideration is enough, one would
think, to calm the most Furious and Revengful, to sweeten the most Sour and
Bitter Disposition, to curb and restrain the utmost fury of all our Lusts; for
I am much mistaken, if it would not daunt the proudest Sinner that ever
breathed, to look upon Death, and to see nothing but Hell beyond it; to behold
the great God of Heaven and Earth clothed in all the Robes of Fury and
Vengeance; to behold him unto others a Merciful Father, and Compassionate
Redeemer; but unto himself a Revengeful Judge, a Consuming Fire. Let therefore
the time past of our Lives suffice that we have lived so directly contrary to
our Interest and Duty: Let the Wicked for sake his way, and the Unrighteous man
his thoughts: Let all sin and wickedness be banished, both our hearts and
lives: Let us lay aside our former corrupt Conversations; and let those Vices
that do at this day rule and reign in our Nation, for the future, not be so
much as once named amongst us, as becomes Saints; since whoever Indulges
himself in the least sin, shall never, whilst he does so, Inherit the Kingdom
of Christ, or of God; and may the God of all Grace so sanctify our hearts and
lives in the ways of his Laws, and in the works of his Commandments, that we,
being cleansed from all filthiness, and pollution both of Flesh and Spirit, may
so perfect Holiness. in the fear of God, that at last we may enjoy the
happiness of his fight and presence for ever.

1 John 4.20, 21. If a Man say, I Love God, and Hates his Brother, he is a
Liar; for he that Loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he Love
God whom he has not seen? And this Commandment have we from him, that he who
Loves God, Loves his Brother also.


WHoever considers the Nature of that New Commandment which our Savior gave of
Loving one another, shall find it to be a Duty so rational and convenient, that
there cannot be any thing more becoming the Nature of a Man, and more likely
to win upon, and prevail with him; and therefore the Prophet calls the Cords of
Love, the Bands of a Man. Hos. 11.4.
This Law of Love being so naturally fitted to the tempers and constitutions of
men (who will sooner be allured and drawn, then forced and driven) that even
the most rude and savage tempers will be calmed and mollified by it, and made
fit for Society and good Order. But now when we come to consider it in its
highest abstraction, and take a prospect of it from that Influence it has not
only upon all the actions of our Lives one toward another, but even those
toward God too, we shall find the excellency of it to be far greater. For, if
before it made us men, it now makes us Christians, and teaches us to love our
Brethren, not for their own, but Gods sake too; since it has this excellent
qualification also, that hereby we are assured of the Truth of our Religion,
and the sincerity of our hearts toward God, our Love to our Brethren being the
mark and sigh of our love to him, without which, all our Religious pretenses
are but vain and foolish, and at the best but Hypocritical and a Lie. For if a
Man say I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar, etc.

In which words we have a Proposition laid down, and two Arguments to prove
that Proposition.

1. A proposition which consists of a supposition: If a man say I love God, and
hates his Brother, and a conclusion deduced from thence, he is a Liar, the
very thing it self carrying a contradiction in its terms; for he that says he
loves God with all his heart, and with all his soul (as every Good man ought to
do) and yet in the mean time hates his Brother, or does not love him so well as
he should, however he may persuade himself to the contrary, yet all his Love is
but false and counterfeit, and he himself, without mincing the matter, is no
better than a Liar, which the Apostle does not only say, but prove from the two
following Arguments; the one drawn from the Nature of Love it self, the other
from the effects and consequences of it.

1. From the Nature of Love it self; For if he does not Love his Brother, whom
he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? It being more Natural
to us, to love those things we see and converse with, then those things we only
hear of and believe, in that Nature is before Grace, and takes the first place
in us; and we are more apt to love those things that are visible and affect our
senses, than those things that are invisible and affect only our
understandings. And therefore, if to men, with whom we converse every day, and
meet with such opportunities, we do not express any Love; what reason is there
to imagine we sincerely love God, when of our love to him, and the sincerity of
it, we were never able to make those Trials? because we never saw him, nor had
any opportunities offered us of showing any real acts of love to him. Besides,
something may be judged from the difficulty of the thing; for he that will not
do a thing that is easy, will hardly be supposed to do a thing that is more
difficult: Now its harder to love one we never saw, than one that we see every
day; in that fight and conversation is one Motive of Love: Now we see our
Brethren daily, but we never saw God at any time; and therefore, where there is
one advantage to allure our love to our Brethren, which there is not to invite
and oblige us to the love of God; if a man fail in the one that is so Natural,
how can it be imagined that he will perform the other which is less Natural? But

2. The Apostles second Argument is drawn from the effects and consequence of
Love, which is Obedience to the commands and will of any person whom we Love;
And this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, loves his
Brother also: So that its evident by the command of God, that we are as really
obliged to love one another, as to love him himself; and therefore if we would
show any love to him, we cannot do it any better way then by Obedience to his
commands. And thus the notion of loving God in Scripture, but more especially
in the New Testament, seems to be taken most fitly for one most eminent act of
love amongst all men, viz. that of doing those things that are most acceptable
and well-pleasing to the Beloved, either as tending most to his good, or any
other way desirable unto him; for this indeed is the only way of expressing our
love to another, all others being but the effects of love unto our selves. But
because God wants no Contribution of ours, either to the promoting of his good,
or the advancing of his glory; and so our only way of doing grateful things to
him, is our performing what he commands: It necessarily follows, that our
Obedience to the mind and will of God in the highest and most perfect manner,
is styled the loving of him, this being indeed the prime, if not the only way
of demonstrating our Love to him; and therefore its the greatest contradiction
and absurdity in the world, for a man to say he loves God, when he contemns and
despises his Will and Commands, and is, as if a man should pretend to be a
Loving and Loyal Subject to his Prince, when his daily practice is to break all
the Laws that ever he made: And therefore hence is it that our Savior says, Ye
are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you: A readiness and willingness
to perform another will and pleasure being the truest sign of Love and
Friendship that can be; so that the Apostle may very well charge that man with
an Untruth, who pretends to love God, and yet takes no care to Oblige and
Gratify him, especially to, when he has but one only way of doing it, viz. by
Obedience too his Commands, amongst all which, I know none pressed more
earnestly upon us, then this of Loving one another. And thus I have at large,
and in as plain terms as I could, given you the meaning of the words, so that I
suppose, by this time, we may from hence conclude, That where there is no true
Love to our Brother, there can be no true Religion toward God. In the
prosecution of which, I shall endeavor 1. To prove that it is so. 2. Show you
some hindrances of our Love to our Brethren, and so consequently of our
Religion toward God. 3. I shall show you how we ought to Love our Brethren.
And 4. Draw an Inference or two by way of Application.

1. I shall endeavor to prove the Proposition, and that 1. From the natural
dependence of all Religion upon Love. 2. From the Pernicious Nature of Envy and
Hatred, which is destructive to all Religion. And 3. From the good Providence
of God, who has made the Love of our Brother to be the mark and sign of our
Love to him.

1. From the Natural Dependence of all Religion upon Love. If we do but
consider the Nature of Religion, we shall find it so necessarily built upon the
foundations of Love, that it is impossible for it to stand upon any other Basis;
nay, it is so natural to it, that all pretenses whatsoever without it, will
soon vanish into air and nothing. For as that which is not of God, can never
stand, so that Religion which does not abound in Love, can never be from God,
and so can neither assure its present Truth, nor its long continuance, in that
God is Love, and that which comes naturally from him (as all true Religion
does) must partake of his Nature, and abide in him, and there is no dwelling in
God, without a dwelling in Love. And therefore our Savior Christ answering
that subtle Question of the Lawyer, touching the first and great Commandment,
makes this one duty of Love to be the fulfilling of the whole Law, Math. 20.^0.
On these two Commandments, viz. Love to God and to our Neighbor hang all the
Law and the Prophets: That is, whatsoever is commanded in the Old Testament by
Moses, or any of the rest of the Prophets, is reducible hereunto, and falls as
so many lines into this one Center of Love. Luke 10.
Nay, St. Luke relating this Discourse between our Savior and the Lawyer,
makes it not only the fulfilling of the Law, but even the only way of obtaining
the Reward annexed unto such an Obedience; for the Question is not here set
down as propounded concerning the greatness of the command, but the obtaining
of everlasting Salvation; Master, what shall I do to Inherit Eternal Life?
Where the Answer is the same, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
Heart, v. 25, 27.
with all thy Soul, with all thy Mind, and with all thy Strength; and thy
Neighbor as thy self, which is indeed the sum and substance of all Religion:
And therefore its this which makes the Christian Law so perfectly a Law of
Liberty, and recommends it to us above all other Doctrines in the World; in
that this does endeavor (as all Religion should) to make man's Nature perfect,
and to restore that Image of God which was at first so unhappily defaced; for
there is nothing that a man can Answer and Resemble God in, so much as Love;
all his other Attributes of Power and Majesty, Justice and Equity, Purity and
Holiness, and whatever the Divine Nature is perfect in besides, being
infinitely above us; but this now is, as it were, exactly fitted unto us; for
as it is Love in him which makes his Sun and Rain to shine and fall upon the
Good and Bad, so its that too which makes us Love and Pray for our Enemies, and
do them all the good we can: By this God forgives us, and we forgive one
another; and as this makes him give what ever we ask of him, so it makes us
give whatever is asked of us: If we are desired to go a Mile, this makes us go
twain; if to give a Coat, this gives a Cloak also; if to forgive one Injury,
this makes us to forgive even till 70 times 7 are offered; and even then too, to
be still ready to forgive. Nay, there is not a Duty which the Gospel obliges
unto, but its founded upon Love: Baptism is a Covenant of Love; the Lords
Supper is a Feast of Love, Faith must work by Love; and to that and all other
Graces, must be added this Grace of Love, as that which seasons all, and is
therefore called the very Bond of Perfection, Col 3.14. But

2. The Truth of the Proposition will farther appear from the Pernicious Nature
of Envy and Hatred, which are destructive unto all Religion. As there is
nothing in the World more excellent and necessary than this Grace of Love, so
there is nothing more hurtful and dangerous than its contrary Passions of Envy
and Hatred; for as the one strives to make men perfectly happy, so the other
does all it can to make them eternally miserable, and fights neither with small
nor great, but with the all of man's felicity; for by mixing and twining it self
into our hearts, it quite stifles our Religion, and does as the Old Serpent did
by our first Parents, Betrays us even in the midst of Paradise: For whilst we
pretend to be Religious, and do not bridle this unruly Passion, our Religion is
not only vain, but will be our Ruin too; there being no greater affront to God
in the World, nor any thing more destructive to our selves, then thus
Presumptuously to sin both against him and our own souls, by presenting our
selves before him so directly contrary to his Nature and Commands; for he has
taken such care that his worship should be free from all such impure mixtures
of Hatred and Malice, that he will rather for a time dispense with his Worship
it self, and have it deferred, then endure that it should be thus unduely
performed: Math. 5.23, 24.
For if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remember that thy Brother
has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar, first, be
Reconciled unto thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift: Whereby it
appears that the Performance of any outward Service unto God, without Love to
our Brother, is very displeasing unto him, who requires Mercy rather than
Sacrifice at our hands: For if the gift, when brought to the Altar, must rather
be lest there then offered up, sure there can be no Acceptance or
Reconciliation with God, unless we be also Reconciled unto our Brother, because
that this must be done before the other can be begun. How many then have
offered not only Fruitless, but Abominable Sacrifices unto him, and instead of
pacifying, have but the rather provoked him, nay, and have with all
earnestness, even besought him to Ruin and Destroy them? And therefore, whilst
they so constantly repeat that blessed form of Prayer which our Savior taught
his Disciples without this Grace of Love in their hearts, they do even
challenge the Power of God unto their own Damnation: For, whilst they
Proportion the Absoluteness of that forgiveness which they beg of God, unto
that which they give to others, and yet all that while are ready to do all the
Mischief they can unto them; what is this but to beg of God to do his worst
against them, and to exercise the utmost of his Power in their Everlasting
Destruction; and sure men, in such a condition are very far from all Religion.
For besides the Destructive Nature of Envy and Hatred unto all humane
Societies, which can no longer stand where these Reign, than an House divided
against it self can, (as may be seen in many fatal instances both at home and
abroad) it is so contrary unto all Religion too, that wherever, its
entertained like a little Leaven, it soures the whole lump, and renders all our
performances fruitless and vain. And then, I hope, there is no man will think St
John either Uncivil or Uncharitable in thus plainly giving the Lie to all
pretenders to Religion toward God, without Love to their Brethren too; for, he
that says he Loves God, and Hates his Brother, is a Liar. But

3. The Proposition will yet farther appear to be True, from the Providence of
God who has made the Love of our Brother to be the mark and sign of our Love to
him. If we do but consider the Nature of that Relation which we stand in one
toward another, we shall easily perceive that this piece of Gods providence,
in making the Love of our Brother to be the mark and sign of our Love to him,
is grounded and bottomed upon as great Reason as any is in the World; for we
are all Members of that Mystical Body, whereof Christ is the Head: Now where
there is no true Love to the Fellow Members, there can be no true Love to the
Head, because in the same Body, the Head and Members share alike: If therefore
the Members fall out, and be at Enmity one with another, they can never agree
and be at peace with the Head. Besides, there can be no other way of showing
our Love to God than this; for as our Capacities are now, all others are either
above us, or below us; we cannot be said to Love God properly, and as he is,
because he is a Spirit and Invisible, and so does infinitely transcend our
highest conceptions of him; and therefore that which we call Love to him, is
not properly such, but rather Adoration and Devotion: And then seeing the
Divine Nature is so far beyond the expressions of our Love, we must look out
some other way, by which we may more clearly evidence it, and that must be by
somewhat of our own Nature and Condition. Angels are therefore above us, and
all others Creatures are below us, and not capable either of receiving or
returning of our Love, so that there is nothing else that can be the object of
it, but our Brethren or our selves: Now self love is too narrow and scanty to
have any thing of this Divine Quality in it, which is of a more extensive and
universal Nature. Besides, its so far from testifying of our Love to God, that
it may as well be in a Devil as a Man, as may be seen in the Case of Dives,
whose request to Abraham, of sending Lazarus to warn his Brethren, Luk^ 16.
did not proceed from any love to, or care of their souls, but only out of
respect unto his own, lest by their coming into that Place, now his torments
should be increased; so that its only the Love of our Brethren that can
testify the reality of our love to God, because that can only prove that we do
not Love in Word and in Name only, but in Deed and in Truth. In that, in the
immediate expressions of our Love to God, there may be nothing more then a
Complemental Hypocrisy; and for that which we show unto our selves, there is
too much of Interest in it to bear witness for us, for self-denial is the great
Principle of Love: Besides, can there be a better way of showing our Love to
God, than this which he himself has taught us? John 3.16.
And herein was the Love of God manifest to us in that he laid down his life
for us, thereby doing that for us which we stood in the greatest need of; and
herein also should we manifest our Love to him in doing what we can, even to
the hazarding and laying down of our lives for him, which we can never better
do, then in Laying of them down for the Brethren, this being the only way he
expects a return from us: And therefore the Apostle well Argues from the
Reasonableness of the thing, Beloved, if God so Loved us, he does not say we
ought also to Love him; but we ought also to Love one another; our Love to one
another being the best Argument of our Love to him, because he which loves him
that begat, loves them also that are begotten of him; Cap. 5. v. 1.
there being a kind of Contradiction in the thing, for a man to say he truly
loves another person, when he hates whatsoever belongs to him, or is like him:
And I am sure there is nothing Resembles God so much, as that which he set his
own Image upon at first, viz. Mankind, in respect of which we being all his
Offspring, ought to Love as Brethren. But

2. I come now to consider the hindrances of our love to our Brethren, and so
consequently of our Religion toward God, and they are amongst too too many,
others these three: 1. Taking up, and divulging evil Reports of them, whether
they be True or False. 2. Harsh and unkind censuring of them and their Actions.
And 3. Confining of our love only to some particular persons.

1. Taking up, and divulging evil Reports of them, whether they be True or
False; 1 Cor. 13.7.
when the Apostle tells us, that Charity believes all things; his meaning is
not, that it is ready to take up every flying Report, and Story that passes up
and down the World for Current, but that it is so kind and good natured, as to
assent and give credit only to those things that are good and commendable; and
if it hears any thing that is otherwise, not to believe it without great care
and Caution, nor even then to spread it farther, but as much as may be (unless
it be too notorious indeed) to conceal it, because Charity bears all things,
before it believes them; and when it cannot choose but believe them, yet even
then it hopes better, and therefore it endures all things too. You know what
mischief the evil Report that was brought upon Canaan did, how it shut both
them that raised, Numb. 14.29, 30, 31.
and them that entertained it too out of the Land; and instead thereof, led
them a tedious march through a troublesome Wilderness; nor shall they fare
better, who are thus guilty in this matter amongst us; A Talebearer, and a
busie-body, being no small troubler of this our Israel too, and therefore such
as these the Apostle justly condemns, as having cast off their first love, 2 Timothy 5.12, 13.
by making contrary to their Duty and Faith given to the Church, such Rents and
Divisions in it, as they by such unchristian carriage did; where you may
farther observe, that the Apostle does not call them Slanderers, but Tatlers
and busy bodies, such as do not invent, but divulge Stories; which things
indeed differ but very little, and no more then the Receiver does from the
Thief: For, let the Report be either true or false, the spreading of it may
very justly be condemned; for if it be False, then thou have made a wound in
thy Neighbors Credit; and if it be True, then thou have made the wound wider;
both which are very prejudicial to Christianity. And indeed this unchristian
Temper, is a very great cause of that general uncharitableness that is amongst
us; for if we hear any thing against a Friend, a clear Demonstration will
hardly convince us, nay, and even then we'll do all we can to smother it;
whereas if we can but get a story by the end against one we care not for, how
ready are we to declare and divulge it, nay, and even rejoice and make sport at
the relating of it too; and if this partiality be not vile and Abominable, and
contrary to the Rules of Charity, I know not what is. Is this to help an
Enemies Ox or Ass out of a Pit, when we endeavor all we can to plunge him
into a Deeper? Is this to do like that good Samaritan, whom our Savior has
propounded for our Pattern and example, when instead of Relieving, we wound our
Neighbor; and instead of Wine and Oil, we pour Vinegar and Gall into the
wounds of his Reputation? No sure, this is so gross a piece of ill nature, that
it looks rather like a maxim of Hell, than a precept of Christianity, since
none but the Devils rejoice at the falls and miscarriages of Men; And therefore
for men to deal thus unnaturally with one another, is to list themselves
amongst that Infernal Crew before their time, and to turn Devils before they
can get to Hell; you know whose work it is to be the Accuser of the Brethren;
but to Accuse them falsely, and to add Perjury to Lying, is of all other things
highly uncharitable.

2. Another hindrance of our Christian Peace is, harsh and unkind censuring of
men and their Actions. And indeed this is such an ill nature Temper, that were
there no such thing in the World as Christianity to be disturbed by it, yet
common Reason, and an ordinary Ingenuity might (one would think) make any
Rational man loath and detest it; and yet there is nothing more frequently
acted amongst us, to the shame of our natures, and scandal of our Religion; for
this will oftentimes put the worst Constructions upon the best Actions, and
condemn a man the severest for those things, for which he deserves the highest
commendation and Reward; This makes a man that is Devout and Zealous toward his
God, to be looked upon as an Hypocrite before men, and altogether to want the
power of Godliness, because he makes use of a Devouter form of it; And can
there be a greater hindrance of our love than this, when we shall thus rashly
deprive one another of our nearest and dearest concern? This is to have an evil
eye of our own, because our Brother has a good one; and not only to rob God of
his Honor, but of those that Honor him too, whilst thereby we many times make
Devils even of his best Saints. This is to lay the greatest matter oftentimes
to the charge of Gods Elect, whom he has justified, and to condemn those for
whom Christ has dyed, yea rather for whom upon that very account he is risen
again; and sure he that is guilty of this, can pretend to but very little of
Brotherly love, Censoriousness, and that being as contrary as Light and
Darkness; And therefore Charity accounts every man honest till he be disproved,
and will not so much as think evil against any, whereas censure and worldly
policy deals with every man, as if he were a Knave, nay, and will endeavor to
make a man bad, before he be so; and will sooner take notice of one bad Action,
than an Hundred good ones. He that loves another will wink at his faults, and
endeavor to hide them from others too, whereas envy and hatred will pass
censure upon Virtues, and Arraign even a man's best Actions; And here I would
not be understood, as if I did condemn all Admonitions and Reproofs, all
observation of other men's Actions, (for then I should be at present silent my
self) no I mean only such as pass unkind Interpretations upon them, when there
is as fair a way made for a good Construction, as for a bad one; when men tell
a man's faults not privately to himself, but to others too, if not to every body
that knows or has but heard of him; and that not with a design to admonish and
reclaim him, but to expose and upbraid him: It Is such only that I here speak
of, for it is the greatest piece of love and kindness that can be, kindly to
admonish and advise; and therefore to have a Friend that is always flattering,
and is either afraid or unwilling to Reprove or chide, when there is cause, is
to meet with such a Friend as wounds deeper than an Enemy, and is such a piece
of Friendship, as I pray God send I may never meet with: It Is therefore unkind
Censuring, and not Counselling and advising that I here speak of, as the great
hindrance of our Christian love; and indeed, if we did but consider the faults
we have of our own, and did but as clearly see the Beam in our eye, as we do
the mote in our Brothers, and withal how unable we are to judge of our selves,
and how often we have been deceived and cheated in both, we should quickly have
enough of this unnatural Temper; how our own goodness has had a mixture of the
Leaven of Hypocrisy, our Charity a Tincture of vain glory, and a desire to be
seen of Men, our Repentance only a melancholy fit, and lost in the next merry
and jovial Company, and our other Graces stamped with Lukewarmness and
Formality; and withal, how we may be as bad deceived in others, how we have
thought, that to be a sullen Moroseness, which has only been a Retir'dness for
Meditation, that to be Pride and Haughtiness, which has been a brave Generosity
and Nobleness of Spirit, that to be folly, which has been the greatest Wisdom;
All which, and many others may convince us of our weakness and want of skill in
judging, unless like God we could search the Heart, and pry unto the secret
Recesses of the Soul, and may also inform us of the mischief we hereby do unto
our Profession, and Christian Love, by our Ignorant indiscretion, and
ill nature. But

3. Another hindrance of our Christian Love is, confining of our Love, only to
some particular Persons. Love is of a Diffusive and spreading nature, and
extends it self like the influence of Heaven both far and wide; and therefore
when it teaches us to be kind unto our Brethren, it also makes every man our
Brother, nay, and brings our very Enemies too into that Relation, since it
commands us to do good to them that hate us, and Persecute us; and therefore
the Brother, that the New Testament says we must Love, is every man in the
World, as appears from that Parable of the man that fell among Thieves: Luke 10.
Indeed we may, and might sometimes, to put a difference between one Brother
and another in the measures and degrees of our Love, according to the different
degrees of their deserts, and the nearness of their Relation unto us; but yet
we must look upon all as Brethren, and must not, to give one a Benjamins
Portion, Rob all the rest of their's. Thus David loved Jonathan as his own
Soul; and our Savior showed more affection unto John, then to any of the rest
of his Disciples; and there is no Reasonable Man will deny, but that we may show
more Kindness to our Kindred and Countrymen, than to mere Strangers; more to
just and good men, then to the Profane and Wicked; Gal. 6.10.
for though we must do Good to all, yet there is an Especially added to those
that are of the Household of Faith: But now here is that Partiality that we must
take heed of, when we confine and limit our Love to these only, and show it to
none but those that are of the same Society with us in the Church, who think as
we do, and are of the same Profession with our selves; when we will not be
Civil and Courteous to those that differ from us in Opinion, nor Relieve those
Poor (let their Necessitys be never so great) that are not of the same Faith as
we are: This indeed has been the very Bane of the Churches Unity and Peace, and
has been the Cause of those many Divisions under which we groan at this very
day; insomuch that there cannot be a greater stumbling block to the Conversion
of the Gentiles than this, when it will be a harder task to persuade them what
kind of Christians to be, then to be Christians at all; nay, for my own part,
had I not something greater than the Examples of Christians (yea, even of those
who pretend to be the best amongst us) I would this very moment Renounce my
Christianity; for I am sure that this kind of Love can never come from God, for
he makes his Sun to shine upon the Evil and upon the Good, Math. 5.45.
and causes his Rain to fall upon the Just and Unjust: So far is he (who has
greater Reason to distinguish then thou have) from making any difference, and
then I wonder who made thee a Judge? If the Master will have the Wheat and the
Tares both grow together, and receive the same common influence of Sun and
Rain, I wonder who set thee to work before the Harvest begin! Sure I am, had
Christ himself taken this course, I know not how we had come by our
Christianity: Had he come only, as well as first and chiefly to the lost Sheep
of the House of Israel, I know not how we Gentiles had come in; no, its true,
he came first unto his own People the Jews, but yet he never Rejected any
Gentiles that believed on him; and therefore the Commission which he gave unto
his Apostles was to Teach all Nations; and to that end, after his Assention, to
confirm their Commission, he bestowed upon them the Gift of Tongues, by which
he poured out his Spirit upon all Flesh: Math. 28.19.
So that now a Turk, or a Heathen, as he is a Man, has a Right to Justice and
Charitable Offices, as well as a Christian; nay, and more Right too, than those
that deny them, since every denial makes a forfeiture, because that what every
man has, was bestowed on him with this Condition, that as he did freely
Receive, so he should freely Give. And again, our Savior tells us, that this
Universal Love, is the only sign that we belong to him; By this shall all Men
know, Joh. 13.35.
that you are my Disciples; not if you love this or that Person or Society, but
if in General you Love one another; Math. 5.46.
for if you Love them that Love you, what Reward have you? Do not even the
Publicans the same? But

3. I come in the next place to show how we ought to Love our Brethren? And
here the Love that we must bear them, must not be of an ordinary or common
Nature; for our Savior tells us, we ought to Love our Neighbor, and sure
then, much more a Brother as our selves; Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy
self, Math. 22. 39.
and then we may soon see how we ought to Love our Brother, since every man
knows how he Loves himself: But yet our Savior does not mean there a Love of
the same Equality, with that which we have for our selves, which would sometime
or other reduce a man to a Natural Absurdity, as in case of Famine, and the
greatest danger, where without doubt, I am to prefer my self first: No, he
means only such a Love which has the nearest resemblance, and likeness to that
which we have for our selves; which is in short, To Love others, as we would
have others to Love us: And indeed this Golden Rule of Justice, in doing as we
would be done by, has a natural influence upon the whole life of a Christian,
and will fully direct him in the whole course of his Duty toward his
Neighbor; for there are many things in which I cannot so fully tell how I
ought to do by others; yet I can resolve them all, by considering how I would
have others deal by me: And therefore, here, as you would not have others to
raise and spread evil Reports concerning you, so do not you do so by them; as
you would not have others to censure your Actions, so do not you censure
theirs: And as you would be fed and clothed, when you are Hungry and Naked, so
do you do the like by them that are in such a Condition: And as in Distress you
would receive Help and Assistance, even from an Heathen, or a wicked man, or
from one that differs never so much from you in Opinion, so let not that divert
your Love and Assistance when they are in Distress. And since (the greater is
our misery) most of our unhappy differences arise from that which should be the
greatest Bond of Peace amongst us, viz. Religion, Let us but for a time suspend
our strife and jarrs about disputable matters, and lay hold of this certain
Truth, To do as we would be done by, and we should be easily reconciled. We
must not carry our selves innocently toward others, and endeavor to impose
our Opinions on them whether they will or not, nor declare any Hatred and
Contempt of theirs; not but that we may confute a false Religion, and strive by
all lawful means to convince a Turk or a Jew, or an Erroneous Christian; but
then we must not Reproach another man's Religion, and cast Dirt both upon him
and his Profession, and upbraid when we should reprove, and the Reason is,
because we would not willingly be thus dealt withal our selves; we would not
have any man Contemn and Despise us, and our Religion, and therefore if we
would have others to consider us, we must not neglect them. And if this short
Rule were but observed, we should be better Men and better Christians, our
Present lives would be more comfortable, and our Eternal ones more happy; for I
can never be brought to understand how biting and devouring one another in this
life can conduce any thing to our Eternal Peace and Quiet in another life. But

4. The Inferences from all, are these two:

1. See here the Excellency of this Grace of Love; It Is that which gives the
relish unto all our other Dutys of Religion, by which we are known to be
Christians, and to Love God, by which we approve our selves to be Obedient unto
him, and without which, it is impossible to please him; for though we have the
gift of Tongues, and could speak with the Eloquence of an Angel; though we had
all knowledge, and understood all that was possible for a man to know; nay,
though we had all Faith, and could do more than is possible for a Natural Man
to do, yet all would profit us nothing without this Grace of Love; for we
should be as empty and vain as sounding brass, and make no better Harmony than
a tinkling Cymbal. It Is this too which reaches not only quite through, but even
beyond all the enjoyments of this life, and is greater than either Faith or
Hope; since this is part of that Happiness which the one looks for, and of that
Assurance which the other desires, which can only be esteemed by the
experimental knowledge of it; for like those things that are truly excellent in
themselves, the more its known, the better its liked, and which nothing but the
everlasting experience of it can describe.

2. See here the sad condition of those that want it; as it is the Excellency
as well as Duty of a Christian to abound in Love, so its the greatest
unhappiness for any man to want it, since not only all his pretenses to
happiness in this world are vain and nothing, but all his hopes in another (if
ever he had any) shall perish; for if the great evidence of our Love to God, be
our Love to our Brother, by which we shall be tried at the last day, how
miserable then shall they be, whose chief and only Plea shall be found a Lie?
When the refusing to cherish and comfort the least of Christ's Servants, shall
be looked upon as denied unto himself; with what face can these men ask an
Heaven of him, who would not give so much as a cup of cold water unto his? How
can they lay claim to his Everlasting Love, that used all the Cruelty and Spite
imaginable against his Members? Can they who would not forgive a Penny, look to
be forgiven a Talent? No certainly, they shall have but one Petition of all
their Prayers Answered, which shall be to be forgiven, as they themselves have
forgiven others: And they that did delight to live here in the flames of
Contention, shall then try how they can dwell with everlasting burnings, and
their punishment shall be what themselves have chosen: For as they have all
along, by their want of Love, lived as without God in the World, so their
Condemnation shall be to live without him for ever. And now tell me poor Soul,
whom thou have injured all the while thou did prosecute thy Hatred and
Revenge? Thou have hated thy Brother, and have thereby sinned against thine own
soul: Thou have unjustly Condemned him, and have signed a Bill against thine
own Life; thou have laid a Trap for him, and art taken in a worse thy self:
Thou were unmerciful unto him, and now thou art delivered over unto the
Tormentors: Consider but this, and then tell me what thou have got by all thy
Hatred and Revenge which was once so sweet! And if this be the end of all,
notwithstanding all thy vast pretenses, Sit anima mea inter Philosophos, O my
Soul, come not thou into their Secrets, for I had rather, at the last day, be
found in the place of a peaceable, sober, and loving Heathen, then of a
persecuting, quarrelsome, and envious Christian: Let me therefore exhort you
all to live like Men and Christians; consider you have all the Obligations that
can be to Love one another; you owe all to God, and this is all the Payment he
expects from you, nay, which he will again Reward you for all at last: The
comforts of this present life call for it, and the Everlasting happiness of the
next command it. Live therefore in peace with one another, that so you may dye
in Peace with God, and have a care of any thing that may break the Peace either
with your Brother or your God, for its no easy matter to make it up again; for
the Wise man tells us, that A Brother offended is harder to be won than a
strong City, Prove. 18, 19.
and their Contentions are like the Bars of a Castle: And I am sure it is no
easy matter to appease Gods Anger when it is once Provoked, whilst on the
contrary, where this happy Union is once made, there is nothing in the World
that can divide it. Let therefore nothing separate you from the Love of one
another, that so nothing may be able to separate you from the Love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus, to whom with the Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, and
only Wise God, be all Honor, Glory, and Praise, both now, and for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

