Practical DISCOURSES UPON THE Morality OF THE GOSPEL.

Printed MDCXCIX.

TO THE READER.
MOrality is my Business. Morality Improved, Exalted, and Raised nearer Heaven
by Religion. If Controversy ever happens to lie fairly in my way, I shall as
fairly pass it by, without taking any Notice of it. I am not at all desirous to
Dispute with my Reader; but to do him good: Which I believe is seldom done by
Arguing and Disputing.

The best thing that Controversy can do, is to show us clearly, which is the
True Religion: And I presume All Parties are Agreed, that This is a very
Necessary Point; or otherwise they would not think it worth their quarrelling
so fiercely and so obstinately about it. But yet, when This is done, we are
only beginning the Great Work of our Salvation. The Best Religion in the World
can never Save us, without a constant Practice of the Best Morality. The Faith
and Law of Christ must always go together. The Creed and the Commandments must
never, upon any Terms, be parted. The First Part will not do without the
Second: It Is always defective, and wants the other Half to make up a Whole
Christian.

I may therefore boldly say, The Subject which I Treat of, is the Best I could
have chosen. I know no Entertainment Better for a Christian, than the Morality
of the Gospel, which is the Law of Christ.

As for the Style and Method of the following Discourses, I leave them to speak
for themselves. They were the usual Employment of my Morning-Thoughts, intended
chiefly for my own Private Improvement: And, though I am far from Admiring them,
yet, having found some benefit in the Writing, I do not quite despair, but that
some few may find the like in Reading them.

My Friends, perhaps, may wonder to see me again in Print; especially after
having Publicly Declared, That I had now done Scribbling. But, however, I hope
they will not Accuse me of Inconstancy, when I assure them, that my Judgment
and my Inclination are still the same; and that it is only by Advice that I have
changed my Resolution. They may also please to Reflect, that having taken some
pains to prove (in Doubtful Cases) the Security of Blind Obedience, it would
look a little strangely if I durst not venture to Practice it.

The Contents.
Discourse I. Of Hearing the Word of God. Discourse II. Of the Advantages of
Christianity, and Duties of a Christian. Discourse III. Of the Love of God and
the World. Discourse IV. Of Worldly Policy, and Christian Prudence. Discourse
V. Of Christian Humility. Discourse VI. Of Christian Marriage, and the Means to
Sanctify it. Discourse VII. Of True Repentance. Discourse VIII. Of the small
Number of the Elect.
Discourse I. Of Hearing the Word of God.
WHEN many People were gathered together, and made haste out of the Cities to
come to Jesus, he spoke by a Parable: The Sower went out to Sow his Seed; and
as he Sowed, some fell by the way, and it was trodden down, and the Fowls of
the Air devoured it. And some fell upon a Rock, and being sprung up, it
withered away, because it wanted Moisture. And some fell among Thorns, and the
Thorns springing up with it, choked it. And the other fell upon good Ground,
and being sprung up, bore Fruit an Hundredfold. And when he had said these
things, he cried, He that has Ears to hear, let him hear. Whereupon his
Disciples asked him, What this Parable might be? And he said, Unto you it is
given to know the Mystery of the Kingdom of God, but to others in Parables;
that Seeing they may not See, and Hearing they may not Understand. Now the
Parable is this: The Seed is the Word of God. Those whose Seed falls by the
Way, are they that Hear; and then comes the Devil, and takes the Word out of
their Hearts, lest they should Believe and be Saved. They whose Seed falls upon
the Rock, are they who when they have Heard, Receive the Word with Joy; and
these have no Root: Who for a time Believe, and in time of Temptation fall
away. And that which fell among Thorns, are they who have Heard, and going
forth are choked with Cares, and Riches, and Pleasures of this Life, and bring
no Fruit. But that which falls on the good Ground, are they who in a good and
honest Heart, having Heard the Word, Keep it, and bring forth Fruit with
Patience. Luke 8. ver. 4, to 16.

The Word of God is the Seed of Salvation; the Seed of those Virtues, by which
we save our Souls. The Heart of Man is the Ground in which this Seed is Sown:
And if the Ground be good, it will Receive the Seed, and Keep it, and bring
forth Fruit with Patience. It Is no wonder therefore, that the Prophet exhorts
us to prepare our Hearts to God, and Serve him only; because we cannot Serve
him, unless we first prepare our Hearts, and fit them for his Service. It is
not Grace alone that makes the difference 'twixt Saints and Sinners. The very
same Degree of Grace which is Received by some, is many times Refused by
others: And the Receiving or Refusing of it, very much depends upon the
preparation of our Hearts. The Seed miscarried Three several ways: 'Twas
Devoured, Withered and Chok'd. Not because there were Three forts of Seed, but
because the same Seed Fell upon Three sorts of Ground: The First did not
Receive it, the Second did not Keep it, the Third brought no Fruit to
perfection.

I.
The First Ground did not Receive it: Because 'twas totally Neglected, and
continually Trampled under Foot. The Husbandmen were Idle, and never offered to
Cultivate it: The Passengers were ever busy, to and fro, and made it too hard
for any Seed to Enter. And this is the common Case of many People's Hearts: 1.
They take no Care to Prepare them: 2. They spare no Pains to Harden them.

1. They take no Care to Prepare their Hearts for the Reception of the Word of
God. They never make it any Considerable part of their Business, to be well
acquainted with it. If they read it, or hear it, it is either Curiosity or
Custom, it is not Inclination, that prompts them to it: And, when all is done,
they seldom or never seriously Consider it. For want of a free acquaintance
with it, they never know how lovely it is in it self: And for want of loving
it, as it deserves, they give it a very cold reception in their Minds, and none
at all in their Hearts. The Word of God is in their Ears, when they hear it; in
their Minds, when they think of it; but never is in their Hearts, till they
Love it. Hatred indeed belongs to the Heart, as well as Love: But Hatred
banishes and drives it away; it is only Love receives it, and embraces it. And
how should they Love it, without knowing the Value of it? Or how should they
rightly Understand it, without Conversing freely and familiarly with it?

As partial as we are in favor of our selves, we cannot reasonably expect that
our Salvation should cost us nothing; and that God should either force our
Happiness upon us, whether we will or no, or let us find it by chance, without
enquiring after it. It Is enough that he is always ready to help us; and that,
because he takes delight in Crowning and Rewarding our Labors, therefore he
will always have us take some pains to help our selves. He bids us seek: He
tells us, we shall find: And, if we do not think the finding worth our seeking,
whose fault is it but our own? Such Sinners as we are, have little reason to
complain, that God deals hardly with us, because he does not speak more plainly
to us. It Is true, our Knowledge of Heavenly things is so Mysterious and
Obscure, that St. Peter Compares it to a Light that shines in a Dark place: But
however, the least Degree of Knowledge is more than is due to those who deserve
Eternal Darkness: And besides, it is better for us that it should be so.
Obscurity is an Advantage to the Good. It Exercises their Faith; Increases
their hearty Desires of Knowing more and more in this World; and Enflames their
fervent Prayers, for the Happiness of Seeing All in the next. It Is then that we
are truly Happy, when all the Desires of our Heart are fully and securely
Satisfied: And since our Hearts expect to be so well Rewarded there, it is but
just they should be put upon their Trial, and do something to deserve it here.
The Obscurity of our Faith is the great Trial of our Hearts. If God had pleased
to let so strong a Light break in upon our Minds, as might Convince us
evidently, and force us to See clearly what now we only Believe, our Heart
would have lost its Liberty of Choosing, and could not have deserved any Thanks
for taking the right side. The worst of Hearts, as well as the best, would have
equally submitted to the Conquering Power of Evidence: And, though God's Mercy
might, perhaps, appear, his Justice could not show it self, either in punishing
Sinners, or in the more delightful part of it, the just Rewarding of Saints:
Whereas, according to the present Course of Providence, his Justice is as
glorious as his Mercy. He Mercifully gives us Light and Strength sufficient to
See and Do what he Commands: He Reconciles our Liberty with his Decrees: He
sets before us Good and Evil, and puts it in our own free Power to make what
Choice we please. All this is infinitely Merciful, and more than we deserve.
His Light is always ready to Direct our Steps: There Is nothing wanting on our
part, but that we Open our Eyes to see it. A good and honest Heart is always
willing and prepared to See and Do its Duty. But a Perverse and Wicked One,
that frowardly and wilfully Refuses to See its Duty, because it has no mind to
Do it: A Heart that will not apply the Mind to an impartial and sincere
consideration of its Choice, but blindly follows where its inclination leads: A
Heart, I say, which thus Neglects and Slights God's Mercy, very well deserves
to fall into the Hands of his Severest Justice, and be given over to the Power
of Darkness, which it is so fond of.

We read in the Gospel, That when many People were gathered together, and made
haste out of the Cities to come to Jesus, he spoke to them by a Parable. The
Eternal Word is made Flesh: His Doctrine is delivered in Parables: The one and
the other are both of them partly Manifested to us, and partly Hidden from us;
not that they may not be found by us, but that we may seek for a more perfect
Knowledge of them, and seeking it, we may deserve to find it. We read,
moreover, That when he had said these things, he cried, He that has Ears to
Hear, let him Hear: That is, He that Hears, let him take Care to Understand.
They had all of them Ears to Hear: But alas! it is not sufficient to Hear with
our Ears; our Minds and Hearts must be Attentive to what we hear, or else we
hear in vain. Whereupon his Disciples asked him, What this Parable might be?
And he said, Unto you it is given to know the Mystery of the Kingdom of God,
but to others in Parables. The reason was, because although these others had
Curiosity enough to gather together, and make haste out of the Cities to See
and Hear him, yet when they had Seen and Heard him, they were so Unconcerned
and Careless, that Seeing they did not care to See, and Hearing they did not
desire to Understand. But the Disciples were more hearty and sincere, and
therefore unto them it was given to know the Mystery of the Kingdom of God. The
Parable gave them some little Light. This little excited a great desire of
more. They sought for it, and they found it: They asked for it, and they had it
for asking.

2. It commonly happens, that they who take no Care for the reception of the
Word of God, are otherwise very busy, and spare no pains to Harden their
Hearts against it. A Heart that lies in common, open to all that comes or goes,
a constant thorough-fare of idle, vain, impertinent Amusements, is hardened like
the beaten Road, the best Counsels make little or no Impression upon it, it is
insensible of the sharpest Reproof, and impenetrable to all good Advice.
Whatever Seed falls there, it takes no Root; but is immediately Trodden down,
or presently devoured. We read in the Gospel, That when they hear the Word, the
Devil comes, and takes the Word out of their Hearts. He leaves it in their
Minds; but at the same time fills their Heads with Crowds of other Thoughts,
which Trample it under Foot, and make their Hearts too hard to receive it. He
leaves it in their Minds, not to Direct them, but to Self-condemn them; and
takes it out of their Hearts, for fear lest they should Believe and be Saved.
He fears they would love it, if they began to like it: He fears they would
believe it firmly, and hold fast to it, if they loved it: And therefore is
afraid they would be Saved, if they Believed it. For this reason, he is ever
busy in contriving Ways and Means to Secure their Hearts to himself. He
manages all manner of Temptations with his utmost Skill, to enslave them to the
Pleasures of this Life: He never fails, in time and season, to Suggest such
Thoughts as he imagines may Create a Prejudice against their Duty, and the
Difficulties of it: He pushes them on from one Folly to another, and drives
them into a perpetual Circle of Diversions and Employments, which leave no room
for Reading, Meditating, Praying, and Endeavoring to Save their Souls: And
thus, at length, he Corrupts them to such a Degree, that they cannot endure to
Hear the Word of God, because they cannot abide to Believe it. They are so far
from caring for the Light of Faith, that they take all Care imaginable to avoid
it. They despise and hate it, because it only Discovers to them a Heaven, which
they do not Relish, and Disturbs them with unwelcome Thoughts of a Hell, which
makes them Tremble. Their Hearts are wilfully Blind, and obstinately Deaf: And
therefore they seeing, see not; and hearing, hear not. Our Savior thus
describes them in the Thirteenth of S. Matthew; Their Heart is gross, their
Ears are dull of hearing, and they shut their Eyes, for fear lest at any time
they should See, and Understand with their Heart, and should be Converted, and
I should Heal them. They are not so much afraid of Understanding with their
Mind; because the Mind only Preaches, it is the Heart that Practices. Their
great fear is, lest at any time they should Understand with their Heart. They
have not patience to think of any real and effectual Change of Life; and
therefore are afraid of changing their Foolish Hearts, and bringing them to a
better Understanding of the Word of God, lest at any time they should begin to
Love it, take Delight in it, and Practice it. The Devil is always watchful to
take the Word out of their Hearts: And they are no less Careful to keep it
always out. He takes it out, for fear lest they should Believe and be Saved:
They keep it out, for the same reason, lest at any time they should be
Converted and Healed. The Devil fears nothing more, than that they should
Believe it, so as to be Saved: And they are so much of his Mind, so fully in
his Power, and so led Captive by him at his pleasure, that the Devil himself is
not more afraid of it than they are.

II.
When the Heart of Man is thus doubly hardened, from without, and from within,
it is no great wonder, that it does not receive the Word of God. No wonder, I
say, that the Seed, which falls by the way, is trodden down, and presently
devoured. But the Second sort of Ground is something better than the First.
Though it be Stony underneath, yet it is covered over with some little Earth,
which readily receives the Seed, and helps it to spring up, although it does
not keep it, nor allow it any Root.

S. Luke says, It withered away, because it wanted Moisture. And indeed there
are some certain Tears of hearty and sincere Repentance, which are apt to
mollify the hardest Heart, and soften all the Stony places in it. They are, as
it were, the Dew of Heaven, that Heavenly Moisture which Nourishes the Love of
God, and of his Holy Word, and helping the Seed to Enter Deeply, hinders it
from being Scorched and Withered.

In the Thirteenth of S. Matthew we read, that the Seed which fell upon stony
places, sprung up immediately, because it had no deepness of Earth; and
presently Withered away, because it had no Root. It was soon up, for want of
Depth; and soon down, for want of Root. The Love of this World, in the Heart of
many Christians, who prefer it before God, and do not know they do so, is like
a Rock under Ground. The Soil seems good; and, so much as there is, it really
is so; but because there is no more of it, it is little better than none at all.
It is not Deep enough to be fruitful. The Seed immediately Enters; but being
little Covered, and less Rooted, is presently Withered with the first heat that
Scorches it.

The generality of Mankind are strangely in love with this foolish World, and
violently fond of transitory things, belonging to this present Life. Their
Worldly Honor, Wealth, and Pleasure, are dearer to them, than their Lives; and
this Life dearer to them, than the next. When they hear of the next, and are
awakened with a lively Apprehension of a future State, where Everlasting
Happiness attends them, if they please; they receive the Word with joy, and are
very glad to understand that, when they have done being Happy here, they may,
perhaps, begin to be so there. They are not very much Charmed with what they
hear of Heaven; they know not how to relish those Spiritual Pleasures, which
are too refined for Sensual and Carnal Souls; but however, they presume, that
God, who cannot but be infinitely Happy in himself, must needs know how to make
them Happy when he takes them to him; and therefore when their own Felicity is
spent, which they desire may last as long as possible, they then are willing to
try what Heaven is, and see if it can make amends for what they leave behind
them. Upon these Terms, they seem to love God pretty well; but it is too plain,
they love themselves a great deal better. And the more we consider the matter,
the plainer 'twill appear, that it is not so much the Love of God which Leads
them, as it is the Fear of Hell which Drives them, into a Desire of Heaven.

Fear is a troublesome Passion: And Hell is a thing so terrible, that even
those who have no mind to believe it, are not easy in themselves, when they
admit a serious thought of it. It soures all Worldly Comforts, and Embitters
the Enjoyments of this Life. And therefore for their own dear sakes, that they
may Love the World Securely, and Enjoy it* with an undisturbed and quiet Mind,
they are willing to come to a Composition, and to comply with all the Exterior
Duties of Religion, provided they may keep their Heart to themselves, and
bestow it where they please, without being obliged to Wean it from the World,
and Disengage it from the Treacherous Endearments of it. For this reason they
are very exact in all their Parish-Devotions, punctual in their times of
Morning and Evening Prayer, diligent in Hearing Sermons, cheerful in giving
Alms, and charitable in comforting the Afflicted. All this they are ready to
do, and any thing else, whatever it is, that does not hinder them from loving
and enjoying Themselves, the World, and their own Humor, as much as ever. And
all this they are the more willing to do, because it pacifies the troublesome
Remorses of their Conscience; it cheats them into a belief that they are better
than they are; it makes them hope they love God better than they do; and that
they are not so very fond of any Worldly Satisfactions, as not to leave them
all for God's sake, when occasion requires.

The outside of their Piety Amuses them, but the inside of their Heart is
always Hidden from them. They take no Pains to Search the Bottom of it, and to
discover the wretched Corruption of their misplaced Affections; because there
are some certain things in which they are fully determined never to practice
any Self-denial; they will not hear of any reason to the contrary; but in spite
of all the Reason in the World, they are resolved upon the Point, that such
things must and shall be reasonable, because they have a mind they should be
so. In other matters, where their strongest Passions are not much concerned,
they can comply with ease. They can Read, and Pray, and Hear the Word of God
with Joy; they can Conceive some good Desires; they can be very much pleased
with a little sensible Devotion for the present: But when these Pious thoughts
begin to sink a little deeper in their Hearts, and to contrive a real and
effectual Reformation of their Lives; when the Seed begins to take Root: It Is
then it meets with great and unexpected Resistance, and finds under a tender
Surface, nothing but the hardness of a Rock. Their Worldly Honor, their
Estate, their Ease, are things which must not, upon any Terms, be called in
question. They are hardened in a Selfish, Proud, and Sullen Resolution, of never
parting with them: And, till the time of Trial comes, they do not know how hard
their Obstinacy is. When all goes prosperously on, and Danger looks upon them
at a distance, almost out of sight, they then can make a shift, in a kind fit,
to offer all these things to the Almighty, and address his Infinite Majesty
with the usual Complement, of being ready, upon all Occasions, to stand by him
with their Lives and Fortunes. But notwithstanding all this, the Gospel assures
us, that these dutiful Expressions of their Mind have no Root in their Heart:
These Loyalists endure but for a time: And afterward, when any Persecution or
Affliction arises, they find, in time of Temptation, how much they were
mistaken in themselves; immediately they fall away.

III.
The third sort of Ground receives the Seed, and keeps it. It keeps it warm and
deep, and helps it to take Root. But because the Thorns take deeper Root,
spread farther, and rise higher, therefore the Seed is choked, and brings no
Fruit. These Thorns, according to the Gospel, are the Cares of this Life. As
for the Life to come, we cannot be too Careful of it; we cannot love God too
much; we cannot have too great a Passion for the Joys of Heaven. But as for
this poor Earth, this Dirt, which only fouls and cloggs our Feet, this Clay, in
which we often stick so fast, alas! this miserable World has nothing in it
that deserves our Care, except it be get well out of it, and make it a safe
Passage to a better. Whatever may be useful to this End, we may be careful of
it. But as for any thing else, belonging to this wretched Life, the Gospel
gives us warning, to avoid the Danger of such Needless and Pernicious Cares,
which hinder the Word of God from being fruitful in our Hearts.

The Danger is the greater, because these Cares are of an earlier Growth; the
Roots of them come into the World with us: They take Possession of our Hearts,
for several Years, before the use of Reason has prepared us for the Word of
God. We read, that the Seed fell among Thorns; which plainly supposes, that the
Thorns were first Possessors of the Ground. But yet, if they had been
extirpated before the Seed was sown, it might have sprung up safely by it self,
there would have been no Thorns to spring up with it, and choke it.

The Thorns have great Advantage over the Seed. Not only their Growth is
earlier, but quicker, and more natural. The Corruption of our Heart is like the
Rankness of a Soil, to which they easily take, and where they thrive at a
strange rate. There needs no planting, watering, or taking any Care of them.
It Is but letting them alone; they grow apace, and spring up of themselves. But
it is not so with Piety and Virtue. There must be Sowing, Planting,
Cultivating: No Pains must be spared to keep them in good order; and all that
we can do is little enough to make them bring forth Fruit, although there were no
Thorns to hinder them.

I tremble when I think how sadly true this is. Experience teaches it; the
Gospel it self confirms it; and our Conscience cannot deny it. We daily see how
careful most Men are of this World, and how careless of the next. They lay up
Riches, and provide for Pleasures. These are their principal Cares, which our
Savior mentions in the Gospel. They are very highly concerned for living long,
with all their Plenty and their Ease about them: But as for living well, and
laying in Provision for a happy Eternity; they entertain these Thoughts with
Coldness and Indifference. The least Prospect of Danger, attending their
Worldly Riches, or their Pleasures, is enough to break their Sleep. The very
Apprehension of a Momentary Poverty or Misery, though at a distance, is enough to
put their Minds upon the Rack, and torture the very Souls of them: But as for
Eternal Riches, and Heavenly Pleasures, though these are perhaps in greater
Danger, they can sleep securely: All the Cruel Poverty and Everlasting Misery
of Hell it self, though they are loudly threatened with its being nearer than they
are aware of, all this will not Rouse them, and Awaken them into a true Sense
of their Duty. So Stupid and Insensible our Nature is in all things, which
regard the other World, and yet so Vigorous, so Active, and so Busy in the
Cares of this.

The Consequence is natural and plain. There Is no Excuse can be admitted in the
Case. We must consider, on the one Hand, the Danger, and on the other, the
Folly of these Worldly Cares: We must go to work with both our Hands, and
labor with all our Strength, to pull them up by the Roots. Without this, all
our other Labors are in vain. We may Confess our Sins; we may be Sorry for
them; we may purpose to Amend: But all these Pious Endeavors will be
fruitless, and without effect; we shall immediately relapse again; our Sorrow
and our Purposes will never be Victorious, whilst our Worldly Cares are
stronger, and more prevalent. We must therefore lay this Matter seriously to
Heart. Eternity depends upon it. The more we consider it, the more we shall be
sensible of the Importance of it. It Is a common thing to meet with People, who
wonder strangely at their own Frailty, and cannot, without Horror and
Amazement, reflect how long they have continued in a Sinful Course; in spite of
all the Pains which they have often taken to amend their Lives. But yet, for my
part, I can never wonder that People lose their Labor, when they go the wrong
way to work. If they will not take Advice, when God himself is pleased to give
it them, I know not how to help it. He tells them plainly, that whilst they sow
among Thorns, the Seed will never bring forth Fruit. And this is a fair Warning
to them, to begin the Amendment of their Lives, by laboring all they can, to
root out all these Thorns, all Worldly Passions and Affections whatsoever, from
whence those Cares arise, which choke the Seed, obstruct the Word of God, and
hinder it from being Fruitful in their Hearts.

I do not descend to Particulars, because the Case is general, and without the
least Exception. No Love of any Creature whatsoever must ever dare to stand in
Competition with the Love of our Creator. All other Loves must be resigned and
moderate; submissive to God's Holy Will, contented with his Appointments,
always Calm, Serene, and Undisturbed. When Worldly Cares are thus restrained,
they are no more than Duties: But when they pass these Limits, then it is that
they are Thorns; which not only prick our Feet, but pierce the very Hearts of
us: They wound our Feet, I mean those Pious Affections of our Soul, which are
the only Feet by which we move toward Heaven, and pierce our Conscience with a
terrible Remorse of loving this World too much, and for ought we know, a great
deal more than the next.

It Is possible, you will say, to love the World to a very great degree, and yet
love God a little better; which if we do, we love him above all things, and
that is enough to save us. But surely you are not in good earnest. Your whole
Heart is due to him: And can you think you do him Justice, by allowing him a
little more than half? Your whole Heart ought to be a House of Prayer: And is
it just, to make almost one half of it a Den of Thieves? Your whole Heart ought
to be the Temple of God: And dare you offer to defile it, by making a Partition
in it, and erecting Altars to his Mortal Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil?

A true Christian cannot be so falsehearted. If we believe the Gospel, He has
the best of Hearts: His Heart is Good and Honest: He Is no Trimmer betwixt God
and the World: He hates all double Dealing, and endeavoring to please both
Parties: He scorns to do so mean and base a thing, as to divide His Heart, and
steal away any part of it from him who has a Right to All. He does not use the
World, because He loves it, but because He needs it. He Eats, and Drinks, and
Sleeps, that He may live: He does not live, that He may Eat, and Drink, and
Sleep. If He takes care of His good Name, it is because it will enable Him to
do more Good. If He diverts himself, it is only to refresh His Spirits, and
prepare them for a better use. He knows very well, that all the Comforts and
Reliefs of our Corrupted, Weak, and Sickly Nature, are very pleasing and
delightful to it, and are therefore apt to entice our Hearts to love them. But
alas! He sees, and grieves at his diseased Condition: And, though He gladly uses
the Remedies, because His Nature wants them, and His Misery makes it His Duty
to apply them; yet He is so far from loving them, that He could wish with all
His Heart, He were so Healthy and so Happy, as not to stand in need of them.
The Sores of His Mortality are grievous to Him, and the itching Pleasure of His
Plasters does not make him such Amends, but that He had much rather be without
them. He hears, and He believes, there is a State of Immortality, where Health
and Happiness expect Him; where He may be sure to find them; if He please; and
where, once found, it is impossible to lose them. The Word of God assures him
of it. And this is the Word, which, in a good and honest Heart, he receives
joyfully, keeps faithfully, and brings forth Fruit, with Patience, because he
is not so much concerned for any Worldly Matter, as to be impatient about it.

Discourse II. Of the Advantages of Christianity, and Duties of a Christian.
JEsus said to his Disciples, Blessed are the Eyes which see the things that
you see. For I tell you, that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those
things which you see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which
you hear, and have not heard them. And behold a certain Lawyer stood up, and
tempted him, saying, What shall I do to possess Eternal Life? He said unto him,
What is written in the Law? How read thou? And he answering, said, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with
all thy Strength, and with all thy Mind, and thy Neighbor as thy self. And he
said unto him, Thou have answered right; this do, and thou shall live. But he
willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my Neighbor? And
Jesus answering, said, A certain Man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and
fell among Robbers, who stripped him, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him
half dead. And by chance there came down a certain Priest that way, and when he
saw him, he passed by. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came,
and looked on him, and passed by. But a certain Samaritan, as he traveled,
came where he was; and when he saw him, he had Compassion on him, and went to
him, and bound up his Wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, and set him on his own
Beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took care of him. And on the Morrow he
took out Two Pence, and gave them to the Host, and said unto him, Take Care of
him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.
Which now of these three, think thou, was Neighbor unto him that fell among
the Robbers? And he said, he that showed Mercy unto him. Then said Jesus unto
him, Go, and do thou likewise. Luke 10. v. 23, to 38.

The Glorious Advantages of Christianity, and the Principal Duties of a
Christian, are the whole Matter of this Gospel. The Advantages are so great,
that we should be ungrateful, if we passed them slightly over; and the Duties
are of such Importance, that we should be inexcuseable, if we refused to take
them into serious Cosideration.

I.
S. Paul, in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians, considers the Preheminency
of the Law of Christ above the Law of Moses: And, that we may better understand
the Comparison, it will not be amiss to observe the Rise and Progress of the
Divine Law, from the first Establishment of it. God in the first Creation gave
to Man a Natural Knowledge of his Duty; which Knowledge is the Law of Nature.
By this, Abel offered Sacrifice, Enoch walked with God, Abraham paid Tithes to
Melchisedec, Lot was hospitable to Strangers, Job was Patient, Just, and
Humble. In a Word, All the Saints, who lived before the Law of Moses, by the
Light of Nature, were instructed in their Duty. Mean time, the growing Malice
of Corrupted Nature every Day increased; the Will became more prone to Evil;
and the Custom of transgressing, being, as it were, a second Nature,
superinduced a second Law, which the Apostle calls the Law of Sin. The Dictates
of this Law of Sin, although they were not able to efface the Original Impression
of the Law of God, yet they obscured and darkened it: The Understanding, which
ought to have led the Will, was now misled and blinded by it: And. Vice
prevailing almost universally, the Law of God was, in a manner, out of Sight,
and out of Mind. When the World was in this desperate Condition, God, of his
Infinite Mercy, promulgated the Law of Moses; the Morality of which was
formerly well known, though now neglected, and almost quite forgotten. Then it
was that the Law was written in their Tables, says S. Austin, because they did
not read it in their Hearts.

The manner of its Delivery is very remarkable. When the Children of Israel
were gone out of the Land of Egypt, they came into the Wilderness of Sinai, and
Camp'd before the Mount; where the Ten Commandments were proclaimed with
Thunder and Lightning; the Earth quaking, and the People trembling at what they
saw and heard. The Morality of these Commandments was neither more nor less
than the Law of Nature; which, as promulgated by Moses, is called the Old Law;
and, as confirmed by Jesus Christ, is called the New. Not that the Law it self,
as to the Moral Part of it, is different from what it was; but that the
Circumstances, I mean the Motives and Advantages are New, and infinitely
surpassing those of the Old.

In the New Law, the Motives which induce us to observe it, are incomparably
greater. The Jews generally feared nothing but Temporal Punishments; they hoped
for nothing but Temporal Rewards; their Self-love aimed at nothing more than
Earthly Happiness; and even God himself, who knew their Hearts were harder than
the Stones, on which he Engraved their Law, proposed no better Motives to them.
They were to be Trained up by Degrees to fear and to obey the Author of their
Nature, before they could be well prepared to Entertain the Mysteries of Grace
and Glory. And thus we read, in the Nineteenth Chapter of Exodus, how God
Commanded Moses, to mind the People of what he had done to the Egyptians; and
that now, having brought them to himself, if they would obey his Voice, he
would take them into his particular Care, above all other People; and, to
Encourage them the more, he would have them know, that All the Earth was his.
They were to remember the Plagues of Egypt, that they might not forget their
Duty, but that their fears might be awakened with expecting the like Severity
in case of Disobedience. And, to maintain their hopes, it was enough that All
the Earth was his; for this was All they wished for; and therefore, if they
Obeyed, he was able to Reward them to the utmost of their Hearts desire. In the
Twenty sixth of Leviticus, he tells them, If you keep my Commandments, I will
give you Rain in due Season; and the Land shall yield her increase; you shall
eat your Bread to the full; you shall Chase your Enemies, and they shall fall
before you; and you shall dwell in your own Land safely. And in the Twenty
eighth of Deuteronomy, he assures them, All these Blessings shall come upon
you, if you will hearken to my Voice: But if you will not hearken to it, Then
All the contrary Curses shall be sure to overtake you. Poor Creatures! And was
This All! Was This the utmost prospect of their Hopes and Fears! These Little,
Earthly, and Transitory Comforts, are they worthy to compare with that
inestimable Blessing promised by our Savior; Come ye Blessed of my Father,
Come and possess the great and everlasting Kingdom of Heaven, which was
prepared for you from the Foundation of the World? Or are the Curses which
deprive us of these Empty and Unsatisfying Pleasures, are they comparable to
that final Curse of our Redeemer, Go ye Accursed into Everlasting Fire, which
was prepared for the Devil and his Angels? No, no. The Eternal Torments, which
no Tongue is able to express; the Everlasting Joys of Heaven, which never
entered into the Heart of Man; and the endearing Charms of God's prodigious
Love, by which he sent his Son, not only to teach us these great Truths, but to
Assist us with his Conquering Grace, and to Redeem us with his Precious Blood:
These, these I say, are new Advantages incomparably surpassing All that the Old
Law ever could pretend to.

It Is true, there were many Prophets, Patriarchs, and Kings amongst them, who
were more Enlightened than the rest; and, though they had not received these
glorious Promises, yet they had some foreknowledge of them afar off, and
languish'd with continual Expectations and Desires to see the Accomplishment of
them. And therefore it is no wonder that we find it written, in the beginning of
this Gospel; Jesus said to his Disciples: Blessed are the Eyes which see the
things that you see. For I tell you that many Prophets and Kings have desired
to see those things which you see, and have not seen them; and to hear those
things which you hear, and have not heard them. We see the Church of Christ
Established firmly and securely; Blessed are the Eyes that see it. We hear his
Gospel Preached, and faithfully Delivered to us: Blessed are the Ears that hear
it. And Blessed indeed we are, if we not only hear the Word of God, but also
keep it. Alas! These great Advantages of Christianity will little avail us:
They will only serve to rise in Judgment against us, and to heap a greater
Damnation upon us, if we neglect the Duties of it.

II.
We read in the Gospel, how a certain Lawyer stood up, and asked our Savior,
What shall I do, to possess Eternal Life? He thought (and with a great deal of
reason) that so vast a Purchase, as Eternal Life, was never to be had for
nothing: He knew that all this Momentary Life of ours, is nothing to Eternity,
which swallows up all Time, with a disproportion infinitely greater than a Drop
of Water loses it self in the Ocean: And therefore he justly suspected, that
perhaps his uttermost endeavors would fall short of it. What shall I do, says
he, to possess Eternal Life? These words of his, express an earnest and a
sincere desire, not only to know his Duty, but to do it: And truly, unless we
fully and absolutely resolve to do it, we had better never know it. Are we as
heartily desirous as he seemed to be? Are we as much in earnest? Are we as
sincere? If so; Hear then what is written in the Law. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength,
and with all thy Mind, and thy Neighbor as thy self. Consider this well; and
then attend to what our Savior says: Do this, and you shall live: Do but this,
and you shall certainly possess Eternal Life.

And is it hard to do so much as this? He is infinitely lovely in himself, and
is it therefore a difficult thing to love him? He infinitely deserves our Love,
and therefore we can never Love him so much as he deserves: But must we
therefore never Love him as much as we can? Let us do our utmost, we can never
Love him so much as he Loves us; and although we had each of us a Thousand
Hearts entirely at his Service, we should never be able to make a suitable
return: Since therefore we have only one, Can we for shame refuse him any part
of that? It Is All of it due; and can we make abatements? It Is all of it too
little, and can we think it too much?

There Is only one Objection obvious in this Case. If we must Love God with all
our Heart, with all our Soul, with all our Strength, with all our Mind, it
seems to follow, that we must Love nothing else. Now this is evidently a great
Mistake, because the Scripture immediately adds, that we must Love our
Neighbor as our selves; from whence it follows clearly: 1. That we must Love
our selves. 2. That, as we Love our selves, so we must Love our Neighbor also.
It Is enough therefore, that with all our Mind we principally consider our Duty
to our God, with all our Strength endeavor chiefly to Serve him, and with all
our Heart and Soul Embrace him, as the most Transcending Object of our best
Affections. It Is enough, I say, that we never Love any thing else, but either
by his Order, or with his Leave: And that all our Love, of any Creature
whatsoever, is always Subordinate to the Love of God, and ready, upon all
occasions, to give place to it, without ever offering to stand one Moment in
Competition with it. Remember what our Savior says: Do this, and you shall
certainly possess Eternal Life. But at the same time, pray remember, that,
unless you Do this, you shall certainly never possess it.

It seems a little strange, that this Lawyer, who was so very skilful in the
general Doctrine of the Law, was yet so ignorant in the particular Application
of it. He knew that all the Precepts of the Law were comprehended in these Two,
of Loving God above all things, and our Neighbor as our selves: And yet he
knew not who his Neighbor was, but asked our Savior the Question, Who is my
Neighbor? Is it a Friend? A Benefactor? A Relation? An Acquaintance? A
Partner? A Fellow-Citizen? A Countryman? Or is it generally any Person United
to us in some Common Bond of Humane Society? I am afraid that many Christians
are as ignorant as this Pharisee was. They generally Love themselves to that
Degree, as not to Care for any Body else, but those who are, some way or other,
Instrumental, Useful, or Serviceable, to their Honor, Interest or Pleasure.
Without something of this, it is no great matter what becomes of them. Whether
they Sink of Swim, it is all the same. If this were all that is Commanded by the
Second Precept of the Law, this part of the way to Heaven would be Broad
enough: We then should have no need to fear, that there are few that find it;
we might be assured there would be none that miss it. To Love our Neighbor for
our own sake, is as easy as it is to Love our selves: But on the contrary, to
Love him purely for God's sake, is as hard a Task as it is to Love our Maker
better than our selves. If we Love God above all things, and consequently above
our selves; this Love, when it extends to our Neighbor, will naturally set a
greater value upon his Relation to God, than his Connection with us. We shall
not then so much consider his Affinity, his Kindness, or his Usefulness; but we
shall chiefly regard his being made to the same Divine Image, Redeemed by the
same Precious Blood, and therefore being capable of the same Grace in this
World, and the same Glory in the next. Let a Man be never so much a Stranger to
us, nay, let him be our greatest Enemy, yet it is still true, that his
Creation, his Redemption, his Capacity of Grace and Glory, are the same as
ours: And therefore, if we Love God above all things, and our selves in order
to him, we are bound to Love our Neighbor principally upon these Accounts;
that is to say, we are obliged to Love him, as we Love our selves.

The truth of this Doctrine is plain and clear in our Savior's Parable of the
Samaritan. When he saw a Naked Man lie Bleeding, and Half-dead of his Wounds,
'twas enough to move his Compassion, and to make him overlook all private
Considerations of his being not only a Stranger, but perhaps an Enemy to him;
for the Jews, in those Days, had such a Mortal Enmity against the Samaritans,
that they would not endure either to Eat or Drink with them. But not
withstanding all this, He was framed of the same Flesh and Blood, he was made
to the Image of the same God, he had a Just Title to the Common Duties of
Humanity; and therefore the Samaritan went to him, he poured Oil and Wine into
his Wounds, he bound them up, he set him upon his own Horse, he brought him to
an Inn, and took Care on him. This was not all. When he had brought him
thither, another Person would perhaps have thought that he had done enough for
one Man's share, and would have left him to the mercy of the Inn, where every
Body else was as much obliged, as he, to have Compassion on him. But the
Samaritan was not content with doing half his Duty; he was not certain that the
People of the Inn were willing to supply the rest; and therefore he not only
left Money in the Hands of his Host, but also left Orders to let him want for
nothing, assuring him, that if the Money fell short, whatsoever he laid out
more, he would faithfully repay every Farthing. The Samaritan, if he had been
so Hard, so Cruel, and so Selfish, as we are, he might have alleged a Thousand
of those cautious pretenses which are common in the World: But his Charity was
too sincere, to need any Excuse; and too great, to allow it.

Our Savior not only Preached this Doctrine, but also Practiced it. The
Parable is not only His, but He himself the principal Person represented in it.
When Adam Sinned, he went down from Paradise into a Vale of Miseries, where not
only He, but his Posterity, are stripped of all the Original Robes of Innocence,
and fallen into the Hands of their own disorderly Passions, which are worse
than Robbers, by whom they are dangerously Wounded, and left Half Dead. Our
Savior Jesus Christ, the true Samaritan, saw our Condition, and took Pity on
us. He descended from Heaven, he poured his Precious Blood into our Wounds, he
Charged himself with the Burden of our Frailties, he brought us into his
Church, and there he took such Care of us, that we are certain to be Cured,
unless we wilfully refuse to apply the Remedies which he provided for us. He
looked upon us as his Neighbors: He Loved us because we are made to the Divine
Image, which, though defaced by Sin, and possessed by the Devil, nevertheless was
still capable of being Ransomed by the Merit of his Passion, Renewed by the
Power of his Grace, and Perfected by the Brightness of his Glory. These are the
Reasons why our Savior Loved us, even when we were his Enemies: For the same
Reasons we truly and justly Love our selves, in spite of all our Faults: And,
though our Neighbor hates us, yet these Motives still subsist, and very well
deserve our Love.

Let us therefore Love God above all things. Let us Love our Neighbor as our
selves. Love is the fulfilling of the Law: Let us only Do this, and we shall
live: Let us Do this, and we shall possess Eternal Life. Amen.

Discourse III. Of the Love of God, and the World.
JEsus said to his Disciples: No Man can serve two Masters: For either he will
Hate the one, and Love the other; or else he will Hold to the one, and Despise
the other. You cannot serve God and Mammon. Therefore I say unto you, Be not
Solicitous for your Life, what you shall cat; nor yet for your Body, what you
shall put on. Is not the Life more than Meat, and the Body more than Clothing?
Behold the Fowls of the Air: For they Sow not, neither do they Reap, nor Gather
into Barns; and yet your Heavenly Father Feeds them. Are not you much better
than they? Which of you by taking Care can add one Cubit unto his Stature? And
why are you Solicitous for Clothing? Consider the Lilies of the Field, how they
Grow; they Toil not, neither do they Spin. And yet I say unto you, that even
Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore if God so
Clothe the Grass of the Field, which to Day is, and to Morrow is cast into the
Oven, How much more will he Clothe you, O you of little Faith? Therefore be not
Solicitous, saying, What shall we Eat? Or what shall we Drink? Or wherewithal
shall we be Clothed? For after all these things do the Gentiles seek. And your
Father knows that you want all these things. Seek therefore First the Kingdom
of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.
Math. 6. v. 24, to 34.

This Gospel teaches us Three Things. 1. That we cannot serve God and Mammon;
we cannot serve God and the World; they cannot both be Masters of our Heart and
our Affections; but if we Love God, and hold to him above all things, we must
of necessity either Hate the World, or at least Despise it. 2. That it is a
Dangerous thing to Love the World and be Solicitous for any thing belonging to
it; because when Love is grown Solicitous it is certainly great, and the worst
of it is, we cannot certainly judge how great it is; it may, for ought we know,
be greater than the Love of God; and if it be so, we have already quitted the
Service of God to Embrace the Service of the World. 3. That it is a needless
thing to Love the World and be Solicitous for the necessary Conveniences of
it; because God himself has faithfully promised us, that as long as we make it
our Chief Busito serve Him, He will always make it part of his Care, that the
World shall be sure to serve Us.

I.
If God and the World were both of the same Mind; if they commanded the same
things, by the same Authority, and for the same End; they would not then be two
Masters Our Obedience to each of them would be one and the same thing; and, in
obeying one, we should obey them both. But this is an impossible Supposition.
We all know very well, that God and the World are Enemies which never can be
reconciled. They command opposite things, by a different Authority, and for
contrary Ends. The Laws of the World are directly Repugnant to the Laws of God:
The usurped Authority, by which they are imposed, is derived originally from
the Devil: And the Ends, they aim at, are as different as Temporal and Eternal.

It Is therefore impossible for God and the World, at the same time, to be each
of them the Sovereign Master of our Heart. If we Hold to the one, we must
Despise the other: If we Love the one, we must Hate the other: And since they
are engaged in a Continual War, we cannot List our selves in Service of the
one, without Fighting against the other. This is the Reason why our Life is
said to be a Warfare upon Earth. And this is the War which is described in the
Epistle of this Day, betwixt the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of this World,
which are always contrary the one to the other. For which Reason S. James, in
his Epistle, tells us, that the Friendship of this World is Enmity with God;
and whosoever will be the World's Friend, is God's Enemy.

And yet although we cannot possibly be Friends to both, we are under an
absolute necessity of making Friends with one of them. The Reason is natural
and evident. We are made to be happy; and indeed, happy we were, when we were
First made: But being unfortunately fallen from the Original Happiness of our
First Creation, we feel the want of what we lost; we cannot but be Conscious of
our Emptiness; and therefore cannot help desiring and endeavoring to satisfy
it. Such is our Nature, that we must and will be happy, one way or other, if we
can: And because our Misery and our Corruption are such, that it is impossible
to find our Happiness at home, It Is therefore no wonder that we go abroad to
seek it. Now there are only two sorts of Happiness that we can think of; either
our present Happiness in this Life, or our future Happiness in the next. God
promises the one: The World invites and tempts us to the other.

The one is True and Sincere; the other False and Counterfeit: The one Sensual
and Beastly, the other Manly and Rational: The one Unmixt and Pure, the other
Sprinkled with Care and Sorrow: The one Secure and Eternal, the other
shortliv'd and always dying, either with us, or before us. One would think that
so much difference in the case, were more than enough to Determine our choice.
And yet This is not All. Our God is so infinitely Good, so Merciful and Kind,
that He not only promises All This hereafter, but even here affords us so much
Comfort Satisfaction and Pleasure in a Virtuous Life, that the World with all
its Charms, can never make a show of any thing that is able to compare with it.
He bestows, at present, more Happiness than the World can offer us; and, for
the future, He promises incomparably, nay infinitely, more than he now gives
us: So that we are evidently Guilty of a double Folly, if we do not gladly
accept of what we have in Hand, and thankfully submit to give him Credit for
the Rest.

Since therefore God has kindly left it to our choice, what Master we please to
serve; and since we cannot avoid choosing, let us gratefully and wisely choose
Himself. Let us serve him, because he made us; let us love him, because he
loved us; let us live and die for him, because he redeemed us; let us obey him
without reserve, because he rewards us without Measure. Let us banish the World
from our Heart, and leave the whole room to Him, who only deserves to be the
Sovereign Lord and Master of it. The World does not deserve our Love, and
therefore we ought to Despise it. On the contrary, it deserves God's hatred, as
well as ours; the Maxims of it are Inconsistent with his Service and our
Happiness; it is a declared Enemy to him, and a pernicious Enemy to us; and
therefore we have a double Reason to Hate it.

If we Love God above all things, the very Love of him is enough to set our
Hearts at liberty: It disarms the Power of the World: It makes us generously
scorn its Riches, Vanities and Pleasures: It calls home our Thoughts, reclaims
our Affections, calms our Passions, enlightens our Mind, enflames our Heart,
and establishes the Kingdom of God within us. When once we Love God as we
ought, we are led by the Spirit of God: And S. Paul assures us, that the Fruits
of this Spirit are, not only Love, but Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, and all those other Virtues which begin
our Heaven upon Earth.

But it is not so with those who Love this World above the next. They are
Slaves to their own Uncleanness, Covetousness, and Pride: They begin their
Hell, before they end their Lives: They wilsully condemn themselves, to all the
Troubles, Anguishes, and Torments, which their eager, violent, and furious
Passions can invent; and when these Executioners have done their worst, the
Devil and his Angels do the rest for ever. They have received the Spirit of
this World, whose Works, according to the same Apostle, are Manifest; not only
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Drunkenness, and
Revellings, but also Covetousness, which is Idolatry, and Pride, which
naturally is attended with Hatred, Variances, Emulations, Anger, Strife,
Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, and such like; concerning which, says
he, I foretell you, as I have also told you in time past, that they who do such
things shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God. No, no: They shall, whether they
will or no, Inherit the Slavery of the Devil: But, as for the Kingdom of God,
they have no Title to it. Unless his Will be done, his Kingdom cannot come.
Unless we Love him above all things, we cannot be his Subjects, nor can he be
our King. Our Heart is the Throne of God: And when we begin to Balance betwixt
him and the World, when we refuse to let him Govern our Affections, we Rebel,
we take up Arms against him, and call in the Devil to help us to Dethrone him.
And can we expect to inherit his Kingdom, if we wilfully renounce it, and
declare against it? Can we be Heirs of his Kingdom hereafter, if we are not
Faithful and Loyal Subjects of it here?

II.
I have said enough to show the impossibility of serving two Masters, the
necessity of serving one, and the Folly of preferring the World before the
Maker of it. I shall now consider the natural Consequences of this Doctrine. If
our present and future Happiness depend entirely upon our Loving God above all
things: If our Misery, as well here as hereafter, is the Effect and Punishment
of loving the World too much: It follows evidently, that we ought to make it
the Chief Business of our whole Life, to improve the Love of God, and to lessen
the Love of this World.

It Is true; the Kingdom of God is never perfect upon Earth: The Empire of
Divine Love is never so absolute here, as to exclude all Worldly Affection. The
Love of this World is entailed upon our Corrupted Nature: It Is an Inseparable
Companion of it, and a Mortal Enemy to it. And this is our unhappy Condition in
this Vale of Misery: We are engaged in a Continual War with our selves: Our
Heart is the Field of Battle, where we must always Fight, and may always
Conquer; but can never Kill our Enemy. We can never quite destroy the Love of
this World. Let us do what we can, 'twill never die before us: But as long as
we live, 't will still live in us; and whilst it lives, will always struggle
with us, and rebel against us. But nevertheless, although we cannot Kill this
Love, yet we can Moderate it, we can Weaken it, and keep it under: And this is
what we are strictly obliged to, unless we have a mind to Cherish our Danger,
and to Perish in it.

This is the Reason why our Savior had no sooner said to his Disciples, You
cannot serve God and Mammon, but immediately he concludes, Therefore I say unto
you, Be not Solicitous for this Life. And the Reason is clear: Because when
once we Love the World to that Degree, as to be Solicitous for it, we are in
very great danger of loving the World too much, and of serving Mammon instead
of God. I have already told you, that when Love is grown Solicitous, it is
certainly great; and that we cannot certainly judge how great it is. It may,
for ought we know, be greater than the Love of God: And, if it be only as
great, it is enough to lose his Favor, and make him leave us to our selves, to
seek our Fortune in the Service of this World.

In Matters of little Importance, where our Heart is not much engaged, we are
not apt to be Solicitous; our Minds are at ease; we expect with a great deal of
Patience, and are disappointed with very little Disturbance. But, if our
Thoughts are always stirring and busy, our Desires eager and importune; if our
Hopes are unquiet and restless, our Fears troublesome and painful; if Delays
very much mortify us, and even the Apprehensions of Disappointments very much
disturb us; we may be sure that the Love, from whence all this Solicitude
proceeds, is very great: And, whether it be Honor, Interest or Pleasure, be it
what it will, it is certain we are very much in Love with something or other,
which Influences all these Motions and Affections of our Mind and Heart; when
things are once come to this pass, it is time to look about us, and stand upon
our Guard. We may hope indeed, that still we Love God better than the World:
And I must needs Confess, it is possible we may; but I am sure it is not very
probable we do. There are great odds against us. For it is a certain Truth, that
All our Inclinations are proportioned to the Love from whence they proceed: And
if our Aversions and Desires, our Hopes and Fears, our Joy and Grief, are
stronger and more active in the Concerns of this World, than in those of
Heaven, we have Reason to be very much afraid, that our Love of this World is
greater than the Love of God.

It Is a gross Mistake to imagine, that because we still Esteem God more,
Therefore we Love him better. Alas! This Esteem is only a Compliment of our
Mind: And this Compliment may easily pass for Current, although the strongest
Affections of our Heart are otherwise engaged. We know too well by sad
Experience, that there is a certain thing called Humor, which often overrules
our Reason, and steals away our Heart to dote upon those very Follies, which,
in our Serious Thoughts, we cannot but despise. A Man who is Solicitous for
this World, may easily deceive himself in this Matter. He may Esteem God a
great deal more, and yet Love him a great deal less. The Disciples had a great
Esteem of our Savior, and thought they loved him better than their Lives: They
All declared they would rather die with him, than deny him: And yet,
immediately after, the Chief of them denied him, and all the rest forsook him.
When they looked upon the time of Trial at a distance, they had a great Opinion
of their Strength: But when the Occasion was present, they soon discovered
their Weakness. This was once their Case: And God only knows how often it has
been ours.

Their Case, you will say, was different; because they were Guilty of a great
Presumption. But pray consider a little. Are not we as guilty as they? Do we
not presume as much? Are we not as confident of our own Strength? We know very
well, that the Love of this World is a Mortal Enemy to the Love of God: And
therefore, if we do not daily watch the Motions of this Enemy, oppose its
Progress, and cut off all Communications which may any way Fortify it; if on
the contrary, we daily furnish it with all Provisions, Ammunitions, and Arms,
against us; if we thus despise the Strength of our Enemy; is it not Visible,
that we too much confide in in our own? And if we commonly neglect those daily
Considerations, Exercises and Endeavors, which are necessary to Increase and
Fortify the Love of God; is not this a downright Presumption in our own
Sufficiency, as if we already loved him enough?

Remember the Fall of the Apostles. Remember how grievously they were mistaken.
Remember that not only their Doctrines, but even their Failings, ought to be an
Instruction to us. Never let us confide in our present Love of God; but let us
daily endeavor to Improve it. Never let us despise the Strength of our Worldly
Love; but let us daily endeavor to abate it. If we could serve two Masters, we
might be Solicitous for both: But since we can only serve One, it is a dangerous
thing to be Solicitous for any Other. You cannot serve God and Mammon, says our
Savior; therefore I say unto you, Be not Solicitous for this Life.

III.
We have seen how Dangerous it is, to be Solicitous for any thing in this
World: The rest of the Gospel shows us, that his Solicitude is altogether
needless. If there were any necessity of it, our Savior would not forbid it.
The Words are plain, Be not Solicitous for your Life. And indeed, if we seek
first the Kingdom of God, if the Service of God be truly and sincerely our
first and principal Concern, it is evidently needless to be Solicitous for our
Life. He made us for himself; and for his own sake he takes care of us. Not
that he is any way the better for us, but because he naturally takes delight in
doing good to All, who do not wilfully oppose the overflowing of his Goodness.
He gave us our Life, that, if we please, we may be Happy, by employing it
entirely in his Service: And as long as we serve the Master who gave us this
Life, our Self-preservation is in better Hands than our own. All the Malice of
Men and Devils put together, can never take away our Life, without our Master's
order, or his leave: And therefore whenever, either by his leave, or by his
order, the appointed Hour of our Death approaches, we may be assured our Master
has no more occasion for our Service; and therefore we have no Pretensions to
Live longer. There is only One thing Necessary in this World, and that is our
Duty to our Master: And, whenever our Duty stands in Competition with our
Life, if we are true and faithful Servants, we shall always readily and
cheerfully conclude; Our Duty is Necessary, but our Life is not. When things
are in this posture, it is evident, that the Observance of this Duty, is the
last Piece of Service which our Master requires at our Hands: And since our
Service is the End for which our Life was given us, if we wish to outlive our
Service, we are every jot as unreasonable, as if we wished to outlive the End
of our Life.

You Will tell me perhaps, you are very willing to Die when God pleases: But you
are afraid of wanting the Necessary Conveniences of Humane Life, and therefore
you are justly Solicitous, for fear of being Miserable whilst you Live. And
truly you are partly in the right. You have all the Reason in the World to be
willing that God should choose the Hour, and appoint the Moment of your Death;
because He only knows what Time is best and fittest for us. But since we are
willing to trust him with our Life, why should we not as willingly trust him
with all things else belonging to it? He has promised to take Care of us. He
knows, better than we do, what is good for us. He loves us better than we love
our selves. His Power is boundless, and cannot be obstructed. Is not this
enough to secure us? He is infinitely Powerful: He is able, says S. Paul, to do
exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask or think. He is infinitely
Good: He cannot but Delight in being so, to those that serve him. He is
infinitely Wise: He cannot commit the least mistake in our Concerns. In a Word,
his Wisdom, his Goodness, and his Power, all concur to Ensure the Blessings of
his Providence, which by a Solemn Promise is engaged for ever, to be favorable
to us. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and All these
things shall be added to you* It Is the Voice of Truth it self: Truth cannot
tell a Lie: His Promise cannot fail.

Is it not the First Article of our Creed, to believe in God the Father
Almighty? Does not the First of all our Petitions begin with these comfortable
Words, Our Father who art in Heaven? If we believe him to be Our Father, ought
we not to believe that he will certainly be careful of his Children? And if we
really believe He is always careful of us, what need we at any time be
Overcareful and Solicitous for our selves. Therefore I say unto you, says our
Savior, Be not Solicitous for your Life, what you shall eat; nor yet for your
Body, what you shall put on. He only forbids our being Solicitous. He does not
forbid us to Work and Labor for an Honest Livelihood. Our Heavenly Father does
not encourage Idleness in his Children. He expects that we should be
industrious in doing of our part: And, when we have done that, He Is always
ready to supply the rest. And to satisfy us concerning this matter, our
Savior is not contented to give us his bare Word for it, but uses several
Arguments in order to convince us.

Is not the Life more than Meat, says he, and the Body more than Clothing? He
who freely and frankly bestows upon us what is more, will he deny us what is
less? Do we not all of us Value our Body more than our Clothing, and our Life
more than Meat? And can we think that He, who voluntarily grants these greater
Benefits, will grudge us others which are much Inferior to them? He gave us
our Body, and Breathed Life into it. What moved him to be so kind? He might
have done as he pleased. Before we lived, we could not deserve our Life; nor
could we so much as ask it. Since therefore He bestowed this Great and
Fundamental Blessing upon us, without either deserving or asking it; may we not
firmly believe, He will never deny us other lesser Blessings, when we not only
ask them, but make it our Chief Business to deserve them, by spending our whole
Life in his Service?

Behold the Fowls of the Air, says he, they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into Barns. They are Idle and Careless; they do nothing for themselves;
and nevertheless our Heavenly Father feeds them. He is not their Father, and
yet be feeds them: And will he refuse to feed us, because he is our Father?
Will he not help us when we have done the Duty of good Children, by
endeavoring to help our selves? Will he do all for them, and nothing for us?
Have we not Reason to believe, He Loves his better Creatures best? And does he
not plainly tell us, we are much better than they?

Which of you, says our Savior, by taking Care, can add one Cubit to his
Stature? No Man ever grew Taller, by wishing to be so: Neither has any Man ever
been Happier, by being Solicitous about it. This Comparison shows plainly, that
Solicitude never does good; and that therefore there is never any need of it.
When we have done what is fitting, and have taken Care to do as much as we
ought, it is Vain and Foolish to entertain any further Concern, and be
Solicitous for the Event of our Endeavors. We have planted, we have watered,
we have done our part: The increase belongs to God; and what have we to do with
his Business? Let him do as he pleases; and let us be Contented with his Holy
Will and Pleasure. If we truly Love him above all things, it will not be so
hard, to like that most, which he likes best.

After these, and other Arguments, our Savior concludes, Therefore be not
Solicitous, saying, What shall we Eat, or what shall we Drink or wherewithal
shall we be Clothed? For after all these things do the Gentiles seek. If we
were Gentiles; if we were Heathens; if we had no Knowledge of God; then indeed
it were no wonder, that we seek these things, and are Solicitous about them:
But since our Father knows a great deal better than we do, how much, how long,
and to what End, we want these things; since we believe in his All-seeing and
All-ruling Providence; since we know very well, that all these things are only
necessary during Life, and that our Life is necessary no longer than God
requires our Service; since, I say, by Faith we are instructed so much better
than the Gentiles; is it not a Scandalous and a Notorious Shame, that all the
World is Witness of our seeming every jot as Eager and Solicitous as ever the
Heathens were? If we serve Mammon like Heathens; how can we at the same time
serve God like Christians? The Gospel plainly declares in the beginning, we
cannot serve two Masters^ God and the World: And, in the end it assures us,
that if we seek first the Kingdom of God, All these things shall be added to
us. The only way, to be truly Masters of this World, is to be True and Faithful
Servants of God. Let us therefore, in the first place be careful to serve God.
All other Care is dangerous, and needless. Let us only serve Him; and He will
certainly take Care, that the World shall serve us, and conduct us, easily and
safely from his Kingdom upon Earth, to his Kingdom in Heaven, which was
prepared for us from the Foundation of the World. Amen.

Discourse IV. Of Worldly Policy, and Christian Prudence.
THE Pharisees went and consulted together how they might Catch Jesus in his
Discourse. And they send unto him their Disciples with the Herodians, saying,
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the Way of God in Truth,
neither do thou care for any Man, for thou regardest not the Persons of Men.
Tell us therefore, What think thou? Is it lawful to give Tribute unto
Caesar, or not? But Jesus perceiving their Malice, said, Why do ye Tempt me, ye
Hypocrites? Show me the Tribute-Money. And they brought unto him a Penny. And
he says unto them, Whose is this Image and Superscription? They say unto him,
Caesar 's. Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things
which are due to Caesar, and unto God the things which are due to God. Matthew.
22. v. 15, to 22.

There Is nothing so Wise, so Charitable, and Just, as Christian Prudence: And
nothing, on the contrary, so Foolish, so Malicious, and Unjust, as Worldly
Policy.

I.
Idolatry is the height of Folly. It Is so extravagantly Foolish, that many
People can scarce believe there was ever any such thing in the World. They are
so incredulous in this Point, that common History will not satisfy them, but
we are forced to have Recourse to Scripture, to convince them. For Example. We
read in Exodus, how they made a Molten Calf, and worshipped it, and sacrificed
unto it. In Deuteronomy we read, they sacrificed to Devils, not to God. In the
Prophet Isaiah, we read, how common it was amongst them, for a Carpenter to
make a God, and worship it: He burns part of it in the Fire, says the Prophet,
and the residue thereof he makes a God: he falls down to it, and Worships it,
and Prays to it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my God. In doing thus, the
Scripture assures us, they forgot God their Savior; they forgot me, says the
Lord, and did not know that I gave them Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and Multiplied
their Silver and Gold which they prepared for Baal. And therefore it is clear,
they did not direct their Worship to God, whom they forgot; but as the Prophet
Jeremy tells us, they turned their Back to God, and their Face to Idols, saying
to a Stock, thou art my Father, and to a Stone, thou have brought me forth. I
must confess, all this is so intolerably silly, that, unless the Word of God
asserted it, I could not easily believe it. And yet I am fully persuaded, that
if we Examine well the Depth of Humane Policy, and search the Foundation of it,
we shall find it grounded upon as gross Idolatry as this.

Thou shall have no other Gods before me, says our Lord, in the first
Commandment. And in the Explication of it, he instances in those particular
Gods which then were most in Fashion, Thou shall not make unto thee any Graven
Image, Thou shall not Bow down thy self to them, nor Worship them. Thus he
forbids the Worship of other Gods, both all and some. And now I desire to know
whether it be not too true, that all those Worldly Politicians are Idolaters,
who seek first the Kingdom of this World, and expect that the Kingdom of God
should be added to them? Do they not change the Truth of God into a Lie, and
Worship the Creature more than the Creator? Do they not make to themselves a
Graven Image? Do they not frame to themselves an imaginary Happiness? A
Happiness which is not to be had in Heaven above, but only in the Earth
beneath? And do they not bow down and serve it? How many are there of whom S.
Paul makes mention, whose Belly is their God, who Sacrifice themselves to
Gluttony and Drunkenness, and waste away their Lives in Flames of Lust? Their
short-lived Happiness is part of it dead already, and burnt in its own Fire;
and of the residue thereof, they still persist to make a God, and Worship it.
How many are there in the World, who are ready at any time to Pawn their Souls
for Gold? Do not these Men make a Golden Calf, and Worship it? Those Men who
quit their Religion to secure their Fortune; who do not think there is a
Thousand Pounds a Year difference betwixt the Right and the Wrong; but prefer
the short Enjoyment of a little Spot of Terra Firma, before the Everlasting
Possession of their Heavenly Inheritance; do not these Men make a God of
Mammon? Do they not put more Confidence in their Estate, than in the God of
Heaven and Earth? Do they not forget God their Savior, as if they did not know
that he gave them all these things? Do they not turn their Back to God, and
their Face to Idols, saying to their Land, thou art our Father, to thee we owe
our Lives, and to their Money, thou have brought us forth, and delivered us out
of the House of Bondage? How many are there who are such Idolaters of Worldly
Honor, that they trample under Foot the Laws of God and Man, the Laws
Ecclesiastical and Civil, rather than seem to Trespass, in the least punctilio,
against the Laws of Hectorism? They prefer those Maxims, which the Pride of
Lucifer has introudced and settled in the World, before the Precepts of the
Most High God, which are revealed, confirmed, and ratified unto us, by the
Gospel, Church, and State. The very Thought of being Laughed at, and Despised by
some few silly People, for a little while, is much more Terrible to them, than
the Loss of God, and all that is Good, for all Eternity. When once the
Reputation of their Modish Bravery is called in question by the least Affront
or Provocation, they are so bewitched, so stupefied, so overpowered, with a
Base, Cowardly Fear of losing it, that although they are daring enough to Die
Eternally for it, they have not true Courage enough to live one Moment without
it. They Sacrifice to Devils, not to God. They force their way through Blood and
Ashes, to the Altars of Revenge and Pride. They imprint and grave in their
Minds an Image of I know not what, which none but Fools call Honor, and to
this they offer up their Vows and Prayers; they fall down to it, and worship
it, and in their Hearts they say unto it, Deliver us, for thou art our God.

The Psalmist tells us, that the Fool says, in his Heart, There is no God. And
truly, if we well consider the matter, we shall find that all those People, who
seek first the Kingdom of this World, the Honors, Riches, and Pleasures of it,
are certainly such Fools, as to say, in their Heart, There is no other God but
these. It Is no wonder therefore that the Apostle says, The Wisdom of this World
is Foolishness with God. No wonder that he tells the Politicians of this World,
that they are vain in their imaginations; that their foolish Hearts are
darkened; and that professing themselves Wise, as really they are, in the
management of Worldly Affairs, they become Fools in the misgovernment of
themselves.

When I talk of Politicians, I do not only mean those great Ones, who sit at
the Helm of Government, Ecclesiastical or Civil; I also Comprehend all those,
who, in the Shades of a Private Life, find warmth enough to nourish Pride and
Luxury, as well as Covetousness. Alas! It is not the Palace or the Cottage that
makes any great difference in the Case: It Is the Heart of Man which is the
Temple of these Idols: And the lowest Condition we can think of, does not
hinder us from loving our selves above all things, and Idolizing such little
Deities as our narrow Capacity can afford us. It Is not the Golden or the Wooden
Idol that aggravates or lessens the Crime: It Is the Worship that makes the
Idolater. We know very well, that Villages retained their Pagan-Worship, when
the greater Cities banished it. We certainly know, that although Self-love and
Pride are boundless in their vast Pretensions, yet they play at small Game
rather than sit out. And therefore it is no wonder if the Poor, as well as Rich,
are apt to Idolize themselves, and so are give ^ver to a Reprobate Mind, Proud,
Coverous, without Natural Affection, Deceitful, Envious, Unmerciful, in a word,
Malicious, and Unjust.

II.
If I did not very well Consider the prodigious Folly of Self-love, I could not
believe it capable of so much Malice. Who could have imagined, if the
Scriptures were not plain, that the Jews who had so long expected the Messiah,
could be so Malicious against him, when he came? He came from Heaven; and this
perhaps was more than they expected. He was True God, as well as Man; and this,
I fear, was more than they desired. He came to fulfill the Law, and to make them
Perfect like their Father in Heaven; and this was a great deal too much, for
those who thought themselves already good enough. But yet methinks they had no
reason to like him so much worse, for being so much better than their wishes.
His only fault was, that he was to^ good for them; and because he was so,
therefore they could not abide him. He came to destroy the Works of the Devil;
to pull down the Idols which they had set up in their Hearts; and teach them to
Adore, the One True God in Spirit and Truth, by taking away the Worship of all
Worldly Honors, Wealth and Pleasures. Learn of me, says he, because I am
humble of Heart. Learn of me, because Blessed are the Poor in Spirit. Learn of
me, because Blessed are they who are Persecuted for Righteousness sake. Learn
all this, and always remember this comfortable Lesson, Theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. Let this be always the Treasure of your Minds; let it always be the
Cordial of your Hearts; remember it was I my self that told you, Theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven.

This was the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ; but this Light did not
shine upon them, so as to open their Eyes, because they loved the Darkness they
were in: The God of this World had blinded their Minds: And they hated the
Light because their Works were Evil. Alas! They did not care for the Kingdom of
Heaven. An Earthly Kingdom was the chief thing they desired. They expected the
Messiah to Redeem them from the Slavery of their Enemies, to Enrich them with
the Spoils of Conquered Nations, and to make the whole World Tributary to them.
They loved themselves too well, to care for any thing else; and loved this
World too much, to be concerned for any other. Their Business was to build
their Tabernacles here: The great Employment of their Minds was to contrive a
Paradise on Earth: And their whole Souls were taken up with striving to be Rich
and Powerful, that they might purchase and command whatever Pleasures they
desired. And therefore when the Messiab came to undeceive them, they were so
surprised, they could not believe he was the Person whom they had so long
expected. They did not imagine, his design was only to Redeem them from the
Slavery of Sin, to assist them in the Conquest of their Vices, and to make
their Passions Tributary to their Reason. The Objects of these Passions were
the Idols, which they had so long Adored, and Worshipped with as furious a Zeal
as any of the Heathens round about them; and these they would not part with,
upon any Terms: They would not endure to have them Abandoned, Undervalued and
Despised: No, no, say they, We will not have this Man Reign over us. And thus
you plainly see, 'twas their Idolatry, which made them so blindly Zealous;
'twas their prodigious Folly, which made them so strangely Malicious against
him.

We read in our present Gospel, that the Pharisees went and Consulted together,
how they might Catch him in his Discourse. His Actions they could not Condemn:
He went about, doing good to all: He was in all things a living Example of
Goodness: But however, their Malice made them hope to Catch him, and lay hold
of some unwary Words in his Discourse. This was not the first Onset: We read in
the foregoing Chapter, how they sought to lay hands on him, but durst not,
because they feared the Multitude, who took him for a Prophet. They durst not
meddle with him: And therefore away they went, and Consulted together how to
Catch him another time. We read in S. Luke, how they watched him, and sent
forth Spies, to feign themselves Just Men, that they might take hold of his
Words, that so they might deliver him to the Power of the Governor.

They feigned themselves Just. They knew well enough the true Character of
Goodness: But the Malice of their Hearts abused the best and clearest Light of
their Minds. They knew how to act their part; but could not endure the sincere
practice of it. A wicked Man is always the worse for his Knowledge: The more he
has, the more cunning he is in making ill use of it, and employing it against
his Neighbor, instead of improving it to himself. They knew very well the
Qualifications of a Prophet sent by God: Master, say they, we know that thou
art true, and teach the way of God in truth, neither do thou care for any
Man, for thou regardest not the Persons of Men. They appealed to his Integrity,
to decide the Rights of Caesar and the People. They knew how hard it was to
please both Parties, and how dangerous to give offense to either. They wanted
the assistance of the one, or other, to destroy him. The Multitude took his
part, because they took him for a Prophet. The Emperor had nothing to say
against him, so long as he did not meddle with the Government. And therefore
the only Comfort of their Malice, was the Hope they had to make him choose one
side, that they might make him odious to the other.

There is nothing so Rash and Enterprizing as Vanity. A Man who is possessed
with a greedy desire of Popular Esteem, will stick at nothing to Purchase it.
The Pharisees by Experience knew the force of it. The Gospel tells us how they
loved to do things to be seen by Men. And therefore they cunningly endeavored
to insinuate how much they admired their Master already, and that nothing could
Crown his Merit with a greater Addition of Glory, than his being bold enough to
Declare against Caesar. Tell us therefore, say they, What think thou? Is it
Lawful to give Tribute to Caesar, or not? Do but tell us boldly, that we, who
are God's People, are free from Tribute, and that it is not Lawful to pay it to
Caesar: Tell us only this, and we shall all of us Conclude, That no Man ever
gave a greater instance of his Teaching the way of God in Truth, without caring
for any Man, and without regarding the Persons of Men.

Thus they maliciously contrive his Ruin, whilst he kindly aims at nothing but
their Good. They flatter him, and try to entangle him, whilst he deals
sincerely with them, and makes it his business to undeceive them. They praise
his Generosity, with a wicked intention, to make him Proud and Indiscreet,
whilst he discovers their Hypocrisy, with a Charitable Design, to make them
Wise and Humble. He perceived their Malice, and thus Expostulated with them,
Why do ye tempt me, ye Hypocrites? Why are you so foolish, as to have other
Gods before me, and only feign your selves Just, in presence of him, who, by so
many Miracles, has proved, he is the One True God, who sees the Secrets of your
Hearts? Why are you so Malicious, as to seek the Ruin of a Man, who comes from
Heaven to Redeem you, and to Save you from Eternal Misery? Why are you so
Unjust, to God, your Neighbor, and your Selves?

III.
What was it that made the Heathens so Malicious against the Primitive
Christians? What made them so Unjust in persecuting, as to lay aside all Rules
and Forms of Justice? The Principal and Fundamental reason was, because the
Christian Faith opposed the Worship of their Gods. Tertullian in his Apology
tells us, That when they were Indicted as Criminals, they were not vouchsafed
the Justice of Legal Trials. They were Tortured after they Confessed; they were
not heard in their own Defense; they were denied all benefit of the Law; and,
after all, they were not allowed to offer their Humble and Dutiful Petitions to
their Prince, for any Redress. Such Proceedings as these, were not only
contrary to the received Laws of the Empire, but against the Common Liberties
of Humanity and Nature, and the Allowance of all Just Governments. In other
matters they observed some measures of Equity: But, when their Idols were
opposed, their Passion banished all manner of Reason, and left no Room for
Justice.

This is the common Case of all Self-lovers. They are Unjust to God, whose
Worship they give to his Creatures; Unjust to their Neighbor, whose Concerns
they Sacrifice to their own; and Unjust to themselves, whose Body and Soul they
Damn for all Eternity. We read in Scripture, He that is Evil to himself, to
whom will he be Good? He that Loves himself above all things, is as Evil to
himself as his Hands and Heart can make him: How then will he be good to any
Body else? How will he spare his Neighbor's Blood before the Altar of that
Idol, to which he Daily Sacrifices his own Soul, his Heart, and All that is
within him? When once the Devil has possessed Men's Fancies with a great Idea of
this World, and led them by Degrees to that exceeding height, from whence he
shows them all the Happiness, and Glory of it; when once they relish the fond
Hopes of all these things, the Honors, Wealth, and Pleasures of this World;
when once their Hearts are fixed upon these Idols of their Mind; there is no
longer any Justice to be had, no Right to be pleaded, no Law to be
acknowledged, but the Sovereign Will and Pleasure of Self-love. They may
counterfeit Piety, Loyalty, Friendship, Justice, Liberality, and all those
Virtues which are Popular and Serviceable to their Politic Designs; they may
possibly have some Degree of Natural Goodness, and may act sincerely in some
small Occasions, where it is no way inconsistent with the Worship of their
Idols; they may feign themselves Just to God, to Caesar, to a Friend or
Neighbor, and all these Virtues may perhaps look well enough in the Face; but,
wheresoever Self-love Lives and Reigns, it is impossible to have them sound at
Heart. These Duties peradventure may obtain some Toleration at a distance; but
must never approach the Altar, where Self-love has placed the Graven Image of
their Happiness. It Is true, the Honors, Riches and Pleasures here below, are
all imaginary things; there is nothing Real and Substantial in them: And, when
the parting Hour draws near, when once these drousie Souls are thoroughly
awakened with a quick and lively Sense of their Eternity, they then see clearly
the illusion, and the emptiness of all these silly Dreams. But nevertheless
they now are so Amused and Charmed, with an imagination of something or other,
in which they place their Happiness, that, whatsoever it is, they make a God of
it, they Adore and Serve it only. All their other Humors, whatsoever they are,
must all bow down to this: And all the Duties of a Christian, of a Subject, of
a Friend, or Neighbor, must be Sacrificed as often as they dare pretend to
stand in competition with it.

These are the Natural Effects of Worldly Policy; the necessary Consequences of
that Wisdom of this World, which, the Apostle says, is Foolishness with God.
It Is Foolish in it self, Malicious against it opposers, and Unjust to all. And
truly we can expect no better, if we consider, that the first Principles of it,
are an insatiable Self-love, a vain Hope of Self-enjoyment, and a silly Belief,
that this miserable World is the only Seat of Happiness.

On the contrary, Christian Prudence, the first of Moral Virtues, which Directs
and Governs the practice of them all, is grounded upon the Three Theological
Virtues, a true Love of God above all things, a comfortable Hope of Enjoying
him for ever, and a lively Faith that nothing else can make us truly Happy.
These are the Fundamental Principles of Christian Prudence, and therefore there
is nothing so truly Wise, so Charitable, and so Just.

1. There is nothing so Wise. Because as Self-preservation is the first
Instinct of Nature, so true Self-love is the first Effect of Divine Wisdom; and
Christian Prudence teaches us the true Love of our selves. It regards our true
Interest and Advantage; it endeavors to free us from our greatest Evils, and
procure our greatest Good; it considers, that inward Peace is better than
outward Ease, that our Souls are nobler than our Bodies, that Eternity is
infinitely more considerable than Time; that the short and light Afflictions of
this World, which are but for a Moment, are nothing in comparison of
Everlasting and Intolerable Torments, and that all the uneasy Pleasures of
this Life, are nothing to the Heavenly Joys which the Almighty has prepared for
those that Love him. Did Esau truly love himself, when for a Morsel of Meat he
sold his Birthright? The present satisfaction of his Humor, was it not soon
past? And did not he himself remain a standing Monument of his own Folly? Did
he not Repent too late, and found no place of Repentance, though he sought it
with Tears? And was not he himself a sufficient Witness of his being Fool
enough to Love a trifle better than himself? Such Fools as this, and worse, are
all Profane Self-lovers. They Love their Humor, not themselves; and to content
some silly Humor, for a Moment, they are willing to destroy themselves for
ever. If any one will come after me, says our Savior, let him deny himself,
and follow me; let him deny his own unreasonable Humor, and follow my Advice;
let him follow me, who am the Way to Truth; let him follow me, who am that very
Truth, which is the Way to Everlasting Life; let him not Idolize a foolish
Humor, and Love it better than himself; but let him kindly and wisely deny his
Humor for a time, that he may Save himself for all Eternity.

2. As there is nothing so Wise for our Selves, so there is nothing so
Charitable to our Neighbor. A Man who believes God's Word, and relies upon his
Promises, is happy in a comfortable Hope of Enjoying him for ever. The
Pleasures of Flesh and Blood are too mean to content him; they are the same
which Brutes enjoy, and therefore he despises them. He glories in the Pledges
of his Hope; his being Made to the Divine Image, his being Redeemed by the
Merits of Christ, and being thus Entitled to Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
These are the Reasons why he justly Values himself. They are the Excellencies
which he is in Love with wheresoe'er he meets them, and therefore Loves his
Neighbor as he Loves himself. The best Christian is always the best Friend. He
is the truest Friend, not only to himself, but to his Neighbor. The World is
strangely mistaken in the Notion of true Friendship, as well as in that of
Self-love. We commonly think a Man Loves himself mightily, when he allows
himself in all his Humors: But alas! He only Loves his Humor, and at the same
time Hates himself. He does not see it, and may be will not believe it, till
he is Damned for it: But then his Hatred shows it self too late; he Hates and
Curses himself for ever. In the same manner, we take him to be our best and
faithfulest Friend, who is always most ready to comply with us, and take our
part in all things. But this is a mistake, as great as the other. If our
Neighbor's Humors are any way unreasonable, a true Friend may endeavor to
moderate, but can never find in his Heart to approve them. Nay, though their
Humors are Lawful, yet if they are not Expedient, it is an Argument of true
kindness to deny one's Neighbor, in all those Cases, in which one would be
glad to have so much Virtue as to deny one's self. For my own part, if ever I
have need of a Friend, I only wish and pray I may fall into the Hands of a good
Christian; a Friend of God's own Making, Choosing and Appointing. Let him be
only able to assist me, I am very sure, the better Christian he is, the better
Friend he will show himself: He Will act by Nobler and Diviner Principles, than all
the Humane Ties of Gratitude and Kindness: And will be sure to do a great deal
more for God's sake, than any Body else will ever do for mine. I grant there
are but few of these; but the fewer there are, the more's the pity: And I am
very much afraid, it is partly our own fault, that the World is not good enough
to have more of them.

3. As there is nothing so Wise, and Charitable, so there is nothing so
Perfectly and Universally Just, as Christian Prudence. Although it necessarily
presupposes Faith, and Hope, yet the chief ground of it is Charity, by which we
Love God above all things, and look upon all things else as nothing in
Comparison of Him. A Man whose Mind and Heart are thoroughly Enlightened and
Enflamed with this Celestial Love, lays up his Treasure in Heaven, where his
Heart is: He gives to God what is due to God, he Adores and Serves him only, he
renders to him his whole Being, his Soul, his Heart, and all that is within
him: He despises all the Treasures upon Earth, where Moth and Rust do Corrupt,
and Thieves break through and Steal: Eternity is his great Aim, and therefore
he scorns to quarrel about any Temporal Concerns, but easily and readily makes
even Reckonings with all the World, by giving to Caesar what is due to Caesar,
and to his Friends and Neighbors what is due to all of them. We never are
Unjust to Caesar, to a Friend or Neighbor, but when we are strongly tempted to
it by an eager desire of something or other relating to our Honor, Profit or
Pleasure: And these are the very things which a good Christian Undervalues and
Despises. When our Savior said to the Pharisees, Show me the Tribute-Money;
and when he asked them, Whose is this Image and Superscription? He was not
ignorant of either: But was willing to let them understand how little he valued
these Money-matters, which were the least part of his Care. A Christian is a
Man of another World; and all the while he is in this, he chiefly minds his way
to the next. He knows that his good Actions are the only things which have a
Current Value there: And as for the Riches of this World, he does not covet to
be loaded with them, but only to have a little about him, as much as may
suffice to pay his share by the way. He considers that the way is short, and
therefore is easily satisfied with any thing. If he Lodge uneasily, and Fare a
little hardly in his Journey, it is only the common Fate of Travelers; he
cheerfully makes the best of it; and comforts himself with thinking how
plentifully he shall Feast for ever, when he comes to his Eternal Home.

O God, who art the only Refuge of Sinners, the only Strength of the Weak, and
only Author of all Piety, incline thy Ears of Pity and Compassion to the Pious
Prayers of thy Church; forgive our past Offenses, all our Folly, Malice, and
Injustice; direct us in the ways of thy own Wisdom, Charity and Righteousness;
and never cease to assist us with thy Grace, that what by thy Encouragement we
confidently ask, we may effectually obtain: Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Discourse V. Of Christian Humility.
JEsus went into the House of one of the Chief Pharisees to eat Bread, on the
Sabbath Day, and they watched him. And behold there was a certain Man before
him which had the Dropsy. And Jesus answering, spoke unto the Lawyers and
Pharisees, saying, Is it Lawful to heal on the Sabbath Day? But they held their
Peace. And he took him, and healed him, and let him go. And answered them,
saying, Which of you shall have an Ass or an Ox fallen into a Pit, and will not
straightway pull him out on the Sabbath Day? And they could not answer him to
these things. And he told a Parable to those who were Invited, observing how
they chose out the chief places, saying unto them, When thou art Invited to a
Wedding, sit not down in the highest place, lest perhaps a more honorable Man
than thou be Invited by him; and he, who Invited thee and him, come and say to
thee: Give place to this Man; and then thou begin with shame to take the lowest
place. But when thou art Invited, go and sit down in the lowest place: That,
when he comes who Invited thee, he may say unto thee: Friend, go up higher.
Then shall thou have honor in presence of those who sit with thee. For
whosoever exalts himself, shall be humbled; and he that humbles himself,
shall be exalted. Luke 14. v. 1. to 12.

This Gospel presents to our Consideration the Best of Moral Virtues, Humility;
exercised by the Best of Mankind, Jesus Christ, true God as well as Man; and
delivered by the Best of Oracles, Truth it self Incarnate. Learn of me, says
he, because I am humble of Heart. His whole Life was a constant Lesson of
Humility. He taught it us, not only by word, but by example. And that we may
the better learn our Lesson, I shall endeavor to show, according to the order
of the Gospel; 1. How He Practiced this great Virtue. 2. How he Preached it.

I.
It Is the nature of Charity to make us Humble; and Humility is also a natural
Disposition toward being Charitable. If we consider Charity in order to God,
we plainly see that a Man, who truly Loves Him above all things, cannot but
undervalue all the fading Glories of this World. The Gaudy Scene of all its
Vanity makes little or no Impression upon him: He easily discerns how false its
Luster is: He sees quite through it, and sees Eternity beyond it. If we
consider the same Charity in order to our Neighbor, whom we Love for God's
sake, as being Made to the same Divine Image, Ransomed by the same Infinite
Price, and thereby Entitled to the same Grace here, as well as the same Eternal
Glory hereafter: These great and glorious Motives shine so bright, that all
those heaps of Honor which the World is able to Accumulate upon us, are no
better than so many Dunghils in comparison of these inestimable Jewels. A Man,
who chiefly Loves himself and his Neighbor upon these accounts, can have no
longing passion for any preference on Earth: He cannot but disdain all these
inferior Excellencies, Dignities and Praises; because the Treasure of his Mind
and Heart is infinitely greater; and all these Trifles are as much below his
Thoughts, as Heaven is above them.

Thus we see how Charity inclines us to be Humble; and it is as easy to
discover how Humility disposes and prepares us to be Charitable. It removes the
Obstacles of Charity: It lessens our inclinations to those things which
commonly create Division amongst us: In a word, it banishes that Pride,
Ambition, and Vanity, which are the usual subject of our Quarrels; and makes
the way plain and easy toward a perfect and a happy Union of Peace and Love.
A Proud Man thinks it a lessening of his Greatness, to make the least step
toward any Reconcilement. He scorns to stoop to his Duty, but expects that
every Body else should bow to his Imperious Humor. On the contrary, an Humble
Man is ashamed of being so Proud. If his Neighbor happens to be Captious,
Envious or Malicious, he freely forgives his fault, and pities his fall; and
never thinks it below him, to go and seek him out, and even stoop to help him
up again.

We read in the beginning of this Gospel, how Jesus went into the House of one
of the chief Pharisees, that is to say, of his chief Enemies, to eat Bread. A
Proud Man would have scorned to eat the Bread of an Enemy; but our Savior's
Humility was too Charitable to need any Invitation, and his Charity too Humble
to desire it. There was good to be done; and that was enough to Invite him. He
knew very well their Pride and Malice: But at the same time he considered, that
the prouder they were, the more they wanted his assistance; and the more they
wanted it, the more willing he was to afford it. He knew they would not come to
him to fetch it: And therefore he went into the House to bring it to them, and
in a manner force it upon them.

Behold the Example of our humble Redeemer! Are we always ready to follow it?
Are we at all times willing to oblige our Enemies? Do not we take quite other
Measures? If our Enemy disdains to make the first Step toward us: If he
expects that we begin to show respect and kindness: If he takes upon him a
great deal more than he deserves: Do not we behave our selves as if we thought
our selves obliged in Honor to be as Proud as he? Do not we sometimes find a
secret satisfaction in showing to the World, how high a Spirit we have? How
heartily we despise all those that slight us? And is it not a strange Folly, to
value so much that very Pride in our selves, which we despise so heartily in
our Neighbors?

Our Savior knew very well the Pharisees were his Enemies; he knew they cared
not for him; he knew they slighted him; and yet he freely goes into the House,
to seek their Company. He knew they always watched him, wheresoever he went,
and whatsoever he did or said. He knew they watched him, with a Spiteful and
Malicious Design, to Misinterpret all his Conversation, Words and Actions. He
knew by Consequence how little Probability there was of doing any Good amongst
them. But yet there was still some little Appearance; and as long as there was
any left, he could not forbear embracing any Opportunities of courting their
Esteem, or gaining their good Will. Not that he either valued or wanted their
Favor or Affection, but that he might teach them to value what they wanted
themselves; and that they might be ready and desirous to receive, and to
improve, those truly Valuable Blessings, which his Hands were always full of.

And behold there was a certain Man before him, which had the Dropsy. 'Twas
enough that the Man was before him: He could not behold his Misery, without
pitying it: He could not see his Want, without desiring to Relieve it. But
however, because he was surrounded by his Enemies, the Pharisees, who carefully
observed, and watched him, with Design to make him Odious to the People:
Therefore Jesus answering, spoke to the Lawyers, and the Pharisees, saying, Is
it lawful to Heal on the Sabbath Day? Our Pride would never have endured to
show so much Civility to those who seek to undermine our Credit, and are not
contented to Despise and Hate us, but are Studious and Industrious to make us
Odious and Contemptible to every Body else. We think it below us to humor such
People; we look upon it as an Argument of a mean Spirit, to comply with them;
we take a great deal of Pleasure, in showing how Great we are in our own Little
Dominions, and how much we disdain the very seeming to value those who
undervalue us. Our Savior was humbler than we: He did not value the Opinion of
the Pharisees, but yet he was humble enough, to give them leave to think he did
so. He knew, that the only way to do them Good, was first to please them: And
that he could not please them better, than by seeming to consult them. Is it
Lawful, says he, to Heal on the Sabbath Day? If he had gone to School to learn
the Law of them, he could not have put the Question in more Humble Terms; but
yet they held their Peace. Their Pride would not suffer them to run the Hazard
of exposing their Ignorance, by reasoning the Matter with him: They were
Conscious, that they had but little Reason on their side; but their Malice made
them hope, that, in his Absence, they might afterward be able to find Fault
with him, and color their Detraction with such Plausible Pretenses, as might
make him pass, in the Opinion of the People, for a Scandalous Person, who had
little or no Regard to the Observance of the Sabbath. Our Savior knew their
Malice, and saw their Pride: But, at the same time, knowing that their stubborn
Silence might very civilly be taken for Consent: And having showed his
Humility, in referring himself to their Judgment, he resolved to defer no
longer his Charity to the Dropsical Man: He took him, and Healed him, and let
him go.

This was not all. He was not content, that their Silence was enough to stop
their Mouths, and to hinder them from blaming what they durst not contradict.
He did not consider himself so much as them. He had done one Miracle already,
but he had yet more Miracles to do: And not only more, but greater. He had
cured one Body of a Dropsy; but what was that to so many Souls before him,
which were all of them more Dropsical, and much more dangerously Sick? Alas,
poor Creatures! They were puffed up with a great Excess of Pride: They were
almost ready to burst with Envious and Malicious Humors, and yet they thirsted
eagerly for fresh Occasions, to dilate these Humors, and increase the Torment
of their Minds. They saw the Swelling of the poor Man's Flesh, but did not see
the greater Swelling of their own proud Hearts. They pitied his Body, but were
too blind to pity their own Souls.

To tell them, in plain Terms, how Blind and Proud they were, would never do
them any Good: It would neither Humble them, nor Open their Eyes: It would only
serve to Aggravate their Pride, and Blind them so much more. When Pride is the
Disease, Humility must be the Cure; and an Humble Person must undertake it, or
else 'twill never succeed. A Proud Man must be always treated gently, and
gained by Insensible Degrees. To gain upon him, we must not offer to Attack
him, as if we designed a Victory over him; neither must we directly Contradict
him. His Maxims indeed are often Contradictory to one another: But the great
Difficulty is, how to go about to make him see it. To take upon us to show it
plainly to him, is as great an Affront, as if we pretended to be
clearer-sighted than he. And therefore the best way is to lead him fairly and
softly by his own Principles, till we have brought him so near the Matter, that
he may easily and clearly see his own Mistake, without our pointing at it. Let
him but have the Honor of seeming to find it himself, and then he will willingly
own it. To do all this is no hard Task, unless we are as Proud as he. If we are
truly Humble, we shall take Delight in it. The Prouder he is, the greater is
his Fall; and the Humbler we are, the Lower we shall willingly stoop to help
him up again.

We have already seen how Humble our Savior was, in not offering to Cure the
Dropsical Man before he had Consulted the Company; and by their Silence, had a
just Pretense to take it for granted, that the thing was fitting to be done.
Let us now consider, how Humbly he behaved himself afterward, as soon as he
had Healed the Man, and let him go. To let them see how far he was from
Slighting or Despising their Opinion of him, he Appeals to their own
Principles, and by a Familiar Example, lets them understand what Reason he had
to judge, they could not possibly dislike what he had done. Which of you, says
he, shall have an Ass or an Ox fallen into a Pit, and will not straightway pull
him out on the Sabbath Day? A Proud Man would have gloried in being bold
enough, to tell them to their Faces, how Blind, how Covetous, and how
Uncharitable they were. Our Savior teaches us another Lesson: Learn of me,
because I am Humble. He does not tell them, they are Proud and Blind, but
endeavors to put them in a way of Opening their Eyes, and chooses that Method
of discoursing, which was least offensive to them. He does not tell them, they
are Covetous, but argues from a particular Maxim of their own, which he knew
their Covetousness would always help them to approve of.

Their Vanity of being exact, in the Observance of the Sabbath, was greater
than their Charity to their Neighbor: And therefore they concluded it was a
Transgression of the Law, to Cure a Man upon the Sabbath. But yet their
Covetousness was more Predominant than all their Vain Hypocrisy; and
therefore, if any of their Goods were endangered upon the Sabbath, they did not
doubt but it was Lawful to secure them. The Life of an Ass or an Ox, provided
it were their own, was a great deal more to them than the Life of a Neighbor.
To save the Life of a Beast, which was worth Money to them, this was a thing of
real Importance, which the Ceremonious Piety of the Sabbath might very well
give Place to. But to save the Life of a Neighbor, by whom, perhaps, they were
not like to get a Penny, alas! What signified his Life to them? They were never
like to be the better for it: Let him even die, say they, and let us keep the
Sabbath.

Behold what Blindness we are capable of, when Pride and Passion overruled our
Reason! Let us consider it well, and lay it seriously to Heart. Let it be a
continual Instruction to us, which may daily Humble us, and make us always
Jealous of our selves. We are made of the same Flesh and Blood; we are liable
to the same Pride and Passion; and may, for ought we know, be as Extravagantly,
and as Proudly Blind, as they. The only way to Open our Eyes, and see that
Pride which Blinds us, is to observe the Doctrine and Example of our Humble
Savior. He is the Light of the World: He Enlightens every Man that comes into
it: He is the only Light, in which we can truly see, how Proud we are. And is
it not a wonderful thing, that Light it self should shine so bright before the
Pharisees, and they not see it? The Gospel takes notice, that they could not
answer him to these things: But however we do not read that they submitted to
him. Their Pride and Passion made them love Darkness rather than Light. And yet
our Savior took all Care imaginable, to make his Light acceptable and pleasing
to them, for fear, lest they might shut their Eyes against it. Which of you
shall have an Ass or an Ox fallen into a Pit, and will not straightway pull him
out on the Sabbath Day? He only proposes, with all Humility, a modest Question,
without the least reflecting upon them; and leaves them to their own
Discretion, to apply it to themselves. My God! How profoundly Humble is thy
Infinite Charity! How infinitely Charitable is thy Profound Humility!

II.
If it be true, that Charity makes us Humble, it is no less certain, that
Self-Love makes us Proud. When once we lose the Love of God above all things,
we turn our Back upon the Light; and being in the Dark, it is no wonder that we
blindly dote upon our selves. We have lost the Presence of our God, whose
Infinite Goodness was the Boundless Object of our Minds, and filled the utmost
Stretch of our Unlimited Desires: And, when we lose him, it is no wonder if we
find our Hearts as Empty as our God is Great. As he is infinitely Great, so we
are infinitely Empty without him: And all that we can find amongst His
Creatures is never Great enough to satisfy us. This is the Reason why we are
so fond of Greatness. It Is the true Cause why we are so Proud, Ambitious, Vain,
and Envious. All our Honors, Dignities and Praises, all our Actions and
Pretentions, every thing belonging to us must be Great: And, if we cannot in
our selves be Great, according to our Wishes, we make it out, with fancying we
are greater than our Neighbors. We study their Faults, and wink at our own; we
study our own Advantages, and wink at theirs; we do what we can to lessen them,
and magnify our selves; and all this Care is taken, only to purchase an
Agreeable Mistake of htinking we are greater than they. If this succeeds not,
but, in spite of all Self-flattering Arts, we still are Conscious of our
Neighbor's Merit being greater than ours; our last Refuge is to have Recourse
to the Opinion of others, to make Amends for what is deficient in our own.
Although we cannot deceive our selves, yet still we hope that they may be
deceived in us, and think us Great, in spite of all our Littleness: And it is no
matter how little we are at home, provided we are great abroad. If our
Acquaintance Love us, Honor us, and Praise us, more than any Body else; if
they Extol us, Magnify us, and Cry us up, above all others; we care not what
Place we have in our own Thoughts, provided we have the first Place in theirs.
The first Place is the thing we always aim at: We cannot endure that any Body
else should have it: And the more earnestly we endeavor to exalt our selves,
the sooner we are humbled.

The reason is plain. Because our being thus exalted in the Minds and Hearts of
other People, is a privilege depending entirely upon their courtesy, and a
favor not to be obtained by force or fear. Esteem and Love are never to be had
for asking; much less by laying claim to them, as if we thought them due to us.
Men's Thoughts are their own; they are free to think what they please: And will
ever do so, without craving our leave for it. They cannot love us, unless they
like us: And how can they like us, if we take upon us to oblige them to it?
It Is a visible Encroachment upon the liberty of their Thoughts and
Inclinations: A liberty which God himself allows them; and a liberty which all
the United Strength of Mankind is not able to take from them. Let us do and say
what we can, they are absolute Masters at home, and altogether Arbitrary in
their own Dominions: We cannot choose our place in their Affection or Esteem:
And the only way to get the best preferment amongst them, is to challenge none
at all, but only endeavor to deserve it, and always leave it to their own
discretion. To do otherwise, will only serve to make us odious and ridiculous.
And therefore our Savior gives us warning not to choose the highest place, for
fear lest we begin with shame to take the lowest: But, on the contrary, to go
and sit down in the lowest place, that we may afterward go higher, and have so
much greater honor in presence of those who sit with us.

And here I cannot but admire our Savior's Charitable Condescension to us, in
making use of our own Principles to instruct us, and in rectifying our
Frailties, so as to make them serviceable to us. When Pride is predominant in
us, we fear nothing more than being humbled, and hope for nothing more than
being exalted: These are our greatest hopes and fears: And, because they are
so, therefore our Savior makes choice of them to Check the unruly motions of
our Pride. What is it, but a violent desire of being Exalted, that makes us so
fierce in challenging Respect, so loud in complaining of Neglect, so hot in
quarrelling about it, so implacable in resenting it, so furious and so cruel in
revenging it? We think that by these means we may perhaps be able to force our
way to Honor, and make a Conquest of the highest place in the Esteem and Love
of Men: But alas! We always find our selves most grievously mistaken. Such
means as these, if we are Rich and Powerful, may possibly prevail so far upon
some few mean Spirits, as to make them fear and flatter us: But it is
impossible, this way, to make them ever Love us, or Esteem us. And since our
strongest hopes and fears are so much bent upon this silly Method of
endeavoring to exalt our selves; what stronger Argument could be employed to
Curb the impetuous Sallies of our Pride, than to open our Eyes, and let us
plainly see, that whilst we are thus hastening to invade the highest place, we
are continually posting to the lowest? Because the prouder we seem to be, the
more they hate us, and despise us. The more they hate the Injustice of our
being so; and the more they despise the Folly of our showing it.

The Injustice of a Proud Self-lover is so Notorious, that nothing can excuse
or palliate it. If he could have it for asking, he would make no scruple to
Monopolize the Esteem and Love of all the World. It Is All too little for him,
and therefore no share of it can content him. If it lay in his power, he would
humble every Body else, to make room for his own dear Self. He is unjust both
to God and Man. He prefers himself before both. And if this be not unjust, I
know not what to call so. Our God who made us, is he not infinitely better than
all his Creatures? And is it not just that we should Love him best? Does not
the first and highest place, in all Men's Minds and Hearts, belong to him? How
dare we then so insolently offer to pretend to it? Our Neighbors, are they not
made by the same God, and for the same glorious End? Are they not all Invited
to the same Eternal Happiness? He who Invites us, is he not the same who Made
us? He Made us what he pleased; and does it not therefore belong to him to
Assign us what place he pleases? Whatever we are, whatever we have, whatever we
imagine greater in our selves than others, we have no just reason to be Proud
of it; because it is no Property of our own, but a free Gift of our Master,
without our first deserving it. We may be humbly thankful for it, but have no
pretense to glory in it; because it does not argue that we are better than
others, but only that God is better and kinder to us than he is to them. We did
not Make our selves, we did not Invite our selves, and therefore must not Choose
for our selves. We have no Right to our being Made, no Claim to our being
Invited, no Title of our own to any Place at all: And since there is no Place
due to us, Are we not horribly Unjust, if nothing but the highest Place will
satisfy us?

In a word, there is nothing so Unjust and Odious, nothing so Unreasonable and
Ridiculous, as Pride. And therefore it is no wonder if the higher we Aim, the
lower we fall. No wonder, I say, if it be always true, that Whosoever Exalts
himself, shall certainly be Humbled, by Men, in this World, and by the Devil
and his Angels, in the next.

On the other side, there is nothing so Humble, nothing so Divine, as Charity;
and, at the same time, nothing in the World so Charitable, so truly Great and
Generous, as true Humility. And therefore it is no wonder that our Savior
assures us, He that Humbles himself, shall be Exalted. If he Humbles himself
exteriourly in the sight of Men, he will be sure to be Exalted, Loved, and
Honored by them here. And if he Humbles himself sincerely in the sight of God,
he cannot fail to be Exalted Everlastingly hereafter.

Discourse VI. Of Christian Marriage, and the Means to Sanctify it.
THere was a Marriage in Cana of Galilee, and the Mother of Jesus was there.
And Jesus also was invited, and his Disciples, to the Marriage. And when they
wanted Wine, the Mother of Jesus says unto him, They have no Wine. And Jesus
says unto her, Woman, what is that to me and thee? My Hour is not yet come. His
Mother says unto the Servants, Whatsoever he says unto you, do it. Now there
were set there Six Waterpots of Stone, after the manner of the Purifying of the
Jews, containing Two or Three Measures apiece. Jesus says unto them, Fill the
Water-pots with Water. And they filled them up to the Brim. And he says unto
them, Draw out now, and present it to the Governor of the Feast. And they
presented it. But when the Ruler of the Feast had tasted the Water that was
made Wine, and knew not whence it was, (but the Servants which drew the Water,
knew) the Governor of the Feast called the Bridegroom, and says unto him,
Every Man at the beginning does set forth good Wine, and when Men have well
drunk, then that which is worse; but thou have kept the good Wine until now.
This beginning of Miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested his
Glory; and his Disciples believed in him. John 2. v. 1, to 12.

This Gospel affords great Comfort and Instruction, not only to those who
engage themselves in Marriage, but also to all Christians whatsoever, even
those who lead a single Life.

I.
The first thing we read in the Gospel is, that there was a Marriage, and the
Mother of Jesus was there; and not the Mother only, but Jesus also was himself
invited to it. They were both invited, and were both of them pleased to be
there. They were not contented to come themselves, to honor this Happy
Solemnity; but, the Disciples being also invited for their Master's sake, He
was pleased to bring them with him, that they might be Witnesses, how much he
honored it, and that his Apostles afterward might preach with greater
Assurance this Orthodox Doctrine, that Marriage is always Honorable, not only
in it self, but in all who rightly engage in it, and observe the Duties of it.

There Is nothing raises more the Value of any Commendation, than to have it
given by those who are Commendable for being of a different Profession. Such a
Commendation carries with it a much fairer appearance of being Impartial and
Sincere, and therefore is more justly Valuable.

If Marriage were esteemed and praised only by married People, we should not
much admire the Commendations which they so frankly bestow upon their own
Condition. But when we see Virginity it self do so much Justice to a Married
Life, as to approve it: When we see the two most perfect Patterns of Virginity,
the Virgin Son of God, and Virgin Mother, Vouchsafe to Adorn a Wedding with the
Glory of their Presence: When we consider, that although they both of them
preferred a Virgin Life so much before it, that the one would not be Born of a
Woman unless she were a Virgin, neither was the other contented to be his
Mother, till she understood, that by a Miracle she might be Fruitful without
the least Prejudice of her Virginity; yet nevertheless, they both of them were
pleased to Accept the Invitation, and be Witnesses of the Solemnity: When, I
say, we duly consider all these Circumstances, we must needs conclude, that
although Virginity be preferrable as being more perfect, yet the State of
Marriage is truly Honorable in it self, and ought to be honored by all
Mankind, since God himself was pleased to Honor it.

Christian Marriage is the Nursery of Christianity, the School where Children
learn the Rudiments of Christian Virtue, and the Academy where they are daily
Trained up to the Exercise of it. Let the Little ones come to me, says Christ
in the Gospel: And it is the great Duty of Parents to bring their little ones to
him. The Institution of Christian Marriage, aims at no less Glorious an End,
than that for which the Son of God was pleased to come into the World; which
is, that the Children of Men may, by his Grace, become the Children of God. For
this Reason he Established his Holy Church upon Earth; He gave Apostles,
Bishops, and Pastors, to carry on the Work of the Ministry; and gave a strict
Commission to Parents to bring their Children to him, that they may know his
Holy Will, and do it, that they may grow up in him in all things, and that by
daily Improvement in the practice of all Christian Duties, they may replenish
the Church Militant here, and the Church Triumphant hereafter. If any, says the
Apostle, have not Care of their own, and especially of those who are of their
own House, their own Family, their own Flesh and Blood, they have denied the
Faith, and are worse than Infidels.

I must confess, it is no small Honor for Married Persons to be constituted
Coadjutors of Christ in that great Work which brought him down from Heaven: But
then again, I cannot deny but that this very Honor brings along with it so
many and such heavy Obligations, that unless the Grace of God support them, it
will only serve to crush them with its Weight. A Virgin has only one Soul to
save, one Person to please, one Passion to conquer. This Passion, being taken
young, is easily made tame; and, being used to that Subjection which it owes to
Reason, grows contented with it. This Person is its own dear Self; one Mind,
one Humor with it self; and is not easily prevailed with to displease it self.
This Soul is entirely its own; it is not divided betwixt a Neighbor and it
self; it is the whole Object of its great Concern, the only Necessary one; and
being free from all Distraction, it has nothing else to do, but to endeavor
the Salvation of it self. But it is not so with Married People. They must take
great Care to save their Children's Souls, or else they greatly endanger their
own. They must instruct them in all their Duties; and that is some little
Trouble. They must, in all things, give them good Example; and that is a great
deal more Troublesome. They must bear patiently whatever Crosses they meet with
from their Children; and this is not always easy. They must be as patient, and
more, if possible, in bearing with all the Faults and Humors of those whom
they have taken for better or worse; and how hard this is, they only know who
have tried it. On the one side, I do not easily conceive how Married People can
please themselves, without pleasing one another: And on the other side, I am
very much afraid it is as difficult a thing to please two Persons, as it is to
serve two Masters. I know very well, that according to the Institution of
Marriage, Man and Wife are but one. They are one in Law; they ought to be one
in Inclination and Affection; and whilst they are so, they are as happy as
Marriage can make them: But when they are two, they are the worst two in the
World. There Is nothing so sour as Love when it turns. From an Excessive
Fondness, which created a Thousand Extravagant Expectations, and a Thousand
more Unreasonable Jealousies, they often pass to to the other Extreme of hating
more than ever they loved: And it is hard to say, which is the greater Plague of
Marriage; too much Love, or too little. A Medium betwixt both is certainly the
best: And even then there is enough to be done, and a great deal more to be
suffered. Abatements of Humor must be made, on the one side as well as the
other; there must be mutual Condescentions used; they must have Patience, if
not always, at least by turns: And all this little enough to maintain that
Peace at home, and Credit abroad, without both which they cannot expect to be
easy. For want of this, we see the Ruin of many Families, who are a grievous
Scandal to their own Domestics whilst they live together, and a greater to the
whole World when they part. To prevent all these Disorders, and to govern all
their Passions with that Moderation and Discretion which is necessary for their
present Happiness, and for the future Welfare of themselves and Children, both
in this World and the next, the Grace of God is indispensibly required. Their
Frailty and Temptations are greater than ordinary, and therefore their Grace
must be so too. They are as Frail and Weak as Water: And nothing but a Miracle
of Grace can change their Water into Wine. This is that Comfortable beginning
of Miracles which Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, to Manifest his Glory, that all
Married Christians may be true Disciples of him, and firmly believe in him,
that though without him they are never able to Support the Difficulties of
their State, yet by his Presence and Assistance they may make those Duties
easy, which are otherwise impossible.

II.
It Is a great Comfort to Married People, that the State wherein they engage is
truly Honorable; and that God himself, his Virgin Mother, and Disciples, were
pleased to Honor it with their Presence. It Is yet a greater Comfort to
Consider, that the things which are Impossible with Men, are Possible with God;
and that although sometimes it may be morally Impossible for Humane Nature, to
endure with Patience the Cares and Crosses which attend a Foolish or Unwary
Choice, yet still God's Mercy is so great, that he will rather Work a Miracle
in Favor of them, than suffer his Omnipotent Assistance to be wanting to them.
But though these Comforts are Peculiar to Married Persons, yet the Instructions
of the Gospel are more general, and may regard all Christians whatsoever; not
only those who are Married, but even those who lead a single Life.

I. There was a Marriage, says the Evangelist, and Jesus was invited. Without
this Invitation, He would not have been present: And without his Presence, they
would have been deprived of his Assistance. This is the Case; not only of
Marriage, but of any other Calling or Profession whatsoever. No good Christian
dares presume, in any State of Life, to expect the Blessing of Christ, without
inviting him to give it. He must be present in their Hearts, by a Sincere
Desire of serving him, and saving their Souls. Whatever they engage in, they
may perhaps have other Honest Motives, but this must always be the Chief. He
must be also present in their Minds, by a Sincere Enquiry into his Holy Will
and Pleasure, which they consult in every Deliberate Action, and much more in
any Solemn Undertaking, which is like to have a greater and more lasting
Influence upon their Lives. They invite not only Jesus Christ, but his
Disciples also; when in all things they consult those Holy Maxims which He and
his Apostles preached; and under the secure direction of Faith, Hope, and
Charity they fix their steady Eye upon the Glories of another Life, and Value
this no farther than it is Subservient to that. It Is thus they prove themselves
to be true Christians, according to S. Paul's Description, by denying all
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, by living Soberly and Righteously in this
present World, and by expecting the Glorious Appearance of him, who is their
God and Savior, Jesus Christ. It Is thus they show to all the World the
Sanctity of their Calling, and make it appear, as the Apostle says, that God
has not called them to Uncleanness, but to Holiness, that every one may know
how to Possess their Vessel in Sanctification and Honor, and not in the Lust
of Concupiscence, like the Heathens, who know not God, and therefore know no
Rule but their unruly Appetites. It Is thus they Build their whole Morality upon
a true Christian Foundation: They believe, they hope, they love above all
things, that Blessed Eternity, whose Joys are set before them; and therefore take
no Measures but what are suitable to it, and are always Prudent in choosing,
Patient in suffering, Just and Temperate in all their doings.

Even those who differ from us in Matters of Faith, are (some of them) of the
same Opinion with us in these Important Maxims of Morality. A very Abstemious
Life, if it be not required as an Essential Part of Holiness, yet it is
necessary as the Means and Instrument of it: Conformably to that of S. Paul, 1.
Cor. chapter 7. Brethren, the time is short; it remains that they who have Wives,
be as though they had none; and they that Rejoice, as though they rejoiced not;
for the Figure of this World passes away. Where we are not only Interdicted
unlawful Pleasures, but forbidden to give our selyes up to lawful ones; and
commanded to use such Moderation as may become Men fully persuaded of the
Shortness and Vanity of this Life, and possessed by the Expectation of a
better. The Christian State is a State of Holiness and Purity: It Is in one
Word, to be Heavenly-minded: And therefore that Course of Lise, which can best
serve to Increase this Blessed Temper, is the Christian's Duty; and that which
Softens and Sensualizes us, is Inconsistent with Christianity. The great End of
Temperance, according to S. Paul, 1 Cor. chapter 9. is the Mastery, or Conquest,
over the World and Flesh, whose Lusts and Pleasures War against the Soul.
Religion being nothing but the Love of God, and Heavenly things, the Gospel
endeavors all it can to wean us from the World and Flesh; it being Impossible
to serve Two such contrary Interests. And, when the Soul is striving for the
Mastery, is it Sense to Arm the Enemy, and Feed it into a Fierce and Brutish
Courage, by indulging those Enjoyments which are the Food and Fuel to its
Lusts? In plainer Words: that Abstinence from Sensual Pleasures, which renders
the Body Governable and Serviceable to the Soul, which Frees the Mind from its
Captivity to Sense, and Establishes its Dominion over the Brutish Part, is that
Temperance which the Gospel requires: And by Consequence, that Indulgence to
Worldly Pleasures, which tends to Pamper and Enrage the Body, to awaken our
Passions for this present State, to make the Minds of Men Soft and Feeble,
Heavy and Sensual, unable to Suffer, and froward if their Appetite be not
satisfied, is flatly Contradictory to the Temperance of the Gospel of Christ.

II. To obtain this Temperance, this Mastery over our selves, we must observe
another great Instruction of our present Gospel. We must not rely upon the
length or number of our Prayers; we must Pray much, and Labor a great deal
more; we must Pray sometimes, and Labor always; our Praying is only part of
our Duty, the whole of it chiefly consists in doing all we can to perform it.
Although we Pray for our selves, although the whole Church offers up her
Prayers for us, although not only the Saints on Earth, but all the Saints in
Heaven, join their Humble Supplications with ours, all this will never prevail,
unless we add our own Endeavors, and do whatever we are able to the utmost of
our Power. We read in the Gospel, when they wanted Wine, the Mother of Jesus
says unto him, They have no Wine. She Intercedes not with the Authority of a
Mother, but with the Humility and Lowliness of a Handmaid. She barely
Recommends their Want, with that Simplicity, and Modesty, and Loving
Confidence, which even we Sinners may presume to Imitate. Our Savior's answer
seems a little Surprising, Woman, what is that to me and thee? He does not so
much as call her Mother: He seems to Check the forwardness of her Submissive
Request, by telling her, his Hour was not yet come. But at the same time he
designed to do as she desired: And knew very well, that although the Hour was
not yet come, it was not very far off. Her Humble Prayer was a great Step
toward it: And when the Servants had done their Duty, in following her
direction, and doing whatsoever Jesus said unto them, when they had filled the
Water-pots with Water, and filled them up to the Brim, when they had done what
they were bid to do, and whatsoever they were able, when they could not now do
more than they had done already, then the Hour was come for Christ himself to
do the rest. Deaw now, says he, and present it: And then it was that all the
Company were Witnesses, the Hour appointed for the Miracle was come, when they
plainly. Tasted that the Water was made Wine.

If we apply this duly to our selves, the Application will be very Instructive.
The Church of God, who is our common Mother, and is to us the Mother of Christ,
by forming his Spirit in us, is very sensible of our Want, and daily Recommends
us, in her Prayers to Christ the Savior of his Body, that our decaying Fervor
may revive again, and our Devotion, which is grown quite Palled and Dead, may
be Inspired and Animated with new Life and Vigor. She Prays here upon Earth:
She Prays in Heaven also, where her better part is now Triumphant, Secure of
their own Happiness, and only Solicitous for ours: And surely if the Fervent
Prayer of one Righteous Man, as the Apostle says, avails so much, the Prayers
of so many Saints, both here and there, must needs be very Prevalent. But yet
we must not lay more stress upon the Matter than it is able to bear. Their
Praying as much as we please, will never serve our turn, without our doing as
much as we can. This we can all of us do: And more than this, we are none of us
obliged to: But this, at least, we must always do, or else all Praying is in
Vain.

When we fall into Sin, we feel our Weakness: And when we strive to rise, we
feel it more. We therefore Pray to God to help us: The Church Prays for us too:
But all this while we do not sufficiently consider that it is not in the Power
of God himself to help us, unless we help our selves. To help us, is not to do
the Work for us, but to do it with us. And then it is that the Almighty helps
us, when we do those Duties with him, which we cannot do without him.
Repentance and Amendment are things which are not to be done by Proxy:
Another's Repenting does not change our Hearts; another's Mending does not make
us better: Such things as these are Personal, which we our selves must do, or
else we must All Perish: And hence it follows clearly, that unless we help our
selves, it is impossible for God to help us. How unreasonable therefore is the
common Practice of those People, who take great Care to ask God's help, and
take no Care to have it? They Pray all; and do nothing. When they have done
their Prayers, they think they have no more to do. They Pray indeed, that they
may Seriously and Heartily begin a thorough Reformation of their Lives, but
still they let their Duty take its Fortune, without ever beginn^^g to go about
it in good earnest.

It Is very observable in our present Gospel, that, in order to the Miraculous
Change of Water into Wine, there was more done than said. The Mother of Jesus
said only three or four Words to him: But there was a great deal more to be
done. There were no less than Six Water-pots to be filled, and great ones too,
such as were then in use for the Washing or Purifying of the Jews: Our Savior
kindly designing to Work a Beneficial Miracle, which might not only be a Relief
of their Poverty at present, but a Provision against it for the Future. It Is
also worth observing, that the Virgin-Mother's Exhortation to the Servants, was
more ample, and more earnest, than her Prayer to her Son; because She knew very
well her Petition would never be granted, unless the Servants took great Care
to do whatsoever Jesus said unto them. Neither is it less Remarkable, that he
no sooner said unto them, Fill^^ be Water-pots with Water, but they immediately
obeyed, and filled them up to the Brim; and in the very Moment of their doing
so, the Miracle was done, the Water was made Wine. If Christ had ordered them
to fill the Waterpots with Wine, they might have justly pleaded, it was more
than than they could do: But since he only commanded them to fill them up with
Water, they had no Excuse left; the Water was near at Hand, they might easily
have it for fetching, and a little Labor was enough to do the Work. This puts
me in Mind of a Celebrated Sentence of S. Austin, God does not command
impossible things, but by commanding gives us warning to do what we can, and to
ask what we cannot. Let us only do what we can, and what we cannot we are sure
to have for asking. We are sure, I say, to have it granted in Proportion to
what we do, and may be, in a greater Measure than we ask. If we consider well
the Matter of Fact, we shall find the Quantity of Wine was more than any Body
asked, but neither one Drop more nor less than what the Servants did in Drawing
Water and Filling. Had the Water been less, the Wine had been so too: And had
they Drawn no Water, they would have had no Wine at all.

The Wine I speak of, is the Wine of Grace: That Wine which Inebriates the Soul
with all Celestial Delights, and makes it so Heavenlyminded, that it Loathes and
Hates the Intoxicating Wine of Worldly Pleasures: That Noble, Generous, and
All-victorious Grace, which gives us the Mastery we strive for, but never-gives
it without our striving for it. This Grace is never granted to the Lazy and
Idle Prayers of a Careless Sinner, nor ever denied to the Faithful and Vigorous
Endeavors of an Humble Penitent. A Penitent who labors all he can to Humble
himself, and lays aside all Censuring of his Neigbours, that he may the more
effectually call home his Serious Thoughts, to Censure and Correct himself: Who
spares no Pains to do or suffer any thing that may be requisite or useful to
reform his Life: Who frequently and seriously Reflects upon the Vanity and
Emptiness of all Worldly Enjoyments, the Folly and Mischief of doting upon
them, the great Advantages and Pleasures of despising them, and being thus
delivered from the Tyranny and Slavery of all his Arbitrary, Restless and
Insatiable Passions: A Penitent, who uses all his Art and Industry to set his
Heart at Liberty, and never leaves off Cuarrelling with this unconstant, silly,
miserable World, till he is quite fallen out with it, and Hates the very
Thought of being reconciled: A Penitent, I say, who will not endure to hear of
any Treaty with his Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, but knowing
well their Treachery, does whatsoever he can, 1. To avoid all those Occasions
in which they seek to Surpri^^ him, 2. To cut off all Provisions and Succors
which may Feed and Reinforce them, 3. To watch their Motions with such Care,
that not a single Thought, Imagination, or Delight, can ever advance one step
beyond the Lines of their Duty, without being presently observed, and
vigorously repulsed: Such a Penitent as this will certainly succeed, and gain
the Grace he strives for. It Is true, the Endeavors of a Penitent who has been
long a Sinner, are as Weak as Water. But nevertheless, if to the utmost of his
Power he struggles with himself, to do all those things whatsoever Jesus says
unto him, he will soon, by joyful Experience, find the Weakness of his Water
changed into the Strength of Wine. Let him but fill up his best Endeavors to
the Brim of his Capacity, ( this he can always do, and God requires no more)
let him do but this, and he will soon be convinced, that Miracles are not
ceased. The World indeed may wonder at his change of Life, and so did the Ruler
of the Feast, when he Tasted the Water that was made Wine; he wondered, because
he knew not whence it was: But the Servants, which drew the Water, knew: And
all God's Servants, who have been Sinners heretofore, know very well from
whence their Change proceeds: They know it is from the Right Hand of the
Highest; who will not let us lose the every least part of our Labor, but for
little Drop of Water, gives us in Exchange an equal Share of Wine; and and in
Requital of our Weak (but Constant and Sincere) Endeavors, never fails to
Assist our Victory with a Proportionable Grace, and Crown it with Eternal
Glory. Amen.

Discourse VII. Of True Repentance.
IN the Fifteenth Year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being
Governor of Judea, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and his Brother Philip
Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the Reign of Trachonitis and Lysanias the Tetrarch
of Abilene, Annas and Caiphas being the High Priests, the Word of God came unto
John the Son of Zacharias in the Wilderness. And he came into all the Country
about Jordan, Preaching the Baptism of Repentance, for the Remission of Sins;
as it is Written in the Book of the Words of Isaias the Prophet: A Voice of one
crying in the Wilderness; prepare the Way of the Lord, make his Paths Straight;
every Valley shall be Filled; and every Mountain and Hill shall be brought Low;
and the Crooked Ways shall be made Straight, and the Rough ones shall be made
Smooth; and all Flesh shall see the Salvation of God. Luke. 3. v. 1, to 7.

We are All Sinners. We are therefore All of us Highly concerned in the Subject
of this Gospel. There Is no Salvation to be had without Remission of Sin: And no
Remission to hoped for, without True Repentance. For this Reason, John the
Baptist was called by God himself, and sent to Preach it. The Word of God came
to him in the Wilderness; and he immediately obeyed: He came into all the
Country about Jordan, Preaching Repentance for the Remission of Sins. The
Evangelist not only tells us the Design, and the Authority, but also the Time
of his Mission: And seems, by Marking the many Circumstances of it, to be more
careful in Dating the coming of S. John, than of our Lord himself; because,
unless by true Repentance we prepare the Way, his coming will be no Advantage
to us, but only rise in Judgment against us. To prepare the Way of our Lord,
three things are necessary to be done. We must make it Level, Straight, and
Smooth. And here I will not dispute what difference there is, betwixt
Repentance and Doing Penance; because, if we believe the Evangelist, the
Prophet Isaiah, and the Voice of one crying in the Wilderness; if, I say, we
believe the Word of God, by whom they were all Inspired, we cannot doubt, but
that Repentance, if True and Sincere, has a great deal to do; the doing of
which is very Difficult and Mortifying, and therefore very well deserves the
Name of Doing Penance. 1. Every Mountain must be brought Low. 2. Every Crooked
Way must be made Straight. 3. Every Rough Way must be made Smooth.

I.
Every Mountain must be brought Low; and therefore our Proud Presumption must
be Humbled. We must neither be so Proud of our own Natural Strength, as to
think we are able to save our Souls without God's helping us; neither must we
presume so much upon God's Goodness, as to expect that he should save us,
without our helping our selves.

There are some People in the World, who have so great an Opinion of their
Natural Strength, as to Imagine they can take Heaven by their own Force, and
Storm it when they please: And therefore they do not apprehend the Danger of
continuing in a Sinful Course of Life. They know very well, that a Custom of
Sinning super-induces a second Nature, almost as hard to be expelled as the
first: They are sensible, that the farther they proceed in any Vicious
Practice, the more they are confirmed and settled in it: They feel the
Miserable Chains of their Wickedness, and the Sad Slavery of Sin, to which they
tamely Submit, and have not the Heart to make any Resolute Attompt for their
Liberty. But notwithstanding all this, they still suppose they are their own
Masters; they fancy that their Weakness is rather want of Will than Power; they
persuade themselves, that a High and Mighty Resolution has an Invincible Force,
and that therefore they are able to rescue themselves from Sin and the Devil
whenever they please. This was the Pride of all those Heathen Philosophers,
who placed the Happiness of a Wise Man in being Self-sufficient, Independent,
and Supreme Disposer of himself in all things requisite to make him Good and
Happy. 'Twas this made Cicero say, Who ever gave God Thanks for being a Good
Man? And this, I fear, makes many Christians say in their Heart, whenever they
do any thing that looks like good, Our own High Hand, and not our Lord, has
done all this. To prepare the Way of our Lord, this Pride must be Humbled: This
Hill must be brought Low: It must be removed out of the Way, by a strong and
lively Faith of our Essential Dependency on the Almighty Hand that made us. All
Sinners, the more they confide in their own Strength, the more they are apt to
defer the time of their Repentance: But when once they are thoroughly convinced
of being able to do nothing of themselves, it is then that they begin to think
how Dangerous it is to continue any longer in a Wicked Course, and to make him
more and more their Enemy, without whose Friendly Assistance they are lost for
Ever.

There are others who understand themselves too well, to be so Proud of their
own Strength. They are very sensible that in their Daily Prayers, when they
say, Thy Will be done, they plainly acknowledge that they cannot do God's Will
without his help. But their Misfortune is, that they are strangely mistaken in
the Notion of his Mercy; they Presume too much upon his Goodness; and expect
that he should help to save them, in spite of all their Faults, and without
their helping themselves. They are wilfully Deluded with Extravagant Idea's of
God's Mercy being above all his Works, as if he regarded very little, either
what we do, or what himself has done, but only studied how to please himself in
being Merciful to Sinners. They Persevere as unconcern'dly in their Sins, as if
the Laws of his Justice were made only to be broken, as if the Precepts of his
Wisdom were given only to be despised, and as if he took Delight in having them
believe, that he is so unjustly and unreasonably Merciful, as to Pardon them
upon their own Terms, and let them live Sinners at their Pleasure, that they
may Die Saints at their Leisure. They think it is time enough to Die to Sin,
when Sin Dies to them. When Death draws near to their Bedside, and stares them
in the Face; if they can but cry Peccavi, before they feel the Fatal Stroke; if
they have but time to say, Lord save us, or else we Perish; it is enough, Our
Lord is Merciful; and since they all along relied upon his Mercy, and sinned
upon that very Score, they Presume he will not now be so Unmerciful, as to
deceive them in the End.

Thus their Presumption swells, and rises to a most prodigious height; and thus
it hinders their Repentance, till their Faith discovers how hollow the
Foundation is. But then the Mountain cracks immediately; it falls to pieces in
a moment; and sinks as low as the Abyss of its own Emptiness. If we believe
God's Word (and surely He knows best how Merciful he is) we soon shall see how
Slight and Frivolous all those Pretenses are, on which they Build their Foolish
Confidence. They would fain contrive some way or other to Reconcile a Wicked
Life with a Holy Death. They would willingly allow themselves their Liberty in
all their Vicious. Humors, and be happy their own way here; and when this is
done, they are contented to leave the rest to God's Discretion, and be happy
which way he pleases hereafter. To pacify their Minds, and calm their Fears,
they Magnify God's Mercy above all his other Attributes, and spare no Pains to
Cheat themselves into a Fond Belief, that He is much more Merciful, than he is
either Wise or Just. But yet they are terribly afraid, that what God cannot do
justly and wisely, he cannot do at all: And therefore some little Reason, or at
least some little Appearance of it, must be found, that they may seem to
justify their Plea for Pardon, and may have something to say for themselves,
that the Sentence of their own Self-condemnation may not pass upon them.

1. There are some who seem to presume upon their Greatness, as if the Laws of
God were only made for little Folks, and not for those who are the great
Lawmakers of the Earth. But the Scripture assures us of the contrary. In the
Wisdom of Solomon we read, Hear therefore, O ye Kings and Rulers of the Earth:
Your Power is given you from the Highest, who shall try your Works. The most
Sharp Judgment shall be to them that are in High Places; and Mighty Men shall
be mightily Tormented. For God shall accept no Man's Person, nor stand in awe
of any Man's Greatness.

2. Others presume upon their great Prosperity in a Wicked Life. I have sinned,
say they, and what harm has happened to me? But the Scripture bids them have a
care of saying so; because although God is patient, yet he will in no wise let
them go free from Punishment. His Indignation, says the Son of Sirach, has an
Eye upon Sinners: Therefore be not without fear of adding Sin to Sin. Bind not
one Sin upon another; but remember that thou shall not be unpunished in any one
of them.

3. Others presume more foolishly, that in so great a Crowd of Criminals, they
may perhaps escape: I shall not be discovered, say they, amongst so many
People; for what is my Soul amongst such an infinity of Creatures? But in the
same Ecclesiasticus we read, Number not thy self among the Multitude of
Sinners; but remember that his Anger will not tarry long. The longest delay is
only till Death; and who knows how short that may prove? Remember also that He,
who Numbers all the Hairs of our Head, will as easily Number not only our
Persons, but our Faults.

4. Others presume upon their great Donations to the Church. But this pretense
is plainly Contradicted in Ecclesiasticus, c. 7. Say not, God will look upon
the Multitude of my Oblations, and when I offer to the most High God, he will
accept it. No: He will not accept it: He receives no Bribes.

5. Others presume upon their great Faith. But what does it profit, says S.
James, if a Man has Faith? If he has not Works of true Repentance can his Faith
save him? No, no: He that will be saved, must keep all the Commandments, and
persevere in them to the End.

6. Others presume upon their much Fasting. But as the Prophet observes, In the
Day of their Fast, they find Pleasure in seeking their own Will, and in doing
their own Ways; and this is not the Fast, which God has chosen, neither is it
acceptable to him.

7. Others presume upon their many Prayers. But what signifies Praying without
Practicing? In the Proverbs we read, He that turns away his Ear from hearing
the Law, even his Prayer shall be Abomination.

8. Others presume upon their great Alms; because it is written, that Charity
covers a Multitude of Sins. But this is chiefly understood of our Neighbor's
Sins, not ours. The covering of our own avails us nothing, unless we Repent,
Confess, and Forsake them. It Is written in the Proverbs, that He who covers his
Sins, shall not Prosper: But whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall have
Mercy.

9. Others presume upon their being Children of the Catholic Church. But as it
was in vain for the Jews to say within themselves, we have Abraham for our
Father, so likewise it is to little purpose for us Catholics to say, we have
the Church for our Mother. The Gospel assures us, that Every Tree which brings
not forth good Fruit, (Fruits worthy of true Repentance) shall be hewed down,
and cast into the Fire. So true it is, that there is no Ground at all for our
Presumption, no Pardon to be obtained, no Mercy to be hoped for, without
Sincere Repentance, and a thorough-paced Amendment.

II.
When Faith has once Levelled these Mountains of Presumption and Pride, the
next Affair in Hand, is to prepare the Way of our Lord, by making it Straight.
There Is nothing so Crooked as Self-Love. It makes us Crooked in all our Ways.
It invents a Thousand Turnings, Windings, and By-ways, to compass its designs:
It never engages in any thing abroad, without contriving to bring something
home: It begins from it self, it tends to it self, it bends till both ends
meet; and what can be more Crooked?

On the contrary, the Love of God is Straight. It directs us in the Way of his
Commandments: And leads us in a Straight Line to that Blessed End for which he
made us. It prepares our Hearts to God, that we may serve him only. It prepares
us for the Kingdom of God within us; that every Loyal Heart may be the Throne
of his Divine Majesty; that all our Passions, Inclinations, and Humors, may be
Faithful Subjects to him, in doing his Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven;
and that his Love may not only Live but Reign in us, and not only now but for
ever.

His Love must begin to Live, before it begins to Reign in us. It must First
move us to Repent, before the Kingdom of God, which always is at Hand, can be
Established in our Hearts. Our Penitential Tears will never sufficiently prepare
the Way of our Lord, unless the Spirit of Love begin to move the Waters. Our
Self-Love may Cry its Eyes out, and almost break its Heart with Grief: Alas!
This Crooked Love can never make the Way Straight: There Is nothing but the Love
of God, who is all Truth, all Justice, and all Holiness, there is nothing else
can make all Straight, by making us truly Repent, and moving us to Detest and
Hate all Falsehood, all Injustice, and all Wickedness.

The Council of Trent, in the 6. chapter of the 6. Session, describing Repentance,
such as always was, and now is, Requisite, as well before Baptism, as before
the Sacrament of Penance, lays the whole Train of Penitential Dispositions in
this Natural Order. It mentions, 1. Our Fear of the Divine Justice; 2. Our Hope
of Mercy through Christ; 3. Our beginning to Love God as the Fountain of all
Righteousness; 4. Our being therefore moved with Hatred and Detestation of our
Sins; 5. Our purposing to begin a New Life, by keeping the Divine Commandments.
And again in the 4. chapter of the 14. Session, the same Council declares, that all
true Repentance includes not only a Cessation from Sin, but also a Beginning of
a New Life, and a Hatred of the Old One; according to the Prophet, Cast away
from you all your Transgressions, and make you a New Heart, and a New Spirit.

Let us now consider a little this Doctrine, and we shall find it so Clear and
Rational, as not to need the Authority of a Council to Recommend it to us.

1. When Sinners Sleep securely, they Dream of nothing but the Sensual
Satisfactions, and the Transitory Pleasures of this Life. But when they once
are roused, and thoroughly awakened with a Strong Belief and Lively Apprehension
of a future State, in which God's Justice will Eternally deprive them of these
things, and punish them severely with the contrary, there is nothing more
Natural, than to be struck with Fear of such a Punishment: And, although they
see it by a Supernatural Light, they dread it with a Natural Fear. Neither is
there any need of quoting Aquinas for this Truth: It being as evidently Natural
to to fear the Pain of Sense, as it is to Love the Pleasure of it.

2. The uneasiness of this Fear is Troublesome to us: And when it is great, we
dare not shake it off, as usually we do our Creditors, whom we refuse to Speak
with, when we have no Mind to give them Satisfaction. The Fear of being
Arrefted, and Eternally confined from all that ever pleased us, when it once
looks Big and Terrible upon us, it soon brings down our Stomachs, and makes us
contented now, to think how Merciful God is, and seek for Hope of Comfort in
the Merits of his Son.

3. When we are thus considering, how good God is, and how bad we are; how
great his Mercy is, and how little we deserve it; how severe his Justice is,
and how much we have provoked it: When we are wavering 'twixt Hope and Fear,
and pondering the Reasons on both sides; admiring that Incomprehensible Mercy,
which moved the most High God to send his only Son for the Redemption of the
World, and being Astonished at his Inexorable Justice, which would not be atoned
by any other Sacrifice: When we compare the Crookedness of Sin with the
Straight Paths of Virtue; the Truth, the Purity, and Equity of God's Laws, with
our Hypocrisy, Uncleanness, and Iniquity: When we study the Charming Features
of his Divine Beauty, and, in his own Light, see our Horrible Deformity: It Is
then, that we begin to Love him as the Fountain of all Righteousness; and,
because we love him, therefore we Detest and Hate our Sins, by which we have
offended him: It Is then, that we are sensible, what Fools we have been, to
forsake our God, the Fountain of Living Waters, and seek our Happiness amongst
his Creatures, by hewing out Cisterns, Broken Cisterns, which can hold no
Water: It Is then, our Heart is ready to Break with Grief, to think that we have
erred from the Straight Ways of Truth, and we tried our selves in the Crooked
Ways of Wickedness and Destruction: It Is then, I say, we firmly purpose to
begin a New Life, because we Hate the Old One: And then, according to the
Prophet, we cast away from us all our Transgressions; because we have now a New
Heart, and a New Spirit; we love our God, whom hitherto we slighted; and, for
his sake, we Hate the Vices which formerly we Loved, and Love the Virtues which
heretofore we Hated.

By what has been already said, it is easy to answer a very Important Question,
Whether Sorrow arising from the Fear of Hell alone, may deserve the Name of
True Repentance? It Is agreed by all, and declared in Council, That without the
Sacrament of Penance it cannot, of it self, justify a Sinner: The Question is,
Whether it sufficiently disposes him, in that Sacrament, to obtain the Grace of
God? To avoid mistakes in a matter of this Moment, we must observe, that in
Hell there are Two sorts of Pain, the one of Sense, the other of Losing God:
And consequently there must be also admitted Two sorts of Fear and Sorrow, the
one proceeding from Self-love, the other from the Love of God.

This Second sort of Sorrow, although it falls short of Perfect Contrition, yet
nevertheless it pre-supposes a Fear of losing God's Friendship in this World,
and his Company in the next, a desire to please him here, and to enjoy him
hereafter, an actual Love of him, as our last End, and chiefest Good: And since
their Love, Desire, and Fear, may be so great, as to imply a Preference of him
before all his Creatures, it follows clearly, that the Sorrow, which is ground
on this Love, may possibly exclude all Actual Desire of Sinning; which if it
does, the Council tell us, That it is an Impulse of the Holy Spirit, not yet
dwelling in us, but moving us, by which a Penitent prepares the way for his
being justified.

But the First sort of Sorrow is certainly insufficient; and it is very fit that
we should know it in good time, before we feel it. And that we may discern what
ground our Sorrow goes upon, S. Austin thus proposes the Case, in his 19.
Sermon, de verbis Apostoli; Behold, says he, the Lord your God tries you, as
who should say, Do what you will; and whatsoever pleases you, take it for
granted that it is lawful; I do not Punish it; I do not cast you into Hell for
it; only I shall certainly deny you the Sight of my Face for ever. If you were
afraid; you Loved. If you are more afraid of this, than any other thing; you
Love him above all things. Your Love inspires you with a Noble Detestation of
all Sin, a Strong Aversion against it, a Continual Fear of incurring God's
Displeasure by it, and a True Penitential Sorrow for having been Guilty of it.
But if you Value not the Loss of God; if you are unconcerned for all the Joys
of his Blessed Company; if you neither Care for Him nor his Heaven, provided he
allows you all your Pleasures upon Earth; you may be very well assured, that as
long as you Love your Humor, Ease, and Pleasure, above all things, your Fear
and Sorrow proceeding purely from this Love, can never of themselves exclude
your Actual Desire of Sinning. This very Love is a Capital Sin, which Breeds a
Thousand Desires of Sinning: And, according to the eagerness of those Desires,
the greater is your Fear, that they will all be Disappointed, and severely
Punished; and the greater is your Sorrow, to think that all God's Penal Laws
against these Criminal Desires, will certainly be put in Execution for all
Eternity. The Fear of Sensible Pain, and the Desire of Sinful Pleasure, grow
naturally both upon the same Stock; they are both rooted in the same Self-love:
And how then can the one be able, of it self, to pull up the other by the
Roots? How can the Fear of Pain extirpate the Love of Pleasure, and exclude the
Will, or the Desire, of Sinning? For this Reason, S. Austin, in his Book
against the Adversaries of the Law, affirms, That the Desire of doing ill is
not excluded, but by a contrary Desire of doing well. And in his Epistle 144.
he says, In vain does he think himself a Conqueror of Sin, who abstains from
it only for Fear of Pain: For although he does not outwardly Accomplish his
Wicked Desire, yet this Desire, this Enemy of his, is still within him. He who
fears Hell, does not fear Sinning, but Burning. Alas! This Servile and Carnal
Fear, as S. Austin calls it, can never change the Heart: It can never alter our
Minds: Because as long as we fear nothing but Burning, we are every ^o^ as
carnally-minded as before; we mind nothing but the Satisfaction of our Senses;
this we love, this we desire; and by the same Rule are Afraid and Sorry, when
we think of Pain and Torment. To be carnally-minded is Death, says the Apostle;
but, to be spiritually-minded, is Life and Peace. Our Repentance is not true,
unless it change our Hearts, and make us spiritually-minded: It must make to us
a New Heart, and a New Spirit: It must make us Love a New Life, and therefore
Hate the Old One. Our Hatred of this, is always grounded in the Love of that;
and, as S. Austin says in his Epistle 144. So much as we Love the one, so much
we Hate the other. O how I Loved thy Law! Says the Psalmist; therefore I Hated
every Evil Way. In a Word, The Love of God must prepare the Way of our Lord,
because Self-love is Crooked, and can therefore never make it Straight.

III.
S. Paul in his Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, humbly and heartily begs,
that our Lord may direct our Hearts in the Love of God, and in the Patience of
Christ. And it is a most Excellent Prayer. For when once the Love of God has
made the Way Straight, there is nothing wanting but the Patience of Christ to
make it Smooth.

1. The Apostle assures us, we have need of Patience to do the Will of God; to
Fight, and Conquer, and Maintain our Conquest to the End. Self-love and Pride,
the Mortal Enemies of our Eternal Happiness, can never quite Die, as long as we
our selves are Living; they lodge in our very Bosoms; we cannot hinder their
Living and Moving in us; we cannot prevent the First Rebellious Insurrections
of them: But however, we can prevent being Surprised by them, we can always be
upon our Guard, we can throw them as fast as they Rise; and we have this great
Comfort left, that every Fall Weakens them, and every Victory Increases our
Power over them, till at length they make so Small and Feeble a Resistance,
that those very Conflicts, which at first were Painful to us, now become a
pleasing Exercise, which seems to be the Sport and Pastime, rather than the
Trial, of our Virtue. This Degree of Patience is the surest Mark of true
Repentance. It Is certain we are not truly Penitent, unless we absolutely and
fully resolve to Decline from Evil, and to Do Good: And though this Resolution
may seem Strong and Firm, yet we shall soon discover its Weakness; we shall
presently Break it, if we have not Patience to keep it. The longer we have
lived in Sin, the stronger are our Vicious Habits, the harder it is to struggle
with them; the more Pains we must take to Master them, and therefore so much
greater Patience is requisite to overcome them. But whatsoever difficulties we
may meet with by the Way, we must remember, that these Obstacles which give us
so much Trouble, are the Work of our own Hands. Our Sinful Habits are the woeful
Fruit of our own wilful Wickedness. The Crookedness and Roughness of our Nature
was Soft and Tender at first: If our Reason had begun betimes to make it
Straight and Smooth, it had been done with ease: And whose Fault was it, that
we did not rise, and fall to Work, at a more Early Hour? Since therefore the
Fault is our own, we have no Reason to Complain, and Grumble at the Hardship of
our Labor. If we cannot now perform our Work without the Sweating of our
Brows, and Aching of our Hearts, we may Thank our own Presumption and Self-love,
which were the Sad Occasion of such long delays; and therefore we have Reason
to have Patience with our selves.

2. We have need of Patience, not only to do the Will of God, but also to
suffer it. We need it, not only to do good, but to endure whatever Evils he
shall please to appoint us. It Is not sufficient to begin a New Life: We must
also Hate the Old One, and be willing to undergo the just Punishments of it.
There Is nothing so effectual, as a true Sense of our Guilt, to make us truly
Patient. An Humble Penitent is thoroughly convinced, that all the Sufferings of
this Momentary Life, are nothing to what he deserves. He thinks himself
unworthy of the Ground he goes upon. He knows that he deserves to have it Open
under him, and Swallow him Alive. He does not look upon himself as Pardoned,
but Reprieved; and therefore Trembles at the Dreadful Apprehension of
Unspeakable and Everlasting Misery, which he still fears may be his Doom at
last. He fears not them who Kill the Body, and are not able to Kill the Soul;
but, from these Words of our Savior, he learns to fear him only who is able to
Destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. The Fear of Hell Sinks deeply in his Mind,
as Deep as the Abyss it self, and Swallows up all other little Fears of
Momentary Pains. Compared to Hell, they are no more than the least Drop of
Water to the Ocean; nor yet so much, because the smallest Drop has still some
small Proportion with the Sea, whereas those Pains have less Proportion with
those, and Time has none at all with our Eternity. And therefore an Humble
Penitent, whatever happens to him, he submits not only willingly, but
cheerfully: He Humbly Kisses the kind Hand which lays the Cross upon his
Shoulders; and thankfully acknowledges the Double Favor of God's Infinite
Mercy, who is pleased not only to Exchange his Many and Everlasting Torments,
for a few Transitory Afflictions, but also to Reward his Little and Short
Sufferings, with a far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory.

3. We have need of Patience, not only to Suffer the Will of God in these
unusual Trials; but also to Bear one another's Burdens, and to Support the
uneasy Humors of our Neighbor, in all common Occasions. That Heroic
Patience is the proper Character of Confessors and Martyrs: This belongs to all
good Christians; it concerns us all, and every one of us. All our Impatience
proceeds from Pride and Selfishness, which make us Love our Honor, Interest,
and Humor, better than God and our Neighbor. When we are Contradicted,
Slighted, or Despised, our Patience has much ado to keep us quiet, our Blood
Rises, our Spirits are Ruffled and Discomposed, our Thoughts are in a Hurry, to
lay hold on some Revenge or other, and without the least Consideration, catch
at any thing that is uppermost or nearest Hand. Is this the Natural Temper of an
Humble Mind? Surely, although we stand in our own Light, we are not so much in
the Dark, but we can see, or feel at least, that these Resentments and
Disturbances proceed from Pride, and that they are all Rooted in Self-love. We
Love our Honor because we Love our Selves: And, for the self-same Reason, we
Love a Thousand other things besides our Honor; all those things, I mean,
which fall under these two Heads, our Interest and our Pleasure. Our Interest
is liable to an Infinity of Various Accidents, which Trouble our Temporal
Affairs; our Pleasure is the Object of as many Inconsistent and unreasonable
Humors; and every little Gale of Wind, that blows Cross to the one or other,
is enough to raise a Storm, in which our Patience seldom fails to suffer
Shipwreck. For this Reason, whenever I see a Choleric Person grow Patient, I
look upon it as an Excellent Sign of his being truly Penitent. When I see him
cast away from him all his usual Motions of Impatience, I easily imagine that
he has made to himself a New Heart and a New Spirit. When I observe him Easy
and Cheerful, not withstanding any Slights or Provocations: When I discover a
calm and even Temper in him, in Spite of any Crosses or Disappointments: When I
perceive him as ready to Excuse or Overlook an Injury, as he was before to
Aggravate it, or Revenge it: Then indeed I have just Reason to conclude, he is
no longer governed by the Spirit of this World, but that he is renewed as S.
Paul says, in the Spirit of his Mind, and led by the Spirit of God, the Love of
God, and Patience of Christ. The very word Repentance, (...)


