A SERMON PREACHED at St. Mary-le-Bow, June 27. School. Before the SOCIETIES, FOR
Reformation of MANNERS, IN THE City of London and Westminster.

Published at their Request.

By THO. JEKILL, D. D. and PREACHER at the New CHURCH, in WESTMINSTER.

LONDON: Printed by R. and T. Mead, for Ralph Simpson, and Richard Cumberland,
at the Harp, and at the Angel, in St. Paul's Churchyard. School.

TO THE SOCIETIES, FOR Reformation of MANNERS, IN THE City of London and
Westminster.
GENTLEMEN,
ALthough I never had so much Vanity as to incline me to think any thing of
mine worthy to be made thus Public, much less so mean a Performance as this;
yet having always an earnest Zeal for the Interest of Religion in general, and
bearing an hearty Affection to your Pious Undertaking in particular, I have,
without any great Difficulty, yielded to your Request of sending this Sermon
thus abroad into the World, since you have thereby declared your good Opinion
of it, and think that it may be some ways serviceable unto both.

The Suitableness of the Subject to the Occasion may not perhaps, be so obvious
at first sight to every Apprehension; but those that consider the Cause in
which you are engaged and know how you have been used, and what Success you
have found, will soon perceive how agreeable it is thereto; yea, how necessary
also to take off those Objections, and to prevent those Discouragements that
have too often appeared, and may yet be made use of against so excellent and
glorious a Work, from the many Enemies it will certainly create, and the many
Friends it may occasion us to lose: For, though the thing may be true as to the
former, yet I very much question whether ever it was so as to the latter, (for
that Man either never was a true Friend, or deserves no longer to be so
accounted or valued, that shall become an Enemy upon such an Occasion as this.)
But admit it to be so in both, yet Solomon tells us, that it shall be otherwise
at last, provided we do but the Things that Please the Lord now: And therefore,
as I know you have been always careful of the one, so I doubt not but you have
often experimented the Truth of the other, and so I hope you always will: For I
am sure it has been so with me; for which Reason, I have in the Application of
this Assertion, to this present Occasion, singl'd out from my own Experience
all those Instances of it, that I have herein given to confirm the Matter of
Fact; except the last, and that also I do as firmly believe, and hope to find,
as I can do any thing in the World; for I am very sure it must and will be so.

Enemies, indeed, we have all along had, and great ones too, and so we must
expect as long as the Devil has any Interest in the World, and so strong a
Party amongst Mankind: But what of all that? W^^e it worse than it is? as long
as the great God is for us, we need not care who is against us. What, though the
Age be vicious, and the Great ones, that should have known and done better,
have made it their Business, for Thirty Years together, to corrupt and debauch
it? What, though the common People rage and rattle against those that endeavor
to reclaim them? Yea, what, though the Magistrates themselves, who invite us to
bring them Information: against the Vices that reign amongst us, and promise
their utmost Assistance in the Suppressing of them, should not only underhand,
but even openly, and upon the Bench, and in the very Courts of Justice, appear
to be the greatest Patrons and Promoters of them; and instead of encouraging
those honest Informers, who thus come to them (upon so good an Occasion as
this) in the Fear of God, and in Charity to the Souls of Men, by making their
Work easy and safe, do all that in them lies, to make it both troublesome and
dangerous, and thereby to beat them off from engaging any further therein: All
which you and I have seen, and a great deal more too; and can therefore truly
say, that the King's Proclamation does them no Wrong, in charging them as it
does, with being in a great measure the Occasion of the abounding of so much
Impiety and Profaneness amongst us: And what if it should be so still, and
those that have in this Cause resisted unto Blood striving against Sin should
be again beaten, and wounded at the very Doors of these Magistrates, without
Protection or Redress, and meet with nothing upon Complaint but Scoffs and
Jears, as I have known it but too frequently to be? What I say, though it should
be thus, and a great deal worse; yet you have no Reason to desist, or be
discouraged; for that God that has supported you hitherto, and prosper'd you so
exceedingly (as is sufficiently known from the several Accounts that have been
given of your Affairs in Print; first by the Right Reverend Bishop of
Gloucester, and since by the Reverend Mr. Woodward, and some others) will do
the same still, and both continue and enlarge his bountiful Goodness toward
you: He knows that what you have done has been for his Name's sake alone; and
that not a Man of you, has ever expected, much less desired or received, one
Farthing of Profit, by all that you have done; nay that, besides the
indefatigable Pains which you have taken therein; you have expended vast Sums
of your own, in Carrying on this excellent Work, notwithstanding all the
Reproaches that the World has cast upon you, as if you made great Advantages of
it to your selves, and did all for filthy Lucre's sake; for no other Reason,
but because the former Governors, as Nehemiah says, Chap. 5.15. used to do so,
and made their Servants do the same: But so have not you done; nay, I know you
can, and do defy the most inquisitive and implacable Malice to fasten any one
Thing of that Nature upon any of you: For, as you have washed your Hands in
Innocence as to that, so you are able to compass God's Altar, in the Integrity
of your Hearts, as to every thing else that concerns this whole Affair, and can
appeal to him to justify you therein.

There are, I know, many of our Dissenting Brethren, that have engaged in this
good Work, as well as you, and have formed themselves into Societies for the
Carrying of it on, as you have done, and that very heartily too: But that is
rather a Reproach to those of your own Communion than to you, since by their
refusing to assist and join with you, they do in a manner force you to seek
Assistance elsewhere. Let but these Men that seem to be thus jealous both of
you and them, assist in this Pious Undertaking, with that Zeal and Vigor that
you have done, and go through with it, as they ought to do, and I dare engage
that you, and they too that are thus reproached, will gladly desist, and with
Transports of Joy, become Spectators only, and concern your selves no further
in it, unless it be to bless God for them that are willing thus to take it out
of your Hands, and to recommend them to his Grace, for all necessary Assistance
to prosper so good a Work here, and for an eternal Recompense of Reward
suitable to it hereafter; as I now most heartily do all those, that are already
engaged in it; being in all sincerity,

Wesim. June 30. School. GENTLEMEN, Your most Affectionate, and Faithful Friend,
and Servant, in CHRIST JESUS, THO. JEKILL.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THERE is now in the Press, a Treatise, which gives a most exact Account of
those just and prudent Measures, whereby the Reformation of Manners amongst us
has been hitherto carried on; with Instructions for the Beginning and
Advancing it in other Parts of the Nation; and with many moving Arguments, to
excite all Ranks of Men thereunto.

They will be Sold by Ralph Simpson, at the Harp, in St. Paul's Churchyard;
and many other Booksellers.

PROVE. XVI. 7. When a Man's Ways please the Lord, he makes even his Enemies to
be at Peace with him.
THE Words having no Difficulty in themselves, nor any Dependence upon the
Context, will not need any Enquiry, either into their Meaning or Coherence; so
that I shall be wholly at Liberty to enter immediately upon that, which I
chiefly intended in the Choice of them, which was to show the Truth and
Certainty of what is so positively affirmed in them, and to apply them to the
present Occasion: For if the Work of Reforming Men's Lives and Manners, and
reclaiming them from their Vices, which we are all so desirous to Promote, be
one of those Ways that are here Described, and the Issue of it be such as is
here Promised; Who is there that does not easily see, what great Encouragement
is hereby given to the Using our honest and utmost Endeavors, by all Pious and
Prudent Ways to the Carrying of it on, to the best Advantage: Especially when
we see how it obviates a grand Objection usually made against this Undertaking,
from the many Enemies that it will create us, when we see it so particularly
asserted by the Divine Oracles, that it makes even those Enemies to be at Peace
with us? In the Handling therefore of these Words; I shall endeavor to do
these Two Things:

I. I shall show that what Solomon here asserts is true.

II. I shall apply it to this present Occasion.

1. By showing that this is one of those Ways that Please the Lord. 2. By
showing that it will have this Effect. 3. By adding something by way of
Direction and Encouragement to the Practice of it, as a Thing most excellent
and commendable every way.

1. I shall show that what Solomon here asserts is true, concerning the Event
and Issue of a good Man's Ways, which are so pleasing to the LORD, and that
notwithstanding all that may be objected against it, either from those many
Texts of Scripture, that seem to contradict it, or from the many Experiences of
a whole Cloud of Witnesses, that may be produced against it, even from amongst
the Best of Men, that have often found it otherwise, to their Cost and Sorrow;
for I am well aware, that a great Deal may be said from both these Heads
against what Solomon here asserts; but yet for all that, I hope to make it
plainly appear, that this Assertion is true, both by the Arguments that I shall
produce to prove it, and from the Answers which I shall give to those Things
that may be objected against it. And here, as I shall not go from the Compass
of the Text for the one, so neither shall I depart from the plain Current and
Tenor of the Scriptures for the other.

The Proof now of the Truth of this Assertion is plain and easy from the Text
it self; and that, 1. If we consider the Person that is here said to do it, the
Lord. 2. The Occasion of his interposing and acting in this manner, which is
from the Acceptableness of the Thing it self unto him. 3. From the natural
Tendency of it to the producing of this Effect.

1. We may see a sufficient Evidence of the Truth of this Assertion in the
Text, from the Person that is here said to do it; For the Wise Man leaves it
not to that, which we call Chance or Fortune, nor to the Management of Humane
Counsels or Endeavors, but derives it from a much higher Power, and a more
certain Original, even from the first and greatest Cause of all; for he tells
us, that the Lord himself will do it, He that made and governs all Things in
general, and that can create this Blessing in particular; for it is the Lord
that gives his People the Blessing of Peace, Psalm. 29.11. Now we know,

1. He can certainly do it, for he has all Things in his Hand that are
necessary for it; and works all Ways after the Counsel of his own Will, as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.11. The Wise Man therefore tells us, Prove. 21.1. That the
King's Heart is in the Hand of the Lord; and that as the Rivers of Water he
turns it whither soever he will; as the Husbandman, or Gardener in watering
of his Ground can so order the Trenches, as to water what part he pleases,
either more or less, turning the Stream every way as he has a Mind to it, so
can the LORD do by the Heart of the King, inclining it which way soever he
thinks fit, and as may best serve the wise and gracious Ends of all his
Providential Dispensations: And if he can do this by the King's Heart; which
Solomon also tells us, Prove. 25.3. is unsearchable, and which we know is more
Arbitrary and Uncontrollable than any other Man's: How much more may he do it,
by those that are in a much lower Degree and Station? If the Heart with all its
Powers and Faculties be thus at his Disposal, it is sufficient for our Purpose,
and we may be sure, that he can easily do what Solomon here asserts.

2. He has done it heretofore, and the many Instances of it are upon Record in
Scripture, to excite and encourage us to expect that it shall be so again, as
often as he pleases, and sees that there is Occasion for it. Yea, how many
signal Instances of it are there in Jacob's Case alone? First, When Laban
pursued after him, with no good Intention, you may be sure, but was prevented
in his Design by GOD, who would not suffer him so much as to speak an angry
Word to him, Genesis 31.29. So also it was in the Case of Esau, who had vowed and
prepared for his Destruction, and came with an Armed Force, and an enraged and
revengeful Mind, to execute what he had both in his Heart, and in his Hand, and
that too upon one of the most favorable Opportunities for such a Purpose, that
the most powerful and implacable Malice could wish for; Insomuch, that Jacob
himself was exceedingly afraid, and greatly distressed, and expects nothing but
Mischief and Ruin; but GOD turned Esau's Heart also, as he did Laban's, the
Night before they met, and made him embrace, and kiss, and show the greatest
Kindness, where he intended to destroy: And I mention this the rather, because
Solomon tells us, Prove. 18.19. That a Brother offended is harder to be won than
a strong City, and their Contentions are like the Bars of a Castle. The same
also appears in the Case of the Schechemites, tho Slaughter of them was so
barbarous and provoking a Thing, that Jacob himself was in the greatest
Consternation that ever he was in his Life, dreading the Fury of the
Inhabitants of the Country, that they would all rise against him as one Man,
and cut off his whole Family at once; and in this Fright he flies from thence,
and calls upon GOD for Protection, as he had formerly done in the Day of his
Distress, and finds the same Success; For the Terror of the Lord was upon all
the Cities that were round about him, that they pursued not after him, Genesis
35.5. And was it not so also, when Pharaoh gave him the Land of Goshen to dwell
in, that so none of the Egyptians might injure him or his? because every
Shepherd (as Jacob and his Sons were) was (as we are told, Genesis 46.34.) an
Abomination to the Egyptians.

And what he found so often, was more frequently and signally made good in a
Multitude of Instances in his Posterity. How cruelly and unjustly they were
used in Egypt, every one that knows any thing of their being there at all, is
sufficiently informed; and must therefore admire, that they should after such
inhumane and barbarous Usage, which redounded also so much to the Gain and
Advantage of their Oppressors, come out from thence in so peaceable a Manner,
that not so much as a Dog wagg'd his Tongue against any of the Children of
Israel, though there was a great Cry through all the Land of Egypt; because there
was not an House, in which there was not one, even of their firstborn, dead.
Nay, to increase the Wonder as well as to confirm the Point in hand, their
Enemies showed them more Kindness at their Departure, than they would have
expected from their best Friends; for they loaded them with Gifts, even to the
Impoverishing of themselves: Insomuch, that they would not have been more
spoiled by the most prevailing Conqueror, and all from the Hand of GOD, who
gave his People such Favor in the Sight of the Egyptians, that they lent them
all that they required; insomuch, that they spoiled the Egyptians, as Moses
tells us, Exodus 12.35, 36. Nor was it otherwise with them afterward; for though
he often sold them into their Enemies Hands for their Sins, yet he caused them
to be pitied of all those that carried them away Captives, Psalm. 106.46. and
not only to show Kindness to them in the Land of their Captivity, but to send
them back with special Tokens of their Good Will to them into their own Land;
according to Solomon's Prayer, 1 K. 8.50. For just so it fared with them under
the Babylonish Captivity, and at their return from thence; as you may plainly
see in the Case of Daniel and his Companions, of Esther and Mordecai, whilst
they were there, and of Nehemiah and Ezra, and the whole Body of the People,
when they were so freely, and so kindly sent home, by the special Order of the
King of Babylon, and under the Protection of the Government it self. But what
need we go further than our own Country for Instances of it, when we also have
had Wolves taking Care of the Sheep, Papists preserving Protestants, (as King
Phillip did Queen Elizabeth) and Men of no Religion assisting vigorously in the
Maintenance and Preservation of it; which though it may, and does stain all the
Glory, that might otherwise have been due to them, for such worthy Deeds; yet
it does the more advance the Glory of GOD, whose Grace and Power is so
remarkably seen therein, and gives Encouragement to good Men, who sincerely
desire and design, what they only Craftily and Mechanically do, to pursue the
same, with greater Vigor and Zeal, and more comfortable Hopes of Success.

3. He has the same Kindness for his People still that ever he had, and will
certainly do it again, when there is occasion for it, and it conduces to his
own Glory, and their Good: His Church never dies, though the Members of it do;
nor does his Love ever cease or change, but descends to all Generations; and
therefore, if he does not show it at one time, and in the same manner, that he
has done at another, we must conclude, that he sees it better for them to have
their Enemies hate them, than to be at Peace with them: Their Enmity may be
better to them, than their Good Will; and they may get more by it in the
Exercise of their Faith and Patience, and the Increase of their other Graces,
as well as bring more Glory to GOD, and good to others too: Thus it was with
the Jewish Nation under the Babylonish Captivity, after which we hear no more
Complaints of their Idolatry; That having perfectly cured them of that sort of
Wickedness: For though other Sins reigned amongst them still, yet they never fell
into that again: And happy would they have been indeed, if such another
Captivity, could have as effectually cured them of all the rest. This being of
the Nature of other Afflictions, and has the same Design, of bringing those
back again to GOD'S Law, that are gone astray from it; and must therefore be an
Evidence of GOD's Faithfulness, as well as Love to his People; So that it does
in no wise contradict the Wise Man's Assertion in the Text, but rather confirms
it; for when a Man has a much better Thing done for him, than was promised, he
can never be said to be wronged; nor can he that made the Promise, be taxed
with being worse than his Word: And this brings me to another Consideration,
that will sufficiently determine this Point, and stop the Mouth of all
Objections drawn from the Veracity of GOD: For,

4. He is as true to his Promise as ever, and as his Love can never change, so
his Faithfulness and Truth can never fail; and therefore, though we do not at
present understand, and are not able to comprehend the Nature and Reason of his
acting in this Matter, yet we may rest upon this, that he is Truth it self and
cannot lie; and upon that we may stay our selves, and wait till we see the
Thing it self confirmed by the Event. If this therefore be his Word and
Promise, and we are careful to perform that which it is made to, we may also
(under the forementioned Limitations) expect the same Blessing according to
the Letter: For as Balaam says, Numb. 23.19. God is not a Man that he should
lie, nor the Son of Man that he should repent; what he has said he will do,
and what he has spoken he will make good; which as it proves this Particular,
so it gives us a fresh Instance of the whole: For that Prophet was a declared
Enemy to Israel; and went to them with a full Purpose to do them Mischief,
being hired by the fairest Prospect of great Rewards to Curse them; But though it
were so much in his Will and Desire, yet it was not in his Power, GOD having
not only restrained him therein, but perfectly overruled him too, and made him
to Bless where he intended to Curse, and to speak Peace where he designed to
proclaim War, and to destroy.

2. The Truth of Solomon's Assertion will further appear, if we consider the
Occasion of GOD'S interposing and acting in this Manner: For it is in a Case,
that is very acceptable to him, and such as must of necessity incline him to
it; for which Reason therefore the Wise Man thus expresses himself, That from
the very nature of the Thing, they may see a Confirmation of the Truth of the
Assertion. Thus, therefore GOD himself appeals to Cain's own Reason and
Judgment, to determine this Matter, whether a good Action can possibly miss of
Acceptance with him, Genesis 4.7. He that pleases GOD cannot fail of being kindly
received, and plentifully rewarded by him. Now nothing pleases him better than
to see us always employed in well doing; its therefore called a Walking-worthy
of the Lord unto all pleasing, Col. 1.10. And doing that which is well pleasing
in his Sight, Heb. 13.21. Its therefore said of Enoch, who always walked thus
with God, and for which God took him to himself, that before his Translation he
had this Testimony that he pleased God, Heb. 11.5. St. John therefore makes
this the Ground of our Confidence, of being heard and answered in all our
Prayers, because we keep his Commandments, which he calls the doing that which
is well pleasing in his Sight, 1 John 3.22. So that it must needs be as the
Wise Man here says, since whatever pleases GOD must of necessity obtain from
him, whatever he has promised to it; for in this Case his infinite and
unalterable Love to Goodness must incline him to it, as well as his Justice,
and we may assure our selves: That he will do it when he is himself so
particularly concerned in it, when it is for his own sake as well as ours, that
he both promises and confirms it.

3. The Truth of this Assertion in the Text will yet further appear, from the
natural Tendency of the Thing it self, to the producing of this good Effect, as
well as to the engaging of the great GOD to concern himself in it; for there is
a plain Probability of it, as a subordinate Means from whence in the common and
ordinary Course of Things, it may well be expected: For which Reason St. Peter
appeals to the common Sense and Judgment of all Mankind to confirm it, 1 Pet.
3.13. Who is he that will harm you, if ye be Followers of that which is Good?
And therefore advises all Christians to have their Conversation honest amongst
the Gentiles; that whereas they speak against them as Evil doers, they may by
their good Conversation, which they shall behold, glorify God in the Day of
Visitation, Chap. 2.12. And in the Third Chap. of that Epist. Ver. 16. advises
them to have a good Conscience; that whereas they may meet with some that are
very apt to speak against them as Evil doers; they may be ashamed that falsely
accuse their good Conversation in Christ: For which Reason St. Paul also tells
us, Romans 14.18. That he who thus serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of Men. Yea, Solomon assures us, Prove. 3.4. That such shall find
Favor and Esteem before God and Man. And, indeed, a prudent and a pious
Conversation has such Charms, that it will make those that will not join with
us therein, yet commend and value us the more for it: And though they do not
intend us any Good, yet they will not easily be brought to do us any Harm: Nay,
St. Paul tells us, Romans 5.7. That they will rather harm themselves than us, and
will even venture their Lives for us, since whatever they may do for arighteous
Man, they will go to the utmost Length therein, for a good Man: For which
Reason the Elders of the Jews besought our Savior to help the Centurion's
Servant, for though his Master was not of their Communion, yet they knew him to
be a good Man, and ready to assist and encourage any good Work, even for those
that differed from him in Opinion and Judgment: For say they, Luke 7.4, 5. He
is for this Reason worthy of this Kindness that we ask; and we are able to give
good Proof of it, having often tried him, and have always found it so, and have
a standing Instance of it amongst us; for he loves our Nation, and has built
us a Synagogue.

Object. But to all this may be objected, what the Scriptures say, that good
Men shall be exposed to diverse Afflictions and Calamities, and be persecuted
and hated for their Goodness; for so our Savior tells his Disciples, Mat.
10.17, 18, 21, 22. They shall be that they shall not only be delivered up to
the Counsels, but that they shall be scourged in their Synagogues; yea, the
Brother shall deliver up the Brother to Death, and the Father the Child, and
that they should be hated of all Men for his Names sake* And that their
Persecutors should think that they did God service in the killing of them, as
he says, John 16.2. St. Paul also tells us, 2 Timothy 3.12. That all that will
live Godly in Christ Jesus, or according to the Christian Religion, shall, and
must expect to suffer Persecution; and what they thus assert, a Multitude of
good Men have found by Experience to be but too true. Nay, David expressly says,
Psalm. 38.20. That he had many powerful and implacable Enemies, that continually
rendered him Evil for Good, and were his Adversaries because he followed the
Thing that was Good. Thus it was also with the holy Prophets, Apostles and
Martyrs, yea, with CHRIST himself, and with a vast and innumerable Company of
his Followers, who all found it so too: But yet all these things do not so
fully contradict this Assertion, as to make the Truth and Certainty of it to be
questioned; for all this may be, and yet Solomon be in the Right too.
Therefore, to all this, I answer,

1. Temporal Promises are never to be understood strictly and absolutely, as
universally and always true according to the Letter, but as commonly so; and
therefore must still be taken in a Limited and Conditional Sense, with a
Reserve always to the Will and Pleasure of Almighty GOD, the Good of his
Servants, and the wise Ends of his Government; if it be for his Glory and the
Good of others, but yet so as always to conclude honorably for GOD, that he
never departs from the strictest Rules of Truth and Justice; and that if he
gives not the Thing promised, he will certainly give that which is better; for
he will in no Sense be worse than his Word; he may go beyond it, but he will
never come short of it.

2. He seldom sets any particular Time to this sort of Promises, but reserves
that to himself: And where he does not so, its a plain Indication that he
intends to take his own Time, which is always best, and that therefore we ought
to wait his Leisure.

3. But let me ask thee, O Man, whoever thou art, that make this Objection;
Have thou been as punctual in the Performance of all those Duties, that are
made the Condition of all these Promises, as thou art punctual and peremptory
in claiming the Performance of them? If so, my Soul for thine, he will
assuredly make it good to a Title, for he can never fail thee.

4. But let the Worst come to the Worst (as we commonly say) and admit, that
thou have been faithful, and yet have not found this to be true, let not this
be any Discouragement or Obstacle to the Perseverance in thy Duty still, for
there is another Life after this, and what is wanting here shall certainly be
abundantly made good to thee there: Which is always the Case of those, whom GOD
has thought sit to deliver so far into their Enemies Hands, as to lose their
Lives by their Power and Malice, or in any other Sense, to fall short of a
full, and perfect Enjoyment of their utmost Expectation here in this World: And
therefore, after the Apostle had brought in a whole Cloud of Witnesses to prove
this, he exhorts all Christians to run with Patience the Race that was set
before them, and to look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of their Faith, who
for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross and despised the Shame,
Heb. 12.1, 2. Let what will happen to us here, the Hope that is set before us
is as an Anchor, both sure and steadfast, and will be sufficient to stay our
Souls, and to keep them from sinking, or being shipwrecked in the greatest
Storms that can arise in the most Tempestuous Sea of all Worldly Persecutions
and Afflictions; For we shall not only arrive safely at that desired Haven, but
shall also be there both filled with Joy and crowned with Glory.

2. I shall apply this Assertion to this present and happy Occasion, for so I
must call it, and hope to make it appear to be so.

1. By showing that the Work we are engaged in, and are so desirous to promote,
is really and truly one of those Ways that please the LORD, nay, perhaps it
will be found one of those that are most pleasing to him, and that it is one of
the best Things that we can do. For,

1. It is certainly a good Work in it self, and must have the Approbation and
Esteem of all wise and good Men; The very Name of the Thing carries Honor and
Goodness in it, and wants for no other Testimony of its Worth and Excellency;
nay, its what the very worst of Men cannot but commend and wish for in others,
though they will not be brought under the Discipline of it themselves. They would
have no Body to debauch their own Wives and Daughters; nay, they will highly
resent it, and be ready to fight and kill any one that shall attempt it. They
would not have their Children bred to Lying or Thieving, nor their Servants
dissolute and false; and if they do not love to walk in the Ways of Religion
and Virtue themselves, yet they cannot but approve of those that do so, and
esteem them the more for it. They even stand in Awe of Goodness, and cannot
help having a very great Veneration for it, and forbear showing it upon
occasion. Those very Persons amongst us, that have showed any dislike to this
good Work that we are engaged in, I mean those of them that pretend to be of
our Communion, will, I know, readily grant, that the first Reformers of our
Church from Popery, were worthy of all Honor in all the Churches of the
Saints; and that their Name and Memory is precious; and that we ought always to
mention them with the greatest Deference and Respect. Now if that was so good a
Work, this certainly cannot be a bad one. Did those pious and good Men do so
well in Reforming the Church from Popery, and must they be thought to do ill,
that endeavor to reform it from Profaneness, especially now when we are under
the particular Obligations of that great Blessing it self, as well as the many
others since, to do all that we can therein? Is it not the Glory of our Church,
to be Virtuous as well as True, to be holy in Life, as well as sound in the
Faith? Well, therefore does the King's Proclamation charge those that are
Enemies to this Work with being a Reproach to our Religion, as well as a
Discredit to the Kingdom; and I may add especially to our Church, to which they
are indeed the greatest Scandal, whatever Boasts they may make of their being
some of the truest Members of it. Is this the Kindness to the best Mother in
the World? And are these the Effects of it? When and where did she ever give
the least Countenance or Encouragement to any such Practices, as you seem to
make her to allow of? Let none therefore from henceforth call themselves her
Sons, unless they mend their own Lives, and rejoice to see the same good Work
effectually carried on amongst all the rest of her Children: For till they do
so, they can never, I am sure, show any good Title to that Character and
Relation: They do in no wise belong to her, but rather to another Society,
which as we can take no delight to mention, so there will be no occasion for
it, since they and every Body else may see whose Children they are by the
Temper they are of, and the Works that they will do.

2. It is the Work of GOD, which he actually engages himself in, as well as
puts us upon. How does he continually, both in his Word and in his Works,
strive with Men to reclaim them, and to bring them by his Spirit back again
unto his Law? Insomuch, that we may say, as Isa. 5.4. What could have been done
more herein that he has not done? The whole Creation is a standing Instance of
it, and a visible Sermon to instruct us in it; which his Word plainly explains,
and his Providence particularly applies, in the most pathetical and convincing
Manner to all Mankind: What are his Kindnesses and Favors? What are his
Chastisements and Corrections, but so many powerful Motives, to prevail upon
us, to reform and amend as well as to demonstrate his particular Concern in
this Matter, by what he thus actually does in it?

3. It is the Work that he sent the Blessed JESUS into the World about, and
which he spent his whole Life in, as all may see that will but look into what
the Evangelists relate of him; yea, in which he sometimes acted in the same
Manner that you are excited to, when he whipped the Buyers and Sellers out of the
Temple, overthrew the Tables of the Money Changers, and the Seats of them that
sold Doves; and thereby forced them to desist from any further Profanation of
that Sacred Place, which had been dedicated to a better Use and Purpose, by
putting the Laws in execution, that had been formerly made against all such
Wickedness, and which expressly forbid the making GOD's House an House of
Merchandise: So far was he from being discouraged at the Objection of a private
Station, or from staying till the Magistrate called him to it, by putting him
into an Office that required it, that he puts himself upon doing the Work,
choosing rather to expose himself to their Censures, than to suffer a Work so
necessary at that time, and so serviceable to the Interest of Religion, to be
any longer neglected.

4. It is a Work that he imploys his best Servants in, and whom he has the
greatest Value for; Such are his Prophets and Apostles, his Saints, yea, his
Angels too; who, as Heb. 1.14. are therefore styled, Ministering Spirits,
because they are sent forth to minister to them that shall be Heirs of
Salvation. I need not tell you what a Value he puts upon all these, and how
dear they are to him; but you may easily see what Value he puts upon this Work,
and of what account he esteems it, when he calls forth and engages such Persons
as these in it. For, as when a Sovereign Prince sends a particular Favorite,
whom he delights to honor, upon any Foreign Embasie, we conclude by the
Quality of the Person, and the great Affection that his Prince bears him, that
the Business he goes about is exceeding great and honorable, for else a meaner
Person might have been sent as well: So we may by the same Rule judge truly of
this Matter, and conclude, that the Work must be great in it self, and of high
Esteem in the Sight of GOD, or else such eminent Persons, and so well beloved,
would not have been employed in it.

5. It is a Work that he has signally owned, and remarkably blessed; and that
not only in those that have been particularly called to it, but in those also
that have voluntarily offered themselves to the Promoting of it. Such as
Phineas, of whom the most honorable mention is made, both by Moses and the
Psalmist, and upon whom the greatest Blessings were entailed: For Moses tells
us, That what he did in executing Judgment upon Two of the greatest and most
scandalous Offenders, was out of Zeal to GOD, and Love to his Country; and that
therefore God would give him his Covenant of Peace, and that it should include
his Posterity too, and prove the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, Numb.
25.11, 12, 13. But David goes further, and not only commends the Fact as a due
Execution of Justice, but relates the happy Issue and Event of it, in stopping
of a grievous Plague, by which GOD himself showed his Approbation of it in the
highest manner that could be: But tells us also, that Posterity shall always
speak of him with Honor, and not only justify the Fact in him, but esteem the
Zeal that he expressed therein most worthy of Imitation: For, it shall, says
he, Psalm. 106.32. be counted unto him for Righteousness unto all Generations
for evermore. Not that the Fact it self is to be imitated by us, till we can
show the same Authority that he had, and demonstrate that we have the same
Spirit to call us to it, that so eminently appeared in him: But the same Zeal
is certainly to be brought into Example, and is most worthy to be followed upon
all Occasions. Is not good Nehemiah also another Instance of this? who for
putting himself upon this good Work, and seeking thereby the Welfare of his
Country, in repairing the Temple, as well as rebuilding the City, and in
restoring Religion, when he had brought back the People, was highly honored,
and remarkably owned, and blessed by GOD for what he had done therein;
Insomuch, that he does himself beg to be always dealt with accordingly for time
to come, saying, Neh. 13.14. Remember me, O my God, concer. ^^ing this, and
wipe not out my good Deeds, that (...) have done for the House of my God, and
for th^^ Offices thereof. And does not St. James also give us as great a
Character of this Work as can be desired? When he speaks of it as a Thing that
is as highly meritorious and commendable as the Saving of a Soul from Death,
and procuring Pardon for a Multitude of Sins: For so he expressly styles it,
Jam. 5.19, 20. Brethren, If any of you do err from the Faith, and one Convert
him, Let him know, that he which converteth a Sinner from the Error of his Way,
shall save a Soul from Death, and shall hide a Multitude of Sins. And may I not
add to all this, the Things that your Eyes have seen, and the wonderful Success
that GOD has given to this your pious Undertaking, since you first began, when
they were but few of you, and those in a manner Strangers, and without Power
and Authority in the Land, that then ventured upon it: For how have your
Numbers been increased, and your Hands been strengthened, and your Work made
prosperous ever since, through the good Hand of your GOD upon you? And what
Encouragement does this give you to go on therein with your utmost Vigor and
Zeal, not doubting but that he will still own you in it, as he has hither to
done.

6. It is a Work which the greatest and best of Men have not thought it beneath
them to do their utmost in; as will sufficiently appear from the Quality and
Stations of those that have voluntarily offered themselves to it, and been most
zealous in it. Such as Moses and Joshua, David and Solomon, Asa and Jehosaphat,
Hezekiah and Josiah, who were all Persons of the highest Rank and Order, and in
the most eminent Place and Power, and were all of them as truly Great for
undertaking this Work, as for the Stations they were in, and the Diadems which
they wore.

7. It is the very End and Design of all their Greatness; for they are made so
only, that they may do the more Good; they are none of them raised to those
Heights to serve themselves, but to serve the Public; not to be gazed at and
admired by some, but to be useful unto all that they can have any Influence
upon, especially in the suppressing of all manner of Wickedness and Vice: For
so the Two great Apostles tell us, that they are the Ministers of God for Good;
and that they bear not the Sword in vain, but are to execute Wrath, and inflict
Punishment upon those that do Evil, Romans 13.3, 4.1 Pet. 2.13, 14. The wise Man
also tells us, Prove. 20.8. That a King that sets upon the Throne of Judgment
scatters away all Evil with his Eyes, will put all Wickedness out of
Countenance, and drive it away from him, by frowning upon those that allow
themselves in it, and by smiling upon those that are virtuous; and thereby so
distinguish upon all Occasions Men of Piety and Virtue from all others, by
particular Marks of their Royal Favor, that they may give the greatest
Encouragement to Religion and Morality.

8. It is that which GOD is highly offended with the Neglect of, and which he
has not only severely threatened to punish, but has actually destroyed whole
Kingdoms and Nations, as well as private Families for: As we may plainly see in
the Case of old Eli, as well as of that of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah.
None could give better Advice than Eli did, none could more pathetically
Admonish and Reprove others for any Wickedness, than he did his Sons for
theirs; But because he did not act as a public Magistrate, as well as a
private Parent, and interpose his Authority to restrain them, by putting the
Laws in Execution against them, he is made a terrible Example of the
mischievous Consequence of all such Remissness; for it was the Occasion of his
own Death, and the Cutting off his House, and reducing his Posterity to a
Morsel of Bread. How far this also contributed to the Destruction of Israel and
Judah, you may soon see by what the Prophet Jeremiah says, Chap. 5.7, 8, 9.
concerning GOD's Resentment of their Wickedness, and his Abhorrence of their
Nation for it: For after he had charged them with ^he greatest Wickedness, that
abounded everywhere amongst them, he expostulates the Case thus with them; How
shall I pardon thee for this? Shall I not visit for these Things? Shall not my
Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Yes, certainly it shall; and so at
last it was.

2. I shall further apply this Assertion in the Text to this present Occasion,
by showing that it shall have the same Effect; and indeed, if we consider this
Case under the same Limitations and Allowances, that we have done all others of
this Nature, we may with as good Reason expe^^ the same Success; for if we thus
Please the Lord, he will make our Enemies to be at Peace with us.

1. They shall be so far at Peace with us, as to allow of the Testimony which
we bear at any time against their Wickedness; they shall publicly own the
Truth of what they are accused of, though it be in it self never so shameful;
yea, though for a considerable time they may reproach their Accusers with
Falsehood therein; yet when they come to be confronted with them, they shall not
be able to reply against the Charge, or to deny the Truth and Honesty of it.

2. The, shall be at Peace with our Persons, so as not to attempt the doing
them any harm, though they live near us, and may have fair and frequent
Opportunities for it, yet their Hands shall be so tied to their good Behavior,
that they shall not be able to hurt us; yea, though their Hearts are enraged, and
their Mouths are opened against us, and their Tongues let loose upon us, yet
they shall not be suffered to do us any Injury. He that made the hungry Lions
thus to be at Peace with Daniel; and the devouring Fire with the Three Children
that were cast into it, will do the same by us and them, and make our most
potent and enraged Enemies rather to treat us well, than by any means to harm
us.

3. They shall be at Peace with our Proceedings, and the Methods we take to
reclaim them in their Judgments, and in their Consciences, though they are not so
at present in their Affections, and in their Passions: These may, perhaps,
prompt them to accuse us of Falsehood and Perjury, of Malice and Envy, of Hatred
and a revengeful Spirit, or of some base and ugly Design; but they shall in a
little time discharge us of all these, and own the Integrity and Justice of all
that we do in this Matter, and esteem us as their best Friends, and be ready to
acknowledge as much to their Intimadoes: Nay, when they come to cool and
consider, as they will do, they cannot but justify us to themselves, though they
will not perhaps so readily own it to every Body else. For the Wise Man tells
us, that this shall certainly have such an Ascendant over them, as to force
them to esteem us more than those whose Conversation they like better, but now
find to have been much worse: For he that rebukes a Man, shall afterward sind
more Favor than he that slattereth with the Tongue, Prove. 28.23.

4. They shall be brought to Repentance and Amendment, they shall be actually
reclaimed from those Vices that they have been formerly so much addicted to;
and when they are so, no one can doubt of their being perfectly at Peace with
us; for they shall acknowledge the Kindness we have done them, and be thankful
to GOD for us, and continually enjoy the Comforts of so blessed and desirable a
Change.

5. They shall be so entirely at Peace with us, as to come over to us, and help
us; they shall actually join with us, and assist us in carrying on the same
Work: They shall give the same Testimony to their entire Reconciliation to all
our Proceedings in this Matter, that S. Paul did to those, that were afraid to
receive him, as doubting the Truth of his Conversion, in offering themselve,
now to support that, which they endeavored heretofore to destroy: And I wish
they could give the same Satisfaction of their Integrity that he did, and by
their after Diligence and Zeal, make amends for their former Remissness and
Opposition: But whither they do so or no, this we are sure of, they shall thus
far own us, by joining with us, when something extraordinary shall even force
them to it; As Talnai, and the rest of his Confederates did, that had
endeavored all they could to obstruct the Building of the Temple; but when a
Proclamation came from Court, to require them to lend all the Assistance they
could to the Building of it, very readily complied, and did all that they could
to the Carrying on of so good a Work, Ezra 6.13, 14, 15. And I doubt not, but
the King's Proclamation has done the same also amongst us, and more I am
confident it will do. But whither all or any of these Things be so or no, this
I am sure of;

6. The next Life shall reconcile them to us, and make them approve of what we
have done, though they never had a good Thought of it before: Nay, perhaps, may
have no Benefit by it, or Comfort in it then; for it shall be then with them
(if they shall be so unhappy as to have their Enmity last so long) as our
Savior says it shall be with those, that shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
and many others of GOD's faithful Servants, whom they have perhaps here
despised, in the Kingdom of Heaven, and they themselves thrust out; they shall
have nothing to object, either to the one or to the other, but must acknowledge
the Justice of GOD in both, though they themselves have no share in his Mercy.

3. And Lastly, I shall apply this Assertion in the Text yet further to this
present Occasion, by adding something by way of Direction and Encouragement to
this good Work. Encouragement you have enough from what has been already said
from the Nature of the Work it self, the Acceptableness of it unto GOD, and the
Success that it shall have: For your Direction therefore in it, that it may
prevail and prosper, give me leave rather to remind you of what you have done
already, and then to inform or direct you further.

Go on you pious and generous Souls in this blessed and honorable Work, as you
have hitherto done; 1. With that Prudence and Judgment that has appeared in all
your Actions, when they come to be rightly understood, and the Reasons and
Methods of all their Proceedings to be fairly heard: For I dare be bold to say,
that when those just and necessary Allowances are made, which all Humane
Actions require, especially in Men of such different Tempers and Inclinations,
Educations and Ways of Living as you are of, there will be found as much of
this, as in any public Undertaking whatsoever. 2. With that Courage and
Constancy, which has been hitherto invincible, and has stood out against the
greatest Difficulties and Discouragements: And long may it do so, till it makes
you more than Conquerors, because always able to triumph in Christ Jesus, by
reason of the continual Success that you meet withal therein. 3. With that
Temper that I have always observed to be very commendable in you, from that
Mixture of Moderation and Gentleness, that has appeared in the greatest Efforts
of your Zeal. And 4thly, and Lastly, With that Uprightness and Integrity of
Heart, that has put to silence all your Accusers, when they have not been able
to fasten one base and unworthy, one selfish and sordid Action or Design upon
you. Go on then, I say, in this Godlike and Excellent Work, making, as you have
all along done, the Laws of the Land the Rule of all your Proceedings, and the
Glory of GOD, the Interest of Religion, and the Salvation of Souls, the End of
them. And may the great GOD of Heaven and Earth, which is always delighted in
such Services as these, not only add to your Number, but crown all that you do
therein, with all that Success, and with all those other Blessings that so
great and so good a Work does every way deserve;

Through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom with the Father, and the Eternal Spirit,
Three Persons, but One God, be all Honor and Glory, now and for ever more.
Amen.

FINIS.

