A THANKSGIVING SERMON, Preached upon the Fifth of November, 1689.

By Ben. Jenks. Rector of HARLEY in Shropshire.

Licensed, November the 15. 1689.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took, and are to be Sold by R. Tailor near
Stationers' Hall. 1689.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Francis Lord Viscount Newport Of BRADFORD, TREASURER
OF Their Majesty's Household, And one of the Lords of His Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
I Must confess the Presumption of this Address, to seek so great a Patronage
for so small a Performance: But when nothing would satisfy some, without my
consenting now to appear thus openly; never durst I think of exposing so
invidious Reflections, a Name remarkable for nothing but your Honor's Favors,
under any weaker shelter than that which I now make bold to beg. But if what is
here submitted to common Inspection, may find no further Approbation, but the
bare forgiveness of so piercing a Judge of Style and Sense; I may harden my self
against the Shock of all other Censures. And the same Charity which was the
Temptation to this Impression, will, I hope, answer for all Imputations on your
Honor's Judgment, for pardoning a Piece so Mean and Dilute: Which if it must
carry the sound of my despicable Name, any further than the little
Circumference wherein it is already known; I shall think it to good purpose
only so far, as it serves to exemplify the thankfulness which I Preach; in
Publishing the continued Munificence of such a truly Noble Patron, as, for
above Twenty Years, I have found. To tell of which, I am Conscious, I do my
self too great an Honor: But I had rather be charged with Ostentation of such
Favors, than really incur the worse Guilt of Ingratitude for them.

My Lord, I have not recovered the Transport, which the late surprising
Redemption gave me; and while I am entertaining my self with such da^ling
Splendors, (as kind Heaven darted in upon us at the Critical Juncture, when a
complication of ill Omens were presaging the most Dismal Night ready to Involve
us:) I humbly beg some Indulgence, if (like the reputed Head of Infallibility
himself, in the Transfiguration,) I speak some things more Warm and
Affectionate, than Exact and Apposite. But whatever Ecstacy the Wonder and Joy
of this Reviving Scene have occasioned, yet of this I cannot choose but be
extremely sensible, that (besides my own biggest Obligations,) there is a just
Debt of the highest Honor and Gratitude, for which the Public is Responsible
to Your Lordship, for your Conduct, so Wise, and Worthy your Noble Self, in
that Happy Settlement, whereof we are glad. And however my forwardness to
express the Pleasure I have taken in it, may already have rendered me as cheap
as I can be, in the Opinion of such as look with an Evil Eye upon that very
thing, which others most cheerfully embrace with all thankfulness; yet cannot I
omit any fit Occasions of Declaring, That with all my Soul, I do Bless the God
of Heaven for it. And as your Honor has still been most deservedly great in my
Thoughts, on many other Considerations; so in particular, for your Honor's
Favor to that Revolution, which eases the Minds, and exhilarates the Spirits
of all Well-Willers to the Reformed Religion, I am more than ever,

My Lord, Your Honor's ever Obliged, Most Humble Servant, Ben. Jenks.

PSALM. XXXIV. 3. O Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name
together.


WHat was said of that Concourse, Act. 19.32. cannot surely be applied to any
of our Congregations this memorable Day; That the Assembly was confused, and
the bigger part knew not wherefore they were come together. The Fifth of
November is a Day better known, as it is a Day still to be much observed to the
Lord of all our Israel in their Generations. And tho it were quite struck out
of our Kalendars, yet would it never be razed out of our Memories; especially
now that another wonderful Eighty Eight has made it the Era of our new
Deliverance: And last year the happy Man of Gods right Hand, whom he made so
strong for himself, set foot on our Land the very same Day, as the
Powder-Plotters were found digging our Graves under it. This has not only
afresh riveted the Memory of it in our Minds, but by reduplicating the occasion
of our Thanksgiving, has made it to England now a high Day indeed, the day of
the gladness of our Hearts, because the day of our double escape; not only from
the old Monk's Gunpowder, but from a new sort of Jesuits Powder, whereof they
had laid large Trains, not only to blow up a single Bishop, and a College, but
the very Foundations of all our Church.

To themselves indeed, (as the Event has made them sensible) a sorry Blast it
proved, to blow off even their Head; but to us a good Wind, that cleared our
Land of the Locusts, which were got so busily at their Work, to spoil all the
envied Prosperity of this Flourishing Church.

And as we cannot forget it to their Infamy, saying with the Prophet, Jer.
20.11. The Lord is with us as a mighty terrible One, therefore our Persecutors
shall stumble, and they shall not prevail nor prosper, but be greatly ashamed,
and their everlasting Confusion never be forgotten. As we cannot, I say, but
remember both the later and former Plots, to the loss of all their Credit in
this Nation: (However the Woman in Scarlet may have a Face of the same die with
her Garb, to leave no room for any modest blush;) So must we not forget to put
an honorable note of distinction upon this Day, to the glory of God's singular
Mercy; and to the exciting in our selves all the most thankful Acknowledgments.
Nor thinking it enough only to affect our selves, unless we endeavor to beget
the like Resentments in others: As those, 2 Kings 7.9. that said one to
another, We do not well, this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our
peace. ('It Is far from well to be listless and dumb to the Divine Praises, upon
such lowdspeaking Occasions:) And like the devout Psalmist here, who calls upon
all about him, to bear a part with him, O Magnify, etc.

Of such excellent Matter and Composition is this Psalm, that Mollerus applies
to it in particular, what St. Basil says of the Holy Scripture in general: It Is
like a Well which flows the purer, the more it is drawn, and the oftener
attentively read, the sweeter it will be found.

It was composed upon a wonderful escape which David had, when flying,
affrighted from one danger, he fell into another; and to avoid the Rage of King
Saul, betook himself to the Court of King Achish: As more afraid of a stingy
Father-in-Law, than of all those very Philistims, whose great Champion he had
lately slain, and with him all their hopes. 'Twas deep distress, (we may
imagine,) that made him act as one bereaved of his Senses, to go cast himself
into such Hands. But whatever was his design in coming there, supposing he had
his Wits about him still; yet as soon as he perceived himself to be discovered,
he thought it then time to renounce them: and by the Artifice of personating
one distracted before the King of Gath, he got himself a quick Discharge: For
the King capitulating with his Servants for bringing such a Mad man to him, and
ordering him to be turned out, so he was at his liberty again, 1 Samuel 21.10. to
the end.

It may be questioned, whether David did well so to act as a Cheat? But if the
counterfeiting were his Frailty; yet that Deceit offers to our Observation this
Truth, That God may deliver, even when men err in the means of Deliverance: And
then his Glory is not the less, but greater still, not to blast all the
Success, because of some faulty Instruments. Tho it be the Lord's doing, yet if
he please to make use of men's Concurrence to effect it, Men will be like
themselves; and no wonder then if there be something in it that may lie open to
Objection. He that can serve the ends of his Glory upon Sin it self, and makes
even the Wrath of Man to praise him; will not be so extreme to mark what his
Servants do amiss, as severely to exact all their Failings; but mercifully
allow for the Infirmity of our Frame, and the pressure of our Temptations, and
not presently curse every good Design, because its Promoters may make some
false steps in their Conduct.

But no sooner did David find himself got off the Precipice, and begin to
reflect on the mercy of so strange a Preservation, but he thought it was time
to look up and bless the good Hand that had wrought his Deliverance. And so he
breaks out in his Benediction, Ver. 1, 2. I will bless the Lord at all times,
his praise shall ever be in my mouth. My soul shall make her boast in the Lord;
the humble shall hear thereof and be glad. He knew that all the Servants of God
who came to the notice of it, would be exceedingly affected with it; and
therefore such he invites to participate with him in the Thanksgiving: not
thinking himself single sufficient for so great a Service, he summons in the
whole Church to take a share. O magnify the Lord with me, etc.

Where we have to consider,

1. The Example and pious Practice of this Royal Prophet; it being implied,
that he did magnify the Lord, and exalt his Name.

His Exhortation and earnest Desire expressed, that others would accord and
strike in with him; O magnify the Lord with me, and let, etc. I shall speak of
it, First, as every one's Duty in particular; and then of its discharge in
Conjunction with others. But to state the thing in its proper Notion, before I
urge our Obligation to it; let me show what it is to magnify the Lord, and
exalt his Name, and how we are to perform it: And afterward what reason we have
all to apply our selves to it.

To magnify the Lord, (in the letter) is to make him great; and to exalt his
Name, is to raise the honor of his Works and Attributes, and all the Revelation
of God, whereby he has made himself known to the World; his Name being himself
as so discovered. Now here we are at a loss in the very entrance of our Work,
for that this thing does not look feasible at all, nor likely for us ever to
acquit our selves of it. To make the Supreme, the greatest and best, higher,
greater, or better; alas, we are not able, it is utterly impossible. Let us not
mistake in arrogating to our selves that which is quite out of our reach, as if
we, diminutive bits of God's Creation, could enrich the Exchequer of Heaven, or
make him, to whom we owe our very selves, beholden to us in the least. Never
must any man think so to be profitable unto God; for in this Consideration, his
Name is exalted far above all Blessing and Praise. And nothing of our ascribing
can make any manner of addition to his Glory: No, it is not at all in himself,
but only in our own Minds, and others Esteem, that we are capable of greatning
and advancing the most Glorious and ever Blessed God, as the sweet Singer of
our Israel expresses it, In my heart, though not in Heaven, I can raise thee.
We cannot make him, but his praise glorious, i. e. when we publish the Name of
the Lord, and ascribe greatness to our God, Deuteronomy. 32.3. When we conceive in our
selves any worthy Sentiments, becoming the Divine Majesty and Goodness; are
filled with an admiring Sense of his Transcendent Excellencies, and a grateful
Sense of his loving kindness: and endeavor, all we can, to propagate the same
magnificent and fair Idea to others: This is the utmost whereof we are capable,
to glorify God in such aggranding Representations, as show him somewhat like
himself.

Nor must we fondly imagine, that he who lacks nothing, affects to be honored,
like sinful Men, whose very defectiveness sets them a gasping after Vainglory:
to be thought of higher and better than their Deserts. The God of all Glory and
infinite Perfections, as he cannot need the frail Breath and good Words of his
poor Creatures; so it is infinitely below the most High, to intend what even a
wise Man would scorn, only to fill others Minds with wonder, and be celebrated
in the World.

His Glory shining with a constantly equal Luster to his own Satisfaction,
whether Men observe it or no: As long as he is infinitely pleased with the
beauty of his own Actions, He concerns not himself whether perverse incompetent
Judges approve or dislike them; (any farther than they stand obliged by their
own Duty and Felicity.) Nor can we suppose him delighted in our Applauses, but
only as our Well-doing is to him Well-pleasing, and the Justice of the thing
requires, that we should render to him all Glory, from whom we receive all
Good. For it is dishonest indeed as well as unthankful, not to own whence we
have every thing that is worth the having; it is sacrilegiously to pilfer from
him, what of all Reason and Right belongs to him. Tho it accrues nothing to his
benefit, yet it is Robbery for us to embezzle it: And when his Name is polluted
in the sight of the Heathen, (which in it self, its true, cannot suffer any
Eclipse,) tho no Affronts can hurt him, yet ought they to wound his Servants:
Ill Reflections on their Lord must be as a Sword in their Bones, and the
Reproaches of them that reproach Him fall upon them.

According to the Greek Father's Paraphrase, (...). S. Bas. Hom. in Psalm.
He magnifies the Lord, who with a large Mind, and profound Contemplation
surveys the great Works of the Creation, that through the Magnitude and Beauty
of the things made, be may steal some glimpses of the glorious Author of their
being. And suitable hereto it is to form and preserve in our Souls such
reverent Apprehensions of the Deity, as may humble us into the Dust at the
remembrance of his Glory, to whom all Nations are counted even less than
Nothing and Vanity. Not to dress a God in our Fancy, such a one as our poor
selves, to worship our own misconceits instead of the True God; who if we Adore
not after the Canon of of his own Word, it is not so much honoring him, as
humoring our selves, with the Will Worship not required at our hands.

Tho here we need not seruple those lowly Forms of Address, which speak us
sensible of the vast disproportion between us, and our Glorious Maker; whose
least angry Finger on the Wall could so dash a great King in the midst of all
his Jollity, Dan. 5. that the thousand Lords his Guests, and all his
Concubines, with the richest Fare, and Wine, and Music, could no more recover
him to his late cheerfulness, than they could cease to admire his present
Dejection.

Nor is God less to be honored in his Merciful, than in his Majestic
Relations; those allaying the brightness of his Glory, and inviting us out of
our Dust, as with a Scepter extended, to warrant our Approaches. Indeed then is
he most highly honored, when most dearly loved; for tho Fear may dwell with
Hatred, Honor is still the product of Love; which sets upon its Object the
greatest value, and entertains it in the highest Room of the Soul.

But we do rather Scandalize than Magnify the God of Love: If we fancy him in
such horrid Appearances as fill us more with dread than love; so that in our
Worship we are only dragged to him, and never taken up delightfully with him;
looking upon him, only as the Malefactor at the Bar eyes the Scarlet Robe,
ready to appall the last residue of his Hope with a killing Sentence.

We must not endure any such Opinions of God, as reflect disparagement on the
Infinite Goodness, which so eminently declares his Greatness, in doing such
noble works of Mercy, as all the Power in the World could not, and all the
Patience in the World besides would not do.

But when we behold him as the Father of Mercies, and Fountain of all Goodness,
the most amiable Being, whose Love is as boundless as his Nature; from which
Love the mighty Frame of Nature sprang, and who so loved the World even when
lost, that he took the most amazing method for our recovery, to make us gainers
even by the sad losses of our Fall; putting our Salvation in much safer Hands,
than when it hung only upon our own Free Will, and giving the surest word of
Promise, that he will put his Spirit in his People, which shall cause them to
walk in his Statutes, and his Fear in their Hearts, that shall not suffer them
to depart from Him: (so that we are kept now by the power of God himself
through Faith to Salvation.) By this sweet Contemplation of his first loving
us, the Divine Love is apt to limn its own Effigies on our Souls, and
powerfully incline us to him, as the blessed and only center of their Rest.

And what greater thoughts of God can we conceive in our Minds, than to look
upon him in Christ reconciling the World to himself, by that Redeeming Love,
(which well may be styled Inestimable,) whose prevalent strains changed our
Judge into our Advocate, and made him pursue his Enemies with nothing but
Bounty, and compass them about only with Songs of Deliverance? Here the
heavenly Critics themselves can, but (...), lift up the Curtain to pry into
this Mystery of Divine Love; but even the Tongues of Angels are at a loss, when
they would turn the Admiration into Expression.

Never can we more highly exalt the Name of God, than to show him to the World
in such lovely Representations, not only as the greatest, but the best, that
has done such unspeakable things, to approve his love, and engage ours; and
still supplies a world of Creatures, that all depend on him for their Being,
and every Comfort. There are such Pleonasms and Redundancies of his kindness,
that a great deal still falls even to their share, who will never so much as
thank him for it.

And thus we do Magnify the God infinitely Good, when we stand in admiration
of such Benignity, that we should have any comfort with our lives, when we have
done so much to spoil all with our sins! Yea, that not a minute should pass but
brings us a new favor from above; and gives us more assurance still that he
desires our felicity, and cannot design our ruin: who is love it self, and
hates nothing that he has made: delights not even in the death of sinners, nor
is willing that any should perish; indeed suffering none to perish for the
want, but only for the contempt of mercy; who stands not watching for
advantages against us, but in fatherly consideration of our Frame, makes
merciful allowance for our Infirmities: and all Dispensations still carry so
sweet a savor of good Will to Men, that not only when he gives us the smiles
of the World, it is to draw us to himself with such Cords of Love: but even when
he threatens, it is to prevent the evils denounced: yea when he touches with
the Rod, it is but to reduce us into the way of Bliss, and supersede our eternal
smart. And thinking thus well of God, we do magnify the Lord, and exalt his
Name.

To do all to the Glory of God, (an Expression oftener used than understood) is
still to propose this End to our selves, that the great and good God may be
more known and admired, revered and loved, believed and obeyed by us and all
Men: aiming and endeavoring with whatever we are Masters of, and all the
interest we have in the World, to do service to the Truth, and promote the
credit of God's holy Religion, that it may look like it self in us, and the way
of Truth may not through our means be evil spoken of.

And when by due Methods we earnestly pursue our own felicity, so we bring God
the greatest Glory; But that we should be willing to perish our selves for the
advancement of his Glory, (as some have screwd it up;) is a thing so harsh and
extravagant, that the very naming it is enough to disprove it, seeing God has
wrought our Salvation in the frame of his own Glory, and he can have no ends in
our serving him, but that we may thereby serve our own best advantage. And this
is the greatest honor he expects from us, that we should do all we are able to
promote our own and others happiest Interests, in believing the infallible
Truth of his holy Word, and making the greatest Conscience in all things to be
determined by it. Nor only giving a total deference to his Will, but reposing
all our bliss in his Hands. For we cannot honor one more than to reckon him
worthy in all things to be hearkened to, and sole-sufficient to be relied upon,
as the wisest and ablest, best and willingest, to do us good.

But the Properties of this Eucharistical Sacrifice, and after what manner we
are to offer it, (that it may be such wherein God is well pleased,) we may
gather from the Practice of the Man after his own Heart, here in the Context.

1. It must be with the Soul, from the Altar of a Sensible Heart. My Soul shall
make her boast of God, Ver. 2. To glory in him, is one way of giving glory to
him: (And well may we value our selves upon the honor to be obliged by such a
One.) And that this glorying may Imitate the Blessed Virgin's, whose Soul
magnified the Lord: It must not be a verbal flash, like the crackling of Thorns
on fire, but making melody in our Hearts to the Lord. Indeed if the Heart is
not thankful, we are not at all thankful. The most pompous Halelujahs and
Magnificats are no more than sounding Brass, and the tinkling Cymbal, if not
the over-flowings of enlarged Hearts. The dead praise not the Lord: Hearts dead
in sin must needs be dead to the Divine Praises. And when matters so stand
within, none of the Rhetoric of our complemental Harangues (speak we never so
good of his Name,) makes any Music at all in his Ears, who searches the
Hearts, and requires Truth in the inward parts. Tho cavity of Instruments is
requisite in common Service, yet here hollow Instruments sound harsh and
hideous; and while they offer to praise God, only divulge their own shame. Yet,
2. Tho it must not be only a Lip-Service, we must not refrain our Lips neither,
but let our mouths show forth his praise. It shall ever be in my mouth, V. 1.
It Is not to imprison up our Thanks, so as to stifle the sense we have of his
Favors, nor hide his loving kindness in our Hearts, making them as the silent
Grave to swallow up all: But out of their Abundance we must be speaking to his
honor, and not think it will sully our Speech to mention the loving kindness of
the Lord. When our bodies are his Temple, and our Tongues the living Bells
articulately to sound his Praise; how can we better employ the speaking
Faculty, than in celebrating his Goodness that gave it? What we are transported
with, we can hardly forbear to speak of, if we are full of it, it is apt to
float on our Tongues: And if the Mercies of God affect our Hearts, it is fit we
should express the same, both to discharge a due Debt our selves, and also to
kindle the like Flame in others.

Indeed no Expression here can be too much, that is without Affectation and
Hypocrisy: Tho we not only extol him with our Tongues, Psalm. 66.17. But our
Tongues speak of his praise even all the day long, Psalm. 35. last. And we
abundantly utter the memory of his great Goodness, (in a pious Vein flowing
from the good Treasure of the Heart,) accustoming our selves to speak of the
glorious Honor of his Majesty, and of his wondrous Works; to speak of the glory
of his Kingdom, and talk of his Power; to make known the Fame thereof to the
Sons of Men. As with Panegyric pomp of Words, this Sacred Orator sets it
forth, Psalm. 145. And even this cheap Oblation (for which we go not to the
Flock or the Field,) shall not fail of a good acceptance above, when according
to the Exhortation, Heb. 13.15. We offer to God the fruit of our Lips, giving
thanks to his Name.

3. To bless the Lord at all times, as Ver. 1. not only by fits, as it pleases
us, or when extorted from us upon some occasions extraordinary, but with such a
Heart, Herbert.
whose Pulse may be his Praise. Our holy Living is the most effectual
Thanksgiving. For so, while we live we shall praise the Lord, and sing praises
to our God whilst we have our Being, Psalm. 146.2. To the offering of Praise
therefore is presently subjoined, ordering the Conversation aright, Psalm.
50.23. And after he had asked, Who can show forth all his praise? immediately
he adds, Blessed are they that keep Judgment, and do Righteousness at all
times, Psalm. 106.2, 3. For as the Heavens (tho silent) are said to declare the
glory of God: (they are Preachers of his Praise,) because their vast and
beautiful Fabric, their constant and regular Motions, their sweet and powerful
Influences, tell the Supreme Majesty, the excellent Attributes, and glorious
Perfections of him that there inhabits: So when we justify the Divine Laws by
our Obedience, and thus stand up to attest their high Reasonableness and
Goodness, instead of repining at them as hard Sayings and heavy Burdens;
showing that really we do admire and applaud them for the blessed Products of
an infinite Wisdom and Love, to contrive and effect our everlasting Happiness:
Then do we give them the best Commendation, to make all enamored with those
Sacred Institutions, which they not only hear set off in hollow Encomiums, but
see produce such happy Effects. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear
much Fruit, Jo. 15.8. The Fruits of Righteousness are by Jesus Christ, to the
glory and praise of God, Phil. 1.11. That Men may so taste and see, and bless
the Giver of such increase. I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the
Work which thou gave me to do, says our Blessed Savior. Joh. 17.4. Where he
intimates that the doing of God's Will, is the way to Hallow his Name: When
like the Luminaries above, that warm and move too, we send out the heat of
Divine Love, and regularly move in the sphere of Obedience; without which
indeed Honor is but an idle Complement, unless we so delight to do his Will,
that our desires like the Cherubims Wings stand displayed, ready even to spell
out his Pleasure, and prevent his Commands.

But a sad reckoning it would prove to us, should we count that we are
delivered to commit abominations, and make the bolder with God's Precepts,
because we have tasted so deep of his Mercies; as if his Goodness were our
Warrant to despise him. Thus licentious Men use to be worst when they fare
best, and in times of Festivity are the greatest Brutes; not knowing how to be
thankful and glad, without being wanton and mad. But such as fear the Lord are
called upon to praise him. Psalm. 22.23. And then do we most acceptably sing to
the Lord a new Song, when we apply our selves to lead a new Life; when we look
on our prosperity, not so much a reward for doing well, as an opportunity still
to do better; not an occasion to the flesh, but an obligation to abound in his
Praise.

The thansgiving of ill Men, it is but a fulsom harangue and offensive noise;
and indeed only reproaching the Name of God, to speak good of it, and do no
good as becomes those that profess it. Praise is comely for the upright, but
it is marred in the Mouths of the wicked. It is a Sacrifice, and none but holy
Persons are to officiate about holy things. As long as we live ungodly, we are
in no capacity to praise God sincerely: We never do it with all our hearts,
till we offer up our selves together with our thanks, and count a whole life
too little to be spent in his service, who has for ever obliged us to himself.

Now all the reason in the World have we thus to Magnify the Lord and exalt
his Name.

For 1. It is the very end of our Being. And what was said of Israel, Isa.
43.21. may be applied to us all, This People have I formed for my self, that
they should show forth my Praise. Man, as the Priest of this Inferior Creation,
is to offer up a general Sacrifice, in the name and behalf of all the rest; who
in their several ways give a tacit consent, and (as it were) say Amen to the
Oblation: And when dumb and negligent to praise the Lord, we not only wrong our
selves, but rob multitudes that would do it, had they but our faculties and
abilities to reason and express it. This is our Province, which the very frame
of our nature adapts us for, and even the whole Creation efflagitates and
expects it from us: And we not only stand for Ciphers, but carry as an
exorbitant rout, breaking our Ranks and disordering the World, if we celebrate
not his Praise who has so set us up.

When we make a Man as they call it, and he is looked upon as our Creature, whom
we have rendered considerable in the World; we are apt to think he can never
enough honor and thank us for it: But how do we cry out of the offensive
humor, if he be ashamed to own what we have done for him, and rather malign
us, for standing as an Eyesore, to upbraid him with the Memory of his former
low circumstances, and his present high obligations? And do not we lie under
the same imputation or worse, when we serve not the Ends and Interest of him
that in the fullest sense has made us? It Is utterly inexcusable not to pay him
the poor Tribute of our thankful acknowledgment, which is all we are capable of
rendering to the Lord, but to give him the glory of his own Gifts: Though we
cannot praise him according to the riches of his Grace, and the multitude of
his Mercies; yet it is fit we should do it to the utmost of those capacities and
abilities wherewith he has blessed us.

And when he has erected the World, not only as a spacious Theater to spread
far and wide his Fame, and the mighty Organ to resound his Glory; but chiefly
for the rich furnished Medium, through which to derive the overflowings of his
immense goodness, which can no more be confined than his Being; when 'twas not
to better himself or supply any need of his own, but all for our service and
benefit; with a wonderful redundancy of pleasures as well as necessaries, not
only to supply our want, but sweetly to entertain our very curiosity and
delight: Shall we make no grateful returns to him that gave us our Being and
every good of it, when he owed us nothing? Or should he make Creatures that
should forget themselves to be his Creatures; as if they were wholly
independent, to live at large, and regard no ones pleasure but their own; so
prostituting all those Noble Endowments, that accomplish them for the happiest
enjoyment of God himself, to serve nothing but some base Lust or silly Vanity?

2. We have not only capacity, to magnify the Lord and exalt his Name: but all
manner of obligations to it; even common justice binds us to render to all
their dues: And when by the grace of God we are what we are, there is the
highest equity, that to the glory of God we should do all that we do, and live
to him as we live by him; nor arrogate to our selves or ascribe to others, that
which is his peculiar Right. Well may we extol him, when he has done so for us;
that was well considered, Psalm. 30.1. I will extol thee, O Lord, for thou have
lifted me up. If it be rude not to honor such as have been kind to us, it is no
less than impious not to honor him that made them so: How many great Luminaries
else soever there be, all disappear at the Rising Sun; and all other
Benefactors must be even nullified to omnifie the Supreme.

Now in this gratitude there is the greatest justice as well as ingenuity; for
there ought to be a reciprocation of Courtesies, a due circulation in
Friendship, and we must take care it do not stagnate and stick at us. And where
the kindness of Noble Friends renders it impossible to retaliate, and absurd to
think of a compensation, (which were but to affront the generous Spirits that
oblige us;) yet he that is capable of no more, can be thankful, and espouse his
Benefactors Cause, Love and Honor their Persons, stand up for their Credit,
and be glad and forward to serve their Interests. And what indeed is our whole
Religion, but such Gratitude? Still acknowledging the Debt we are never able to
pay? All the dear Pledges of Gods Love are so many Mouths crying aloud for such
returns; and thanksgiving is but the echo of received Mercies: But how swinish
is it to devour the Blessings, and never look up whence they come? When it is
indeed no small endearment of every Mercy, (if we consider it) to receive the
same from such Hands: For if we prize a gift for the givers sake, how does it
add to the value of the Mercy, that the Most High so condescends to concern
himself in the care of us, and takes pleasure in our prosperity?

May our acknowledgments then bear some proportion to our engagements: For
great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised. Psalm. 48.1. 'Twere endless to
enumerate particulars, when we are so daily loaded with his benefits, they
oppress us with their multitude, tho the precious things give us no Burden at
all but what we delight in, and should count it heaviest not to bear.

3. As we are obliged, so by the goodness of it encouraged to it? It Is good to
sing Praises to our God. Psalm. 147.1. It Is so with all the names of Good; not
only a virtuous Good, doing the thing meet and right to be done; but as the
Psalmist reasons there, It Is pleasant and Praise is comely. It gives the pious
Soul a sweet satisfaction, like the pleasure which an honest Man takes in
paying his Debts. My Soul shall be satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness, and my
Mouth shall praise thee with joyful Lips. Psalm. 63.5. The most delicious Viands
are not more grateful to a Healthy Body, than the Praises of God are to a well
affected Soul. This raises us even into Heaven aforehand, to anticipate the
Anthems of the Celestial Quire; and this helps most effectually to casheir all
black prejudices against a serious practical Religion, (as a sour and
melancholy thing;) when sweet experience tells devour Souls the contrary, what
a joyful and pleasant thing it is to be thankful.

And how great is that Honor, to be taken up in the work of Angels? How much
for our own praise to praise him, that has given us both matter and hearts for
it? It Is no diminution at all, but the preservation of honor and addition to
it, for the highest on Earth to stoop lowly to the Supreme Majesty of the
World, who has promised to honor them that honor him.

And tho this Duty seems to have nothing of self in it, (as giving all unto
God;) yet is it indeed (as all the Duties of Religion,) much for our profit
every way; for that it not only secures the blessings of God to us, but
increases them still upon us; he thinking them well bestowed where they are so
well resented: And Praise provoking us also to an imitation of him whom we
extol, thus it has a tendency to assimilate us to the Divine Perfections, and
consequently to prepare us for the everlasting Glory; to bear a part with all
Angels and Saints, in the Admiration, Love, and Eternal Praise and Fruition of
God in his Heavenly Kingdom.

Thus as we are capable of magnifying the Lord, and obliged to it; so even in
point of our own best Interest, we ^^nnot but be sensible what reason we have
for it.

And now (suitable to the design of this day,) consider we the public
expression of it, and its discharge in conjunction with others; according to
the invitation here given, O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his
Name together.

He that was taken up even wholly in the Praises of God, himself, could not be
contented to enjoy so much sweetness alone; but as true goodness is ever
diffusive of itself, (and indeed does but still add to its own dimensions by
such Communication:) So was he for calling in partners to share with him in so
sweet an entertainment. After he had led the Chorus as Prefect of this Music,
he declares for a Consort in it, and gives not a cheap exhortation without his
own example: Nor is he for going in so good a way without company, but (to make
the Communion of Saints a point of practice, as well as an Article of Faith,)
he was for joining all the sparks to blow them up into a mighty Flame. And his
Apostrophe is not only to the Children of Sion, but it is All ye Lands make a
joyful noise to the Lord. Psalm. 100.1. 117.1. Praise the Lord all ye Nations,
Praise him all ye People: And that none might be slack and backward, he not
only calls on them, but upon God himself to quicken them. Psalm. 77.3, 5. Let
the People praise thee, O God: Yea, let all the People praise thee.

He was not only for giving thanks apart in private recesses, but for going
into the House of God, where Praise waits for him in Sion. Psalm. 65.1. I will
give thee thanks in the great Congregation, I will praise thee among much
People. Psalm. 35.18. To whisper thanks in corners is but a tacit kind of
denying received Benefits. Sen. de Benef. He cared not how many Witnesses he
had of his thanksgiving; not for ostentation of himself, but to excite an
Universal compliance of the Church. A good Man would lose much of the pleasure
of Heaven's Way, to move solitary in it: But here he gives the most charitable
instance of his sociable Nature, to draw all that ever he can along with him.

Indeed this is a kind invitation to Festivity as well as Duty; and here to
devout Souls a hint is enough, though to dull Brutes a spur is too little: But
to none can we offer a greater courtesy, than to importune their Society, in
so delightful a Path to their own Happiness. And such as stand off here, are
the most absurd of all Dissenters; and nothing fit to taste of that good, for
which they are too stiff to give thanks.

Nor did this eminent Servant of God think himself too high to assist with his
Inferiors in the Divine Worship; (that Spiritual Ordinary which levels all
before him, with whom is no respect of Persons.) So great a Prince was not
ashamed to own whence he received all: yea among the rest, he calls on the
Mighty to give unto the Lord Glory. Psalm. 29.1. For Princes and Grandees of the
World (that have most temptations to forget God and exalt themselves,) must lay
aside the consideration of their greatness, when they fall down and worship
before the Lord their Maker. No height in the World but must humble itself to
him, who is higher than the Highest; and compared with whose Omnipotence all
greatness else dwindles even to nothing. The Noblest Worthies in Heaven
themselves, do cast their Crowns down before the Throne of God, Rev. 4.10. and
that does but faster secure them on their Heads.

But Oh! how much are they out in their sense of honor, as well as defective in
their conscience of this duty, who offer to set up their own credit on the
ruins of God's Glory! Indulging to the Popish humor of assuming to self, and
Idolizing Creatures, in derogation from the God of our Lives, and of all our
Mercies. Truly Atheistical is it, so to live without God in the World; afraid
to own him, but ascribing all to a lucky hit, (this or that did the Work;) and
no mention of Him that works all in all.

When Men would be reputed great for being Ungodly, and like wild Horses, in
the carreer of their Impiety, cast dirt at their Owner, as if they were neither
in debt to him, nor in danger of him: As if it were below them, to own
subjection to him that made them, Servile not to be above Duty, and a
Diminution of their own Excellency to Magnify Him. And if Conscience extorts
from them any acknowledgments of God, they are in care that none but himself
may observe it, (who sees indeed that they are ashamed of him before Men, and
so he will be of them one day, before all the World:) Thus such as use to glory
in their Shame, are ashamed of their Glory too. And tho all a fire at any
disgraceful reflection on themselves, counting every thing less than flattery
an affront; yet this gives a notorious instance of their Bastardy (which is the
foulest Infamy) that they can so easy brook a contempt of the Heavenly Father;
thinking it fine to hear his Name Blasphemed, and his Word Burlesqued, and
never stirring to assert his Honor, as they would, to vindicate the good Name
of a Friend.

Well may they dread the Fate of Herod, to perish wretchedly, for not giving
God the Glory: Or to be sent with Nebuchadnezzar to School to the Brutes, to
learn to know their Owner: When they can live all upon his good things, and yet
scarce afford him a good Word. Right Brethren in Iniquity, to Cabal for
Mischief, and run eagerly to excess of Riot; to eat and drink and inflame Lust,
and contribute every one to heighten the Debauch; but none can find a Heart or
Tongue to recognize the blessed Founder of all their Comforts: Or no sooner is
any thing to his Praise set a foot amongst them, but it is frowned upon, droll'd
away, and hist out. Not so much as his Name must be mentioned unless in Oaths,
for fear of spoiling all good Company.

But besides this Profane Generation, (that instead of joining to Magnify the
Lord, do nothing but vilify, and would, if they could, even nullify God:
Instead of exalting his Name, acting as 'twere in perfect spite and defiance
of him, who has told us, he will not hold them guiltless that profane it:
Tossing that tremendous Name in their unhallowed Mouths, as a thing of naught,
and their Blessing and Praising is even nothing but Cursing and Damning.)

There are others, (a new sort of Nonconformists,) who peradventure will find,
that they have not done well to be so angry, to stand off from contributing to
make up this Harmony, to Magnify the Lord with the rest, and exalt his Name
together. When it is so good and pleasant for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity; and best and pleasantest of all to unite in the Praises of him who
obliges and blesses us all. No Good Fellowship in the World comparable to this,
when we can as readily concur to celebrate, as to participate the Blessings;
that the Church may go up with general Shouts and Acclamations, and the noise
of Axes and Hammers in the Temple may not drown the voice of Rejoicing and
Salvation. That what is as Life from the dead to some, may not be as the shadow
of Death to others.

And O that in this sense the Church would once cease to be Militant, and learn
at last to accord in beginning the Eternal Triumph, with one Mind and one
Mouth, to glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! O that Hearts and
Tongues, and Pens might all agree here: that some may not be snagling as Saws,
when others are running as oiled Wheels with enlarged Hearts! That we would not
postpone the Public Good to private Piques, nor show our selves so mighty
sollicitous for our own little concerns, as for the Glorification of the Power,
Wisdom, Mercy, and Faithfulness of God, in appearing, as he has done, for his
Church.

But O what a Soil is that, wherein the most auspitious Influences of Heaven
produce nothing but Briars and Thorns! How contrary is this to him that brings
good out of evil, when we are only for fetching evil out of good, and so full
of Discontent and Contradiction, that there is no room at all in us for the
Praises of God?

Some may think it a great matter to be quiet; that the Government is much
beholden to them, as extremely obliging, when they say nothing, but vouchsafe
only to hold their Tongues, and not load every one with Complaints, when the
truth is, they have all the reason in the World to give Thanks, instead of
making a Hubbub, as if sorely pinched and wronged.

But when every Malecontent must set up for a Pope, to make a whole Kingdom
answer it at their infallible Bar, and damn all the Country that are not for
driving just the same way as themselves: The same Pride that has mislead some,
will hardly suffer them to own that they have erred. And then in what
disposition are they to admire the Goodness, and gratefully commemorate the
Blessings of God, when they are All-a-mort, and even continually cruciating
themselves with the matters, to them, cross and offensive? Here they sit down
restive and averse to all Thankfulness, poring and hatching on their
Grievances, till they overlook all that the gracious Lord has done for them,
and grow not only rude and surly with Men, but sour and sullen even to God
himself. Instead of that cheerful Spirit of Thankfulness, which makes Society
easy and delightful, and sheds abroad the sweet Satisfaction, which is like
Oil and Wine, to facilitate and exhilarate our motions; they hang the head, and
tragically exaggerate the matters they take to be ill, and dolefully forebode
worse, to cast a damp on their own Spirits, and exasperate or deject all whom
they can influence.

And here every little busie-body fancies himself no less than an Atlas, to
bear up the Pillars of the Earth, and support a sinking Kingdom; betraying
nothing so much as Pride and Ill-humor, Envy and Vengeance, a cankered Breast,
and a raw sore Mind, unacquainted with the way of Peace. To lie barking at the
Sun and Moon, which God in our doleful distress, has raised up, to illuminate
and refresh our Land.

Thus Usurping Judges make bold to shoot their Bolts, and dogmatize after some
of their own preconceiv'd Measures; not allowing a step out of the common Road,
to unravel what others had so woefully perplexed. Like idle Spectators on the
Shore, stand censuring Mariners toiling in a Storm, for not observing every
Punctilio in Mood and Figure. They think Physic may be administered to a
wretchedly distempered Body, without any disturbance. When indeed considering
into what Exigencies a Jesuitical Conduct had cast us, well may we wonder and
bless the God who watches for good over us, that we are so well as we are, that
all is not desperate, and that any hopes of a better Regulation than those of
late, are yet before us.

No marvel if Papists hold themselves agrieved, but murmuring Protestants look
now somewhat monstrous, composed of such Contradictions, as need an Oedipus to
unriddle them: when they would have their Religion Regnant, and yet they keep a
Coil at the Extirpation of that which struggled so hard to ruin it.

How long shall the Lord bear with such as despise all the Riches of his
Goodness, and huff and pish at Mercies too good for their betters, (because
every thing is not exactly tasteful to their particular Appetites,) and hardly
forbear to snap at the Hand that brings them all the Tokens of his Love? May
not he expostulate with them, as Number. 14.11. How long will this people provoke
me? and how long will it be ere they will believe me for all the signs which I
have showed among them? When still we are as Incredulous and Misdeeming, as if
nothing at all had been done for us, nothing conferred upon us? And may we not
thus tempt God to bring us yet lower, when we are so out of sorts, that we are
got no higher? O when will Dust and Ashes know it self, and leave off such
Arrogance, and daring the free dispencer of every Mercy, to turn us out of all?

To contribute somewhat, if it be possible, to help us out of this ill Humor;
to get that foul Jaundice out of our Eyes, which discolors the fairest
Blessings, and makes them mistaken for Grievances and Calamities: That the
Tares of our Divisions may not still prevail to choke the sweet Fruits of our
Thanks and Praise; that the strings out of Tune may at last cease their
jarring, and vain jangling, and be wound up into an harmonious Agreement with
the rest, and change the Cynick Tone into the more becoming Accents of Praise
and Thanksgiving to God, rejoicing in the Gladness of his Nation, and glorying
with his Inheritance; that none may be slack or haled, to Magnify the Lord,
and exalt his Name; But all having a joint Sense of the singular kindness of
Heaven to us, may conspire as one Man, to give him the Honor due to his Name: I
would offer to Consideration but these two things for a Conclusion; Our own ill
deserts, and God's distinguishing Mercies of late to us.

1. Our own ill deserts. That we may not look on our selves as extraordinary
Persons fit for the Lord to take especial notice of; but wonder rather that he
should at all open his Eyes upon us, and do so for such; wonder it is no worse
with us, instead of grumbling it is no better. Ah Lord, how can a People laden
with so much evil expect to receive nothing at thy hands but good? How do we
forget our selves, when we are so curious and hard to be pleased? Must we have
every thing just our own way, or else we'll turn back the Mercies of God, and
crosly refuse all, if he will not do for us exactly as we would have him. Must
Slaves newly redeemed out of the Galleys, ruffle and swagger if they have not
all Liberties, Gayeties, and Delicacies? Must the Obnoxious who have forfeited
all, grow Insolent, if they enjoy not the highest Privileges? and when we
deserve not a Drop or Crumb; will nothing but Fullness and Variety serve our
turn?

If Taxes and Troubles were harder upon us, if Difficulties and Dangers were
yet greater before us, alas, what is all this to the Punishments wherewith the
Righteous Judge of all the Earth might justly plague us? When it is of his
Mercy we are not consumed, shall we be sick with Vexation, that we have any
thing at all to affright or afflict us, and are not still caressed in the Arms
of a cherishing Providence? O may we not only reason our selves out of the
Ingratitude, but shame our selves out of the ill Manners of the thing; to
Assault the King of Heaven's Door, if we are not presently pleasur'd with all
that we have a mind to: When it is Mercy, if he hear and spare us at all, would
we enjoy the whole of our Wishes on the sudden, or else must go fill all places
with our impatient Outcries? When nothing but Fear, and Sorrow, and Suffering,
is our due Portion, shall we mutiny, as if a great deal of wrong were done us,
if all succeed not just to our wishes? And howl like Wolves, if we are but
threatened, and cry like Swine if we are but touched, yea, before we are
touched, lest we should be?

O let us give Glory to God, in Confessing our Sins, whereby we shall
illustrate the Praise of his Power, Patience and Mercy in pardoning the same.
Great Sinners must lay their Hands on their Mouths, tho they should be great
Sufferers. But, ah, what do we talk of Sufferings, when, on every side, we are
so surrounded with Heaven's Blessings? And that we may not open our Mouths,
unless it be in celebrating the Divine Praises;

Consider, 2. (When it is impossible to recount all,) but God's distinguishing
Mercies of late to us. For as it is the high En^^^^ment of Mercy, when it is
vouchsafed to the unworthy, how much higher when the greatest mercies are not
withheld from such as cannot lay claim to the least? Now besides the great
Deliverance from that hellish Conspiracy, which if it had taken effect, we had
not been here to praise God, as we do, this Day: That he has broke the Teeth of
the ungodly, who would now make us believe they did not mean to bite, because
they missed their hold: yea by a new Resurrection of our Affairs, sealed in the
Appearance of our Deliverer on English Ground this same Day, when they that
hated us, yet ruled over us; he has transfused a new Life into our Hopes, and
come in with the most seasonable Rescue, when, (like Isaac, bound on the
Altar,) we lay tied up, a Victim to Popish Vengeance, with the Knife at our
Throats. That Men are not riding over our Heads, and the Sword is not sheathed
in our Bowels; but we have been preserved as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, who
were held back (with his invisible restraints, that has his Hook in the Nose,
and his Bridle in the Lips of Senacherib,) when they were set upon it to make
such havoc, that the name of Israel might be no more in Remembrance. That our
Air is so happily cleared of the noisome Pestilence, which we were dreading, as
ready to spread it self all over our Land: That we have escaped the Brunt which
has fell upon many of our poor Neighbors, and are at rest in our Houses, and
secure in our Possessions, and (which is more than all,) at liberty to Worship
God in the Beauties of Holiness; to go into his House and pay him the Vows,
which our Lips have uttered, and our Mouths have spoken, when we were in
Trouble: That the Care of the higher Powers is employed, not to undermine, but
better Establish our happy Establishment: That the Throne is filled with such
Defenders of the Faith, and Guardians of our Country, as bear not an empty
Title to abuse us, but settle the Minds, and glad the Souls of all True-hearted
Protestants, to have them there, before our Hopes, tho later than our Wishes.
And not wading through Blood, to take Possession, but called by a wonderful
Providence, making the way plain before them; and Invited and Welcomed thither,
by as general a Consent, and universal Acclamations, as ever any were there.

May we not now gather together these Mercies, as so many Precious Stones, of
which to rear up an Altar for the Sacrifice of our Thanks, and call it our
Eben-ezer, hitherto has the Lord helped us? And where now is the ground of our
Discontent? At what are any so peevish and Phrentick? Is it that such as were
coming to eat up our Flesh, are stumbled and fallen? Is it that they have lost
the Happiness, to be Papists or Slaves? Is it that excellent Laws, and not an
Arbitrary Will shall Rule us? Is it that a Reformed Religion, and not Fulsom
Superstition, is owned and countenanced throughout the Nation? Is it that the
Saul's in their Career are cast to the ground, and none shall be ruined for a
Ceremony? Many good Works have I showed you, for which of those do you stone
me? pleads our Savior, Jo. 10.23. So may we capitulate with the Unthankful;
Very worthy Deeds are done for our Nation; happy things brought to pass;
variety of especial Immunities above most in the World do we enjoy: At which
are they so netled, that they will never forgive their Deliverers? The healing
wrought is manifest, and cannot be denied; but like the Malevolent, Act. 4.17.
They are for suppressing the Fame, that it spread not among the People. And if
it cannot be so held in; then it must be blemished with some of our Reflections.
But such questioning the Legality of Proceedings, is still as liable to be
questioned. For all the sour Intimations given, and hard Words spoken, (of an
indelible Blot cast on our Profession,) such Reproach need not break our
hearts. ('It Is easy to put an ill Name upon any thing, and than run away scared
with the Mormo of our own Creating:) The proof is yet to come, that the things
excepted against, are what some make bold to call them. It Is, at the worst, but
a moot Point: But that somewhat else was highly unlawful, is no controverted
Case at all. And to be sorry that we are discharged from that Yoke is a strein
above Primitive Christianity it self, which never restrained its Votaries, from
being glad and thankful, so to be rid of their Persecutors.

In the day when the Lord delivered David from the hand of all his Enemies, and
from the hand of Saul, he said, I will love thee O Lord, my strength. Psalm.
18.1. Blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my Salvation be exalted. ver. 46.
And does not such high thankfulness become us alike singularly obliged? Not
only the living Monuments, but the Mighty Wonders of the most Signal Goodness?
When got out of the gloomy Shades of Babylon, to possess the Land; which again
we may call our own: We have the fairest invitation to lift up our Voices with
our Hearts, and sing the Songs of Zion.

And in our high Estate, may we not forget him who remembered us in our lowest:
May not our Hearts be shut to him, whose Hand has been so open to us. O what so
Charming Rhetoric, as to beseech by the Mercies of God? And being under a
sweet Constellation of such Mercies, O that we may feel their benign influence
to transport us all into a cheerful Celebration of his Praises! And not be
worse than the dull Earth itself, which reflects the Rays sent down upon it,
nor stifle the Memory of his Benefits, who has done the greatest things for us.

As to which now we may say with the Psalmist here, ver. 2. The humble shall
hear thereof, and be glad. Indeed we want only to be humble to make us
thankful: No such bar to gratitude, as a supercilious pride. The proud thinking
all due to their Merits or below them, they are ashamed to give thanks;
especially for such things as others have done to their hands, but not just to
their minds. Only to the humble God gives more grace; and such Souls will he
still fill with his good things: Let us then be humbly sensible of, that we may
be cordially thankful for, his Mercy.

And as nothing will so secure the Blessings of Heaven to us, so nothing will
strike such confusion and dread into the Enemies of our Peace: Like as when of
old, they began to Sing and Praise the Lord, the Enemies of Judah were all
Defeated before them, 2 Chronicles. 20.22. Such blessed effects might we see of our
sweet accord, and uniting all to Magnify the Lord and Exalt his Name. They
that have long hoped to reap their Harvest, out of the Seeds themselves have
sown to breed our Dissentions, would then Hear and Fear, and no longer live in
expectation, to set up their Dagon again: But be ready to throw their helpless
Idols to the Moles and the Bats, and go hide in Holes for fear of the Lord, and
for the Glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the Earth.

And then may we Bless God, not only for the Deliverance begun, but also for
our hopes of the Perfecting all that concerns us: If we will not reluctate
against the Hand that is saving us, but be only contented to be Happy, and
willing to see Glory dwell in our Land: We may find the God of all Grace
delighting yet further, to oblige the Objects of his former Bounty, and doing
still more for us because he has done much already: In the experience we have
had of his Mercy, lying all the best confidence we have of our security; that
he will go on to show Mercy, even for his Mercy's sake, (making it a Motive to
itself, Circulating by its own Spring in a Perpetual Motion;) and to complete
the History of his own kindness, because so long he has been Favorable to our
Land, watch over us still to do us good. To him (as we are most bounden for the
Mercy of this Day, and for those innumerable Mercies showered down upon us every
day, to fill even our whole Lives:) let us with the greatest Sincerity and
Cheerfulness, concur to Ascribe all Glory, Thanks, and Praise, now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

