THE CHANCELLOR'S Address and Confession To Both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
WHEREBY His Black Crimes, Illegal Actings, Damnable Designs, and Wicked
Intentions are laid bare and open, to satisfy the Nation.
IN the Golden Age, when Men were more Zealous to please God than to promote
their own Interest; when Popish Intreagues and Jesuits Plots had not shown
their Faces on the Stage of these Kingdoms, the Prince feared no Plotting
against him, and the Subjects lived in Peace, every one abhorred Injustice, and
he that should have acted in those days, those Crimes and Villainies which I
have perpetrated in these times, would have been looked on as a Monster in
Nature, unfit to live, and Destructive to the Commonwealth; every one would
have pointed at him in the Street, and every Man that had but the least
Honesty, would have abhorred his presence, would have scorned to defile his
Eyes, by beholding so vile an Object, and would have shunned the very Ground he
trod on: His Memory would have been blotted out, his Good Name taken away;
every one would have threw the dirt of his Indignation in his Face, and in
every respect, revile, reject and hate him as much as possible: Though such a
Man would be in a very bad case, and without the least comfort in the World,
yet for ought I know his case might be better than mine; for he being under
such Dejection and Despair, might have the Good Fortune to end his Life the
sooner. But I cannot be so concerned for my Sins, as to kill my self by
extraordinary Repentance; neither can I (as I hope I shall not) do as Judas
did; I have no Somach to Die, nor no Heart to Repent. I endeavored, by my
Indirect Dealings, to Enslave the Nation, that I might live in extraordinary
Pomp; and was always more ready to Sacrifice my Conscience for my Interest,
than my Life for my Religion; and it is a hard thing for (...) to practice
Piety, and repent for my part (...) who have so long (...) Oppression, and
never knew what true Repentance was. But,

What a Damned Fool was I, that I did not run away in time! Could not I have
had the Wit of Petres, put my Ten thousand Pound Bag of Guineas under my Arm
and troop'd to Brussels? A dull Beast! to stay to be thus noos'd. I was often
told of a Dutch Invasion, and a Protestant Parliament, but by St. Coleman's
Necklace, I could never believe it. Now Petre, Pope and Judges, with your
Dispencing Scarlet; where are you to assist me? You will be Damned before you
will help me at a dead lift. I see, I see now, I was a mere Ass, out upon it,
to be thus ont-witted! they all promised to stand by me; Ay, ay, so they will,
if I will go into France.

Was it for this I perverted Justice, and did things contrary to both the Law
of God and Man? Oh! Hub, Bub, Bub, Boo, what shall I do now? A PARLIAMENT! A
PARLIAMENT! What a Dreadful Sound does that word leave in a Dispencing Ear. I
did not think they would prove such a sort of Men as I find they are like to
prove; an Inquisitive PARLIAMENT. Oh that I might vent my Choler against them,
as I used to do on the Bench against the Poor! Who would ever thought to have
seen such a PARLIAMENT? This Parliament will not wink at my Faults; as my Job
of Journey-work in the West, etc. This is a Parliament will have Justice, the
more is my ill Luck. I was never more Drunk with Wine, than I am now with
Passion; Oh how I could -- Ay that I could, if I had power over the Scriblers
and Balladmongers. I had hoped by this time to have seen the days of Queen
Mary, that I might have piled those barking Persecutors, the Objects of my
Hate, up in heaps like Faggots, and then have set Fire to them: Oh! I thought
to have made the World tremble, and filled the Goales with them all. I would
have been worse to them than Bonner, verily I would, but now the Scene is
altered. They bring all my Crimes publicly on the Stage, they forget nothing
that may help to Condemn me, Pox on their Memories, Hang me if I know what to
do in this Case.

There is one comes with a List of the Names of those I put to Death in the
West, another comes with their Dying Speeches and Prayers; a third comes to
have Justice done upon me for the same; one cries Hang him, another cries that
is too good for him; a third cries, no Death is bad enough for him; a fourth
cries Hang him first and Judge him afterward: But though they differ in all
other Points, yet they agree in this, ( viz.) they all cry, Let him Dye, Oh!
that I could have stopped their Mouths with Fire balls, or have Hanged them out
of the way, as well as the other; then they had not lived to have done me this
Mischief. But now all my Crimes, both old and new, are made public to the Eyes
of the World, and I am exposed in my proper Colors!

Curse of my Fortune for a Bitch! that ever I should be born in a time of
Printing; by St. Judas, I hope he that invented this Heretical Art, is in that
place where I fear to be before it is long: I had thought (if things had
happened out pat) to have sent all those Stingy Booksellers and Printers to the
Devil by Dozens, and to have set up an Inquisition against Printing before this.

They put my Name in Capital Letters, and leave out my Titles too, and seem to
care no more for me than for Balaam's Ass. Now shall I have nothing from them
but wicked Lampoons, odious New-Years-Gifts, Plaguey Memorandums, Satirical
Poems, etc. baul'd about the Town: One comes with a Looking Glass for me;
another Forms a Confession in my Name; a third brings a Dialogue; a fourth
invents a Petition, etc. And thus I am run down by every Poetical Scribler; and
thus these Rogues, Villains, Dogs, Rascals, and Heretical Curs, will perpetuate
my Memory when I would be forgotten. I cannot leave my wonted Language, they
have put me into such a Fustian-fume, worse than when the City turned me out of
my Recorder-ship. But stay, let me think of something to comfort me; I have
some Fellow Sufferers, it is true, but alas! they are scarce taken notice of,
it is I bear the burden; Oh! the People have a dear love for me! I see they
stand ready to devour me! Some Cordial quickly, I have a sullen Fit just a
coming upon me: Oh! my Heart grows cool, a Devilish Qualm has seized me. Ah!
Impeached for High Misdemeanors? By Gad it is no Jesting Matter: A Lord
Chancellor! And what of that? My Purse and Mace will not defend me; my Purse
will serve to put my Head in after it is off; and my Mace will serve to stick
it upon afterward: The Parliament will have Justice done without any respect
of Persons. I shall never endure to Dye; I find there is a certain Antipathy
between Pain and me, I shall never endure it. No, no, it is a Folly to talk on
it: What! will they Hang a Lord Chancellor? Ay, Ay, they fear nothing. I am
told of Trisilian, Sir Thomas Moor, etc. Oh terrible! terrible! Trisilian was
Lord Chief Justice, and yet Hanged at Tyburn; Moor was Lord Chancellor and yet
Beheaded, a very ill Example! I never thought things would have been brought to
this pass, no In Faith did not I. I had many Hopes and Assurances that this
would never be; I had imagined far other things in my Head; but now to see how
the Devil has ordered it, all things look Scurvy, Ill, and with a Dreadful Hue.
But my Conscience also is presenting Visions before the Eye of my Mind, and my
Secret Sins and Debaucheries are set in order before my Eyes; Nay, my Memory
also is strangely touched, and I remember I have read in the Scriptures, such
like places which might have deterred me from my Wickedness; as Job 4. 8. They
that plow iniquity, and so wickedness, reap the same; we are wearied in the way
of Iniquity and Perdition, and the way of God have we not known. What profit
have we received of all our pomp and pride? They are now past as a shadow, and
as a messenger that rides in post, and we are consumed in our own iniquities.
Thou shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, thou shall not respect the person
of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but in righteousness shall
thou judge thy neighbor. Cursed is he that perverteth judgment. To do justice
and judgment, is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice; the integrity of
the upright shall guide them, but the perverseness of the transgressors shall
destroy them. I know your mighty sins, you take a bribe, and turn aside the
poor in the gate from their right. I, alas! had quite forgot all these
Scriptures, and to see that I should think on them now! Is there no hopes? No!
I fear I shall find as severe Judges to judge me, as I have been my self to
others; and, which is worse, a Severe and Impartial Judge in Heaven, who will
not be bribed, and before whom I must clear my self, or be Condemned. Oh! what
a Reckoning have I to make! What an account have I to give! How many Women have
I made Husbandless! How many Children have I made Fatherless! And how many Men
have I made Money-less! How shall I answer all? My Crimes are innumerable, the
Roll Black and Long, my Offenses Heinous, my Deeds most Evil, my Sins of the
Darkest Die; and I must have an Impartial Judge, from whom there is no Appeal.
I must leave my Pomp, forsake my Delights, my Pride must down; I must Dye, and
the day is coming when I must pay for all, and answer for the least and every
of my innumerable Sins: Where all my Private Intreagues, Wicked Thoughts,
Damnable Designs, and Evil Deeds, will be Exposed before the Blessed Angels.
God Almighty will be my Judge, and my Conscience will bear witness against me,
How shall I behave my self? How shall I clear my self? I must not Dissemble,
What shall I say? Oh that I could but tell? My Conscience Condemns me already,
and if it do so now, What will it do then? Oh that I should bring my self to
this! Who would venture his Soul for a little Trash? Who would venture to have
Eternal Damnation for a little Money, and to please a Company of Jesuits? Whose
Designs, I verily believe, was to Enslave the whole Nation, and make the People
bow their Necks under a Papal Yoke and Tyranny. They care not who they Ruin,
so that they can but advance their own Interest; and what better and easier way
to Enslave the People, than by Seducing and Drawing to their own Party such of
the Great ones, as are guided more by their Interest than their Conscience, the
part of one of which I (have reason with shame to) confess I have too much
acted, as is too well known. To keep up my Interest, I would run my self into
the greatest Sin, use the greatest Oppressions, and venture my own Soul. And
all that I can now do, (and all that is like to help me) is to go and prepare
my self for another World, for I have little hopes of continuing long in this.
I have little to say in Vindication of my self, for if I had never so much,
there is none would believe it, my Crimes are so Evident, Plain and Notorious.

London, Printed in the Year, 1689.


