The Bell Rung to Prayers.

An Earnest PERSUASIVE TO THE Daily Worship of GOD IN Every FAMILY. Calling
upon all Houses to be Houses of PRAYER.

By BEN. JENKS, Rector of Harley, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl
of Bradford.

Pour out thy Fury -- upon the Families that Call not on thy Name, Jer. 10.25.
LONDON: Printed for Will. Rogers at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church: And
Benj. Took at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. 1699.

TO THE READER.
I Thought I had done with the Press, and was concluding, that I should Trouble
it no more. But I find yet another Cause to Plead, further than my Voice can be
Heard. And in the Defense of that Cause, I send this Sound into the World, and
would have these Papers to Speak, as well as they can, even when I am Dead.

Besides the too Common Neglect of God's Worship, in so many Families, Observed
and Bewailed by all, whose Eyes he has Opened, which might give sufficient
Occasion for the present Exhortation: A very Pious Lady, for whose Excellent
Person, and Exemplary Family, I have a just Esteem and high Regard, was pleased
to desire this of me, That in the next Edition of my Prayer Book, I would add
more than I had there said in the Preface, to put all Families upon their
Prayers. That I might not only show such as needed the Help, How they should do
it: But also (if possible) be Instrumental, so to Prevail with them, that they
might not still leave it Undone.

And some late Observations that I have made, give me cause to Enlarge the
Complaint in that Preface, of the Dullness and Indifferency of Sinful Men, to
that which is best for them, and which most highly Concerns them; That they are
not apt to be Solicitous, (so as they use to show themselves in their Worldly
Concerns) to Seek after the Provisions and Conveniences for the Spiritual
Life, unless these fall directly in their way, and are set just before them.
For I find that some will not vouchsafe, but so much as to Use them, even when
they have them Ready by them.

Now, though the Impression of that Imperfect Piece is gone off; yet I am not
Determined by those Solicitations, which would put me upon Another. Because my
End being already gained; in seeing it Communicated, and all Hands filled, as
far as I thought my self Obliged: I have no Motive now to be further concerned:
Unless it were to make such Corrections, and to fill up such Defects, as might
give my self (if not others) some better Satisfaction in that Performance.

But what I have here to offer, would be too Large to be Inserted in a Preface:
And the Time also might be too Long, to wait for that Opportunity. Therefore
this Service to Souls, I now give out by itself And though, I know, it might be
much better done by many others, if they would think fit so to Concern
themselves; yet in the mean time, accept it in such manner, as can at present
be done, by one that is full of Care and Desire to Promote it as far as lies in
the Power of

Thy B. J.

THE CONTENTS.
A Preparation to the Design; Capitulating with Masters of Houses, about the
Pious Regulation of their Families. Page 1 The Recommendation and Pressing of
Family Prayer; By Arguments and Motives. Page 9 1. From the Obligation to it as
a Needful Duty. Page 10 2. From the Encouragment to it, as making 1. For the
Safety Page 18 2. For the Profit Page 19 3. For the Credit Page 23 4. For the
Comfort of the Family. Page 27

Answers to the Objections made against this Family Worship, to Excuse the
Neglect of it; as 1. For want of Command Page 33 2. For want of Time Page 36 3.
For want of Ability Page 42 4. For want of Company, for it. 1. The Generality
Abroad, to Appear in Favor of it. Page 46 2. Fit Partners at Home, to Join and
Assist in it. Page 50
5. Want of Success this way. Page 52
A Discovery of the Real Causes of its Neglect. As, 1. Ignorance. Page 53 2.
Pride. Page 57 3. Sloth. Page 59 4. Worldliness. Page 62 5. Enmity against God.
Page 67 6. The Love of Sin. Page 70
A Proposal made, to Determine and Fix upon some Set and Stated Time, for
Family Prayer. Page 75 Some Considerations offered to Promote and Secure, 1.
The Morning-Prayer. Page 77 2. The Evening-Sacrifice. Page 81
A Serious Invitation to Frequency in this Prayer. Considering, Page 84 1. That
now is the only Time for it. Page 86 2. That the Oftener we thus come to God, we
shall be the Welcomer. Page 88 3. That our Prayers the more Frequent, are the
more Excellent. Page 89
Directions for the Management of these Prayers. 1. A particular Advice to
Masters, to afford their Presence, and Countenance, and good Example herein.
Page 90 General Advice to them, and All, 2. To look narrowly to their Aims and
Ends, in the Worship. Page 92 3. To Remember what a Presence they are in. Page
93 4. To Read somewhat out of Holy Scripture, before Prayer. Page 95 5. To show
a profound Reverence in the Worship. Ibid. 6. To Endeavor to make it Easy and
Pleasant. Page 99 1. By going to the Lord, as Our God. Page 99 2. By Offering
up all, in the Name of Jesus. Page 103 3. By joining our Praises to our
Prayers. Page 106
7. To do all with Zeal and Fervency of Spirit. Page 110 8. To take Care of
Family-Reformation, as well as Family-Supplication. Page 114
The Conclusion, containing a Renewed Persuasion to the Work. Page 117
A PERSUASIVE TO Family Prayer: OR, AN Earnest Exhortation to the Daily Worship
of God in Every Family.
MY present Undertaking may seem very Facile and ordinary: But I expect to find
it exceeding Weighty, and attended with no small Difficulty. How I shall Acquit
my self, and come off in the Accomplishment, I dare not be Confident to
Presage: But that I could have no Rest in my Spirit, till I had Engaged in it,
I am best able to make Report.

It Is no New Project that I am upon. For Abundance of God's Laborers are
aforehand with me; and have here bestowed their Pains, over and over. The
thing has been often done; And yet, Alas, it still needs to be done. And
whether or no I shall say any thing, but what has been said; God grant I may
say something, that shall take Effect. I can but use my weak Endeavors, and
Wait and Beg for the Blessing, from Him that has the Power to Persuade
thoroughly; where even St. Paul, the Chief Speaker, can do it but Almost.

Christians* I address my self to you all. That as you are called the Lords, So
you may Call upon the Lord: and Approve your selves his true People, in being a
Praying People; and make it appear you are the Children of God, by crying Abba
Father. Yea may not only give yourselves to Prayer, and the humble
Signification of your Desires to God still, for the obtaining of all that you
would have, every one Apart by yourselves; (Which I know none that own the
Christian Name, who do not pretend to:) But may Accustom your selves to Pray
also Conjunctly, and all together in your several Families. Which is that part
of the Service of God, that my thoughts and Endeavors are now at work, to
Eng^ge all whom I can prevail with, to set upon it, and to show their Zeal and
Fidelity in it. It Is not the Manner of doing, that I am now Prescribing; Nor
the Set Time in particular, when you shall do it. But my chief Business is to
Propose and Recommend the Thing it self: And so to Quicken your Care, and Win
your Consent, that it may be Daily and Duly done.

And my Application is First to the Masters, that have the Inspection and
Conduct of Families. For the Houses have no Ears: And O that I may not find
some of the Owners as Deaf, as if they had none! It Is You, Sirs, that must Set
the Fashion to your People; and not only Tell them of their Duty, but go before
them in it. It Is your Example that will go furthest, either to Deboch, or to
Reform, your Houses. And you cannot do Well or Ill, but it will be like to
Affect the Rest, as well as your selves. And of the same Strain as the Master
is, much thereafter use to be the Children and the Servants. For they will
think themselves Concerned to Write after his Copy; if but to be the Easier
under him, and the more Acceptable to him. So that you shall not only Answer
for your selves, but for all the Members of your Families; that were Hurt, or
Bettered by you. According as you go in and out among them and lay the Pattern
before them; It may be as much as their Souls are worth: And they may have
cause to Bless you, or to Curse you, for ever. They now so much Depend upon
you, and are so much Determined by you; That what you Are, and what you Do,
goes for Law with them, and has the greatest Influence upon them, to make them
Be and Do Alike. If you then that should be the Stays and Guides of your
Domestics, are Swearers, Drunkards, Brawlers, or Muck-wo^ms; without any
Savor of God's holy Religion; and no Lovers of Prayers; but Cold and Listless
to set them Forward; even Loathing any thing, which Looks that Way; and
Introducing somewhat in its Room, more to your Mind, but less to your Credit. O
what Disorderly wretched Houses then are you like to have? And who can expect
that thy Son and thy Daughter, thy Manservant, and thy Maid servant, should be
much Better? When thou who should go to Pray with them, and shut up the Day,
with the Worship of him that gave it; Instead of doing them any Good, Lie
only as a Log in their way, to Stumble and Hurt them: When there is nothing of
God to be seen in thee, beyond thy Human Shape, Nothing of God to be Heard from
thee, but in thy Oaths and Curses: O how Deadly then is thy Case? when thou art
in thy Blood, and the Blood of all the Souls too, that are under thee, and so
Abused by thee, will he upon thee! Such a Master, such a Father! Thy Servants,
and thy Children may feel the Plague of thy Ungodliness upon them, to all
Eternity. As a great Oak Falling, Crushes down all the Underwood before it, So
thy Falls and Miscarriages are fatal Breaches upon thy whole Family. Thou art
the Ignis Fatuus, that Leadest them out of the way' and Teach them to
Transgress. Thou art the Jeroboam, that make them to Sin. Thou have the
Charge of them; But so Betrayest the Trust, that instead of being the Better,
they are all the Worse for thee, and will rise up in the Judgment against thee.

The Lord give thee Eyes to see thy Case; and a Heart first to Judge thy self;
and Grace to Repent and Amend the matter; before thou Fall, and thy House Fall
upon thee; and sink thee into the deepest Damnation, never to get up again. O
that thou may Remember thy self, and thy Accounts, and Turn to the Lord, and
walk more Regularly and piously in thy House: To Repair some of the Mischief
that thou have done; and yet to Benefit the Souls that have been so much
D^mnisi^d by thee. For thou art a Vain man, to stand Rallying at thy House; and
complaining of Stubborn Children, or Treacherous Servants, when thou will not
give thy Example, nor thy Prayers, to make them Better: Though by this means,
(for ought thou knew,) Thou might be the happy Instrument of their
Conversion and Salvation.

But Blessed Souls! That set a quite contrary Pattern! And instead of Leading
others into Sin, are all for Helping them out of their Sins: And thus Serve the
Lord, and Assist their Ministers, in Turning many to Righteousness; and by
their Examples and their Interest, by their Speaking and their Doing, Guide
their Neighbors in the Progress to Heaven; Quicken their Families to Seek the
Lord; Trace them out a fair Path of his holy Worship; and Encourage and set
them forward, in all the ways of Sobriety, Charity, Decency, Godliness, and
Honesty. A Comfortable Account shall they have, and a Sentence full of Joy from
the Lord. Their Families, their Neighbors, shall rise up and call them
Blessed: Yea God, even their own God shall Bless them; and make them enjoy the
Fruits of their Labors, and of his Grace and Bounty, in the Heavenly
never-ending Glory.

O that you would all so lay this to heart, as to think your selves more
Concerned in the Godly Regulation of your Families; and the narrow
Circumspection of your own Conversation among them! For this is the main
Indication and Discovery of what a man is, By his Conduct and Behavior at
Home; and the Rules and Orders that he keeps in his House. Because Men Abroad
usually go upon their Guard, and are more Reserved and Demure in strange
Company; So Concealing themselves, as to appear Other and Better than really
they are. But where they may be Bold, among their own People, There they are
wont to show themselves, in their proper Shapes and Colors. That you may then
Judge according to Truth, Here take better Notice of your selves: And that you
may also rightly Instruct and Edify Others, Take better Heed to your own Ways.
For they will Watch the Steps of your Feet, more than Mind the Words of your
Advice; and there Venture to Slight the best of your Counsel, where they see
you take the Liberty, to Run out another way.

Nor yet think it all, to set some good Examples, for them to Follow; (Letting
them see, That you are not Hypocrites abroad, and Devils at Home:) But use all
the Interest and Authority you have with them, to do them Good; and to make
them such as God would have them. For so (you know,) The Lord commended that
great Father of the Faithful; Genesis 18.19. I know him, that he will Command his
Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.
You that are Over them, must Lay your Charge upon them: And here is the best
way of showing your Authority: and that you are Resolved to be Masters in your
own Houses: When you Declare, So I expect it, and so I will have it, from all
the Members of my Family; Such and such Orders, at all times; and our Offices
of Joint Prayer and Devotion, at such and such Appointed Times, and a Constant
Serious Attendance upon them. And thus Resolve, not only for your selves, but
for all under your Roof: With that great Exemplar, as well as Commander; Josh.
24 15. As for me, and my House, we will Serve the Lord.

And then are you sit indeed to be Masters of Houses; When you take not Care
only of the Work, and the Diet, and outward Conveniences of your People; but
chiefly of their Religion, and their Souls: To bring them under the Yoke of
Christ; and to Train them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. And
though you cannot Undertake for them, to make them all what they should he: Yet
must you Resolve, That it shall not stick upon you; as the Fault of your
Conduct, if they be nor. For too commonly, their ill Manners fly in your Faces;
and Upbraid your Mismanagement. How else could Children be so Rude, and Ripe
for Hell, even before they knew any thing of God and Heaven; If you gave them
better Education and Example? Durst Servants Swear and Curse, and Talk filthy,
and Act as Scandalously, If their Masters were Pious, and showed no
Countenance, but their Abhorrence, of such Wickedness; and gave Themselves
Patterns of the Contrary? But how many do little or nothing Regard, What their
Servants are toward God, if they Carry but any thing Fair toward them? And
may be readier to Scoff a poor Servant, that Fears the Lord; Than to Check a
Vile Wretch, that is as V^^n and Loose as themselves. They Drive their Servants
even only as a Team of Brutes: And all they expect from them, is to do their
Work: whatever becomes of the Work of God. They think it enough to Provide for
their Bodies, Let their Souls Sink or Swim. And the greatest Teaching they give
their Children, is to be Thrifty and Stirring, to make their Part good in the
World. Or if they do Teach them any Catechism, or Heads of Religion; Alas, what
Good is it like to do them; As long as they see the Parents so shamefully
Contradict their own Instructions? They are Children indeed, that have not so
much natural Logic, as to Argue with themselves, -- If the Service of God were
of such Necessity, as we are told, why then do our Parents so Neglect and throw
it by? They are grown to Discretion; and in all Appearance, much Nearer to
another World, than we: Therefore what makes them so Careless of Religion, and
do nothing at it, but what mere Custom leads them to once a Week at Church? Do
they think, it is only for Children to meddle with; and that Men have somewhat
else to do, and are got above it? Children have the depraved Nature in them,
that will make them Witty enough, to hit upon any such Evasions, to throw off
their Duty. And their Parents way and Practice, shall do more to make them
Vicious; Than all their Injunctions, yea and their Corrections also, to make
them Pious.

And so Servants find it their Interest, to be Like their Masters. And if the
Master be against all serious Godliness; The Servant then thinks he must not be
so Impudent, to Appear for it: Nor offer to be Better than his Betters. No, He
will show more Manners, and better Discretion. A Word from his Master, shall do
more to Disgrace, Wound, and Stah Religion, and strike it Dead; Than many a
^^^mon from the Minister, to Recommend, Endear, and keep it Alive. And thus
such Tutors train up Pupils, fit to Serve and Strengthen the Kingdom of the
Devil. Here the Seeds are Sown, and the Trees nursed and reared up, which (when
Transplanted abroad) help to Poison all the Earth with their cursed Fruits. And
here* that filthy Corruption, which Education should Tame and Vanquish, is made
Rampant and Incurable.

O that all of you who are concerned, would put to their helping Hands, to
rectify this Error in the first Concoction! And cast their Salt into these
Fountains, that serve all the Kingdom: And do that good Service to the Public,
as to Serve God more faithfully, in th^^^ Private Capacity! For the Reformation
among us, which the King's most Excellent Majesty now Declares for, and which
he Promises to Promote at Home, in the Persons who are Near his own Sacred
Person; It does Depend upon the Reformation of particular Families: Those
little Kingdoms, where every Master is as the Sovereign, to give Laws to all
his House. And without you, (whom I am speaking to,) it will not be done. But
by your Combined Assistance, The Particulars, (of which the Whole consists,)
will be Reformed: And so God's Anger will be Averted, and the Nation Saved. And
where you cannot have All, to bear you Company, yet Strive, whatever you are
able, to make a Majority. And by that Means, you will most oblige your Country;
and be sure every one, to Provide for the Security, and the Felicity of his own
Family.

Now hitherto I have been dealing in Generals; To prepare the way to my Main
Design: And that is, particularly and especially, to engage you all to the
Serious Practice of Family Prayer. For as there will be no true Happiness,
without sincere Holiness: So there can be no Holy, Sound Reformation, without
humble and earnest Supplication. And it was a true Connection; (though the
Application seems too Severe, to be fastened upon so Good a Man) Job 15.4. Thou
castest off Fear, and Restrainest Prayer before God. For they do not indeed
Fear the Lord; that do not Call upon him. Not to Call upon the Lord! That is
made the very Upshot of all the Baseness and Wickedness recited; Psalm. 14. ver.
4. All other Goodness will do no Good, if this be wanting. And all other Care
and Pains will signify Nothing; If thus the Lord be not Prevailed with, to add
his Bless^ing. Except the Lord Build the House, they Labor i^ Vam that Build
it, Psalm. 127.1. And except ye seek and beg this best Edification of all your
Houses, at his Hands; you are as Vain, to Expect it. When as all hangs upon his
Blessing: And even that Blessing he has Suspended upon your Praying? And so*
(after a sort,) has put the matter into your own Hands: Whether you will have
all the Good which you desire, in the way of Prayer: Or else Lose the Blessing,
for want of Asking.

Now that I may not seem to put upon you any Unreasonable Service; or to urge
you to the thing, that is of no Necessary, or of no Importance: I will
endeavor to show you the Reasons for it; and also to Answer the Objections
against it. And after I have given a few Words of Advice for the Management of
it; I will add some more of Persuasion, to Quicken you to it; and constantly to
go on, and Persist in it.

In the Reasons for it, I would let you see both your Obligation, and your
Encouragement to it: And not only convince you, That it is your Duty; but
Satisfy you, That it is also your Interest; and every way as Good as it is
Needful for you.

1. I Argue from the Obligation, That Family Prayer is your Duty, and the Duty
of all Families. God having signified his Pleasure, to bind you to it:
Therefore you ought to make Conscience of it: And not to look upon it as a
matter of Indifferency, left at your Choice; but of Necessity, to Oblige your
Conscience. The Command and Injunction is so Clear and Frequent for Prayer it
self, To Call upon the Lord, and Bless his Name; that I never heard any Dispute
it: But even they who do nothing at it, will yet speak for it, and talk of
Serving the Lord, and Praying to God; when yet they neither Mind nor Care, How
or When it shall be done. And the Command is as Express, To Pray every where, 1 Timothy 2.8. and to Pray Always, Luke 18.1. And by this Praying Every Where, and
Always, What can we understand Less, Than that we should do it, in all Places,
and at all Times, that are Fit and Proper for it? Now in your Families, Have
you not fair Conveniences for it, and inviting Opportunities, to put you upon
it? More and Better, (I think,) than any where else, unless the Church. For
there sure, Two or Three, or more, may Meet together, in our Lord's Name; as
well as upon any other Accounts. And there (...) have the Advantage and Talents
put into their Hands; which they are bound to Use and Improve, to the Honor of
their Lord; and to the Promoting of their Mutual Salvation. And it is their
wilful Fault, and their wicked Neglect; if they let Slip those Advantages, and
Bury those Talents. Sure, if they do Regard the great End of their Living; They
will think themselves infinitely Concerned, to Employ them to better purpose:
And not count it more Material to attend their Backs and their Bellies; than to
serve their God, and save their Souls.

He that in his Providence, has so Ordered their Being, and the Circumstances
of their Living, may well expect it from them, That they should Recognize and
Adore him, in their Joint, as well as Single, Capacity: Not only as Individual
Persons, but a little Body and Society, brought together, even for the purpose;
To join their Forces in the Common Service of their great Founder, and
continual Benefactor, and strive Together in Prayer. This seems to be given for
the main End of their Conjunction in a Family: Acts 17.26.-7. God that made the
World, has determined the bounds of their Habitation, That they should Seek the
Lord. Not that they should Forget and Disown the Supreme Head of the Family;
and Cohabit, as if they had no Relation to him, nor Dependence upon him, Nor
any Homage and Tribute to pay him.

You Masters have a Power, which you ought to use for your great Master in
Heaven; To Convene your People for his Worship. For they are not only Near in
Place, but stand in Readiness at your Call. And you are so Joined in mutual
Relations together; that it is to be supposed, You should be more h^^itily
concerned for one another, and more forward to Contribute your Assistance in
the Service, that tends so much to the greatest Good of all your Souls. Here
then is the Obligation, not only of godly Zeal and Piety, but of Brotherly Love
and Charity, lying upon you. And though you pretend to Pray every one Apart;
yet you look like a kind of House-Schismaticks, if you cannot Agree, to do it
in Conjunction, and such Joynt-Worship; which you should still Covet, as much
as you can have it, To show that you are for Practicing, as well as Believing,
the Communion of Saints.

You that have the Care of the Rest, How can you show your Care better, than in
making, the best Provision you can for their Souls. That these also may have
their daily Meals with you, as well as their Bodies. And if you must take Care
that they Worship God: May not you be better satisfied, to see them Join with
you; than to follow them every one to their Privacies? As to which, You may
Exhort them; but there you must be ^^ in to Leave, and Trust them. You are
allowed Teachers in your own Families: You have there authority for it; yea and
a Command to it, Deuteronomy. 6.7. And how can you better Teach them, than in Teaching
them to Pray? That so they may be all Taught of God. And then what so Effectual
Method of Teaching them to Pray, as to Exemplify it to them, in your Daily
Practice* and to go before them in the way of Prayer?

I hope you will readily acknowledge, That God the Lord of your Family is to be
Honored by you, in every Relation and Capacity: And that he should not have
the less Honor, but the more, from Masters; Because he has Honored you with
that Authority, above the rest of the Family. And if you must Honor him in the
most Solemn, and best manner, that you are able; I shall leave you to judge,
Whether you do not Visibly pay him the Greater Honor, in Falling down to him,
before your Family; and Obliging them all to Join and Assist you, in the
Adoration, Than only to Steal into a Corner, and do it by yourselves. You give
Glory to God, even in Confessing your Sins: And as you Sin together, so it
looks like a Concern for his Honor, Humbly to Confess it all together: To
show, That though you be all Frail Creatures, yet you do not Hold together
against him, as a Cluster of Rebels: But throw your selves upon your
Submission, before him; and make all the Satisfaction, that you are able, to
him.

And let me mind you to Consider, yet further* Whether you have not Blessings
to the Family, as such, which therefore you ought to Own all together? Even for
this very Privilege, and such precious Opportunities as you have, to come into
the Presence of God; and Pour out your Complaints and Desires before him; Sure
you are bound to Bless and Praise him. And can you Live all still upon his
Blessings; and yet Smother ^il the Kindness of Heaven in a base Disregard? Can
you Live together, and make no Acknowledgments together, of your
Joynt-Obligations to the Lord? When you are all so much Beholden to him, that
you Live continually upon him?

Yea, are you not all Christians, that is, Persons Devoted, as Holy to the
Lord? And must not your Houses then and Societies, that are made up of such, be
so Devoted too? as a Generation of them that Seek him, Psalm. 24.6. You may
read; Lev. 27.14. Of a man Sanctifying his House, to be Holy to the Lord And
the Title of the 30th Psalm, is, A Song at the Dedication of David 's House.
Now all the Houses of Christians should be so Consecrated; because the
Inhabitants are. And every one of your Houses should be the House of God; A
Bethel, or Temple, where be dwells. Thus you hear of the Church, in such or
such a Man's House, Romans 16.5. The Church in Aquila and Priscilla's House. Col.
4 15. The Church in Nymphas's House. Philem. 2. The Church in thy House. And
where are but Three, though Laymen, (in the Judgment of Tertullian,) There Is a
Church. And what a Church is that, where they do not Pray and Praise together?
In his Temple every one speaks of God's Honor, Psalm. 29 9. Not only each by
themselves; but all in a Body. If not, it is doubted they belong to another
Lord, and that their Houses are yet Profane: and Unhallowed Chapels of Ease to
the God of this World; and such Tents of Wickedness, where Satan's Throne is:
and He the Lord Paramount, to employ them, about other sort of Business; and to
Intercept their Homage to the Rightful Sovereign: whose Honor and Glory he
Envies, and Hates, and Hinders, all that ever he is able. And will you be Ruled
by such an Enemy, to withold the Rights of Him, who Owns and Keeps you all?
Will you be Children of Belial, that Despise their King, and bring him no
Presents? 1 Samuel 10.27. When you hold All from him; will you pay no Suit and
Service to him? Will you grudge him so much as the poor Acknowledgment of your
Prayers? And think that little, Quit-Rent too much for him to have? You show
then what you would do, if it were left all to your Ingenuity: when you can
thus Embezzel from him, against so much of his Declared Pleasure. And does not
Conscience here Arrest you for this Debt, due to the Crown of Heaven; and hold
you in Durance, till you pay it? For can you say, in this case, That you want
the Knowledge of his Will; if you had but the Will to do it? Does not he who
Promises his Blessed Presence in the midst of Two or Three Met together in his
Name, Matthew. 18.20. So give you to Understand, How much he is Pleased with the
Service? And is not his Blessing upon Praying-Families, in the Prosperity of
their Souls, (if not of their other Affairs also) to make them, in all real
Goodness, aforehand with the rest of their Neighbors; A Visible Proof, How
well he likes and approves of their doing?

But does that Menace, Jer. 10.2^. of the Lord's Fury to to be Poured out upon
the Famthes that Gall not on his Name; nothing Affect you? What if Families
there denote Tribes, the Stock or Kindred? Yet the Lesser sure is included in
the Bigger: and Parity of Reason will bring it down to Families properly so
called. And though Calling on his Name, imports all the Worship of the true
God: Yet that Chief Part is never to be lest out, which is so Eminent, that it
gives Denomination to the whole. But I would not have you to Venture that
Wrath, upon any Private Interpretation of that Text, (more to your Fancy, than
your Safety;) Least you should be convinced of your Error, by a dreadful
Consequence. Indeed the Curse has already Entered and S^iz'd, even in an
Apparent manner, upon most Prayerless Fam^^es; that are so many sad and searful
Monuments of Heaven's Indignation, and an Angry God Frowning upon them; in
those worst of all his Judgments on this side Hell: that is, To be given up to
the Reprobate Sense, and Vile Affections; To commit all Uncleanness even with
Greediness; and fall from one Wickedness to another, without any Stop or
Restraint. Yet such is the Supply, that uses to rush into those Families, where
Prayers are thrust out. Which is enough to make you set up Prayers in all your
Houses; If but to cry mightily to God, for this one thing; From such dreadful
Signs and Discoveries of thy Everlasting Wrath, Good Lord deliver us.

And if you do not think your House-Prayers a Necessary Duty; I can tell you of
one that did, whose Extraordinary Wisdom makes his Judgment very Regardable. It
is the great Daniel; Chap. 6.10. who Pra^ed in his House; and with his
Household, (it is to be supposed;) Because the Informers came and found him at
it. Ver. 7. And it was at such a Time; when those Prayers were Prohibited, even
upon pain of Death. And yet he thought it more Needful to Persist in Calling
upon the Name of his God; Than to shift for the Preservation of his Life. And
if you would not Arrogate a Wisdom above his; and be thought to understand
yourselves, and the Will of the Lord, better than he; that was so well
acquainted with the Sec^ets of God: Look not then upon these Prayers, as a
By-Business; which you may Perform, or you may Let alone, as you Please: But
fall about the Work, and keep to it, as that which is Meet, Right, and your
Bounden Duty to do.

Should any now tell me, This is one Doctor's Opinion: and Many Men, Many
Minds. I see, and Grieve, That among the Multitudes of Families, all Professing
one and the same Faith, There is yet such different Conduct; That some of them
Carry, as if they were quite of another Religion; and some, as if they were of
none at all. Some much Given to Prayer: Some doing very little at it: and some
clear off it, doing even just Nothing. As if their Houses were Priviledg'd from
the Service; Or they had found some Back-way to Life, by themselves; without
Striving to Enter any Strait Gate. Unhappy Libertines! That have got Rope
enough, to do their own Business. O Cursed Privilege! To enjoy an Open
Latitude, to Run upon the Damnation of Hell; and nothing to Hinder them. And
dreadful Liberty! To keep off from the God of their Life; and not to Call upon
the Lord, that they might be Saved. Therefore,

2. I would make you Sensible, That it is not only Niedful, but Good for you,
thus to Draw Nigh to God. That you may not think, I am going to offer a
Trouble, but a Kindness to your Houses; and would not lay a Burden, but bring
down a Blessing upon them. It is a Singular Privilege, and Favor, from the
Lord, That you may go thus in a Body, (when you will,) to him; and find Welcome
and kind Acceptance with him. Nothing makes more for your true Interest, and
happy Advantage every way. And to Reason with you, as our Lord did with the
Samaritan Woman, John 4.10. If you knew the Gist of God, and who it is that
Calls you to him, and gives you not only Leave, but Encouragement, to speak
your Mind Freely before him; You would not be so Slow to Seek; Nor Need to be
Driven into his Presence; But Glad with all your Souls, to Open your Wants to
him; and to Ask all that you Need from him. If you knew what made most for the
Establishment and Prosperity of your Families, Instead of Disputing the matter,
and making a Controversy of your Duty; You would Fly and Flock to your Prayers,
as Eagles to their dearest Entertainment. When nothing in the World so much
tends to Promote the Safety, the Profit, the Credit, and the Comfort of your
several Houses.

1. The Safety; To Preserve and Secure your Houses, from the worst of all
Plagues, The Infection of Reigning Wickedness: and from the most dreadful of
all Fires, the Burning Indignation of the Lord of Hosts. A man's House is
counted his Castle; where he may sit Safe from Assaults and Dangers. I am sure,
it will make your Houses more Impregnable, and much better Garrisons, for your
Defense and Preservation; If by your Prayers and Devotions, you will Engage the
great Almighty Keeper of Israel, to come to you, and Dwell among you, and be
For you. For it is He only that makes you dwell in Safety, Psalm 3. last verse.
And he that dwells in the Secret place of the most High shall abide under the
Shadow of the Almighty, Psalm 91.1. Yea because thou have made the Lord, who is
my Refuge, even the most High, thy Habitation; There shall no Evil befall thee;
Neither shall any Plague come nigh thy Dwelling, Verse 9, 10. O then Fortify
yourselves in your Houses, with these strongest Batteries of your Prayers. As
Daniel, upon the Plots and Cruelties of his combined, bitter Enemies; betook
himself to his Knees, instead of his Arms; and would not stand to Struggle and
Fight it out with them, But fell to Wrestle and Strive with his God* That he
might Engage ^n Interest, to Countermine the Malice; and make a Friend on his
side, that should be too hard for them all. And David took the same wise
Course. Psalm 109.4. For my Love they are my Adversaries; but I give my self to
Prayer. And Psalm. 55.16. After his Complaint of spightful ^oes, and false
Friends, As for me, (says he,) I will Call upon God, and the Lord shall Save
me. So when Pestered with Troublesome Neighbors about you; and Threatened with
Enemies to Invade you; and especially when Endangered by the Roaring Lion,
still upon his Circuit, Seeking to Devour you: O run to this Shelter, and here
take Sanciuary: So shall you be sure to Escape; and all the Peril shall fly
beside you: Or as much as Lights upon you, shall never Undo you. When your
Lintels and Side-Posts are so Sprinkled with the Blood of your Sacrifices; The
Destroying Angel will pass over you. And though a Common Destruction seems to
make no Distinction; yet in the very Destruction you shall find Salvation. For
whosoever shall Call on the Name of the Lord shall be saved. Romans 10.13. It Is
not Stones and Timber can Secure you: For Diseases and Death even there can
break in, and get at you. But Faith and Prayer builds your House upon the Rock,
that will never Fail you. Where nothing shall Hurt you: and even Harms
themselves shall do you no Harm.

2. This Course of Family Prayer is a most Thriving Course, to Enrich your
Houses. Not only to keep all your People Faithful, in their several Offices;
But to Prosper your Designs and Labors: To fetch down that Blessing of the
Lord, which makes Rich: And (if he see it Good for you,) to increase the
World's Good upon you. For Godliness, which is called Profitable to all things;
has the Promise even of the Life that now is, as well as of that to come. 1 Timothy 4 8. And he that teaches us to Ask our Daily Bread, does not bid us Seek
his Face in vain. But all things are like to Succeed the better to you, when
you take him along with you; who can so easy Blast the Greatest, and Bless the
Smallest, Hopes, whenever he pleases. So that you may Speed better by a few
Minutes hearty Prayer, than by a whole Day's tugging Labor. And this Begging
Trade is the most Gainful Trade. For though you be still Beggars; you can never
be Poor, as long as your Lord is Rich: Not only Rich in himself, but To all
that Call upon him Romans 10.12. And this Joint Begging looks still the more
Hopeful for Speeding; Because it gets more Hands subscribed to the Petition;
and many Strings Twisted together, to make the Cord, that is to draw down the
Precious Goods, the Stronger.

And however you Fare for this World, Thus you shall be sure to get Rich
toward God. Luke 12.21. Rich in Faith, and Grace, and Good Works: Which is the
true Treasure, and the Greatest Wealth. For our Blessed Savior has taught us,
That a Man may get the whole World, and be never the better, but Undone for
ever. But he that Wins Christ, and has the Blessed God himself for his Portion,
is set up for a truly Rich and Happy man; and may Scorn all the Rest, as Dross
and Dung. Nor is this only an Estate of Fancy's Raising; and the Dreaming of
Golden Mountains. The Worldlings Substance, indeed, is such a Shadow, a Cheat,
a Nullity. Prove. 23.5. He sets his eyes upon that which is Not: That which he
shall experience to be Nothing; Nothing to Help him; when he (...) have the
most Occasion for its Help.

For that will be sound Real Gains, at the Foot of the Account; which will do a
man Good at the Last, and Stick to him, and Stay by him, as Long as ever he can
Need it. And what is that, but the Never-failing Treasure in the Heavens; and
and our Interest in it. Our Title to it, and what we have to show for it? Now
Prayer is the Key to Unlock all these Treasures; For it is but Ask and Have.
Surely, The most Compendious Art of Thriving; The quickest and Easiest way to
be Rich: To get all, and Cost you nothing: Never a Penny; Nor any Turning and
Winding; unless it be of your Prayers. And by this Means, how many have got a
mighty Stock already? and have a great deal to show for it; in all the Graces
and Good things of God's Spirit; more worth than Jewels. Rubies, Pearls, and
Diamonds; Wherewith they Abound and Overslow, to Edify the Church, and Enrich
this poor Sinful World? What they have so Won with their Prayers, they Wear in
their Lives.

But as for such Exorbitant Spendthrifts, that Defeat the Discipline, and for
all the Prayers, make Shift still to Continue in all their Sins: When this does
no Good of them, I know not what will. And then if any that use Good Prayers,
be ^ad Livers; The Fault lies all in the Persons; and not in the Prayers: Nor
is it Imputable to the Thing; but to their Ill doing it; and making a mere
Formality of it. And then they must Answer for the Abuse; and not the Prayers
be charged with the Bad Success. Or if some of the Family-Members, that were
Held in, and Haled to that, which they never Loved, do after Scandalously fly
out, and take the Liberty to show what they were: They shame themselves, and
not the Holy Offices; and only Convince us, That the Best Means are Lost upon
some Ill men; Who from the Eminent Height, to which they were Advanced, can
take the Advantage to Break their Neeks: Or Murder themselves, in the very
Ship, that is carrying them over to the Blessed Land. But our Lord's Family
must not bear the Blame of the Traytor's Villainy: For it was not because the
Master kept Strict Orders: But because the Servant was a Wretch of Incorrigible
Manners.

This Way of Prayer, is God's own Appointed Means; abundantly to Benefit Souls.
For this, there is an Aptitude in it: And all that are Conscientious in the use
of it, shall find such a Blessing going along with it. As the Lord Blessed
Obed-Edom, and all his Household; when the Ark, (that Symbol of his Presence,)
was there: 2 Samuel 6.11. So shall the Houses be Blessed, where Prayer Dwelling,
Calls in, and Prevails with the Blessed God, to Dwell there too.

And thus you may Increase in Riches; If you will not be Niggards in the
Expense of your Prayers. And as you all use to be at it, Laboring together to
Improve your Estates; So all be at it, Praying together, to Augment your
Spiritual Wealth. And never fear, that it will Hinder your Business, or Destroy
your Gains; to Stay for Prayers: Nor be so Hasty to be Rich, that you will not
Tarry to Pray. For what this Stops you one way, it will make you Amends, the
Hundredfold, another way. But never shall that Good be for your Good; that is
not Sanctified to you, by the Word of God and Prayer. Though so you may Tear,
and Snatch, and get it: Yet better you had been without it; When it shall Abide
by you, only to be a Curse to you; and to Rise up in the Judgment against you.

O see here how you may be best Provided, of all that shall be Good for you;
and such Good as shall never be taken from you. Ye know, how men use to follow
and Court the Great Ones, that can Advance them and their Interests; And how
they will Despise those, that have no such Friends; and Censure the Folly of
such as will not make Use of them; when they have 'em. O may you Learn this
Wisdom of the World's Children, To Frequent his Gates, who, (before all Friends
in the World,) is Able to do Exceeding abundantly for you, even Above all that
you Ask or Think: That you may not Starve, in the midst of all the Fullness; Nor
let it be said of you, Ye have not, Because ye Ask not.

3. This Family Prayer will be most for the Credit of you and your Houses. God
will Provide for your Honor; when you take such Care of his. And you shall be
Esteemed then, as a People Near and Dear to Him, and Great and Intimate with
Him. Nor can it so much ^^y you open to the Exceptions and Lashes of some
Profane Scoffers: But it will a great deal more Raise your Value, with all
their Betters. Yea the Regularity and Piety of a Sober Religious Family, has a
Beauty, that takes with many, who yet will not be at the Trouble, to Promote it
in their own. In Former days, it was thought no Disparagement for a great
Officer, to Give himself to Prayer: Nor was his Devotion counted Scandalous,
but Glorious. For Cornelius the Centurion, a Devout man, and one that Feared
God, with all his House, Acts 10.2. and that Prayed in his House; ver. 30. (Or
in his Family; for so the word (...) is used, Heb. 11.7.) and did there
Officiate Himself: Is said to be a man of Good Report, among all the Nation of
the Jews, ver. 22. And as Degenerate as ever the World is grown, Sure it sounds
more Landable still, for a House to be called, An Orderly, Praying House; than
a Wild Drinking House: And no ^^ssening Character of any Master, To be more for
God and for Prayer; than for the World, and for his own vain Pleasure.

The Gallantry and Bravery, The Furniture and Hospitality, I know, are the main
things Admired and Cried up by the Epicurean Tribe. But Wiser and Better
Judges; do see the Nakedness of the House through all these: And that One thing
still, and that the Main thing of all, is Wanting; Where the Care of the Soul
is Forgotten; and the Lord of all has not so much Respect among them, as would
be showed but to any Considerable Man, that comes to Visit them. He that has
more to do there than they all, shall not be Regarded at all. But it may be
written over the Door, God is not in this Place. His Religion here has no Room;
Nor his Name, unless it be in the Swearers or Scorners mouth. And thus the
Master Loses himself with all the best of his Friends: and more would drop
their good Opinion of him, if they came better to know him.

Though a Loose Family may call him a Good Master, who does not use to Call
them to Prayers: Yet what is he Good for, that Provides no Better for them,
than if he were an Infidel? When they shall every day be Concerned with one
another in all Business else; But no more Correspond in any Joint Worship of
God, Than if each of them were to the other a Heathen man or a Publican. If St.
Paul calls him worse than an Infidel, that Provides not for his own House, on
the Worldly Account; I know not what better to Esteem him, that will not
Provide for them, on the Religious Account. When it looks Probable, (by the
Lares and Penates, their Houshold-Gods,) That the very Heathens did offer up
somewhat like Divine Worship in their Families. How can we then Think without a
Reflection of Infamy, upon any, who Name the Name of Christ; with whom their
Lord stands even for Nothing; and they have other matters to mind, than ever to
think of his Worship?

O what a House is here kept! A Heathenish House, The Famed Author of the Whole
Duty of Man, calls them. (Part 5. Sect. 11.) Are they a Family of Christians,
where the Worship of God, by Daily Prayers, Morning and Evening is Neglected?
The late Archbishop (whose Memory is so deservedly Honored,) says, (Sermon. of
Fam. Rel.) He sees not how in Reason they can be so esteemed; Or indeed to have
any Religion. Which they have not so much as the Face of. They are more like a
Fortress of Rebels: Or a Nest of Serpents; Spitting Contempt and Defiance at
their Maker and Preserver. And thy House then is no other^ than the Seat of an
Usurper: And thou there assumest the Glory of God to thy self; where thou must
be so Uppermost; that even He shall not be Owned Above thee. And then who (do
thou think) must Honor thee, when thou can treat the most High with such
Contempt? Never do thou imagine to keep up thy Authority, by Denying his. For
that Arrogance, which makes thee so Topping, to set up thy self above thy
Sovereign^ It does but Uncover thy Nakedness, instead of Clothing thee with
Majesty and Honor: It makes thee the more Base and Despicable to all the
Faithful Subjects of Heaven. And if thou do not sooner take Shame to thy
self; He that is Jealous of his Glory, will one day bring it upon thee, before
all the World.

Thou Consultest Shame to thy House; in keeping off that Serious Religion,
which would be the Glory of thy Family. And till thou do more wisely bethink
thy self, and set up better Orders among thy Retinue; Thou art Vile and
Scandalou^ thy self; and helpest to Spoil their Credit, together with thy Own.
And you all then Live together, like a Lawless Rout; that Forget your selves,
and Mistake your Business in the World; and are going the way to be Cast out
from God for ever in the next World; Because you so Live without him in this.
And you have no way to Recover your Reputation here, and to Prevent your
Everlasting Confusion hereafter; but by Humbling your selves before him, from
whom you have so Departed; and Returning to your Allegiance, and giving up your
selves to his Service, and setting about his Business; Even that Worship of the
Great God, which is the Glorious Employment of Saints and Angels in Heaven; and
which Honors the Highest Kings and Princes of the Earth, more than all their
Crowns and Regalia, and the Plaudits and Cringings of their Subjects: Yea,
which will Raise even the Poorest of you all, to the Dignity of an Equality
with them in his Sight; and to be Favorites of Heaven, and the Beloved of the
Lord. For so Daniel was called, Chap. 9.23. Greatly Beloved. Not so much for
his Excellent Parts, or his Eminent Station; as for his singular Piety, and
Flaming Devotion. How Proud are men of the Service, to attend upon their
Prince; and not only to wait in his Presence, but to be happy in the Enjoyment
of his Favor? And what Bigger Title has the Highest Prince in the World, than
to be a Servant of the most High God? And yet to Serve his Christ, will make
you such as the King of Heaven will think fit to Honor. So says our Lord,
Joh. 12.26. If any man Serve me, him will my Father Honor. Any man, even the
Meanest man, is Capable of this Highest Preferment. And, for my part, as I
cannot but Despise and Abhor the Habitations of the Prayerless, tho never so
Fine and Splendid, Pompous, and richly Furnished: For there they are Strangers
to God, and Out with Heaven: And while their Bellies are filled with the Hid
Treasure, Leanness is sent into their Souls: and amidst all the Plenty, still
they are Beggarly, because they will not Beg. So I Reverence the Praying
Families; though never so Poor and Low in the World: For God is with them; and
the most High has a Gracious Respect unto them. And such Servants of His, you
all may be, and ought to be. Yea thus you may be Royal Favorites; and Rise to
be Great in the Kingdom of Heaven. Not by Carrying it High, like the Proud
Pharaoh, that asked, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his Voice? No, But by
Honoring him with the Profoundest Adoration your selves; and also seeing that
your Families all do the Like: Calling upon them, as his Renowned Servant has
taught you; Psalm. 34.3. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name
together. And in thus Exalting Him, you will also Exalt your selves. For you
can never indeed so Exalt him, as to make him Higher than he is: All that you
can do, is but to give him what is Due to him; and so to raise him in your own
Souls, and in others apprehensions. Yet when you do but thus much, he will
exalt you Really; and raise you even above your selves, to an Equality with his
Blessed Angels.

4. This Family Worship will make for the Comfort of your Houses: To render
them Sweet and Peaceable Habitations; amiable as the Tabernacles of the Lord;
lightsome as the Gates of Heaven; and filled with the voice of Joy and
Salvation; as the Presence Chambers of the God of Consolation. There Is no such
House kept, as where God is pleased to Dwell. And he Dwells in every House,
where the Inhabitants set themselves to Seek his Face; and meet together to
Call upon his Name. And then the very Heart of them may Rejoice, that Seek the
Lord, Psalm. 105.3. It Is not a Doleful Service therefore, but a Heavenly
Entertainment. It Is not only pleasant and comely to Praise the Lord; to recount
the Richest Favors, and to discharge your Debts in making grateful
Acknowledgments: (For that is all the Pay Heaven expects from poor Creatures:)
But even Confession eases the Heavy Heart; and Supplication gives the Mind full
Vent, and pours out all the Grievances of the Soul; and then it Returns to its
Rest.

O do not then look upon Prayers as your Drudgery, but the sweetest Festivity:
and go to God as to the Dearest Friend, and your Exceeding Joy. Though Prayer
has its Sighs and Groans, yet these are but as the Bass to the Music: and
still it is the Joyful Sound: Pleasing to the Lord, and no less so to all
experienced Souls, that delight in approaching to their God. They are to serve
him with Gladness, and come before his Presence with Singing, Psalm. 100.2. And
he promises to make them not only Welcome but Joyful, in his House of Prayer,
Isa. 56.7. So does he use them; and so do they use to find it, above all that
they are able to express it.

And therefore suffer not the malicious Tempter ever to put you out of conceit
with Prayer: To make that pass for your Task and Torment, which the Gracious
God has provided as the poor Souls Song and Hearts-Ease in the House of its
Pilgrimage; and for a reviving Cordial in every time of Trouble. And if your
Sins and strangeness to God make it uneasy to any of your Souls; it is not
because Prayer is harsh, and void of Comfort, but because your Souls are
diseased and out of Tune. And then instead of taking Distaste at the Prayers,
your business is to get those Souls in better Temper; and pray on, till you
have conquered the Difficulty, and prayed down the Sins that destroy the
Comforts. For be sure the Pleasure is to be Found, it is before you; and
therefore press on still after it, till you reach into the Possession of it.

And as they that have received Grace from the Lord, long to propagate the same
to others; so whoever has tasted the Sweetness of Prayer in secret, will desire
that all his Friends may partake with him in it; that the Harmony may increase
with the Consort: And then it is, O come let us sing unto the Lord; let us make
a joyful noise to the Rock of our Salvation, Psalm. 95.1. And this is your sweet
and comfortable living together, when you are for inviting one another to join
in the Praises of your Maker and Redeemer; and to seek all your Happiness in
his unmeasurable Fullness, who has enough to supply and pleasure you All; and
will have never the less still in himself, how much soever he bestows upon you.
O where can you ever be Better than with him? Where so Well? When to be in his
Presence is to be where is Fullness of Joy.

But separated from him, and out of this way of your Duty, O what shall you
find but Vanity and Vexation, Fatigue and Disappointment? Now and then, (it may
be) the Fair Face of Satisfaction; but still at the botrom, the bitter Root of
Sorrow. You may be cheated with Expectation of Joy in a hundred Adventures and
Expedients, while you are drawing one another from God: But in drawing nigh to
him, you draw up to the Fountainhead of Joy complete, and Pleasure
everlasting. As long as you live in the wilful Neglect of these Holy Duties,
you are quite out of your Places, and may despair there ever to find Rest to
your Souls. For Conscience (if alive at all) will never let you be easy, but
Taunt and Harass you, and give you many a Twitch and Pang, to spoil the Sport
of your sinful Pleasures; and make your Hearts sad, even in the midst of the
Laughter. So that I shall never grudge unto loose Families, all the Joy of
their wild Liberties; nor count them in better case, than those whose
Confinement to the Pious Offices seems to Debar them of all the Sweets of a
Merry Life. For I know that the Liberty of the one is only a Latitude to
Mischief, and undo themselves. And the Confinement of the other, is only a
Walling them up in a fair Walk of Decency and Duty, so to Conduct them to the
Blessed End in all Felicity and Glory. O cursed Freedom! to Rove up and down
the Broad Way after such a Leader, as has no Design in all the large Allowance
by the way, but to throw them upon an intolerable Damnation at the End! And O
happy Confinement, under an Easy Yoke, and Precious Burden! In waiting upon
the Best of Masters, that sets you not on work to serve any Ends upon you; but
only Imploys you, that he may Glorify you, and keeps you under his Discipline,
to Train you up for his Kingdom. His Service gives you Hearts-Ease on the Way,
and Heaven at the End. It creates a Blessed Peace within you, and sets Eternal
Glory before you.

So full of Heavenly Satisfaction and Pleasure, is the Life that is led with
God, in this holy Way. And the Religious House, which looks, in the Carnal Eye,
so Melancholy, and even as a Gool; The Praying Family, upon which Profane
Creatures look so Insulting and Scornfully: Such is the Sweet Retreat, the
Happy Sanctuary; where Princes and Nobles have outrun the Glories of a Throne,
and Stole away from the Pleasures of a Court; to Hide and Solace themselves:
After they have come to Learn a Wisdom, better than the World can Teach; and to
Taft that Pleasure Within, dropped down from Above; which makes them Pity the
mean Souls, that are Smelling and Hunting for Pleasure only along the Ground.

I know, some Masters and Families are for Forcing a Pleasure, quite another
way, than what I am describing: And think to Ens^^e it, and to take their Fill
of it; in Drinking and Ranting, Singing and Gaming, Jesting and Fooling,
Feasting and Jolly doing. They will have it; Not only without God's Leave; But
as it were, in Spite of his Word; quite against all that he has said. And then
the Bible must lie Close in a Corner of the House; Lest, if Opened, it fly in
their Faces; and Shame and Ruin the whole Scene of their Gayety. And Prayers,
indeed, have no Agreement with such Tempers: No, They Despise the poor Sneaks,
and Melancholy Fools; that must needs be under God's Rules; and taken up so
much in his Presence. They have no Joy, but in Forgetting him, and upon the
Ramble from him. And therefore they seem so Comfortable, only because they are
so Unconscionable; To Rob God of his Rights, and Regale themselves, with their
Stolen Meats. Their Pleasantness is the rotten Fruit of their Forgetfulness:
And all their Gladness of Heart, arises from the Hardness of their Hearts. And
O how Mad is that Mirth, which is had with God's Wrath! How can you Laugh, when
He Frowns? And while the Meat is in your Mouths, the Wrath of God is ready to
Light on your Heads! Unless you could Die, as well as Live, like Brutes; The
Dying and After-Reckoning, that will still Damp and Mortify all the Rejoicing.
Small cause then to be so Jocund upon Earth; when you are got in such a Case,
as to be even Ripe and Ready for Hell! And all the Frolicking, and Wantonness,
and Pleasure of this kind of Life, seems but an ugly Preface to the Weeping,
and Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth.

O Sirs! This is not the Way. It Is all but Froth, and nothing of Substance. It
will never do, to give you Peace within; any more than to bring you Peace at
the last; To make you Easy at the Bottom, and heartily Joyful. No, you shall
never know true Comfort in your Life, Till you turn over a new Leaf; Till you
Live to another End; and walk more Humbly with your God: Till you are upon
better Terms with Him; and keep a fairer Correspondence above; and accustom
yourselves to the Exercises, that look Hopeful, to fit you up for your highest
Advancement. When your Families look like so many little Colonies and
Nurseries, meet to be Transplanted into the Paradise of God: Then you may
Rejoice indeed, that your Names are Written in Heaven. And when your Valleys
are covered over with such blessed Fruits, they may Shout for Joy, and also
Sing. So sweet is it to Live with God in this way of Duty: That will make you
to look with Comfort even upon Death, and Desire to be Disselved. and to be
with Christ. And then you may ^fford to go Rejoicing all the Days of your Life;
and fear nothing to Destroy the Comforts that grow upon such a Root.

Thus much I have to say for the Family Prayer. And now let us hear, what any
has to say against it. It Is wonder if it be not contradicted: Wonder if the
great Ruler of the Darkness of this World has no Advocates in it, to Plead his
Cause; which, by this means, seems in danger to be so much Damnified. Some
Objections I have Heard. And some I do suspect, that I not expect to Hear. For
there are Colorable Excuses for the neglect; that use to be alleged: And
there are Real Causes of it, that lie Concealed: As not thought fit to be
mentioned. I shall take Notice of both. And of the former sort are, The want of
a Command, The want of Time, The want of Ability, The want of Company, for it:
And the want of Success in it.

1. Some except against this Family Prayer, for want of a Command. They
complain, That it is the making of Duties without any Commands: And cry out of
the Imposing and Priest-Riding; To bring a Free People under Slavery; and Tie
them up, where God has left them at Liberty. Now this is a heavy Charge; could
it be made out. And I know from what Quarter this Wind uses to blow. But it is
well, that if is but Wind; and that there is so little Reason for it. I am not
upon a Disputation, but an Exhortation: And therefore shall not pretend to an
ample Demonstration. But besides, That I have already prevented my self, for
proving the proposed Duty, to be a needful Duty: I believe, that the Objectors
Cavils are not Reasons that satisfy even themselves: But they go conscious that
their neglect is more for want of Mind to it, than of a Command for it. When if
there were no Express Charge in Particular; yet it is so evident, That the
whole Drift of God's Holy Word, is to set us about our Heavenly Father's
Business, and to engage us to follow it with all our Might, all our Days, in
all our Stations and Relations. And to look upon all the little Time we have
here, but as a preparing Time for the Place and State, where we must abide for
ever. And still to carry ourselves in this Vale of Mortality, as the Candidates
and Seekers of a better C^untry, in everlasting Glory.

It Is not only the Letter of Scripture, and what is expressly said in it, but
also the Deductions of Scripture, and what may naturally be drawn from it, that
we are to look upon as Scripture, and our Rule to go by. We must be determined
by, Thus says the Lord, though not said in Terminis, when it is by plain and
easy Consequence. Else we might not only turn Baptism out of the Church, but
the Lord's Day out of the World, as well as Prayer out of the House.

But besides the Command to Pray every where, that is fit for the purpose, as
you must all own your: Houses to be, unless you will condemn yourselves as
unfit to Lave in them; if you make them: unfit for it: And the Command to
continue in Prayer, Col. 4 2, which was given particularly to Masters of
Families: And the Duty which our Lord has taught us in his Prayer, to do the
Will of God on Earth, as it is in Heaven; which, be sure, is with the joint,
unanimous Adoration of all that Glorious Family: God has said enough in his
Word, to Determine the Practice of all his D^vout Servants, and Dear Lovers:
Though not to satisfy the perverse and disafficted Ill-Willers, who use to show
the Mettle that they should spend in the Service, to Argue themselves out of
it, and to Condemn the whole Generation of his Children, in all Ages and Places
of the World, for a Company of Mistaken Zealots; to accustom themselves still
(as they have done) to this Family Worship. When, indeed, the general constant
Usage of these, may go for one of the most Authentic Comments upon God's
Revealed Pleasure, in all such common Practical Cases. And the usual Opposers
of this Service, are too well known to be none of the likeliest Persons, to be
best Acquainted with the Will of God. Nor are they so Tender, to consult the
Divine Pleasure, in any thing that makes for their own Pleasure. And what suits
with their Humor, they do not call for a Text to prove it. No, they can often
force their way through a Hundred Texts that Condemn it. But what they have no
Kindness for, they are not willing to believe themselves Bound to. If it go
against the Stomach, they are forward to Fancy it may as well be let alone. In
that which is to be done for God, they Dispute the Obligation: And they will put
him to make a Distress upon them; to get his Rights of them. He must go to Law
with them; but they shall find good Law in abundance against them; for that
Ungodliness, which is the Grand Bar to their Prayers.

Should an Earthly Prince but give them as much Intimation of his Mind, that
they should be Welcome with him, coming as often as they would for Riches and
Honor: A Hint should serve the turn: And how soon would they Spell out the
meaning? And not hang long in Suspense, whether they were bound to go or not?
And if the King of Heaven has given sufficient Indication of his Mind, that the
Morning and Evening Sacrifice of the Family, are such a Sacrifice wherewith he
is well pleased. What if he would not speak out more particularly, that he
might trust Love, and leave somewhat to the Conduct of that Spirit, which is to
Lead his People into all Truth? And to try the Choice of Heavenly Wisdom;
whether we will not understand ourselves better, th^n to Wrangle away the Holy
Work, which is so much out Blessed Privilege? You may rest ass^^ed then, that
here you do well, and take the safest part: And that when your Lord comes, you
shall never be Blamed, but Blessed, to be s^^nd so doing.

2. Some plead want of Time, to Excuse them from the Work. They have (all of
them) their Hands so full, so much lying upon them; such a Hurry of Business,
such Multiplicity of Affairs, this and the other to be done; they know not
which first. Between the Care of their Families, the Burdens of their Places,
the Ailments of their Bodies, and the Crosses and Troubles of the World, that
they cannot have time to Attend these Family-Prayers. They are too much called
upon themselves, to lie Calling upon the Lord. They would do it, but they have
no Room for it. And so they put off their Monitors, and seem to Content
themselves, that they cannot Help it, and it is none of their Fault. And it is
well in the mean time, if they be not more pleased than grieved with the
Hindrance.

Now, though it is true, some have much more, and better Leisure than others;
and so more may be expected from them: And the heavier Reckoning remains for
them, if they throw away those precious Opportunities upon their
Impertinencies, or in the Devil's Service, which God gave them, wherein to
Glorify him, and to work out their Salvation. And such as are Involved in more
Business and Cumber, I shall leave to Examine themselves, Whether they do Groa^
under the Burden of their Apostasy; that they must Eat. their Bread in the
Sweat of their Faces? And do not rather Rejoice, that they have got an Evasion,
to. Privilege them from being any more concerned in the immediate Attendance
upon their God.

Yet which of you all can pretend, You have no Time for doing that, which God
gave you all your time in the World to do? Or do you think it will bring you
off at the last, for neglecting the One thing needful, that you were so
cumber'd with many things else? When compared with that, Alas, What are your
many things, but as so many Rattles, which the Children stand shaking; or the
Dirt-pies that they make; or any such pitiful Trifles, wherewith they Amuse
themselves? Unworthy ever to be Named as any Apology, why the Great Lord of all
should not be duly Attended, and his Worship and Service constantly performed.

Whatever Business else you have, be sure still, Your greatest Business of all
is with Him: And all the rest will come to nothing without him: And you will be
never the better for any thing that ever you do, if all your Works are not
Begun, Continued, and Ended in Him. If you cannot find time to do the Work of
God, you will one day Curse the Business that took you off; and find, after all
the Bustle, you had as good all your Day to have stood Idle, as so to fill it
up, there was no Room left for Prayers. You say this must be done, and that
must be done. But our Lord has taught you to say, I must work the Works of him
that sent me; and that must not be left undone. If one or the other must needs
be omitted, the Wise and Faithful Servant of God will quickly determine which
shall Truckle and give Place: And rather borrow from his Meals, or his Pillow,
than He shall have none of his Time, who gives it All; yea, and renounce that
Calling, wherein he cannot Abide with God; and rather venture himself to be
turned out of Doors; than grasp so much Business, as to Justle Prayers out of
Doors.

But Poverty and Troubles look very ill Excuses to shif^ off Prayers; when
indeed they are more in Season than ever. For, Is any afflicted, let him Pray.
James 5.13. And Call upon me in thee Day of Trouble, Psalm. 50.15. As then you
have the most Need of Help; so then you have the Thorns in your Sides, to Prick
you on the more to look after it. And in such Times and Cases, you are never
the worse provided with Sufficiency for this Work, which requires not Bodily
Strength, nor any Money to Raise this Stock. And you might be thought as Crasy
in your Minds, as in your Bedies, if you should think fit to let alone your
Prayers, till such time as you had nothing to Trouble you; and no less Idle, to
put it off, till you had nothing else to do. For all would pretend some things,
and some would Enumerate many things still to be done, and so there would be no
Time at all left for Prayers.

But some are busy Men, and they Love (more than Need) to be so. They plunge in
the Business, peradventure, to Save themselves from the Prayers. They are for
hiding in these Thickets and Bushes, (like Guilty Adam and Eve) from the
Presence of God. They will still find themselves somewhat else to do; who
cannot Skill of this Work, nor Abide it. Though they can find Time for a
hundred smaller matters; they have none for this. They have Time to pick up all
the Stories of the Neighborhood, and all the News of the Kingdom; and so they
seem not to have Business enough of their own, but must have their Sickle in
every ones Harvest; and tell what this Man should do, and Censure another for
doing that: And their Tongues run Divisions upon every ones Concerns, as if
they had nothing else to mind. And yet they want Leisure to go speak with God,
about the most Important Business of their own Everlasting Salvation. They Want
it, and they make themselves want it; they will want it. But Time should not
fall them, if their Hearts did but serve them for the Work. The poorest
Laborers will have Time to Eat, and Drink, and Sit, and Chat, and Sleep, and
Rest. And sure those in Wealthier Circumstances have more Command of their
Time. Or who is to be blamed, if they Impose harder Necessities upon
themselves, and will not better Consider their own Souls. But I shall show
them, (e're I have done) that there is somewhat else, and worse yet, than the
Business, lying in the way.

David, and Daniel, and others, were as much busied as they, yet they gave
themselves to Prayer, and would find time for that, whatever became of their
other Concerns. David had all the Business of a Kingdom to look after; yet the
Cumber did not so Distract him, nor the Pomp so Dazzle him, nor the Pleasure so
Enguls him, as to tun him into forgetfulness of his God, and his Duty. No, he
minded a greater Business than the greatest on Earth; and left all to go to the
God of his Life. And so will every one, whose Heart is Right with God. All the
World shall not keep them from it. Love and Zeal will make the Way, and break
throw every Impediment; and Despise the Common Pretentions, as very
Insignificant, that are counted the Just Bars, and Lawful Hindrances of Prayer,
to make some Houses Exempted from the Service.

And I must be bold to tell you, That it argues either your silly Improvidence,
no better to Cast your Time, and not leave Space for that which concerns you
Eternally: Or else your open Ungodliness, to Prefer your filthy Lucre; or your
fleshly Pleasure, before the Blessed Communion with your Heavenly Father; and
not to slight all the World, rather than the Supreme Eternal Lord. If you would
be less Worldly, or more Orderly, you should find Time sufficient. And take
heed that you do not make Diversions, as well as Necessities, to defraud the
Blessed God of his Service, and to rob your Souls of (...) greatest Advantage.
Take heed you do not catch hold of any Business, to supersede and rid your
Hands of somewhat else, that is against your Humor. For you know well enough,
what Uses to be done, when your Will is to it, and your Heart is set upon it.
You know how you can sit up, and Work, to Dispatch any Worldly Occasions that
you are for Promoting. And what is your Beloved Work, that shall be even your
Every-day's Work; nay, in the midst of your greatest Business, you will steal out
for a little sweet Correspondence with the Dear Friend that you Love above all,
when you have him just in the House with you, or very near to you. And if God
be the chiefly Beloved of your Souls, you will make such a Loose, from all
Occasions in the World, to get to him, and even Force the Opportunity for it,
rather than want it. And would you Adjourn every Business else, that his might
be dispatched: Would you leave all to come to Him, when yet so much lies upon
you: This, this would be indeed acceptable to Him, and the kindlier taken by
Him.

But amidst all the Business, beware that you have not Time for Forgery, and
Coining false Counterfeit Reasons, which you know will never pass with Him; to
whom you must give Account. Do not betray the wretched Hypocrisy of this
Pretense, at your Idle Times and your Spare Hours, when it is Vacation with
you, and you have even Nothing to do: And yet even then, no more shall be done
for God, than when you were never so much taken up. Nay, when you can be so
lavish even of God's Cons^rated Time, and commit Sacrilege upon the Hallowed
Season; to make it serve for any thing, rather than his Holy Service. And then
it seems you have too much Time, and yet it is all one, as when you had too
little; that is, you find Occasion to Shift off the Work, even at all Times.
And on the Lord's Day, when you cannot have the Business of the World in your
Hands, then you must have some Bauble in its stead; and to Divert yourselves,
when the Sacred Time lies heavy upon you, ye are ready to tun after
Butter-Flies; to catch hold of any Occasional thing to pluck you from
Attendance upon the Lord; and glad of any Company or Accident, (though never so
Trifling and Sportive) that will but Relieve you here, and help to deceive the
Work of the Day.

O see the old Deceiver in this, and be not so Fooled and Cheated out of those
precious Hours, that you have, or might have if you would, to Serve your God,
and to Secure the Salvation of your Souls. Consider, I beseech you, How little
a while it is, till your Mouths will be Stopped, and the Days of Request will be
over; the Times of Audience, and all these Opportunities of Address to the
Majesty of Heaven, will be past and gone; and all the fair advantageous
Seasons, of Calling upon the God of your Salvation, will be quite at an End.
And you that now complain, you have no Time, shall ere long find Cause indeed
for that Complaint; that you have none. No, all your Time is slipped away, and an
unchangeable Eternity has swallowed you up. Yet a little while, and the Door
will be Shut, and no Hearing; though you Cry never so hard, Lord, Lord, Open to
us. Your Day of Grace will soon go out in an endless Night; and your Season of
Mercy, the accepted Time is now, even to Day. But you know not what shall be on
the Morrow You have no Ass^^^ance, but this Day shall be your Last. And then
are not you infinitely concerned, as to Hear his Voice; so let him hear Yours
to Day? According to his Call, Isaiah 55.6. Seek ye the Lord, while he may be
found; Call upon him, while he is near. When our Lord says, He comes as a
Thief, and his Day as a Snare; and you know not the Day nor the Hour. O do not
stand complaining you want Time, when you have it, but use it while you have
it; and be in Care to Live, as you would be Found. And take his own Warning and
Charge, Luke 21.36. Watch ye therefore, and Pray always, that you may be
counted worthy to escape all Evils that are coming upon the World; and to stand
before the Son of Man. And while you wait for his Coming, wait much upon your
Knees, in your Prayers. And then Blessed is the Servant, whom his Lord when he
comes, shall find so doing.

3. Some plead Insufficiency, and would be excused from Family-Prayers for want
of Ability. They have not Heads and Memories, Invention and Elocution. Though
they can make shift to say somewhat for themselves, yet they should make
nothing of it before others; but to Pollute the Office, Confound themselves,
and Offend the Company. Therefore as good and better never meddle with it, nor
offer at it.

To this I answer, If you have Sense and Reason, Good Judgment and Voluble
Tongues, Skill and Readiness, to speak well enough of other matters, it is your
Inexcusable Fault, that you are no better provided here. For some that have
Parts and Boldness sufficient to speak to any Man; yet when they should pay the
Duty they owe to God, all their Wit and Courage fails them; and here they can
say Nothing. If it were to speak for their Bodies, and the Concerns of the
World, they could find their Tongues; and who more ready? But when it is for
the Soul, and for Heaven, they are at a Stand and Loss; and here would have it
pass for their good Manners, to be Silent. Now, if such be your Case, it speaks
rather your Carelessness, than your Weakness; and that you do not so much want
Skill, as Will, to the Work. And then you are to use your Endeavors, better to
Fit and furnish your selves for it; and beg of God to grant the Gift and the
Spirit of Prayer, that you may Discharge it in an acceptable manner; and that
you may not be readier to put forth yourselves in any Service else, than in
his, who made you to Serve him, and who best deserves all your Best.

And take head you forbear not to do it at all, because you think, you cannot
do it with a Flourish, or as well as the Best. Aim not at Neathess and Finery,
but Plainness and Sincerity. No matter how Plain, if it be but Pertinent. Do
but Honestly and Devoutly as you can; and Task not yourselves above what you
find your Strength to be. Yet use yourselves to it, and by Practice, you will
still Learn to do it Better. A great Zeal for it, will be like Wings to early
you through it. And if you give your Minds to it, you will find yourselves (even
beyond your Expectation) enabled to go on with it. Or though you are Infirm and
Indisposed for it, and not so Fervent upon it, yet where there is no Keen
Appetite, (in Sickness) there must be some Eating, or there can be no Living;
and then even in the Use of your Food, you may find a better Stomach.

When Dullness is the hindrance; a Serious Consideration may Warm and Rouse you
into Zeal and Devotion. And you will carry the best Prayer Book in your own
Breast, when you well work upon your Hearts, the lively Sense and Apprehension
of your Sins and Wants, your Maladies and Enemies, your Temptations and
Dangers; the Corruption of your Nature, and the Deceitfulness of your Hearts;
the Shortness of your Time here, and the Eternity of your Abode elsewhere; the
Certainty of Death, and the Dreadfulness of Judgment; the Joys of Heaven, and
the Pains of Hell; the Miseries of Others, and the Mercies of God to You and
Yours; his Presence with you, and his Inspection of you; his Power over you,
and his Justice to give you what belongs to you; the Necessity of a Savior,
and the Fullness of his Satisfaction; his All sufficiency and Inclination to do
for you; and the Usefulness and Prevalency of Prayer, to help you to all that
you can Need or Crave. These and the like Thoughts set Home, and duly pondered
in your Minds, will raise such a Stock and Supply at hand, that you need not be
to seek for the Materials of your Prayers.

But where your own Experience tells you, That all this will not do. God be
thanked, you have Variety of other helps in a readiness; and you may provide
yourselves with Choice of such Books' of Devotion, as you find most proper and
agreeable to your Condition. And if you do not only Read, but Pray over those
Forms, provided to your Hands, and Inform them with a Soul, and bring a Spirit
to the Book, and put Life into the Dead Letter, your poor Offering then shall
be nevertheless Acceptable and Effectual, for using the Words of Others, when
the Devotion is your own: And you do it not in this manner to save your Labor,
but because you think another has Expressed it better for you, than you can do
for yourselves.

But when such as these are all the Helps you have; and you think it enough to
have them: And there let them lie by, Idle in your Houses; they may so little
Befriend you, as to prove some of the Books opened in the Judgment, to bring in
Evidence against you, for such Supine Oscitance, and Shameful Laziness, that
you would not so much as be at the Pains to use them. And who will then regard
your Complaints of the Cold, if you May, and Will not, go to the Fire? You are
like to continue still Indisposed, if you will not endeavor to Read, and
Meditate, and Pray your selves into a better Temper.

There is one Case yet, which this will not come down to; and that is, among
such of the poorer Sort, as can neither Read themselves, nor have any in their
little Families that can. Such may plead the Inability, for which you may think
there is no Remedy. Yet have I heard a Man pray with Fervency and Propriety of
Speech, that did not know a Letter of the Book. And he that ordains Strength
out of the Mouths of Babes and Suck^ings, can make the Illiterate herein to
exceed the Scholars. But where he is not pleased to make up the Educator's
Neglects with such Extraordinary Gifts; yet they that cannot Read, may
notwithstanding (without Book) know their Sins, and Confess them; and for
Christ's Sake beg Pardon of them, and Power against them: And for Grace, to be
pleasing unto God; and by his Goodness, to be Provided for here, and Saved for
ever. And when they do but this heartily, as to the Lord, they shall be heard
without their Muchspeaking.

And further than this, they may Learn a Prayer by the help of others. And I
scarce know how any that Frequent our Churches, can Escape the Learning and
Remembering some of those Prayers, which they have heard so many hundred times
over. And if they do but carry away the Confession, with which we begin at
Church, and the Prayer of our Lord, and here and there a short Collect; they
may make a Service of this at Home, as Good in the sight of Heaven, as that of
their better Accomplished Neighbors, because it is the Best that they can
offer. And now by these means, all may be so helped out, that none shall find
any Excuse for his Impiety, from his Inability.

4. Some would justify their Neglect of Family. Prayer, for want of Company.
Either others Abroad, to Accompany them in it; or such Partners at Home, as are
fit for it.

1. They plead the want of Company Abroad. It is a thing so out of Use in
Multitudes of Families, yea, and many that are of Good Reputation, and well
Esteemed in the World; but here and there a Few that keep it up, and appear for
it, and are constant in it. And would you have us then to Upbraid our honest
Neighbors, with our Pretensions to be Wiser and Better than the rest? Would
you persuade us to be so Unfashionable and Singular, as to Expose ourselves to
Censure and Laughter?

I hope the Omission is not so Common, nor the Practice such a Rarity, as the
Objection intimates: And that it is not yet grown such a Scandolous thing for a
Family of Christians, to Join daily together, to give the highest Honor they
are able to their Lord. I am willing to think with more Charity of a Christian
Country. And as much Truth as is in the contrary, is (I am sure) as much
Reproach to us; and one of the worst things that could be said of us. But the
Universality of Sober Men have another Sense of the Matter; and cannot but
think the better of these Families, that show such Exemplary Piety, as all the
rest ought to Imitate. And if any seem well to Pass without it, they would be
much more Praiseworthy with it. Whatever else is commendable in them, their
Casting out the Worship of God, casts a foul Blot upon them. For tho here and
there a Profane Wretch foams out his own Shame, in throwing Contempt and
Derision on the Praying-Families, and making their Seriousness his Sport: Such
Revilers of them, may too late wish, That themselves had been found among them,
when the Lord shall come with Ten thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment
upon such Scoffers, for all their hard Speeches which they have spoken against
Him; to Disgrace and Interrupt his Servants in the way, where he put them; and
where it would better become those who profess the same Holy Religion to Follow
them, than to Object their Faithfulness against them, and turn their Piety to
their Infamy.

But if any, here wonder at your Singularity, you have much more Cause to
wonder at their Impiety; and let them Wonder on, but for all that, do you Pray
on: As you are taught by a very great Example, Psalm 71.7. I am as a Monster to
many: But thou art my Strong Refuge. I care not how Prodigious they accout the
Practice, as long as I find how Blessed is the Benefit. You may as much Despise
their mighty Numbers, as they Despise your numerous Prayers; and still think
but so much the better of them, because such as they are against them. To
Season your Houses with Religion, and make it Familiar to your People; if this
be to Break the Custom, it is such a Custom sure, as has great need to be
Broken. What if Few do follow this way? Has not our Lord told us, That Few do
find the Way to Life? And has he not intimated the Reason to be, because so few
do Strive to Enter? And is not the Chief of all our Striving in our Praying?
But is not all the Struggle in Prayerless-Fathilies quite of another Nature?
Alas, all Careless Sinners are so far from striving to Enter in at the Strait
Gate; that they scarce set their Faces this way, so much as to Seek after it.
And these, I confess, are a vast Number. But yet such as are now for a Poll,
and Glory in being of the bigger Number, will not find it for their Interest to
stick to that way, and there be Found, when the great Shepherd and Bishop of
our Souls shall come to Separate the Sheep from the Goats. For though they had
far more than they have on their Side; the little Flock will then have the
Infinite Advantage of them, when their Father shall give them the Kingdom; and
at the some time Disown them that were Ashamed of him, and thought his Worship
a Disparagement to their Houses; turning them over to the Master, whom they
S^^^'d before Him; and who had more of their Devetion, than their Rightful Lord
could ever get from them. And upon whomsoever the Scorn and Confusion is now
cast, they shall then, to their Cost, find to whom it Belongs.

One thing under this Head, (though I do but touch) I must not Slip. For I have
heard it objected, That even some Ministers do not keep up these Prayers in
their Families. And if they that have the Sacred Calling, which brings them so
Nigh to God, to stand between him and the People, do not think themselves
Obliged to it: What can you expect from the Laity, from Tradesmen and poor
Laborers? If they that are the Mouth of the rest, be Dumb and Speechless this
way; must the People usurp the Office of their Teachers, and take upon 'em to
Teath them? i. e. To Teach them better things than their Own Practice?

I am willing to believe, That this is all Calumny: And that there is no
Foundation for it, in matter of Fact, shall I say, or foul Neglect. But if
there be any of my Brethren, that give no better Patterns: (As there were
Pastors so Brutish, not to seek the Lord, Jer. 10.21. And our Lord himself had
one of the Function, that was more for what he could get of the World, to Fill
the Bag; than to Draw down Blessings from Heaven, and to be Filled with all the
Fullness of God:) I will take the Boldness to drop a Word of Exhortation, even
for Them, whose business it is to Exhort others.

I Beseech you Brethren, by the Mercies of God, and by all that is Dear to you
in the World; Do not throw such a Stumbling Block before your People; nor so
Block up your own Passage to the Throne of Grace. You know, that your Work is
not only to Preach to them, but to, Pray for them, and to recommend their Case
unto Him that is able to Help them; and to give you Success among them; and to
Bless all your Labors bestowed upon them. And shall the House of the Man of
God, be void and empty of the Worship of God? What Good then are you like to do
them, by all that you say to them, at the House of God? They will be more
Inquisitive after your Orders at Home, than Determined by your Rules at Church.
And all your most Elab^rate. Preaching will not Help them, so much as your
Scandalous Neglect of Praying Hinders them: Tho you Extol Prayer (proform^)
from the Pulpit, for a Flourish, to Set off your selves; (and indeed unto such
as are acquainted with your Domestic Practice, to Condemn your selves;) Alas,
Why should they Regard that, which they know you so to Slight? Let your Houses
then, as well as your Sermons, show them what they have to do. And let not your
own Walls, as well as your Neighbors Mouths, cry out of you, for unfit to take
Care of the Church of God; when you no better Rule your own House, 1 Timothy 4.5,
6. You have a Talent to Exercise, which the other Appointed Offices leave but
little Room for at the Church. I mean, The Gift of Prayer. And where can you
stir up and improve that Gift of God in you, so well as in your Family? O do
not hang all upon the Common Charge then, to Live only upon the Public Stocks:
Nor let that Privy Key which God has given you, to his Treasures, lie by and
Rust, for want of Use. But Use it; and Love to Use it. And that not only to
Stop the Peoples Mouths, but to bless and enrich (together with their Souls)
your own Houses and your Hearts.

This to a Few; I hope, to a very Few. But now again to All.

If you do not look altogether upon Others, by them to determine your own
Practice: If you will not Refuse to take the way for Heaven, till such time as
you can have all the Country along with you. Yet

2. Do you suspend the Family Prayer, because you have not Company at Home, sit
to join with you in it? Why, what is the matter with them? Are they such
Ignorant Creatures, they know not what belongs to Prayers? Or such Wicked
Sinners, That God will not Hear them, but count their Prayer Abomination? Yes,
you think, they are some of them so Dark and Stupid; and all of them Corrupt
and Unconverted.

But take heed that you do not involve your selves in as bad a Guilt, when by
the Rash Judgment you pass your Sentence without certain Knowledge; and so may
Condemn those whom God will not. Or put the Case to the worst, that it is as
Bad as you Suspect with them: Yet how do you know but that God has Designs of
Everlasting Love to them? And what can you tell, but in time by your very
Prayers he will Call and Convert them? Would not you have them lie in the Way,
and under the Use of his Prescribed Means? What would become of all our Prayers
at Church, if the Presence of wicked men should spoil them? Tho it is then a
mighty Encouragement and Advantage, to have Right Hearted Zealous Partners to
strive with us in our Prayers; (and instead of throwing Water upon the Sparks,
to bring their Bellows to Blow up Devotion into a Fl^me:) Yet you must not
therefore forbear the Service, because you have not such as you could wish, to
assist in it: But Pray the Harder with them, and for them; that they may be
made such as you would have them. For even the Wicked shall not be Rejected,
Returning. But how shall they get out of their Wickedness, without their
Prayers? Their Praying is one great Expression of their Repenting, and the very
Way of their Returning. And so the Calling them to Prayer, is a Calling them to
Repent, and Turn to the Lord, i. e. To do the thing whereof they have the
greatest Need of any thing in the World. It Is your kindest Charity* then to Put
them upon it; and you could not be more Cruel, than to Excommunicate them from
it.

5. Some throw by the Family-Prayers for want of Success. They see them do no
Good upon many that Use them: and they find themselves never the Better for
them: and so they are Heartless to be Concerned with them.

I confess men may here as well as elsewhere, bestow Labor in Vain, if they
will. For the Prayers will not work like Potions or Plasters, by mere
Application: and all that Use them will not of necessity be Healed by them. For
it is not the Bare use, but the Right use, that will make them effectual. Many
do give them the best Commendation, in the Good Fruits, that they make appear,
Produced by them: and can put to their own Seal, for the Blessed Effects. And
such as are still too Bad With them, might have been yet much Worse Without
them. And you that Complain, for want of Experience in your selves, of any
thing done by your Prayers, whereof you can make your Boast; Peradventure may
know the Fault, where it Sticks; that they are no more prosperous. And then
your wisest Course is, Not to Fall out with the Prayers, but to Correct your
selves; and Remove that which Hinders, out of the way. That so you may order
the matter to more advantage; and not still be Counting over the Treasure, and
grow never the Richer: But so Pray to God, That you may find Cause to Bless
God, for what you have got by the Trade. And for that Way of Management, I am
to give some Advice, before I have done.

But here let me Caution you, from making Hasty Conclusions, and Denying the
Fruit of Prayer; only from your present Sense of the Matter. For you may have
the Benefit, which you do not Observe; and the Prayers may do you Good many
other Ways; tho you Perceive not the Good, to your Mind, in some particular
Manner, proposed or expected by your selves. The Phy^i^k that makes Sick, is
yet in order to Health. And you must not Look for the Harvest, as soon as the
Seed is Sown. God will Avenge his own Elect, that cry day and night to him: Tho
he bear long with them, Luke 18.7. Yea he will do it Speedily: That is, The
very First Fit Opportunity: Tho not so Soon as they might make Account. And tho
you do not now Feel the Benefit, you must Wait till you do; and Believe, That
you shall be the Better, for Following the Course, which He himself puts you
upon; who has Pleasure in the Prosperity of his Servants; and does not bid the
House of Jacob, nor any House of Yours, Seek his Face in vain.

But after all these Complaints, of wanting a Command, and Time, and Ability,
and Company, and Success: There are other Wants, that more need to be
Complained of, for Hindering these Prayers. Tho they be Wants here less
Observed. Even, The Want of Wisdom, Humility, Zeal, a Heavenly Mind, The Love
of God, and a Holy Life. As I shall show next, in pointing out the Real Causes,
That Family Prayer is so much Neglected. And these Causes I take to be,
Ignorance, Pride, Sloth, Worldliness, Enmity to God, and The Love of Sin.

1. Ignorance is a Cause. For the Prayerless Families do not Know, or they will
not See (which is the worst Ignorance of all, because a Wilful one,) the Needs
of their Souls, which should Hasten them to their Prayers: Nor see the things
of their Peace, which should make them Glad to be so Employed. Many pass for
Knowing men, yea, Deep and Sharp, Shrewd and Politic; and they are really Wise
in their Generation: Who more Cunning, to Serve their own Turns, and to bring
about their Worldly Ends? But to do their Souls Good, and to render themselves
for ever Happy, They have no Knowledge. To Ingratiate themselves with the Best
of all Friends, and and to Compass the most Blessed of all Ends, in the matters
of God's Holy Religion, and their own Eternal Salvation. Here all their Skill
sails them. They act as Idiots and Novices; and show the extreme Folly, in
turning away from the Supreme Felicity And tho they cannot choose but get some
Knowledge of God in his Creatures, yet they do not Know him in his Son; nor as
Revealed in his Word; nor as showing his Power and his Glory in the Sanctuary.
They do not Know how Great he is; or else they would more Fear him: Nor how
Good he is to his Servants; or else they would be more with him, when they
might Get so much by him. And tho they make a Quarrel, upon the Charge of
Ignorance; as did the Pharis^es with our Savior, J^h 9.40. Are we Blind? They
take it heinously, that such Pretenders to know more than all the rest, should
be brought in with their ^^^oramus. But he told them, (next ver.) That as much
as they did see, only helped to Aggravate their Guilt; and so they but Knew how
to Increase their Condemnation; and were Witty, but to get themselves the more
Stripes. How many are ready to Brag, with La^d^^ea, Rev. 3 17. That they are
Rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of nothing: When God knows, They
are Miserable and Wretched, and Poor and Blind and Naked? They do not Know what
Case themselves are in. They are me^e Strangers at Home; and have no Good
Acquaintance, with their own Souls. They would Face us down, That their He^^ts
are Right, and very Good; when God's Word pronounces them Deceitful and
Desperately Wicked: And they never show us, what they are Good for; in Pouring
out of the Abundance of them before the Lord.

David begg'^ hard* of God, and made this his Argument to prevail and speed,
For I am Poor and N^edy, (...) 86.1. Tho he were a Wealthy Prince, that wanted
for nothing of the World; yet he was so W^se a Man, as to know what Need he had
of God. And it is this Spiritual Poverty, that furnishes us with the best
Sagacity: The Sense of Indigence at Home, that sets us upon Seeking Abroad.
Thus the Poor in Spirit, tho they may seem to be such as have less Need, than
some of their Neighbors, yet they Pray more and oftener: And herein show
themselves the Wiser; because they understand their own Occasions better.

But the Prayerless Families do not know what is Good for themselves: How to
Traffic with that Kingdom, where is all to be had; nor how to get the richest
Stock; to raise a Fund and Estate Inexhaustible; and to make their Fortune and
themselves for ever. If they well understood themselves indeed, they would take
their Time, while a Price is put into their Hands; and not turn their Backs so
upon the Blessed Giver of all Good, and lose All, because they would not come
to his Gates, nor lie waiting every Day, to Receive of his Infinite Fullness.
They Would be as forward as any to call Fools, where they saw Men thus slight and
neglect all their fairest Advantages in this World. And what are they better,
that will turn themselves out of all the Highest Good, World without end,
because they would not set themselves to Ask, till the Time when it was too
late to be found?

And then they that thought with themselves, We will not be such Fools, to lie
waiting thus, and spend our Time, and our Strength, in our Prayers; shall cry
out of themselves, We Fools, would not take God's (Way), but made account to do
better in our own: We mistook our Business, and our Interest both, in
preferring our Humor and our Pleasure, before our Conscience and Obedience.
And now we perceive how the God of this World infatuated our Minds, and blinded
our Eyes; how the Old Serpent was too old for us, and his Subtilty outwitted
us, and made worse than Babies of us; to fill our Hearts with deadly Prejudice
against Christ's way of receiving the Kingdom of God, as little Children. And
we have refused all the Offers of Eternal Glory: We would not Keep in with Him,
in whose Hands was all our Life and Bliss. But we Rawbled from him, and took
more care for an Inch of Time, than for the Never-ending Eternity. O, whither
are we going? And what shall we do now for ever? Had we Wist, what would have
been the Issue, we would have taken another Course; we would have Cleav'd to
the Lord, and S^uck to our Prayers; instead of Adoring the World* and Serving
our Lusts. But now the Time is past, and we are lost; and have lost All p^st
Recovery, and must bear the Eternal Brand and Smart of our Folly. O, it is the
end, that must make appear, Who were Wise, and Who the Fools. And when
Launching hence into the World to come, Then that Wisdom of the World which is
Foolishness with God, will show to be no better, even in the Worldlings own
sight. Then the Prayerless-Families will open their Eyes, and see their Error,
and find that they were quite out; and did but Trifle and play the Fool, when
you threw by the Work of God, to find you somewhat else to do; and that it was
your Ignorance which kept you from your Prayers.

2. Another Cause of this Neglect is Pride. For it is the Proud Heart that makes
Men so Sti^^ in the Knees. The Wicked through the Pride of his Countenance will
not Seek after God, Psalm 10.4. He that is so Full of Himself, sees no Need he
has to lie Begging at the Throne of Grace. When so highly conceited of his own
Dignity, he takes it for a reproachful Dimi^^tion of himself, for such a one as
He, to be commonly seen in lowly Prostrations to the Majesty of Heaven. He
counts himself too Good, to be God's Humble Servant: And Scorns it, as Below
him, to own any in his House Above him; fearing it would Lessen and Lose him
with his Family; if, before them, he should pay his Great Lord the daily Homage
and Fealty: That it would be too great a Degrading and Disparagement for him,
to Worship, and bow down, and Kn^^l (with them) before the Lord ^is Maker. O
wretched Worm! (I cannot forbear) Thou pitiful Bit of stiff Dirt! How do thou
forget thy self, and utterly mistake the way to Honor? When thou make
account to keep up thy Port and Grandeur among thy People, with Huffing and
Swaggering, Looking Big, and Talking Loud, and carrying so High, as if it were
too great a Blemish to thy Quality, to be every Day upon thy Knees in thy
Family. When, alas, in the Worship of God, all are Equal, and no Respect of
Persons. But as the Hills on the Earth disappear, and bear no Proportion at
all, but the Whole shows to Heaven as a smooth perfect Globe: So the
Metaphorical Mountains are made Low, and the Valleys Raised before the Lord.
And all, of what Degree soever, are on a Level in his Presence. Only that the
most High has chiefest Respect unto the lowly. And the Lower any Stoops in the
Humbling himself, the Higher does he Rise in the Blessed God's Acceptance. It Is
then by Abasing thy self in the Dust of the Earth, that thou will get nearest
to him who Dwells in the Heavens. Which is the Wonder, the Riddle, the Mystery
of Humility; but the Word of the Lord has established it for an undoubted
Verity; That he whosoever Humbles himself, shall be Exalted. But when thou art not
more Pliable to Bend, and too Stubborn to be brought thus Down; take heed he do
not bring thee down a worse way, and yet more against thy Heart; to make the
Sturdy Enemy his Footstool, and dash thee in pieces as a Potters Vessel.

There are a sort of Independents, that Set up for themselves, and Live to
themselves, and make themselves their only End; Atheists indeed, that Live
without God in the World. As if he had nothing to do with Them, nor they with
Him. And their Cry to him, is like that, Jer. 2.31. We are ^ords, We will tome
no mere unto thee, q. d. We Scorn to Wait upon thee. Who is Lord over us? What
is this Lord of Heaven and Earth, that we should Obey him? The Application may
seem too Keen to any among us. But I shall leave all Prayerless Masters and
Families to Examine themselves, whether they be not Ashamed of the Humble
Worship of God, and for m^er Pride, will not be Seen in it. And at the same
time to bethink themselves, what a silly, idle Attempt it is, for any to make
account of setting up their own Reputation, upon the R^^ns of his Glory.

And if any may think, it pinches too much upon the Privilege of a Gentleman,
to throw himself down Promiscuously among his I^feriors, in the Worship of his
Maker; that it is for poor Sn^aks, and Abject Spirits so to C^eap and Grange,
and Lick the Dust; and Beg and Supplicate, not only for their Lives, but even
for their Daily-Bread: If with the Arrogant Lucifer, they would not suffer God
to be the most High, but would be like him, and as High as He. If they would
have their Dependence upon him, and their Submission to him, kept as a mighty
Sec^^t; not to be Divulged by such Humble Acknowledgment and Self-Abasements:
If they count this the way to keep up their Pre-eminence, and to render
themselves the mere Considerable. I shall leave (...) their Wisdom, a little
better to Advise upon this Point; Whether it would not be more for these Credit
and Honor, to be less Houghty and S^lly? And whether Glittering Worms are ever
the less Wo^ms and Vile, because they will so fo^^^^ themselves, as to Aspire
after an Equality with the Highest? And whether we must so Co^^^ them our
Betters, as to forget, that there is an infinitely better than they? In si^^,
whether themselves would not be much Better to be Humbler; and by the Low
Abasement of themselves in the Sight of God, get them a worthier Esteem among
all Men, whose Judgment is worth the Regarding.

3. Sloth is another Cause of this Neglect. And, O how many Families count the
^^ily Worship of God too Troublesome to be endured among them? Some, for
Laziness, will not do the thing, which yet they seem to Approve of; and to wish
it done, if Wishing would do it; but they will not be at the Trouble. They have
caught the Spiritual Cold, which Benums them to all Holy things. And here they
are so Listless and Flaggy, they will not lay out themselves, nor Exercise
their Parts to Conceive a Prayer; no, nor Charge their Memories to bear one:
Nor lower yet, but so much as go over the Forms prepared by others for their
Assistance. But though they are Brisk, and Nimble, and Laborious in other
Business; yet are Heavy and Dead to this Work; and cannot find their Hearts,
nor their Hands, nor any Powers, to fall about it, or to go through with it.
They are Alive to the World, and full of Mettle for their Bodily Concerns, and
their Fleshly Pleasures: At any ones Call, for their Temporal Gain and
Advantage. But when the Lord bids them Seek his Face, they are dull of Hearing:
When his Service is to be Attended, their Strength is departed. No Delight, nor
Readiness to do the Will of God. No Preparations to Meet him; no Caring and
Contriving; no Laboring and Striving for the Blessed Fellowship with him; but
all for Slipping the Yoke, and Hiding and Stealing from the Irksome Employment.
So many Hours they are at it, even from Morning to Night, for the Back and
Belly; but one Quarter of an Hour shall be grudged, as too much to wait upon
the Lord in any Holy Duty. They have both Legs ready to run upon the World's
Errands; but when called upon Service to their Master in Heaven, they are stark
Lame, and cannot Stir. With what Vigorous Efforts will they bestir themselves,
to gain their worldly Points? And though they meet sometimes with unfeisible
things in the way, to Bass^e their Attempts: Yet, again and again, they are at
it, to try what they can make of it. But when they should be taken up with God,
yea, when it is to win Christ, and inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, here the Men
of Might are as Weak as Water, and nothing to be done, let who will take all,
for them.

And is this (do you think) a hopeful Preparation for Heaven? And like the
Taking it, even by Force? Does it not indeed look more like a Concern and
Endeavor, all they can, to Shun and Escape it? Is this the seeking Glory,
Honor, and Immortality, by Patient Continuance in well-doing, and the Fervency
of Spirit in serving the Lord? Can such Truants and Triflers in the Worship of
God, ever think this is the Way to come to him, and to Live for ever with him?
Can they look to be regarded in the number of his Servants, that will not so
much as put themselves upon his Service? And can they promise themselves all
the Ease and Rest of his Kingdom, and all the Welcome and Pleasures of his
House, that would never Labor in his Vineyard, nor be at any Pains to do their
Heavenly Father's Business? Alas, What Is all their Confidence worth, to Reckon
of having All, when they will do even Nothing? To think sure of getting to the
Blessed End, when they scarce tread a Step in the Way that leads thither? Do
they applaud themselves in the Negative Goodness, and think it enough, that
they are not mischievous Plagues to their Neighbors; and to say, They do no
Hurt? Not to dispute the Truth of that Assertion, which they would be hard put
to it, to make Good: Yet, Matthew. 25.30. you may hear a dreadful Doom past upon
a Man, To be cast into outer Darkness, where shall be Weeping and Gnashing of
Teeth. Not because he was a Stigmatized notorious Sinner, but a Sloathful and
Unprofitable Servant. It was no part of his Indictment there, That he had
Murdered, or Robbed, or played any Villainous Pranks in the World; But that he
went and hid his Lord's Talent in the Earth. He was Idle, and good for nothing,
at any Holy Duties, to Glorify and Serve the Lord. And so his Sloth and
Negligence was his Bane and Damnation. O Think of this, and sadly think of it
again, all Prayerless-Families; that Bury your Parts and Endowments so in the
Earth, that they are all lost to Heaven: And when the God that Gave them,
should have the Use of them, they are out of the way, and no such thing to be
heard of. If you do not do a little more and better, than you have done; it is
doubt, you will hear of another Greeting from the Lord, than Well done, Good
and Faithful Servant.

4. Worldliness is the common Cause of this Neglect, and the utter Ruin of the
Family-Religion. Where Mammon is the Mistress, God shall not be Owned and
Attended, as the Master of the House. No, by that time She is served, his Part
is gone. This is his great Rival, that stands in Competition with him, for our
Hearts and Service. And how frequently is the Usurper aforehand with the
Blessed Owner? And comes and gathers up all the Rents and Dues? And then at his
Demand nothing's to be had; all disposed of another way, and go^le, p^st the
true Proprietor's Retrieving And then though he stretch forth his, Hand all day
long; there is nothing but Rebelling and and Gainsaying: Either downright
denying, We will not have Him'^^ Reign over us. Or a Fraudulent Put-off, When I
have a convenient Season, I will send for thee. We are too Busy now, it cannot
be. And to Morrow shall be as this Day, and so the next, and the next. And this
Injurious Invader seldom lets go the Hold, but rather strengthens the Interest
by long Possession. And no Wedging in Religion here, among a Family of
Worldlings. They are still so Full, the Vessel will contain no more. They
cannot hold their Hands, and throw by the Rumble, never so little. And if any
Office of Divine Worship is ever stirring among them, they are Patients all the
while, as under the Ghirurgions Hands; they bear it as a heavy Interruption to
their more beloved Concerns, and long to have it, as soon as possible, out of
the way, that they may get into their Element again. And what is not quite
turned out, yet shall be so Run up in the Nurrows, that it Dwindles all away
into an Empty Formality. And no body Gares for it. No body gets any Good by it.
And, alas, How can the Wings mount up, that are so loaded with thick Clay? And
when is it like to be better with them?

Though sometimes they may talk of Lessening the Business, to Retrench the
Encroachment; yet how commonly is it but Talk? For the Love of Riches is still
a Temptation, rather to Engulf and Overload themselves with more, to lay
further Snares for their Souls, as if they were not Fast enough in already. And
then they are Snappish and Cross, to be taken off. What, would you have us
Beggars, or turn our Houses into Monastries? Indeed we would have you to be
God's Beggars, and to think yourselves more concerned to lie waiting for his
Favor, than to Court the Smiles of the World; and with such a wise and holy
Care, to Divide and Order your Time, as to make Room still for God's Worship;
even without your Hindrance for the World. Or where you must Pinch upon the one
or the other: Let it not be on God's Part. But be sure to have him first
served, and the World only used under Him, and never to steal away the Service
from him.

Nay, we would not have you render your Condition worse than it is, not to
deprive yourselves of the Happy Benefits that you might have; nor thus to
Dispute yourselves out of the highest Privilege in the World. As to cry you
Serve God in your Ordinary Calling; and that may suffice for you. And let such
Discharge the other Services, (here pleaded for) that have fitter Opportunities
for them. And you shall not Envy them the Preferment. I grant that you Serve
God (as well as yourselves and the Public) one way, by serving your
Generation, in faithfully and usefully Discharging your several Places. And let
them be never so Mean and Servile, you shall be as acceptable to God in them,
as if you were in the most Honorable Posts, and the Highest Stations. But yet
sure you would not think, that th^se poor Hindes, which are Drudging and
Moyling abroad, would argue very wisely for themselves, when their Lord should
Send and Invite them to come to him in his Parlour at certain times, and there
do some of the Better Offices, of Waiters upon him; yea, and Embolden them to
Sit down and Talk, and Eat, and Drink, with him; if they should Decline and
Refuse it, saying, They served him in the Field; and therefore he could not
blame them for not doing him any Service. But as to the immediate Attendance
and Favor offered, they had rather be Excused; and let who would take the
Office. The Queen of Sheba had a better Opinion of such Service; when she so
applauded the Advantage of Solomon's Attendants, 1 Kings 10.8. Happy are thy
Men; happy are these thy Servants which stand continually before thee. And if
the Least of you may be so Taken up with a Greater than Solomon, and are not
only Permitted, but Invited to come so Near him, and to be so Free with him;
and yet you Pray him to have you Excused, because you are Serving him in your
Particular Callings: I think your Refusal will not commend your Piety, so to
decline the Opportunities of drawing Nigh to your God; nor yet commend your
Wisdom to care no more for that Honor and Favor, than which the Kings of the
Earth, and the Angels in Heaven, cannot have a greater.

Whatever be your several ways of Subsisting in the World; (which are all
designed but for the Support of your Bodies, in the mean while, till you have
secured the Salvation of your Souls) O remember, That there is one great
Profession, which equally Concerns you and me, and every one, as the Common
Trade of us all. And that is, to provide so well for our Eternal Subsistence,
that we may live Blessedly for ever, in the World to come. And then be not so
Intent upon it, to Rise and get up in this World, to throw yourselves down, and
be utterly undone in the next. But take more Notice of your Danger, and be more
with God in Prayer, to Preserve you from that common Slaughter.

David prayed to be Delivered from Men of the World, that have their Portion in
this Life, Psalm 17.14. O beg of God, That you may not be put off with that
wretched Portion; that the Lord may not turn you over at last for your Reward,
to the Mammon which you served, and say, Take that which you Chose. You would
not come to me, that you might have L^se. You might have hall it, if you would
have come for it. But you preferred the Pelf and Dung of the Earthy before all
the Treasures and Pleasurds of Heaven. You made light of my Invitation, and
went your ways, one to his E^rm^, another to his Merchandise; where you thought
you could make better Market^. You had rath^r be the World's bored Slaves, than
the Lord's Freemen, and Followers of God, as dear Children. And now all is
gone; and that World, in which you Trust^^ and Delighted has shaken you off.
And, what will you do World without end? You thought nothing too much to do for
the Friend, that in your Woe* Need, Will do Nothing, Can. do Nothing for you.

O Sirs, did you look more out beyond this World; sure you would be more
looking Up, and have your Eyes ever toward the Lord. Did you s^e the World
passing away, as a Shedow, no more to be for ever (...) Sure you would not
Stick so unr^^sonably to it; not enduring but so much, as for Prayer whiles, to
be parted from it. But when you find the World so Rude and Impertinent, to Rush
in upon the Sacred Offices, and Mingle^ with your Holy Things; either to put
you beside them, or to Interrupt and Spoil you in them: Never abide the
Intruder so to Damnify your poor Souls, and Defraud your Glorious Maker. Let it
not here stick so hard with you, that Christ shall not have you. Like the
Customer, Matthew. 19.22. that went away in his Dumps, because he could not have
the Savior, but he must be Weaned from his Wealth. Shall the World fill your
Heads and your Mouths; your Hands and your Hearts, as if you had nothing at all
to do in it, but only to make your utmost Benefit of it? Will you be so wholly
for Back and Be^^y, as to Forget and Slight God and Eternity? O Bethink your
selves Better, and then the Lord shall Hear of you Oftener. And then you will make
the World stand Aside, till he has his Attendance paid: And not Run your selves
out of Breath in Pursuit of Mammon; ^ill you have no Breath to lay out in
Calling upon God; nor let that Pluck you from his Gates, which can never Save
you from his Wrath; nor make you any amends for the Loss of your Souls. Let
those Alarms still sound in your Ears, 1 John 2.15. Love not the World, nor the
things of the World: If any man love the World, the Love of the Father is not
in him. And Jam. 4.4. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, Know ye not, that the
Friendship of the World is Enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be the
Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God. If you cannot be so In with it, but
you must be Out with Him; and you will turn him, not only from you, but all
against you: Take heed, lest in Reckoning to Get all) you Lose all. And instead
of suffering the Prayers thus to be Cashiered and Routed; let them be set up as
the Barriers and Fences, to keep off the Encroachment: That you be not seized
by the Enemy, and carried away into an Unredeemable Captivity.

5. There is the Enmity against God, which Hinders this Praying to him. The
Wicked are all to pieces with Heaven; and then these Offices of Friendship are
not to be expected from them. They are by Nature the Children of Wrath: They
brought the Seeds of Enmity with them into the World; and the old Grudge and
Core was never yet Healed. No, Still the Quarrel goes on; and the Breach grows
but Wider. Still they are Enemies in their Minds, through Evil Works, Col.
1.21. And the Enemies in Mind are the Bitterest Enemies of all; That have the
Masice there Rooted at the Bottom. And till they be Reconciled, and made better
Friends, They will keep off, and have as Little as may be, to do with One, whom
they take for their Enemy. God's Enemies would not have him to be the Head of
the Family. No, They have not so much Honor for him. For tho we cannot bear
the Contempt and Affronts cast upon our Friends; yet we care not how much our
Encmies are Vilified and Despised: We Grudge to pay them any Honor our selves:
and we are not well pleased, to have them Admired and Magnified by others. Yea
further, We Delight in the Company and Conversation of our Dear Friends. We
Love to go to them, and never think it Long to be with them. And if your Hearts
be Joined to the Lord, you will not think the Daily Prayers come too Fast to
bring you to the God of your Lives: On that they make you have too much to do
with him, whom your Souls Love. But one that we do not Care for, we are Strange
to him; and when he comes and Offers himself, we can have Twenty Excuses to get
away, and Shift him off. And so is God Served by the Prayerless Families: He is
not to their Mind; and they do not care for his Company. Even a Godly Man that
does but bear his Image, is an Eyesore to them: They have no Kindness for him;
and how then can such a Holy God be for their Turn? When it is Likeness that
breeds the Love; and Love draws all to Union. But where there is no manner of
Suitableness, there is like to be small Dearness. And then where the Friendship
is Cold, the Visits are but very Rare and Short; and all but mere Formality,
nothing Hearty. Now such is the Case between God and Wicked Men: Who are
Estranged from the Womb; and not only Fallen from, but Fallen out with him that
Made them: Full of Prejudice against him, and Retaining no Favorable Opinion
of him. And so they are Shy toward him, and Listless to come near him. They
think they have Better Friends; and can bestow themselves more to their Content
another way. And therefore are quite off this Course: Yea so Far gone from God,
and Combined in their Apostasy, That they scarce so much as make any Mention of
the Family-Duty; unless it be in the way of Derision and Drollery, as a Name of
Scorn and Infamy; To Ridicule the Tenderness of a Neighbor, whose Pious
Practice Upbraids their own Shameful Neglect.

Now is not this a Sad and Fearful Consideration, that may strike you down, and
make you Tremble; To think that your Strangeness to God, arises from this
Enmity; and that therefore you are Prayerless, because Enemies? At Odds with
your Glorious Maker, and up in Rebellion against the King of Heaven? And then,
O what do you mean to do? Will you stand it out, and Prepare for Battle; and go
try Strength with the Lord Almighty? Are you for the Encounter? And dare you
Resist, and Venture to Bear the Shock of his Indignation? O Sottish Creatures!
How Unequal is the Combat? For a poor frail Arm of Flesh to Fight with Tempest,
Lightning, and Thunderbolts? For Dry Stubble to Maintain its Own, before a
Consuming Fire? This can never do your Business. No Standing in his Sight, when
once he is Angry. No Escaping his Hand, when he comes to take Vengeance. The
Proudest must Stoop to him; The Strongest will Sink under him.

It must be another way, that you Prepare to Meet your God. And that is, To go
and Cast your selves at his Feet, and assuage his Wrath with your Prayers; and
Beg Pardon and Peace, for his Son's Merits. For you will sind Judgment without
Mercy, if you do not make your Peace in this Time of Mercy. You will be Torn in
pieces, when there shall be none to Deliver, if of the Offended Majesty himself
you do not obtain Deliverance from this Cursed Enmity. Acquaint now thy self
with him, and be at Peace: Thereby Good shall come unto thee, Job 22.21. Yea
thou shall make thy Prayer to him, and he shall hear thee, ver. 27. That Is a
Wonderful Indulgence; for Enemies, who lie all at his Mercy, to be admitted to
Parley. That he will allow you to come, and Speak for your selves. Yea, that he
puts you upon this very Course: And the Gracious God, (wronged and offended,)
seeks first, to have all Accommodated and Healed. And will you not then take
the Time, and the Offer, while you may have it? Yea, and when we pray you in
Christ's stead, to be Reconciled unto God? If ever you will show Wisdom, to do
you any Good, show it here: and show it Quickly. Hasten to your Prayers; and
hold not your Peace, till the Lord speak Peace. And Cry maghtily, that you may
find a perfect Cure of the Antipathy. So that from Abhorring of God, you may
come to Delight your selves in the Lord.

6. One other Cause, (near akin to this,) of withholding the Prayers, is The
Love of Sin. When Wickedness is sweet in the Mouth, and (as u pleasant Morsel,)
is Hid under the Tongue, Job 20.12. Then Prayer is Unsavory and Bitter, and no
acceptable Relish to be found in it. Tho the Pious Soul uses to fall to it,
like an Epicure to his Feast: Yet as men grow Fo^d of their Sins. They fall out
of Conceit with their Prayers. And if they do not Check themselves in the
Wicked Course, They shall find a Obeck at the Throne of Grace. If you are
Conscious of Iniquity Regarded in your Hearts, and Allowed in your Practice;
Then going to the Lord in that Pickle, you can expect small Welcome, nor any
Destrable Hearing. When you go on in your Trespasses, you will be Heartless to
carry on your Prayers. And where the Wickedness is become Delicious, there the
Prayer will grow Fulsome. And how can you in earnest Pray against the things,
which you Love above all things? That which makes thee Abashed before the Lord,
will be apt to Keep thee out of his Presence. When thy doing is so Inconsistent
with thy Praying; and thou know where is the Stop, and what is the Matter,
That God Hides his Face from thee, and will have nothing to do with thee, till
thou have done with the provoking thing: Then thou hangest back from the
Galling Office; and triest to Divert and Ease thy self another way. And what
Heart have thou to Seek the Face of the Lord, which his Word tells thee is
Against them that do Evil, Psalm. 34.16. Alas, the Ungodly Wretch has got other
Haunts than to the Throne of Grace. And what should he do there, who has no
Purity of Heart, nor any Holy Hands to Lift up? The way of Frayer is utterly
Cross to the Course of his Life. And to Draw Nigh to the Holy Righteous Lord,
does nothing but Upbraid and Torment him. He can have neither Boldness nor
Comfort there: But sinds himself Easier to Stay away. And so he withholds
Prayer, as a Rub in his Passage; that he may go on the more Cl^ver and
undisturbed in the pursuit of his Lusts.

I cannot much wonder that a Wicked Family, should be a Prayerless Family.
Where their Heads and their Tongues run upon Vanity and Foolery, Pomp and
Pride, Fashions and Dresses, Dainties and Excesses, the Pot and the Game,
Cursing and Swearing, Corrupt Communication, and Dissolute Conversation, Raking
and Tearing for the World, or Brawling and Fighting among themselves: Such a
Life and Prayer, agree like Fire and Water, They are Rambling from God, and
Flying out against him: And how then can they for Shame, see one another's
Faces before him? Their Prayers would look but like a Jest; and not only a
piece of Formality, but of Mockery.

O Sinner! When thou turnest thy self loose, to walk in the Ways of thy Heart,
and the Sight of thy Eyes: When thou kickest against the Pricks, and breakest
throw all the Restraints of Conscience, to run out after thy Pleasures and
Extravagancies, thy Idols and thy Harlots, a Whoring from the Lord: When thou
live Dishonestly or Idly; carriest on Base Designs; and scornest all Holy
Rules: When thou lie weltring in Lust, swollen with Pride, fired with Malice,
eaten up with Covetousness: And all thy Sins are in their Power upon thee: And
nothing but what is Hateful to God, is Dear to thee: Does he not see thy Ways,
and count all thy Steps? Do thou not know he is aware of thee? And then with
what Face, can thou go into his Presence, and take on thee to do any thing at
Prayer? In this Case, thou art liker to make a Scoff at it, thin to have any
Serious Concern in it. And thy Companions that know thee, would but Laugh at
thee, to hear of such a one as thee, ever offering so to Employ thy self. Thou
could scarce have the Patience, but to Kneel so many Minutes at thy Prayers,
as thou could sit Hours at the Cards or the Drink. And when thou so hardenest
thy self against the Cries of the Poor; How can thou expect to find any Mercy
that wilt show none. When thou can not Forgive, but go full of Vengeance;
thou wilt be afraid of Cursing thy self, to go over the Blessed Form, Forgive us
our Trespasses, as we Forgive them, etc. When thou have been stretching forth
thy Hands to Iniquity, and Stealing or Cheating sticks to thy Fingers, what
Hands are those to lift up in Prayer? And what a Tongue is that to Bless God,
that so commonly breaks out to Blaspheme him? How can thou pretend any
Adoration to the God of Heaven, when thou know, that thy God is thy Belly?
Yea, how can thou expect to be ever the better for that Praying, which thou
can make the Subject of thy Mocking and Jeering? It Is no Employment for such
a Profane Wretch. No, thy very Praying is even as much a Taking of God's Name
in Vain as thy Swearing. There Is that Abomination in thy Heart, which Cramps
and Damps every Petition that comes out of thy Mouth. Thy Trade of Life, alas,
it stops the Breath, and Kills the very Heart of thy Prayers.

And this is the Reason, that many have so soon enough of their Prayers; as not
finding the Exercise to agree with their Constitution; nor with the drift of
their Conversation. They will not be at the Pains to Cleanse themselves; and
then they know, as good not meddle with the Prayers. Nay, the Enemies of God,
which they Reset in their Hearts, will never abide it. When it brings the Sins
to Sight, and is a kind of Arraigning themselves at the Bar of Heaven;
therefore they Abstain from it, or are so very Sparing in it; not only for
Shame that the Holy things may not Confound them; but for dread also, lest they
should Raise the Evil Spirit to Torment them.

But will this serve the turn? And shall they who go on thus perversely in
their ways, so Guard and Defend themselves in the Pessession of their Sins? O
silly, idle Attempt of Desperate Creatures! For all must come out. And the
Conscience, which they now so Strangle and Provoke, will one day Return, but
with the greater Force and Fury upon them. It Is Vain then to Cover your
Transgression, and think to hide Iniquity in your Bosom; or with a high Hand to
get the Mastery of your Convictions, and make a League and Peace with your
Sins, that shall hold Inviolable. For be sure they will find you out. And for
all these things, God will bring you into Judgment. And there is no way for you
to Escape the Danger of them, but roundly to Judge yourselves for them: And if
you Seek the Lord, to let these go their way. And as ever you would see lin
with Comfort; Cast out, the Cursed Things that set him against you. And down
with those Walls of Separation, that keep you and your Prayers from him. And
away with the Bosom Lusts, and Darling Sins, that spoil all the Dearness with
Heaven; and that cut off your fair Correspondence Above. O see the desperate
Straits into which you run yourselves, by continuing under the Love and Power
of your Sins. For if so you Hold to Iniquity, it will certainly be your Ruin.
And you cannot come out of it, without the Help of your Prayers. And yet, alas,
what Hearty Prayers can you make against the Sins, which you love in your
Hearts? And let even this, turn your Hearts for ever against those Sins, that
they blast all the Joy and Comfort of your Lives, and turn you out of the best
Refuge in the World, and make that mighty Help of poor Sinners, Insignificant
and Helpless unto you, by keeping you from it, or destroying all the Advantage
you might get by it, and making that Blessed God the Terror of your Souls, who
should be the only Joy of your Hearts.

These things considered, I hope you will not forsake your Prayers, to cleave
to your Sins. But Fly from your Sins, to get such a worthy Peace in your Minds,
that you may go sweetly on with your Prayers.

And now before I offer any Advice, for the Management of this Duty, let me
settle some Preliminaries, to make the Way for these Family-Prayers. And I will
propose but these Two Things: The fixing of some Stated Times for Prayer: And
also the Frequent Returns of your Prayers. That you may make Sure of them, and
that you may be as Osten, as is needful in them.

1. Make Sure of some Stated Times for Prayer: Though I tie up none to
Canonical Hours, or to any other Certain Hours in particular yet I would have
you to Fix upon some yourselves. After you have each consulted your several
Conveniences, for the fittest Seasons, which you find to be most Proper and
Advantageous for the Purpose: Determine the Time with yourselves, and let your
People know, that then you Expect their Attendance with you before the Lord.
That so all may cast to be Ready, and to get all that Hinders (as much as they
are able) out of the way. For the Corrupt Flesh will be apt to frame many
Evasions, to carry you off your Bias, with other Matters; when you are under
no such Rules, but only for Praying, when the Spirit moves. And if you do not
fix upon your Times, Named and Appointed, the thing will be in Danger often to
be Forgotten, and Thrust out, and to slip and drop to the Ground. Thus tie
yourselves up then, (where you have not already) and keep as near as you can to
the Set Times, that nothing (under such unavoidable Impediments, as you could
not Prevent or Foresee) may put you beside them: And that none through their
Fault, nor unless upon any Just and Needful Account, may be Wanting, but Ready
at Call for the Service. Though I deny not, but Prayer may sometimes give Place
to a less Work than it self, when it is a Fit and Necessary Work, and such that
cannot be done another Time, as the Prayer may. Then you may step aside,
somewhat out of your Way, to let the Carriage go by. But use not willingly, and
upon Frivolous Occasions, to Break your settled Measures. And when you do, let
it be so, That they who know you, may perceive, that the Interruption is none
of your Pleasure, but rather Pain and Grief to you.

But here I would take upon me so far, as to recommend to you the Morning and
Evening (...) the Beginning and the Close of the Day, as very Inviting Seasons
for your Prayers. And such as all the Faithful Servants of God, generally every
where throughout the World, have been used to make Choice of. And that not
without very weighty Reasons. Some of which let me here Suggest, as Motives,
encouraging you to be with so much Good Company.

1. For the Morning Prayers. It may well be called the best Beginning, to Begin
with him, who is the Best of all Beings. To have your First Business with God,
is such a Tincturing of the Vessel, as may make it carry a Sweet Savor all the
Day. After you have been so piously Taken up with the Lord; you will be the more
Meet for an Innocent and Useful Conversation with Men. When first you have been
Seeking Directions from Above; you will better know how to Carry yourselves in
all your Concerns. First Fruits were, of old, God's Part. And still we are to
Seek his Kingdom, and the Righteousness thereof, in the first place. And this
is one way of Seeking the Lord Early; when you Resolve with that Great and Holy
Man, Psalm. 5.3. My Voice shall thou Hear in the Morning, O Lord. In the Morning
will I direct my Prayer to thee, and will look up. And before you break your
Fast, or pour down your Morning's Draught, it is fit you should break open your
Minds, and pour out you S^uls to God in your Prayers.

And this you are to take the more heed of, that the World Rush not in, to be
served before your God; and that Bodily Occasions do not get the Start of your
Religion, so that it never Recover all the Day. Some Men are Early up; but is
only the World, or their Fleshly Pleasure, that Rouzes them. They are in Hosta
to be Bustling out and gone, before they have asked God's Leave, or taken Him
along with them. Instead of Calling upon the Lord, and first of all Securing
the Service of God: As soon as up, they are Calling upon their People, and
Spurring them on to the Service of Mammon; to make Haste, and do this and that
besure. But not a word of the thing that is most Needful of all to be done. O
what Preposterous Doing is here? The Attendance on the Vile Body, to exclude
all Care of the Precious Soul! Earth to be set above Heaven! And any paltry
Trifles, and perishing Trash, to take Place of Immortal Glory, and the God
Blessed for ever! To run away with all Speed in the Morning, without Him, that
has brought you to it; as if you had no Dependence upon him, nor he any Title
to you.

Again, I would engage you to your Morning Devotions, even for the Decency of
the thing. And to make some handsome grateful Returns to your Great Preserver,
who has brought you out of your Sleep, as out of the Hands of Death; and raised
you from your Beds, as from your Graves; and let you see a New Light, like a
Resurrection to another Life: O can you choose but say, with his approved
Servant, Psalm 139.18. When I awake, I am still with thee. As soon as I Open my
Eyes, I cannot but Lift them up to the Lord, from whom comes all my Safety, and
my continual Supply. For that I laid me down and Slept, and Awaked again; What
was it, but because the Lord sustained me? Psalm 3.5. Who did keep you in your
Sleep, when you were in no Capacity to Look to your selves? Who secur^d you
from Dangers, and Refreshed you with a comfortable Rest? And is it not worth
your Notice and Acknowledgment? And will you give him no Thanks and Praise for
it? O let even common Ingenuity extort from you the Morning Sacrifice. And
lannch not forth into the Business of another Day, Before you have paid your
humble Devotions, for the Protection, and the Repose of the last Night.

Yet further, Let me urge the Necessity, as well as Decency of this Duty. If
ever you would be safe, and Do Well, Do not Vonture out in the Morning without
this Guard and Defense of your Prayers about you. For your Souls to go thus
Undressed and Unblessed into the world, it is worse than for your Bodies to set
out Naked in the Sharpest Season. You know not what you do. So to Expose your
selves. You know not what Temptations and Perils you shall meet with; nor what
is near you, or just hanging over you: In such an Evil Dangerous World, wherein
you Live, Beset with such a Mighty and Deadly Enemy; that is still watching and
plotting for your Mischief and Ruin: And when you are so weak and Insufficient,
to maintain either your Integrity or your Safety; and it is as much as you can
do, with all your Prayers, to secure your selves. O what will become of you
then, if you get not under the Shelter of the Almighty? If you Engage not his
Aid in your Defense? You are never out of Harms way, when out with God. However
you may Fancy your selves safe and well enough, even under the Devil's Power:
(For so he will seek to Humor you, into your own Undoing:) All your Security
and Prosperity then, Alas, it is but a Dream and Imagination; when you are out
of God's Hands; and will not by Prayer, commit your selves to his Tuition. That
which looks for your Welfare then will prove but a Trap: And even the things in
which you Applaud your selves, as Best for you, will turn to your Downfall and
Ruin.

Once more,

You have as much Need of your Morning-Prayers, as you have of the Blessing of
God upon all your Designs and Labors of the Day. For how Vain is it, To Rise
Early, and Sit up Late, and Eat the Bread of Carefulness and Sorrow, Psalm.
127.2. If the Lord do not give Success, and make your Endeavors Prosperous?
The best Contrivance, and the greatest Pains will never do, without his Favor
and gracious Influence. All your Planting and Watering will signify nothing, If
he do not give the Increase, 1 Cor. 3.7. You may Plough and Sow, and Reap the
Wind; If the kindly Blessing of Heaven do not Rear up, and Ripen and Perfect
the Fruits of the Earth. You may Reckon all Sure, and Fear nothing to hinder
the Success; and yet somewhat be Latent, out of your reach to Discern; that
shall Blast and Spoil all. So that you have not only need every Morning, To ask
your Daily Bread; But a Daily Blessing upon that Bread, to make it Bread
indeed, Fit to Nourish and do you Good. And if you are so Intent upon the
Business, or in such Haste for your Journeys; that you cannot stay for Prayers;
But count that much Time Lost, which is so Bestowed: You will make too much
Haste for the Good Speed; and come to know at Last, That Prayer never Hindered
any Good and sitting work; But is the Best Means in the world, to make it
Prosperous. And whatever seeming Success you found; as good you had never had
it, if by your Prayers you did not Seek or Sanctify it. O then Begin all your
Works in God's Holy Name; and let your Prayers go before your Labors. And
never think that all your other Striving will do greater matters, than this
Striving with God for the Blessing. Nor think to Snatch it out of God's Hands,
and work it out your selves, whether He will or no: But before you Engage in
the Work of the Day, Stay to Engage and Pray him into your Interests. And
instead of fearing any Damage by this Course, Expect to Fare the Better all Day
Long, for your Morning Devotions.

2. If you Plead, That such are your Occasions, your Family, uses to be
scattered in the Morning: And one is Up and gone: Another Engaged this way,
another taken up in that Business: So that you cannot have them together, to
make any thing of the Morning Prayer. (Though I doubt not, but you might order
your Affairs, for the common prevention of this; were you indeed Lovers of God;
Zealous for the Service, and full of Concern to Promote it: Peradventure you
might amend the matter, by going to it a little Sooner, or staying somewhat
Later: Yet) in the Evening this Excuse is out of the way. For then you are
usually all together. And as you Join in a Body to Sit and Converse, and Eat
and Talk together: So why you should not Join together upon the Best and most
Needful Account of all, I know nothing to Hinder, but your own False Hearts,
and Earthly Minds, Contempt of God, and Disaffection to his Holy things. And if
one Steals to Bed before Prayer-time, and this and the other Run out, and find
themselves other Employment: It is thy Fault, as a Master, that thou do not
use thy Authority, to Oblige them to better Attendance: And see that ye take
this fair Leave of one another, before you part; to call upon the Lord with one
Consent, and Magnify his Name together. That you may not only in a Formality,
say, Good Night; but have good Reason to Hope it: And be like indeed to find
Souls-Rest in your God, as well as the Bodily Rest in your Beds: And not go
away with Regret of Conscience, for making your Beds your Lurking Holes; where
to Hide from the Lord and Outrun your Duty.

Again, If you have Forgot your selves, in the Hurry of the Day: At Night is
the Time of Recollection, to call your selves to Account, and go Humble your
selves to the Majesty Offended; And beg his merciful Pardon in Christ Jesus,
for all that you have carelessly Omitted, or wickedly Committed, the Past Day.
For who Can understand his Errors, Or know how often he Offends. O! which of
you can tell how Frequently you Fail and Break with God, in your Thoughts,
Words and Deeds, every Day, every hour. And if you would Lie down in Peace, and
find your Sleep truly Sweet; It concerns you first to Seek God's Peace, and
earnestly to Sue for Pardon. That you may find him Reconciled, before you enter
the Regions of the shadow of Death: And not go into your Beds with all the
heavy Load of the Day's Sins upon your Souls; For ought you know, Ere next
Morning, to sink you down, too Low for any more Rising.

And that is yet a further Engagement to your Evening Prayers, That you may be
Defended from all the Dangers and Terrors of the Night. Not only from Fire and
Thieves, but from the Wrath of God, and the Incursions of Devils. That the
Blessed Keeper of Israel may watch over you; when you are not in a Condition to
take Care of your selves: And that you may be Preserved safe, under the shadow
of his Wings. For O how many have gone to Bed well, and slept their Last? And
from their Beds, been Carried to lie in the Dust; Never to Wake again, till the
great Morning of the Last Day? And what Assurance has any of you, but when you
go into your Chambers, you from thence immediately go down to the Chambers of
Death? How do you know, but this Night your Souls may be required of you? How
do you know but it shall be the Last Leave that ever you w^ll take of one
another? And would not you Labor hard with God in your Prayers, If you were
sure not to Rise and Live another Day? And had you not best then be in as good
Earnest; Because you have no Certainty, but so it may prove? And let me tell
you, ye are Foolhardy, and throw a desperate Cast for Eternity; To leap into
your Beds, before you go to your Prayers. And as you should be greatly Ashamed,
to be such Brutes, so you should be as much Afraid to run such Hazards. And
before you commit your Bodies to the Brother of Death, Commend your Spirits to
the God of your Life. And go to your Beds, even as to your Grave^ And then
before you lie Down, you will think it Good to Kneel Down: And never Omit to
make this one of your Prayer Times.

But whatever be your Hours of Prayer,

2. Take care of the Frequent Returns of your Prayers. That you may be at them
Daily, and apply your selves to them, as often as is Necessary. If you keep not
just to such and such Times, nor to Solemn Prayers exactly so many Times: Yet
get such an humble Sense of your Wants; and such an high Esteem of the Blessed
Freedom with God; That you need not be Spurred, to catch all the fit
Opportunities for it: Nor ever run into such common Neglects, and long
Strangeness to God; Till you are Overgrown with your Sins; and give Satan even
all the Advantage he could wish, against your Souls. Yea and showing that you
have no Regard of that holy Religion, whereof you make Profession: For though
some (no less Silly than Profane) are forward to call Hypocrite, when they see
a man much Addicted to his Prayers; Yet amuch more Competent Judge, Job 27.10.
makes the Rarity to be a Badge of Hypocrisy. Will the Hypocrite Delight himself
in the Almighty? Will he Always Call upon God? No, But if he Begin with it, and
Offer a little at it, and carry it on for some Small Time, upon some Unusual
Account: Yet he will soon have Enough of it: and Flag, and fall Back, and let it
alone; As nothing Agreeable, either with the frame of his Spirit, or the Tenor
of his Life. He is for another sort of Company and Conversation, Than to be
Much with God, and serve him, like Anna, Luke 2.37. with Prayers Night and Day.

Some Families are for Prayers only on the Lord's Day at Night; and then the
Lord shall have no more of them for a Week. They Will not come near him, till
that Day Se'nnight again. But do not make such Fearful Chasms and
Interruptions, I beseech you. For every Day is the Lord's Day; and a Day of
Audience, and a Prayer-Day; wherein your Heavenly Father Expects you: And
wherein you (I am sure,) do full as much Need Him. And count it as Strange and
Unusual with you, to Suspend your Prayers, as your Meals: Yea to have your
Prayers at a Stand, as to have your Breath stopped: For Prayer is the very Breath
of Religion; without which it is suffocated and stifled, and cannot be kept
Alive, in the Family, or in the Soul.

Nor let the Lord only Hear of you at the Pinch and Extremity; when nothing but
mere Dread forces you upon it. Lest you find the sad Disappointment, of
Beginning an Acquaintance then; and seek in Vain, because you would not seek
Before. But let Prayer be more in Fashion with you, and more Common among you.
Be Ready to it, and Much in it: Till you have made you a Frequented Easy Path
to the Throne of Grace. Let it be even as the Air, that you Breathe in; and as
the Food that you Live on; and as the very Pulse of your Souls. Carried on even
without Ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. i.e. Keep in a Constant Preparation for it; and
be Ready, upon all Occasions, to fall into the Actual Exercise of it. That it
may not be as a Predigious thing to you; but an Every Day's Business, and
Familiar, even as your Eating and Drinking.

Now to Quicken you to such Frequency of Prayer, Do but Consider with me Three
Things; That this is the Only Time for it: That the Oftener you thus come to
God, you shall be the Welcomer: And that your Prayer, the more Frequent, is the
more Excellent.

1. Consider, That this is the Only Time. The Time of Reaching out the Scepter,
to Invite the Petitioner. The Finding-While, to Obtain Mercy. When Mercy's Arms
are Extended, to Receive the Humbled, Yielding Sinner. But it is but a While;
and O how Short a While! Even as Nothing, to the Vast Infinite Duration, in
which you must take up For ever and ever. Can you think much then of your Daily
Prayers? Or think more than Once a Day too much, To Beg and Importune the God
of Heaven, to have Mercy upon your poor sinful Departing Souls; to vouchsafe
some Tokens of his Love unto you; and to bestow the Riches of his Saving Grace
upon you; before you go hence, and be no more Seen, nor Heard among the Living?
Does the Lord allow you now to Ask, Seek, and Knock? Does he by his Command,
Oblige you to it? And by his Promise of the happy Success, Encourage you in it?
And yet you are Careless and Listless, to make your Benefit of it, while Time
serves you for it? O that you would Open your Eyes, and see the Gracious Day
that yet shines upon you! And so well understand your selves, as to perceive,
That it is no hard Put upon you, but a Singular Favor offered unto you. When
you are Solicited, to make your Frequent Addresses to the Father of Mercies:
That you may find his Mercy to Eternal Life; Find it, in the Time of this
Mortal Life. O could the Damned Pray themselves out of Hell, How Hard would
they be at it? How Incessantly upon it? And if by thy Prayers, Thou may keep
thy self from ever Coming there; O how well would all the Pains and Expense be
laid out, though thou should waste thy Lungs, and wear out thy Knees, in
Crying Day and Night, to be Delivered from God's Wrath and Everlasting
Damnation.

O will you then Know the Time of your Visitation! And if you Know it, Use it,
while you have it. And let this be as the Goad, to prick you forwards, ever and
anon to Renew your Prayers: To be at them again and again; and still Persist in
them, and never have done with them, till your Life is Run out, and all your
Danger is over. O Use your selves now to Cry in Time; that at Last you may not
Cry in Vain. Now Follow your Prayers, that then you may not Lose your Prayers.
For if you do not Begin them, till just your Time is Ending; even as good you
had never begun them. O how many that now might Pray, and Would not, may then
find, that though they would Pray, they Cannot? Yea though (after a sort,) then
they do Pray, there will be none to Regard their Prayers. According to that
terrifying Denunciation, Prove. 1.28. Then shall they Call to me, but I will not
Answer. They shall Seek me Early; but they shall not Find me. But now you may
Prevent the Killing Frustration: And if you let the Lord often Hear of you, in
Your Day; you are like to have a Comfortable Hearing with him, in His Day. And
it is the Conscientious Course of your Constant Praying Every Day, that will
give you good Hopes of Solid and Everlasting Consolation, in your Dying-Day.
And therefore now Give your selves to it, and be Often in it, that then you may
Reap all the Sweet and Blessed Fruits of it.

2. Let it Hearten you on to such Frequency of Communion with God, That the
Oftener you so come to Him, the Welcomer you shall be with Him. For he is not
Weary of Hearing, nor Impoverished with Granting; as Men use to be Sick of Bold
Lavish Petitioners, and give them not only a Repulse, but a Rebuke: Upbraiding
them with Want of Manners, as much as any other Wants they complain of. But the
Opening of our Mouths Wide, has the Promise of God's Filling them. And the most
Importunate Beggars are his biggest Favorites. He is (as our Church expresses
it) always more Ready to Hear, than we to Pray. And best pleased with those, by
whom his Gates are most Frequented: And though we have something to say to him,
not only Daniel's Three times a Day, but David's Seven times a Day; yea though
it should come up to the Seventy times Seven; He would never be Tired with the
Repeated Cries; nor Frown upon the Endless asking* But would Delight in you, so
Delighting your selves in the Lord; and like the Better of you, for showing
that Greatest of all Wisdom; in coming still to Draw out of his Infinite
Fullness; with whom is not only the All-sufficient Ability, to do for you,
whatever you can desire; but as great an Inclination and Pleasure to do it. And
your Much-asking, is not to make him the more Willing to Give, but you the
Fitter to Receive. When you show the mighty Value which you have for his
Favors, that you know how to Prize them, and think no Waiting and Begging too
much, that you may Prevail and Speed at the last.

3. Be not ashamed of coming so often, not fall into dislike of your Prayers,
for being so Many. When here the Oftener the Better; and Prayer the more
Frequent, the more Excellent. Though some speak of Common Prayer, as a Name
bearing a Sound of Contempt. Prayer indeed ought to be Common, even as our
Needs are. And the Commonness is its Commendation. For the best and most
needful things in Nature, are most common; as the Sun and Air, Fire and Water.
And you must not think that your Prayers shall be more Esteemed, for being
seldom Heard: As some Princes think to raise their Esteem, by being seldom
Seen. The Offices will not grow more Rare and Worthy, because more Rare and
Unusual. For here the Wealth lies in the vast numberless Sums, that make up the
Treasure. And this speaks not only your Riches, but your Honor, that you^ are
got into the best of all Correspondence, Clad and Adorned with these costliest
of all Suits, (the Suits of Prayers) even for your Every-day's Dress: So
Habituated to your Prayers, and in Love with them: So used to the Presence of
Majesty, even the highest: So Great and Intimate with Heaven, as there to have
your main Traffic and Conversation, and to be even All together so Taken up.

Now, after all this Excitation to the Family Prayer. There should be some
Direction for the Management of it* That is a New and Great Subject, which
deserves Enlargement upon it by a better Hand. But as it is not my present
Business, so my Shoulders Shrink at the Undertaking. Yet now my Hand is in,
somewhat I must Adventure upon it, that all my Design may not be Lost. For to
what purpose, to Ring the Company in, and tell them nothing what to do there?
Though I set about the Work then with some Reluctance, as conscious of my own
Insufficiency, here to Instruct the World; and shall be glad to be Assisted in
this my self, by such as are able to help me out, and would Teach me and
others, not only from the Notions of their Heads, but from the Experience of
their Hearts. Yet in the mean time, I shall hope they will be favorable to my
Intention, and forgive the Advice, which is Below their own Regard: Turning it
over to others, that can pick any Benefit out of it.

1. To begin with some whose Superiority minds me to wait upon them first. If
thou art not thy own Chaplain in the House; but have a Substitute, to Officiate
for thee; do not so turn it over to him, as to turn thy self out of the
Communion. Nor by turning thy own Back upon the Worship of God, make it
Suspicious, that thou art Ashamed to be Seen in it; or think thou can
Better bestow thy self elsewhere the while, than to come and meddle with it.
That though, for certain Reasons, thou do Suffer it; yet for the Thing it
self, thou do not Desire it. Though thou will vouchsafe it a Room in thy
Family, it shall rather have thy Room than thy Company. And thus thou seem
to bring it into thy House; only that thou may have Occasion to Expose it to
more Contempt, than if thou did quite turn it out. For in so doing, thou
would give but one great Instance of thy Abhorrence; which by the customary
Neglect, might grow to be less Observed. Whereas now even every Day, thou
Renewest the visible Proofs of thy Scorn; when it is so Nigh thee, and yet thou will Abscond, and get out of the way to Save thy self from it* Leaving the
Inferior Sort, as good enough, to go through that Drudg^ry. But to Invite thee
in to thy own Prayers, (which is the Design of this Advice) that they may be
indeed Thine, and not only the Prayers of thy Family: Whoever thou art, and how
Great soever be thy Post and Quality in the World, let me make bold to tell
thee, That the Prayers would much more Honor Thee, than ever thou can Honor
the Prayers. The Greatest Kings in the World (if any of the Best) have more
Gloried in paying this Service to the King of Heaven, than in Receiving the
best Service of all their Subjects on Earth. Nay, I must tell thee, Thou art
more Obliged to the Attendance, than any of the Rest; that thou may not bring
it down to be Base, with all the Rest; yea, and tempt some to slight it, even
for the Pride, to be in the Fashion.

O then let it have not only thy bare Allowance, but thy Presence, and thy
Countenance, and thy Inspection and Care, to see that all be Present at it, and
Decent in it. And as thou art the Head, so show thy Headship here: And be the
First and Chief to Lead up all the Company to the Throne of Grace, and Present
them before the Lord. Yea, and take that for a much more Glorious Office, than
any thou can bear in the Court, or the Camp.

Nor think it enough, there to show thy self among them, but fall down and
Worship at the Footstool of thy Glorious Maker and Judge Eternal, even as one
of them. Lay aside then all the Thoughts of thy Greatness and Pre-eminence
above them: And take thy self there to be upon the same Terms as they, and no
bigger than the least, before the Blessed God most High and Great above all.
Yea, let thy Example shine so Bright before them, that looking upon Thee, they
may see how to Worship God, and learn to be all Humility, and Reverence, and
Devotion, and Fervency in the Work of the Lord. And then thou will think thy
self equally concerned, as they or any, in the following Words of Remembrance
and Advice.

2. Look narrowly to your Aims and Designs in the Worship: For what Reasons,
and to what Ends you set about it. That it be not only to Rock Conscience a
little Asleep, and make you think well of yourselves in a wretched Damnable
Case; or to Compound for your Sins, and bear you out in an Ill Course: That it
be not only to pay a Due to Custom, and to escape the Common Odium: That it be
not for Fear of this Man; Or to Recommend yourselves to another: Or to get you
a Name, or a good Word: to be seen of Men, or to make a show in the World.
Though (in a Cold Age, that so wants Flagrant Examples) you may be willing,
That Men should know it, to be Edified by it: And when it is not to Glorify
you, but your Father in Heaven. Yet take heed you do not make their Seeing, the
ultimate End of your doing it. But let it be done in the Conscience of your
Duty; and as the Means of your Felicity. Let your Intention be the Glory of
God, and the everlasting Advantage of your Souls: To shape them into a nearer
Resemblance of him, and to bring you into a better Acquaintance with him* And
use your Prayers as the Steps of Ascension to raise you up to him; and as the
Way wherein he has appointed you to wait for Grace from him. See that you go to
Him, as your only Blessed End and Rest, because you Thirst after him, and
cannot be satisfied without him: And therefore Seek him, that you may know
more, and have more of him: That you may see his Power and his Glory, so as you
have seen him in the Sanctuary: And may perceive still more of the
Strengthening and Reviving, which you have found upon this way, till from such
Glimpses, you reach at last, to the Fullness of this Heavenly Light.

3. Remember what a Presence you are entering into, when going to your Prayers,
and drawing nigh to God. Though you are never out of his Sight; yet then place
yourselves as directly under his Eye, and surrounded with the Glory of the
Lord. As Daniel worshipped Before his God. Chap. 6.10. So do it Heartily as to
the Lord. Seek the Lord, and Seek his Face, Psalm 105.4. As if you were
speaking to your Sovereign Face to Face. Pour not out Words, without minding
the Majesty, with whom you have to do. Lest the Lord Capitulate with you, as he
did with those, Zech. 7.5. Did ye at all do it to me? Even to me? You had some
one else in your Eye; and other Matters in your Mind. And I that was in your
Mouths, was least Regarded in your Hearts. O How Few indeed Draw Nigh to God,
even when they Seem to do it? And how many Prayers are Lost by the way, that
never Reach to him? Because, alas, They did not so much as Aim at him. And even
in the midst of all their Prayers, God was not in all their Thoughts. O take
heed that your Prayers be not such Mock-Prayers: Which have not God present
with you, for the Glorious Object, to whom they are Presented. But Look upon
Him, as just Before you, and on every Side, Round about you. That your Prayer
may be the Ascending of your Hearts; and a Dealing and Conversing Immediately
with him. That you may not take so much Notice of any thing that strikes upon
your Sense, as of the Great God that Searches your Hearts; and overlook all the
Company, to Lift up your Eyes to him that Dwells in the Heavens. And as the
Eyes of Servants Look to the Hand of their Masters; and as the Eyes of a Maiden
to the Hand of her Mistress; So let your Eyes Wait upon the Lord your God, till
he have Mercy upon you, Psalm. 123.1, 2. Yea, Lift up your Hearts, together with
your Eyes, for his Blessing and Direction, his Assistance, and Acceptance, in
that great Work you are upon. And if, in the Beginning of your Worship, you do
not always make such an Address, with your Mouths, yet never Forget to do it
within your Hearts. That you may find Him who is with you, Present, in such
sweet and joyful Effects, as shall be like a Beginning of Heaven to you.

4. Though I must not Impose it, yet I cannot choose but much Approve and
Recommend it, That before your Solemn Prayers, you would Read and Consider some
Portion of the Holy Scriptures. To Hear what God says unto you, Before you
Speak unto God. For this is not only a Decent Preface, but an Excellent
Preparative to Prayer: Thus to Gather in your Thoughts, and Compose your Minds,
to Wait and Attend upon the Lord. And those Families that are much Concerned in
the World, have the greater Need of this Means; To Excite and Engage them to
the Worship of God; By Hearing of somewhat first from the Word of God. He that
turns away his Ear, from Hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall be
Abomination, Prove. 28 9. Though I quote not that Text, to prove it a Duty,
still to Use such Reading before our Praying: (when the Meaning is, that an ill
Practice will spoil even the best Prayers.) Yet we seem then to stand the
Fairer, for a desirable Hearing with the Lord: When we are first Inquisitive
and Attentive to Hear what he says to our Souls. And you can hardly Read a
Psalm, or a Chapter, with Deliberation, and Serious Pausing upon it, (as all
Holy Scripture ought to be Read,) but it will Suggest some Thoughts and
Reflections, that may prove of mighty Use, and Advantage, to Quicken and
Promote your Prayers.

5. I would not only advise, but earnestly exhort you to a Profound Riverence
in the Worship of God: And such an Awful Carriage in his Presence; as may show
you to Pray with Understanding; and to Know Where you are, and to Whom you
Address. For it is another thing to Negotiate with the God of Heaven; than to
go and speak to the Greatest Prince upon Earth. And if the Glorious Powers
Above throw down their Crowns, and Shrink up themselves, before his Throne: O
how can despicable Worms here ever Abase themselves Low enough at the Feet of
such a Holy Incomprehensible Majesty? And they that will Dare to play with this
Consuming Fire, may Dread to be made Dust and Ashes, in the Saddest
Acceptance. His Name is not only Glorious, but Fearful. Deuteronomy. 28.58. This
Glorious and Fearful Name, The Lord thy God. He makes not only the Earth, and
the Devils, but even his holy Servants, and the Pillars of Heaven Tremble. So
Great and Good a man as David, was not ashamed to Confess, Psalm. 119.120. My
Flesh Trembles for Fear of Thee; and I am Afraid of thy Judgments. O the
Madness then of Desperate Sinners, that can make as Bold as their List, with
such a King, of Unlimited Power and Glory! The Lord Open their Eyes; For they
know not what they do. But let the Biggest in the World learn to be Wiser. As
they are taught, Psalm. 2.11. And Serve the Lord with Reverence and Godly Fear.
And let me apply that for thy Admonition, proud Sinner! Psalm. 114.7. Tremble
thou Earth, at the presence of the Lord: At the presence of the God of Jacob.
For Alas, What art thou, but a Piece of Weak, Vile Earth? And thou may
exceedingly Fear and Quake, to think how Stiff and Stubborn thou have been with
the Almighty Majesty of Heaven.

And because nothing so Low abases us, as the Sense of Sin; The more therefore
to Heighten that Sense, Be more Free and Full in Confessing of your Sins, and
Impleading your selves. And forbear not to tell even all the Worst. For such
Doleful Accents issue in Joyful Accounts. The plentiful Showers produce
fruitful Crops, Psalm ^2.5. I said I will Confess my Transgressions to the
Lord: And thou forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. And though he Mourned in his
Complaint, and made a Noise, Psalm 55.2. Yet he Comforted himself, Psalm 6.8.
The Lord has heard the Voice of my Weeping; q. d. He gave more regard to the
Groans and Tears, than to the Words and Phrases. Be not sparing then to
Confess, if you would have the Lord abundantly to Pardon. Yet here, not only
your Prudence, but Necessity must set Bounds. For if you think you must Tell
All, you will never have done. Do then what you can: And like poor Debtors,
that use to pay some one Time, and some another. And then think you have done
it to some purpose, when you have but confessed enough, to Pierce your Hearts,
and to pull down your Souls.

But because many may pretend to the Reverence within, which they do not make
Appear, and de^y us to Judge of their Hearts: Therefore leaving to every one
the Care of Humbling their Souls before the Lord: Let me call upon you all, to
make the outward Signification of this inward Reverence, in your Family
Worship. That the Quietness and Gravity of your Carriage, the Seriousness of
your Countenance, the Lifting up of your Hands and Eyes, the Bending your
Knees, the Working of your Sighs and Groans, and such Fit and Decent
Expressions, may tell the Company, That you have a due Regard of what you are
about. For there are Rude Creatures, whose Presence at the Worship is only a
Nuisance to the rest. Bither Wriggling in a restless manner, to show how Uneasy
they are in the Service; or Staring idly about them, to let us see that they
mind nothing less than the Eye of Heaven; or using such wanton Trifling
Actions, as seem to make but a Game of the most Solemn Business: And either
Gaping and Yawning over it, or Blowing their Noses, or Raking their Throats,
and throwing out their Spittle, as it were in Scorn and Defiance of the
Prayers. One would think, a little Good Manners here, without any thing of a
Religious Principle, might teach them to Correct such Disorders: And not to he
seen in the Worship with such an Air of Contempt and Irreverence, as only to
offer the foulest Indignity to it.

Though I confess, That the Humbling of the Heart, and the Abasing of our Souls
within us, is the main of our Subjection to the Father of Spirits: And he
loathes the Hail-Master, where the Knee is bowed in Mockery: He Scorns the
Lip-labor, the Formal Cringing, and all the Bodily Exercise of Empty Fops,
that have no Internal Spring of Devotion, no Broken Spirits; nor Souls that
have gone under the Work of a Serious Humiliation. Yet that Lowliness and
Reverence within, will usually be expressed Abroad: And the Humble Heart will
also pull down, the Knees. And as long as you have Bodies to attend your Souls
in the Service of God; it is fit you should make them know themselves, and
observe their Distance. And remember some Difference between speaking to the
Supreme Eternal God, and speaking to any Mortal Man upon Earth. And never think
you can too much Abase yourselves, before the Omnipotent Maker of the World,
the Tremendous Judge of Quick and Dead. That the Self-diminishing Postures may
do you this Kindness, to mind you of the Infinite Disproportion between you,
and the God whom you Worship; and to Preach to you that deep Humility, which is
the sure and ready Way of rising to Honor and Glory. Yet,

6. At the same time you remember your Distance, that you may not forget your
Privilege; nor let your Reverence of God swallow up, and devour all your
Delight in him, endeavor to make your Devotions Easy and Pleasant. Not a Harsh
and Grievous Task, but a sweet Heavenly Entertainment, and a Labor only of
Love. And this you may do, by going to the Lord, as your God; by Offering all
your Worship in the Name of Jesus; and to your Prayers, joining your Thanks and
Praises.

1. Sweeten your Devotions, by having Recourse to the Lord, as your God. One to
whom you bear a near Relation. And in whom you have an Especial Interest. And
therefore may be bold to cry, Abba Father! and confident to find a kind
Welcome. It was said of the Renowned Emperor Augustus, (in whom was such a
Mixture of Majesty and Clemency) That they who durst Venture upon him; did not
know his Greatness: And they who would not make bold with him, did not know his
Sweetness. So is the Glory of God attemper'd with his Mercy, that the bright
Resplendent Perfections, do not so much Check our Approaches to him, as
Inaccessible: But the sweet Gracious Attributes do as much Embolden our
Applications unto him, as the Best and Dearest of all our Friends. Here the
most High Condescends to us, who else could never Aseend to Him. And this may
make us in Love with our Prayers, that they bring us to our God, and our
Father. For what a Pleasure do we take, to be near to our Great and Sure
Friends? And to have Free and Familiar Intercourse and Conversation with him?
And when it is, God my God! Then it is, Early will I seek thee: My Soul
thirsts for thee: My Flesh longs after thee, Psalm. 63.1. Then will I go to
the Altar of God, to God my Exceeding Joy: yea upon the Harp will I Praise
thee, O God my God, Psalm. 43.4. And though we are involved in Troubles, yet we
Cheer up our dejected Souls, as it follows there, and bid them Hope in him: For
we shall yet Praise him, who is the Health of our Countenance, and our God.

If the Lord be thy God, this will make Amends for all that thou can Lose or
Suffer in the World. O, how large Expectation may thou have from him? And
what may thou not A^k and Have at his Hand? who has given thee Himself? This
puts Life and Heart into thy Prayers, and Raises and Engages thy Eternal
Thanks: That the Lord is thy God, and thou have free Access to him, and can
make Bold with him; and shall still be Cared for by him; and Receive a Child's
Portion from him; and be for ever Blessed with him. No Cordial in the World so
reviving as that, Isaiah 25.6. Lo, this is our God: We have waited for him, and
he will Save us. And Chap. 61.10. My Soul shall be Joyful in my God: For he
has Clothed me with the Garments of Salvation.

Poor Christian! Be thou never so Low in the World, Well it is with thee, and
Happy shall thou be: If so highly favored with this Blessed Privilege, to have
the Lord for thy God. Take Comfort in it; make thy Advantage of it; let thy
Prayers be Endeared by it; and Raise thy Heart in Thankfulness for it. My
House, my Lands, my Money, my Cred^t, my Friends, my Interest in the World! All
these are Contemptible, and nothing to the Bliss of Adoption. My God! my God!
is worth Infinitely more than them All. And it is as much as all your Prayers
are worth, to have this Witness of the Spirit with your Spirits, that you are
the Children of God. For then you shall be sure to be Heard and Answered,
Pitied and Spared, Helped and Relieved by your Father. God, even your own God
shall Bless you. And what cannot the Greatest of all Powers, and what will not
the Best of all Fathers, do for you? Come what will; happen the worst that can:
Our God is able to Deliver us: Our God will Stick to us. In Troubles and in
Death, he will be with us. And whoever else Fails us, He will never Leave us,
nor Forsake us. Still we may Speak to him; yea, though he Slay us, Trust in
him. Still our Prayers shall come at him, and Prevail with him, to bring Good
even out of the Evil; and to Bless to us, all that befalls us; that it shall be
never the Werse, but Happy for us, it was so Bad with us.

Thus Blessed, and Blessed again are the People who are in such a Case, to have
the Lord for their God. No Question to be made, (you will say) How Sweet and
Glorious, beyond Expression, is the Privilege, to them that are thus Invested.
But do you so Question your own Title to it, that this dashes all the Comfort
of your saying, Our Father, which art in Heaven? If you doubt still, whether
the Lord be your God, and that Deadens your Prayers, and Saddens your Lives:
Let me then ask you, Does it so Trouble you indeed? And do you so Prize the
Heavenly Gift, that you long not so much for any thing in the World? Why even
that, I cannot but take for some hopeful Discovery, That either you have it,
or stand in the fair Way for it. For such as have no Interest in it, do not use
to show this Concern about it. I cannot here run out into the ways of Trial, or
the means of Acquisition. Only this let me tell you in short, and to the
present purpose, That your very Longing after God in your Prayers, you may
Reckon as a Good Evidence, that he is your God. For the Spirit of Supplication,
is for certain, the Spirit of Adoption. And what is yet Dubious and Wanting in
the Case: By this Means you may come to Clear it off, and Fill it up. For his
Promise is, To Give the Holy Spirit to them that Ask him. And it is by that
Spirit, you are enabled to say, Abba Father! So that to go on with your
Prayers, is the likeliest Course to get above all your Doubts, and to setch
down all the Comforts. And if you will but Persist in them, according to the
Directions here given, I dare promise you, That ye shall attain to Answer your
own Scruple in the most effectual Manner, and not fail at last, to find the
sweet Satisfaction which yet you Want.

2. Offer ^all your Worship to God, In the Name of his dear Son. For it is
through Him, that we all have Access to the Father, Ephesians. 2.8. Yea, Boldness and
Access with Confidence through the Faith of Him, Chap. 3.12. Himself is the
Way, and the Door of our Admission. And there is no other way for Sinful Men to
get in with a Holy God; but by Him, that has made the Attenement for their
Sins. Our Savior himself has told us, John 14 6. No Man comes to the Father,
but by me. How much soever this Way is come now to be spoken against, even by
some that Name the Name of Christ; (and are very Industrious to Destroy their
own and others Comforts) I shall never Trust to all their Wit and Depth, to
find us out a Bette^. But above all the rarest Inventions of any Men, I admire
this Wisest Project, I Adore this kindest Design of the most Gracious God. And
I am Amazed and Sorry, that any Reputed Christians should be so much their own
Enemies, as to stand off from Submitting to this Righteousness of God. When the
very Jews (that have since denied the Messiah) did of old look to God for
Acceptance only through Him. For what else was the meaning of their Praying
still with their Faces toward the Ark of the Covenant: But to Express their
Faith in God that was to be manifested in the Flesh; of whom that Ark was the
Type. And when Daniel (that directed his Face the same way, in his Worship,
Chap. 6.10.) begged so hard of God to be Heard for the Lord's Sake, Chap. 9.17.
What Lord could he mean, but the same whom David called his Lord; that is now
Sitting at the Right Hand of God?

You must look then by Faith unto Jesus, if you would have God to look with
Favor upon your Souls. And thus also you may come to get a new Testimony of
your Sonship, For to them that Believe on the Name of his Christ, he gives
Power to become the Sons of God, John 1.12. Yea thus, for all the Infirmities
of your Prayers, and the Failings of your Lives, yet still you may keep Hope
and Comfort alive in your Souls. When the Raggedness of your own Righteousness,
and even the Iniquities of your Holy things Recoil upon you; and let you see,
that your very Prayers and Virtues need a Merciful Allowance, and some Worthy
Advocate, to make them Authentic and Current, before the Tribunal of Heaven:
Here you may see the Almighty Helper, of God's own providing, at hand to Help
you out: And may Believe that you shall be Heard, though even your Prayers for
Pardon be such, as need to be Pardoned. For when put into his Hands, they are
accepted for his Sake, where they deserve but to be rejected for their Own. God
has Respect to the Covenant, in which you are, more than to the Sacrifice,
which you offer. And Christ is the Mediator of that Govenant, Heb. 9.15. All
the Promises of God are made in Him, 2 Cor. 1.20. Yea the mighty Promise, which
Comprizes all, even that of Eternal Life, 'twas made to him, Tit. 1.2. For to
whom else could it be made, before the World began? It was to him, in behalf of
all the Children, which God would give him. By him then you are to Offer your
Sacrifices. Heb. 13.15. And as the men of Tire and Sidon, Acts 12.20. made
Blastus, the King's Chamberlain their Friend, in order to their Peace: So make
a far greater Friend; Even the Son of the King Eternal your Friend in the Court
of Heaven: And by the Mediation of that great Master of Requests, you shall
Speed and Prevail; for Peace, and all that ever you would have.

The Conscience of Sin, and the Experience of your own Inability to do any
thing as you ought, will pull down your Courage, and Nip and Blast all your
Comfortable Expectations at the Throne of Grace: If you have not one there,
that Deserves Better, than you, to be Heard for you. But when the Hands are
Faint and the Knees feeble, and the Burden Heavy: Yet there is a Support, yea
the matter of Rejoicing, even under all the Load of Sin and Trouble; That there
is the Holy One of God, and the Beloved of his Soul, Appearing Above on your
behalf. And he makes Intercession for the Transgressors. And God will not only
Glorify his Mercy, but his Son; In Granting Pardon, and all that is asked in
his Name, (granting it) for his Sake. Do not therefore Despond, Because all is
Imperfect that comes from you; and nothing done by you, but what needs Pity and
Pardon: Nor grow Heartless to use your Prayers, Because you can make no Better
Work of them; and still you find them such poor sorry Services: For even the
Evil that you see in them may do you this Good; To make you Look beyond them;
and send you away to the only Savior, for that Rest, which is no where on this
Side him, (No not in the best of your Duties) to be found. But in Him, you may
Find it: And Coming to Him, He has Promised to Give it. Do as well as you can,
then: And though it be very Short and Faulty still; Yet Cheer up, and Go on
Sowing in Hope, Because you have One to undertake your Cause, and to set you
Right. And it is not for the Worth of your Prayers, But for the Merits of your
Savior, that God Accepts you, in the Beloved of his Soul.

3. That you may have more Comfort in the Holy Offices, Join to your Prayers;
your Thanks and Praises. Be not all in Confessing, Begging, Complaining, and
Crying out: But observe all the Matter that you have for Thanksgiving. And be
as Ready to Acknowledge your Receipts, as to Crave Supply of your Wants. If you
complain of Burdens and Sorrows, Do not make your Lives more Sad and Heavy than
you Need; by Depriving your selves of those Joys and Refrestments which your
Heavenly Father not only Allows, but commands you, to take. Do not Sullenly
Hang your Harps upon the Willows; when he bids you Take them down, and Recreate
your weary Troubled Spirits, with this Heavenly Music. For Religion is not a
Sour and Melancholy thing; If you do not make it so. But it is the way of
Peace, and the well spring of Everlasting Consolation. You may Serve the Lord
with Gladness; yea, and you ought to Rejoice in him evermore: Even when you
find Tribulation in the world: And in every thing, to give thanks, 1 These.
5.18. Even in Losses and Crosses, which the World counts the Worst things. For
it is Good to be Afflicted. And will not you then Thank him that does you Good?
Though the Bystanders may take it to be nothing but Evil.: When the Gloomy
Cloud drops Fatness, and the seeming Sharpness, is his Real Kindness; Not to
let you Perish indeed, for want of that which he knows to be the Preservative,
to keep you from it. And if this Grieves you, and that goes Cross with you, and
the the other makes against you: Yet still you have a Hundred things, which call
for Thankfulness from you: For all that ever has been Enjoyed by you, and all
that yet Remains to you. When you are out of the Deserved Hell, and Receive at
the Lord's Hands Still a great deal more Good than Evil, and even Nothing to
the Wages of your Sins.

O then let not every Disaster and Ailment Damp your Thanks and Praise, Nor be
Querulous, and in the Dumps, out of Humor, and all on the Fret, when every
thing is not to your Minds: Or when any Affliction is laid upon your Loins. As
some will Whine and Clamor, yea Rant and Ruffle; as if they would fall out and
Fight with Heaven: And so spoill and hinder their Praring, as well as their
Thanksgiving: When any Calamity lights upon them, or any Damage and Injury is
done them. Which is not only Perverse Unmannerly Carriage toward the great
Lord of all; Who has the whole Authority, (as he pleases,) to Order us; And
still deals much Better than we might expect by us: And such as have the Least
Cause, do often show the most Impatience; and of all the Various things, for
which they have to give Thanks, they can scarce find in their hearts, to be
Thankful for any One: as if all were still Below their Worth, and Nothing Good
enough for them: But this Ungrateful Grumbling Temper also Destroys all the
sweet Peace and Comfort of their Lives, that harbor it: And makes them as
Uneasy to themselves, as they are Rude and Troublesome to others: Even ever out
of Tune, and Unacquainted with that Joyful and Pleasant thing to be Thankful,
Psalm. 147: 1. And herein are put quite to Confusion, by many poor Afflicted
Creatures, that can yet be Decent and Cheerful, Even when they have almost
nothing to be seen but Hardships, and Brushes* in the World.

O you know not what Sweetness you Lose, For want of this Exercise, This
Spiritual Recreation, To be Thankful to the Lord, and Bless his Name. When it
is so Pleasant, Psalm. 135.3. He said it, who knew it by a Joyful Experience.
For who more Abounded in God's Praises than Himself, And more called upon
others to come into the Confort? As you may s^e throughout the Psalms. And many
a Psalm, which he Begins with Complain^ing, He Ends with Thanksgiving. And when
you have such frequent Occasions of Thankfulness, in the Mercies that Come so
Thick upon all every day, That I dare not undertake to Enumerate all, which
even the Poorest Receives: Yet can you find none but the Jarring Strings of
Greivances, to Grate upon? Not so much as this Blessed Advantage^; of the sweet
and happy Opportunities with God* that you may all have, even when you will:
Shall it not be Owned to his Praise and your Comfort? O will you not only Rob
the Lord of his Glory, but your Souls also of the Pleasure, to Recount his
Mercies and Bless him for them? To Chew upon the Delicious Morsels, and make
you Relish the Favors of Heaven: And not only find the Refreshing Taste of
Blessings Received, But Prepare you still for all further Blessings Desired? O
Sprin^^e more of this Spice all over your Oblations, And be not Niggards here,
to your own Dear Souls: But let them have a larger Share in these Festival
Entertainments of all the Blessed Inhabitants of Heaven. Here play the
Epicures; And let your Souls Delight themselves in Fatness. Yea let them be
Satisfied, as with Marrow and Fatness, when your Mouths praise the Lord with
Joyful Lips, Psalm. 63.5.

I am the more upon this, Because, I fear, there is more Discontent, than
Thankfulness, in most Families. Though all (if they would see it,) have more
Cause to give Thanks, than to make Complaints. And that I might also take off
the Prejudice, that lies in so many Minds against a Serious Religion; for the
Sadness, which they take to be in it; As if they must take leave of all Joy,
when they turn over to this Way; Which indeed would bring them into the
Possession of Better Joys, than ever they Tasted in their Lives. Do not think
then, That I call you to a Doleful Business, in Calling you to your Prayers.
When to all well-disposed Souls, they are so full of Sweetness even in
themselves. And I also tell you, How to make them yet Sweeten; By Expatiaring
more in those Rich and Fragrant Fields of Thanksgiving, and all the Joyful
^raises of God; where you may Solace your selves, even as often, and as much as
you please* I would not holp to Sadd^n your Lives; but to make them indeed
Easy^^ and full of the Best Comforts. By Advising you to Pour out your Heavy
Hearts; and Cast all your Burden upon the Lord; And then to Raise those Hearts
up, in the Admiration of his Love, and the Celebration of his Praise. To make
Melody in your Hearts: And sometimes also with your Mo^ths; In Psalm^, and
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; Singing, as well as Spraking the Praise of the
Lord. And O that you would not here be Euemies to your own Joy and best
Delight! But take the way to be out of Care, and out of Pain. The way, not only
Prescribed by me, but by the Apostle, Phil. 4.6, 7. Be Careful for nothing; but
in every thing, by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let your
Requests be made known to God. And the Peace of God which passes all
Understanding, shull keep your Hearts and Minds through Christ Jesus.

7. Let your Prayers be made with Zeal and Fervency of Spirit. And be in
Earnest with them, that you may be indeed the Better for them. Do not think it
enough to Say over so many Words; or to S^^y out such a Time. But put forth
your selves, in the Service, As the Greatest Work, wherein you can ever be
Concerned. When there is the Ca^kass, without a Soul; The Form of Godliness,
and nothing of the Power; only a Face of Religion, but the Life Departed; no
Fire on the Altar; No Hear^ in the Sacrifice; The very Devotion Indev^us; As
Dull as Lead, and as Cold as Ice: Such an Oblation is not only Vanity, but
Abomination. Ah Lord! What a Present is this, for the Living God, The Searcher
of Hearts, The great King, The Lord of Hosts, whose Name is Dreadful among the
Heathen* Though Zeal does not lie all in No^siness; A great Cry, and nothing
else: A Forced Tone, and Unnatural Heat: Yet when the Words come Warm from the
Heart: And a Sensi^le Heart Pours out its Abundance, in a Lively Voice; It is
very Affecting both to Speaker and Hearers. And such Ardour sends up the
Incense, and makes the Soul Ascend, as in a Fiery Chariot.

But do not count it your Zeal, To Huddle over Words, as Fast as you can speak;
And so Hasten to the End, as to let your Tongues Outrun your Attention; And
Baffle the quickest Apprehension, for being able to keep Pace. It would be more
Advisable, to have your Words Fewer; so that they were Considered better; and
that you might have more Leisure to Feel, and Taste, and Digest your Prayers.
For it is not to Devour a great deal; but to Feed upon as much as you are
Capable of. I say, To Feed upon it, and make your utmost Benefit of it. And
with that Proviso, Be as Hot upon it as you can.

O Stir up yourselves to take hold of the Lord. And show that you really do
Mind the Business that you are about; and do Heartily Engage in it. Set God,
and Heaven, and Death, and Hell, before you: To Rouse up your Sluggish Hearts,
and make you Struggle the harder in your Prayers. Nay, learn from the very
Beggars at your Doors, to be as Earnest with God in your Houses. How hard will
the poor Wietch beg, but for a Piece of Bread, or a Cup of Drink? And not give
over, not be Quiet, till they have got it? And does it not much more Concern
you to be Importunate for the Bread of Life, and the Cup of Salvation? That
your poor Souls may not starve and perish for ever? But do you think that God
will Regard you, when your selves do not Regard what you say? When you Sleepily
tell over an old Tale of so many Words, with not half so much Concern, as a
Beggar will do for a Crust?

And though you cannot be Intent upon every Word and Particular throughout the
Prayers; yet see that you keep up a Zealous Concern, and a Devout Frame of
Spirit, quite to the End. And let not the Shell and Husk of the Duty content
you, but press on to the Inward Heavenly Benefit Everlasting. And when y^^ are
to Draw nigh to God, let not your Hearts be out of the way, but bear the
Chiefest part of all in the Service.

Do not throw the Prayers off so Late at Night, till the Hearts that should be
lifted up to God, be pulled down with Sleep. And one is Nodding here; and
another there quite gone; like so many dead Logs. And all Long to have the
Hindrance out of the way, that they may be gone to their Beds. But let Him that
gives All, have of the Best from you. And what you do to the Lord your God, do
it with all your Heart, with all your Soul, and with all your Might.

Whoever make a Jest of your Earnest, Scorn the Zeal, and call it More Ado than
Needs, so to Abound in the Work of the Lord: And think you would be more Wise,
if you did Less: Crying, What a Work is here with their Praying? Why cannot
they put off God with a Complement, as the Common Worshippers do? And only
Riddle over a sew Words of Course, and call that Prayer Sufficient? Regard not
so much, What they say against you, (who would show more Wisdom to be Employed
with you): As you regard, What an All-deciding Judge you attend, and what an
Important Business you have in Hand: It Is the Judge that must Doom you, and all
the World for ever: And it is the Matter of Life and Death Eternal. And in such
a Case, you may as much Scorn the Scorner, as David despised the Taunts of his
good Partner. When Michal, the Wife that was Tok'd with him, Drew another Way
from him: And what was his Meat, was her Poison: When she made a Game of his
Transport, for Dancing with all his Might, before the Ark of God, and Jeered
him, as you may find, 2 Samuel 6.20. How Glorious was the King of Israel to day,
who uncovered himself to day in the Eyes of the Handmaids, his Servants, as one
of the Vain Fellows, shamefully Uncovers himself? q. d. 'Twas a fine Sight to
see a King make such a Fool of himself. He told her, It was before the Lord;
and so not his Vanity, but his P^ety. Therefore her Scoffs should not bring him
to confess it a Fault, But if that were to be Vile, he would be more Vile than
so. And thus still, with Epicures and Worldlings, the whole Generation of God's
Children go for a Company of Impertinent Busy bodies: Yet at the same time,
their better Practice condemns all the Tribe of Epicures and Worldlings, for a
Company of Ungodly Truants, that stand Stating and Laughing at others Zeal and
Devotion; when it infinitely Behooves them to show their Own. Go on then with
Diligence about your Heavenly Father's Business, as those that are Playing, a
Priz^, for Eternity. And they that now deride your Simplicity, shall one day
Wish, and Wish again, that they had born you Company.

8. Look to your Conversation, as well as to your Supplication. See that your
Houses be Regular in other Respects, as well as in the Periodical Returns of
Prayer; that your Carriage may be of a Piece with the Worship. For when the
House is Divided, and all in Uproars, Torn with Strife, and Fired with Wrath:
When it Rings with Peals of Oaths and Cursing, Ranting or Scolding: When it is
Stuffed with Covetousness, or Dissolved in Wantonness: Set up with Pride, or
pulled down with profuse Consuming upon Lust: When the House is like a Hold of
Rebels, where the Crew of God's Werst Enemies find the Best welcome: And from
Morning till Night, nothing like Holy Religion, or so much as any Good Order to
be seen among them: Good God! What a Prepanation is here to Prayer? What Kin is
such Wild doing to the Pious Worshipping^? And well may such Family-Members
shark, away from the daily Prayers, and be ashamed to hold up their Heads
before the Lord at Prayer Times; when they use him so basely at all other
Times. I cannot wonder, that Men who lead such Disorderly Lives, (they can but
seldom come Home Sober to their Houses, if they meet any Temptation by the way,
that they) are so little Friends to Prayers; and can neither ^kill of, nor away
with such kind of Exercises. And where all the S^rings are so much out of Tune,
what Music are they like to make in the Consort! Nay, when those whom God has
Joined together, Divide^ themselves asunder; and the Husband and Wife ^ly upon
one another like Infernal Furies: Or can only sometimes Hit it off, as
Lascivious Brutes: No wonder if by such Living allowed, the Prayers be Hindered,
1 Pet. 1.7. Yea, worse yet, when Whoredom takes away the Heart, and strange
Fires, with their Sulphurous Stench, prevail over all the Love of God, and all
the right worthy Affection to Men: Their Prayers then (if they do make any)
carry so ill a Savor, Noisome to Heaven and Earth, that God Abhors them; and
the World cries, Let them amend their Lives, or what signify their Prayers?

And after all that I have said for the Family-Supplication, I must tell you,
That this will be in Vain, without Family Reformation. Nor will it do you any
good, to have some Prayers in your Houses Observed, when the very Walls of your
Houses cry out against you, for the Wickedness there Harbored. But an Upright
Heart, and a Godly Life, (next the Blood of Christ) has the most powerful
Oratory, to prevail with Heaven, and will speak Better for you, than all the
Words of Prayer, and all the Importunity, of Lord, Lord! For you may read of
those, whom he said he would not Hear, though they made many Prayers, Isaiah
1.15. But you shall find such as never fail to speed in any Requests, 1 John
3.22. Whatever we Ask, we Receive of Him; because we keep his Commandments, and
do those things that are Pleasing in his sight. This Care and Conscience to
Please the Lord, will give you such a Recommendation with him, that you shall
never find the Repulse from him. But indeed, it is much about one, whether you
have Prayers or no Prayers, if you can Reconcile the daily Praying with Ungodly
Living, and continue as Impenitent in your Sins, as Constant in your Prayers.

O then Repent and Turn to the Lord, as well as Call upon his Name. And not
only down upon your Knees, but down with your Sins. Cast the Cursed things out
of your Houses, and your Hearts, that will not let the Lord Dwell with you, nor
look with Favor upon you; but make his Holy things Pain and Grief to you, His
Presence to Dash you, and his Worship to ^orment you. Though I do not, in this
Life, expect any Conversion without Imperfection; or that you should so Turn to
the Lord, as to Turn all Sin out of your Soul^. I do not look to find the
Families, or the Christians without Faults. Yet I would have you to Bewall as
much as you cannot Cure; and not to Beg the Grace, which you would not have;
not Pray against the Sins which you do not mean to Leave. I would have your
Lives free from open Scandal^ before the World; and your Hearts free from
allowed Hypocrisy in the Sight of God. And so to Keep your Hearts, and Order
your Lives, that you may not lose all the Labor of your Prayers. O Make not
Prayers the Asylum, to Shelter any Wickedness, but the Battery, to maul and
break it to pieces: That in the Name of the Lord, you may Destroy it, and by
his Strength (called in with your Prayers) you may Surmount and get above it.
And with such Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, carry toward the great Overseer
of your Heart and Lives, that you may be Bold in your God, and Delight to come
to him, and still find the sweet Welcome with him.

And now having given you the Reasons for your Family Prayers, and put to
Confusion (if not to Silence) the Exceptions against them: And produced those
true Causes of the Neglect, which are not for the Credit of any Prayerless
Families to be mentioned: And having showed both how it should be Timed, and
also Managed* O that I could Persuade and Prevail with all that knew themselves
Faulty, to Break the Ungodly Custom, and to get over the Barricado's, that so
long have Stopped and Detained them: Before the Lord come and stop their Breath,
and break in with his Fury upon them. And when all that any have to Object, is
so frivolous; that I should scarce have answered, if I had not thought it more
to Need, than to Deserve the Answer: O that you would fall from your Excuses to
your Prayers, and not stand, alleging this and the the other, which you will not
dare to mention, when your Judge comes to Call you to Account; or if you
should, you shall not then be Heard. And should you suffer the deadly Enemy of
Souls, and of Prayers, to Gagg and Muzzle you now, you will be struck Speechless
then. For Conscience will tell you, what you should have done, and what you
might have done. And being so Self condemned, it will be Vain then to Speak.
But you will depart from the Lord, and go away with the Curse upon you, for a
most Silly, as well as Ungodly Company, that you would not come to Him, nor
have the Mercy, because you would not so much as Ask it, in the Time when it
was to be obtained. O prevent that Desperate Madness with which you will then
fall Foul upon yourselves, if still you Refuse to make your Advantage of the
Price put into your Hands. Prevent the dreadful Crying out too Late, by Crying
mightily to God, while he gives you Leave and Opportunity for it; yea, when he
gives you a Charge and Command to it. O think it a Happy Word, that God should
say to every one of you, as Agrippa did to Paul, Acts 26.1. Thou art permitted
to Speak for thy self. Then Reckon and Resolve with yourselves, we will not
lose the Eternal Blessing for want of our Speaking. We will Use our Time, and
take the Liberty; and with all our Souls, be Thankful to the Blessed Giver. Not
flying for Shelter here, only in some Dark and Perilous Day, or under such
grievous Pressures that Extort^ it from us: But be Constant to it, ^s to all
the things that we have most Need of in the World.

Now, you do not think a Meal, or a Nap once in a Week, or once in two or three
Days, enough for your Bodies: But you are at your Meals every Day, and at your
Rest every Night; and apt to think it much, if you want but one Day's Food, or
but one Night's Sleep. And I must tell you, ye are under a wicked Mistake, if
you do not think your Prayers to be of greater Concern to you, than your Diet,
or your Raiment, or your Natural Repose. For though Destitute of these, you may
have God's Love, and be Happy for ever. But without your Prayers, you are
without God in this World, and like to be Lost Creatures Eternally in the Next.
Do you sind the Need then of Daily Bread, and not of Daily Prayer? And what
that is Good can you think of yourselves, when Hardened in this Neglect? Shall
Jews have Morning and Evening Sacrifice every Day? And shall Christians, that
are so much more Obliged to God, have L^ss? Nay shall Papists, Turks, and
Ethnicks, make their Daily Prayers? And shall any that call themselves
Reformed, and Profess so much a Better Religion, lead more Ungodly Lives, and
make no Conscience of their Prayers? We may Protest against such Protestants,
that are as the Scabs and Botches of our Church, and live in it only to
disgrace it, and to plague it. And may you all better Remember yourselves, and
Return to your Lord, and Cleave to Him, and Keep in with Him.

O that you may be here Determined, and so Settled in this way of Duty, that all
the World may not put you beside it! And so make it your Custom, that you may
be Known by it, and let all Men know that you will not break it. Men use to be
Fond and Tenacious of Customs, though they be none of the best, too often some
of the Worst. O that you would make your Praye^s so much your Habit; that here
you may Plead your Custom, and set up your Resolution; so I have Inured my self
to do and so I will do* I am clearly for it, whatever I hear against it.
Nothing shall Pull me from Jay God. In his Service, so long I have lived, and
no Cause have I (...) to Complain, but abundant Obligation to be Thankful. No
Reason do I find to Desert, but the strongest Motives to Persist. For never can
I Serve a Lord so Good, never wait on any that can do for me so Well. Therefore
what I have Begun, I will Carry on. And what I have done in the Daily Worship
of God aforetime, so I will continue to do as long as I have any Time.

You may read how the Devout Daniel, Chap. 6.10. would still go on Praying to
his God, even in the Face of Danger, and just before the Mouths of the Lions:
Under that Bloody Interdict, which made his Duty like to cost him so Dear as
his Life; yet he would not endure to have such an Embargo laid on (...)
Prayers, nor suffer the severest Menace to Terrify him out of the only Refuge
for a distressed Soul; but would let all Men see, That he did not Serve the God
whom he was Ashamed or Afraid to Own. Though, no doubt, but he was sufficiently
Tongue-Lasht among the Profane Spectators of his Devotions, as a very Silly
Ridiculous Precisian, that could not forbear his Accustomed Praying; at least,
when such a Mulct and Capital Punishment was laid upon it. What does the Man
mean so to throw away his Life? Or does he think to Court the Lions with his
Prayers? Or to Blunt the Edge of their Teeth with this Breath of his Mouth? Yet
all could not take him off, but still he proceeded in the wonted way of his
Worship.

Now th^s he did in such a Perilious Time: And will not some of you be brought
to pay your Lo^^ this Homage in a Time of Safety and Liberty? When there is no
Lion in the way, but of your own Fancy; when to do it, is not at your Peril;
but instead of any to Deter you from it, you are Solicited and Called upon to
do it? Yea, and told what a Shame, and Scandal, and Danger, it is for you to
leave it undone? How you venture upon the Roaring Lion, because you will not
Fly for Succor to the God of your Salvation. And what will you Answer to him,
if thus you Persist, I say not, to Serve him, but to Neglect him, and to
Despise and Slight his Service? When you will not Touch the Burden with one of
your Fingers, which you may have the Honor and Praise, for taking up: And
which others would go away with, though it was as much as their Estates and
E^ves were worth, to bear it. And even at this day, How many do Smart and
Suffer for the Exercise of that very Religion, which you are not only
Tolerated, but Exhorted and Importuned to Exercise, yet more and more? And it
is not the Devil now as a Roaring Lion, that Afrights you from it; No, but the
Devil, as the Old Serpent, that would silly Argue and Cavil you out of it! They
are such Devils, as I have told you of: The Devil of Sloth, the Devil of Pride,
the Devil of Profaneness, that puts you out of Conceit with it; and makes you
rat^er Wrangle at it, than set about it.

And that you may not be carried away with the Stream of Custom, down into the
Dead Sea of this dangerous Neglect: O look not so much upon the Way of the
World, as to the End of the World. For though now you may Account the Jolly
Libertines that scorn Prayer, Brave and Happy; and of the Praying-Families, may
Think and Speak as Base and Disdainfully; yet when you shall come to take your
last Leave of this World, I know of which then you will like the Better, and
whether of them you will reckon the Happier. And when our Lord shall come to
Judge the World, I know, with which Sort you would be glad to be Found. However
you had rather Live with the One; I am sure, you would wish to Dye with the
Other. O then do not Stifle your Convictions, nor lose your O^portunities,
while they are before you. Do not put off the Work of Life, till you reach to
the very Period and Conclusion of your Lives. To let nothing but the Stroke of
Death just feizing your Souls, drive you to your Prayers; and then only to
Breathe them out, when you shall be Breathing your Last; To Defer the Pious
Orders of your House, till Death is coming to Break up the House. But learn
Wisdom betimes, and Cry now while you may be Heard, least you be forced to set
up the hideous Outery, when there shall be no Hearing. O see at l^st, the foul
pernicious Error. And let me beseech you, for your own dear Souls sakes, to
amend this Matter. And let the Sinful Omission be made up by you, before the
D^^m of the Slothful Servant be past upon you. Let none of your Houses be a Day
longer without Gad, and without his Holy Fear, and his Devout Worstip. But
Resolve quickly, with the Heavenly, as well as Honorable, Herbert, I and Dear
Prayer will together Dwell. Admit and Welcome this Guest into your Houses, as
one of the Best that ever came there. And i^ you look for Everlasting Rest with
God; now better ^es^^r you for him. Humble your Souls before him for Loitering
so long, and Trifling so much, as you have done. Confess it, and beg Pardon,
for it. And Pray, and Resolve, and Strive, that it may be so no more: That you
may follow better Examples, and yourselves come to set better Patterns. And
make such Conscience, yea, and take such Delight, to keep up the Daily Worship
of God in your several Houses: That your Children may Bless God, that ever they
had such Parents: That your Servants may Bless God, that ever they had such
Mastens: And that I may Bless God, that I have not lost my Labor, nor your
Love, by this Work. And that yourselves, when Death comes to show you the
Blessed End, whither the Way of Prayer leads, may Bless the Lord for Putting
you upon it, and Keeping you in it* And for giving you the Encour age^^nt to
make your Supplications to him, that so he might have the Occasion to make you
Happy, with all the Unspeakable Gifts of his Everlasting Bounty.

Thus I have used great Plainness of Speech, and spent all my Power of
Persuasion. I cannot tell what will be the Success; but am Sensible, That I
have been Rouzing among many Families, where I am like to find small Welcome;
but as many Complaints of my Over-Officiousness, as I have made of their
Under-doings. From such I may expect to hear, Pragmatical, and a Busy-Body in
other's Matters: As much as I call Slothful and Negligent in their Heavenly
Father's Business* They may ask, Why cannot I let them alone? And I must
Confess, I have as much Reason to let them alone, as they have to let alone His
Work that Ma^e them. But some may Hear more of what they Call this Heavy Cry
from me; till I Hear more of the Heavenly Cry from them. For where I see so
many (and several of them my Friends) Possessed with such a Dumb Devil, I find
it very hard to Forbear Speaking. Though it may look like the Troubling my self
to make others Uneasy^ I had rather do so, than they should be for ever
Unhappy. The Sound of this Bell, though none of the Sweetest, (but such as will
be thought Shrill and Harsh in many Ears) yet if it prove but Load enough to A
woken such as I intend, I have my Design. And therefore I would have it Sound,
not only throughout my Neighborhood, but all over the Land. For I have Cried,
and Cried again, to some, a great part of my Life: And if I can find no better*
Audt^^^^ than hitherto, I shall leave this Bell to Ring a Peal in their Ears:
And this little Book, like a Spirit to Haunt their Housul after my Death. And
such a Trouble-House. I am contented to be thought, if I can but Prevent their
Everlasting Trouble. But you know, one that ask^^, Art thou he that Troubles
Israel? 1 Kings 18.17. (...) was the greatest Troubler of it Himself. And let
such as here Complain, but Examine themselves for the Cause^, and they may find
a Troublesome Companion in their own Bosoms, that will never let them be at
Qutet, though I should. I can heartily say, as our Lord Commands, Luke. 10.5.
To whatever House I enter, Peace be to this He so, But if the Son of Peace be
not there, ( i. e. such as are Meet to Receive it) I cannot help it; And that
they no better Know the Way of Peace, I am Sorry for it. And this is my Desite,
to Point out that Way to them, if they will take it. And where I must Lose any
of my Priends, may it be by this ^^eed^^ and Faithfulness, with them, and for
bestowing such a Labor of Love upon them. May no bigger Hurt come to any of
your Houses. And may they all be as Happy, as I do wish them. And then I am
sure it will be much better with them, than any that I here take the Boldness
to Capitulate with, go the way to make them.

They are Ruful Dwellings, where God is not among them; but all that Belong^ to
Him, is set at Naught by them. And some of the Houses whose Nakedness I have
been Survering, they are Worse than Mes^ch and Kedar. It Is even as the Mouth of
Hell, to Dwell in such Ten^s of Wickedness. The Lord* be Merciful to them, and
turn out the great Master of Misrule: And take Possession of them for Himself:
And so New-Model them that he may have some better Service from them, and come
yet to take Pleasure in them.

But all the Blessings of Heaven be the Portion of those Families, where God is
daily and duly Called upon My Heart is with them; and all the best of my Wishes
are for them. The Lord Increase them more and more, them and their Children.
May they continue such Shining Lights in the World; till they come to Shine as
the Brightness of the Firmament in the Kingdom of their Father. And may others,
at these Torches, Light their own; yea, so may this Light be Communicated (as
the common Light) to Propagate itself far and wide throughout the Earth. That
such as See it, may fall in Love with it, and be Drawn in by it. And say to the
Praying-Families, as the Gentiles to God's Israel, Zech. 8 23. We will go with
you; for we have keard that God is with you.

I have done. The Lord Prosper my poor Warning with his Heavenly Blessing; and
Excite and Quicken you to Prayer; and Teach and Help you in it; and make you
Ready and Mighty it it; yea, well pleased and much in Love with it. O that it
may be the Joyful Sound in every one of your Houses! Daily heard among you, and
Duly made by you. That so you may Pray down all your Sins under your Feet, and
Pray down all his Blessings on your Heads. And never leave off to Ask, and
Seek, and Knock, till you have Received, and Found, and got Heaven Opened; and
an Entrance made into the Everlasting Kingdom of (...) Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Where you shall find your Time thus well bestowed, Expiring into the
Blessed Eternity; in which to Enjoy all the Sweet, and precious Fruits of your
Prayers, and your Redeemer's Purchase for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for W. Rogers.
ARchbishop Ti^^tson's Works, Folio. Price 20 s. -- Sermons of the Stedfastness
in Religion: Of Family-Religion: Of Education of Children: And the Advantage of
an Early Piety. Twelves. Price 1 s. 6 d. -- Persuasive to Frequent Communion in
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Octavo. Price Stitcht 3 d. -- Discourse
against Transubstantiation. Octavo. Price Stitcht 3 d. Two Discourses: The
First of Evil-Speaking. By his Grace, John, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
The Second, Of the Government of the Thoughts. By his Grace, John, Lord
Archbishop of York, both Preached before Their Majesty's, 94. Bishop of
Norwich's Two Sermons of the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence, Preached before
the Queen at Whitehall. Quarte. -- Sermon at St. Andrews Helbourn, on Gal. 6.7.
-- Sermon of Religious Melancholy. Octave. Price 3 d. -- Sermon of the
Immortality of the Soul, Preached before the King and Queen at Whitehall, on
Palm Sunday. Quarte. -- Thanksgiving-Sermon before the King at St. James's,
April 16. 1696. -- Sermon Preached before the House of Lords, January 30. 1697.
Quarte. Bishop Kidder's Commentary on the Fire Books of Moses, with a
Dissertation concerning the Author or Writer of the said Books; and a General
Argument to each of them. In 2 Vol. Octavo. -- Demonstration of the Messiah*
Second Part* Octavo. -- Sermon of the Resurrection, Preached before the Lord
Mayor, April 9. 1694. Dr. Sherlock's Practical Disconrse on Death. Octavo.
Price 3 s. -- Practical Discourse concerning Future Judgment. Price 3 s. 6 d.
-- Discourse concerning Divine Providence. Quarte. Price 5 s. Mr. Warren's Holy
Mourner. Octavo. Price 3 s. 6 d. Mr Elis's Sum of Christianity. Price Bound 6
d. -- Catechism. Pride 6 d. Mr. Bl^ckall's Sermon Preached at Breentwood in
Ess^^^. Second Defense of the Church of England. Quarto. Dr. Bedford, Concio ad
Cleru^^ Londi^ensum; Habita ap^^ G^lkgrum Sionense, xvi ^^l. Jun. A. D.
MDCXCVIII. Mr. Love's Carechism. Price 6 d. Dr Clagett's Sermons. In Two
Volums. Octavo. Mr. Jeffery's Sermon Pre^c^^d at Norwich, March 8. 1695/6 --
Plain and Short Discourse concerning the Nature of the Lord's Supper, and the
End of Celebrating it. To which is added, a Paraphrase of all those Places in
the New Testament wherein the Lord's Supper is mentioned. Octave. Price 3 d.
BOOKS Printed for W. Rogers and Benj. Took.
THE Liberty of Prayer Asserted and Guarded from Licentiousness, Octavo. Price
2 s. Two Letters written to a Gentleman of Note, guilty of Common Swearing. To
which is added a Third Letter to another Gentleman in the Commission of the
Peace, exciting him to the performance of his Part in Executing the late Act
against Profane Cursing and Swearing. Price 1 s. A Sermon preached at Harley
in Shrepshire, December 2. 1697. being the Day of Public Thanksgiving for the
Peace, and for His Majesty's Return. Quarto. Prayers and Offices of Devotion
for Families, and for particular Persons upon most Occasions, Price 2 s. 6 d.
These Four by Benj. Jenks, Rector of Harley, and Chaplain to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Bradford.
BOOKS Printed for Benj. Took.
A Collection of Cases, and other Discourses lately written to recover
Dissenters to the Communion of the Church of England. By some Divines of the
City of London Foliv* Memoirs and Observations, made in a late Journey through
the Empire of China, and published in several Letters; particularly upon the
Chinese Pottery and Varnishing: The History of Plants: Description of their
Cities: Public Works: Number of People: Their Language, Manners, Commerce,
etc. By F. Louis le Compte, Illustrated with Figures. The Third Edition.
Octavo. A Complete Body of Chirurgical Operations, containing the whole Tract
of Surgery, with Observations and Remarks on each Case. Illustrated with Copper
Plates. By M. D. la Va^gaion, M. D. and Intendant to the Royal Hospital of
Paris, Octavo. A New Voyage to Italy, wi^h a Description of the Chief Towns,
Churches, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, Statues, and Antiquities, of that Country.
Together with some Useful Instructions for those who shall Travel thither. By
Maximilian Misson, Gent. Adorned with Figures. 2 Vol. Octavo. The Roman
History, from the Building of Rome. In Two Volumes. By Lawrence Eachard, A. M.
Octavo. Reflections upon what the World commonly call Good-Luck and Ill-Luck,
with regard to Lotteries, and of the good Use which may be made of them.
Written in French by Mons. Le Clerk. Twelves.
ERRATA.
Page 3. l. ult. after and r. open and. p. 8. l. 31, 32. 35. for their r. your.
p. 11. l. 10, 11. r. there they have the Advantages. p. 14. l. 23. dele. ed. p.
31. l. 7. r. Ensure. p. 32. l. 15. for your r. that. l. ult. r. do not. p. 33.
l. 16. r. it is. p. 36. l. 13. r. Monitors. p. 38. l. 1. r. the. p. 44. l. 28.
r. other. p. 46. l. 24. r. keep. p. 52. l. 30. for to r. so p. 57. l. 3. for
the r. ye, and for their r. your, and l. 4. for their r. your. and for they r.
you. and l. 16. r. Diminution. p. 62. l. 10. r. O think. p. 64. l. 25. for
these r. those. p 66. l. 7. r. Farm. and l. 15. r. Wo-need. p. 77. l. ult. for
is r. it is. p. 82. l. ult. r. Shadow. p. 83. l. 21. after you add may. p. 88.
l. 31. r. Delighting. p. 89. l. 28. for your r. you. p. 91. l. 28. r.
Attendance. l. 31. for the r. thy. p. 94. l. 6. r. O how. p. 96. l. 7. for For
r. And. p. 100 l. 13. r. Friend. l. pen. r. shall. p. 110. l. 3. r. Thus I. p.
111. l. ult. r. Wretches. p 114. l. 26. r. Worshipping. p. 115. l. 4. for had
r. has. and for Divided r. Divide. p. 116 l. 30. r. O make. p. 117. l. 1. r.
Overseer. and Hearts. p. 118. l. 8. r. a charge. l. 9. r. to do it. l. 19. r.
Extort p. 119. l. 5. r. much more. l. 28. r. my God. l. 30. after I dele have.
p. 124. l. 21. r. Cause.


