I Appoint Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, to Print this Information,
According to the Order of the HOUSE of COMMONS; And that no other Person
presume to Print the same.

November. 10th 1680. Wi WILLIAMS, Speaker.

THE INFORMATION OF Robert Jennison Of GRAY'S INN, Gent. Delivered at the BAR of
the HOUSE OF COMMONS, Tuesday the Ninth day of November, In the Year of our
Lord, 1680.

Perused and Signed to be Printed, According to the Order of the House of
Commons, BY ME William Williams, Speaker.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1680.

THE INFORMATION OF Robert Jennison OF GRAY'S INN, Gent.
THis Informant says, That about the beginning of the Year 1678. he has heard
Mr. Ireland, and Mr. Thomas Jennison, both Jesuits, Discourse of a Design by
the Roman Catholics to obtain a Liberty, or a Toleration, for the open
Profession of their Religion here in England. And the way he then heard them
speak of, was, by Collecting a round Sum of Money among their Party, and by
Bribing the greatest part of the then Parliament. This Informant has likewise
heard the two forenamed Persons talk of the securing the Duke of York's
Succession, which they told this Informant was to be done by granting our
Commissions to those of that Religion, to the end they might be ready to Rise,
upon the Death of the King. He has also heard those, with other Jesuits (viz.)
Blunden and Fenwick, Discourse in General Terms, of the Necessity and
Usefulness to their Party, of altering the Government Established, and that the
Roman Catholic Religion could never be settled in England till that were done,
and that the present Government were brought to the French Model.

In the month of June in the same year, this Informant being at Mr. Ireland's
Chamber in Russel Street, Covent Garden, and there happening some Discourse, That
the Roman Catholic Religion would suddenly come in, and be owned in England,
Mr. Ireland did then say, That there was only One in the way, that hindered
that Religion from Flourishing in England again, and that it was an easy
matter to Poison the King. That Sir George Wakeman might opportunely and easily
do it: And this Informant then demanding if Sir George Wakeman was the King's
Physician, Mr. Ireland did to that Question reply, No, but that he was the
Queen's, and thence might have an Opportunity to do it.

In August following, the same day this Informant came from Windsor, (which he
has reason to remember by very good Circumstances) this Informant went to Mr.
Ireland's Chamber, where he found him pulling off his Boots upon the Frame of a
Table: Who told this Informant, He was newly come by Post from Wolverhampton in
Staffordshire, and that this Informant's Relations there were well, and would
have been glad to have seen this Informant there: who after a return of Thanks,
and some congratulation upon his arrival, told Mr. Ireland he was newly come
from Windsor. The said Ireland thereupon enquiring what News from thence, and
of the diversion of the Court; the Informant made answer, He understood that
his Majesty took much delight in Crow-hawking and Fishing, but chiefly in the
latter, which he used to follow early in the Morning, accompanied with a small
Retinue of two or three. Mr. Ireland presently replied, He were easily taken
off, or removed. To which this Informant returned and made answer, God forbid.
After some Pause, No, says he, I do not say it is lawful. Here happened this
Interruption: This Informant then asked Mr. Ireland, seeing he was newly come
out of Staffordshire, what his Aunt said concerning a Letter sent to her about
two Months before, relating to the same sum, or thereabouts, which this
Informant had had in the mean time of him. Mr. Ireland did then make answer, as
from her, That she did not think fit to answer it; and further, That the old
Gentlewoman was hard enough, and would hold her own. After this he drew down a
Discourse concerning Religion, which was shortly to be brought in, and pressed
this Informant by diverse Arguments to be instrumental in it, urging how
Meritorous it would be, and how much to the Glory of God: and thereupon offered
to cause the Twenty pound borrowed of him by this Informant, to be remitted,
and forgiven him, if he would be Assisting to the Taking off the King, and
would be one of those that would go to Windsor about it. But this Informant did
answer, That he would not for Twenty times Twenty pound have any hand in the
Death of the King. Whereupon the said Ireland replied, Will you do nothing to
bring in the Catholic Religion? To which this Informant did say, That he did
not believe it would ever come in by Blood. Upon which the said Ireland
replied, What! would you not have Religion to Flourish in England again?
Whereto this Informant answered, If it were done, if the King were taken off;
so, and well; but this Informant said he would have no hand in it. But the said
William Ireland not being satisfied with this Informant's Answers, pursued
thus, Do you know any Irish men of our Religion, that are stout and courageous?
This Informant replied, The Irish Gentlemen were commonly so, and did name
Captain Levalin, Mr. Thomas Brahall, Mr. Karney, three Irish men, and Mr. James
Wilson, being all Gentlemen that lived in or about Gray's Inn, of whose Names
(two of them at the least) the said Ireland took particular notice in Writing,
to the best of this Informant's remembrance. And this Informant did then tell
the said Ireland, That he believed no men of Estates would be concerned in that
Affair, and that he himself was Heir to an Estate (his Brother being a Priest)
and he understood that Captain Levalin was Heir to a very good Estate; and
therefore this Informant did believe he would have nothing to do in any such
matter, unless the Pique which he had to the King might move him to it. And
this Informant says, That after he had, upon the importunity of William
Ireland, named unto him Captain Levalin, Mr. Karney, Mr. Brahall, and Mr. James
Wilson, to be stout and courageous Gentlemen, the said William Ireland did ask
and require this Informant to go down with the said Gentlemen to Windsor, to be
assistant in the Taking off the King, which this Informant refused, saying, He
would not have any hand in the Death of the King: saying, No men of Estates
would engage therein, as this Informant believed. And the said William Ireland
did approve of the said four persons named as aforesaid, by this Informant, as
fit for the Design; and declared that he knew Mr. Levalin, and Mr. Karney,
before this Informant had named them. By the which this Informant did apprehend
that he might have communicated with them of the said Design for Windsor,
before the nomination aforesaid. And he further says, At the same time when he
came from Windsor, Mr. William Ireland did ask this Informant for the Twenty
pound lent unto this Informant upon Bond, although the same was not then due;
and further said, He wanted Fourscore pounds, having then occasion for that
sum, and this Informant did say, He would return what he owed him, as soon as he
should get into the North.

And this Informant further says, That nigh two Months after the Mustering the
Forces upon Hounslow-Heath, the aforenamed Tho. Jennison told this Informant,
He had a matter of great Consequence to impart unto him: adding, That there was
a Design on Foot, so laid, as it could not well be discovered, wherein the
greatest Catholics in England were Embarked; That the Queen and the Duke were
in the Design, and several Lords; by Name the Lord Bellasis, the Lord Powis,
the Lord Arundel of Warder; and the said Thomas Jennison did say, That they had
often attempted the Lord Treasurer, and at the last had made him theirs:
further saying, That it would be of great advantage to this Informant to
Embarque with them, and that he could not be in greater danger than they: and
that he would acquaint this Informant with more particulars after he had
received the Sacrament of Secrecy, which he engaged this Informant to do upon
the next Holiday, at Sir Philip Tyrrwhits house in Bloomsbury. But this
Informant did not receive the Sacrament upon any account whatsoever about the
Plot. And this Informant then wishing he had had a Commission in the new
Levies, the said Thomas Jennison replied, That he would get him a Commission
from the Duke of York; whereunto this Informant returning answer, How could
that be, seeing all the Commissions are now granted out, and full? The said
Thomas Jennison did then in plain Words tell this Informant, That there was a
new Army to be raised for to bring in Religion, but would acquaint this
Informant with particulars hereafter, and therefore desired to know of this
Informant how he might send him a Commission with safety, he knowing this
Informant intended suddenly to go into the Bishopric of Durham: and as this
Informant remembers, this Commission was not to be sent until the Taking off
the King was effected; whereat this Informant was surprised; but Thomas
Jennison did say, He could tell him Things more at large, after his receiving
the Sacrament of Secrecy. And this Informant further says, That upon the day
that this Informant received the Twenty pound lent unto him, he went with the
said Thomas Jennison to Mr. William Harcourt's Chamber in Dukes-street, to
return Thanks for the Obligation in consenting to lend the Money. Mr. Thomas
Jennison falling upon that common Topic, that Religion would suddenly come in,
he did express himself as Dr. Oats has it in his Narrative (viz.) If C. R.
would not be R. C. he should not long be C. R. which he interpreted, Si Carolus
Rex non esset Rex Catholicus, non foret diu Carolus Rex.; which was not the
first time this Informant heard that quibling expression from the said Thomas
Jennison, who further then added upon Discourse, That the King being
Excommunicated, and Deposed; he was no longer King, and it were no sin, or no
great sin at least, to Take him off; and if it should be discovered who did it,
perhaps two or three might die for it bot denying the Fact. This Informant
supposes his meaning to have been, denying themselves to be Papists that
committed so Barbarous and Villainous a Fact, the Matter would soon blow over
(because the Duke was to Succeed.) And this Informant further says, Being with
the said Thomas Jennison and another Gentleman about the latter end of April,
or beginning of May 1678. (whose name he remembers not) in the aforesaid
Ireland's Chamber, there came one in, who after some private discourse with Mr.
Ireland departed; and after he was gone, the said Thomas Jennison told this
Informant 'twas one Mr. Oats, who had been a Parson, but was come over to
them, and that he was a brisk jolly Man, well worth this Informant's
acquaintance. And this Informant very well remembers, there happening some time
after, a Discourse about the said Parson that was lately come over, the said
Thomas Jennison did say, That that Parson was engaged in the Design; whereto
this Informant objected, That a reconciled Enemy ought no more to be Trusted,
than an open Foe. But the said Thomas Jennison answered, They were sure enough
of him, and that being once reconciled, they were the more zealous and trusty;
to which opinion this Informant submitted, instancing Dr. Godwin, and Dr.
Bayley, as being zealous Catholics, although they were Protestant Converts.

And this Informant further says, That he was in Shinsield Parish near Reading
in Berks, about the time of Coleman's Trial, where he met with Mr. Cuffell, a
Romish Priest and Jesuit, who then much blamed the said Coleman, saying, He was
infatuated to suffer his own Papers to be taken upon the Discovery of the Plot,
when as he had given Notice to Mr. Harcourt, Mr. Ireland, and the rest of the
Jesuits, to Burn or Secure theirs. And he very well remembers, That amongst
other Discourse, this Informant spoke against the Opinion that Bellarmine,
Mariana, and Suarez maintained, touching the Power of the Pope, to Depose
Kings; upon which the said Cuffel mentioned a Sentence, which, he said,
Bellarmine did draw out of the Scripture for that Opinion, which was, Quod Papa
habeat eandem potestatem super Reges, quam Jehojada habuit super Athaliam. And
this Informant further says, That Madam Hall, his Sister, being present at the
said Cuffel's other Discourse, concerning Coleman's infatuation, in sending
Notice, as before, etc. upon this Informants reflecting in the absence of
Cuffell, viz. That by his side-words he seemed manifestly to own a Plot, his
Sister did then say, She very much feared That they had some Bloody Design, for
that she had heard the said Cuffell, some little time before the breaking out
of the Plot, upon a Discourse, That Religion would shortly come into England,
say these Words, viz. There must be some blood shed, before Religion could be
introduced; but she told him, She did not believe it ought to come in that way.

This Informant further says, That usually visiting Madam Harewell, his Aunt,
and her Daughter, at their Lodgings in Kings-street Covent Garden, at the least
three or four times a Week, which was, as this Informant certainly remembers,
before the Trial of the five Jesuits Executed for the Execrable Plot, he had
the opportunity of Seeing, Reading, and Transcribing several Papers and Letters
from his Brother Mr. Thomas Jennison, all tending to invalidate Mr. Oats his
Testimony, the particular Way he used does not occur to his Memory. But this
Informant remembers he told Madam Harewell and her Daughter, That he thought
those Arguments would do his said Brother but little good for his Defense,
unless he had better behind; but there were Two Passages in the said Papers or
Letters, some whereof were Subscribed to one Dr. -- or Sir -- wherein the said
Thomas Jennison thus Expressed himself, Why are our Friends disgusted? I will
not stir one hairs breadth. By which Expression, this Informant did believe,
That some of the Plotters were Afraid and Jealous, lest the said Thomas
Jennison should Detect their Plot, and therefore by those Words he assured
them, that he would not recede one hairs breadth from his Resolution of
Secrecy. And this Informant says, That he then communicating his said
Reflection and Observation to the said Ladies, they were at a stand, not
knowing how to excuse his Meaning. The second Passage was, about what the said
Thomas Jennison supposed himself to have spoke to the Lady Tyrrwhit, upon his
being Apprehended at her Lodgings in Bloomsbury, whereof he seemed very
solicitous to be ascertained in the aforementioned Papers, and that by some
cunning third hand. For, I believe, said he, I said, I did not know Mr. Oats;
by which this Informant perceived his Meaning to be, That if he had then, viz.
upon his Apprehension, denied his Knowledge of Mr. Oats to the Lady Tyrrwhit
(who by the way was his Proselyte) he was resolved to persist in the said
Denial to the last; though on the other hand this Informant does certainly know
the said Thomas Jennison was well acquainted with the said Mr. Oats, as
appeared by Two remarkable Instances in the former Depositions of this
Informant.

This Informant likewise says, That Mrs. Ann Ireland coming to this
Informant's Chamber to Chide him, for that she heard he was about to Discover
some Matters touching the Plot: She, to dissuade him, hastily said, On my
Conscience I think you will bring your self into the Plot, and by your Discovery
will own, That there was a Plot, and, That you was Engaged in it, and so
Disgrace your self; though she probably knew this Informant was no further
concerned, than in what was imparted in that Discourse he had with her Brother
(she being then present) after this Informant's arrival from Windsor. And Mrs.
Ann Ireland further said then, That this Informant was worse than Dr. Oats;
for that Doctor Oats did follow the Plot, and make an early Discovery; but,
that this Informant came in too late. To which this Informant replied, That
what he had to say, he remembered from the very first Discovery, and before, or
at the least within three or four Months of the Breaking out of the Discovery
of the Plot: and that he would not offer to Depose any thing upon Oath, but
what he could certainly charge his Memory with, and so bid her not trouble her
self.

This Informant also very well remembers, That about the latter end of
September, or the beginning of October, 1678. when he was at his Father's House
in the Bishopric of Durham, Mr. Ralph Jennison, a Jesuit, came to see this
Informant; who before they parted, asked the said Mr. Ralph Jennison, how he
might conveniently send Twenty pound to Mr. Ireland, which this Informant said
he did owe to him. Mr. Ralph Jennison replied (which Directions this Informant
did then take in a little Journal) You may send a Letter with your Bill to Mr.
Ireland, and Enclose them in another Letter to Mr. Oats, at his Lodgings at
Mr. Grigsons in Drury Lane, and your Letter or Moneys will come safe that way
to Mr Ireland.

Robert Jennison.
Jurat. nono die Novembris, coram nobis,

William Pulteney. Thomas Stringer.





