A True and Perfect ACCOUNT Of a Strange and Dreadful. APPARITION Which lately
Infested and Sunk a SHIP bound for New Castle, Called, The Hope-well of London.

And of the Strange Deliverance of JOHN PIE MASTER, and Nine Men more; Who were
all Examined and Sworn to the Truth of the following RELATION before Justice
WOOD of London.

With Allowance.

Roger Lestrange, March 30. 1672.



LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, 1672.

A LETTER from a Friend, in reference to the following Relation.
Mr. Clavel,
I Have sent you enclosed, an account of a strange Accident lately happened in my
journey, to a Newcastle Ship, called, The Hopewel of London, being infested
with an Apparition, and sunk with a stroke of that influence, I wish it might
be exposed to public view, being satisfied, that nothing is expressed therein
but the truth; having beard the Examination of the said John Pie Master and
nine men, all belonging to the said Ship, before the Mayor of Grimsby: And
since their arrival at London, I have received an account that they were not
only examined, hut all sworn there before Justice Wood; and besides all the
concurring Circumstances of the whole number of men in the Ship, nothing can be
more convincing, then of the Masters face being burnt and blasted, especially
on the left side. I hope to be with you in London shortly: I rest,

Your Affectionate Friend, Nathan. Jemson.
Grimsby in Hull River, March 27. 1672.
A True and Perfect Relation of the Strange and Dreadful Apparition which
lately Infested and Sunk a Ship bound for New Castle, called, The Hope-well of
London.
THe 22. of February, 1671. we sailed from Gravesend; and the 26. by Gods
Providence we sailed over the Bar of Newcastle, and there Loaded the (...) of
March. About Nine or Ten of the Clock in the Night following, we having made
all clear and ready for the furtherance of our Voyage, some time after Supper I
went to rest, when about Twelve of the Clock in the Night, to the best of my
remembrance, I was awaked out of my sleep by a great noise, (but saw nothing)
which to the best of my capacity bid me Be gone, and that I had nothing to do
there. But being so hastily disturbed, and not certain what might be the cause,
I gave it over for a Dream, and past that accident as uncertain of the truth.
Now after the first Day was past, about Eight or Nine of the Clock at Night I
went to rest; and about Twelve, my Mate was striking a Light to take a a Pipe
of Tobacco, (as I suppose) and expecting the Wherry to go up to the Town, being
the Tide fell out about Two in the Morning, I desired the Candle might not be
put out; and being as well awake as now I am, to the best of my judgment, I was
then pulled by the Hair of my Head off from my Pillow, and the same words
declared to me as before; and then I saw the perfect face and proportion of a
Man, in a black Hat, stuff Coat, and striped Neck-cloth, with hanging down
Hair, and and a sour down-looking Countenance, and his Teeth being set in his
Head, I had then time to say, Lord have mercy upon me, what art? at which he
vanished: Yet the Candle burned very blew, and almost went out: Hereupon being
much discontented, I did by the following Post give my Owners a just account of
what had befallen me.

The fifth of that instant, we set sail: about four of the Clock in the day,
the Wind at W.S.W. fair Weather, and a brave Gale off the Shore, which
continued until half an hour after Eleven on wednesday Night; at which time the
Man at the Helm called out that he could not stir the Helm: but after I had
pulled off the Whip-Staff, the Ship steered as before, being still fair
Weather, the VVind then coming to the N. W. and Snowing VVeather, but very fair
and clear. I was yet doubtful of more VVind, and therefore caused the Men to
furl the fore Top-sail, and lower down the main Top-sail upon the back of the
main Sail, but could not with all the strength we had hale in; the VVeather
brake off the fore Topsail, when this was still in my judgment, that our Ship
did hale as much, as when our Sails were out. Then we haled up our main Sail,
and still the Ship had the same list as with a large VVind, which to my
judgment might be half a streak, or thereabouts.

By this time it was Two of the Clock, then our Men tried the Pump, and found
little or no water in her: the Man at the Helm called out, That the Candle
burned so blew in the Lanthorn, That it gave little or no light, and three
several times went out, so that I held the Candle to the Look-out, which Candle
did burn very well, and showed a good light; but of a sudden our Ship would
not feel her Helm so kindly as before, and brought all our Sails aback. Then
our Ship heeled as much to VVindward as before to Leeward: the Glass being out,
we went to the Pump, and found uo water in the ship, but she did not steer
well, neither could I find the reason, being still so fair weather: This unkind
steerage, made me urgent to try the pump yet more, but I could not get the
upper box to work, nor stir; but having taken that up, and trying with the pump
hook, we could not come near the lower box by a foot and a half, which to my
judgment was hindered by something like a Bull-fish, or Woolsack, that as we
forced down, gave up again with the hook: Whereupon Mistrusting that all was
not well, I caused our men to keep the Coat of our pump up, and my self loosned
the tack; in the mean time I ordered two men to loose the Boat, which they did,
being lashed in three places: Yet they do not remember to this hour, that they
loosned any of them but the middlemost; and with three men in her, the Boat
went over the top of the Foresheet, which lay above the stem, without touching
it, with such violence, as even amazed us that saw it: And they that were in
the Boat, gave such loud cries, as frighted him at the Helm, who came running
out unknown to me. But then finding the ship coming nearer the wind then
formerly, I ran to the staircase, to bid him put the Helm over, but could not:
And hearing one jump down at the hatch, which was open at the half deck, did
suppose that the Helms man came down again; and calling him by his name to come
and help me, the word was no sooner out of my mouth, but I perceived the same
person that I had formerly seen before we came out of the Harbor; who came
violently to me, saying, Be gone, you have no more to do here; throwing me in
at the Cabin door, clear upon the top of the table; when I crying out, In the
Name of God what art, he vanished away in a flash of fire; thinking withal,
that the ship had split in a thousand pieces, it giving such a crack. The men
thereupon calling out, Master, if ye be a man come away, did something revive
me; and striving to have got to my chest, being I had some money it, I found
that something hindered me, but what it was I could not tell. Then perceiving
the main Sea coming in so fast, that I was up to the waste, before I could get
out of the Cabin; and finding all our men in the Boat but only one, I desired
him to get a Compass; which he did, yet could never after know what became of
it. We were no sooner in the Boat, but the ship sank down, and yet having a
great Sea Fur Gown, which lay upon the dicker, upon the ships going down, the
very upset of the water brought it to the Boats side, and one of our men took
it in. We reckoned our selves to be ten or twelve Leagues E. S. E. from the
Spern, I perceived the Fane at the Main-top-mast head, when the ship was sunk:
We continued in the Boat from three in the morning, till ten or eleven that
day, when we were taken up by a Whitby Ketch, who used us very kindly, and
towed our Boat at his stern with two ends of a hauser, till she brake away: She
being bound for Newcastle, and the wind being contrary, did on the Saturday
following, set us a shore at Grimsby in Hull River, where the Mayor gave us a
Pass for London.

This is a true and perfect relation to the best of my knowledge in every
respect,

John Pie Master.
And attested by nine men more, all belonging to my Ship.



FINIS.
Postscript.
I Had forgot to express, that one side of my face is burnt and blasted sorely,
which I felt within half an hour after I was gone out of the Ship; but how it
came upon me in the Ship I could not tell, being then in a great horror and
amazement,

John Pie.


