Mr. Francis Jenk's Speech Spoken in a Common Hall, the 24th. of June 1679. for
which he has been ever since maligned and scandalized by the PAPISTS and their
Abetters.
Mr. Common Sergeant,
IT seems a vain thing for this Court to be serious about the Choice of
Magistrates and Officers for the well Government of the City, except they first
take care to remedy those many Mischiefs and Grievances, which the City now
groans under, and which seem to threaten the ruin and destruction of the
whole, that if there be not some speedy redress, there will be little need of
Magistrates and Officers; for there will be no City or People left here to be
Governed.

London has once already been burned to ashes, and firing is now become such a
Trade, that not only London, the Borough of Southwark, and the places
adjoining, but all the Cities, Buroughs, Towns Corporate, and places of
principal Trade throughout the whole Kingdom, are perpetually in danger; so
that no rational or considerate man amongst us can promise himself, his Wife,
his Children, or Estate one nights security, but they may all be devoured in
the consuming flames, except some speedy and effectual course be taken.

But this is not all; For were our Houses secure from fire, yet such is the
general decay of Trade, as if not remedied, must unavoidably bring the whole
City to poverty and ruin; and it is conceived, that this is very much
occasioned by the French, who have laid such great Impositions upon our Woollen
Cloth, Stuffs, and other Manufactures, that we have almost lost our Trade with
France; they have spoild our Trade with Holland, Flanders and Germany, by a
destructive War; they have ruined our Trade at home, and beggared many
thousands of our honest and industrious Weavers, and other English Manufactors
and Traders, by the vast quantity of their Silks, and other unnecessary
Commodities imported hither: so that upon an exact balance of the Trade
between us and them taken, it has been demonstrated, that this City and Kingdom
does lose Eleven hundred thousand pounds every year. By means whereof, they who
in Queen Elizabeth's time might not be suffered to build Men of War are now
grown so powerful at Sea, as to be able to beat both Dutch and Spaniard, and
have made themselves in a manner sole Masters of the Mediterranean Sea: And
they are grown so presumptuous as daily to injure and affront our English
Merchants, and sometimes in his Majesty's own Ports. Their Privateers daily
take our Merchants Ships, plunder others, strip, imprison and torment our
Seamen to the great discouragement of our English Navigation, and almost ruin
of the Merchant.

I shall instance but in one thing more, but that is worse than all the rest,
That is the just apprehension that is upon the minds of good men of danger to
his Majesty's Person and the Protestant Religion.

I had not spoken this at this time and place, but having the honor to serve
this City in Common Council, I have endeavored at several times to bring these
things before that Court, but could not. In the end of the last Common Council
I did desire my Lord Mayor that a Common Council might speedily be held to hear
and consider of a Petition about trade, subscribed by a great number of
Citizens of good quality, and his Lordship did then promise that a
Common Council should speedily be held; But it is a good time since, and there
have been many Fires and Losses, but no Common Council. Wherefore methinks it
does become the wisdom and gravity of this Court not to admit of any longer
delay in a matter wherein their All is concerned. And I do humbly move (and I
conceive it is not only my sense but the sense of the far greater part of this
Court) that some Members of this Court may accompany the Sheriffs and Mr.
Common Sergeant before we proceed to any other matter, to wait upon my Lord
Mayor, and the Court of Aldermen, to desire that a Common Council might
speedily be held, humbly to Petition His Majesty, That for the quieting and
satisfying the minds of his liege People, and for remedy of the many mischiefs
and grievances we now groan under, He would graciously be pleased (according to
the Statutes of 4th. and 36th. of Edw. 3.) immediately to call a New
Parliament.

FINIS.

