BY Virtue of an ORDER of the Honorable the HOUSE of COMMONS, I do appoint
Thomas Basset and Richard Tonson, and no others, to Print my Informations,

Robert Jenison.

THE INFORMATIONS OF Robert Jenison OF Grayes Inn, Esquire. Relating the Horrid
Popish Plott, AS They were given in Writing upon OATH TO THE Honorable House
OF COMMONS ON Tuesday the 9th day of November, 1680.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, and Richard Tonson, at the George in
Fleet Street, and at Grayes-Inn Gate, next Grayes-Inn Lane, MDCLXXX.

THE INFORMATIONS OF ROBERT JENISON, Esquire Concerning the Horrid Popish Plot, etc.
THis Informant says, That about the beginning of the Year 78. he has heard
Mr. Ireland and Mr. Tho. Jenison, both Jesuits, discourse of a Design by the
Roman Catholics, to obtain a Liberty, or a Toleration for the open Profession
of their Religion here in England; and the way he then heard them speak of,
was, by collecting a round Sum of Money among their Party, and by bribing the
greatest part of the then Parliament. This Informant has likewise heard the
two forenamed Persons talk of securing the Duke of York's Succession, which
they told this Informant, was to be done by granting out Commissions to those
of that Religion, to the end they might be ready to rise upon the Death of the
King. He has also heard these, with other Jesuits, viz. Blunden and Fenwick,
discourse in general terms, of the necessity and usefulness to their Party, of
altering the Government established, and that the Roman Catholic Religion
could never be settled in England till that were done, and that the present
Government were brought to the French Model.

In the Month of June, in the same year, this Informant being at Mr. Ireland's
Chamber in Russel Street Covent Garden, and there happening some Discourse,
that the Roman Catholic Religion would suddenly come in, and be owned in
England, Mr. Ireland did then say, That there was only one in the way that
hindered that Religion from flourishing in England again, and that it was an
easy matter to poison the King, and that Sir George Wakeman might opportunely
and easily do it; and this Informant then demanding, if Sir George Wakeman was
the King's Physician? Mr. Ireland did to that Question reply, No: but that he
was the Queen's, and thence might have an opportunity to do it.

In August following, the same day this Informant came from Windsor, (which he
has great reason to remember by very good Circumstances) this Informant went
to Mr. Ireland's Chamber, where he found him pulling off his Boots upon the
frame of a Table, who told this Informant, he was newly come by Post from
Wolverhampton in Staffordshire, and that this Informant's Relations there were
well, and would have been glad to have seen this Informant there, who, after a
return of thanks, and some Congratulation upon his Arrival, told Mr. Ireland he
was newly come from Windsor; the said Ireland thereupon enquiring what News
from thence, and of the Diversion of the Court; the Informant made Answer, he
understood that His Majesty took much delight in Hawking, and Fishing, but
chiefly in the latter, which he used to follow early in the morning,
accompanied with a small Retinue of two or three. Mr. Ireland presently
replied, He were easily taken off, or removed; to which this Informant
returned, and made Answer, God forbid: After some pause, No, says he, I do not
say it is lawful. Here happened this Interruption; This Informant then asked Mr.
Ireland, seeing he was newly come out of Staffordshire, what his Aunt said
concerning a Letter sent to her about two Months before, relating to the same
Sum, or thereabouts, which this Informant had had in the mean time of him; Mr.
Ireland did then make answer, as from her, that she did not think fit to answer
it; and further, That the old Gentlewoman was hard enough, and would hold her
own. After this, he drew down a Discourse concerning Religion, which was
shortly to be brought in, and pressed this Informant, by diverse Arguments, to
be instrumental in it, urging how Meritorious it would be, and how much to the
Glory of God, and thereupon offered to cause the 20 l. borrowed of him by this
Informant, to be remitted, and forgiven him, if he would be assisting to the
taking off the King, and would be one of those that would go to Windsor about
it. But this Informant did answer, that he would not for twenty times twenty
pound have any hand in the Death of the King; whereupon the said Ireland
replied, Will you do nothing to bring in the Catholic Religion? To which this
Informant did say, that he did not believe it would ever come in by Blood. Upon
which the said Ireland replied, What? Would you not have Religion to flourish
in England again? Whereto th^s Informant answered, if it were done, if the King
were taken of, so and well, but this Informant said he would have no hand in it.

But the said William Ireland not being satisfied with this Informant's
Answers, pursued thus, do you know any Irish men of our Religion, that are
stout and courageous? this Informant replied, the Irish Gentlemen were commonly
so; and did name Captain Levalin, Mr. Thomas Brahal, Mr. Karney, three Irish
men, and Mr. James Wilson, being all Gentlemen that lived in or about
Greys-Inn, of whose name (two of them at the least) the said Ireland took
particular Notice in writing, to the best of this Informant's Remembrance. And
this Informant did then tell the said Ireland, that he believed no men of
Estates would be concerned in that Affair, and that he himself was Heir to an
Estate, (his Brother being a Priest) and he understood, that Captain Levalin
was Heir to a very good Estate, and therefore this Informant did believe he
would have nothing to do in any such matter, unless the pique which he had to
the King, might move him to it; and this Informant says, that after he had
upon the Importunity of William Ireland, named unto him, Captain Levalin, Mr.
Karney, Mr. Brahall, and Mr. James Wilson, to be stout and courageous
Gentlemen, the said William Ireland did ask and require this Informant, to go
down with the said Gentlemen to Windsor, to be assistant in the taking of the
King; which this Informant refused, saying, he would not have any hand in the
death of the King; saying, no men of Estates would engage therein, as this
Informant believed; and the said William Ireland did approve of the said four
Persons, named as aforesaid by this Informant, as fit for the design, and
declared that he knew Mr. Levalin, and Mr. Karney, before this Informant had
named them, by the which, this Informant did apprehend, that he might have
communicated with them of the said Design for Windsor, before the Nomination
aforesaid; and he farther says, at the same time when he came from Windsor,
Mr. William Ireland did ask this Informant for the twenty pound lent unto this
Informant upon Bond, although the same was not then due: and farther said, he
wanted fourscore Pounds, having then occasion for that Sum, and this Informant
did say, he would return what he owed him, as soon as he should get into the
North.

And this Informant further says, that nigh two Months after the mustering the
Forces upon Hounslow Heath, the aforenam'd Thomas Jenison told this Informant,
he had a matter of great Consequence to impart unto him, adding, that there was
a Design on foot, so laid, as it could not well be discovered, wherein the
greatest Catholics in England were embarked; that the Queen and the Duke were
in the design, and several Lords by name, the Lord Bellasis, the Lord Powis,
the Lord Arundel of Warder; and the said Tho. Jenison did say, that they had
often attempted the Lord Treasurer, and at the last had made him theirs;
further saying, that it would be of great Advantage to this Informant, to
imbarque with them, and that he could not be in greater danger than they, and
that he would acquaint this Informant with more Particulars, after he had
received the Sacrament of Secrecy, which he engaged this Informant to do upon
the next Holiday, at Sir Philip Tyrrwhit's house in Bloomsbury; but this
Informant did not receive the Sacrament upon any account whatsoever, about the
Plot; and this Informant then wishing he had had a Commission in the new
Levies, the said Thomas Jenison replied, that he would get him a Commission
from the Duke of York, whereunto, this Informant returning Answer, how could
that be, seeing all the Commissions are now granted out, and full; the said
Tho. Jenison did then in plain words tell this Informant, that there was a new
Army to be raised for to bring in Religion, but would acquaint this Informant
with Particulars hereafter, and therefore desired to know of this Informant,
how he might send him a Commission with Safety, he knowing this Informant
intended suddenly to go into the Bishopric of Durham, and, as this Informant
remembers, this Commission was not to be sent, until the taking of the King was
effected, whereat this Informant was somewhat surpised; but Thomas Jenison did
say, he would tell him things more at large, after his Receiving the Sacrament
of Secrecy: and this Informant further says, that upon the day that this
Informant received the twenty pound lent unto him, he went with the said Thomas
Jenison, to Mr. William Harcourt's Chamber in Duke street, to return thanks for
the obligation, in consenting to lend the Money, Mr. Tho. Jenison falling upon
that common Topic, that Religion would suddenly come in, he did express
himself as Dr. Oats has it in his Narrative, viz. If C. R. would not be R. C.
he should not long be C. R.: which he interpreted, Si Carolus Rex non esset Rex
Catholicus; non foret diu Carolus Rex: Which was not the first time this
Informant heard that quibbling Expression from the said Tho. Jenison: who
further then added upon Discourse, That the King being Excommunicated and
Deposed, he was no longer King; and it were no sin, or no great sin at least,
to take him off; and if it should be discovered who did it, perhaps two or
three might dye for it; but denying the Fact, (this Informant supposes his
meaning to have been denying themselves to be Papists that committed so
Barbarous and Villainous a Fact) the matter would soon blow over (because the
Duke was to succeed).

And this Informant further says, being with the said Tho. Jenison and another
Gentleman about the latter end of April, or beginning of May, 78, (whose Name
he remembers not) in the aforesaid Ireland's Chamber, there came one in, who
after some private discourse with Mr. Ireland, departed; and after he was gone,
the said Tho. Jenison told this Informant, 'Twas one Mr. Oats, who had been a
Parson, but was come over to them, and that he was a Brisk Jolly Man well worth
this Informant's acquaintance. And this Informant very well remembers, there
happening sometime after a discourse about the said Parson that was lately come
over, the said Tho. Jenison did say, that That Parson was engaged in the
Design. Whereto this Informant objected, That a Reconciled Enemy ought no more
to be Trusted, than an Open Foe. But the said Tho. Jenison answered, They were
sure enough of him, and that being once Reconciled, they were the more Zealous,
and Trusty. To which Opinion this Informant submitted, instancing Dr. Godwin,
and Dr. Baley, as being Zealous Catholics, although they were Protestant
Converts.

And this Informant further says, That he was in Shinfeild Parish near Reading
in Berks, about the time of Coleman's Trial, where he met with Mr. Cuffell a
Romish Priest and Jesuit, who then much blamed the said Coleman, saying he was
Infatuated, to suffer his own Papers to be taken upon the Discovery of the
Plott; when as he had given Notice to Mr. Harcourt, Mr. Ireland, and the rest
of the Jesuits, to burn or secure theirs. And he very well remembers, That
amongst other discourse, this Informant spoke against the Opinion that
Bellarmine, Mariana, and Suarez maintained touching the Power of the Pope to
Depose Kings. Upon which the said Cuffell mentioned a Sentence which he said
Bellarmine did draw out of the Scripture for that Opinion, which was, Quod Papa
habeat eandem potestatem super Reges quam Jehojida habuit super Athaliam.

And this Informant further says, That Madam Hall his Sister being present at
the said Cuffel's other discourse concerning Coleman's Infatuation, in sending
Notice as before, etc. upon this Informant's reflecting in the absence of
Cuffell, viz. That by his side-words he seemed manifestly to own a Plot, his
Sister did then say, She very much feared that they had some Bloody Design, for
that she had heard the said Cuffell some little time before the breaking out of
the Plott, upon a discourse that Religion would shortly come into England, say
these words; viz. There must be some Blood shed before Religion could be
introduced: But she told him she did not believe it ought to come in that way.

This Informant further says, That usually visiting Madam Harewell his Aunt,
and her Daughter at their Lodgings in Kings Street Covent Garden at the least
three or four times a Week, which as this Informant certainly remembers, was
before the Trial of the Five Jesuits Executed for the Execrable Popish Plott,
he had the opportunity of seeing, reading, and transcribing several Papers and
Letters from his Brother Mr. Tho. Jenison, all tending to invalidate Mr. Oats
his Testimony; the particular ways he used, does not perfectly occur to his
Memory; but this Informant remembers he told Madam Harewell and her Daughter,
That he thought those Arguments would do his said Brother but little good for
his Defense, unless he had better behind. But there were two Passages in the
said Papers, or Letters, some whereof were superscribed to one Dr -- or Sir --
wherein the said Tho. Jenison thus expressed himself, Why are our Friends
disgusted, I will not stir one hairs breadth. By which Expression this
Informant did believe that some of the Plotters were afraid, and Jealous lest
the said Tho. Jenison should detect their Plott, and therefore by these words
he assured them, That he would not recede one hairs breadth from his Resolution
of Secrecy. And this Informant says, That he then communicating his said
reflection, and observation to the said Ladies, they were at a stand, not
knowing how to excuse his meaning. The second passage was about what the said
Tho. Jenison supposed himself to have spoke to the Lady Tyrrwhit, upon his
being apprehended at her Lodgings in Bloomsbury, whereof he seemed very
solicitous to be ascertained in the aforenamed Papers, and that by some cunning
third hand; For I believe, says he; I said I did not know Mr. Oats. By which
this Informant perceived his meaning to be, That if he had then, viz. upon his
apprehension denied his knowledge of Mr. Oats to the Lady Tyrrwhit, (who, by
the way, was his Proselyte) he was resolved to persist in the said denial to
the last: Tho on the other hand this Informant does certainly know the said
Tho. Jenison was well acquainted with the said Mr. Oats, as appears by Two
Remarkable Instances in the former Depositions of this Informant.

This Informant likewise says, That Mrs. Anne Ireland coming to this
Informant's Chamber to chide him, for that she heard he was about to discover
some matters touching the Plott, she to dissuade him hastily said; On my
Conscience I think you will bring your self into the Plott, and by your discovery
will own that there was a Plott, and that you was engaged in it, and so
disgrace your self. Though she probably knew this Informant was no further
concerned than in what was imparted in that discourse he had with her Brother
(she being there present) after this Informant's arrival from Windsor. And Mrs.
Anne Ireland further said then, That this Informant was worse than Dr. Oats;
for, that Dr. Oats did follow the Plott and make an early Discovery, but, this
Informant came in too late.

To which this Informant replied, That what he had to say, he remembered from
the very first Discovery, and before, or at the least within 3. or 4. months of
the breaking out of the Discovery of the Plott, and that he would not offer to
depose any thing upon Oath, but what he could certainly charge his Memory with;
and so bid her not trouble her self.

This Informant also very well remembers, That about the latter end of
September, or the beginning of October, (78.) when he was at his Fathers House
in the Bishopric of Durham, Mr. Ralph Jenison a Jesuit, came to see this
Informant, who before they parted asked the said Mr. Ralph Jenison how he might
conveniently send 20 l. to Mr. Ireland, which this Informant said he did owe to
him. Mr. Ralph Jenison replied, (which Directions this Informant did then take
in a little Journal) You may send a Letter with your Bill to Mr. Ireland, and
enclose them in another Letter to Mr. Oats at his Lodging at Mr. Grigsons in
Drury Lane, and your Letter, or Moneys will come safe that way to Mr. Ireland.

Robert Jenison.

FINIS.

