A PROPOSITION FOR The Safety and Happiness of the King and Kingdom both in
Church and State, and prevention of the Common Enemy.

Tendered to the Consideration of his Majesty and the Parliament against their
next Session.

By a lover of Sincerity and Peace.

The Interest of England lies in holding a firm Union in it self, and the
advancement of the Protestant Religion. For England is a mighty Animal, which
can never die, except it kill it self. The Duke of Roan in his Treatise of the
Interest of the Princes and States in Christendom.

London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

A PROPOSITION for the safety and happiness of the King and Kingdom.
IT has pleased Heaven to visit us of late with his heavy and astonishing
Judgments. The year before he swept away our Citizens from their houses; The
last year he swept away our houses from the Inhabitants; And this year who
knows what and who may be swept away by that divastation which accompanies the
Sword? If there be not a spark, as there is not a Sparrow, lights on the House,
or the Mast top without the Divine Will, methinks it will neither be
unseasonable to lay his Providence to heart, nor unsuitable to make use of
them, unto acts of mercy and commiseration of others.

I am a person that am not very careful how I appear to you, and if it were a
light matter I had to speak about, you might turn away your ear from it, and
regard me as little: But if it be a business of the greatest consequence (as I
am persuaded it is) that can be tendered at this present for a healing of the
Nation, I hope you will both spare me a reasonable hearing, and a candid
interpretation.

There has passed of late some Acts, whereby you have been very severe against
many innocent persons that fear God, and do you no harm. I am loath to declare
my resentments in particular, unless I have further necessity: But I will
pursue in the general those ends I have in my purpose, which are the happiness
of our State, the peace of the Church, the safety of the King, and preservation
of the Nation, not in that way which has been trodden hitherto in late
proceedings, but in the paths of moderation, which some have not known, and
some will not know, who have already perhaps imposed too much, and would not (I
hope) be imposing more on us.

It shall be an Argument good enough for me from this late calamity on the City
and upon our Ships, to alarm you to the quenching those Flames which we have
helped to enkindle by the over-rigour of such Acts in the hearts of the Nation.
God Almighty's righteous dealings toward us, may bring our own toward others
into remembrance, and his severity teach us indulgence. It can neither be an
unchristian or unwise admonition, when our Churches, with other buildings, are
laid in heaps, to look after our Religion, and to prevent the ruin, which
therein also does threaten us, by beginning our repentance in those ashes.

I shall be clear and plain. I desire to be faithful to my Country, to my King,
and to my God I hope, though I know not how I shall approve my self in the
delivery. In magnis, pejus est illud, non voluisse, quam quomodo facias, non
intelligere. We are at this time involved in Wars abroad with our neighbors,
and we are encompassed, as our Island is, with a Sea of intestine dangers
amidst our selves in the divisions of our people. There is the subtilty of the
Jesuit, with those many, too much to be feared advantages of that party; and
there is on the other side, the wildness of the Sectary, with their multitudes,
and high exasperations. Both these are, as it were, the upper and nether jaw of
destruction opening her mouth upon us: If we do not find out a way to
reconcile the sober Protestant, that we may have their combined strength to
oppose these extremes in case of inundation, I know not how soon these jaws may
shut upon us, and overwhelm us in our confusion.

The Motion therefore I have to make is for moderation in the business of
Religion, first seriously debated, and then prudently concluded, in an Act of
Accommodation between the Conformist and Nonconformist that are sober in their
principles, and Indulgence toward others who are so in their lives: So far I
mean as ever it will stand with the Rules, both of Civil and Religious
Prudence, and the good Order of the Land.

I am sensible of what a pause there will be on some men's spirits at this
Motion. I am with Coesar at the flood of Rubicon, and the Dye is cast.

I will confess ingenuously, I know not how it fares with others, but there is
a company of people about us in the Country of different persuasions, who meet
sometimes many hundreds together, that our Justices have been in perplexity
what to do. The most of them for ought I perceive are certainly inoffensive
persons; and they have really no more against them than Pliny against the
Christians of old when he sent to Trajan about them, that is, only that they
meet, and preach, and pray together. And if that excellent Prince was ashamed
after this report he gave him of them in his Epistle, to have these good men
sought out any more unto punishment, I cannot but favor those inclinations,
which are averse from the like inquisition. I profess to God it is such an
ungentleman-like thing methinks to trouble ones Neighbors, that I should be
glad to rid modest men of that work. It were better all these Acts suffered at
once a due and Christian Regulation, than we should be still put upon this
untoward dragging innocent folks thus to prison, for doing nothing in earnest
but endeavoring to save their souls. In the name of God take you your Psalter,
and let them say their prayers as they will.

I have made my Proposition, I shall now offer you my Arguments. Visa est enim
mihi (with the forementioned Author) res digna consultatione, maxim propter
periclitantium numerum; Multi enim omnis aetatis, omnis ordinis, utriusque
sexus etiam vocantur in periculum, and vocabuntur. Neque enim Civitates tantum,
sed viros etiam atque agros superstitionis istius contagi^ pervagata est, quae
videtur sisti, and corrigi posse.

My Arguments may be reduced to these heads. The course you have taken in your
former Acts, will not reach the End you have designed in them. The way I
propose in this Act is liker to do it. The present consideration and exigency
of affairs requires the same of us. One more, The present juncture of affairs,
and conscience toward our Brethren requires it. These heads I will wrap
together in my discourse, and leave the Analysis to your acuter Judgments.

If it were not a time to speak now, we might lay our hands upon our lips, and
our mouths in the dust. I said, Days should speak, and years teach wisdom.
But there is a spirit in man. Great men are not always wise, neither do the
Aged always understand Judgment. I am sorry to understand such a reverend
silence to have been on the spirits of both Houses at the present prevailing
Counsels of some great Persons, which if I may speak it with lowliness to them,
as with zeal unto God and my Prince, are not good at this season, nor will
answer their entendments. I wonder really in whose Shops they have bought their
Spectacles (not of Menante I believe or Tacitus) that they can see this great
thing Unity (of folks spirits) in Uniformity, and the establishment of old
Foundations in new Impositions.

It is a principle of the serious tender Christian, which he lays as a Rule to
himself for practice, That he will not do any thing for fear, which he would
not out of conscience; And it is a deadly temptation against present
Injunctions, that they have a penalty annexed to them. For besides that the
sense of the unreasonableness and cruelty of such Acts are effectual wires upon
the affectious, There is a spirit in man, and resolution of integrity, Not to
do evil that good may come of it, as forestalls the mind with a steeling
against it, instead of submission. If therefore in lieu of proposing such a
piece of Banishment to fright the Non-conformists into the late Oath, enjoined
in the Act at Oxford, there had been offered a Liberty of the Ministry on that
condition, without any penalty, the Act had been perhaps to purpose. Conscience
upon Conscience would do something, when Force upon Conscience will do nothing.

Have we never read the Ecclesiastical Story, or heard at least of the ten
Persecutions, how the Church grew in those times, and what was the Seed of it?
I will tell you a way that a Politic Prince took in ill doing, that you may
take in doing better: The great Julian, that wise Apostate and cursed brave
man, when he saw that all the cruelties of predecessors did but increase the
vigor and life of Christianity, The more they afflicted them, the more they
multiplied and grew, and they were grieved because of the Children of Israel;
He took this course, he would not let any Christian have Dignity or
State-preferment, no not so much as to be one of his Soldiers, unless they
came over to his Religion; they might have their liberty to use their
Consciences to themselves without persecution, but they should have none of his
Favor or Countenance. By this means he did so starve any brave attempt of
Christian Sufferings, and kept them so low and out of heart in their
Profession, that it is judged he made more waste upon Christianity in a few
years, than all the Sword, Fire and Torments could before in two or three Ages.
Lo here a line of Chalk, after which your Timber must be cut that goes to the
building the Ecclesiastical State in this Nation. If there be any can cut it
better by aim of his own head, I am mistaken.

Vis Concilii expers, mole ruit su^.
Vim temperatam, Dii provehunt (...) majus.
There are but two ways, resolve upon it. In the Kingdom of Japan I heard
lately there was some Jesuits had crept in and planted the Christian Religion.
Their King hearing this, sends a present terrible Persecution, whatsoever man
is found Christian, they execute him presently: This not serving the turn, they
do not execute the man only, but all the house where he was found to be
harbored: This not rooting them quite out neither, the King commands that both
that house and the next two houses on both sides of it, should be all put to
execution: The terrible dread hereof seizing upon all, there is not a man can
escape the discovery, and the Sect is immediately extirpate. Could your hearts
now endure to do this? or could your hands serve you? Lay that righthand on
your breasts, weigh what I say; You must either come to this, if you see to the
end, or you must come to an Accommodation.

And what are those things I^ pray, you would have of them, or destroy them? It
is not the^ Dignity of the Bishops, their Lordships and Revenues; It is not
their Cathedrals, Organs, and their Divine Service in what state and
magnificence they please; I^ is not Comman-Prayer, no no^ any Ceremony of the
Church whatsoever for all its significancy if it be but a circumstance of
worship and no more, that could hinder most of the judicious and sober
Non-conformists to come over to you; but it is these Declarations,
Subscriptions, and Oaths which you impose on them in your Acts, as for which I
will show you they are one of the worst ways that could be devised ^o take or
hold any. I will convince you. There is nothing under the Sun makes such a
bruit and stir in the hearts of People ^s these Declarations and Oaths, when it
is no less than the Concience of a Lie, before the face of God and men, in a
case too of Confession, and the fear of Perjury with it, that makes them leave
their Livings and Ministry, rather than keep them on such conditions: and yet
when all is done, be they taken or be they not taken, it signifies nothing. I
will make this appear, And that not only because there is no hole whereout a
man can creep that has taken a former Oath, but he can get out of the same, or
find another like it, in any new Oath you put upon him: but because there is
nothing that is a man's duty, or unlawful, before he has taken the Oath, but
it remains a^ it was, after he has taken it; and he will be obliged neither
more nor less, (I speak as to the thing ^ not degree) whether he take i^ or not
take it. Let a man be convinced in his conscience that Episcopacy is
Antichristian, and tha^ it is much for the Glory of God, and his Duty, to
extirpate it root and branch, let him take a thousand Oaths, yet so long as he
retains his Principles, and he accounts his Conscience stands bound by a former
Obligation, ^he latter Obligation can hold him nothing. What is the Covenant to
an Episcopal judgment that has taken it? and what will be the late new Oath to
a contra^y judgment? What, but a few new Withs on Sampson's hands, that brake
like Tow, when the Philistine comes upon him?

Again, there is another thing upon this, that is a dreadful thing, and that
is, When a man has ^osned the reins of his Conscience a little too slack, in
swallowing a forced Oath, there is nothing so like to imbitter his sou^ as
this, against those that impose it: Like a Lion in a chain, which not only
holds no longer than he can break it, but Woe be to the^ he meets next, when it
is broken.

A certain plain honest Neigh^ bour of mine, coming to Church constantly as
others did, it cam^ to his turn to be chosen Church^ warden; He goes to the
Court a^ long with others; when he come there, they tender him the Church
wardens Oath; he knowing n^ well what to make of it, nor ho^ to avoid it, takes
it as the rest do^ when he comes home, the Oa^ lies in his stomach, and he can
fin^ no rest until he leaves both h^ Church wardenship, Church a^ all, and goes
to the Anabaptists, and never since came there more. Do not think those persons
that take this Oath, do love you or the Oath ever the better for it. I will
appeal to the bosom of an honesthearted person, who stands at as great an
Elongation from the thing Hypocrite, as the most of ^en alive I am persuaded,
what^ever else he be, whether his being caught into that Oath once, as ^e was,
makes him love the Co^enant, the takers and imposers, ^e dearer since, yea or
nay? I ^ould to God there had never ^ath, besides the Assertory Oath, which is
for the end of all strife, ^een known amongst men; for ^is counter-swearing,
the Cove^nt, and the new Oath, and the like, does make such debauchery work
amongst honest minds, that we shall rue the time that eve^ they were born into
the World.

It is not long since when many a worthy Gentleman of the Parliament have
bitterly complaine^ of the injury of that late Cove^nant and Engagements forced
o^ them, who for their Conscience sake would hazard their Estate rather than
take them: And ho^ shall these conscientious person then, as Christians, be
content t^ have opposite Oaths and Subscriptions new coined in our Acts, an^
imposed upon others? Therefo^ art thou inexcusable, O man, w^ do the same
things, which tho^ have condemned? You may b^ easily s^re to find Daniel a
Tran^gressour if the great Ones will contrive a Law on purpose; and that too in
the matter of his God, when otherwise, there is nothing ^o be found but
innocence in him.

Do ye forget, O ye Right Reverend! how the Oath of Et ^aetera made more
wrinkles in ^he brows of men, than is in that ^haracter it self? It cost Philip
^e Valois dear, that he made our Edward the Third swear him fealty. Indeed an
Oath in civil things that is taken with a good ^ill, is of moment, but an Oath
upon constraint we abhor. Ruit ^manum genus per Vestitum. To ^ommand a thing
wherein be^^re we were left free, is enough (...) whet our humane nature unto
opposition. To prohibit it, will make it coveted, and we can^ have no desires
for that which is easy of access. If these few sheets which I write do get,
and may come with an Imprimatur^ out of the Press, they will hardly be read;
but if they be seized on as dangerous, they will be sought. If many of the
ejected Ministers who are flockt to now when they venture to preach had liberty
to say on, till they had wearied themselves and Auditors out, we should see how
the rouling Snow-balls would melt, and, excepting a few o^ the eminent of them,
their Congregations quickly would b^ thin enough. If any of ou^ Episcopal men
would be followed, let them get those loose. It is true, we are indeed mad
already in Schism and Faction, but it is this Restraint, like the fetters of
Bedlam, makes us madder.

And alas Sirs! if there were only wilfulness in it, it were another matter.
But it is men's Brains are infected; and after that way you call Heresy, they
worship the God of their Fathers. Their judgments, their consciences and hearts
are convinced and engaged. I remember in Sfetigrade a Town of Epi^us, in
Scanderbeg's time, which was situate strongly on a rock, and in which he
placed much ^rust; when the Turks came into ^is Country and besieged it, a
^ertain Villain who had compacted Treason, throws in a dead Dog into the
Common-Well, which one was all the City had. The Soldiers came in the morning
for Water, and find the Carrion; upon this sight there is not one of them will
drink one drop: Their Captain comes and beseeches them; He takes of the Water
and drinks first himself; but do all he could by threats and entreaties,
nothing would serve, but through a more than Jewish Superstition, that i^ was
polluted to Christians, the Town must be delivered up and all lost, rather than
any of them can be got to do it. The remembrance of this Story make^ me pity
the imagination of the Sectary, and reflect on my ow^ spirit. I do verily hope
in the Lord, that there is nothing in these fears and dreadful abodings of many
good men's hearts, about the Discipline and Way of Worship in our Church, but a
Conceit. The Lord knows, I do not know, but this I am sure, it is not these
Laws and Penalties from without, have any tendency to the cure of them. Can you
remember when you were Children, and had heard some ^ale of Sprights and Ghosts
over^ight, and then waking about ^welve, how you have lain sweat^ng with your
fears at something ^ou knew not what? There are ^s certainly such impressions of
^read and superstition on many ^ens consciences, no less strong, but more
lasting and waking, that are as irresistible and hard to be helped. And you may
as well expect the most fearful Child should go and abide in the dark by it
self, as that such should do those things that are enjoined, until these
imaginations get off. It is Time and Liberty and Custom must prevail with
these, as the Candle, and Day and growing to be men will with the other.

It is the common opinion of our Protestants that the Pope is Antichrist and
the Beast in the Revelations, whereof such terrible things are spoken. For my
own part I know not that the Pope is that Beast any more tha^ Wat Tyler or Jack
Cade was; Ye^ when I see our Divines so ordinarily say and believe so, it has
begot in me such apprehensions, that I think I durst not take upon me the
profession of Popery and the practice, which I must accordingly fancy to be the
mark in the forehead and in the righthand, in the Text, out of that fear only,
if there were nothing to offend me in their tenants else, that it is possible
it may be so. There are many serious men living and dead, that have joined
Prelacy and Popery together in the same rank, and if there be a dread upon the
hearts of many that fear God in sincerity, lest this be Antichristian and the
Beast, as well as that, and Conformity to each, the character of either, who
can help such sick thoughts? and how shall Acts and Punishments do any thing
here, when the rankling of the wound is within and hid from any? unless you
could tender them something more dreadful than that fire and brimstone in the
presence of the Lamb, wherein that man and woman shall be tormented for ever
and ever, and have no rest day nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image,
and whosover receives the mark of his name, you can do nothing at all this
way. Lo here what you are to do if you go on thus.

I tell you, what perhaps you may have thought too mean for your notice; You
will not by Violence under present circumstances, bring People to Uniformity.
The great thing that keeps these Fanatics from the Church and Common Prayer,
lies in such private odd impressions on their thick beliefs and dark minds. I
tell it you, and it were well if none of the most serious and learned are not
touched after a soberer fashion, with the same malady. Find out a way now to
root out such principles, such fearful conceits, and superstitious jealousies
of you; To meddle with their persons is but to torment the body, not heal their
conceptions. You must take another course than quite, that you may do this. For
what ^s that, which can make these men with any appearance of Truth, think our
Governmen^ Antichristian, unless it be the persecuting them by your Acts which
they lay all upon the Prelate, and look upon it as the spirit of Antichrist,
and our Church as Babylon, opposing the Power of Religion? That you persecute
is Faction, and the factiou^ spirit; but they take that Spir^ to be the Power
and Life o^ Christianity. The natural way it follows; to convince them t^ the
contrary, is, a Cessation (...) these Acts (that when there (...) no rage or
persecuting, the may believe there is no Bea^ nor Antichrist;) a conjunctio^
with the sober of them (that the may see you advance, and n^ hate true Piety;)
and overco^ing the rest in their weakness, with forbearance, long-suffering and
gentleness.

There are none ignorant of one piece of advice that was given by an honorable
Lawyer among the Jews, where the holy Apostles, those Fishermen-Preachers
disturbed the World. There was one Theudus rose up and boasted himself (says
he) and one Judas, and these came to nothing: wherefore I say to you, Refrain
from these men, and let them alone; for if this counsel or work be of men, it
will come to naught, as others did: but if it be of God, ye cannot overthro^
it, lest happily ye be found even to fight against God. I wish to the Lord, the
great Ministers of our State would be content to be no wiser men than Gamaliel:
If these Sects and Sectaries in their union against Prelacy, how contemptible
soever in their dispersion, are indeed of God, or a Counsel of his, then shall
not Prelacy stand before them: But if they be all nothing but the imaginations
of divided mortals, without the power of Religion as their center, Then refrain
from these men, and let them alone, (according to the advice of that time) and
you shall see how much more easily they will break all to pieces of themselves,
than by your keeping a stir with them.

Let me offer you one president to your conviction. When Vespatian and Titus
came to the last Destruction of Jerusalem, there was three factions of the
Seditious, called the Zealous; the one held the City, the other two divided the
Temple. At the Roman Army drawing up before the Walls, all these factions agree
unanimously, and withstood them with equal courage and bravery. The General
hereupon takes this advice, he withdraws his Army from their Territories for a
season, leaving them to themselves purposely; They presently upon his removal,
fall together into their former discords, till they had almost wasted and
ruined one another; and then comes he with his Army back, and after a cruel
siege, takes the City. There are more than three Factions among us, who are
zealously united against Prelacy; If you could find a way to divide them and
break them, you must withdraw these Acts against them. It is your Laws combine
their interest, that otherwise was divided. A strange piece of Policy that
proposes safety to Episcopacy in the union of the Adversary, and Peace to the
Nation in their highest exasperations.

A little before Archbishop Lauds time the Puritans had got a fashion of
wearing their hair so short, as above their ears. They placed matter of
Conscience in it, and there was few but were careful observers of it. It
pleased God that Dr. Laud took a humor to approve short hair for the Ministry,
which he requiring more than ordinary strictly as Canonical, This presently has
a contrary effect on our zealous Brethren, who plead for their liberty by their
practice, and none of late were seen to wear their hair more long than those
who were for a Gathered-People. If I know any thing of the spirits of men, it
is Rarity and Difficulty that whets the appetite, and it is Satiety and Liberty
asswageth them. And if some such way as this, could it be hit upon did not
prevail more toward Uniformity, than the flat severity of direct Injunctions
for it, I will shut up my Table-Books, and take no more reckoning of Experience.

It may be there are some please themselves in the thought, that the new Oxford
Oath has divided the Non-conformists, seeing part of them do take it, and part
do not. But what is the division of men, into some taking the Oath, and some
not taking it any more than some of the^ Presbyterians, some Anabaptists so
long as they retain the sam^ heart and principles as to their common concerns?
While their combined Interest is all one, the dividing them in their single
Interests, and little angers, is bu^ multiplying parties against you^ and
playing with their disturbance.

I know some Politics man direct you, that when there is (...) growing Party
or Faction under any State, to keep a severe hand ^ver them for their
suppression: ^ut this must be understood before those parties be grown, and ^ou
be sure that they are the ^^sser number. If such Factions ^e considerable and
equal, a ^eutral kind of unconcernment ^^d indifferency, makes the chief
^agistrate strong, while he keeps ^s interest in all of them; where(...) an
espousing of one, does ^oth bandy the others against it, ^d makes his Horses to
be but ^^eir Horses, and his Chariots ^^eir Chariots. It is not a few
^considerable Ministers only, ^e engagement of whose souls ^e against these
late Acts, but ^ere are many worthy Gentle^en, and grave Citizens, and sober
Persons, besides the multitude of multitudes of such tha^ are mixed with the
Sectaries. (...) wish heartily that our Sovereig^ Lord the King could but mak^
one equal trial of the gener^^ inclination: Suppose he should give Commission
to the Sheri^ of any County pitched upon i^ differently, granting leave to the
people promiscuously to me^ together, and give their Vot^ freely, whether they
would have an Indulgence and Liberty (...) Conscience or no? Let us have but
fair play for it, and if we (...) not carry it in the Hearts an^ Votes of the
good Subject, (...) will neither move the wing, n^ open the mouth, nor peep
more (...) this business.

It has pleased God at this ^eason to bring us into that con^ition, that an
Agreement of all ^ersons, to the strengthening of ^ur hearts and our hands for
his Majesty, would be seasonable. And were I asked, what means were most likely
to do this? I ^o think verily there is nothing under the cope of Heaven
com^arable to such a passing a really ^ee and ingenuous Act of Grace ^^r
Indulgeance in matters of Re^^gion; The King would see, and ^^e Nation would
feel another spirit running in their Blood, ^^d what a difference there is
^etween a Man whose heart is ^ld at the thoughts that when ^e has fought for
his King, and ^eaten his Enemies, he must come home (as it were) again to his
bonds; and of his, whose spirit is flush with assurance that after Victory
abroad, he shall return to the enjoyment of that thing that is dearer to him
than his Life, the Liberty of his Conscience.

O Sirs! Is there never a drop of English Blood in the Veins of the Sectary?
How shall that thing you call Obstinacy and Faction, when they suffer the
violence of your Laws, and are unmoved, appear to be the most undaunted Courage
of the English Spirit, when it shall show it self in the Field? Are there no
sober men amongst all the Malcontents, whose advice, assistance and prayers
would do you no harm, to take them with you? It was not the Cause, but the
Party, and this thing, Liberty of Conscience, that got the better of the King
in our late Insurrections. It was Laberty of Conscience got into the House, and
pulled down the Bishops; that went with the Parliaments Army and won all. It
was Liberty of Conscience came back and pulled up the Parliament, and then sat
down and reigned with Cromwell. It is this piece of single policy, the raising
up such a Principle in base and mean fellows, to mate the Bravery and Spirit of
the Gentry, shall eternallize that Mortal. It was Liberty of Conscience, when
our Religion was at stake in those Confusions, that tack't about and restored
the King. And if his Majesty will hearken to the counsel of a mean person,
rather than to the person of mean counsel, let him keep this wild thing,
Liberty of Conscience, on his side. This Liberty of Conscience, let me say
against is that mad Earl of Warwick i^ the time of Edward the fourt^ and Henry
the sixth, called Make King, that the gain or loss o^ him on either side, was
the gai^ or loss of the Kingdom with him*

It may be there is some great Prelate or eminent Statesman a the Helm are too
hard for you^ inclinations, which steer and by (...) them unseen, into other
Counsels; I will therefore humb^^ argue with them. Behold I w^^ be to them in
your stead; I am framed also out of the clay. Let me ^ot, I pray you, accept
any man's ^erson, neither let me give flattering titles unto Man: for I know ^ot
to give flattering titles, in so ^oing my Maker might soon take ^^e away. Ye
have said, We are ^^e men, we have found out wis^om. I will reprove them. Great
^en are not always wise.

Was it, in the first place, con^lted wisely, when we restored ^piscopacy in
this Nation, to re^eive a company of men as low (...) their interests as in
their con^tion, unto such vast Emolu^ents which never were, and are ever like
to be again, being ^e fruits of twenty years toge^^er in one, unto which
(excepting a very few of them) they had no relation in the Earth to challenge
the least penny before actual possession? How wel^ might such persons have been
contented to have entered the present Revenews and Honors and left the Arrears
for public accounts, or good works? Thi^ possibly was not wise (Sirs), no^
only for the improvidence, bu^ for that envy and just kind o^ disdain, that so
excessive Riche^ (thrown upon men so undese^ vedly) has raised in the stomachs
of others (to the Function it self for the Covetousness o^ the Persons)
especially of tho^ whose high merits for the Kin^ and his Cause did require
some other gratification, than a languishing looking-on, and repi^ing at their
fortunes. Great ^en are not always wise.

Was it, in the next place, wise^y consulted (wherein yet, above ^ll, you would
seem most wise) (...) making such a stir with the Covenant, as has been done
in ^ur late Impositions? It was the Visdom of the Ancient Church, ^^stead of
contention about the Jewish Ceremonies, to take a ^pecial care that they might
have ^n honorable burial, and there^y have they bin all hushed without trouble
for many Ages. Me^^inks, if the wisdom of these ^^eat and wise men, were not
^iser than the ancient Wisdom, ^^ey might, at least for his Maje^es sake, have
dealt accordingly with the Covenant. The might have laid it in a state of
silence, without light, and without words, evermore to be forgotten, and never
would it have done them further hurt. But now have they raised it twice or
thrice up (in a former Subscription and the late Oath) as a dreadful Ghost out
of his Grave, to do what mischief, or raise what troubles for the future I
cannot tell, but to little end at present for ought I see, only to terrify
men's Consciences, and keep alive the memory of it, which were fitter to die,
and be thought on no more. Great men are not always wise.

Once more: There was a time when these wise and great men might have
compounded for Episcopacy with the pious and learned of her Adversaries, upon
as high advantage and a sure foundation, for themselves and the peace of the
Nation, as could be well wished or desired in any reason; But they outstood
their market, and slipped the opportunity. Great men are not always wise.

They have slipped it, yet may we redeem one lock of it; to wit, It is better the
Parliament compounded them, than that a foreign Enemy, or the Papists should do
it. We know when it was our Ridley and Hooper were agreed. I draw up this: If
the greatest Seers may fail in their Politics and err in Vision, in some
things, when there is no man doubts of their integrity otherwise than of their
ability, why may they not possibly have been out here, in their advising us to
these Acts about Religion?

Come then, and let us set the Sun and Wind to strive again for mastery. You
see what the cold boisterous blasts of these late Acts have done on the
Travellour, that they have made the most but hold their Cloaks the faster about
them. Now let us have some gentle rays and warm beams from his gracious
Majesty and his loving Parliament, in an Act of Indulgence and Concord that
shall please his People, and you shall see them all, not only to throw down
their Cloaks and Estates, but their Hearts and Lives at his feet, saying with
Amasa in holy Story, Thine are we, O David, and on thy side, thou Son of Jesse;
Peace, peace be unto him, and peace to those that help him.

I will here turn, and look back on the way I have come. You have my Motion and
my Arguments under the three first heads mainly, at first named; I must explain
my self a little upon the Motion, and offer the other. Namquid facimus, id nisi
utile sit, stultae omnis atque inanis inde est gloria.

To eke out then this Proposition. I will take breath, and not be afraid to
show you also my Opinion. There are the learned and sober Godly amongst us,
which are to be compounded with as your Brethren: And there are the Zealous and
Giddy in lesser Fractions, which are to be born withal in mercy, and won over
with patience and gentleness.

For the former. There was a Declaration of his Majesty's about these
Ecclesiastical Affairs before black Bartholomew, wherein a composition is drawn
up to our hands, well and wisely: and there are Laws in our Statute-Books
against Pluralities. If that Declaration were passed into a Law, with as little
canvasing and alteration as may be, though with no less than is necessary to
calm the withholding party, we need no more to do our business. And if those
Statutes were refresht into a new Act, that no mortal breathing should hold
more than one Living and one Dignity; that is, one Cure of Souls (upon which
also he should ordinarily be resident) with one Canonship, Prebend, or the
like, which is a sine-Cure (as a reward of special merit or favor): then
should you not, only do God right, and render the Hire to the Labourer, which
cries for justice, but you would make an Act of Grace or Accommodation
significant, while you put the means into his Majesty's hands to gratify his
Restored, and make him bountiful with their leavings. I know who will be ready
to stamp here, and fling dirt in the Air. This is a kind of Clergy-Treason. But
it is no matter, I will leave it upon Record for his Majesty's service, that if
there be occasion or exigence for it, what is prepared may be used.

For the latter. Let us suppose a Liberty granted to these persons for their
Assemblings according to their Consciences, provided by Law, that for security
to the State, and upon account of that Rule, Not a Novice, (which modesty
should teach those who are without learning, to hold themselves to be so much
longer than others) lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil, they do not permit any to be their Pastors, or to
speak in their Churches, but such as are of gravity and years as is fitting;
and that, lest they should meddle about State-matters, their Meeting-places (as
they would have them) should be open for any that will to hear them, and
implead them if guilty; I humbly conceive, without any policy more, that when
the present Zeal of this Generation had beat ^t self out a little season, and
^here be none of the heat of the Young man (which runs out in ^ese persons unto
the itch of reaching, as it does unto amo^es and the like in others) to keep
alive the strange fire, which ^eaking against Government sually enkindles:
Before these men that are so hot upon it unto four or five and twenty shall
come to have forty years hairs upon their beards (or thirty five, if they will
be content at least but to stay so long) they will get, it is likely that
discretion to see how contemptible is their stuff in comparison of the grave
studied Minister; and being cold moreover to applauses by that time, They will
be so ashamed and flat to such an insolence, that as soon as ever a few of
those that are now living shall give up their Churches and Ghosts together,
there shall not hardly in a little time be any found more to succeed them.

I heard, to strengthen this, i^ fared so with one of their Churches of great
resort in London, that was a fierce Revelation-mans, one Mr. Strange, who being
taken away by the Mortality, they having not his Peer left to take his
Bishopric, dissolved immediately, and their place knew them no more: Had that
person, as he was often sought, chanced to have been taken, and put up in
Newgate, it is like they would have been provided of a Substitute. It is not
therefore your haling these men and women to Goal that will disperse them; for
when you have them in Prison, they will Conventicle there, and the rest be at
the next Meeting: but if you refrain from these men, and let them alone, (as
that grave Gentleman before in Scripture advised) till a few of the more stanch
and considerable do die, they will come to dissolution of their own accord.

One thing yet I will tell you further, which you perhaps think not of. Suppose
this Freedom in the Worship and Service of God according to men's inclinations:
Those that are for the Congregational way shall draw the most considerate and
moderate from the Sectary; and those that are the Presbyterian Preachers shall
drain the Gathered Congregations; And then the most eminent and judicious of
the Presbyterian coming over to the Liturgy upon a little condescension to them
in a few of their most material exceptions, This thing, Liberty of Prophecy,
which you so mortally dread, as the enemy of Conformity, shall happily become
one of the most politic, apt, and kindliest means, that can be thought upon at
this season to bring up the people to it.

There is a block after this, which I foresee will be laid in the way, and
pretended to enervate this discourse. It cannot stand with ingenuity for any
that plead in general for Indulgence in regard of their own Consciences to put
in any bar against others that are conscientious; and consequently the door
hereby will be opened for the Papist to under-set and overrun the Protestant
Religion. But this is a Cloud that need not be feared by a Wind that blows so
opposite to it. For besides that the Act moved for, is an Act for Concord and
Indulgence in the Reformed Causes, and this Liberty of Conscience must
necessarily include that of the Magistrate, as well as the Subject, which cannot
allow of Idolatry, or any thing of that nature by Public Sanction, when it may
condescend much in matters of indifferency: The thing we know is to pass the
debate and deliberation of both Houses, who will provide well enough beyond
doubt in that matter. Neither am I much moved if you say, that the Arguments I
use for the Non-conformists may be applied ^o the Papists; for though some of
them indeed may, many of them may not, nor the main heads of them. These are
not like to be reduced this way. The interest of State consists not with the
Jesuit, as the King's Supremacy does not with the Pope. Otherwise, were there
no more danger to men's souls and lives ^n prevailing Popery than in Presbytery
or the Sectary, I am not the man that could find in my heart to persecute any
harmless peaceable person, for doing his devotions another way than I do.

I know there will be this, and twenty things perhaps more said to traduce and
choke this Motion: But I oppose the same buckler, to wit, The Motion as it was
at first stated, and the Debate of Parliament. There is no^ Act of Grace can
pass the two Houses, but it will prevent the inconveniences, and answer for it
self against Exceptions. A legal stated Toleration will not undermine, but
uphold Religion; and be no friend, either of Superstition or Confusion.

To return from this pursuit. It has been I see the policy of late
transactions, to endeavor to root out those Principles from men's minds whereby
they have maintained the lawfulness of former Sedition and Rebellion, and
hereupon has the renunciation of the Covenant been so pressed in our Oaths and
Subscriptions: But if the Policy of those first Wheels that move others, had
bin rather to root out the Causes from us, which make men willing to entertain
such Principles, I do humbly suppose that Policy to have been the deeper. The
way to establish the Kings Throne in the hearts of his People, and to do it for
ever, is this; to make it appear that all that Good (to wit, substantial Good)
which they ever expected (or can expect) from a change of the Government, or a
Commonwealth, may be had from Him (or from a Prince) in the Acts of his
Parliament. This saying I will leave upon file as digested; and I will add
something (though more rawly) hereunto; that those Good things mainly which
secretly have been and lie on the hearts of the Commons, may be reduced to
these: An Enfranchisment of Servile Tenures. A^ commutation of Tithes (suppose
by a Law enjoining every man to buy out his own, and the money be laid out in
Glebe.) A Register of Estates. A Tendernes^ toward men's Consciences in matters
of Religion.

Where there are no hopes from Inovation, no body will go about to make it. But
when a People have all can be had, all that can come to a settlement with
Judgment and Righteousness by the present Government already then will there be
no hopes from ^novation. Ergo, When those ^ings are taken into considera^on by
the Parliament (or Par^aments) and after mature de^ate and consultation, come
to ^e concluded upon ingenuously and sincerely, wisely and righte^usly, which
have been on the ^earts, and in the design of the ^ore publick-spirited in
these ^te times rudely and wildly: ^en shall our Government of Monarchy in this
Land (leaving ^e persons of our successive So^ereigns unto Providence and their
chances) be out of danger ^r future Generations.

I descend to what remains, ^at is the last head unto which reduced my
Arguments.

Hitherto then I have spoken to you as Men, I will speak to you now as
Christians and Believers of the World to come; and if I differ something in my
style upon that account, I hope you will bear with it. O you Governors and
Rulers, let me address you as fellow-mortal-men, who must appear before the
great Tribunal one day to give an account of your Stewardships unto Jesus
Christ your Prince and Lord, as my self must, who am not able ever to stand
there but by infinite exceeding mercy in the blood of the Lamb, who was slain
for the remission of ou^ sins. I know not any kinder office can be done you
than this in all humility to advise you to let none prevent you, but be your
selves the Authors of that Grace and Benignity which is ^o absolutely necessary
to the Nation.

It will make the dignity of ^our high places, and the face ^f your lives past
look more ^hearfull to you, when Death ^all bring his Leaden Mace to ^change
with your Golden^itles, if you shall have the Testi^ony of your Consciences,
that ^ou have been content to deny ^ur selves in this thing, and ^splease some
men for the sake ^ our Lord, who was so mer^full and good to every body, at he
exercised Indulgence all ^s life long, and then died that (...) might obtain
more, for you, ^d me, and such as could not receive any of him while he wa^
here.

There is a Person I hope you would do a kindness for with a^ your heart, and
you have reason, it is for your dear Lord tha^ bought you, and there is no^
thing in the World you can d^ I am persuaded that he will tak^ so kindly from
you at this time as to be pitiful to his Servant who are distressed about you
Acts in point of Conscience and who the more despised the are and like unto
their Lord the fitter subjects they are for your compassion. Neither w^^ it
hurt you in another piece (...) tenderness toward the People to prevent
Insurrection, and (...) tifie against Invasion; securin^ hereby both the Bad
from punishment, and the Good from danger.

It were better certainly for any one man's own part, that there never had been
Bishops, than that he should be one condemned hereafter for taking that course
in establishing of them, as thereby to have sinned without repentance, against
the souls of many whom Jesus Christ ^s not ashamed to call his Bre^hren, and so
against him, who shall be our Judge, and will take whatsoever we do unto them,
^s if we did it unto Himself. ^f you had no need of mercy from God, it were
tolerable then ^or you to be extreme toward others, But if you are ready to
indulge your selves too often in many things that are not allowed by him, when
permitted by you: methinks the way to en^ gage the Lord unto pardon should be
in bearing with them in these things which are disallowed only by you, and
permitted by him. If you forgive no^ your Brethren their trespasses neither
will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses He shall have judgment
without mercy, that has showed no mercy.

Do you know that many o^ these things which are imposed are really against
men's Cons^^ences, and would you indee^ have any such to do them thoug^ they be
so? Do you conside this, and what it is? If it b^ better to be drowned in the
Sea with a Millstone, than to offend ^ne of God's little ones, what is it ^o
offend multitudes, that is, so ^ffend them as to enforce them ^o sin against
their Consciences, which is to wound them and to ^uine them? Why Sirs! if one
^f these men on the sudden, to ^void the penalty, shall do what (...) enjoined
unsatisfiedly, his soul when he reflects on it is smitten, and he can hardly
again ever reover it perhaps all his life. I ^rofess to you, it is better in
this ^ase really you had taken a Po^iard and stabbed him to the ^eart, it had
been less pain, and ^e stroke of less deadly conse^uence to him. If you sin
against ^e Brethren, and wound their weak Consciences, you sin against Christ.
Do you believe the Gospel, or that there is such a thing as sin? what then is
stealing, and drinking, and lying with women, i^ such damnable untenderness as
this is, be nothing? Is it a sin to kill a man, and no sin to dam^ him
everlastingly? On my conscience, you would be grieve^ all your life if you had
murdered any man; and shall you really b^ the occasion of murdering the souls
of many, and not once consider what have we done? I hop^ and am persuaded that
many o^ these things at which some good men are stumbled, are nothing yet to
him that esteems any thing to be unclean, it is unclean. And what if upon a
man's yielding to one thing that is against his conscience, being put upon
distress, he shall make shipwreck of his present Faith, and departing from it
now, never be regardful of it more, and so become irrefragably damned? Is there
no pity and turning of your bowels at the thought to have such a one crying
out eternally upon you, that if it had not been for your Acts, ^he had never
come into that place of torments?

Give me leave then, for anticipation of this cry and guilt, in the behalf of
many, of thoulands, of many thousands of in^ocent people, men and women ^n the
Land, to beg Quarter of you for their Consciences. They are not able to yield
to the things you impose upon them. Though they be lawful or indifferent in
themselves, yet so long as they are against their consciences, He that eaveth
and doubts, is damned if he eat. O do not force their souls upon damnation.
You may be perhaps of a strong Mind and hardy Conscience, and others weakness
and fear of Sin may be but a Romance to you. We might instance in some, who
little thought at the Kings Return, of their after-experience, that they should
fall down slain at Conformity, who might expect some other fruit from thence,
and were not able to reap it. I profess to you, the most, I believe, are not
capable indeed to judge in this matter. You have not been wounded or lain under
those terrors, to know what Tenderness in this kind is; yet have you sinned
against the Lord Almighty, as well as others, and have need of his indulgence.

It was the determination of Mirandula, that no man can make himself believe
what he will. It is not consequently the severity of Laws that can do any thing
with the Mind, though it may with the Outward-man. Force may make men
Hypocrites, not Converts to a Faith which is enjoined. Neither is the penalty
indeed of our Acts, as it relates to the Minister who conforms not to them
(which lies mainly in the deprivation of their Ministry and their
serviceableness to God in their place) such, as is fit to have been promoted on
some of them, or like to have effect on others.

I know not how well those may like of themselves in their Sacerdotal Function,
who can be a Bishop here, and a Dignitary there; a Dean in one Church, a Canon
in another, a Prebendary in a third; the Rector of such a Parish, and Parson of
such; who can shovel-up their Preserments together in heaps, as if the Cure of
Souls were indeed nothing else but the Care of Money, or the raising of their
Families: But as for those men that expect none of these things, but are intent
on their work, their business and account, which makes them groan under the
weight, I cannot conceive any temptation so shrewdly grateful to flesh and
blood as what you have been offering them by your Acts. And will you indeed
conspire with Satan, and with the flesh of sinful men, to rob the people, who
are innocent and have not offended, of that serious, faithful, painful
Preaching of many of these Men, for want of which you know not how many of
their souls may perish, and how much sin may abound, the guilt whereof may be
laid to your charge; and in the mean while only pleasure these whom ye account
the Offenders themselves so extreme highly, as to set them at perfect ease; free
them from their care and study, and give them the most voluptuous enjoyment of
perpetual leisure? A very little whereof, without our Acts, their busy
Consciences would perhaps let them have.

They may thank you. But I will tell you a better course to punish a good
Preacher for his Nonconformity than to pleasure the flesh, and discharge him
for it. Only I must plead with you a little from the Argument I am upon (that
is, Conscience) in the way. Have there not been some, nay many of those
Ministers, whom you have ejected by your Acts, serious Persons, faithful
Laborers, and worthy of the Vineyard? And why have you imposed such conditions
to the entrance, or continuance of their Ministry, as they cannot yield unto
without going against their Consciences? Can you say that in these conditions
you have really condescended to them as far as possibly you could without
sinning against yours? And that you have done moreover all that you are able
for their Restitution? Why then is your Peace with these men laid upon the
approbation and use of those things which in their nature are disputable and
unnecessary? The Church is a company of persons professing the belief and
practice of those things which Christ has appointed to Salvation, and when no
more can indeed be required unto union than a joining in the owning and
practicing all things that are such, why is there any thing that is not
necessary to Eternal life made the condition to a man (after trial of his
sufficiency and allowance by Orders of performing his Ministry, any more than
of his Communion with the Congregation?

Let a man then, once ordained, any way, be still held, and retained for a
Labourer in the Harvest. Let not the Master be offended who has employed him,
nor his Talent be wrapped up: But let him be made a Gibeonite to the sons of
the Church, that they may use him as an Assistant for their burden, while
Institution and Induction is conferred only according to Law. This will
satisfy the sincere Nonconformist, who will obtain hereby his main end, the
glorifying God in his Calling: and this is the best way to fetch in others, who
certainly will grow weary at the long-run, when they shall have Work provided
them as Ministers, but no Benefice until they conform.

When the Persians had made a Bridge over the Hellespont, and the Grecian
Commanders were consulting to break it down, it was Themestocles's advice, by
all means to let it stand; which when he perceived they were not like to
entertain, he sends privately word to the Enemy, what they were consulting to
do: They fearing thereupon lest they should be prevented, march back suddenly
in those numbers which (if they had not had the means of returning) must have
swallowed up the whole Country. The Counsel of this Athenian shall be a
President to me in what I have been offering at this season. There was a Bridge
at his Majesty's return, in a treaty between the Bishops and their
fellow-endeavourers of his happy Restoration, that was on building; a Bridge,
not for any to depart Enemies from us, but for those who are Brethren (of the
same Religion, differing only in some circumstances) to come over to You into
Union and Concord with You. I know not by whose advice it was broken down; It
may be, really, not by his Majesty's any more than by mine, who do study thus
(if possible) to set it afoot, and would be content to have it rebuilt any way,
rather than not at all. Let me hear that gracious word, Thus says Cyrus, Arise
and Build; and when it is builded I would have that Motto on it, as my Lo. Bacon
has on his House (now the worthy Master of the Roll's) of Goram, being a
modest but fair structure, In the front of it there is this written, Mediocria
firma.

If the Bishops will not, yet may they at least hear a little of his Majesty's,
or the Nation's mind about it; That they may write down in the Book of what
hereafter shall befall them, Moniti meltora.

There are, I perceive, many fears and hopes upon the minds of people, and the
presages of their hearts are many. I do not know whether there be any dark
Notices from some Spirits that preside over us, of some great Events sometimes
when they are near us: But methinks the minds of some have of late aboded us
some very great Evil, or great Good, not to be far from us. For my own part as
I am a Christian, and born under the constitution of this State, I must profess
and declare, that it is unlawful for any to expect Deliverance (I speak it as
to the Oppressed in the chiefest of their possessions, their Consciences) from
any hands whatsoever, but his only, in whose are the heart of the King to turn
it as the Rivers of Water. The Supreme Authority lies in his breast, and if we
go any way that is not in order to the attaining the stamp of his Will, a le
Roy^e Veult, we go out of the way of our Constitution, and consequently against
the Ordinance of God in our Nation. Let every soul be subject to the higher
Powers; for there is no Power but of God; and the Powers that be, are ordained
of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. But now, if
it shall please Almighty God to touch that Heart he has in his hands, the
Heart of his Sacred Majesty, our Lord and King, with the prevalent sentiments
of Clemency and Mercy, of Nobleness and Pity, of Righteousness and Peace, so
as he shall come to see, that this narrow uncatholick spirit, that would have
the minds of all persons, of every sect and condition, to be of the size of
theirs only, is unbeseeming his Royal Grace and Influence, who is not the
Father only of the Circumcised, but of the Uncircumcised also: Then shall the
Salvation of God come out of Zion, and the Captivity of his People be turned
back. Then may those blessed Seeds that were sown in his Majesty's wise and
gracious Declaration so long since, revive, take root and spring up. Then may
the Ejected Ministers, and other Civil Officers worthy of trust, that, like the
Witnesses in the Revelation, have lain dead for these three days (a day for a
year) and half ((...), not a half, but half three days more) by their Civil
death (insomuch as others have come into their places, as dead by the Act) in a
Street ((...), a certain Street) of the great City, (The great City, says Mr.
Mede, is Rome with her ten Tributary Kingdoms, whereof Britain was one) have a
Spirit of Life enter and set them on their feet (that is, raise them from this
condition) and they ascend up in a cloud to Heaven (that is, with remark, to
preferment) by the call of a Voice from thence (which can be no other than that
of the Supreme Magistrate) saying, Come up hither.

Pardon the Allusion, which seeing others are, or have been too apt to make use
of, to the entertaining such hopes and thoughts that are perhaps of dangerous
consequence, I would direct unto a Hope that is lawful, if at all there be any:
while so many distressed Consciences lie bleeding, and know not whither they
are to have recourse for succor. May it therefore please his most excellent
Majesty, with the Lords and Gentlemen of both Houses, to take this Motion at
their Session into consideration, that the matter being first duly weighed,
debated, digested, for the agreement of things that seem to differ, the
difficulties may be cleared, inconveniences prevented, none displeased: and so
the Proposer may have pardon, and the Proposition a soit fait comme il e desire.

Give Indulgence (stated consultedly) and you remove Discontent. You put an end
for ever to Sedition and Rebellion; You root out the seeds and foment of them;
You take away the very pretense. You prevent the Evil, you encourage the
Well-meaning and Good. You will establish the Church. Do all good, No hurt. You
will win our hearts; You will unite us at home; and for our Enemies abroad, if
they dare, let them come. Ecce quam bonum and amaenum est, habitare Fratre^
etiam una.

When Popilius came from Rome to Antiochus he declares his message, that the
Senate required of him to withdraw his Armies from Egypt, for Ptolomy was their
Friend and Confederate. The King answers, he will take respite and consider of
it. Popilius with the end of his Rod draws a Circle round about him upon the
ground, Before you pass this Circle (says he) resolve, that I may declare you
Friend or Enemy to the Romans. Antiochus, whether daunted at their known Power,
or affected with the Bravery; or whether (as is not unlikely) out of the Native
goodness that accompanies Princes, which makes them receive such unexpected
Actions with grace, candor and generosity, he seeing indeed it was best for
him; answered immediately, He would do as the Romans would have him.

Great Sirs! I am come to You this day from an Authority more mighty than the
Senate of Rome, in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel. There are
a People you prosecute in your Acts, that make conscience of their ways, and
live peaceably. Withdraw this Hostility of yours; for they serve God, and are
his Confederates, as well as you, or others; and he will bless those that bless
such, and be an Enemy to their Enemies. Thus says the Lord, Be merciful as
your Father in heaven is merciful. Before you pass over these few Lines that
are left, Resolve, whether you will be like him, or like him not? Resolve, that
I may declare you to be his Sons; and him no Enemy, but a Friend, to our
Sovereign, and to his People. And it came to pass as he was speaking, Amaziah
said unto him, Art thou made of the Kings Counsel? Forbear, why should thou
be smitten? Then the Prophet forbear.

June the 18th. 1667.
FINIS.
Reader, By reason of the Author's absence from the Press, these faults have
escaped, which thou art desired thus to amend with thy Pen.

Page 6. line 3. for we, read you. p. 10 l. 2. f. these, 1. those. and l. 4. f.
those 1. their. p. 11. l. 10. f. viros 1. vicos. p. 17. l. 2. f. ni r. in. p.
25. l. 18. f. Vestitum r. Vetitum. p. 35. l. 7. f. where r. when. p. 53. l. 15.
f. Namquid, r. Nam quod. and l. 17. f. stultae r. stulta. p. 57. l. 17. f.
amo-ares r. amors. p. 62. l. 7. f. Causes 1. Cause.


