TWO LETTERS Written to A Gentleman of Note GUILTY OF Common Swearing.

When Clowns hear their Betters discharge loud Volleys of Oaths, they will soon
find they are as well qualified for that part of Greatness as the best: Their
Tongues are as much their own, and will be glad that by such an easy
Employment of them, they can be Gentlemen so good cheap. Gent. Call. By B. J.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, 1691.

THE First LETTER.
Worthy Sir,
THOUGH this comes not from one that can pretend to the Honor of your intimate
Acquaintance; yet one, nevertheless, your Friend in the greatest Sincerity;
yea, much more your Friend, than such as can be unconcerned, any further, than
to make a Game of that which threatens the Ruin of a Gentleman so well
accomplished with more than ordinary Parts and Ingenuity.

To deal freely with you, Sir, (since I have lately heard you make so bold with
One that is infinitely more your Superior, than you are mine) That which you
might reckon the Grace and Emphasis of your Talk, was to me so extremely Noisome
and Grievous, that I found it a very difficult Task to be your Patient so long
as I was. And because I then spoke so little to interrupt the profane Humor,
I think my self obliged in Conscience, to signify the more in this Paper; yea,
the rather did I prevail with my self so much to stifle my Resentments at that
Time, because I resolved now to pour them out more fully in this manner, as
hoping I might do it with less Offense, and better Effect, to propose the
Matter to your calm Thoughts, when cool and retired, than if I had offered to
Ruffle before those, who might peradventure have stomach'd me as injurious to
their Meeting, had I there solemnly entered the Lists to dispute that Cause,
which I am going to plead with you at present.

It Is to me, Sir, a most astonishing thing, to see one whom the Bounty of
Heaven has raised so much above the Common Level, both for Endowments of Mind,
and Enjoyments of the World, so far forget himself, as to fly in the Face of
his Sole Founder, and Supreme Benefactor, and at the most daring rate, Tear and
Blaspheme that Tremendous Name, which He has declared, He will not hold him
guiltless that takes in vain. When it is not only the most irregular inverting
the end of your Creation, (as if you were made only to dishonor God) but the
very height of Ingratitude, so to turn the noble Faculty of Speech against him,
without whom you could not so much as speak at all.

Can you choose, Sir, but discern what an Absurdity it is to own the Christian
Name; yea, and bow at the very mention of Jesus; and yet so slight and play
upon the Great Lord of Christians, as to Swear even altogether, when he Charges
every one of his, not to swear at a^l. And what does it, but still add to the
Absurdity, when it is readily confessed to be a scandalous Evil, which you ought
to renounce, and yet you will as confidently persist in this Guilt, as if you
believed it harmless, or a Matter of nothing.

What sort of Christian is that, who acts as 'twere in spite of Christ? And I
may asked, What kind of Subject too, that is so cross to his Sovereign, as
boldly to keep up that horrid Ungodliness, which our truly Christian Prince has
used the utmost Care to suppress? Letting all the World know, it is after
another rate now, he would have Men express their Loyalty to him, than to Swear
and Drink for him. As being a great deal Wiser, than to expect they should ever
be true to him, who stick not so notoriously to Rebel-against an infinitely
Greater. And were it at all possible, they could thus be Loyal, yet how would
he abhor their Service at the Cost of God's dishonor; counting it no
commendable Reflection at all on his Sacred Person, to own such bold Pretenders
to his Grace and Favor: Who (if his Signal Example will not at last shame them
into better Manners) must go stigmatized as worse Affronters of his Laws and
Majesty, even than any that take upon them to dispute the Right of his Royal
Authority: For though I do not think, that this admits of any just Scruple at
all; yet as to the Profane Customary Swearing, there is not the least
Controversy with any Men of Sobriety whatsoever, But that he, who allows
himself in such a known Wickedness, openly Resists, and Desies the Crown of
Heaven and Earth both together.

Whatever, Sir, be your Station, Revenue, Titles, and Dignity, you cannot
imagine, sure, that you have any Authority to be a Common Swearer, as you are a
Gentleman, a Magistrate, or a Soldier.

First, As a Gentleman, How utterly should you scorn such Boarish Manners as
infinitely below you! That which is a Badge of Infamy to the very scum of the
People; arguing no better Rank and Quality, than to be of the Hissing Lineage
of the Old Serpent, who is for Spitting his Venom most against him that is
absolutely the Best. Can it become your Dignity, or ever be be reckoned as any
of your Bravery? Be sure, that Lamp of Reputation which is fed with God's
Dishonor, will cast but a very ill Whift in any Nostrils, except such as
prefer the nastiest Dunghill before the sweetest Garden. The Swearing which I
now make bold to capitulate with you concerning, but like an Imposthume issuing
out of a dead Man's mouth, speaks you even Dead in Sin, and so rots your Name,
and lays all your Honor in the dust.

But the most unaccountable thing it is, that ever Swearing should be reputed a
Mark of fine Breeding; or any gentile, graceful Property, which in truth is so
contrary to all good Manners, and a rude Entrenching upon all Orderliness and
Common Civility; a Nuisance and Affront to every Ingenious, Sober Company; and
the greatest Offense to all that fear God, and make any Conscience at all of
his Word; who had rather you should spit in their Faces, than so outragiously
abuse and mock the Sovereign Object of all their dearest Love, and highest
Regard.

Next as a Magistrate; Are you not obliged, Sir, to Check and Punish this very
thing, which your self have been so deep in the guilt of? And which your own
Practice so tends to Countenance and Embolden, that the Vulgus take no small
Pride to be in your Fashion, thinking to ingratiate themselves with their
Betters, by licking your Ulcers; yea are afraid to be hissed off the Stage as
Squeamish Precisians, should they be so Cowardly as not venture to Copy out
such Presidents; and so even to save their Credit, it seems necessary to
transplant your Shame into their Soil. Thus instead of exerting your Power and
Interest to quash that Profaneness and Blasphemy, which makes the Land to mourn,
and cries aloud for Vengeance; How do you sadden the Souls of the Righteous,
strengthen the Hands of the Wicked, and express the greatest Spite and Enmity
to your Country, in doing still so much the more Mischief, by how much the
larger is your Influence? For this makes the Wicked Swagger, and tumultuously
walk on every side, when the vilest Men are exalted. When such possess the
Places of Honor, Trust and Power, as not only stand for Ciphers, to let the
most obnoxious escape with Impunity; and dare not shame that which Dishonours
God, least it should recoil in their Faces, and put themselves to extreme
Confusion; but also serve for a Back and Skreen to the Blasphemous Rout, to
make them scorn the Parson, and set every Reprover at defiance, when as they
have such big Names to quote for their Justification and Warrant. O! Sir, How
do you think the Eternal Judge of Quick and Dead, will in the final Audit, look
upon this sort of Magistrates, that gave such singular aid and furtherance to
his Ministers:

Again, as a Soldier; Can you think it your Valor, Sir, to hector God
Almighty? And that you are a stout Man, because you dare make so bold (as no
one in his right Wits would do) with the Supreme Majesty? Whom to contemn, the
very Heathens have counted it no better than Fool hardiness and Madness: Or is
there any thing like a wise Conduct in the Case, when as you are engaged
against other Enemies, to go strive with your Maker, and so make him your Enemy
too? O! Sir, if you would approve your self truly Great and Courageous, here is
a Combat worthy the faithful Soldier and Servant of Christ Jesus, even to
encounter with all your might this reigning Sin of Swearing, that like another
Mighty Goliath, sends out Challenges against Heaven, defying not only the Hosts
of the Living God, but even the God of Hosts himself; yea, that Marches through
the World, Great and Terrifying, Insolent and Domineering, to dishearten, even,
the Zealous for their Lord's Interest, from venturing to resist it.

When this Party of Rebels is grown so big, that the Injustice of the Cause
even cease to be questioned, and their Numbers pass for Arguments on their
side; and therefore do so many take the boldness to list themselves into the
Hellish Regiment; taking it for a piece of Cowardice to fear an Oath; when he
that will not Swear at all, is ready to be pointed at, with ((...)) yonder is he!
star'd at as a Prodigy, and scoffed for a Pedant. When you hear your Company,
Sir, grow Malapert and Saucy with God himself, to toss in their unhallowed
Mouths, as a thing of naught, his Tremendous Name; and at every turn cite the
Glorious Majesty, and Dreadful Judge of all the World, to vouch all their
impertinent Prate; as if their Tongues were touched with a Cole from Hell, and
their Consciences seared with an hot Iron out of the same Fire; that even as
fast as they fetched Words out of the abundance of their Hearts, so fast this
putrid Scum boils up into their Mouths from the same corrupt Fountain: yea,
when they can Swear and Rant, not only out of inadvertence, but avowedly, for
the Gallantry of the business, as if they were the braver Men, because they
dare be such Sinners with a Witness, and take Hell by violence, scorning to be
stopped or restrained, trampling under foot the Blood of Christ; if but to make
themselves sport, piercing his Side afresh with Oaths, sharper than the
Soldiers Spear; and playing away the Virtue of that Name, which alone is able
to save them from the Damnation they imprecate. Here! here is a Field, Sir,
wherein to acquit you as a Man, and approve your Conduct and Prowess in making
a worthy Opposition, and daring to appear for God, when such multitudes have
the Foreheads to let fly at him, and discover themselves against him. Here Is a
Warfare where you have the best Cause, and the best Call; and if you shrink
back, you fall under a Curse too, even that of Meroz, for not coming to the
help of the Lord, against such mighty Adversaries of his Glory.

Do but think with your self, Sir, what an unpardonable Affront would such a
one as you account it, to be called a Bastard? And the most indelible Brand of
Cowardice, not to stand up in your own Vindication, under such a vile
Imputation. But, truly Sir, if a Son honors his Father, and cannot endure to
see him exposed, or hear him ridiculed; I must be bold to tell you, that you
give shrewd suspicion you are but of a Spurious Brood, and no true Child of
the Heavenly Father, when you can find in your heart, so unnaturally, and even
of set purpose, to load his Name with Scorn; yea, when you can but be a tame
and silent Witness of his Dishonor, and your Blood not rise, and your Spirit
not be stirred in you, to put you upon the Vindicating and Asserting of his
Right and Glory.

Should one offer to give you the Lie, I know, Sir, you would think your Honor
so touched, there were not only Apology enough for a Quarrel, but even
necessity of a Duel. And yet if you are a Swearer, pray what considering Man
will you ever induce to believe that you are no Liar? For what should make him
strain so much at a Lie, who has so glib a Swallow for Oath upon Oath? When the
very same Lord that said, Thou shall not forswear thy self; said also, Swear
not at all: He that sticks not to thwart him in the latter, it is hard trusting
him in the former. And to tie Truth to such Men's Oaths, how fond and senseless
is it? It is true, say you, for I heard such a one swear it: Pitiful Logic!
When the right Inference from the Premises is just on the other side, It Is
false, or nothing like to be true, because a Swearer affirmed it. For what is
said by the Swearers, be sure comes from none of Christ's Scholars, who is
Truth it self; they are better Taught, and Swear not at all. It must then come
from them, who are of his training up, that is, the Father of Lies, and is to
be credited thereafter. And such must never hope to recover their Credit among
the Wise, till they cease to be found among the Swearers; their Word then, will
indeed go a great deal further than now their Oath.

Do but see then here, Sir, how mischievous to the World, and what an
irreparable wrong to humane Society, is the weakening these Sacred Bonds of
Conscience, by the frequent use of Oaths in ordinary Chat, so to render them
cheap and contemptible; when the Awe and Reverence of an Oath is quite lost and
gone, by debasing it to every toyish purpose; And when Men can play with Oaths,
even every where; alas, who can expect they should be punctual and serious
therein any where? And after this rate, what the more satisfaction can you
have, when you give Men their Oaths, that they do not make a Lie as well as
make Oath? And how can the King and Queen be sure of such Men's Allegiance, or
any one else of their true Testimony or Fidelity to their Promise? And so
Kingdoms are shaken, and all Faith and Trust among Men destroyed, by the idle,
trivial use of Swearing. And for all such Damages accurring to the Public,
from this horrid Abuse of Speech, every Common Swearer is responsible; and much
more those of Eminent Station, who by their Examples should teach others better.

How like a Ruler then, that Rules for God, as well as Reigns by him, does the
King's most Excellent Majesty now urge the hampering those unruly Beasts of the
People with Penal Inflictions, that will not be wrought upon to forgo such a
Barbarous Practice, by any more fair persuasive Methods? And as they are the
deadly Enemies of their Country, who will not abridge themselves of this
Ungodly Pleasure, though it were to save a Church, to save a Kingdom, and to
please God and the King both together; So I dare refer it to your self, Sir,
(when you do but entertain any serious Thoughts) what true Friends they can be
to the Public, who in such a Case as this, will Heal and Connive at the
Offenders, and not dare, what in them lies, as far as they are bound, to bring
such notorious Criminals to Shame and Suffering. But this, alas, we are not
like to have the pleasure of seeing, till the Lesser Wheels move yet more
regularly under the Greater. For the Vulgar will not think it good Manners to
lead their Betters the way, till yea, yea; and nay, nay; become the Mode of
their Landlords and Masters, as well as of their King and Queen; and not only
Sovereignty on the Throne, but Magistracy also on the Bench, fears an Oath.
But, O! how happy then would it be with us, if every one concerned would act as
Good Subjects under the Best of Rulers, who are not for bearing the Sword in
Vain, but would be (as the Rejoicing of them that do well, so) a Terror to
Evildoers.

Now, this, Sir, I cannot but think most pertinent for your Consideration, who
profess so much Love to your Country, and Loyalty to King William and Queen
Mary. They are both indeed excellent Pretensions, and it is great pity you
should be therein guilty of any Self contradictions.

For how can you sincerely Love your Country, when you Patronize the
cursedthing that bodes nothing but its Ruin? As His Sacred MAJESTY, most truly
and piously, like himself, has laid down the Position, That our Religion,
Peace, and Happiness, are all endangered by reason of that overflowing of Vice,
which is too notorious in this Nation.

And what Loyalty to Their Majesty's, when still you are so much for the thing,
which they have declared themselves so much against: It Is, methinks, a strange
sort of Loyalty, only to Cross and Provoke them. Though the Ranting Loyalty of
Debauched Ruffians, it is true, was sometime since in Fashion; yet, pray good
Sir, remember, that now it is another Reign, and such Princes (blessed be God)
we are under, as do not make a Jest of all Serious Religion. And the pretense
of honoring them with God's Dishonor, is growing so fulsome, that nothing
more uncovers the Nakedness of the Authors; when the King's published Letter
again acquaints us, That He most earnestly desires, and will endeavor a
General Reformation of the Lives and Manners of all His Subjects, as being that
which must establish His Throne. What Supporters then are they of the Throne,
who think still to testify their Loyalty by the most profane Extravagancy? And
what Honor and Deference do they pay to the Royal Pleasure, who instead of
striving to promote it, only give broad Significations, how much they Scorn and
Contemn it?

I have heard you declare, Sir, That you are no Papist, Phanatick, nor
Disaffected to the Present Government. Yea, I perceive too much, you are very
forward, uncalled, to Swear, when some will not Swear now, though called to it.
But in good truth, Sir, I think it is to little purpose, what you do call your
self, as long as you abide under this Heinous Guilt; for at the bottom they can
be of no Religion at all, but are the foulest Scandal to the Christian Name,
and a heavy Plague to the World, who Name God in their Oaths, oftener than in
their Prayers; and have little to do with Him, but only thus to provoke him.
See that you do not here symbolize too right with Rome, before you are aware,
in postponing the weightiest Matters of the Law, to the Mint, Annise and
Cummin; while you inveigh most bitterly against all that (to a hairs breadth)
conform not to the Humane Institutions, and in that mean time your self can
swallow the Camels of such Monstrous Oaths, as make the greatest Violation, and
the rudest Attack upon God's own express Command.

One would think you owed the Church of England no real Kindness, Sir, when you
so eagerly lay claim to its Membership, only to Reproach it; as if it gave you
a Protection for that open Ungodliness, which the very Light of Nature utterly
Shames, and Condemns: And you would prove your self a Son of the Church, by
acting like a Child of the Devil. Sir, you too much Credit those, whom you so
divert your self to Bespatter; yea, you change Names with them, while you Rant
at them. For who in earnest is the bigger Fanatic and Madcap, he that boggles
at an indifferent Ceremony, or he that makes no Conscience at all of the most
notorious Damnable Iniquity? Do you think to Convert Dissenters with your
hairbrain'd Swearing and Damning? Or to invite them into our Holy Communion,
with such lewd Communication? Indeed, no wonder this should make the Offering
of the Lord abhorred; and bring a Scandal and Prejudice on the best Cause it
self, for the sake of such kind of Patrons and Abettors appearing in it, only
to turn the Adversaries Stomachs more, and open their Mouths wider against it.

Be it known to you, Sir, The Church of England is no Mother of such
Abominations: It Is the silliest mistake in any, that think to find Swearing in
her Litany. And he as obstinately shuts his Eyes against the Light, who sees
not all irreverent Abuse of God's Name, cried down in her Homily. But when you
can so defile your own Nest, and Blemish the most Excellent Profession, as well
a desperately fling at the Glory of Him that made you; Here, if ever, The
Righteous Judge of all the Earth is concerned to show himself, and take such
Audacious Criminals in hand, to make them feel it in Judgments worthy of God,
who will not leave off, so to dare him to it; but carry on the Affront still,
though their Sin has not so much as the face of any Worldly Interest, or
Fleshly Pleasure in it; and there is no Natural Inclination, or Impetuous
Appetite to it, not so much as to make the Plea of Humane Infirmity for it. But
the mad Swearer swears even for pure Swearing sake; Sins Gratis, in Contempt of
Heaven; and sells his Soul for no Consideration at all, but out of a Fantastic
Humor, to follow an inconsiderate Herd to his own Eternal Ruin.

Good Sir, you have Reason to Judge and Consider in Cases much less plain than
this; what Lethargy then has seized your Sense, that it does not befriend you
here? To reflect, what a fearful thing it is to fall into the Hands of the
Living God, who is a Righteous Judge, Strong, and Patient, and wretchedly
provoked (you know it) every day. But think you not that he could Command the
Earth to open her Jaws, and take the Swearers down quick into Hell, as once it
did Corah and his Crew? Or think you not, that he could Rain a Hell down even
from Heaven, as he did on Sodom, and the Cities of the Plain? For certain his
Arm is not shortened, that he cannot; but his Bowels are so tender, he waits,
and gives ill Men space to Repent and Turn; which if after* all his Goodness
that should lead them to Repentance, they will not, it is time for him then to
lay to his Hand, and whet his Sword, and bend his Bow, and make ready his
Arrows, and prepare for them the Instruments of Death.

Your self, Sir, I am sure, would never endure to have such Contempt cast upon
you, and such Affronts offered you: And must he, that is so beyond all
Comparison more Excellent, be thus put upon, and take all the foulest
Indignities from you? All the Patience in the World else, would never bear at
this rate. And abundant Experience indeed, Sir, you have had of it, that God is
Long-suffering; But yet he that endures so long, will not do it always: Abused
mercy must be righted, and will have Vengeance. Though the profane Swearer may
be ready to think himself hail-fellow with his Glorious Maker; yet be sure his
Sin will find him out. God has his Book of Accounts, in which all the Oaths
stand upon Record; and he has said, He will not hold him Guiltless: And the
Blasphemous Wretch will be like to find a Meiosis too in that Threat, which
imports thus much more than is expressed, that such shall be proceeded against as
the most guilty. And it is as if he should say, I will be sure to punish them,
whoever else escape; because of my Name, I am most tender, even as the Apple of
mine Eye; such shall therefore take my Name in vain another day too, and in the
last Judgment, cry Lord, Lord, but I will not hear them. And after all their
time of Swearing and Slighting me, I will take my time to cast them off, and
swear they shall never enter into my Rest.

Thus is the Swearer's Doom gone out already: And he does but Antedate his own
Eternal Dirges, as he so often Anticipates the Sentence of his own Damnation;
beginning betimes to Exercise himself in that Cursing and Blaspheming, which is
like to be the best Music of his Torments for ever; and so well may Orcus
signify, both an Oath and Hell, when they are so near a kin. The place rings
with such sounds, and it gapes for such Miscreants, as use to belch out this
Poison, only to please a Devilish Humor.

Now, Sir, will you cry, Damn him, he Preaches Damnation? Though you should so
vent your Indignation; you know a Reason why I am not to wonder at the very
worst you can say against your Fellow Creature. But with your leave, Sir, if I
do predict the Wrath to come, that you may flee from it, I think I do but offer
you a Blessing for your Imprecation; and let my Charity find only the
contemptuous Return, He Preaches! I shall as little regard to be made the scorn
of the Swearers, as the song of the Drunkards.

But I hope better things yet, Sir, from such a Temper and Reason as yours. I
hope that you, who can be so obliging to others, will not preversly shake off a
Servant of his, you call your Savior, only Praying you in Christ's stead to be
Reconciled unto God. I hope that you, who know so much more than many of your
poor Inferiors, will be Wiser than to make the sad purchase of more stripes,
for striking so madly at God himself, when as Conscience cannot choose but tell
you all the while, it is nothing but kicking against the pricks, and Struggling
with Him, who will certainly prove quite too hard for you.

Your fair Reception of a late Friendly Admonition, speaks you to be of another
nature than those Beasts that turn again, and rent their Reprovers. And it is a
thousand pities, that a Disposition and Ingenuity capable of the most Excellent
Impressions, should be so overrun with rank Weeds, and the most pernicious
Briars.

Alas, Sir, What can you ever propose to your self, in adhering to a scandalous
Haunt, that has no manner of Satisfaction, even to the Carnal Appetite;
pleases never a sense? You know what the Ingenious and Honorable Mr. Herbert
says, Were I an Epicure, I could bate Swearing; it is Pleasure that drills on
the Drunkard; filthy Lucre that is the Misers bait; and the Ambitious towers
after the Lure of Honor; all have some Color, though false, for their Evil;
only the Diabolical Swearer embraces Wickedness even for it self.

Let me beseech you then, Sir, for pity to your own Soul, (if not for the Fear
and Love of God) Rescue it from the Bonds of this Ruining Custom, and do not
yield your self to be taken Captive by the Devil at his will. But after all
your impious Oaths, will you make one Religious Vow, never so to Swear again;
and Fear an Oath, even as you would dread a Chain that will bind you to Fire
Unquenchable. O! let him that gave you a Tongue, and Power to use it, have the
Praise and Glory of it. And do not make it the Weapon so to Fight with your
Maker, against whom none did ever stand it out and prosper. Nor think it will
ever at all sessen your self, should you vouchsafe most highly to magnify Him,
and for ever stand in awe of Him, whom all the Noblest Creatures in the World
are Ambitious to Honor and Adore.

Can it choose, Sir, but grate hard upon your Rational Sense, to pervert that
Power of speaking, which sets you so much above the Bruits, to make you even
like the Devils? And shall the Member, styled your Glory, only serve to shame
your self, for throwing Dirt with it at your Lord and Master? O! What has he
ever done to you, that you should so fly upon him? Has he filled you so full
with his abundant Kindnesses of various Sorts, only that you should Swell and
Burst out against him* and ever and anon be speaking Evil of him, who is
continually doing you good? And what are you made of, if that most Venerable
Word of his, which Awes all the World, is no more to you than the most
Contemptible Ballad, which you can trample in the dirt; venturing still to
Swear so thick, when therein you are so strictly charged, Not to do it at all?

O! Sir, as you have, I say, not only any Conscience and Religion of a
Christian, but any Sobriety, Decency, and Discretion of a Man; have no more to
do with such notorious Works of the Devil, but Renounce, Reprove them, and
testify your Abhorrence of them; and make all else, that ever you are able,
ashamed and afraid of them. O! use your Tongue henceforth to better purposes,
than as the Boystrous Instrument to lift up against Heaven, and destroy your
own Soul, and injure all your Neighbors, (I say All) while you nothing but
harden some, and sadden the rest. And let not the same Mouth, with which you
pray to God, and praise him, be ever wrung to those harsh and hideous Notes of
Cursing and Blaspheming.

O! be thankful to him, that he has not long since taken you off in the Act of
Swearing, and thrown you down into the Place of endless Cursing. And speak Good
of his Name, which he would have to be for ever exalted above all things; take
it not into your Mouth only to pollute it; nor ever mention it, but with all
Reverence and Godly Fear. If you take not the Lord for a dumb Idol, dare not
any more so to Reproach the Living God. For, alas, the little Bubble that
swells, and arrogantly imagines to appear Big for huffing the Almighty himself,
will but thus the sooner be dashed to pieces; and God will get Glory to himself
in confounding the proud Rebel, who after a little Blaze, shall go out in a
Stench here, and awake hereafter to Shame and Everlasting Contempt. But them
that Honor him, God will Honor: Honor them with that Honor that is of
himself, a deserved Reputation on Earth, and Glory Everlasting in his Heavenly
Kingdom.

SIR, I fear you are tired with reading, and I hope you will grow as weary of
the rebuked Sin, which else will bring you a far heavier Reckoning. I pray,
that you may so feel the Burden of its Guilt, that you may never feel the
Weight of its Punishment. And God grant that you may become as Eminent and
Exemplary for your Tenderness and Zeal to Reverence the Name of God, and Assert
his Glory, as ever you have been Obnoxious, and under Censure, for making bold
with his Titles, and trampling upon his Honor. I am, Sir,

Your most faithful Monitor, and Humble Servant, B. J.

THE Second LETTER.
Sure he is a very sorry Shepherd that is buisie to kill Flies in the Sheep,
but lets the Wolf Worry at pleasure. Why one Wolf will do more Mischief in a
Night, than a Thousand of them in a Twelvemonth, Bp. Sand. Sermon. 1. ad Mag.
Sir,
I Must beg your Pardon, if I cannot apprehend any just Cause of Displeasure
given, That a Copy of the Former was Published for the sake of others; when as
the Name is still concealed, for the sake of one best known to your self. It
being upon no Person at all, but merely upon the Thing which most grossly
Dishonours any Person, that I would cast the Disgrace. And when it is to be
feared, There are many equally concerned as your self in the Miscarriage: I
cannot be sorry, they should all take their Share in this Publication: Which
carries no Design to Libel any particular Gentleman; but to disperse a general
Admonition to as many as will be no kinder to themselves, than to make it
pertinent to their own Case. At least I would Perstringe, whom I cannot
Reclaim: And throw my Bucket upon that Flame, which is too Outrageous for me to
Flatter my self with the Hopes of quite Extinguishing.

YOU may think your self out of my Thoughts, as well as out of my Reach, Sir,
now you have crossed the Waters, to abide in Parts more Remote: But as all the
Waters in that Channel you have past, cannot quench my Concernment for you; so
the Kindness of a Noble Friend who divides with me the Cure of your Welfare,
(That these Applications, which carry some Heat, may not find you as the Clay,
but the Wax;) has assured me of such a Conveyance, that this shall not fail to
find you out: Yet, Sir, I had no Thoughts of sending after you the SECOND
ADDRESS till I perceived you took along with you some Resentments occasioned by
the Former: Which I know, told too much Truth to Please any, but such as in
Earnest hate the Rebuked Evil: and count it no Exposing of themselves, to see
that which Dishonours God put to Confusion.

THAT I take upon me again to Advertise you, Sir, of a domestic Enemy, which I
fear may prove more pernicious to you, than you are apt to imagine, and
threatens you with bigger Dangers, than any from French or Irish (let them do
the worst that God shall suffer them:) If my Calling does not give me Warrant
to do it, I am sure my Conscience would not give me Quiet till I did it. And I
had rather be Blamed as too Officious, for tendering a Rejected piece of
Service and Friendship; than lie under some other Frowns and Rebukes, more
grievous to be born, than any I fear from Men. However, I apprehend it a Bold
Attempt, not only to Hazard the displeasure of any above me, but also to Engage
against me a whole Band of Sticklers for their Diana, who peradventure upon
such an Occasion, may add to their former Scores, and Bind themselves in some
New Oaths of Vengeance: Yet this to me gives Encouragement enough to Balance
whatever's difficult or frightful in the Undertaking, That I am but persuing
the Service which I have Vowed to God, and the Loyalty which I have Sworn to
Their Majesty's: And herein have not any manner of Personal Quarrel to incite
me; nor a design to defame ought in the World, but the most Odious Impiety it
self: and what I can to Enervate the Force of that which I have more than a
single Engagement upon me to Fight against.

NOR is it at the Gentry that I have the least Pique at all: than among whom I
do not know more Excellent Christians in the World: And to whose Kindness and
Respects I have so many particular Obligations: (more than are fit for my
Expression, as well as above my Expectation:) Enough to tempt me to Pride and
Boasting, rather than to any other sort of Ill Humor. And I must leave others
to judge, What Room there can be for the Objection, That I should invidiously
derogate from that which I have nothing to show for my self, (though I am
sensible how inconsiderable is the Honor derived from a Family, to add one
Cubit to Onos Stature.) And I count it but Loss, etc. But therefore to the
Gentleman do I make my Application, both as supposing him Master of the
Quickest Sense to take the Impressions of Reason; and also to have the biggest
Influence, to Credit whatever such a one as He Espouses and Favors: And, by
that Medium, the more to Hurt or Benefit many others. Now for the Success, I
must leave it in his Hands, who Fashions all Hearts; hoping it will not be
utterly Frustrate and Lost upon all: Though to some it should prove no better
than a New Verification of the Prophets Old Complaint, I will get me to the
Great Men, and will speak unto them, for they have known the Way of the Lord,
and the Judgment of their God: But these have altogether Broken the Yoke, and
Burst the Bonds.

Sir, As I cannot be eager to live in the Fire, so it is far from my Design, to
be a Man of Contention: Yet you know there is a Warfare wherein I am full as
much concerned as you, which engages us, upon some Occasions, to Contend, and
that Earnestly too. Who ever call such Zeal and Fidelity to our Lord, nothing
but Pragmaticalness and Enmity to our Neighbors: These are the same kind of
Judges among whom that passes for the only Charity, which the sacred Oracles
call Hating our Brother in our Heart, who think every one hates them that does
not rightly humor them: And cry out of the Reprover for a Turbulent Wrangler;
though he breaks no Peace, unless that which the Prince of Peace himself tells
us, He did not come to send: The Peace which nuzzles Men up in those Sins that
Ripen them for Hell; crying, All Is well, till all be Undone. But whenever I
must be so unhappy to lose Friends, or procure Foes, I shall count it none of
the most opprobrious, (as I am sure it is none of the worst) ways to do it, in
the Conscientious Discharge of that Justice and Charity which I owe to my
Neighbors Soul. And I cannot think there is much occasion to droop under the
Indignation of those that show no such Antipathy, either against the Ghostly
Enemies which they have Vowed to GOD, or against the Worldly, which they are
paid by Their Majesty's, strenuously to Oppose; as against the Honest Reprover
whom they stomach as the bigest Offender; and take none for such a bitter
deadly Foe, as him that would bereave them of that Darling, which our Savior
calls, The Right Hand and the Right Eye: And who would much regard the Slander
or Clamor of their Mouths, that can so far forget and debase themselves, as to
act not only the Clown, but the Fiend, to fly in the very Face of Him that made
them?

IF you thought, Sir, that I said too much to the Gentleman, the Magistrate, or
the Soldier; I must beseech you to excuse me, that herein I am so far from
being of your Mind, that I do not think I have said enough; And therefore this
comes as a supplement, further to urge those things which many may judge fit
for you to hear; though I am far from Judging my self the fittest to speak: yet
having my hand in, I will do as I can, where I cannot as I would.

AND to begin again with the Gentleman, (who may expect to be first served,
though, if Guilty, he might better like some other Service:) It may be thought
a Solaecism in Manners, for an ordinary Man to make so bold as mention Decency
to such as have had Opportunities better to know the Laws of Polite Breeding.
Though it was one of the Apostles that seconded his Lord, in giving that
Charge, Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not. Who knows but some Huffing
Gentlemen, (should we direct this toward them,) might Quarrel both his Office,
and his strictness in the Point. What, no more but my Brethren? Hold Friend, We
are your Masters. And Swear not Above all things? Why is that the Worst Thing
you can name? What do you think of the Dissimulation and Hypocrysie of Godly
Cheats? Truly Sir, I think as bad as ever you can of them, wherever they are
found: But I hope this Apostle was not one of 'em, for giving such a Check to
the Swearers Practice. I profess I am under a mighty Mistake, if a Man may not
rebuke odious Impiety, without being a Hypocrite. Yea, when upon occasion he
does not testify his Detestation of it, I see not how he can be the Faithful
Servant of his LORD, with a Heart Right in the Sight of God: When one of the
best Churches that ever was in the World, (Rev. 2. 2.) though among other Parts
of her high Elogium, was commended for her Patience, yet) could not bear them
that were Evil. And the meek Moses himself (you know) was Hot in GOD's Cause.
Yea, even the Pacifick Lamb of God, who, for his sweet obliging Temper, heard
Friend of Publicans and Sinners, yet could not forbear to Lash out of the
Temple its Profaners: And had he met with another sort of Profane, that make
so Bold with a far Greater than the Temple, I cannot believe he would have
thought them deserving of any Fairer Quarter.

But though it is no New Shift of Profane Men, to put off their Admonishers
with the Retort of Hypocrisy: And you may take it for Paradox, That Hypocrisy
and Prophanness should ever Cohabit in the same Breast: Yet the Solution is
obvious to a duller Apprehension than yours, that will but observe it. For in
Conscience, Sir, what better Name than Hypocrite belongs to him that takes on
him to be what he is not, yea what really he hates to be? Now does not the
rudest Swearer and most scandalous Liver among us, own himself a Christian? And
would be much aggrieved not to be so reputed and called: A Christian! That is,
A Professor of the Holiest Religion in the World: And yet if he openly act, as
it were in spite of that most Holy Profession, and makes but a mere Scorn of
its Excellent Rules and Precepts, particularly those against Swearing: To what
purpose does he profess it, but to play the Hypocrite, and Disgrace it?
Pretending to Christianity, and yet when warned to Forbear those very Works of
the Devil, which as a Christian, he has solemnly Vowed to Renounce: (And which
indeed common Morality as well as Christianity cries shame of:) He is only
exasperated, and moved much more to Choler, than to Amendment. As you know
some, Sir, that can so ill bear to be dealt with upon this account: They do not
very Genteelly use such, as even in the fairest manner, offer them the kindest
Friendship.

And such you know that look so big, as if all of Inferior Rank were quite
below their Notice: Or at least very Saucy and Pragmatical, if they Offer at
more Service to GOD, than Themselves: That can Rip and Tear, like those that
would Banter Heaven it self, and Run down the ever Blessed Majesty that there
inhabits. As if the poor angry Worm which can but just crawl along the Ground,
should think to sully or put out the Glorious Sun, with squirting a little
Dirt. Thus do they go to force themselves a Reputation by carrying it with a
High Hand toward their Lord and Judge, as nothing afraid of Him, nor caring at
all what his Word says to 'em. This, Sir, is Pure forcing things indeed; even
as if they should strive to make the Stream of a River run upwards. For the
World (however it Lies in Wickedness,) is not yet grown so Degenerate, as to
count this Carriage Lovely and of good Report. Or what if it should be never so
Highly Esteemed among Men, when it is Abomination in the sight of God? And I may
be confident that not one of the Knot can ever Believe that God thinks well of
it: or can expect to hear at last from Him, Well done good and faithful
Servant, for it. Though the Cry of his Companions is, A good honest ingenuous
Fellow! The most Authentic Records in the World call him, The Wicked, who
through the Pride of his Countenance will not seek after God. And expose him
for no better than an arrant Fool that scorns the fear of the Lord. Let them be
the greatest Kings and Judges of the Earth, they are very ill instructed, and
far from Wise, if they serve him not with more Fear. Were such assuming
Wickedness Recommendation enough for a Gentleman, How cheap a thing would
Gentility be? When even the vilest Wretch that is good for nothing, can soon get
the Knack, to be an Egregious Bold-fac'd Sinner, lustily to Tun in his Drink,
and Belch out his Oaths: And, it may be, Blaspheme GOD, and Bless the King,
both in a Breath: Glorying in his Shame, instead of giving God the Glory; and
the worse he does, thinking himself the Better to pass.

But how easy is it, Sir, to show you A more excellent Way? He that would
justify his Claim to a Brave Mind, must not count Religion, but such Impiety,
far Below him; esteeming it the Highest Birth to be Born of God, and ask the
King of Heaven Blessing: And seeing more Excellence even in despised Godliness,
than in all the Gallantry of this World: In whose Eyes a Vile Person is
contemned, though never so Gay: But he Honors them that Fears the Lord, be
they never so mean. The Mark of a truly Great Spirit, is to aspire after that
Noblest Attainment, to be Great with the Most High himself. Not Lucifer-like,
to Rival with him; and think to set up for a Great Somebody, for daring to be
excessive Ungodly: Nor to huff and storm as the Lofty Pharaoh, who, (though so
big a Man,) was but a silly Rebel for asking, Who is the Lord, that I should
Obey him? As if it would too much have undervalued his Worth, to own any above
him. So would some be thought more than Men, who perhaps of all others, have
the least of Men in them. For let a Man appear never so Splendid abroad, (if
the TONGUE be any Index of the Mind, and he may discover that Heart to the Ear,
which our Eyes cannot see*) As the Stinking Breath makes us suspect something
Corrupt within: His Speech Bewrays him more than his Face. And the Blasphemous
Mouth speaks his Soul to be even as Black as Hell: And then he must not think
it much, that he is no more honored, who will make himself so Cheap. Or
whatever Caps and Knees and Complements come in, he may look on all the Respect
Men give him, as owing merely to his Worldly Appendages about him; out of which
Theatrical Gear if he were stripped, he might, (for any right Worthy
Accomplishments of his own,) look as ridiculous even as Aesop's Jay.

METHINKS, Sir, such as have been Well-bred, do very ill use it, when they
Scurrilously Abuse their Betters, especially Him, who is so transcendently the
Best, to whom they are Debtors for all the Advantages that ever they Enjoy
above others. But how can it in truth deserve the name of Good-Breeding, that
does not so much as teach Good Manners? And what Worse Manners can there be,
than most rudely to Treat the Noblest Friend and Benefactor we have in the
World? Has any Gentleman, think you, a License to make bolder with God than his
poorest inferior should? When of a Truth, God is no respecter of Persons; but
in every Nation he Accepts the Man (though of the lowest Rank) that Fears Him
and Works Righteousness; and in no place will he accept the Gentleman, or
other, that nothing but Despises him, and works Wickedness.

From Noble Organs, Sir, we expect Harmonious Sounds: and Vesse^s of Honor
sure should not be prostituted to the basest uses. The Foul mouth can never at
all become the fine Gentleman. Indeed no Gentleman can ever Credit such an
odious Sin, which does so extremely disparage any man. To feed on the coursest
Fare, or filthyest Trash, and Carrion it self, how base and unworthy your
Quality would you account it? And yet, if you will abide by the Determination
of the Best Judge in the World, you must acknowledge that no Meat which goes
into the Mouth, does so much Defile a man, as the Wicked Words which come out
of it. Pardon the Freedom, Sir, of such as make bold to tell you, That they who
count themselves so much better Persons, ought to set much better Patterns, and
excel their Neighbors in Generous Virtue, and Heroic Piety, as well as in
outward Estate and Dignity, else they are Persons of such Quality, as is little
to their Honor. And many whom they scorn for their vile Parentage* may really
prove much the Better Men; because the more Sober, Just, and Holy Christians.
Indeed the Better men are* so much the Worse they make themselves, by doing
thus ill: For that nothing is so Bad as the Corruption of the Best. And when
the Gentleman-Swearer shall come to undress for another World, he may wish,
That not only his Gentility, but all Remembrance of it too, were put off with
his Mortality, rather than find it Rise up to Inflame his Reckoning, that such
a one as he should do so naught, whom God so deeply engaged to do better.

NEVER think then, Sir, That can at all Excuse, which does but still Aggrand
the Crime; for the more you are a Gentleman, the more should you abhor the
thing which Taints your Blood, especially the most unbecoming thing in the
World, which is, instead of paying Honorable Respects where Honor is due, to
cast a rude Contempt on the very Head Fountain of all Honor. If no injury
exasperate so much as Contempt, and no Contempt so much as that of our
Superiors; (who as they should be most Deserving of Respects, so are most
Sensible of Disparagement:) O! what is it then to Despise the Great God
himself? The calling all men Liars, and engaging the whole World against us,
were less Rude, as well as less Unadvised than to Affront the Supreme Majesty
of the World, and grow upon him, as if he were a God of Clouts, that neither
Saw, nor Heard, nor would ever Visit for these things.

Be not deceived, Sir, As God is not Mocked, to be imposed upon by the closest
Hypocrite; so neither will he be Braved to Arrest Judgment against the most
Ranting Son of Pride. Such, you know, God is said to Resist; and if Omnipotence
set it self against a Leaf; alas, what can all its Rustling do? Belshazzar may
Dazzle and Daunt some poor Mortals; but the Writing on the Wall will much more
Damp himself. Whatever be the Figure he makes for a while in the World, though
clad in Purple, underlaid with Gold, Pompously Attended, and Generally Admired;
yea, to carry it higher, in the words of Zophar, though his Excellency Mount up
to the Heavens, and his head reach to the Clouds; yet (how short is all this
Triumphing?) he shall perish for ever like his own Dung; they that have seen
him shall say, where is he? He that sits in Heaven shall deride the Vanity of
such Fools that mock at Sin, and thought to set at naught the Dreadful Judge of
Quick and Dead; whose least Appearance (at his coming to Reckon with them) will
loose the Joints of their Loins, and make their Knees smite one against
another, and set them a begging the Favor of Rocks and Mountains to fall upon
'em, and Conceal them from Him.

NOW, casting my self at the Gentleman's Feet for this Parrhesia: That I may not
be mistaken, for too bold with Magistracy, which none can in truth more highly
Honor and Reverence, as the Ordinance of God, and for which I constantly do
Bless his Name, as one of the especial Tokens of his Love to the World, in
setting up these Shields of the Earth, to secure us from Wrong and Rapine; to
whom, under God, we owe our Lives, and all the Good things we can call our own
here, and all the outward advantages of attaining to live for ever Blessed
hereafter; and in consideration of the continual Care and Burden they undergo
upon our Account, and the sundry Benefits we Enjoy by their means; we are not
only to Accept it always, and every where, with all Thankfulness; but for
supporting the Strength and Credit of such Government, cheerfully contribute
all that we are able.

Let me beg you will believe me, Sir, That my Freedom of speaking to you in this
your Worshipful Capacity, is rather from an Excess, than any Defect of Honor
to your Eminent Station; as being so highly concerned for any thing which to me
seems derogating from the Dignity of your Office, and to weaken that Authority,
which I know to be most useful and necessary for the good of the World, that
indeed my fear of your bringing the same into Contempt, is that which has given
me all this boldness, to offer somewhat that might be cautionary to your
serious consideraon; and though every one will not tell you so much, and but
few, it may be, go so far with you; yet am I well assured, that herein I speak
the sense of many, much more considerable than my self. The Celebrated Author
of the Gentleman's Calling Reasons to the same effect, when he tells you, That
the Zealous Endeavor of Reforming your selves and others, will rescue your
Reputation from that Foulest Blot, of being an Agent for Satan; and advance it
to the highest Dignity of being Serviceable to God: So Bishop Sanderson long
before; Fear not to say to the Wicked, Lift not up your Horn, so shall you
preserve your Persons and your Places from being Baffled and Blurted by every
Lewd Companion. Yea, wonder not, Sir, if upon such in Authority as are your
Partners in this Guilt, all Thoughtful men do charge the Blame of that Impudent
Domineering Wickedness, which gives so full a check to the Completing of those
Mercies, wherewith God has been pleased so far to Bless us already. When he has
Graciously opened such a Fountain of Justice Above, where does it stick, but at
the Ministers of Justice Below, if Judgment Run not down as Waters, and
Righteousness as a Mighty Stream?

Did all the Kings Representatives but Represent also his Sobriety, Piety, and
every thing in his Sacred Majesty, which is so Highly Praiseworthy; such
Refulgent Mirrors every where would strike that Awe and Confusion into the Wild
Profane Generation, as might make even those who hate to be Reformed, yet
afraid and ashamed to be so avowedly Wicked. But this so much breaks the Royal
Design for Reformation of Lives and Manners; when many of those whom the King
Entrusts and Adjures to Assist him in it, (if not obnoxious themselves, and
fitter to abide Censure than Inflict it, yet) are so Remiss in doing their
Lords Will, to make the Vile Impious Gang feel their Power; that these dare
Swear and Curse, and act worse than the Bruit even just before their Faces; and
the Men of Might can find no Hands, nor so much as a Tongue or Frown, to make
them sensible of their Evil doings: Yea would to God we had none Disaffected to
the Higher Powers upon this very account; because (in the Opinion of such) they
take too much upon them, in attempting to amend such Matters as they judge not
only tolerable, but even the Trim Ornaments, and Piquaint Relish of Society.

Have we none who give Suspicion, that they would much better like their Prince
if he were not so stiff a Back to the Edge* which he Commands us to turn
against this Sin; for how can they, who are so incensed at their Reprovers, be
very well pleased with such as set us on, whether the Heavenly Majesty or his
Vicegerents on Earth? The snapping at us, does reflect somewhere else. And it is
not indeed to be expected, that such a Reign as casts disgrace upon them,
should be heartily liked by them; if we were in worse Hands, it might better
serve their Turns; But if Scandalous Wickedness shall not still be in Request,
there is a mighty Crew will hold themselves aggrieved: Ranging doggedly too and
fro, and Grudging if they be not satisfied, to have it as they have had it. And
no Wonder if Pious Rulers be Maligned and Stomached by them; when alas, any
strict Regularity is not only as Shackles, but even Death to 'em: To be
curtailed and abridg'd of their lewd Ranting Liberties, they cannot bear it.

YOU may have heard of a Time, Sir, when the foulest Extravagancy was counted
an Expression of Loyalty: And some of the worst Men's Wickedness was to pass for
a piece of Allegiance: Yea, such as boasted themselves the KING's best Friends,
were ready to break the Heads of those that refused (with Swearing and
Drinking) to break the Kings Laws: Speaking against such, whose Sobriety put
them to shame, after the Drink had put themselves almost past speaking. And all
that were against their Riot, were against the King straight, and who would not
be of the Confederacy, to be Traitors to Christ, must down in their Black Book,
for ill Members of the Government. (The old Nonsense of such as are hard put to
it, still to keep their hold of those Favorite Sins, which God and his
Messengers call them to Turn from.) Some may hang the head, and bewail their
Misfortune, that those days are now past. But I dare not tell you, Sir, that I
am sorry for this their sorrow; I must rather tell you, I take it for the great
Greivance of all that are Decent and Orderly in the Land, that such Evil Doers
are no more snub'd and curbed: Now they are driven out of their old Fatness,
and cannot shelter their Licentious Pranks, under the Kings Name, can have no
Protection, but from loose Magistrates, when they offer to set up again.

But should we yet after all Miscarry, where but at the doors of such Ciphers
and Supine Rulers, (the Pictures of Authority, that represent the King but only
in Effigy) must lie the Blood of a lost Nation? When it was put into your very
Hands, to Maul the Topping Mischiefs, in Executing those Good Laws we have
against such Incorrigible Offenders; and you could not find in your Hearts to
do us so much Good, as to Act that Worthy Part: No, the Church might call long
enough, Who will rise up for me against the Evil Doers? Who will stand up for
me against the Workers of Iniquity? And you would not be pleased (to bear a
share with those truly Great and Sensible Patriots, which, Blessed be God we
have, and Rejoice in them, as some of our Richest Treasure, and look upon them
with Veneration, as Stars of the First Magnitude, and for Ruling well, count
them Worthy of more than Double Honor. And we hope they are not so thin sowed
over the Nation now, as Bishop Sanderson observed in his Time, Here and there,
says he, One or two, peradventure in a whole side of a Country to be found,
that make Conscience of their Duty more than the rest, and are forward to do
the best Good they can: God's Blessing rest upon their Heads for it. You would
not add to their Number,) to endear yourselves, and oblige your Country so far.
But by an Oscitant Slackness, and Lax Connivance, (Bearing the Sword in vain,
and never reflecting on the impudent Sinners, to expose them for Exemplary
Sufferers, nor making them that do so Evil afraid:) You even bid the Lewd
Companions, be filthy still: And so let all go to Naught and Ruin; as who
should say, There, there, so would we have it.

LET me beg your Patience, Sir, while I insert here some Bigger Authorities
than my own; that may peradventure move more with you: And the Excellence of
their Apposite Reasonings, and Happy Expressions, will, I hope, more than
Recompense for the Length.

The Examples of many great Persons, who were able to be the Sovereign
Restorers of Virtue, and Re-establishers of a Happy World, with the endless
Bliss of many now perishing through their great Default, are at this day the
only Ruin and Despair of Goodness: Having forgot whose Lieutenants they are
in the World, for what end they were placed, for what end they are honored,
and most of all, what a great Account they have to pass at the Last Audit: When
their Favorites and Fancy-feeding Flatterers shall all shrink from them; and
nothing but their own Deeds and Deserts accompany them, Sir Edw. Sand. Survey.

WHO, forsooth, is the Brave Spark, the Complete Gentleman, the Man of
Conversation and Address, but he that has the Skill and Confidence (O Heavens,
how mean a Skill! How mad a Confidence!) to Lard every Sentence with an Oath,
or a Curse? -- It Is wonderful, that any Person of Rank should deign to Comply
with so scurvy a Fashion: A Fashion more befitting the Scum of the People, than
the Flower of the Gentry. -- If Gentlemen would regard, the Virtues of their
Ancestors, which advanced their Families, and severed them from the Vulgar:
This degenerate Wantonness and Sordidness of Language, would return to the
Dunghill, or rather (which God grant) be quite Banished from the World: The
Vulgar following their Example. Dr. Barrow.

THE Gates of Rome, the Gates of Hell, could not hurt us, if we did not hurt
our selves: But as every Sin is a Traitor to a Man's own Soul; so every wicked
Man is a Traitor to his King. Let him sooth and swear what he will, his Sins
are so many Treasons against the Prince and State; for Ruin is from Iniquity.
Ye that are Magistrates then, not for GOD's sake only, but for the King's sake,
whose Deputies you are, as he is God's: Not for Religion only, but for very
Policy, as you tender the dear Life of our Gracious Sovereign: As you regard
the sweet Peace of this State and Kingdom, the Welfare of this Church: Yea, as
you love your own Life, Peace, Welfare; rouse up your Spirits, awaken your
Christian Courage, and set your selves heartily against the Traytorly Sins of
these Times, which threaten the Bane of all these. Bp. Hall. Panegyr.

THOUGH there be too many Springs which feed the Ocean of Prophanness and Impiety
that overflows this poor Nation, yet there will scarce any be found to have
more liberally contributed, than the open and scandalous Viciousness of the
Gentry. -- It Is they that have brought Vice into Countenance; made it the Mode
and Fashion of the Times; so that People dread the Singularity of being
innocent: And a Man may with less peril of scorn, appear in the most
superannuated Dress, than own the obsolete Qualities of Meekness, Sobriety,
etc. When Gentlemen are Atheistical, Clowns will think themselves very modestly
wicked, if they be but profane.

-- This Converts the Bridle into a Spur, when those that should discountenance
Vice, thus animate and encourage it. -- Turning Communities of Men into Herds
of Beasts; yea, into Legions of Devils, Gent. Call.

SUCH love their own Ease so well, they care not which way things go, backward
or forward, so that themselves may sit still, and not be troubled. -- Of
Gallio's Temper, who, though a foul Outrage was committed under his Nose, and
in sight of the Bench, yet the Text says, He cared for none of those things: So
the forenamed Bishop. But Laws, (says he) are better unmade than unkept: And
without Execution, of less Regard than Scare-Crows in the Cornfieldsd; of which
the Birds are a little afraid at first, but soon after they are a little used
to 'em, they grow so bold with 'em, as to sit on their Heads, and defile them.
He calls you Lex Loquens, who are to breath fresh Life into the Languishing
Laws; which of themselves will not let even the Great Ones break through; but
only by the Abuse of Bad Men, together with the Baseness or Cowardice of sordid
or sluggish Magistrates, who let the Wicked escape, (if not otherwise taken
off:) dogged off by their own Guilty Consciences.

AND because you may bear such sharpness better from the Right Reverend, than
from one of a much Inferior Order: Take his Parabolical Representation of the
Matter to close this Part.

Imagine you saw a goodly Tall Fellow, trickt up with Feathers and Ribbands,
and a glittering Sword in his hand, enter the Lists like a Champion, and
Challenge all Comers: By and by steps in another Man, perhaps of his own size,
but without either Sword or Staff, and does but show his Teeth, and stare upon
him; whereat my Gay Champion first trembles, and anon for very fear lets his
sword fall, and shrinks himself into the Crowd: Think what a ridiculous sight
this would be: And just such another thing as this is a fearful Magistrate;
that stands on the stage, and raises Expectation, as if he would do something:
But out-brav'd with big Looks and Bug-Words, draws on himself scorn and
contempt. -- O divide not Honorem ab Onere. Do not decline those Burdens which
cleave to the Honors you sustein. Harden your face against all the Temptations
that would Warp you another way. Contemn the Frowns, the Favors and the
Letters of Great Ones, in Comparison of that Trust, which Greater Ones than
they, the KING and State, and yet a Greater than they, the Great GOD of Heaven
and Earth has reposed in you. Gird your Sword upon your Thigh; and (keeping
ever within the Compass of your Commission, as the Sun in the Zodiac:) Go on
as a Giant that rejoices to run his Race. So shall the Wicked fear you, the
Good bless you, Posterity praise you, your own Hearts cheer you, and the Great
God above Reward you.

TO speak to you once more, Sir, in your Military Capacity: (if I may Adventure
so far upon the Sharps, to approach the Armed Champion, with nothing but this
little Sling in my hand:) as the apprehension of your Danger, and the necessity
of your Case, is my Call: So the Goodness of the Cause, with my Affiance in him
whom I plead it for, is all my defense. Your Post, I confess, Sir, is
Honorable, appearing in the Head of a Company, to Fight for your King and
Country, Laws and Religion: And we that stay at home, as we ought to Assist you
all that Lies in us with our Prayers; So to neglect no opportunity of
expressing our Thankful Resentment of the Noble Service, when you are pleased
to engage in Hazzards and Hardships for us. He very ill deserves to share in
any the Advantages of your worthy Enterprise, who does not Honor, and Heartily
Wish you well; But how he should truly Honor you, who is nothing concerned
for that which is your greatest Dishonor, or in earnest desire your Welfare,
who nener Cares, though you lie and dye in the most dangerous Damning
Wickedness (as he would not let your Beast lie in a Ditch, if he could help
it:) I do not understand. And for my part, Sir, I cannot but take this
Plain-dealing with you for the best expression of my real inclination to serve,
and do you all the Good I am capable of. Should I be so unhappy, as be
misunderstood, I must bear that Cross. But now a Door is open to me, I shall
not spare, (both for my own sake, and yours also that take up Arms for us,) to
Cry aloud of that which so fearfully Endangers all.

IF Soldiers and Seamen, who carry their Lives in their hands, and Border so
much nearer than the rest upon another World, will verify the common
observation made upon 'em, That Swearing, Damning, and all God-despising (so
rife among them,) passes for the Fashionable Badge of their Profession, and a
Characteristick Note to distinguish them from other men: They only tell us what
Anomalous Creatures there are in Humane Nature, as well as of Bruital Kind; and
that Africa is not the only Part of the World which breeds Monsters, when we
can find so near Home such Profligate Offenders, as give too manifest
Specimens, what a Mighty Empire has the Devil, to Sweep down even Stars with
his Tail: To Metamorphose Men, and make them like himself Rage the more,
Because they have but a short time; yea, and be then worst, when they have all
the reason in the world to be Best of all; when they are going into the Field,
or upon the Waters, to fly out upon their Judge Eternal, at whose Bar they are
ready to hold up their Hands, and mistake the best of Friends for their
chiefest Foe; like a sort of Frantic Theomachi, that had no design upon Small
or Great, but only that King of Israel who is the Lord of Hosts, to send up
Volleys against Heaven, and dare the Divine Vengeance. Of whom we are Tempted
to say, quite contrary to what the men of Lystra did of Paul and Barnabas, The
Devils are come up to us in the likeness of Men, when, with with this Hellish
Oratory, they show themselves so Learned, in the Depths of Satan, and discharge
such Eruptions, as if they carried an Aetna or worse Fire within. Gent. Call.
we need not be at the pains to draw their Picture, who Limn themselves in such
hideous Blasphemies, as speak their Parentage too plain, and point out who is
their Father, that Teaches them no better.

To whom agrees Sir Edwin Sandy's Observation of some, that think it a Glorious
Grace to Adore the King of a Country; but to Name or think Reverently of the
Creator of the World, to proceed from a Timorous very Base-mindedness and
Abjectness. The Soldiers Profession and Exercise (says that Worthy Knight)
was of Old reputed the only School of Virtue, So that the Wisest Philosopher
thought the Lacedaemonians therefore more Virtuous, generally than other
Nations, because they followed the Wars more. At this day, it is a Cause in all
Places of clean contrary Effects, and now Infam'd with all Vice and Villainy.
Blasphemings have* so prevailed now in our Christian Camps, that if any Refrain
them, he shall be upbraided as no Soldier or Gallant minded Man: That the very
Turks have the Christians Blaspheming of Christ in Execration, and will punish
their Prisoners for it; yea, the Jews (in their Speculations of the Causes of
the strange Successes of the Affairs of the World,) Assign the Reason of the
Turks so prevailing against the Christians to be their Blasphemies and
Blasphemous Oaths, which Wound the Ears of the very Heavens, and Cry to the
High Throne of Justice for speedy Vengeance.

WELL may the Enemies Laugh among themselves, to see such go to Fight for the
Reformed Religion, who themselves so hate to be Reformed; and while they carry
the Bible in their Colors, nothing but bid Defiance to its Blessed Author with
their Tongues. How low then must be our hopes of a Blessing upon the Service of
such Miscreants? Or though the Almighty (who, it is true can make the Worst
Instruments serve the Best Purposes, (as Judas himself, who meant nothing less,
was made subservient to the Worlds Redemption: Though he) should give
Prosperity to the Arms of ill Men, for the sake of a Good Cause; (as sometimes
he Flushes the Espousers of a Bad, to Fat them up for Slaughter:) Though he
throw the Briars in the Gap, to stop the Enemies Incursions; yet, after that
service, what are those Briars good for but the Fire?

But how much, Sir, might such as you do to stop the spreading Contagion of
this Epidemick Plague so hot in our Armies, would you but (Phineas-like) stand
up and Execute Judgment, and employ the Influence you have upon those under
you, to make them feel the smart of it on their Backs or in their Purses, if
not in the very Part Offending: (For I need not acquaint you, Sir, what are the
Rules and Articles of War; you know this is one, That if any Officer or
Soldier shall presume to Blaspheme God, he shall have his Tongue Bored through
with a Red hot Iron.) At least leave your Soldiers no Cover to shelter under
their Commanders Example or Authority. The Gospel tells you of a Man in
Authority that had Soldiers under him, who did not think himself worthy the
Lord Jesus should come under his Roof; and can you ever act, as if you thought
the same Lord unworthy to come into your Mouth, unless it be to Rally him with
an Oath? I need not tell you, Sir, That you have no Commission from the King,
so to Fight against the God by whom he Reigns. And how can you really serve
their Majesty's, if you have not a more Awful Regard of the Heavenly Majesty?
And if you do not make those who are subject to your Discipline know their
Commander for a better Leader, than to go before them in such Desperate ways
as Emboldens the Common Soldiers to be Common Swearers. For Great men's Vices
are of a more Gyantly Frame; they Proclaim solemn War with Heaven, Levy Forcs
and draw in multitudes of Abettors and Confederates in their Hostilities, and
God Knows, this Vnevangelical kind of Violence the Kingdom of Heaven daily
suffers. O! that the Christians and Leaders of these unhappy Troops would at
last think fit to sound a Retreat; that they would in Pity, if not to
themselves, yet to their seduced Followers, cease thus Desperately to rush upon
the mouth of the Canon, the Jaws of Hell. Gent. Call.

O! that you would set your Soldiers another sort of Copy, Sir, and if you
Punish them for any Disorders, let not that Profaneness escape unpunished, which
is the Grand Root of every Irregularity, and renders the Guilty suspicious
indeed to have little Conscience of any thing they say or do. Make not your
self an Accessory, under pretense of Pity; when there is no real Kindness at
all in the case, but rather cruel Enmity to your Neighbor, to your Nation, and
to your Soul, to Heal with Pestilent Caitiffs against God and the King. Teach
their Tongues, as well as the rest of their Bodies, to keep better Rank and
File; and think it not enough to make them set their Feet right on the Earth as
long as they set their Mouth against the Heavens: and so call for a Curse on
every Enterprise, where in such sorry Tools are employed.

Sir, You know better things than to think this the way for Soldiers to
Demonstrate their Valor in Challenging the Lord of Armies, and to prove they
are no Cowards, because they can so Resist and Assault Omnipotency it self, as
long as its Owner keeps silence and lets them alone. But they that can be so
sottish to think the Great God even altogether such a one as themselves; yea,
not only their Match, but their Subject: Alas, how will this their mad Courage
be cooled, when the Holy one and Just, the irresistible Judge of all the Earth,
(from whose face Heaven and Earth will fly away) shall come to visit and
avenge, to Reprove and set all these things in Order before them? How much does
it concern you to consider this betimes, all ye that so Forget God, and your
selves? Least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to Deliver! When his
Wrath shall be poured out like Fire, to divert or abide it, with all your
Forces, you may as well think, with a Wisp of Straw, to withstand a mighty
shower of Flames rained down from Heaven.

NOW knowing these Terrors of the Lord, we persuade men. And O! that we could
find all but so perswadeable, as to be willing to do the greatest good to their
own dear Souls! For how many Leviathans are there that laugh at the shaking of
all our Spears? And only make themselves merry at the Preachers sober sadness?
How many hardened Hearts, that like Anvils, beat back every stroke in our Faces?
Let Boanerges thunder the Denuntiations of God's Word, and even flash the Fire
of Hell upon 'em: There are Rocks that stand sturdy and unconcerned, and let
themselves be out done by the Devils that Believe and Tremble.

To slight their Sins, and deride the Parson, is their brave accomplishment:
And 'twere well, if he that shall Judge 'em could escape 'em: If their bold
Drollery would stop, ere it grew up to Heaven, to give a dire proof, that they
no more Fear God than Regard Men.

No such disparagement in the World with such, as Repentance. Let them be sick
even to Death, the haughty Spirit will not suffer them to own any Disease.
What! Such as they so reflect on themselves, and oblige the Barking Priest with
a Palinode? and close up all the damning, with damning the Bedlam Humor it
self? (As the late Earl of Rochester, when come to himself, cried out of This
Language of Fiends hanging yet about him. (Bp. Burn.) They scorn no dirty thing
more, than to lose themselves thus among their Champions for the Cause, and be
Posted up for silly Sneaks, and Contemptible Renegades: After all their
Masterless sporting themselves in the wide Sea of Libertinism, to Tack about
and strike Sail to dull Sobriety. No, let them alone to Immure themselves in
the undisturbed Possession of all their Impieties, and steal upon Hell it self,
never knowing the worst, till it be too late for Remedy. Away with these Sour
Michaiahs, that Prophecy no good concerning them, but Evil. Let the Righteous
Reprove them; It shall be at his peril. (Though a much greater and better Man
called it, a precious Oil that should not break his Head.) They that heartily
love their Sins, even above God and Heaven, are too touchy so to be dealt with.
Who offers to make any Breach upon their Darlings, they could (but for
endangering their own) even break his Neck.

Ah Lord, who shall convince these furious Drivers to set upon their Evil,
posting along the Wide Way, and mad at any that offers to stop them; till the
Flying Roll of Curses, not only come and Enter their Houses, but, seize their
Persons too: And that Execration which they prided in as their Garment, derive
it self like Water and Oil into their Bowels and Bones; and there stick to 'em,
fastened with the Final Doom, Depart ye Cursed.

It Is worthy that Almighty Spirit who comes to Convince the World of Sin, to
make them so sensible as to know their Transgressions: And prevent others for
impeaching them, by bringing them to do that Office upon themselves, and be
first in their own Accusation: O may the Divine Power and Mercy be Glorirified
in giving Repentance to such as so Oppose themselves.

BUT shall I now beg of you, good Sir, for his sake, by whose Name you are
called, only with Patience, and some serious Thoughtfulness, to Weigh the
Considerations, that I have made bold here to set before you. And should any
sharpness of Expression, herein possibly offend you; would you look upon it,
only as an Overflowing of earnest Zeal, you would not deny me your Pardon: Nor
for the sake of ought, that may not be thought so fitly said, deny your self
the Benefit of all the rest, which may be neither impertinent nor unprofitable,
for you to bestow a few of your best Thoughts upon.

O how happy, Sir, should I count my self, could I but prevail with you to
renounce and abhor the thing, which I am sure never did you any good; yea,
which if you stick to it, will certainly do you the most great and irreparable
Hurt. I speak to one quick and sharp to discern between Right and Wrong: O do
not, for want of a little sober Recollection, degrade your self to a Level with
the dullest; suffering all your Acuteness to fail you, while you adhere still
to a Senseless Sin, that the more Reproaches your understanding, because it has
nothing but its own downright Sinfulness, for a temptation. When God has given
you Wisdom, and many fair Accomplishments, to render your Company and
Conversation so acceptable: O why will you soil and desecrate all your
Commendable Properties, with the Allowance of that filthy Habit, like a
frightful Bear-Skin, to cover 'em? Away with it, Sir, I beseech you, and fling
it from you with the greatest scorn and detestation. Let me beg of you by all
that ought to be most dear to you, give me not the trouble of a Repulse, where,
to grant my Request, you may do your self so great a Kindness.

I am the more importunate, Sir, as upon your own particular Account, that I
might be instrumental, by your leave, to do you some of the best service; so
for the sake of the Public too, because, I most heartily concur with you in
the Design, wherein you are at present engaged: On which our Peace and Safety,
and all our happyest Interests so much depend: And because I take the desired
Issue of that design, so much to depend upon our Reconciliation to the offended
Majesty of Heaven; especially as to the Notorious Offenses, that so openly
affront him, and even bid Defiance to his Holy Word. However, the securing of
your own Soul, (which you know not how soon may be dispatched away to its
Eternal Dwellings, after so many whom you have seen cut off before you) is for
certain extremely concerned in your cheerful Compliance with these my earnest
Solicitations.

IF for Conscience it be, Sir, that you take up Arms, What is it but evident
self-contradiction, to struggle still against Conscience, in harboring so
known a Wickedness? And if you enter into War, for the sake of Peace, the
Divine Promise, is, That when a Man's Ways please the Lord, he will make even
his Enemies to be at Peace with him. This as far as infinite Wisdom sees fit
and Good: But thus, in any Case, you shall be sure of a far better Peace, even
that of GOD: And the most refreshing serenity and applause of your own Breast;
which in vain you may expect, till this cursed Makebate be turned out. And if
you go into the Field seeking Honor; the Reformation I am so urgent for, will
bring you in the Esteem and Praise of all, whose Good Thoughts and Good Words
are worth the having. Yea, 'twill make you Great and Conspicuous in the sight
of Heaven it self, where nothing looks big and renowned, but what is
subservient to the Divine Glory. Thus, you shall get the Noblest of all
Victories, That over your self; and over the Scoffs and Railleries of that
Embittered Pack, who snarl most at the thing which pleases GOD best: (Growing
to regard their Noise no more, than that of the Barking Animals.) And thus
shall you Fight, not only for the Applause of the People, or the Favor of your
Prince, or the Fullness of the World; but for a Crown and a Throne: And that
such, to which all the Crowns and Thrones on Earth are no better than the
Faintest Shadows. For the Heavenly Glory admits of no Hyperbole; and is too
bright for Mortal Eye to behold, too vast for Heart of Man to Conceive. How
worthy then of the best Gentleman's Ambition? And who can ever do wiser and
nobler, than to take the Excellent Way which leads to that Blessed End? Even so
to Glorify GOD now, that GOD may Glorify him forever.

THAT you may ride on so prosperously, Sir, till you have hewed Agag in pieces,
trodden under foot this inveterate Foe, and every deadly Enemy of your Soul;
and become the Favorite of God, and triumph in the Everlasting Enjoyment of
the Conquerors Joy and Glory; is the worst, Sir, that I wish you, and my Hearty
Prayer to GOD for you, who am, as formerly,

Sir, your, etc.
FINIS.

