A LETTER Concerning the COUNCIL OF TRENT.
SR,
Having perused the The History of the Council of Trent, written in Italian by
Pietro Soave Polano, translated by N.B. printed London. 1676. in fol. pages
769. If my Reader have a different Edition, he may observe his whole number of
pages, and (by the Rule of Three) as this of mine is to that, so will my
quotations be to his.
Author you so much recommended to me, I am apt to fancy that never any two
Historians disagreed more than yours and mine; the one so zealous in exalting,
the other in depressing of the Council. But yet I am not of opinion that this
was the only difference bewixt them. Pallavicini had the freedom of the Vatican
Archives; He referrs himself to the Records of the Council, and the writings of
He setts down their names, l, 8. c. 10. n. 14.
such Persons as were Members of it: Moreover, He is so far from being partial,
that D. Still. Rat. Account.
Aquilino says He has done the Church more disservice by his Answer, than his
Adversary had done by his History. As for your friend Soave, I am afraid he is
apt to make the worst of things, even when he speaks truth as to the substance.
His intimate acquaintance with the Archbishop of Spalatro, and his
correspondency with the French Huguenots. are enough to make me suspicious of
him. If you tell me, he was a Popish Friar, I must mind you, that he was a
Venetian Papist, that he lived in a time of great dissentions betwixt the State
of Venice and the Pope, and that he was even then engaged in writing against
the Pope's proceedings. It Is hard to say how much he was a friend to the Church,
But any man may see how bitter an enemy he was to the Court of Rome. He liked
well enough to be meddling with State Affairs, and the Senators consulted him
as an Oracle: which unusual honor was enough to make him proud and factious;
and, whether it did or not, He only knows who sees men's hearts. However all
this put together is enough to make me suspect him. Pallavicini, you will say,
being of the Court-party deserves to be suspected too. But, if that be all you
have to say against him, we will not quarrel about preliminaries, nor loose
time in disputing what grains of allowance are due to each of them. Upon
condition you will believe your friend Soave when he speaks well of the Council, I
am content to believe Pallavicini whenever he speaks ill of it.

You remember how easily, when I saw you last, you agreed with me, that if the
Council of Trent were as General, as free, and as legal in all it is
circumstances, as the first four Councils were, you must needs own your self
obliged in conscience, to submit to it, and to leave of Protesting against it.
'Twas fair and reasonable, and what I might expect from a Son of the Church of
England: I desired no more in hand, but was willing to give credit for the rest.

I might have told you that if the Council had been only Patriarchal; it would
have bound the English Reformers to the obedience of non-contradiction. Three
British Bishops sat in the I. Council of Arles: and S. Athanasius in his 2.
Apol. says that they were present in the Council of Sardice, which ratified the
Pope's power in decision of Appeals: From whence you may conclude, that the
British Clergy were subject to the canons of Arles and Sardice, and
consequently to the Western Patriarch. We find them also afterward in the
Council of Constance, where voting by Nations the English were one of the four
in condemning these doctrines of Huss* and Wickliff, that The Pope is not the
immediate Vicar of Christ, and that The chief Bishop of the Roman Church has no
Primacy over other particular Churches. I might have added the testimony of
your own Dr. Field, who in his book of the Church freely confesses, that The
Decrees of Popes made with the consent and joint concurrence of the other
Western Bishops, do bind the Western Provinces that are subject to him as
Patriarch of the West. But this is not the case: the Council of Trent is truly
General; and, if the Reformers cannot manifestly prove the contrary, they
remain without excuse. The Objections which you sent me in your Letter, I have
considerd at leisure, and according to promise, have sent you here my Answers:
but, before I set them down, I must beg your pardon if I try your patience with
some few remarks which follow. Chapter Gov. P. IV.

1. A General Council requires, either the presence of all the Catholic
Patriarchs, or their Legates, with the Bishops of so many Provinces as can well
convene, or their Delegates; or else (in their necessary absence) it requires
that the Acts and Decrees be approved, either by all, or by the major part of
the absent Prelates.

2. As for such a General Council as comprehends all the Bishops of the
Catholic Universe, there never was yet any. We find always a greater or lesser
number, according to diverse circumstances; propinquity of place, peace of
Princes, numerosity of Sects, etc. The first four Councils, of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, by reason of the Oriental Heresies,
were held in the East, and consisted principally of Oriental Bishops. In the I.
were present only the Pope's two Legates, and three Western Bishops. The II.
had no Western Bishop at all, but only was afterward confirmed by the Pope and
his Council. The III. had only three Delegates, sent by the Pope and his
Occidental Council. They transacted most of their business, and condemned
Nestorius, without the presence of the Antiochian Patriarch. The IV. had only
four Legates sent by the Bishop of Rome, two African Bishops, and one Sicilian.
They acted without Dioscorus the Alexandrian Patriarch, They deposed him for
favoring Heretics, and for his contumacy against the Sea of Rome.

3. If all Catholic Prelates, or the much greater part, by personally present
in the Council, there is no need of farther acceptance to confirm it. But, this
wanting, it is supplied by the after-acceptation of such persons as are capable
of a vote, and so many as, if they had been present, would have made it the
much greater part of Catholic Prelates, that is, of such as were not before
shut of the Church by Heresy or Schism. The II. and V. General Councils
became such by the confirmation and after-acceptation of Damasus and Vigilius
with their Western Bishops: and it is a fundamental principle of Government not
simply Monarchical, that No Laws can be promulgated, no Unity preserved, if of
their Governors the lesser part be not regulated by the greater.

4. The Council remains General, notwithstanding the absence of some
considerable Churches: 1. if they cannot conveniently come: 2. if they refuse
without just hindrance: 3. if they were formerly cut of by Heresy or Schism.
The Catholic Church is narrower than Christianity and a Council may be
General, though the Church were reduced to one Patriarchate.

5. All that were capable of a voice in any General Council, were summoned to
Trent. The Eastern Bishops, in the Turks Dominions could not conveniently come,
there being war betwixt Christians and Turks. The Division, which occasioned
the Assembly, arose only in the West, and therefore there was less need of
their presence. Moreover six Greek Bishops sat in the Council: And, ten years
after, the Wittenberg Divines sent the Augustan Confession to Hieremy Patriarch
of Constantinople, whose Answer to them differs very little from the Decrees of
Trent. It Is true; Cyril Lucar 1629.
published a Calvinistical Confession: But his immediate Successor Cyril of
Iberia assembled at Constantinople a Synod of 23. Bishops, besides the
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Jerusalem; And again, his Successor Parthenius
assembled another of 25. Bishops, and amongst them the Metropolitan of Moscovy:
Both these Synods anathematized Lucar with his Adherents; and also justified
these Tenets of the Council, the Corporal Presence of Christ's Body and Blood
with the Symboles; Invocation of Saints; Veneration of sacred Images; Prayer
and Alms for the Faithful deceased with repentance, as betterable in their
present condition by them; Free will; seven Sacraments; Church Infallibility,
etc. See Leo Allatius, De perpetuo Consensu etc. l. 3. See Monsieur Arnauld's
Answer to Claude l. 4 ch 7.

6. The absence of the Protestant Clergy from the Council did not hinder it is
being General. 1. They who are not Bishops, have no right to sit there. 2. When
Bishops contumaciously absent themselves for fear of Censure, their presence is
not requisite; otherwise farewell the Power of all General Councils. 3. There
is no place due to them whose Doctrines have been anathematized in former
General Councils. Veneration of Images was declared lawful in the II. of Nice.
Our Canon of Scripture, Purgatory; Seven Sacraments, and Pope's Supremacy, were
defined in the Council of Florence: Auricular Confession and
Transubstantiation, in that of Lateran.

7. Although in the first Sessions under Paul III. there were only about 48.
Bishops, 3. Benedictine Abbots, 5. Generals of Religious Orders, with about 40.
able Divines by way of Counselors: This paucity under Paul or Julius was amply
recompensed by a greater number of Prelates under Pius IV who all unanimously
received and ratified the former Acts of the Council. If you count them, you will
find in the Catalogue, 270. to which if you add the learned Divines who
assisted, the whole number amounts to about 450. persons.

8. A General Council requires, that the Pope either preside in it; or approve
the Acts of it, as in the case of the II. and V. General Council. In the IV.
VI. VII. and VIII. the Protestants allow that he presided. To the III. he
deputed S. Cyril. To the I. he sent his Legates. Osius, you will say, subscribed
before them. 1. It Is thought he presided in the Pope's name with them 2. If not,
it was a pure indulgence of honor to him: The Legates subscribed before all
the Patriarchs. 3. The subscriptions were manifestly irregular, because the
Bishop of Antioch, who was the III. Patriarch, suscribed after the Bishops of
Egypt, and also those of Palestine, which were subject to him. I have now done
with my remarks, and shall make what have I can with your objections, setting
them down in the same order you sent them.

I. The Eastern Bishops were absent: and the Protestants would not go to the
Council. A. 1. There were six Greek Bishops present: Afterward three Eastern
Patriarchs, and two Assemblies of their Prelates approved the chief points. The
Protestants had no right to a decisive voice: Their opinions had been censured
in former Councils, and were like to be condemned again in this: If, for these
reasons, they absented; 'twas their own fault: The Council was never the worse
for it. 2. Read the Bulls of Convocation: you will find that all and every one
who, either by law, by custom, or by privilege, have any right to be present,
or to deliver their opinion, in General Councils, were summoned to appear in
Trent. 3. Soave himself relates how there was a deliberation of sending, and
granting safe conduct, to the Greek Churches under the Turk; p. 451.
but it was presently seen, says he, that these poor men afflicted in
servitude, could not without danger, and assistance of money, think of
Councils. He says also, that p. 408.
although the Pope was put in mind, that to send Nuncio's into England and to
Princes elsewhere, who do profess open Separation from the Sea of Rome, would
be a disreputation to him; yet he answered that he would humble himself to
Heresy, in regard that whatsoever was done to gain souls to Christ, did become
that See.

II. In some of the first Sessions there were not above fifty Bishops. A. The
difficulties and disturbances of the Times bear all that blame. All was fully
recompensed in the end, by a numerous and unanimous ratification of all, and by
the acceptance of the absent Prelates afterward. Soave says, that, under Pius
IV. p. 504.
the Actions of this Council were in greater expectation than in former times,
in regard the number of the Prelates were assembled four times as many as
before. He says, p. 757.
All the Decrees made in this Council, under Paul and Julius, as well of Faith
as Reformation, were recited: And the Secretary going into the midst did
interrogate, whether the Fathers were pleased that Confirmation should be
demanded of Pope Pius IV. of all things decreed under Paul, Julius, and his
Holiness; and they answered, not one by one, but all together, Placet.
Pallavicini says the same; only he proves that l. 24. c. 8.
the votes were given, as usually, one by one.

III. Many of the Bishops were only Titular: And many made, during the Council,
that the Papalins might over-vote the Ultramontans. A. As to the first part;
Soave takes notice only of two Titular Bishops, the Archbishop of Armagh in
Ireland, and Upsal in Sweden; both driven from their Sees by persecution of
Protestants, both true Bishops by their Ordination, and both sent by the Pope
in the beginning of the Council. The second part, being barely asserted, looks
like a groundless calumny, and may justly be supposed such, till some proof
appear.

IV. The Popes, of those times, and major part of the Prelates, would never
allow this Title, of the Council, Representing the Universal Church: Therefore
they themselves did not look upon it as a General Council. A. Here I must beg
your pardon, if I think you very much mistaken in your inference. This Title
was usurped by the Councils of Constance and Basil; but never assumed by any
Council, which was totally approved. You know very well, that Catholic Divines
are divided upon the point; whether the Pope be superior to a General Council;
or whether a General Council, without him, be so complete a Representative of
the Universal Church, as to be superior to the Pope? They who maintained the
superiority of a General Council, were zealous for this Title; and the others
constantly opposed it: But both parties always agreed, that the Council of
Trent was as truly General, as the first four Councils were, or any have been
since.

V. It was never received by the Protestants: Nor by the French Catholics. A.
1. The Council of Nice was never received by the Arians. 2. It was universally
received by both Ecclesiastical and Civil State of France, in point of Doctrine
3. The Decrees of Reformation were approved by all the Catholic Clergy of that
Kingdom. In the Assembly at Blois, in the year, 1576. The Archbishop of Lions
in the name of all the Ecclesiastical State of France begged the assistance of
the King's Authority to put this Reformation in execution. In the Assembly of
Melun, 1579. the Bishop of Bazas, in their name, made the same request to the
King, chiefly because they are tied and bound to all Laws, so made by the
Catholic Church, upon pain of being reputed Schismatical, and of incurring the
curse of Eternal Damnation. At Fontainebleau, in the year, 1582. The Archbishop
of Bourges tells the King, The stain and reproach of Schism rests upon your
Kingdom amongst other Countries. And this is the cause, why the Clergy does now
again most humbly desire, etc. In the General Assembly of the States at Paris,
in the year, 1614. Cardinal Perron, and Cardinal Richelieu, then Bishop of
Luson, prosecuted in vain the same request. Thus you see the Catholic Clergy
of France unanimously receiving and approving the Council of Trent in matter of
Discipline. The Civil State, as it has no share in the Votes of the Council, so
their non-approbation cannot diminish the Authority of it. You may guess at the
reasons of excepting against it, by what the Queen Regent, Catherine de
Medicis, was pleased to tell the Pope's Nuncio; that the Council could not be
admitted, because by the Council's Decrees the King could not gratify such
Ministers of State, as had done him singular service, with the means of
Religious Houses, and of Church-Benefices.

VI. Leo X. before the Convocation of the Council, had declared that Luther and
his Adherents were Heretics: Being therefore already condemned, why should
they come to Council? A. 1. Their Errors had been condemned in former General
Councils: and, since it really was so, Why might not the Pope say so? 2.
Because the Pope had condemned them therefore they See Soave p. 11.
appealed to a General Council: and, since they had appealed to it, Why should
they not go to it?

VII. It was not a legal Council. A. That is to say, it was not such a one as
they had a mind to. Luther, being questioned, first made friends to be tried in
Germany. As soon as he was there condemned by Cajetan, he appealed to the Pope.
Immediately after, foreseeing his condemnation there, he intercepted this
appeal with ibid. p. 8.
another, from the Pope to a General Council; having ground to imagine, He
would never call one, who was supposed, to fear that it would severely reform
him and his Court. As soon as he saw that, in good earnest, a Bull was
published, in the year, 1537. to call a Council at Vicenza; he began presently,
to vilify Councils, and put out a book De Conciliis, to prove that they always
did more harm than good; not sparing so much as the first Councils of Nice, or
of the Apostles Then he appealed from Council to Scripture, where He that makes
himself supreme Judge of the Sense, may easily maintain what absurdity he
pleases. Soave tells us, he was p. 17.
used to say that he was so well assured of his Doctrine, that, it being
Divine, he would not submit it so much as to the judgment of Angels; yea, that
with it he was to judge all, both men and Angels. After this, his Followers
thought it more plausible not to shuffle so visibly, but to admit a Council,
and clog it with such conditions as would quite disarm it, and make it useless.
You may read them in Soave, as follows.

p. 600.
1. That it should be celebrated in Germany; 2. That it should not be intimated
by the Pope; 3. That He should not preside, but be part of the Council, subject
to the determinations of it; 4. That the Bishops and other Prelates should be
freed from their Oath given to the Pope; 5. That the Holy Scripture might be
Judge in Council, and all Humane Authority excluded; 6. That the Divines of the
States of the Augustan Confession, sent to the Council, might not only have a
consulting, but a deciding voice; 7. That the Decisions in Council should not
be made, as in Secular matters, by plurality of voices; but the more sound
opinions preferred, that is, those which were regulated by the word of God. You
will not deny, but that in England we have had some Kings whose title to the
Crown has been unquestionable, and that some free and legal Parliaments have
been assembled during their reign. Give me leave to put the case, that two or
three Counties had revolted, protesting against all that would be done in such
a Parliament, and refusing to send any Deputies to it, but upon these
conditions: 1. that it be assembled in their Territory; 2. that it be not
called by the King; 3. that his Majesty may be subject to it; 4. that all the
members of it be freed from their Oath of Allegiance; 5. that all Humane
Authority of former Parliaments may be excluded; 6. that they may depute as
many as they please with a decisive voice; 7. that (for fear of being
over-voted) the Decisions be not made, as usually, by plurality of voices, but
that the more sound opinions, (that is, their own) may be preferred. What would
you think of these Articles? Would you conclude, the Parliament was illegal, if
it did not submit to their demands? I do not pretend here, to make an exact
parallel betwixt the Monarchy of the Church and that of England: yet however
the parity is not so unequal, but that it may help to open your eyes.

VIII. The Parties concerned were Judges in their own case. A. No more than in
the I. of Nice. The world was then divided into Catholics and Arians, as now
into Catholics and Protestants: And, as the Catholics had then a right to
judge the one, so now they had the very same right to judge the other. If any
part separate from the whole, it does not therefore acquire a right of saying,
that the Whole, from which they divide themselves, is now a Party, and
therefore must not judge them. Pope Leo and Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria
counteraccus'd one another of Heresy; and yet the Pope legally presided in the
IV. General Council which condemned Dioscorus, Neither was it ever thought a
sufficient excuse for Dioscorus to say, the Pope was a Party and Judge in his
own case.

Mr. Chilling worth confesses, that, in controversies of Religion, it is in a
manner impossible to avoid but the Judge must be a Party. For this must be the
first controversy, whether he be a Judge or no; and in that he must be a Party.
Such is the Pope's Case, in the Definition of his Supremacy. The same necessity
is found in supreme Civil power. Inferior Courts are liable to Appeals: But,
if some of the King's subjects rebel against him, and oppose his prerogatives
or laws; it is evidently necessary that the King must judge his own case, or the
Offense must not be judged at all. What must the King do? Substitute an equal
number of Royalists and Rebels? This can never be an effectual provision for
the Common Peace of Government. Or must he remit the arbitration to a
neighboring State? 1. This state is always interess'd; and therefore partial.
2. This does not leave, within the compass of any Kingdom upon earth,
sufficient power to procure the common good. 3. Were it allowed in Civil Power,
it cannot be applied to our present case, unless Controversies in Religion
could be decided out of the Church, by men of no Religion at all.

In the National Synod of Dort, in the year, 1618. the Low Country Remonstrants
seeing themselves like to be over-voted by the Protestants, made the same
excuses; saying, that the major part of the Synod was declared of a contrary
party; that they were already excommunicated by them; and, therefore, they
ought not to be Judges. To this, the Synod replied: that, if this exception
were admitted, it would subvert the whole frame of Ecclesiastical Government:
that Pastors would be discouraged from their duty of opposing the first
beginnings of Heresy, if therefore they must forfeit their right of giving
suffrages, or being Judges, afterward: that the Arians and other Heretics
might ever have pleaded the same exception against the Orthodox Fathers: that
Divines neither are, nor ought to be, indifferent in matters of Religion; so
that, if only Neuters may be judges, there will be none left in the Church, and
we must go abroad (no body knows where) to look for 'em. This was the substance
of their Answer; which I here set down in the Latin, to satisfy your
curiosity. Nunquam praxim hanc Ecclesiarum fuisse, ut Pastores, quoties
exorientibus erroribus ex officio se opponerent, propterea jure suffragiorum,
aut de illis ipsis erroribus judicandipotestate, exciderent, Ita enim omnem
everti judiciorum Ecclesiasticorum ordinem; efficique ne Pastores officio suo
fideliter fungi queant.... Eos qui in doctrina aut moribus scandalorum autores
sunt, semper Censores suoge, Consistoria, Classes, Synodos, ceu partem
adversam, rejicere.... ad eum modum Arianis, aliisque olim hereticis, adversus
Orthodoxos Pastores semper licuisset excipere. The English Divines delivered
their opinion in these terms: 1. Huic sententiae refragatur perpetua praxis
omnium Ecclesiarum. Nam in Synodis Oecumenicis, Nicaeno, etc. ii. qui
antiquitus receptam doctrinam oppugnarunt, ab illis, qui eandem sibi traditam
admiserunt and approbarunt, examinati, judicati, damnati sunt. 2. Ipsius rei
necessitas huc cogit. Theologi enim, in negotio religionis, neque esse solent
tanquam abrasae tabulae, neque esse debent. Si igitur soli neutrales possent
esse judices, extra Ecclesiam in qua lites enatae sunt, quaerendi essent. 3.
Ipsa aequitas suadere videtur. Nam quae ratio reddi potest, ut suffragiorum
jure priventur omnes illi Pastores, qui ex officio receptam Ecclesia Doctrinam
propugnantes secus docentibus adversati sunt. Si hoc obtinuerit, nova dogmata
spargentibus nemo obsisteret, ne ipso facto jus omne postmodum de illis
controversiis judicandi amitteret. Pray, give me leave now to ask, Why might
not the Parties be Judges in the Council of Trent, as well as in the Synod of
Dort? If, in one case, the Remonstrants were obliged to submit to the
Protestants. Why were not the Protestants obliged to submit to the Catholics
in the other? The Synod was forced to pretend some disparity; and, for want of
a better, alleged this; that the Protestants and Remonstrants were under the
same Magistracy. And, what if if they were? We are not now talking of Civil
Assemblies, but of Ecclesiastical. Dos the division of Civil Power destroy the
Unity of the Catholic Church, which we believe in our Creed? Or, if there be
any reason why (when any Schism arises) the Authority of the Whole is devolved
to the major part, does not the same Reason conclude as evidently in favor of
a General, as of a National, Council?

IX. To make it better appear, which was the major part, the Protestants ought
to have had a decisive voice in Council. A. 1. Binius says, that the Council
premitted this caution; that, if the Protestants were allowed, for once, to
give a Placet, it should be no prejudice to the right and honor of the present
and future Councils: which looks as if the Council were not fully resolved to
deny this to them, if much insisted upon. 2. They, who openly maintain such
doctrines as have been formerly condemned in General Councils, are cut of from
the Catholic Church; they are not Members of it; and therefore can have no
right to a decisive voice. 3. If it had been permitted, they were still certain
to be over-voted by 270. Bishops; to whom if you add the Catholic Divines, by
the same rule as the Protestants, there remained no ground for any hopes. This
the Protestants saw well enough, and therefore were willing to wave all
Ecclesiastical Judges. Soave tells you, how they shuffled in this point. One
time, they proposed a Decision by Laics indifferently chosen, in an equal
number, on both sides. Another time, they appealed to p. 73.
a godly and free Council, which is not the Tribunal of Pope and Priests only,
but of all the Orders of the Church, not excluding the Seculars. Here indeed
the Clergy were admitted to this godly and free Council; but it was only, by
way of spectators, to see what the Laity would please to do there* for ibid.
the Pope making himself a party to the cause, it was just that the manner and
form of the proceeding, should be determined by the Princes. This was the ib.
Answer of 15. Princes, and 30, Cities, assembled in Smalcalda, 1535. Again,
about two years after, when the p. 76.
Emperor sent his Vice. Chancellor to exhort them to receive the Council, they
answered, that they had always demanded a free and Christian Council, that every
man may freely speak, Turks and Infidels being excluded. Here you see, that
every man, who called himself a Christian, (no matter how otherwise qualified)
was to have a free Vote in Council: only Turks and Infidels were to be
excluded. Judge you, what a free and godly Council this was like to be. Mean
time, all this was only a copy of their countenance* They clearly foresaw that
the much greater part, of those to whom God has committed the care of his
Church, would certainly condemn their errors: They were already self-condemned,
as to Authority; And therefore they never intended to appear in any legal
Council, but hated the very thought of it: Although the Name of a Council was
very plausible, and fit to be made use of, for a time, to amuse the world with
(...) an opinion of the Reformers, that they were not proud and obstinate; but
always willing to hear reason, and desirous to be better informed.

The Duke of Prussia was more sincere, when Canobius came to invite him; He p.
413.
answered plainly, without any mincing or disguising of the matter, that he was
of the Augustan Confession, and therefore could not consent to a Popish
Council. Yet, after all, to do the Protestants justice, I must needs confess
that, as soon as they were no longer in fear of the Emperor, they began to
unmask and speak as plainly as the Duke did. Read Soave's Annals, 1562. he says
that, p. 599.
so soon as the Diet was assembled in Francfort, the Prince of Conde sent to
treat an union of the Huguenots with those of the Confession of Ausburg; and,
in particular, to make a joint demand, for a free and new Council, in which the
resolutions of Trent might be examined, the French men of the old Catholic
Religion giving hope also that they would agree unto it... But the Dutch
Protestants were most averse from a Council, so long as Germany might be in
peace without it. And therefore a book was printed in Francfort, full of
reasons why they neither would, nor could, come to Trent, with protestation of
the nullity of all that was, or would be, done in that place.

One thing, which makes me less wonder they could never agree to any Council of
ours, is this, that I find in Soave, they could not agree in a Council of their
own. p. 411.
In Germany, says he, the Princes of the Augustan Confession, assembled in
Neumburg, being ashamed that their Religion should be esteemed a Confusion for
the variety of Doctrines amongst them, did propose that they might first agree
in one, and then resolve whether they ought to refuse or accept the Synod...
They said, the Augustan Confession was to be the ground of their Dottrine; but,
there being diverse copies of that Confession, which differed, in regard of
diverse additions made in diverse of them, some approving one and some another,
Many thought they ought to take that only which was presented to Charles in the
year, 1530. Whereunto those of the Palatinate did not consent, unless it were
declared, in a Proheme made unto it, that the other Edition did agree with it.
The Duke of Saxony answered, that they could not stop the eyes and ears of the
world, that they should not see and hear their differences; and that if they
would make show of union, where they were at variance, they should be convinced
of vanity and lying: And, after many contentions, they remained without
agreement in that point. How should the Catholics please them, if they knew
not how to please themselves?

X. The burning of John Huss was a sufficient excuse for the Protestants, not
to rely upon any Safe conduct, A. I must beg your pardon, if I believe no such
matter. It was no excuse at all. His Safe conduct was of the ordinary form;
Theirs was extraordinary: And, there fore the Case was quite different.

It Is certain that the Ordinary Safe-conducts secure a man only from unjust
violence, but not from the just execution of a legal sentence, if he be found
guilty. When a person, suspected of a crime, is cited to appear, and to answer
for himself, the Ordinary Safe Conduct secures him from all abuses or affronts
which might otherwise be offered to him, either going, staying, or returning:
but however, if, after a fair Trial, he be legally condemned: it will never
save him from suffering according to Law. If this were all the Security that
Huss relied upon, we may justly admire his confidence, in going so boldly to
the Council; but cannot reasonably wonder, either at his imprisonment, or
execution.

That this was all the Security given him, appears by the testimony of one of
his own Disciples, who wrote his Acts which are published in the beginning of
his Works, and says he was an eyewitness of what passed. He relates the words
of the Emperor Sigismond telling Huss to his face, at Constance; Acta Iohannis
Huss. p. 15.
Although, says he, Some say that, by your friends and patrons, you received
our Letters of Public Faith, fifteen days after your imprisonment; yet we can
prove, by the testimony of many Princes and men of chief note, that, before you
lest Prague, you received our Letters by Wenceslaus of Duha. and John of Chlum,
to whose trusty care we recommended you, THAT NO INJURY MIGHT BE DONE TO YOU,
but that you might speak freely, and answer for your self, before the whole
Council, concerning your faith and doctrine. And this, you see, the most
Reverend Lords, Cardinals and Bishops, have so performed, that I have reason to
give them many thanks... Now therefore we advise you, not to defend any thing
obstinately, but to submit your self, with what obedience you ought, to the
Authority of the Holy Council. If you do this, we will endeavor, that, for our
sakes, you may be favorably dismissed by the Council. If not... We truly will
never patronize your obstinacy and your errors.

In this discourse of the Emperor I observe, 1. That the Letters of Public
Faith were given to Huss, only that no injury might be done to him: And
therefore conclude, that, if contrary to the common law of Safe-conducts he
endeavored to make his escape, his imprisonment was just, and no injury done.
See Bremus a Protestant Lawyer, Quaest. ult. de Securitate, who cites a great
number of others, agreeing with him this opinion* that Public Faith is ended
or forfeited, if a man, having received Public Faith, committs a new crime, be
cause, for this, he may be punished. 2. That the friends of Huss made no great
scruple of telling stories in favor of him, and of raising a false report that
the Letters were given him the fifteenth day after his confinement; thinking,
perhaps, that by this rumor the Emperor would be obliged in honor, to rescue
him out of prison: Which deceitful dealing makes me less wonder, either that
his Disciples make no mention of his endeavoring to escape, or that the Nobles
of Bohemia, take no notice of it in their Letters of complaint to the Emperor;
and makes me more apt to believe the Relation of it, set down by Ulricus
Reichental, an inhabitant of Constance, an eye witness of what happened, and an
accurate Historian of the Council, whom if you understand not in the original
Teutonick, you may read this part translated into Latin by Cochlaeus, lib. 11.
Hist. Hussitarum, page 73.

Before Huss was guilty of this crime, he had been kindly received and
favorably treated at Constance, as well as all the way thither. This he
confesses himself, in his Letters to his friends. Epist. 5.
We came, says he, to Constance, after the feast of All Saints, passing through
the Cities without any ill usage, And we lodge in a street which is nigh the
Pope's Palace. Again; Ep. 6.
All my affairs are in a good posture, says he; Scitote quod been sto per
omnia. And, in his Letter above cited, speaking of Latzembock and Lepka to
whose care the Emperor had recommended him, he says, Ep. 5.
They have been with the Pope, and have spoken to him concerning me; Who
answered, that he will do nothing by violence. Besides, his Chamber-fellow
Plebanus de Jannowitz wrote a Letter dated from Constance, the Saturday before
S. Martin's feast; in which he tells, how Ep. 4. Hussiticarum.
the Bishop of Constance with his Official, came to their Lodging, letting them
know that the Pope suspended the interdict and the sentences of excommunication
against Master John; desiring him nevertheless, that, to avoid scandal and
discourse of the People, he would absent himself from the solemn services of
the Mass; otherwise, that he might freely go about to see the Town, the
Churches, or any other places, as he pleased.. We have, says he, full liberty
in Constance.

Afterward, as Ulricus relates it, the people flocked together, to hear Huss
say Mass in his Lodging; which being a scandalous thing, (he having been
excommunicated for Heresy, and not having yet justified himself) the Bishop of
Constance, as Ordinary of the place, prohibited his doing so: But, Huss still
persisting to celebrate, and the Bishop forbidding the people to be present, he
began to look upon it as an evil omen of his future condemnation, and resolved
to contrive his escape. Upon the third Sunday in Lent, when Huss did not appear
at dinner, Latzembock went immediately to the Governor of the City, and
complained of the flight of John Huss. The gates being shut, and search made,
Huss was found hid in a Cart of the same Latzembock, where he lay covered with
hay and straw, which had been ordered to be transported out of town, that
afternoon. Latzembock made him be set on horse back, and brought him to the
Pope's Palace. He pleaded, that, having Safe Conduct, he ought not to be
impriprison'd. But this Noble Bohemian (who knew very well what Safe Conduct he
had, he being committed to his care, by Signismond) answered, It Is so Decreed,
that either you must justify your Cause, that it is not heretical; or die,
unless you renounce it. I do not say, this was not severe; The Imperial Laws
are severe enough: but yet, since it was according to the Common Law of
Ordinary Safe-conducts, it cannot be truly called an Injury, And, by the same
rule, that the Emperor was not obliged, according to his Letters, to patronize
his obstinacy and his errors, neither was he obliged to protect him from the
course of Common Law in this occasion.

Nevertheless I am apt to believe, that the Emperor did really design to
procure (as much as he could, by fair means) more favor for him than the
rigor of the Law allowed. Among other reasons which incline me to this
opinion, these two may suffice at present: 1. that John Chlum Inter Epist.
Hussiticas. number. 57.
complained, his Master's Safe Conduct was violated: 2. that the Emperor
himself in his Answer to the Nobles of Bohemia, writes, He Cochlaus l. 4, Hist.
Hussitarum. p. 155.
often solicited for him; often, in a passion, went out of the Council; yea
rather, upon his account, departed from Constance; till they said, If You will
not give Justice leave to take its course in Council, what have We to do here?
Whereupon says he, I concluded, it was not in my power to do any thing more, in
this matter. Neither was it lawful for me to speak any more, of this Business;
because, by so doing, the Council would have been dissolved. Thus He behaved
himself; And, whether it were Vanity, or Generosity, or Policy, that moved him,
is not my business to enquire; It Is enough for your satisfaction and mine, that,
by his Letters of Public Faith, He was not obliged, either in Conscience, or
in Honor, to rescue him out of the hands of Justice, but only to protect him
from Unjust Violence.

It Is incredible, you will say, that Huss should be such a fool as to go to
Constance upon these terms. Neither can I deny but that it must be some degree
of folly for any man to be so confident of his own abilities as to cope with a
whole Council, and to defy all his Opposers to convince him of his errors. But
why might not the Master be as bold as the Scholar? I mean Jerome of Prague who
followed him soon after, to Constance, upon the same terms, with a Safe conduct
from the Council. Sess. 6.
Citamus... quatenus compareas... recepturus, ac facturus, in omnibus Justitiae
complementum, ad quod A VIOLENTIA, JUSTITIA SEMPER SALVA, omnem
Salvum-conductum nostrum, quantum in nobis est, and Fides exigit Orthodoxa,
praesentium tenore offerimus. Observe these words, a violentia; The
Safe Conduct was only to secure him from unjust violence. Observe also the
following clause, Justitia semper salva; He was not to expect any protection
against Justice. If Jerome desired no more than this from the Council, Why
might not Huss be content with as much from the Emperor?

That this was the Ordinary form of all Safe conducts, granted according to
Common Law, appears evidently by the general consent of Lawyers; among which,
for your better satisfaction, I shall cite only such as were Protestants.
Bremus, q. 7. de Securitate, says, this is the common Imperial form of
Safeconducts; Damus tibi Fidem Publicam, causam dicendi in Judicio, CONTRA VIM,
NON CONTRA JURIS EXECUTIONEM. Mynsingerus, Observe. 82, upon the Judgment of the
Imperial Chamber, says, Quando datur alicui Securitas, vel Salvus-conductus,
Tunc intelligitur solum de VIOLENTIA, quae de facto CONTRA JUS infertur. Et
ideo, meo tempore, cuidam, qui habebat Salvum-conductum, capto propter
delictum, vel maleficium, and supcanti in Camera pro Mandato de relaxando...
petiti Processus a Dominis Assessoribus sunt denegati. Again, Everardus
Specklan, another Lawyer, Centuria 1. q. 1,. 18. cites a great many Authors,
All agreeing that such is the usual form. And, in the Jus Camerale, Tit. 276.
(See the Edition of Goldastus) this Law of Maximilianus Augustus is read;
Subditos Judicio Rotwitensi avocaturi, Fidem actori Publicam. CONTRA VIM, NON
CONTRA JUS, dare tenentor. Any man, that understands Latin, sees plainly by
these quotations that Common Law, in such Cases, always grants Security from
Injury, but not from Justice.

That Huss had no Safe Conduct from the Pope, he expressly acknowledges,
Epist. 6. I came, says he, to Constance, without Safe Conduct from the Pope.
That he had none from the Council, appears not only by his silence, but by
Soave's History, pages, 298. and 307. which I shall cite in the following
Objection. That the Safe Conduct, which he had from the Emperor, was never
intended to hinder the Council's proceeding against him, according to the
Canons, is manifest, not only by what has been already said, but by the
Emperor's Letters of Public Faith, dated from Spire, October. 18. 1414. extant
in Goldastus his Appendix Documentorum ad Commentarios de Regni Bohemiae
Juribus and Privilegiis. p. 81. We heartily recommend, to all and every one of
you, the honorable Master John Huss Bachelor of Divinity, and Master of Arts,
the Bearer of These, whom We have taken into Our protection and Safeguard of
the Holy Empire, passing from the Kingdom of Bohemia to the General Council
which is shortly to be held in the City of Constance: Desiring you to receive
him kindly, and treat him favorably whenever he shall come unto you, and
that you will and ought to show your readiness, in promoting what belongs to
his speed and safety, either by Land or Water, permitting also, him, his
servants, his horses, and all things else beionging to him, freely, and without
any hindrance, to pass, to stop, to stay, and to return, by any passages,
ports, bridges, lands, dominions, jurisdictions, cities, towns, castles,
villages, and whatsoever places of yours, without any expense of tribute, toll,
or any other payment; And, that you will, and ought, for the honor and respect
of our Majesty, to provide Secure and Safe conduct for him and his, when
occasion shall 'require.

All this the Emperor commanded, as much as lay in Him, And, in all this, his
subjects obeyed, as much as lay in them. He had no Authority over the Council,
in matters of Religion: Nor do I find the least syllable of any promise, made
by the Emperor to him, that the Council should not proceed against him,
according to Law. He came upon his good behavior, and in his own defense;
confiding in his own prudence and abilities, as well as in the Emperor's
Letters; in which there is no sign of these two promises, 1. that he should not
be imprisoned, if by any misdemeanour he deserved it; 2. that he should nor be
executed, if legally condemned.

Both these promises were plainly included in the Extraordinary Safe Conduct
which the Tridentine Council granted to the Protestants: And therefore, as I
told you in the beginning, The Case was quite different. Read Soave, and if you
believe him, you will begin to be ashamed of your objection. p. 348, Conc. Trid
Sess. 15. and 18.
The Synod does make Faith to all Priests, Princes, and Persons of what
condition soever...Safe conduct, to come, remain, PROPOSE. and speak IN THE
SYNOD, to HANDLE and EXAMINE WHAT THEY THINK FIT. give Articles, and confirm
them, ANSWER the OBJECTIONS of the Council, and DISPUTE with those, whom it
does elect, declaring that the CONTROVERSIES in this Council shall be handled
according to the HOLY SCRIPTURE, Traditions of the APOSTLES, approved COUNCILS,
Consent of the CATHOLIC CHURCH, and Authority of the Holy FATHERS; adding,
that they SHALL NOT BE PUNISHED upon PRETENSE OF RELIGION, or OFFENSES
COMMITTED, or which WILL BE COMMITTED...and shall RETURN, when it shall seem
good unto them, WITHOUT LET, with SAFETY OF THEIR ROBE, HONOR, and PERSONS,
but with the knowledge of the Deputies of the Synod, that provision may be made
for their Security: granting that, in this Safe-coduct, ALL those CLAUSES be
held to be included, which are NECESSARY FOR REAL and FULL ASSURANCE: Adding,
that if any of the Protestants, either in coming, or in Trent, or in returning,
SHALL COMMIT ANY ENORMITY, which shall NULLIFY THE BENEFIT OF THIS PUBLIC
FAITH, he shall be PUNISHED BY THEIR OWN Protestant JUDGES, so that the Synod
may be satisfied: and, on the other side, if any Catholic in coming hither,
remaining here, or returning, SHALL COMMIT ANY THING which may VIOLATE THIS
SAFE CONDUCT, he shall be punished by the Synod, WITH APPROBATION OF THE GERMAN
Protestant 's THEMSELVES, who shall be present in Trent.... which things it
promises faithfully, in the name of all faithful Christians, Ecclesiastical
and Secular. If Huss and Jerome had come to Constance with such a Safeconduct,
they had neither been imprisoned, nor executed. With such a one as this, the
Bohemians went afterward to Basil, were civilly used, and returned quietly
home. With this the Wittenberg Protestants went to Trent, remained quiet there,
and returned without receiving any affront. That no more of the Protestants
followed their example, in going thither, was their own fault: They knew very
well, they might have gone, remained, and returned, securely, if they pleased.
Confider all this, at leisure; and then, tell me (if you can) what is become of
your Excuse.

XI. The Councils of Constance and Sienna had declared it lawful to break the
faith of any Safe Conduct whatsoever. A. Read the Decrees; you will plainly see
the contrary. The Council of Constance dos not say, it is lawful for any,
whosoever they are, to violate the faith of their promises; but only declares,
that no Secular Power can legally hinder the exercise of Ecclesiustical
Jurisdiction, because it is, not only independent of it, but manifestly
superior to it, in matters of Religion. It Is a common Maxim of the Law; Superior
legibus aut pactis Inferioris non ligatur. And, in all appearance, the design
of the Council was to satisfy the World, that, although the Emperor had
pretended to grant an Extraordinary Safe Conduct, such as exempts a man from
Justice as well as Violence, it could nor have hindered the supreme Power of
Pope and Council from proceeding according to the Canons, in Causes which are
purely of Religion.

This was the reason why the Protestants would not rely upon the Emperor's
Safe Conduct; Nor can I blame them for it. See Soave, p. 298. Duke Maurice
wrote to the Emperor, that his Safe Conduct was not sufficient. For, in the
Council of Constance, it was determined, that THEY MIGHT PROCEED AGAINST THOSE
THAT CAME TO THE COUNCIL, THOUGH THEY HAD SAFE CONDUCT FROM THE EMPEROR. And
that, therefore the Bohemians would not go Basil, but under the Public Faith
of the whole Council. See p. 307. The Ambassadors went all together to the
Presidents, and told them, that the Emperor had given the Protestants a
Safeconduct, but that they were not contented with it, alleging that it was
decreed in the Council of Constance, and really executed, that THE COUNCIL IS
NOT BOUND BY THE SAFECONDUCT OF ANY, WHOSOEVER HE BE; and therefore they
required one from the Synod. These Protestants, you see, understood the Council
in the same sense as I do: How come you to understand it otherwise?

Let the Decree speak for it self, and judge case betwixt us. It runs thus:
Presens Sancta Synodus, ex QUOVIS SALVO CONDUCTU per Imperatorem Reges, and
alios Seculi Principes, HAERETICIS vel de Haeresi diffamatis, putantes eosdem
sic a suis erroribus revocare, quocunque vinculo se adstrinxerint, CONCESSO,
NULLUM Fidei Catholicae, vel JURISDICTIONI ECCLESIASTICAE, praejudicium
generari, vel IMPEDIMENTUM PRAESTARI POSSE seu DEBERE declarat, QUOMINUS dicto
Salvo-conductu non obstante, LICEAT JUDICI competenti and ECCLESIASTICO de
hujusmodi personarum erroribus IN QUIRERE, and alias contra eos DEBITE
PROCEDERE, eosdemque PUNIRE, QUANTUM JUSTITIA SUADEBIT, si suos errores
revocare pertinaciter recusaverint, etiamsi de Salvo conductu confisi ad locum
venerint Judicii, alias non venturi: Nec sic promittentem, cum fecerit quod in
ipso est, ex hoc in aliquo remansisse obligatum. Conc. Constable. Sass 17.

The Council does not say, that any one, who makes a promise, is not obliged in
conscience to keep it, to the utmost of his just and lawful power: But only
declares, that every man's Promises, and Obligations of performance, are
confined within the limits of his own Jurisdiction, which he cannot lawfully
exceed; And that, therefore, No man either can promise, or be by promise
obliged to perform, any more. This is the plain sense of those words: Nec ipsum
promittentem Imperatorem, Regem, vel alium quemvis Secoli Principem, cum
fecerit quod in ipso est, quod nimirum, ex officio, and jure suo, potest ac
debet, ex hoc Salvo-conductu, in aliquo, quod Jurisdictioni obsit
Ecclesiasticae, remansisse ulterius obligatum. Can you blame this Doctrine?
Does not every body know, 1. that any man may promise, and every man ought to
perform, what lies in his power? 2. that no man can, either promise to encroach
upon a power superior to his own, or be obliged to perform it?

The 1. Act of the Council of Sienna proceeds upon the same principles. Though
it was very inconsiderable in its issue and conclusion, it was General in its
convocation and design; It imitated the Council of Constance, in assuming the
Title of Representing the Universal Church; And, by virtue of the supreme
Ecclesiastical Power implied in that Title. They commanded All Governors
Ecclesiastical and Secular, to prosecute the Laws against the followers of Huss
and Wickliff, revoking and forbidding all privileges, immunities, exemptions,
and Safe-conducts whatsoever; Privilegiis, Exemptionibus, Immunitatibus, SALVIS
CONDUCTIBUS, a quibuscumque Personis, Ecclesiasticis vel Secularibus, etiamsi
Pontificali, Imperiali, Regali, aut Ducali; aut alia quacumque Ecclesiastica
vel Seculari praefulgeant dignitate, concessis vel concedendis, NON OBSTANTIBUS
QUIBUSCUNQUE. You may look upon this Persecuting Decree as a severe thing, and
blame it (if you please) upon that account: But you cannot justly blame the
Doctrine upon which it is grounded, it being the very same with that of the
Council of Constance.

If you ask me, Why then dos the Council of Trent insert this clause in the end
of the Safe Conduct, that p 348.
the Synod shall not use, or suffer any to use, any authority, power, right,
statute, or privilege, of laws, canons, or Councils, ESPECIALLY that of
Constance, and of Sienna; which things, in this behalf, and for this time, the
Council does disallow? Why dos it disallow these Statutes, if they were fair
and just? A. It dos not disallow them absolutely, but only conditionally; that
is, IF they contain any doctrine contrary to the Security of Public Faith. The
reason of this proceeding was, because among the Protestants there were a great
many who had an ill opinion of these Decrees, and were very jealous of them.
'Twas more easy for the Council to protest, that, whatsoever they were, they
should not prejudice the Safe Conduct; than it was, to persuade them that the
Decrees were innocent. It was the charitable design of the Council to use all
condescension possible, and give such an extraordinary Safe Conduct, as might
prevent all jealousies and take away all excuses. And here it is, that the
Synod might justly say, what the Pope said upon an other occasion, They p. 408.
humbled themselves to Heresy, in regard that whatsoever was done to gain souls
to Christ, did become that Council.

If you have a mind to see a great deal more of this charitable condescension
toward them, read Soave's History, where he tells you how, the Council having
granted them a Safe conduct in the 13. Session, they excepted against it, and
demanded another of a more ample form, which was soon after granted, and
published in the 15. Session, Jan. 25. 1552. Observe how Soave relates it. p.
343*
The Emperor's Ambassadors desired to have the draught of it, before it was
published, to show it the Protestants, that if it did not give them
satisfaction, it might be so amended, that they might not have an occasion to
refuse it, as they did the other. Afterward the Emperor's Ambassadors called
the Protestants to them, and the Ambassador Pictavius exhorted them to give
some little part of satisfaction to the Council, as they received much from it;
told them that it was concluded, to receive their Mandates and Persons, and to
hear their Propositions, and to defer the conclusion of the points of Doctrine,
though already discussed and digested, to expect the Divines, and hear them
first; that they have a very ample Safe Conduct, as they desired... that it was
necessary to yield something to the time, and not to desire all at once; that
when they shall be entered into the business, occasion will make them obtain
many things which before seemed hard... that they themselves, the Emperor's
Ambassadors, have matters to propose of great moment, and do stand only
expecting that the Protestants should begin, that afterward they themselves
may come forth also. For this cause he prayed them to proceed slowly in their
demand, that the Pope should submit himself to the Council. For the Fathers do
know that there is something to be amended in the Papal greatness; but withal,
that they must go on cunningly; that they themselves have daily experience,
what dexterity and art must be used in treating with the Pope's Ministers.
Therefore let their Divines come, who should have a convenient audience in all
things, and when they shall see themselves wronged, it shall ever be free for
them to depart. The Protestants retiring and considering the draught of the
Safe Conduct, were not content. They required four things more; 1. a decisive
voice; 2. that the Scripture, and interpreters conformable to it, should be
Judges; 3. that they might exercise their religion in their own houses; 4. that
nothing should be done in contempt of their doctrine. p. 349.
The Imperialists persuaded them to go on with dexterity; saying, as before,
that with time they should obtain all; but, seeking things distasteful, and
before there was opportunity, every thing would be more hard: that the 3.
article was understood to be granted, because it was not forbid: and that the
4. was plainly expressed, because good usage was promised. Ambassador Toledo
had told them, p. 344.
that the chief importance was in the Security of coming and departing; that
the residue appertained to the manner of their Negotiation, which might more
easily be concluded by the presence of the Divines, that it was too much
obstinacy, to yield in nothing, and to desire to give laws to the whole Church.
After all this, p. 352.
the Protestants received the Safe Conduct; but, with protestation, that they
did it, only to send it to their Princes. Would not any body think, these men
were very hard to please?

XII. When some of the Protestants came to Trent. they were denied audience,
and liberty of disputing. A. Neither the one, nor the other, was denied them.
It Is true, they were not heard: but whose fault was that? It was because the
victorious Army of the Protestants made the Bishops run away from Trent, before
the preliminaries of the Treaty could be well agreed upon. They came about the
middle of March, and departed in the beginning of April. Have but a little
patience to hear Soave tell the story, and you will presently see that this
objection is a mere calumny. ibid.
The Electors of Mentz and Collen departed the eleventh of March.... four
Divines of Wittenberg and two of Argentina came to Trent afterward, and
desired to begin the Conference. The Legate answered, that the nineteenth of
March being a day appointed for the Session, they would then consider about a
form how to treat. Was this, denying audience? Afterward a resolution was
taken, to prolong the Session till the first of May. This was some Delay
indeed, and little enough to deliberate upon the preliminaries of so unusual a
Treaty; but however, it was no Denial. Mean time, p. 352.
the Protestants often desired the Action should begin (it seems, they were in
great have) but difficulty was still raised, sometimes about the manner of
treating, sometimes about the matter with which to begin... p. 353.
the Adherents of Caesar, Spaniards, and others, moved by the Emperor's
Ambassadors, desired to proceed; but the Papalins (he has always a fling at the
Court) suspecting that the end of the Imperialists was to come to the
Reformation of the Court of Rome, embraced all occasions of delay. The Legate,
says he, was thought to feign himself sick; but Soave, I presume, did not think
so himself, because he tells us in the very next page, that he died soon after
at Verona, which was no good proof of his dissimulation. But let us go on with
his story. ibid.
The first of April, the Elector of Saxony besieged Ausburg, which did render
it self the third day, and the sixth news came thereof to Trent, and that all
Tirol did arm, and meant to go to Inspruc... Therefore many of the Italian
Bishops embarked, and went down the river Adice, to go to Verona, and the
Protestants determined to depart. See here the true cause of their departure:
and tell me no more, of their being either denied audience, or liberty of
disputing.

XIII. The place was not secure. A. Very true; it was far from being secure for
the Catholics: The Protestant Army forced them to suspend the Council, April,
28. Neither was it any wonder, that they were so much afraid of their
victorious arms: Soave says, p 355.
The Emperor was forced to fly by night, with all his Court from Inspruc, and
to wander in the mountains of Trent, and that a few hours after, Maurice
arrived there, the same night, and made himself Lord of the Emperor's baggage.
Consider here, on the one side, how littie reason the Protestants have to
complain of the choice of this place: 1. it was nigher the Protestants of
Germany, than the Catholics of Spain and France: 2. the Pope's forces had no
access thither; 'twas in the Emperor's power: 3. the appearance only, of the
Protestant Army, was enough to fright away the Council. On the other side, you
see how justly the Pope refused to call a Council in any City of Germany, for
fear of the Protestant arms. As for the Canon, Ut illic lites terminentur ubi
exortae sunt, it is understood of those causes, where some fact is to be proved
by witnesses that live upon the place.

XIV. The Council was not free. It was called by the Pope: And nothing could be
determined till the Pope sent his instructions from Rome. A. If any man have a
right to convocate the supreme Ecclesiastical Assembly, it is certainly He who
has from God the supreme Ecclesiastical power upon earth; and this right, of
calling it, appertains as manifestly to the Pope, as the convocation of a
Provincial Council belongs to the Metropolitan. Moreover, Soave says, the
Princes in the Diet of Noremberg desired p. 31.
that by the Pope, with consent of the Emperor, a free Council should be
intimated as soon as was possible: he says, the Emperor sent Letters to the
Diet of Spira, that p. 34.
he was resolved to pass into Italy, and to Rome, to treat with the Pope, for
the calling of a Council: and afterward, under Pius IV. he says, p. 304.
all Princes had agreed in demanding it.

As to the Second part of your objection; It Is certain that, if it had stood
with the Pope's convenience, He ought to have been present. In his absence,
'twas necessary for the Legates, representing his person, to receive frequent
directions from him, that they might the better supply the want of his
presence. If, for this reason, it was lawful to give them instructions before
the Council began; why not, afterward, as long as the Council was fitting? In
fine, whatsoever advice came from Rome, Nothing in matter of Doctrine was
determined, which any considerable part resisted. Soave himself confesses, 538.
that it was a general Maxim in this Council, that to establish a Decree of
Reformation, a major part of voices was sufficient; but that a Decree of Faith
could not be made if a considerable part did contradict.

XV. Many of the Bishops were Pensioners to the Pope. A. Soave acknowledges,
that several p. 116.
of the Bishops, moved by poverty, made grievous complaints, and threatened that
they would depart. If therefore the Pope maintained some of them, it was a
great charity done by him; a good example to Princes; a thing which formerly
used to be done by the Emperors. 2. Secular Princes had more money than the
Pope; and, if it had been the policy of his Holiness, they might easily have
countermin'd it. 3. All the Popes, in their Bulls of Convocation, desired and
exhorted all Secular Princes to send as many of their Bishops as possibly they
could. 4. His Pensioners were not necessary for him, at least in the Protestant
Controversies; and therefore this is no excuse for the Reformation.

XVI. In some Sessions, under Paul and Julius, there were scarce any befides
Italians. A. 1. The Council being drawn out from 1545. till 1563. and actually
sitting for about four years, it cannot be rationally expected that any great
frequency of Bishops should be continually present. 2. The disorders, caused by
the Calvinists in France, and by the Lutherans in Germany, required their
Bishops residence to secure Catholic Religion at home; otherwise they would
not have been absent from the Synod. 3. The dissentions that happened betwixt the
Pope, the Emperor, and King of France, and the civil wars betwixt Catholics
and Protestants, hindered the Bishops, sometimes of one Nation, sometimes of
another, from attending the Council. 4. All this was fully recompensed, in the
third and last Convocation of the Council, under Pius IV.

XVII. In the end of the Council, we find 187. Italian Bishops, and all the
rest make only 83. A. 1. All these Italians were not of the Pope's Territory,
but a great many of them subject to the Emperor, the King of Spain, the Duke
of Florence, and the State of Venice. In several matters they had different
instructions, and adhered to their diverse interests, even in opposition to the
Pope, when the Ambassadors of their Princes craved their assistance. Soave
tells us, p. ^22.
it was publicly said by the Papalins (so he is pleased to call them) that
France had ever pretended to limit the Pope's power, and subject it to the
Canons; Canons; and that this opinion would be followed by many Italians, who,
because they cannot, or know not how to make use of the preferments of the
Court, do envy those that do; besides those, who are desirous of novity, they
know not why, of whom there seemed to be a considerable number.

2. It Is no great matter, as to our present purpose, whether the Pope had all
the Italian suffrages at his beck, or no; because it is certain he had no need
at all, of any such assistance, in deciding the Protestant controversies, in
which the Bishops, of all nations, unanimously agreed. See what Soave says,
concerning the following points. Apostolical Traditions. p. 145. It was
approved by all, that they should be received, as of equal authority with the
Scriptures. Vulgar Edition of Scripture. p. 150. It was approved almost by a
general consent. and p. 152. the Congregation being ended, the Cardinal Santa
Croce assembled those that had opposed the Vulgar Edition, and showed they had
no reason to complain, because it was not prohibited, but left free, to correct
it, and to have recourse to the Original; but that only it was forbid to say,
there were in it Errors of Faith for which it ought to be corrected. Original
Sin. p. 164. No man resisted the condemnation of the Articles. Justification
and Merit. p. 215. In condemning the Lutheran opinions all did agree with
exquisite Unity. Sacraments* p. 219. All the Divines agreed in affirming the
number seven, and condemning the contrary opinion as heretical. Baptism and
Confirmation, p. 232. All parties were satisfied. Worship of Christ in the
Eucharist. p. 306. All agreed. Communion under one kind. p. 306. All made use
of long discourses, but all to the same purpose. and p. 485. They all agreed
that there was no necessity, or precept, of the Cup. Transubstantiation. p.
309. There was a contention between the two Schools, Dominican and Franciscan,
which troubled the Fathers, with the subtility and small fruit thereof. The
Dominicans said, the one substance is made of the other; The Franciscans said;
the one does succeed the other; Both agreed, that it is properly and truly
called Transubstantiation: and p. 310 it was determined in the General
Congregation, to use an expression so universal as might be accommodated to the
meaning of both parties, without approving or condemning, either the one, or
the other. Sacrifice of Mass. p. 508. In the discussions of the Divines, all
were uniform in condemning the Protestant opinions; although there was some
contention, whether or no Christ at supper offered himself; p. 538. some
saying, that, in regard of the three and twenty contradictors, it was not
lawfully decided; and others answering, that an eighth part could not be called
considerable. Auricular Confession. p. 328. 329. 330. No disagreement appears
among the Prelates or Divines, concerning the 6.7. and 8. can. of the 14.
Session. Extreme Unction. p. 330. The Divines spoke with some prolixity, but
without any difference among themselves. Promotion of married persons to holy
Orders. p. 698. The Fathers did uniformly, and without difficulty, agree upon
the negative. Matrimony. p. 730. The doctrine, and anathematisms, were read; to
which all consented. Purgatory. Invocation of Saints. p. 749. The Decrees were
read, and all approved, with great brevity and little contradiction.
Indulgences. p 757. The Decrees were read, and approved by all.

XVIII. Proxies were not allowed to have decisive votes. A. 1. There were but
seven in the Council. 2. They had votes in consultations, among the rest. 3.
They had no right to a decisive vote. 4. Were it indifferently allowed, it
would encourage Bishops to pretend necessity of their absence.

XIX. All the Bishops were sworn to the Pope, before they sat in Council. A.
1. They never swore to vote against their judgment: They only swore Canonical
obedience and fidelity to him, that is, such obedience and fidelity as the
Canons of former Councils require, Bellarmin, De Council. lib. 1, cap. 21.
as long as he is Pope, and so long as he commands those things, which,
according to God, and according to the Canons, he can command; but they do not
swear, that they will not in Council say what they think; or that they will not
depose him, if they convict him of being a Heretic. 2. An Oath taken in
general terms, to defend his Canonical rights, leaves the Council in perfect
liberty to examine what is Canonical, and what not. 3. Without the Oath they
are strictly bound, by the Canons, to the same obedience and fidelity; so that
it induces no new obligation, but only confirms what was their duty before. 4.
Parliament Men swearing fidelity to their King, according to the Laws, do not
loose the freedom of their Vote, nor the power of changing many Laws, and
making others, with the King's consent. 5. Every Bishop in the English Church,
at his consecration, swears due obedience to his Archbishop and his Successors:
Why may not Catholic Bishops swear as much obedience to the Pope? And what
harm is there, if they take the very same Oath again, before they sit in
Council?

XX. In one of the Congregations the Bishop of Guadice was interrupted and
affronted; and the Cardinal of Lorain complained, the Council was not free. A.
This happened only once, and satisfaction was presently given Soave relates it
thus. p. 593.
The Bishop of Guadice speaking of the last Seff. 23.
Canon, where it was determined, that Bishops called by the Pope are true and
lawful, said that there were also Bishops, not called by the Pope, nor
confirmed by him, which nevertheless were true and lawful. For example he
brought four Suffragans, elected and ordained by the Archbishop of Salzburg,
who take no confirmation from the Pope. Cardinal Simoneta did not suffer him to
proceed, saying, that whatsoever the Archbishop of Salzburg or other Primates
did, was all by the Pope's authority. The Bishop of Cava, and two more, called
him Schismatic, and said he ought to be put out of the Council. Immediately
there followed a great noise among the Prelates, as well of whispering as of
fee^, partly in offense of the Prelate that gave his voice, and partly in
defense. The Legates did hardly appease the stir, by making others proceed, who
were to speak in that Congregation; which being ended, Lorain said the Bishop
had not spoken ill.... and indeed it was found that the Bishop had not spoken
ill, and the Canon was corrected; for whereas it said, the Bishops called by
the Pope of Rome, it was altered thus; the Bishops assumed by the authority of
the Pope of Rome..... Mantua did also reprehend the noise made with feet and
words, saying that, if hereafter they did not speak with respect, They, the
Legates, would go out of the Congregation.... Lorain commended the admonition,
and said that as the Legates ought not to go out of the Congregation, for any
occasion whatsoever, so it was most just that the perturbers of it, should be
punished. Here you have a full account of the whole matter. It was only a
sudden heat, and soon over. The public reprehension, of those who made a
noise, was satisfaction abundantly sufficient for what was past: And the
altering of the Canon, according to the Bishop's advice, was a very
extraordinary encouragement for him, and every body else, to speak freely for
the future. The Cardinal complained, before the satisfaction was given, and the
Canon altered, but not after. Besides, it is not impossible for great men to
find fault when there is but little reason for it. They are used to be
humored, and when they are crossed, a small matter is enough for great
complaints. I Will give you an instance out of Soave. p. 615.
Lorain and Madruccio had composed a form concerning Residence; The Legates
approved it at first sight; afterward, consulting with the Canonists, they
disliked one part. Lorain and Madruccio were much offended with this mutation,
and thought they were disparaged. Lorain said, it was not a free Council. Why
was not the Council free? If the form which they two had composed, had been
blindly received without examen; if, out of compliment to them, it had been
approved nemine contradicente; All had been well; The Council had been free
enough: But because some others took the liberty to consider it, and spoke
their minds freely in contradicting it; therefore the Council was not free.
Madruccio ibid.
did not forbear to say, there was a secret Council, within the Council, which
did arrogate more authority. The Canonists, who examined the form which they
two had composed, are here called a secret Council, and accused of arrogance;
not because they assumed more authority, but because they pretended to an equal
liberty of speaking as freely against the form as others had spoken for it. So
proud and so ambitious we are, to have our own opinions idolized, and to
enlarge the empire of our fancies by enforcing them upon our neighbors; that
when we meet with any opposition, though ever so reasonable, we are straightened
for want of room, and complain for want of liberty. So, when Guzdellun came to
the Council, and had p. 617.
seen the passages of one day, he said, he understood plainly the Council was
not free. What these passages were, Soave does not tell us: and, I am sure, if
any thing had happened contrary to the liberty of the Council, the Relation of it
would have been nuts to him. Since therefore your Historian leaves us to
conjecture what we please; for ought I know, Guzdellun might have so great an
opinion of himself, as to imagine, that, when he came to Council, the weight of
his reasons would have presently turned the scale of their deliberations, and
that in one day he should carry all before him: but afterward, when he plainly
sound his mistake, and saw he could not in one day have all things determined
as he pleased, then it was he understood plainly, the Council was not free.

XXI. In the History of the Council we find several grievous complaints of the
Spanish Prelates, that they had not their liberty in proposing and determining
the divine right of Residence. A. Let us hear their several complaints in
order, and if you believe your own Historian, you will find they had no reason
to complain.

1. p. 474.
They complained of the Pope for holding the Council in servitude, to which he
ought to leave free power to handle and determine all things, and not to meddle
himself. A. This last clause is manifestly unreasonable; Why should not he
meddle as well as they? Pray, read Soave, and see in what manner he meddled
with them. p. 470.
He commended them for speaking according to their Conscience.... He complained
of those who referred themselves unto him, because the Council was assembled
that every one may deliver his opinion... p. 471.
He was pleased that every one should deliver his opinion freely... but said,
it was a strange thing, that he who was Head of the Church, and other Prelates,
who have voice in Council, may not be informed of what is handled, and speak
their opinion... whereas, on the other side, it is plain that so many Prelates
come to Trent with commission from their Princes, according to which they
proceed; and that the Ambassadors by Letters and persuasions do compel them to
follow the interests of their Masters, and yet, for all this, no man says, that
therefore the Council is not free. This He amplified with much vehemence, and
certainly with a great deal of reason.

2. In their Letter to the King of Spain, They p. 515.
complained of the Legates for not suffering the point of Residence to be
concluded, before they could have an answer from Rome. A. They themselves
aquainted the King with these matters: Why might not the Legates inform the
Pope? They ibid.
beseech'd his Majesty to consult with godly men about this Article: Why might
not the Pope consult with godly men, as well as He? They ibid.
assured themselves that, after mature deliberation, He would favor their
opinion: Whether He would or not, was more than they could tell, till they had
an answer; and Why might not an answer be expected from Rome, as well as from
Madrid?

3. In the same Letter, they complained ibid.
that there was no liberty in the Council, because the Italians did overcome
with plurality of voices. A. In the same Letter they tell the King, that two
thirds of the Prelates did desire the Definition, and that all the Ambassadors
did favor the Truth herein. If two thirds were for them, and only one third
against them, can you tell me how it was possible for them to be overcome with
plurality of voices?

4. They complained that p. 475.
when a proposition is made in which 70. Bishops do uniformly agree, they are
hindered even to speak thereof. A. Who hindered them? Soave tells us, that the
King of Spain wrote to his Ambassador to let p. 505.
his Prelates know, He thought the Declaration did not befit the present time,
and therefore wished them to desist; and that the French Ambassadors wrote to
their Master, how little hopes they had of p 507.
reforming the Court of Rome, because the Spaniards, who were very zealous for
the Reformation, were cooled, and put in fear, by the reprehension of their
King. But the Pope, instead of wishing them to desist, p. 470,
commended them for speaking according to their Conscience. Neither did the
Legates with them to desist: They only p. 473.
answered, that the Article was not fit to be proposed in that Session, but
that it should be done in time convenient: which was so far from being any
hindrance of their speaking, that upon the very next occasion p. 477.
they began to discourse again of it... and the heat grew so great, that some
of the Ultramontans threatened to protest and depart; and perhaps would have
departed, had not the Ambassadors pacified them. So unreasonably jealous men
are of their Liberty, that, even when they take too much, they think they have
too little.

XXII. Andrew Dudith, Bishop of Five-churches, sent by the Emperor Ferdinand
as his Ambassador to the Council, writes afterward a Letter to Maximilian II.
in which he complains that the votes were not weighed but numbered, that the
Pope had a hundred for one, that the Holy Ghost was sent from Rome in a
Postillons Cloak bag... O monstrous extraordinary madness! Nothing could be
ratified which the Bishops did decree, unless the Pope made himself the Author
of it. A. 1. His Lordship was perhaps a little angry when he wrote this Letter;
and an angry man, you know, is apt to talk extravagantly: Iratus nil
nisimonstra loquitur. What would you say, if a Member of the House, a friend of
yours, should complain at the same rate; O monstrous extraordinary madness!
nothing could be ratified in Parliament which the Lords and Commons did decree,
unless his Majesty were pleased to give his Royal Assent. Would you take this
for the language of his Reason or his Passion? 2. Although he seemed a
Catholic when he sat in Council, yet he declared himself a Protestant soon
after; which is another motive to suspect he makes the worst of things. 3. It Is
remarkable that his conceit of the Cloak-bag was first made use of in Trent,
when the Legates, finding p. 464.
a fourth part only against the divine right of Residence, and observing how p.
465.
they came to words of some bitterness, they exhorted the Fathers to modesty,
gave them leave to depart, and agreed to give the Pope an account of all. This
did not please the Spaniards: but, why Bishop Dudith should find fault, I
cannot understand. Soave tells us, he employed his Rhetoric to oppose the
Bishop of Aiace, and to prove that it was lawful for Bishops to p. 457.
busy themselves in the Courts of Princes, and in the Affairs of the world, as
being Judges, Chancellors, Secretaries, Counselors, Treasurers, etc. which
was, as Soave observes, a plain p 458.
contradicting of those who thought that Residence was de jure divino. Pray,
help me now, if you can, to reconcile your Friend's History with the Bishop's
Letter.

1. In his Letter, we find him very bitter against the hireling Bishops, the
images of Daedalus that moved by nerves which were none of their own, the
country bag-pipes which could not speak, but as breath was put into them. And
who would think, after all this, that in your History we should find him among
these very Papalins, and as busy as the best of them, giving his suffrage with
them, against the Decree of Residence? Who hired him? what nerves moved him to
side with them? Whose breath was put into him to make him speak in favor of
them? 2. In his Letter, he complains the votes were not weighed but numbered:
And, in your History, the agreement of the Legates, not to determine a point of
Doctrine, which p. 464.
a fourth part did dislike, makes it plainly appear, that the votes of Bishop
Dudith's party were not only numbered but weighed. 3. If we believe his Letter,
the Pope had an hundred for one, and if those had not been enough, he could
have sent a thousand more in a Cloakbag to have helped in time of need: And, if
Soave's History may be believed, the Papalins in this occasion were ibid.
a fourth part only; They had three for one against them. How to accord these
matters, I confess, I am at a loss: when you have nothing else to do, you may
try you skill at leisure. Mean time, I can discover no other reason, he had to
quarrel with the Council, but that it was a Body with a Head. He had a mortal
aversion against the Pope: And, whether the Papalins were for Dudith or against
him, 'twas all the same: If his Holiness were consulted, he had not patience to
support it without exclaiming, O monstrous extraordinary madness! What shall
you and I call Passion, if this must pass for Reason?

XXIII. Soave himself, after having related the manner how the Council was
transferred from Trent to Bolonia, defies any man p. 251.
to say what liberty they had. A. Let us hear him tell his own story; take it
in pieces; and see whether Soave be not able to answer himself.

The Article of Residence being set on foot by the Spaniards, together with
several other points of Reformation; the Legates wrote to Paul III. that p. 239.
the Prelates did every day take more liberty, not refraining to speak of the
Cardinals without respect, and with small reverence of his Holiness: that
hereafter it would be hard to keep them in order, because they had many private
assemblies among themselves... and that it was not likely they would be so
bold, without they were upheld, and perhaps incited, by some great Prince. The
Pope considerd, that all the Reformation aimed to restrain his Authority, and
to enlarge the power of Bishops... that p. 241.
the Spaniards, are a wise Nation who step not one foot forward without looking
a great way before them... He thought that this webb was secretly spun by the
Emperor, in regard his Ambassador did daily treat with them... He weighed
above all, his words used to the Nuncio, that he had no greater enemy than the
Pope. He feared that when he had established an absolute authority in Germany,
he would think to do alike in Italy, making use of the Council to suppress the
Papacy... To translate it to a place where he had more absolute authority,
seemed the best Counsel... Bolonia seemed the best place... and he resolved to
cause it to done by the Legates, by the Authority given them in the Bull of
Translation. Being thus resolved, he sent a private Gentleman, with Letters of
credit, to do this Embassage to both the Legates... p. 248.
The 21. of April, the Popes messenger appeared and declared to the Legates his
Credence... At this time, it happened fitly, that many in the families of the
Prelates were sick... the air had been moist many days before... the Physicians
spoke as if the disease were contagious... it was reported that the neighbor
places would have no commerce with the City.. The Physicians were examined, and
a Process made concerning the Pestilent infirmity... the Process was prosecuted
until the 8. day, when news came that Verona would trafick no more with them...
Therefore, the 9. day, a general Congregation was held, and Monte took this
opportunity to propose the Translation of the Council, and cause the Pope's
Bull to be read... The Emperor's Prelates answered that the disease and dangers
were not so great, and looked upon it as p. 250.
a pretense. The next day a Congregation was called to consult upon the same
matter. It was found that 11. Prelates were already parted; and they began to
speak of the place, whither to go. That it should be in Germany all did abhor.
It could not be in the State of any Prince, because they had treated with none.
The Legates proposed Bolonia... The Imperialists did contradict: but the major
part consented... The next day, the Session being held, and the Decree read.
25. Bishops and 3. Generals did assent, but the Cardinal Pacceco and 17. other
Bishops opposed. Among those that consented, there was not one of the
Emperor's subjects, etc. In this Relation I have purposely omitted several
clauses, not only for brevity sake, but because I cannot think that any man is
obliged to believe such abusive constructions and conjectures, without better
proof than Soave's bare word for it. And now you may here observe,

1. How little power the Pope had in Trent, since he thought it not fit to
appear in this business, and since the Legates were in great danger of finding
an insuperable opposition, had not the sickness happened fitly for the purpose.

2. How much power the Emperor had over all his Prelates. Soave says, p. 250.
the Imperialists were commanded by the Emperor's Ambassador, not to depart,
until his Majesty were informed, and gave them order. He gives an account
afterward of their p. 253.
remaining in Trent by express order from the Emperor, and obstinately p. 260.
refusing to go or send to Bolonia, to acknowledge the Council; although the
Pope p. 262.
prayed them, either to come, or send Proctors.

3. The Pope praying on the one side, the Emperor commanding on the other; the
prayers being slighted, the commands being punctually obeyed; it is easy to
conclude, which was most likely to restrain the liberty of the Council, when
returned to Trent: especially, if we consider the Emperor's being then p. 283.
King of Spain and Naples, Prince of the Low Countries, and having other
adherencies in Italy.

4. The Emperor's Protestation, read by Valasco in the Council of Bolonia,
shows plainly what liberty might be expected from him, who assumed to himself
the arbitrary privilege of judging the p. 263.
opinions of the Fathers, and determining who did speak for conscience sake,
and p. 264.
who, though not so many in number, ought to be preferred, as more wise. At
this rate, All the other Prelates of the Universal Church, what would they
signify? Though they were ten for one against them, it is no matter; the
Prelates of the Emperor must always be supposed to be the men who speak for
conscience sake, the men who are more wise, and therefore the men who ought to
be preferred.

5. If the Pope, having just reason to suspect the future servitude of the
Council, endeavored to prevent the great disorders, which might happen in
Trent, by giving secret instructions to his Legates, to transfer the Synod to
Bolonia, Who can blame him?

Soave says, p. 251.
it scandalized every one. And yet I know not why they should be scandalized,
any more than you and I were, when King Charles removed the Parliament from
Westminster to Oxford. He goes on, if the two Legates could command all the
Prelates to part from Trent, and compel them by censures, Let any man say that
can, what liberty they had. It Is easily said; They had, all of them, liberty to
vote freely according to their conscience; The Legates commanded no body; The
matter was put to Votes, and the Majority carried it: And now, Let any man say,
that can, what liberty they wanted.

XXIV. This is not all. The same Author (having rehearsed how the Fathers at
Bolonia unanimously agreed, not to treat of returning to Trent, till those, who
remained there, first came to Bolonia, to unite with the rest, and acknowledge
the Council;) concludes with these words, ibid.
The Spirit which was wont to move the Legates to think as the Pope did, and
the Bishops to believe as the Legates, did work as formerly it had done. A.
Have but patience to consider well what Soave himself has said elsewhere; p.
260.
and, if you believe him, you will believe he is mistaken here.

1. Pray what spirit formerly moved all the Imperialists to stay behind at
Treat, when the rest went with the Legates to Bolonia? In Trent the Bishops
formerly had disagreed about going thence: Afterward in Bolonia they all
agreed about staying there. And, truly, if Soave could have persuaded us that
Concord and Discord are all one, he might easily have made us believe that in
Bolonia, The spirit workt as formerly it had done. Befides, These of Bolonia
were the major part, and it is no wonder they persever'd in their resolutions:
Those of Trent were the lesser part, which ought to have submitted; and yet,
although the Pope exhorted them to their duty, and p. 262.
prayed them, either to come, or to send Proctors, they still remained as
obstinate as the others were constant. And, I must needs say, betwixt you and
me, if your Friend Soave had been impartial, he would never have committed such
a mistake in the misplacing of his jest: He would have told us (with a great
deal of Truth, and without appearance of impiety) that The spirit which was
wont to move the Ambassadors to think as the Emperor did, and the Bishops to
believe as the Ambassadors, did work as formerly it had done.

2. If, by this conceit, he would insinuate that the Legates were always
Papalins; I must beg your pardon, if I undertake to prove it notoriously false,
by his own History. He often tells us, how the proceedings of the Legates were
contrary to the instructions they received from Rome. p. 470.
The Court did generally complain of all the Legates, for suffering the Article
of Residence to be proposed... because they had an example of the disorder,
which this dispute caused in the first Council.

3. Although I do not find that, in this Council, the Ambassadors of any
Secular Prince ever dissented among themselves, in things relating to their
Master's interests; yet Soave himself assures us, that, in this case of
Residence, only two of the Legates were for the Papalins, and three against
them: p. 464.
Altemps followed Simoneta, and the other two adhered to Mantua. By which you
may clearly see that your Historian was grievously mistaken, when he said, the
spirit was wont to move the Legates to think as the Pope did; for, by his own
computation, there were three to two among them, who were moved to think quite
contrary.

4. You remember the contest which arose, concerning the third Convocation of
the Council: The Spanish Ambassador p. 473.
made earnest suit in the King's name, that it might be declared a Continuation
of the Council, begun under Paul III. and prosecuted under Julius. He was
assisted by the Spanish Prelates, and others who followed them... On the other
side, the Emperor's Ambassadors used strong persuasions to the contrary,
saying they would presently depart and protest... The Legates were divided:
Seripando had no other aim, but that it should be determined to be a
Continuation... but Mantua did constantly resist... Here you may take notice
once more, that Soave's jests are not always true ones: The Spirit did not move
Mantua to think as the Pope did: for when the p 474.
news came to Rome, the Pope was sorry to see that Cardinal joynd with the
Spaniards in the point of Residence, and opposite to them in the Continuation;
which was to cross him in all things.

5. Afterward p. 478.
the Pope resolved that the Continuation should be declared, let the Emperor
do what he could; and dispatched a Currier to Trent with this Commission. If
the Spirit had been wont to move the Legates to think as the Pope did, why dos
Soave tell us that, this Commission being arrived the second of June, they all
resolved uniformly to inform the Pope better, and show him the impossibility to
perform his Order? Why dos he tell us, that the next day... at night, a Currier
came with Letters, that his Holiness did refer all to the wisdom and judgment
of the Legates? I might cite you a great deal more, to this purpose; but this
is enough to show, 1. that the Legates spoke freely their minds, and acted
according to their Conscience; 2. that the Pope did not endeavor to hold the
Council in servitude.

XXV. Nothing could be debated but what the Legates proposed; the Pope's
Commissions running with this clause, proponentibus Legatis. A. 1. At least the
Council voted freely upon the matters which were proposed. 2. In great
Assemblies such a method is necessary, to avoid confusion. 3. It was at length
Sess 24. cap. 21. de Reform.
declared, that the clause was not inserted with design of changing the usual
method of treating matters in General Councils; and then, Soave says, p. 728.
The difficulty received an end, with satisfaction of all.

You that have read Soave, may easily remember a great many passages, in which
the Prelates overruled the Legates, and forced them to debate things which
they had no mind to. 1. This clause, proponentibus Legatis, was ibid.
much agitated: 2. The Title of the Council, Representing the Universal Church:
3. The divine right of Residence: 4. The Institution of Bishops being de jure
divino: 5. The general Reformation of the Church: which point might have been
pusht perhaps too far, if the Legates had not wisely counterpoised it, with
proposing a suitable Reformation of Secular Princes. 6. Concerning the grant of
the Cup, demanded by the Emperor, you read in Soave, that p. 530.
the Legates were desirous to give him satisfaction, but could not, because the
party of the negative prevall'd. 7. About admitting the Protestant Divines to
disputation, you find that p. 343.
this opinion was readily embraced, first by the Dutch, then by the Spanish
Prelates, and at last somewhat coldly by the Italians, the Legate remaining
immovable, and showing plainly that he stood quiet, being forced by necessity.

Give me leave to add one instance more, and if you are not fully satisfied
with it, I shall know what to think of you. Read Soave, p. 498. and 499. and
observe, 1. how boldly the Bishops of Veglia and Sidonia spoke their minds
concerning the corruptions of Rome, and Reformation of the Pope himself; 2. how
moderately the Legates and other Papalins discoursed about it, when, the
Congregation being ended, they remained in the place together to consider the
holdness, and too much license, of the Prelates, in broaching new matters.

Upon this occasion Castello, who had been Speaker under Julius, told them that
Cardinal Crescentius was used to interrupt them and sometimes impose them
silence. But the Cardinal of Varmia sharply reprehended this practice, and
said, that Nothing is more necessary to a Christian Synod than Liberty; and
that, reading the Councils of the better times, one shall find contentions and
discords in the heginnings of them, even in the presence of the Emperors,
which notwithstanding did, in the end, turn, by the assistance of the Holy
Ghost, into a mavelous concord; and that was the miracle which did pacify
the world. He said, there were infinite contentions in the Nicene Council, and
most exorbitant in the Ephesine, and therefore no wonder if there were now some
diversity of opinions civilly carried, which he that would resist by human and
violent means, will let the world know that the Council is not free, and take
from it all reputation; that it is good to refer the cause unto God, who will
govern Councils, and moderate those who are assembled in his name. The Cardinal
of Mantua approved this opinion, and disliked the proceeding of Crescentius,
but said, it was not contrary to the liberty of the Council to moderate abuses
with Decrees, prescribing the order and time of speaking, and distributing to
every one his own part. This was comme^^^^ by Varmia, and they agreed to (...)
for it.

XXVI. Notwithstanding all this, the Legates would not give leave to propose
the Article concerning the Institution of Bishops. p. 550.
Granata, Braganza, Messina, and Segovia, having obtained audience of the
Legates, desired that they might handle the Articles, that Bishops are
instituted by Christ, and are Superior to Priests jure divino. The Legates,
after they had conferred together, answered, that it was fit to declare, a
Bishop is superior, but p. 551.
that it was not necessary to say, quo jure. Granata replied, that there was a
Controversy, and that, if the Divines did dispute it, the necessity of deciding
this point would be known. The Legates would not consent by any means. A. 1.
They did not absolutely forbid the debating of this matter. 2. After experience
of the contentions about Residence, they could not but foresee that this
dispute, so much connected with the other, might occasion greater disorders, of
which they would have been guilty, had they given leave: and therefore they
ibid.
would not consent by any means. 3. The Divines and Prelates freely took leave,
though it was not given them; and never spoke more boldly, than they did upon
this subject. If you will not believe me, believe your friend Soave: Read what
follows, and believe your own eyes.

Michael Orencuspe, a Divine of the Bishop of Pampelona, argued, p. 558.
that howsoever it be true and certain, that Bishops are superior jure
Pontificio, yet the Lutherans are not in this regard to be condemned for
Heretics, because that cannot be an Article of Faith, which is grounded only
upon the Law of man.

ibid.
John Fonseca a Divine of the Archbishop of Granata followed, saying, it
neither was, nor could be forbidden to speak of it. For the Article being
proposed to be discussed, whether it be heretical or no, it is necessary to
understand whether it be against Faith; against which it cannot be, if it do
not repugn to the Law of God. He said that if the Pope be instituted by Christ,
because he has said to Peter, Feed my Lambs, Bishops are likewise instituted
by him, because he has said alike to all the Apostles, as my Father has sent
me, so I send you. And, if the Pope be Successor of S. Peter, the Bishops are
Successors of the Apostles; which he proved by many Authorities out of the
Fathers. He added, that to be confirmed or created by the Pope, did not
conclude, that they were not instituted by Christ, or had not authority from
him. For the Pope himself is created by the Cardinals, and yet has his
authority from Christ: So the Bishops receive the Diocese from the Pope, and
authority from Christ. Their Superiority over Priests he proved to be jure
divino, by authority of many Fathers, who say that Bishops succeed the
Apostles, and Priests the seventy two Disciples.

Antony Grossetus insisted upon the same point. p. 559.
He said it was necessary to declare, that Bishops have not commission, for
their Office, from men; for so they would, be Hirelings, to whom the Lambs do
not belong, because the man, who had committed the care unto them, being
satisfied, they had no more to think on.... In the end, he excused himself,
that he had spoken without premeditation... not remembering that that point was
forbidden to be spoke of. Here it is that Soave would make us believe, that
Grossetus feared some bad encounter, but, I am sure, if any bad encounter had
ever happened to him, upon this account, Soave would have taken care to let us
know it. Have but a little patience to observe how freely and boldly the
Bishops delivered their opinions in the following Congregations, and then Pl
give you leave to tell me, if you can, what bad encounter they feared.

The Archbishop of Granata said, p. 565.
They must needs declare both these two points, that is, that Bishops are
instituted jure divino, and are jure divino superior to Priests: And he
confirmed his opinion at large, with many reasons, arguments, and
authorities...He cited Pope Eleutherius, who, in an epistle to the Bishops of
France, wrote, that Christ had committed the Church Universal to them. He
added, that Ambrose upon the Epistle to the Corinthians says, that the Bishop
holds the place of Christ, and is Vicar of the Lord... that there are extant
Epistles of Cyprian to Fabianus, Cornelius, Lucius, and Stephanus, Popes, where
he gives them the title of Brothers; and of Austin, written in his own name,
and of the Bishops of Africa, in which the Popes Innocentius and Bonifacius are
likewise called Brothers; and, which is most plain, not only in the Epistles of
those two Saints, but of many others, the Pope is called Colleague... that it
is against the nature of a College to consist of persons of diverse kinds... In
this College of Bishops, the Pope is Head; but, for edification only... that S.
Gregory says in his epistle to Johannes Syracusanus, that when a Bishop is in
a fault, he is subject to the Apostolic See, but otherwise all are equal by
reason of humility, which Christian Humility is never separated from the Truth.
He inveighed against those Theologues who said, that S. Peter had ordained the
other Apostles Bishops... p. 566.
He jested at those Divines who had said, that all the Apostles were instituted
by Christ, and made equal in authority, but that it was personal in them, and
ought not to pass to their Successors, except that of S. Peter; asking them, as
if they had been present, with what ground, authority, or reason, they were
induced to make such a bold affirmation, invented within these fifty years
only, expressly contrary to the Scripture, in which Christ said to all the
Apostles, I will be with you until the end of the world, which words, because
they cannot be expounded of their particular persons only, must be necessarily
understood of the succession of all.

p. 567.
The Archbishop of Braga proved at large, the Institution of Bishops de jure
divino. He said, that the Pope cannot take from Bishops the Authority given
them in their consecration, which does contain in it the power, not only of
Order but of Jurisdiction... that to Titular Bishops a City is allotted, which
would not be necessary, if the Episcopal Order could subsist without
Jurisdiction. He was followed by the Bishops of Segovia, of Segna, and others,
who spoke as boldy as himself, not fearing any bad encounter; and Soave says p.
569.
almost the half were of that opinion.

Afterward, p. 577.
to quench the boiling heat of the controversy about the Institution of
Bishops, that it might not increase, by means of so many who were prepared to
contradict Laynez. they would not hold any Congregation for many days. And yet
they were so far from fearing any bad encounter, that almost every day p 578.
three or four of them joined together, and went to some of the Legates to
renew the instance. And, one day, the Bishop of Guadice, with four others, told
them, among other things, that ibid.
as a Prince dos institute, in a City, a Judge of the first instante, and a
Judge of Appeal, who though he be superior, yet cannot take authority from the
other, nor usurp the causes belonging to him: so Christ in the Church has
instituted all Bishops, and the Pope superior, in whom the Supreme
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was; yet so, that others had theirs depending on
Christ alone.

After all this, the Bishop of Segovia, when the Prelates met again in
Congregation, argued p. 582.
that it was decided in the Congregations under Julius III. that Bishops are
instituted jure divino; though it was not published in Session, by reason of the
sudden dissolution of the Council... The Cardinal of Mantua caused the Acts of
that time to be searched, and that to be read by the Secretary, which was then
defined to be published... Three Heads of Doctrine were then composed, and in
the third, which was of Hierarchy, it was said, The Holy Synod does teach, that
those are not to be hearkened unto, who say that Bishops are not instituted jure
divino, it appearing manifestly by the words of the Ghospel, that Christ our
Lord has himself called the Apostles, and promoted them to the degree of
Apostleship, into whose place the Bishops are subrogated; neither ought we to
think that this so eminent and necessary a Degree, has been brought into the
Church by human institution. There were also eight Canons, the last whereof
said thus: He that shall say, that Bishops are not instituted Jure divino, or
are not Superior to Priests, or have not power to ordain, or that this does
belong to Priests, Let him be Anathema. This the Cardinal of Mantua
interpreted, only of the power of Order, and the Bishop of Segovia understood
it of All, which contains Order and Jurisdiction; and, though he answered
reverently in appearance, there past so many replies, that they were forced to
break up the Congregation.

When the Cardinal of Lorain came to Trent, he told the Cardinal of Mantua, he
p 583.
would not be curious in unprofitable questions; that, for his own part, he was
more inclined to the opinion which does affirm the Institution of Bishops, and
the Obligation of Residence, to be de jure divino; but, though it were
certainly true, he saw no necessity, or opportunity, to proceed to a
declaration thereof. Nevertheless, when Lorain came to Council, p. 596.
The Bishop of Liria, to inform him of all the reasons of the Spaniards, did
recapitulate, with great eloquence, whatsoever they had said in this matter:
And added besides, that nothing was more in favor of the Lutherans, than to
say that Bishops are instituted by the Law of man.

When Lorain gave his suffrage, he proposed the reasons on both sides; he p.
596.
concluded in the end, that the Question was boundless; and exhorted the
Fathers to leave it, omitting jure divino, and saying instituted by Christ. But
notwithstanding this, ibid.
The French Prelates, who spoke after Lorain, did not use the same ambiguity,
but maintained openly, that the Authority of Bishops was de jure divino.

Again, in another Congregation, p. 598.
The French made proof of their liberty. They said, that the Institution and
Jurisdiction of Bishops was de jure divino, as well as that of the Pope; that
there was no difference, but in degree of Superiority; and that the Pope's
Authority is confined within the limits of the Canons, relating and commending
the style of the Parliaments of France, that when any Pope's Bull is presented,
which contains any thing contrary to the Canons received in France, they
pronounce it to be abusive, and forbid the execution. Have you never heard,
that such boldness as this, even in a free Parliament, has been enough to send
a man to the Tower? And yet, Soave confesses, They were heard with much
patience. Consider well these passages, from the beginning to the end of this
Dispute; and tell me then, what liberty was wanting in the Council.

XXVII. If the Prelates were so bold, and took such liberty, How was it
possible for the Council to end so quietly? A. In some matters, they had full
p. 728.
satisfaction; as in the clause, Proponentibus Legatis. In some, a considerable
part opposed, as in the Doctrine of Residence; which therefore, according to
the p. 538.
general Maxim of the Council, could not be determined. In others, as the
Institution of Bishops, and the Pope's Authority, although their arguments had
been urged, repeated, and amplified, in several Congregations, yet still the
major part was of another opinion; it was, therefore, impossible to come to any
determination: And, you know, how natural it is, for reasonable men, to be
quiet and silent, when they plainly see, it is in vain to speak.

XXVIII. Was not the Pope's Authority, at length, made use of, to restrain
their liberty, under pretense of their abusing it? A. Soave himself, who never
makes the best of things, is pleased to tell us quite another story. Lorain
(who, at his first coming to Trent, had opposed the p. 583.
declaration of these points, and had p. 596.
exhorted the Fathers to leave it) p. 684.
proposed the omission of the two Articles, of the Institution of Bishops, and
Authority of the Pope, as things wherein the parties were too passionate. And
very fitly, says your Author, ibid.
an Order came from the Emperor to his Ambassadors, to use all means that the
Authority of the Pope should not be discussed in Council; which his Majesty
did, because he saw the major part inclined to enlarge it... The Ambassadors,
having treated with the Legates in conformity hereof, as also with Lorain, and
other principal Prelates, did cause this Article to be omitted, as also that
other of the Institution of Bishops. But first they made many consultations
about it, that all might rest contented.

XXIX. Why were the Popes, of those times, so afraid of a General Council? Why
so averse from it? Why did they, to secure themselves, shift sides so often
betwixt the Emperor and King of France? A. You might as well have asked me,
Why dos a Pilot fear a storm? Why is he so averse from it? Why dos he trimm the
boat so often? S. Peter's Ship, in those days, was grievously tossed, and
almost coverd with the waves: But our Lord, who seemed to sleep, at length
arose, commanded the winds and the Sea, and there followed a great Calm.

XXX. Why did they avoid, and defer so long, the General Reformation? Why were
Bulls given secretly to the Legates, to suspend or transfer the Council, as
occasion served? Why did they openly declare, that a Council is ever dangerous,
when the Pope's Authority is questioned? A. You Will never have done with these
cramp-questions, except a man give you as good as you bring. Is not the
Reformation of Abuses, in the Church, as dangerous as the Redressing of
Grievances, in the State? If our Nation were in the same ferment, as under the
reign of Charles I. would you blame his Majesty for pretending to prorogue or
dissolve as he pleases? And have we not, ever since, great reason to believe
that a Parliament (though, otherwise, excellent in it self) is always
dangerous, when the King's Authority is questioned? In those tumults of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, Reformation was a dangerous business: And, had the
Reformers been let slip at the Abuses, they would perhaps have worried the
whole Church. If S. Paul was in perils among false Brethren, the Successor of
S. Peter was no less. p. 284.
Not only the Protestants did impugn his Authority, but many Princes also would
restrain it, and many Bishops did think to moderate it. p. 205.
The Spaniards had a secret, which they communicated only among themselves, to
make great the Episcopal Authority, so that the Pope could not restrain it. The
French had p. 522.
ever pretended to limit the Pope's power, and subject it to the Canons and
Councils, p. 34^.
The Emperor's Ambassadors had given the Protestants hope to moderate the
Papal Authority, and said that they expected to see a Gate laid open by their
negotiation, that afterward they might second it: and Julius III. had
intelligence, that the Emperor had a design to advance himself, by debasing of
the Papacy. This was enough to make the Popes, of that Age, take care to look
before they leaped. But yet this was not all, if Soave says true. The p. 17.
Governors of Countries regarded not much, what the Council might determine
concerning Doctrines; but desired it might be such a one, as might reduce the
Priests and Friars to their beginning; hoping that by that means the regalities
and temporal jurisdictions might return unto them. And therefore they said, it
was in vain to call a Council where the Bishops, and other Prelates, only,
should have a deliberative voice; because they ought to be reformed, and it was
necessary that others should have the charge thereof, who could not be deceived
by their proper interests. Here you see, in plain English, what the Reformation
was like to come to. 1. The design was laid to bring the Ecclesiastics to
their beginning: They were to be brought to their Staff and Scrip again, and
sent about their business, whilst the Reformers plundered the Church, and
divided the spoils. 2. To do it with more ease, it was in vain to call a
Council of Bishops, but the Laity were to have the charge thereof, who could
not be deceived by their proper interests. This Reason, I confess, if it had
taken place, would have been worth it is weight in gold: but, pray, give me
leave to make the case your own. Suppose a man should demand your purse; and,
upon refusal, tell you He is the better Judge, whether or no you ought to
deliver; because your interest blinds you but He cannot be deceived by his
proper interest. Would you believe this honest Gentleman? How did you like this
method of Reforming, when our English Rebels threw the Sovereignty out of
doors, and the Church of England out of the windows? Did you fancy that those
Church-and-State-Menders deserved to have the charge of those matters, and that
it was necessary they should have it, because they could not be deceived by
their proper interests?

If such a Throughout-Reformation as this, had been effectually procured, All
had been well: Complaints would then have ceased, because there would have been
nothing left to complain of: The Reformers would have reduced the Pope, the
Cardinals, the Bishops Priests and Friars, to their beginning, which in plain
English is little better than reducing them to their end: The Faction would
then have triumphed, according to their hearts desire; just as our Rebels did,
when they had brought our Monarchy to it is beginning, by beheading of the
Government. But, this not being effected, All the rest was nothing to the
purpose. One would think that eleven or twelve Decrees, containing above 140.
chapters of Reformation, might be some degree of satisfaction to any reasonable
men: But, when people are disappointed in their principal design, right or
wrong it is all the same, they are out of humor; and, when they are so, it is a
hard matter to please them. This was the reason why the Lutheran Critics were
so sharp in censuring and ridiculing the Decrees, as soon as each Session of
the Council was published in Germany. p. 504. The Birth of the Mountains, was a
proverb much in vogue, which Soave has recorded in more places than one, though
otherwise worded, The travail of the mountains, and the nativity of the mouse:
an expression proper enough to let us understand, what vast projects they had
laid of reducing all things to their beginning; and how much they were
disappointed in them; since what was decreed by the Council, compared with what
they would have done themselves, was no more than a mouse to a mountain. In the
same page, he goes on; Concerning the Reformation it was said, that more light
points could not be handled, nor more lightly; and that they did imitate the
Physician, who, in a hectical body, labored to kill the Itch. This was another
pleasant jest, which Soave took care of, for fear it should be lost. But, let
him jest as he pleases, the Itch, he talks of, is not so easily cured. This
humor, of Reforming, is a very itching humor: And the Itch is a strange
restless disease: Even the wiser sort of mankind, when they have once got it,
cannot for their lives forbear Scratching, though they know by experience that
it dos more harm than good.

Read the Decrees of Reformation from the beginning to the end, and if you read
them with a serious attention, I am very confident, an impartial man, as you
are, will not say they are, either light, or lightly handled. If you have the
Council in your Library, I had rather you would read them there, than in Soave;
who, I must needs tell you, is not so exact as I could wish him. Under pretense
of relating the substance, he leaves out a great many circumstances, which a
curious man would be desirous to know: And besides, although I have compared a
very small part of his translation with the original, I find several mistakes
in it. p. 503. n. 1. he reads is, for is not. p. 692. n. 12. he reads six, for
five. p. 733. n. 2. he reads two, for three. p 753. n. 1. of two express
commands, he has made only one exhortation. Such negligences as these are
enough to make me suspect him in other matters; and are a great argument that
it was more his business, to find fault with the Reformation, than to give an
exact account of it. But, whether you consult the Council or his History, that
you may find out all the Decrees in order, without any trouble, I have directed
you to all the Sessions of the one, and pages of the other. V. 173.174. VI.
211.212. VII. 247.248. XIII. 320.321. XIV 331.332.333.334. XXI. 503. XXII.
537.538. XXIII 691.692.693. XXIV. 730.731.732.733.734.735. XXV.
751.752.753.754.755.756. And, for your better satisfaction, I have set down
some few instances of Soave's Translation, comparing it with the Original, and
enclosing, what he has either altered or omitted, in a parenthesis like [this.]

1. Concerning Scripture. The first point of Reformation, in the first chapter,
of the first Decree, is this, p. 173. n. 1.
that in the Churches, where there is a stipend allotted for reading Divinity,
the Bishop should provide that the Holy Scripture should be read by the
Stipendary, if he be fit; and, not being fit, the Bishop should depute a
Substitute to perform the charge: But, for hereafter, that the Benefice should
not be conferred but upon a sufficient person. That in the Cathedral Churches
of populous Cities, and Collegiate Churches of great Castles, where no such
stipend is assigned, the first Prebend that falls void, should be applied to
that use, or a simple Benefice, or a contribution of all Beneficed men, to
institute the Lecture. And again, concerning p. 693. n. 18.
the institution of Seminaries, it was constituted, that every Episcopal Church
should have a certain number of boys, brought up in a College, to learn, among
other things, the Holy Scripture. All this Sess. 5. c. 1.
The Holy Synod orders and decrees [least that heavenly Treasure of Sacred
Books, which the Holy Ghost has so liberally bestowed upon mankind, should lie
neglected.]

2. Concerning Ecclesiastics. p. 732. n. 1.
The Decrees of Reformation did contain, That whosoever have right in the
Promotion, shall be admonished that it is a mortal sin, if they shall not use
all diligence to promote the most worthy and most profitable to the Church. And
it was added, How necessary it is, that the Pope, in regard of his Duty, should
endeavor to assume Cardinals of [most] excellent worth, and to provide the
Church of fit Pastors, because if the flock should perish by [the evil
government of persons negligent and forgetful of their duty] Christ will
demand an account of his Holiness. p. 733. n. 3.
That [Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitans, and] Bishops, shall be bound to
visit [their proper] Diocese... That the Visitor shall go with a modest train
of men and horses, dispatching the Visitation, as soon as may be; and shall not
receive any [money, or present, whatsoever it be, or in what manner soever it
be offered] but frugal and moderate Diet... ibid. n. 4.
That the Bishops shall be bound to preach in person; or, having a lawful
impediment, by others. And in case the Parish Priest be hindered, that he cannot
preach in his own Church, he shall, at his charge, maintain another to do it,
deputed by the Bishops... That the Bishop shall admonish every one [that, where
it may conveniently be done, he ought] to go to his own Parish, to hear the
Sermon: and that None [either Secular, or Regular, even in the Churches of
their own Order,] shall preach against the Bishop's will. p. 734, n. 10.
That where Visitation, or Correction of manners, is in question, no exemption
or appeal, though to the Apostolic See, shall [any way] hinder or suspend the
execution of that which is decreed or adjudged. p. 735. n, 17.
That no Ecclesiastical person, though a Cardinal, shall have more than one
Benefice, which not being able to maintain him, another simple Benefice may be
added, so that they do not both require Residence; which shall be understood of
all Benefices, of what title or quality soever, though Commended. And he that
has now more Benefices than one, shall be bound to leave all but one, within
six months; or, if not, they shall be all void. p. 753. n, 1.
The Reading of the General Reformation did follow, which, after an Exhortation
to Bishops, for exemplary life, [commandeth, not only that they be content
with] modesty and frugality of [houshold-stuff and table; but also, that in the
rest of their way of living, and in their whole house, nothing may appear but
what bears the character of simplicity, zeal, and contempt of Vanities: And
absolutely] does forbid them to enrich their friends or kindred, with the
revenues of the Church; but, if poor, to allot them their distribution, as to
the rest of the poor. What has been said of Bishops, it Decrees to be observed
by all beneficed Eccleasticks, either Secular or Regular, and also by the
Cardinals.

Here I have cited only eight points, a very inconsiderable part, of the whole
Reformation which contains above a hundred and forty chapters: But, for a man
of your skill, a pattern is enough to judge of the whole piece. And, besides
all these Decrees, there are also others of Doctrine, forbidding and condemning
several abuses, which are worth your taking notice of.

1. Concerning Purgatory p. 75^.
The Synod teaches no more, than that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls
detained in it, are assisted by the suffrages of the faithful, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass. Therefore it does command Bishops to teach sound
doctrine in this matter [such as is delivered by the Holy Fathers, and Sacred
Councils] and cause it to be preached, without handling subtle questions before
the ignorant people, nor suffering uncertain and unlikely things to be
published; Prohibiting curiosities, superstition, and unhonest gain.

2. Concerning Masses. p. 537.
A Decree was read concerning abuses, to be corrected, in the celebration of
Masses: And contained in substance; that the Bishops ought to forbid all things
brought in by Avarice, Irreverence, or Superstition.

3. p. 751.
In matter of Saints, it does command Bishops, and all others who have the
charge of teaching, to instruct the people concerning the intercession and
invocation of them, according to the ancient doctrine of the Church, consent of
Fathers, and decrees of Councils, teaching, that the Saints do pray for men,
that it is profitable to invocate them, and to have recourse to their prayers
and assistance, to obtain benefits from God, through Jesus Christ his Son our
Lord, who is our only Savior and Redeemer. Concerning Images; that those of
Christ and the Saints, ought to have due honor given them; but that there is
no divinity or virtue in them... Afterward it adds, that, desiring to take
away the abuses, and occasions of pernicious errors, it does Ordain... that all
Superstition, in invocation of Saints, in worship of Relics, and in use of
Images, be taken away.

4. Concerning Indulgences. p. 757.
The Synod does only anathematize those that shall say, they are unprofitable,
and that the Church has not power to grant them. It does command that all
those offices of Pardon-mongers be abolished: And, for the other abuses [which
have taken their rise from superstition, ignorance, irreverence, or any other
way, Whereas they cannot conveniently be forbidden, in particular, by reason of
the manifold corruptions of provinces, and places where they are committed,] it
does command the Bishops, that every one shall collect all those of his own
Church, to propose them in the Provincial Synod, p. 733, n. 2.
which shall be called by the Metropolitan, or the most ancient Suffragan,
within one year, at the most, after the end of this Synod, and afterward,
every [three] years, at least.

Tell me now your opinion concerning these matters, All these points, are they
light, and lightly handled? Are they all nothing to the purpose? Suppose the
Vineyard had been a little neglected, and the Vines wanted pruning, Will
nothing else serve your turn, but reducing them to their beginning, and cutting
them up by the Roots?

I had almost quite forgot to tell you that, in the end of the General
Reformation, the Council has taken particular care, that no Dispensing power
may obstruct the force and benefit of the Decrees. Be it known to all men, says
the Council, p. 756. n. 18.
that the Canons shall be observed [exactly and] indistinctly by all, and shall
not be dispensed, but for [an urgent and just] cause, heard with [great]
maturity, and without cost [by whosoere they are, to whom it appertains:
Otherwise, the Dispensation shall be judged Surreptitious.] If the Cause be,
not only just but urgent; if the justice and urgency be well known before the
grant of it; if nothing be given to any whosoever for it; Such a Dispensation
is unquestionably blameless. And now, I desire to know, How was it possible for
the Council to provide more effectually for the punctual observance of all
these three conditions, than by declaring that otherwise the Dispensation is,
and shall be, surreptitious, and of no effect?

XXXI. In the end of the Council, there was great joy in Rome, for having
cheated the world, and advanced their interest, where they feared to have their
wings clipped. A. Here I know not how you will be able to make the two ends of
Soave's History meet. In his first book, he talks much at this rate; and, in
his last, he largely contradicts it. He tells us, in the end, how the Pope and
Cardinals deliberated upon the matter, whether or no the Decrees of
Reformation, were to be confirmed; And says, that p. 759.
the Court, understanding that the Pope was resolved upon the Confirmation,
changed their joy into grief; All the Officers complained of the losses they
should receive in their offices, if that Reformation were executed...
Supplications also, and Memorials, were given to the Pope, by those, who,
having bought their Offices, and foreseeing this loss, demanded restitution...
The Pope having diligently considered thereof, deputed eight Cardinals to
consult upon the Confirmation; and to think upon some remedies for the
complaints of the Court... He concludes, It is certain, that they who did
procure the Council, had no aim but to pull down the Pope's Authority; And,
while the Council did last, every one did speak, as if it had power to give
Laws to him.

After all, you think to mortify me with objecting, that the corruptions of
the Court, and the abuses tolerated in the Church, are as great as ever. But
you must give me leave to tell you, 1. I am not obliged to take your bare word
for it; 2. Whether it be true or false, it is nothing to my present purpose. If
false, you are to blame for saying so: If true, it is none of the Council's
fault. Having proceeded legally, and having made good Laws, the Council has
done its part: it is ours, to do the rest. My business is to defend the Council:
I have nothing to do, to rake the dunghill of the Church. Has the Decalogue
less Authority, because the greatest part of mankind are so disobedient? Or is
the Ghospel less Sacred, because there are so few who live according to the
maxims of it? If this be the only reason, why you Protest against the Council
of Trent, because the Decrees of Reformation are not every where, in all
things, punctually observed; I see no reason, why you may not, with as good a
grace, Protest against the Ghospel, and the Ten Commandments.

I have now done with your Objections: And although I am not of the Poet's
mind, that Brevity is always good, be it, or be it not, understood; Yet I have
endeavored to be as short as possibly I could, because, when I deal with a man
of your parts, a word is enough to the wise, and few words are best.

As for Soave, whom you so much admire, I desire to ask you a few questions,
before I tell you what I think of him. Suppose a mortal enemy of yours should
Libel you, by the way of History; call you Rogue and Rascal in the very
Preface; and, at the same time, persuade his Reader, that he follows exactly
the truth: Would you have me take this Author for an Oracle? Would you not
think me reasonable, if I suspected almost every word he said? And ought not I
to do the Council as much Justice, as I would my Friend? It Is certain that Soave
was a mortal enemy of the Council: In the very beginning, he declares it: He
says, p. 2.
it has caused the greatest deformation that ever was, and calls it the Iliad
of the Age; which is as kind a compliment to the Fathers, as if he had called
them, a pack of Villains. He tells us indeed, in the same place, that he is not
possessed with any passion, which may make him err; and this was well enough
said; But how shall a body do to believe him? If it were your own case, I Am
sure you would not like my being credulous: And how do I know but that an Enemy
of the Council may deserve as little credit, as an Enemy of yours?

Another reason, why I do not like him, is because he takes upon him to write
men's private thoughts, with as much assurance as he writes their words and
actions. He hardly ever speaks of any intelligence coming to Rome, but he
entertains his Reader with a pleasant Scene, in which he brings the Pope alone
upon the Stage, discoursing with himself his secret apprehensions and
deliberations upon every matter; such thoughts as no wise man would trust his
neighbor with, although he were the best and surest friend he had in the
world. How Soave could possibly come to any certain knowledge of such things, I
am not able to comprehend: And truly, if a man, in one case, will tell me more
than he can know; I have just reason to be afraid that, in another, he will tell
me more than he dos know.

A third reason, which weighs more with me than all the rest, is this: You tell
me, on the one side, He was a Popish Friar; And, on the other, I cannot
believe, but that (although perhaps, for some reasons, he did not openly
profess it) He was really a Protestant. It appears so plainly, by his censuring
the Decrees of Doctrine, as well as those of Reformation, and by the severe
reflections of his own, which he intermixes with those of the Lutheran
Critics; that I do not conceive how any man of sense, who reads him with
attention, can be of another opinion. Had he been a barefaced Protestant, I
should be more inclined to believe him. There is something of integrity and
honor in a man that openly professes what he is: And, although passion and
prejudice may blind him, yet I am apt to think that such a person will never
deceive me, more than he deceives himself. But a Protestant, that lives and
dies in the profession of a Popish Friar, How can I believe his words, when the
most serious of his actions are only so many lies? For my own part, I would as
soon make choice of a Catholic Jew to comment upon the Ghospel, and to write
the life of Christ, as I would choose a Protestant Friar to write the History
of a General Council.

Before I end my Letter, give me leave, once more, to mind you of the Discourse
we had, when we saw one another last. We both agreed, that C. II. p. 1.
it were a very irrational thing to make Laws for a Country, and leave it to
the inhabitants to be the Interpreters and Judges of those Laws; for then every
man will be his own Judge, and by consequence no such thing as either Right or
Wrong: that ibid.
therefore we cannot suppose, that God Almighty would leave us at those
Uncertainties, as to give us a Rule to go by, and leave every man to be his own
Judge: that ib.
Christ left his Spirit and Power to his Church, by which they were the Judges,
even of the Scripture it self, many years after the Apostles-which Books were
Canonical, and which were not: that ibid. p. 2.
the Judgment of the Church, is without Appeal; otherwise, what they decide
would be no farther to be followed than it agrees with every man's private
Judgment: that because, in the Apostles Creed, we believe in the Holy Catholic
Church, therefore we ought to believe in the first four General Councils, which
were true and legal Representatives of it: And lastly, that if the Council of
Trent were proved to be as General, as free, and as legal in all it is
circumstances, as any of the first four Councils were; then you must needs own
your self obliged in Conscience to submit to it, and to leave of Protesting
against it.

This last part I have here endeavored to prove, out of Soave himself, your
own Historian, who always makes the worst of things, and never speaks a
favorable word, but when the Power of Truth constrains him to it. If I have
not performed according to expectation; it is your own fault, who are to blame
for having a better opinion of me than I deserve. I am no Doctor, nor Graduate;
but every way unfit to be a Champion of the Cause. Yet, having received your
Commands, I have just reason to expect, that you will easily pardon a man, who
in this occasion is guilty of no other crime than being ready to show himself,

Sept. 22. 1686. Your Obedient Servant, N. N.

Page. 70. line. 1. read. rewarded. p. 75. *. 4. r. chapter 14. p. 76. l. 8. r. his
9. book. p. 85. l. 26. r. many. p. 86. l. 29. r. the year 831. p. 89. l. 8.
dele de. p. 114. l. 21. r. his 2. book. p. 152. l. 27. r. shut out. p. 161. l.
6. r. it has. p. 165. l. 1. r. your. p. 168. l. 5. r. haereticis. p. 172. l. 3.
dele an. p. 176. l. 26. r. in this. p. 189. l. 22. r. to Basil. p. 190. l. 9.
r. the case. ibid. l. 13. r. HAERETICIS. p. 194. l. 1. r. another. p. 225 l. 3.
r. Charles II. p. 240. *. 2. r. 590.

FINIS.

