THE ARGUMENT OF THE Lord Chief Justice OF THE Court of King's Bench CONCERNING
The GREAT CASE OF MONOPOLIES, BETWEEN The EAST -- INDIA Company, Plaintiff, AND
THOMAS SANDYS, Defendant.

Wherein their Patent for Trading to the East Indies, Exclusive of all others,
is adjudged good.

Entered Trin. 35 Car. 2. B. R. Rot. 126. and Adjudged Termino S. Hilar. annis
36 and 37 Car. 2. and Primo Jac. 2.

LONDON, Printed, and are Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
MDCLXXXIX.

The Publisher to the Reader.
TO commend this Argument I Will not undertake, because of the Author; but yet I
may tell you what is told me, That it is worthy any Gentleman's perusal, for
the Subject is of concern to the Public in general, and to every individual
Man in the Kingdom either immediately or by Consequence, since Trade is the
Life of a Nation, and all Men are Traders either by themselves or others; the
Consequences of it are Strength, Wealth, and Employment to all sorts of People
whatsoever: And that, and nothing but that, can secure the Peace of the
Country, it employing both Rich and Poor, and keeping all from Idleness, and so
prevents Ill Men from disturbing the Government by Treasons, or the Subject by
Felonies, both which are most frequent when Trade is dull, and Men are Idle;
when the Exchange is thin, and Shops are empty.

'Twould be an endless Task to recount the Desolations and Ruins that have
happened to States and Kingdoms by Sloth, Luxury, Idleness, and the neglect of
Commerce, and the prodigious Benefits that have accrued to several Countries by
the contrary, and to our own in particular; and the vigilant Care and Zeal,
which wise Kings, Princes, and other Sovereign Potentates, have always had and
used for the Countenance and Promotion of Traffic, within their respective
Territories.

That Foreign Trade is of absolute necessity, and infinite advantage to
England, is as apparent as that we are an Island peculiarly adapted, and
prepared for it by Nature her self; insomuch that Shipping, which at first was
an Invention of the Deity, for the Use of Noah and his Family, seems a Blessing
designed, most particularly for us, to render us sociable with the Inhabitants
of Foreign Countries, that we might borrow of their Necessities, and vent our
own Superfluities to them instead ou't; and so maintain a Correspondence with
all the habitable World.

That Foreign Commerce cannot be advantagiously maintained without Societies
instituted for that purpose, is sufficiently manifested to all considerate Men,
from the Policies of other Laws abroad, which establish them, and from the
Provisions of our own, which allow and protect them, and from the necessity of
the thing it self, as appears by the vast Charge, (in Intelligence, Factors,
Castles, Forts, Men, Arms, etc.) and the wise Conduct requisite for the support
of such a Commerce, which without the united Aid of a considerable number of
understanding Merchants, upon a considerable Stock; must necessarily be
obnoxious to the growing Encroachments of neighboring Countries, (which use
the Policy of settled Companies) and to the other mischievous Casualties, that
may daily happen through the Indiscretion and Rashness, and other weakness in
Stock or Conduct of particular individual Persons, exercising such Traffic.

As for the East India Company, they support the Crown by the incredible
Customs, which are yearly paid by it; they bear a considerable Proportion of
public and necessary Subsidies; they enrich the Nation by their Importations;
they Convert Infidels, or at least civilize them, and make them more humane by
their Correspondencies; they employ vast numbers of Poor People; they negotiate
vast Sums of private Persons Moneys, which would otherwise lie dead or useless:
They educate and breed vast numbers of Sea men for the Services of War; they
build and employ Vessels of great Burden, useful to the Crown and Public upon
emergent Occasions: Their Naval Force is part of the Defense of the Kingdom;
their Trading Fleet, is both the Glory and Riches of the Nation; they have
improved and do maintain the Spirit of Commerce to that degree, as preserves
the Balance of Trade between us and our Neighbors in its just Proportions;
which Company, were it dissolved, their Trade and Strength would increase, and
ours decay, and we should be reduced to our Primitive State of
Self-subsistance, and our Merchants, (now the Pride of England, and the Envy of
the World) must become Domestic Pedlers, for an home ignoble Traffic from
Cities to Towns, and from Towns to Villes, and sic retrorsum: For these Reasons
is the ensuing Argument published.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys, Concerning the Great CASE of
MONOPOLIES.
PLEA.
I. DEfendant demands Oyer of the Letters Patents which are set forth in haec
verba. In which (as it has been observed) the penalty of Forfeiture of Ship
and Goods, one moiety to the King, and the other to the Company, and
Imprisonment is omitted.

II. There is also a Clause, that the Company may License Strangers or others,
and that the King will not without the consent of the Company give Licenses,
etc.

III. That none shall have a Vote in the General Assembly but he that has 500
l. Stock.

IV. And there is another Clause which has not been mentioned by the Council
on either side, that if it should hereafter appear to his Majesty or his
Successors, that that Grant or the continuance thereof shall not be profitable
to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or to this Realm, that after three
years warning under the Privy Seal or Sign Manuel, the same should be utterly
void.

For Plea, the Defendant says by an Act of Parliament made 15 E. 3. It is
enacted, that the Sea shall be open for all Merchants to pass with their
Merchandises where they please, and that the Defendant by virtue of that Act,
and according to the Common Law of England did Traffic within those places
mentioned in the Declaration without any License, and against the will of the
Company as the Plaintiffs have declared prout ei been licuit.

Plaintiff Demurrs.

In the debate of this Case at the Bar there were several matters discoursed
of, but at length by the consent of both sides, as I apprehend, the Case was
resolved into these two Points.

I. Whether these Letters Patents giving or granting License or Liberty to the
Plaintiffs to exercise the sole Trade to the Indies within the limits of their
Grant, with prohibition to all others, be good in Law.

II. Admitting the Grant good, whether this Action be maintainable for the
Plaintiffs.

Now to let me into the Debate of these two Points: I think not amiss to
remember some things that have been mentioned by the Counsel that I think are
no ways in Question.

I. At this time I conceive therefore, that whether the King may prohibit his
Subjects from going beyond the Seas by Writ, or otherwise, by his absolute
Prerogative without giving any reason, is not the Question, nor sure was it
ever thought a Question till it was lately stirred at the Bar. For the Writ in
Fitz. N. B. 85. and the Register import no such thing, and our Books say, the
Surmises mentioned in those Writs are not traversable: so is Dyer 165. and 296.
for surely the King may restrain his Subjects from going beyond Sea, and is not
bound to give any reason for his so doing; but that is not now in Question.

II. In the next place, I do not conceive there is any difference (tho much
discourse has been about Indians and Infidels) whether the East Indies were at
the time of the Grant of this Patent inhabited by Christians or Infidels; tho
by the way in the debating of this Case, I shall show, perhaps that matter may
in some measure affect the Defendant, but will not at all affect the Grant to
the Plaintiffs. So that I conceive that whether this Country or Place, or any
other be inhabited by Christians or Infidels that is not otherwise provided for
by Act of Parliament, will make but the same Question.

III. Whether every Clause and Article in these Letters Patents, viz. Touching
forfeiture of Ship and Goods, Imprisonments, or diverse other clauses contained
in the Charter be legal or not, is not now in question. For surely it would be
hard to maintain them all, and therefore the Plaintiffs Council have avoided
those Questions by bringing this Action; and tho the Defendants Council have
mentioned them, yet surely it was only intended to fully the Cause, and not
that they thought them to affect the Question.

IV. Nor is it the Question, Whether by this Grant to the Plaintiffs the King
has fettered or confined his Prerogative by putting in a Covenant to exclude
himself from granting Licenses to others of his Subjects to trade within the
limits of the Plaintiffs Charter; tho Mr. William's (always a friend to the
Kings Prerogative) in tenderness and care thereof seemed to be surprised by the
inconsiderate extravagancy of the Grant, and would have us believe that he was
afflicted with the dismal Consequences that must necessarily ensue by the
King's parting with so great a Prerogative, and that either by the advice,
consent, or the inadvertency of his Attorney General and the rest of his
Council, by having a greater regard to the East India Company for the sake of
their Money than they had to the King in discharge of their duty. To acquit
them and us therefore of that Dilemma, I am of opinion, though it makes nothing
to the question that is now before us: The King may grant Licenses to any of
his Subjects to trade to the Indies notwithstanding the Charter or any Article,
Clause or Condition therein contained to the contrary, and notwithstanding any
Caution or advertisement that in his argument he gave to the King, or his
reflection that he made upon his Council either for their ignorance or hasly
inadvertency in the passing of that Grant; and I am the rather induced to be of
that persuasion, for that the most learned of our Profession whose Opinions
have been quoted by him and others that have argued on the Defendants side were
then of the Kings Council, and were privy to, and advised both these Letters
Patents and all others of the like nature that have been granted for these
hundred years last past. I therefore think fit to say, that I believe Mr.
Attorney General, and the rest of the King's Council have discharged their Duty
as well to the King, by maintaining of this Grant, as Mr. Williams has in this
instance manifested his Loyalty by endeavoring to destroy it. In short
therefore, as I said before, every Clause in this Charter is not to be
maintained, and therefore is not to affect the Question now to be determined.

V. Whereas it has been objected, that tho upon the Pleadings it is agreed,
that the Defendant never was a Member of the East India Company, nor had any
License from them to trade to the Indies, yet he might have a License from the
King, which, as I conceive, the King is not debarred to grant by any Clause in
the Letters Patents; yet I am of opinion, that if the Defendant had any such
License, it ought to have been shown on his part, which not being done, it
ought to be taken by us, as I believe the truth of the Fact is, the Defendant
never had any such License.

VI. It was observed, that the Plaintiffs in their Declaration had alleged,
that this Trade could not be managed but per hujusmodi Corpus Corporatum; and
by this means they had excluded the King from Constituting any more Companies
to trade within their Limits, tho perhaps the advantage of this Kingdom might
hereafter require it: Nay, tho the Indians might desire a further Treaty of
Commerce, or that the Trade of these places might require more Companies to be
erected; yet say they, this Grant has made the Plaintiffs a mere Republic,
and thereby has altered the Constitution of England in the management of Trade
by Commonwealths, by placing it in Companies, who (were they Independent upon
the Crown) are truly so called. Yet in as much as I did before observe, that
the King is not by this Grant either excluded from making any new Treaties with
the Indians, or from making any Corporations or granting any other Licenses to
any of the rest of his Subjects, notwithstanding any of the Clauses in the
Charter: So I am of opinion, that that Objection also does not affect the
Question now to be determined, and for that reason amongst others, I thought it
not improper to mention that Clause in the Charter that was omitted at the Bar,
which the King has annexed as a Condition to his Grant, that if it should
hereafter appear to his Majesty or his Successors, that that Grant or the
continuance thereof in the whole or in any part, should not be profitable to
his Majesty, his Heirs and his Successors, or to this Realm, that after three
years warning by War, under the Kings Seal or Sign Manual, should be made
utterly void. So that it appearing that the King has neither divested himself
of the power, nor at the time of the Grant did design to be prevented to show
his inclination for the promoting of the advantage of his Kingdom, has given
himself scope enough to obviate all those Emergencies. Yet by the way I cannot
but observe, that Mr. Williams to show his dislike to a Commonwealth, declared
it to be absolutely opposite to the interest of a Single Person, but the Single
Person he concerned himself for was not the King and his Prerogative, but his
Client the Defendant, and his Trade, who tho I cannot in propriety of Speech
call a Commonwealth; yet I cannot but think this opposition of his seems to
proceed from a Republican Principle; for he by his Interloping has been the
first Subject that within this Kingdom for near an hundred years last past,
has in Westminster Hall publicly opposed himself against the King's undoubted
Prerogative in the Grant now before us; and I hope by this Example the rest of
his Majesty's Subjects will be deterred from the like disobedience.

There were some other superfluous Objections made against the Clauses in the
Charter, and against the Formality of the Pleadings, which I think not
necessary to remember, and therefore having thus premised, I shall now descend
to those Points I think only material in this Cause.

I. The first and great Point in this Cause, is, Whether this Grant of the sole
Trade to the Indies, to the East India Company exclusive of all others, be a
good Grant in Law or not, and I am of opinion it is, and by the way I cannot
but make the same remark in this Case as my Lord Chief Baron Flemming made in
the great Case of Bates in the Exchequer, Lane, fol. 27. that it is a great
Grace and Eminent Act of condescension in the King to this Defendant, that he
does permit this great Point of his Prerogative to be disputed in
Westminster Hall; but by this he does sufficiently signify to all his
Subjects, that he will persist in nothing, though it seem never so much for his
advantage, but according to the Laws of the Land. I shall therefore endeavor
to make it appear that he is invested with this Prerogative by the Law of this
Nation; But by the Law I do not only mean the customary Common Law or Statutes
of this Realm which are Native and peculiar to this Nation, which as Mr.
Attorney well observed are not adapted to this purpose. But such other Laws
also as be common to other Nations as well as ours, and have been received and
used time out of mind by the King and people of England in diverse Cases, and by
such ancient Usage are become the Laws of England in those Cases; namely, the
General Law of Nations, the Law-Merchant, the Imperial or Civil Law, every of
which Laws so far forth as the same have been received and used in England time
out of mind, may be properly said to be the Laws of England.

And for the better communicating my Thoughts upon this Subject, I will proceed
by these Steps:

1. I will very briefly consider of the Inland Trade within this Kingdom, and
the Foreign Trade with other Nations, and therein observe that the King's
Prerogative is concerned in both, and that there is a great difference between
both allowed by the Municipal Laws of this Kingdom.

2. I shall show that the Liberty of Foreign Trade may be restrained.

3. That Foreign Trade and Commerce being introduced by the Law of Nations,
ought to be governed and judged according to those Laws.

4. That by the Laws of Nations the Regulation and restraint of Trade and
Commerce is reckoned Inter Juris Regalia, i. e. the Prerogative of the Supreme
Magistrate.

5. That though by the Laws of this Land, and by the Laws of all other Nations,
Monopolies are prohibited, yet Societies to trade, such as the Plaintiffs, to
certain places exclusive of others, are no Monopolies by the Laws of this Land,
but are allowed to be erected both here and in other Countries, and are
strengthened by the usage and practice of both, in all times.

6. I shall show the Authorities that are extant in our Books, together with
such Presidents, Reasons both public and politic; for as my Lord Fleming
says, that such Reasons are good directions for our judgments in such Cases as
these; being demonstrations of the course of Antiquity; and therein also
observe the necessity and advantage of such Societies, and by the way endeavor
to answer the several Acts of Parliaments, Presidents and Authorities, with all
other the objections that have been made against my Conclusion.

1. First then, to consider the difference between the Inland and the Foreign
Trade allowed of in our Books, and that the King's Prerogative does affect
both. As to Manufactures under which all sorts of Artificers are concerned, I
think they remain with the most Liberty by the Common Law; and as Mr. Attorney
observed, the Publick-weal is little concerned therein, only to preserve every
one in the quiet enjoyment of the fruits of his own labor and industry, yet
even in that the King's Prerogative has not been totally excluded; for as it
is taken notice of in our Books, that all things that are this day enjoyed by
Custom or Prescription, had their Commencement by Royal Grant, and by that
means no Artificer within the City of London can at this day use two Trades, i.
e, a Carpenter cannot use the Trade of a Joyner, or a Bricklayer of a
Plaisterer.

2. As to the Trade of Merchandise or Inland Commerce generally speaking, it
had the next Freedom by the Common Law, but was subject nevertheless to be
limited or restrained by the King's Prerogative in several particulars. As for
instance, to prevent all forestalling and engrossing.

So Mr. Attorney did well observe, that numbers of people could not meet to
traffic or Merchandise without being in danger of being punished as unlawful
Assemblies, the Crown therefore granted the liberties of Fairs and Markets for
the sake of Commerce and Trade; all which did originally proceed from the
Crown, and therefore by abusing those liberties may still be forfeited to the
Crown; and passing by all other instances, I shall only instance one taken
notice of in our Books, which well considered may go a great way in the Case at
the Bar* Register, fol. 107.

The King grants to the Abbot of Westminster and his Successors, that they
should hold a Fair at Westminster thirty odd days together, with a prohibition
that no Man should buy or fell within seven Miles of that Fair during that
time, and the King does there command the Sheriffs of London by his Writ to
seize the body of an Inhabitant of Salisbury for selling Clothes in London
within the time of the Fair: Now here is a Charter granted to a particular
Person exclusive of others, for a time subject to more Objections than the
Charter now in Question, yet approved of by our Books.

Hence it came that Corporations were erected, and Trade confined to Places and
Persons exclusive of others; for all such came originally from the Crown, and
as I said before in the Case of Fai^s, so I may now say in the Case of
Corporations, that though they claim Liberties and Privileges by prescription:
yet these originally proceeded from the Crown, and are therefore forfeitable to
the Crown, an Eminent instance hereof is that great Case of the City of London
for abusing their Liberties, which they claimed by prescription confirmed by
diverse Charters and Acts of Parliament by Judgment of this Court, their
Liberties and Franchises were seized into the King's Hands, and therefore
remain as a Vill to all intents and purposes till his Majesty shall be pleased
of his Bounty to restore them.

Now that the Inland Traffic is most concerned either in Corporations, Markets
or Fairs which all proceeds from the Crown, does plainly evince that the King's
Prerogative has a more immediate influence over Dealings in Merchandises than
it has over other Mechanic Crafts and Mysteries; and that as Mr. Attorney did
well observe to prevent Frauds, Deceits and other abuses either in Weight,
Measures, or otherwise, which would certainly interrupt such Commerce; but our
Law goes yet a Step further, and allows further difference between Inland
Merchandise and Foreign, and allows a different way of determining Controversies
that arise thereupon, the Common Law and Statutes of this Realm allowing the
Law-Merchant, which is part of the Law of Nations, should decide such
Controversies to. Decimo tertio H. 4. fol. 19. a Complaint made to the King and
Council of some goods taken away from a Merchant; it was moved in that Case,
that the matter might be determined at the Common Law, but the Lord Chancellor
said, that the Suit being brought by a Merchant who is not bound to sue
according to the Common Law to have his Cause tried by twelve Men, and to
observe the other Solemnities of our Law, but shall sue in Chancery according
to the Law of Nature, which is the Universal Law of the World. And it is in
that Case agreed by all the Judges, that if Foreign Merchandise were stolen or
waived, they could not be seized as other England Merchandises might be by the
Rules of the Common Law, as Waifs and Strays, which shows plainly there is a
difference in the consideration of our Law between foreign Merchandises that
cross the Seas, and other Inland Goods and Commodities. If two Merchants be
Partners in Merchandises, one shall have an Action of Account against the other
secundum Legem Mercatoriam, says the Register, fol. 135. and F. N. B. 117. D.
and yet by the Rule of the Common Law, if two Men be jointly possessed of other
Goods which are no Merchandise, the one cannot bring an Action of Account
against the other, if one of the Merchants dies, the Executor may bring his
Account against the Surviver for his moiety. Reg. 135. F. N. B. 117. but if it
were a Copartnership for other Goods, it would survive per Jus accrescendi
according to the Rules of the Common Law.

In an Action of Debt upon a Simple Contract, the Defendant may wage his Law,
but it is otherwise in a Contract about Merchandise in Lanes's Reports, Bates's
Case agreed, Reg. 260. A. At Common Law, the Goods of Ecclesiastical Persons
were excused from Toll; but says the Writ dum tamen Merchandizas aliquas non
exercitat de iisdem, it shows that then they fall under another consideration;
if one Man wrongs another Man of his goods, here an Action of Trespass will
lie; but if a Merchants goods be taken upon or beyond the Seas, there must be a
Writ of Reprizal to obtain Satisfaction, the Parliament Roll, 3 Ed. 1. M. 19.
in Archivis Turris Londini, where the Bailiffs of Southampton are commanded by
Writ, quod omnes Mercatores Leodienses ad parts Angliae accidents per bona
and Catalla sua distringantur secundum Legem Mercatoriam and Consuetudinem
regni ad satisfaciendum Mercatoribus Florentinis, etc. Where by the way
observe, that Lex Mercatoria, which differs from the ordinary Common Law, is
said to be Consuetudo regni Angliae, by which we may observe, that Foreign
Merchandises and Traders differ from others in the Eye of Law, even by the
allowance of the Common Law it self.

Several Acts of Parliament have been also made for the more speedy Recovery of
Debts contracted for Merchandises, as the Statute of Action Burnel, the Statute
de Mercatoribus, and the Statute Vicesimo Septimo, Ed. 3. Cap. 2. Amongst other
things it is enacted, That for Merchandises taken away, the Party shall be
arrested, and speedy and ready Process shall be against him from day to day,
and from hour to hour according to the Law-Merchant, and not at the Common Law.
So the Statute for erecting the Court of Ensurance designed for the speedy ease
of Merchants, has left the determination according to the Law of Merchants, and
therefore has ordered the Judge of the Admiralty's Court always to preside in
those Commissions: by all which I think I may fairly conclude there is a great
difference allowed of between the Inland and Foreign Commerce; and that,

II. I shall endeavor to prove that the Liberty of Foreign Trade may be
restrained.

And here I must premise, that as at first all Things were promiscuously common
and undivided to all, so the free Exercise of this Universal Right was then
instead of Property; but as soon as the number of men increased, and they found
by experience the inconveniency of holding all things in common, things were
reduced into Property by agreement and Compact, either Express as by Partition,
or implied by Primier Occupancy.

After this Government was established, and Laws were made even for the
ordering those things to which no man had any Right. As for Example, Deserts,
Places uninhabited, Islands in the Seas, Wild Beasts, Fishes and Birds, the
former were usually gained and disposed of by him that had the Sovereignty over
the People; the latter by him that had the Dominion over the Lands and Waters,
who might forbid all others from Hunting, Fishing, etc.

And in Virtue of this Universal Law, his Majesty and his Predecessors have
always disposed of the several Plantations abroad that have been discovered or
gained by any of their Subjects, and may do for the future in case any other be
discovered and acquired. For tho the Laws of Nations can command nothing which
the Law of Nature forbids: yet they may bound and circumscribe that which the
Law of Nature leaves free, and forbid that which naturally may be lawful. Now
to apply this to our present purpose of Trade and Commerce, Mr. Williams quoted
that common saying, Commercia debent esse libera, from whence he infers, that
by the Law of Nature and Nations, the Sea and Trade, and Traffic ought to be
free as the Air, and for that he has cited Grotius de Jure Belli ac Pacis, Cap.
3. Wellwoods Abridgment of Sea-Laws, in his Epistle to the Lord Admiral;
Grotius de Mari libero, where he says, Mare and Littora Maris Jure Gentium sunt
communia. Britton, Cap. 33. De perchase le mere and le air sunt thores Common.
Sir John Borough his Sovereignty of the Seas. Baldus de rerum Dominiis. But I
think none of those Books can warrant his conclusion, for surely that
Expression Commercia sunt libera, cannot possibly be understood in such a
literal sense, that every man in every Nation should be at liberty to trade
either in what Commodities, or to what place or at what time soever he shall
think fit; for I took it to be granted by all that argued for the Defendants,
that Trade and Commerce must be subject to some Laws; and Grotius in his Book
de Mari libero, proposes this main design to prove, that any one Nation had not
power to hinder another Nation from free Commerce, and that the Spaniards
therefore had no right to prohibit the Dutch from trading into such part of
Indies whereof the Spaniards were not possessed, upon pretense that they had
the Dominion of those Seas, Inter Nos and Hispanos, says he, heac Controversia
est, sitne immensum and vastum Mare regni unius nec maritimi accessio? Populone
unquam jus sit volentes populos prohibere ne vendant, ne permutent, ne denique
commeent inter sese; and for the benefit of his Countrymen he does therefore
assert, licere cuivis genti quamvis alteram adire cumque ea negotiare, which,
taking that to be true which by the Law of Nations is certainly otherwise: yet
nothing can be inferred from thence but only the Question of Commerce between
one Nation and another, and how that was before Leagues and Treaties were made,
little may perhaps be found, as Mr. Attorney well observed, besides the Laws of
Hospitality, which do not give any Demandable Right; but surely Grotius there
has no particular respect to particular Subjects of this or any other Nation,
how far the Supreme Power of any Nation may erect a Society of Trade to a
certain place, and for certain Commodities exclusive of all other Subjects of
their own.

And that plainly appears both from the Scope of his Book, as also for that for
several Years both before and at the Time of publishing that Treatise, the
Dutch East India Company was established, which I shall have farther occasion
to discourse of by and by. As for Welwood's Epistle, I have seldom observed
that Epistles have been cited in Westminster Hall as Authorities: yet supposing
it to be so, that all loyal Subjects shall have their Petition granted to
Safety and Security in their Trade; I suppose Welwood little dreamt of
Interlopers, when he talked of loyal Subjects, if it can be meant only of such
who may trade by Law, that is, to beg the Question in respect of the Plaintiff
and Defendant: as to that of Britton that the Sea is common, it is answered, by
what has been said before. And VVelwood Page 66. says that by commune or
publicum is meant a thing common for the Use of any one sort of People,
according to that saying, Roma communis Patria est, but not for all of all
Nations; VVelwood page 66. That Passage of Borough is only observed to prove
the Kings Prerogative within the four Seas. And though Mr. Williams would have
insinuated, as the Sturgeons and other great Fish and Wrecks and the like had
come to the King by the Statute of the 17. E. 3. C. 11. that Act was but a
Declaration of the common Law, for he had it by the Right of his Prerogative,
Plowden's Commentaries in the Case of Mines, Cook 5. Sir Henry Constable's
Case; these things were vested in the King by his Prerogative by the common
Law, yet I cannot but observe that the Treatise of Mare liberum on which Mr.
Williams so much relied, was craftily writ to overthrow the King's Prerogative
in that beneficial Part thereof, relating to the Fishing on the English Coasts;
and contains a plain Proclamation for all Persons of any Nation indifferently
to Fish in all kinds of Seas, for says cap. 5. fol. 10. quae autem Navigationis
eadem Piscatus habenda est ratio, ut communis maneat omnibus; and herein though
Mr. Williams intends to make good the Premises; I presume that Mr. Pollexfen
that argued on the same side, has a greater concern for his Friends in the West
than to join with him to make good that conclusion. And before I go off from
this Point, I think it not amiss, the better to clear the way to my
conclusions, to give some Instances wherein other Nations as well as our own,
have not only thought it legal, but necessary for their several public
Advantages to put restrictions upon Trade, and did not think it injurious to
natural Equity, and the Freedom of Mankind so much discoursed of on the other
side. To give some few instances: Videmus Jura Commerciorum, says Bodin de
Repub. lib. 1. chap. 7. Non solum omnibus populorum principumque inter se
conventis, verumetiam singularum Statutis, etc. And after he has enumerated the
Compacts for Trade between the Pope and the Venetians, between the Citizens of
the Hantz Towns, and the Kings of England, France, Spain, and several other
Countries: illi, says he, inter se Commercium multis modis personarum, mercium,
locorum, temporum atque omni alia Ratione coarctarunt. So is Marguardus, fol.
155. and Buchanan in his 7th Book de rebus Scotiae, and in all Countries the
Importation and Exportation of some Commodities, are prohibited, as Salt from
France, Horses from other Countries, Wool from hence. In whomsoever that Power
of restraint does remain the Power of Licensing some and restraining of others
surely does also remain by parity of Reason; but of that more by and by: and as
Mr. Attorney did truly observe upon perusal of the Statutes that are now in
Print relating to Trade, the Parliaments have in all Ages even to this Kings
Reign since his Restoration, thought fit to make more Laws to prohibit foreign
Trade than to increase it, as looking upon it more advantageous to the
Commonweal. And thus having observed that other Nations as well as we have not
only thought it legal, but necessary to make Laws for the restraint of Trade,
and thereby thought they did no injustice to the Liberty of Mankind,

III. I proceed to the next Step. I shall therefore thirdly, endeavor to prove
that Foreign Trade and Commerce being introduced by the Laws of Nations, ought
to be governed and judged according to those Laws, and I do not know of any
Statute or Book of the Common Law now in Print that does oppose this Assertion,
Cokes 3. Inst. fol. 181. in the Margin cited by the Defendants Council at the
Bar; Commercium, says he, Jure gentium esse debet; nay, it is the Express Text
of the Law, ex Jure Gentium Commercia sunt instituta, which being laid down as
undeniably true, and so admitted to be by the Defendants Council; I would infer
from thence, since Commerce and Traffic are founded upon the Law of Nations by
the natural reasons of things, all Controversies arising about the same, should
be determined by the same Laws, especially where there is no positive and
express Law in that Country where such Controversies do arise to determine
them by. And Mr. Williams seems to allow, that these are no such Laws in this
Kingdom, for he thinks that the Controversy now before us is not to be
decided, but by Parliament.

All other Nations have governed themselves by this Principle, and upon this
ground stands the Court of Admiralty in this Kingdom, viz. that there might be
uniform Judgments given there to all other Nations in the World in Causes
relating to Commerce, Navigation, and the like; and in as much as the Common
and Statute Laws of this Realm, are too straight and narrow to govern and
decide Differences arising about Foreign Commerce, and can never be thought to
bear any sort of Proportion to the universal Law of all Nations, as the
Interests of all Foreign Trade, do necessitate them to contend for: It will
become us that are Judges in Westminster Hall, for the better determining this
Case, to observe the Methods used by our Predecessors in determining such like
Causes, and take notice of the Law of Nations.

The Common Law, by the several Authorities I cited before, takes notice of the
Law-Merchant, and as the Book of Ed. 4. before cited, says it is part of the
Law of Nations, and leaves the determination to be according to that Law, the
several Acts of Parliament I before cited, make a particular Provision, that
matters of this nature should be determined according to the Law-Merchant,
which is part of the Law of Nature and Nations, and is universal, and one and
the same in all Countries in the World, and therefore Cicero speaking of this
Law, says, Non erit alia Lex Romae, alia Athenis, alia nunc, alia post hac, sed
and inter omnes gentes and omni tempore una eademque lex obtinebit; and I the
rather thought my self obliged more industriously to search into the Law of
Nations, the better to enable me to give Judgment in this Case, the Consequence
whereof will affect the King's Subjects in all Parts of the World, and I was
minded thereof particularly, by my Lord Chief Baron Flemming, in the giving
Judgment in the great Case of Bates about the Imposition upon Currants, Lane
fol. 27. and does not only affirm it as necessary, but the common Practices of
all Judges in all Ages.

Do not we leave the determination of Ecclesiastical Causes to be decided
according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, Foreign Matters, Matters of Navigation,
Leagues, Truces, Embassies, nay, even in the Case at the Bar, the stopping of
the Defendants Ship by an Admiralty Process, was left by the Opinion of all
this Court, and afterward by the Courts of Common Pleas and Exchequer, to be
decided in the Admiralty, and by virtue of a Process out of that Court, his
Ship is detained to this day; and as I said, that Court proceeds according to
the Law of Nations, and the Matters before specified, are not to be controled
by the Rules of the Common Law.

And if Customs make a Law, then the Custom of Nations is surely the Law of
Nations, which brings me to my next particular, which is the main thing upon
which this Cause will turn.

Therefore, 4thly, I conceive, that both by the Laws of Nations, and by the
Common Law of England, the Regulation, Restraint and Government of foreign
Trade and Commerce, is reckoned inter Jura Regalia, i. e. is in the Power of
the King, and it is his undoubted Prerogative, and is not abridged or controled
by any Act of Parliament now in force.

This Question is not concerning the Consequences of this Power, or any
Inconveniences that may happen thereupon, because upon Inconveniences arising,
the King is to be supplicated to redress them, which I shall farther take
notice of, when I come to answer the particular Objections made against this
Grant.

Commerciorum Jura sunt Privilegiata ac non nisi iis concessa qui exercendorum
Mercatorum licentiam Principis indultu and authoritate meruerunt, is the very
express Text of the Civil Law, and so is Carpzovires, Constable. n. 5. Bodinus de
Republica, lib. 1. Cap. 7. says quae tametsi Jure gentium esse videantur
prohibere tametsi saepe a Principibus videmus, and in Cap. 6. quoted by Mr.
Attorney, That the Laws of Commerce are contained in the particular Compacts
and Agreements of People and Princes. So Salmasius page 236. Mercatura est Res
indifferens in qua Magistratus vel in vetando vel permittendo suam pro Commodo
Reipublicae potest imponere Authoritatem. So Carpzovires, a famous German
Lawyer in his Decisions lib. Decis. 105. N. 13. and 14. Exempla haud rara sunt
ubi Privilegio and edicto Principis commercia ad certas Personas certave loca
restringere videmus; These Rules and Principles asserted to be the Laws of
Nations, agree with the Principles of our Laws; Mr. Attorney in his Argument in
this Cause cited many Records and Presidents to make good this Assertion, which
I think he did with great clearness: I therefore will content my self with as
few of them as I can, and only remind you of such as I think absolutely
necessary to make good my Assertion, which I will do by these steps.

I conceive the King had an absolute Power to forbid Foreigners, whether
Merchants or others, from coming within his Dominions, both in times of War and
in times of Peace, according to his Royal Will and Pleasure, and therefore gave
safe Conducts to Merchants Strangers to come in in all Ages, and at his
Pleasure commanded them out again by his Proclamation or Order of Council, of
which there is no Kings Reign without many Instances; and the Statute of Magna
Charta, Chap. 30. so much insisted upon by the Defendants Council, is but a
general safe Conduct; Omnes Mercatores nisi public ante prohibiti fuerint
habeant salvum and securum Conductum, etc. Where by the way I must observe,
That Mercatores, says my Lord Cook, in his Comment upon the Chapter, is only
intended of Merchants Strangers, for I cannot find, that in those days any of
the Subjects of this Kingdom did apply themselves to foreign Trade, or at least
the Trade was not so considerable, as to be taken notice of in any Book or
Record that I can meet with; and before the making of that Statute, my Lord
Coke 2. Institut. fol. 57. does agree, that the King might and did prohibit
Strangers at his pleasure: But he conceives, and with great respect be it
spoken to his Memory; I think, without any color of Reason, would make these
words, nisi public prohibeantur, to intend only a Prohibition by Parliament;
and his Reason is, for that it concerns the whole Realm: Now did the coming in
of Strangers concern the Realm, after the making of the Act, more than it did
before? Surely no. Does not the Power of making War and Peace absolutely belong
to the King by his Prerogative? and is not that of public concern to the
Kingdom? and is not the Prohibition of Strangers, a natural dependant upon that
Prerogative? if the word public there had been out, there had been no color
for that conceit, and surely the King's Proclamation will make the matter as
public as an Act of Parliament can do; nay, and I may say, more, for Acts of
Parliament anciently were made public by Proclamation; for in our Books we
have many Instances of Writs directed to Sheriffs of Counties, to cause Acts of
Parliament to be published by Proclamation, and so was the constant and ancient
usage; and it is not more natural for Strangers that are abroad to take notice
of the King's public Edicts, which is known to be of great Importance in all
Countries, more than they would of an Act of Parliament, that affects the
King's own Dominions only; besides it appears more impertinent, if you turn
those words into a Proviso, and then it will amount to no more in plain English
than this, provided, that this Law shall continue, except it be hereafter
repealed, which surely would be very ridiculous.

Mr. Attorney and Mr. Solicitor, both in their Arguments, quoted several
Records and Precedents, where the King in all times after the making of that
Act, did prohibit Strangers from coming in, and did command them out when they
were here at pleasure; I shall not trouble you with the Repetition of the
Records, for they were many: Nay, the King, when Acts of Parliament had
prohibited, did grant Safe Conduct, and of that sort, in Rolls Prerogative 180.
you will find several Instances, and in the several Acts of Parliament, cited
by Mr. Attorney, to confirm the King's Prerogative, as to safe-Conducts it does
appear. Syderfyn, fol. 441. It is said, that the King, by the Common Law, might
prohibit the Importation of Foreign Goods; and whoever acted against such
Prohibition, forfeited his Ship.

The King might prohibit any of his Subjects from going beyond the Seas at
pleasure, and recall them again as he thought fit; and that, as I have said
before, without giving any reason: the Books of Fitzherbert's N. B. and
Register before-cited, makes this evident: Mr. Attorney indeed cited many
Instances, wherein the Kings had made use of their Prerogatives, Roll 's Ab. 2.
fo. 214. Commons pray leave to export and import Foreign Goods at their
pleasure, except Goods of the Staple, notwithstanding any Proclamation to the
contrary. Resp. le Roy voet estre advise parson Council.
as, 7 Ed. 2. M. 10. Quadragesimo Ed. 3. M. 24. Stat. of 5 R. 2. Cap. 2. which
confirms it, 3. Inst. 179. Vicesimo quinto Ed. 3. M. 10. with many more; and
indeed, I think, it was not denied, but that after a Prohibition it was an
Offense, admitted of by the Defendants Council, for any Subjects to go beyond
the Seas; Dyer 165. and 296. agrees it.

And that is sufficient for the present purpose, there being a Prohibition in
the Charter, in question to all Persons that are not there mentioned.

What influence the King's Prerogative must necessarily have upon Foreign Trade
and Commerce, appears by his frequent granting Letters of mark and reprizal,
these are not allowed of by the Law of Nature, Civil or Common Law; for thereby
no man is bound by another Act, without his Consent, but by the general
Consent of Nations, humana necessitate exigente. The King only has the power of
making Leagues and Truces with Foreign Princes, upon which only all Foreign
Trade does depend, and those Leagues are made upon such Terms and Conditions,
and under such limitations, as both Princes think fit; many Instances to this
purpose were also cited by Mr. Attorney, to which I refer my self, and the
differences that arise from Merchants beyond the Seas, are to be determined
according to those Leagues, and cannot be decided by the Municipal Laws of this
Realm, which cannot be put in Execution in Foreign Parts.

Fourthly, The King is absolutely Master of War and Peace, which he could not
be, in case he had not a Power to lay restraint upon his own Subjects, in
relation to Foreign Commerce: Since eo ipso, that War is proclaimed, all
public Commerce is prohibited, and the Council that argued for the Defendant,
admitted, That the King might prohibit his Subjects to go or trade beyond the
Seas in cases of Wars or Plagues. How strangely preposterous then would it be
for a man to imagine, that the King should have an absolute Power of War and
Peace, and yet be denied of the means to preserve the one and prevent the
other! Is not that therefore the great Reason why the King is at so great
Expense in maintaining Ambassadors and Envoys in all the Trading parts of the
World, without which, we should be in a perpetual state of War? Would it not be
monstrous, that when the King is entered into League with any Sovereign Prince
in a matter of Trade, very advantageous to his People, to have it in the power
of any one of his Subjects to destroy it? as for instance, Suppose a League
between our King and the Emperor of Morocco, for a Trade to Tangier, were made
upon Condition, that no English Ship coming there for Commerce should be above
a hundred Tun, and a Fleet of Merchants Ships within that Condition, were in
Port at Tangier; and Mr. Sands with the same Obstinacy, as he seems to appear
in this Case, should have gone with a Ship of above a hundred Tun to Tangier,
that would have been an absolute breach of the League, we should have been
immediately in a state of War, the Merchants Goods and Ships absolutely
forfeited to the Emperor, by the Law of Nations; and they and their Families
thereby undone without any remedy, till Mr. Sands should be pleased to return
into England, and also bring with him an Estate sufficient to make them a
Recompense; and then also, perhaps, it would be difficult to contrive such an
Action in our Law, to compel Mr. Sands to do it: besides, the King has no other
way, if his Ambassadors and Ministers in Foreign Parts cannot prevail, that
right should be done to his Subjects; or if Mr. Sands's Interloping Ship, and
all its Cargo, had been wrongfully taken away from him by any Foreign Prince,
but by the King's declaring of a War, and compelling them to make Restitution
by force; the Consequence whereof will affect more than Foreign Traders would
be then concerned, both in their Persons and Purses, and it would be very hard
for all the King's Subjects to lie under the burden and charge, and the profits
and advantages accrue only to a few; and here by the way, I think it not
improper to take notice of an Objection, that was made by the Defendant's
Council, of the unreasonableness that the King should be entrusted with this
Prerogative: For as well as he may restrain Persons traveling to the Indies,
he may also restrain them from Trading into any other part of the World. The
very Objection seems to carry an unsavory, as well as an unreasonable mistrust
in a Subject to his Prince; for as it is a Maxim in our Law, the King cannot be
presumed to do wrong; and I am sure the constant Practice of our Present King,
has not given us the least umbrage for such Diffidence: and I think I may truly
say, we are as safe by our Princes own natural Inclinations, as we can be by
any Law in this particular; the King has the absolute Power of pardoning all
Offenders, by his inherent Prerogative, which an Act of Parliament cannot
deprive him of; the Case of Murder is a full Instance of that, nor was that
Prerogative ever disputed in any Age, tho never so troublesome, saving in that
single Case of the Earl of Danby, and that without any Reason that I could ever
hear of: Is it therefore to be objected, and presumed, that the King will
Pardon all the Traitors, Murderers and Robbers, and other Felons, and make use
of his Prerogative to let all Malefactors escape?

The King is the Fountain of Honor, as well as of Justice, and in virtue of
that Prerogative, may ennoble as many of his Subjects as he pleases, and
thereby exempt them from Arrests, and other common Processes of the Law, by
means whereof Men do more speedily recover their just Debts, and have redress
for Injuries. Is it therefore to be presumed the King will make such a glut of
Noblemen, because he may do it?

And as this is against his Inclination, so certainly it is against his
Interest, to make such Grants as the Defendant's Council seems to fear; for it
is more for the King's benefit than it can be for his Subjects, the greater the
Importation of Foreign Commodities is, for from thence arise his Customs and
Impositions, those necessary supports of the Crown; and therefore in some sense
the King is the only Person truly concerned in this Question: For this Island
supported its Inhabitants in many Ages, without any Foreign Trade at all,
having in it all things necessary for the Life of Man.

Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis, Says the Poet.

And truly, I think, if at this day most of the East India Commodities were
absolutely prohibited, tho it might be injurious as to the profit of some few
Traders, it would not be so to the generality of the Inhabitants of this Realm.
And therefore as I have offered these few Instances to prove the King should
have such a Prerogative, in the next place, I come to show that the Kings of
England have exercised this their Prerogative in all Ages; and as the King has
the power of restraint of Foreign Trade, so he is the only Judge when it is
proper to use that power, which seems plainly to be for the same reason: And, I
think, Mr. Williams's remark of the difficulty of this Case, that it should
necessitate the King to call a Parliament to assist him with power to determine
this Question, is not to be passed by without some Observation.

God be praised it is in the King's power to call and dissolve Parliaments, when
and how he pleases, and he is the only Judge of these Ardua Regni, that he
should think fit to consult with the Parliament about; and Mr. Williams would
do well to save himself the trouble of advising the King of what things are fit
for him to consult with his Parliament about, till such time as he be thereunto
called; but it has been too much practiced at this and other Bars in
Westminster Hall of late years, to captivate the Lay Gens, by lessening the
power of the King, and advancing, I had almost said, the Prerogative of the
People; and from hence comes the many mischiefs to the King's Subjects in parts
abroad, by making the Power of the King thought so inconsiderable, as tho he
were a mere Duke of Venice, being absolutely dependent upon his Parliament.
Would it not be mightily for the Honor and Dignity of the Crown of England,
think ye, That the Emperor of Fez and Morocco, or any Prince of the remote
parts of the World should be told, that Mr. Sands one of the King of Great
Britains Subjects came into the Emperor's Territories against his Prince's
consent, and that he had no power to hinder him, unless he would consult with
all his Nobles and the Representatives of all his common Subjects to assist
therein? Would not the Emperor believe Sands to be the greater Prince of the
two? But though such sort of Declamations are so much for the service of the
Crown, and for the Honor of the Kingdom as they would have it believed; yet I
think they have the same tendency of Duty and Service to the King, with some
other matters that of late have happened amongst us, viz. Some have been so
concerned as well for the safety and security of his Majesty's sacred Person,
and to make him formidable to his rebellious Subjects at home, as to desire
that his Guards might be discharged, because it looked as tho he designed to
rule by a Standing Army, and to show their tenderness to his Sacred Life, would
have him removed from the assistance of evil Counselors, as they called them,
and put himself into the hands of Assassinates, as though one murdered Prince
were not sufficient to satisfy that piece of State Policy, in one and the same
Age; and in order that he might have sufficient to support the Necessity as
well as Dignity of a Crown, which all good Subjects are zealous for; some of
late have industriously endeavored to have prevented him from being able to
borrow any Money upon the Credit of any part of his Revenue; a privilege that
the meanest of the Persons concerned in that Question, would think themselves
highly injured to be debarred of: These and the like attempts if not prevented,
will render the King and his Government low and despicable in all other parts
of the World: and as for the instance between a Denizen and a Man Naturalized,
I think it rather makes against, than for Mr. Williams's Conclusion, as to the
main Question; for though the King cannot Naturalize a Man, and thereby give
him inheritable blood as a natural born Subject to inherit Lands: yet he may
make an Alien a Denizen, and by that means he becomes to have as much privilege
as any of the King's natural Subjects has, as to Trade and Commerce, which is
the only question now before us; and I cannot help being of Opinion, that this
Kingdom was in greater regard abroad, and the Inhabitants thereof more
prosperous at home, when the Prerogative of the Crown was more absolute than
now it is; therefore it is our Duty as good Judges as well as good Subjects, to
endeavor to support it as much as we can by Law. And so I proceed to mention
some Presidents and Authorities, whereby the Kings of England have in all ages
exercised this part of their Prerogative of Restraining, disposing and ordering
matters of Commerce and Foreign Trade by Royal Licenses, Charters and
Dispensations.

And herein I shall content my self with as much brevity as I can, only in
producing some few of those many instances, which were with great care and
industry found out by Mr. Attorney, and Mr. Solicitor, and by them so
learnedly and properly applied to the Case in question.

I. Therefore it has been well observed, that the Staples which were the common
and public Marts for all Merchants to resort to, were first erected by the
King's Prerogative without any Act of Parliament, as it does plainly appear by
the several Acts of Parliament mentioned at the Bar, either for setting the
Places, or enlarging the Commodities that were permitted to be brought to the
Staple; for surely in all times when the Staple was fixed in the Dominions of
any other Prince, that must be done by League, which none can make but the
King. To instance one Authority for all; the Stat. 2 Ed. 3. Cap. 9. expressly
says, It is enacted, that the Staples beyond the Seas, and on this side,
ordained by Kings in time past, etc. Mr. Attorney and Mr. Solicitor cited
several Records and other Acts of Parliaments, that allow this to be the King's
Prerogative absolutely, which I shall only name, they having opened the
particulars at large, viz. Vicesimo E 1. Plac. Parl. Rolls: Abrid. fol. 108.
130. Octavo E 3. numero 20. 27 E. 3. Cap. 1. 43. E. 3. Cap. 1. 47. E. 3. N. 17.
Prim. R. 2. N. 98. with many more, which did not only License Merchants to
repair to their several Staples, but prohibited them from carrying their Staple
Commodities to any other places; and the several Acts of Parliaments made
touching the Staple, only inflicted greater Forfeitures upon the Persons
offending, more than the King by his Prerogative did inflict, but neither added
to, or diminished any part of the Power of the Crown: the truth whereof will
also farther appear by the consent of the Parliament, plainly declared in
several Statutes following, viz. 2 Hen. 5. Cap. 6. 2 Hen. 6. Cap. 4. 8 Hen. 6.
Cap. 17, and 27. by which and several other instances, both by Mr. Solicitor
and Mr. Attorney, I do conceive it does plainly appear that the Statute of 2 of
Ed. 3. Cap. 9. Nono l. 3. cap. 1. Decimo quarto Ed. 3. cap. 2. the Stat. of
Decimo quinto, Ed. 3. mentioned in the Defendants Plea, Decimo 8. Ed. 3. cap.
3. which the Defendants Council have so much insisted upon for the opening the
Liberty of Trade, only concerned Merchants of the Staples, and by the Acts of
Parliaments made relating to that Trade, since particularly mentioned by Mr.
Attorney stand now repealed.

And tho the place of the Staple as well as the Commodities were ascertained by
Acts of Parliaments; yet the King granted to Merchants Licenses to trade
elsewhere, which Prerogative is allowed of by Acts of Parliaments, and other
Authorities in our Books: for instance, amongst many others, the Stat. 8 Hen.
6. 21. 22 Hen. 6. cap. 4. 15 Hen. 6. cap. 3. 27 Hen. 6. cap. 1. 1 Hen. 7. fol.
3. A. 13 Ed. 4. fol. 3. l. 5 E. 4. 33. amongst other Books make it appear.

And as well as the King, before those Acts of Parliaments mentioned, ordered
the Merchandises of the Staple, so all other Foreign Trade not taken notice of
by Acts of Parliaments, were begun and absolutely disposed of by the King's
Prerogative; for as my Lord Coke in his Comment upon Magna Charta, cap. 30.
does truly observe, that by Mercatores, there only is meant
Merchant-strangers; for as I said, I do not find that any of the Subjects of
this King meddled in Foreign Trade in many years after the making of that Act:
the first instance I meet with, is in Malin's Lex Mercatoria, fol. 150. of the
Society of Merchants which is the Staples Adventurers, made by a Grant from
King Edw. III. and were called the Brotherhood of St. Thomas a Becket of
Canterbury till the time of Hen. 7. who confirmed their Charter, but changed
their Name to that of Merchant-Adventurers, by which Name they continued a
Corporation.

^ And that the King did shut and open Foreign Trade at his pleasure, by many
instances mentioned by Mr. Attorney and Mr Solicitor, does farther appear, 33
Hen. 3. memb. 1. 2 E. 3. pars secunda memb. 35. 3 Hen. 3. N. 33. Rolls
Prerogative 170. and 214. before-cited, primo Hen. 5. 41. decimo octavo Hen. 6.
N. 60. and the Stat. of 12 Hen 7. cap. 6. which I have caused to be searched;
and in Plowden's Commentaries in the great Case of Mines-Royal, it is set down
as a Rule that ancient Charters and Grants of the Crown are the best Evidences
of the Prerogative. Phil. and Mary erected the Corporation of Russia Merchants
by Charter, with a Prohibition to others with the like Conditions within
mentioned in the Charter at the Bar, and was afterward approved of in
Parliament, in 8 Eliz. and the Forfeiture mentioned in the Letters Patents made
more effectual; and as Mr. Attorney did truly observe, that when Callis was
taken, and thereby the Staples unsettled, Queen Eliz. thought according to the
President of the Russia and other Companies, it was most advantageous for the
carrying on of Trade and Foreign Commerce to erect Societies and Corporations,
which was well approved of in those times, and so has continued ever since
undisturbed until this present Question, which I shall more particularly insist
upon when I come to discourse of the next Head.

And here by the way I shall only remember, that there were many Records and
Books cited by the Council at the Bar, to prove the difference between alien
Enemies and alien Armies, and how these Infidels are in Law looked upon as
perpetual Enemies, and the many Cases that were cited about the Jews and others
I think will not be necessary to be farther insisted upon; for I conceive they
do not concern the Question that is now before us: for were not the Charter now
in question in being, it would be worth while for Mr. Sands to consider how far
he might be obnoxious to punishment for trading with Infidels, who are in Law
called Perpetui inimici, and therefore I conceive it is as Penal for any of the
King's Subjects to trade with Infidels who are alien Enemies without a Royal
License, as it is to trade with alien Armies contrary to a Royal Prohibition:
and I cannot conjecture how he will avoid this Rock, notwithstanding his
pretended skill in Navigation, without making use of this Charter as a
safe conduct to him by Implication, though he seems here so much to struggle
against, and how far that would prevail for his benefit may be also considered.
But as I said before,

IV. The true Question is, Whether this be a good Grant to the Plaintiffs of a
sole Trade to the Indies, were the Inhabitants thereof Christians or Infidels
exclusive of others, be good or not, is the true Question, and therefore I
proceed to the next Step, that though unlawful Engrossing and Monopolies are
prohibited by the Laws of this and of other Nations, yet I do conceive that the
Charter now in question of a sole Trade exclusive of others, is no such
unlawful engrossing or Monopoly, but is supported and encouraged as conducing
to public benefit by the Law, Practice and usage of this and other Countries:
and herein by the way, though the word Monopoly or Engrossing generally spoken
of are odious in the eye of our Law, yet some Engrossings, and so some
Monopolies are allowed of in our Books, and so I desire to be understood, when
I say a lawful or unlawful Monopoly, or a lawful or unlawful Engrossing; and in
as much as this is the great, and as I think, the only Objection that either
has or can be made against the present Charter; I shall be the more particular
in giving my Opinion therein, with the Reasons and Authorities that have
induced me thereunto.

I premise only this, that in all those Countries where Societies of Trade are
erected by the Supreme Power exclusive of all others; as the Case at the Bar,
Monopolies are forbidden, and are as severely punished by their Laws as they
can be by the Common and Statute-Laws of England, viz. in Holland, Germany,
France, Spain, etc.

And so where ever the Civil Law prevails, Monopolies are punished with
Confiscation of Goods and Banishment, C. de Monopoliis and Cens. Forens. part.
1. fol. 497.

Now though Monopolies are forbidden, yet that cannot be understood to be so
universally true (as no general Law can ever be) that it should in no respect
and upon no occasion or emergency whatsoever admit of any Exception or
Limitation.

The Exceptions thereof may be such as these:

I. Though no private Persons can have the sole Trade to themselves by their
own private authority; yet this may be granted to a public Society by the
Prerogative of the Prince; if

II. It be upon good cause, and for the public advantage of the Kingdom.

III. From the necessity of beginning and carrying on such Trades and Foreign
Commerce, which can be only done by Companies and Societies.

IV. Such Companies and Societies ought to be continued and supported upon the
Natural Equity and Justice, that no other Persons should be permitted either to
reap the profit, or to endanger the loss of what has been begun and been
carried on by them with great hazard and expense.

Now in as much as Foreign Trade can never be of advantage to this Kingdom,
except the balance be kept equal between this and other Countries, which can
never be done but by keeping up to proportionable Rules, for the regulation
thereof with the other Countries: and because as I said before, the Municipal
Laws of this Realm seem too scanty for that purpose, I will therefore first
consider how this Question stands as to the Law, of Nations; and then how it is
considered by our Law, producing Authorities in both, to make good my
Assertion, and because I thought the former more natural and effectual for the
decision of this Question, made me more inquisitive than otherwise I should
have been. Cujacius, lib. 16. obser. 23. distinguishes inter monopolia licita
and illicita.

Licitum Monopolium, says he, est, si certis personis vel quod potius est certo
Collegio concesserit Princeps ut ei soli Jus sit vendendi certae mercis; and
therefore recites a Law of the Emperors Theodosius, and Valentinian, by which
certain Governors of Commerce were appointed, Edictali Lege sancita, ut nulli
mercatori nisi ad designata Loca temporibus praestitutis ad negotiationis suae
species distrahendas passim liceret accedere, etc.

Carpzovires in his Decisions before mentioned, lib. 2. Decis. 105. N. 13 and
14. makes this no new Case; Et certe (non est novum) modum Commerciis (quae
tamen liberrima esse debent) poni ex causa nimirum publicae utilitatis vel
Necessitatis, ex quo monopolia, alias prohibita jure subsistunt.

And again, exempla haud rara sunt ubi Necessitat, and edicto principis
monopolia quandoque probari: Commercia ad certas personas and loca restringi
videmus.

Idem Decis. 4. N. 10. and N. 13. Nimirum exercitium ac permissio monopoliorum
a principis arbitrio dependet, etc. Scacca de Commerci^s. Q. 7. fol. 301. N.
15. Hoc non procedit in monopolio, autoritate principis sive Reipub. contracto.
Quia sicut monopolia, privata autoritate contracta Reipub. sunt perniciosa: Ita
haec, quae legis autoritate, ex justa contrahuntur causa Reipub. valde utilia
sunt.

Grotius de J. B. and P. lib. 2. cap. 12. sect. 16. Monopolia non omnia cum
jure naturae pugnant: Nam possunt interdum a summa potestate permitti, justa de
causa and pretio.

He gives amongst others these two Examples.

I. From the History of Joseph, when he was Viceroy in Egypt, Which is, says
he, an illustrious instance of this matter.

II. That under the Romans, the Alexandrians had the sole Trade for all Indian
and Ethiopick Commodities.

So Thuanus, lib. 32. gives an instance of a Grant from the French King, An,
1604. for the sole Trade into Canada or new France, for which he gives this
reason, Ne gravis esset aerario ad sublevandos Navigationis illinc institutae
sumptus.

Which I conceive will go a great way in supporting all such Trading Companies,
as cannot be begun but by a public Expense.

C. de monopoliis the Prohibition is expressly limited, Nisi Privilegium vel
alia Consuetudo in utilitatem publicam vergens resistat.

Mercatura est res indifferens, in qua magistratus, vel in vetando, vel
permittendo suam pro Commodo Reipub. potest interponere Autoritatem. Salmas. de
foen Trapezit. fol. 236. Hoc solum permissum est Regi ut possit prohibere, ne
aliis vendat salem. Alciat. in Q. inter publica 17. in Fin. F. de verb. Sign.
As it is at this day practiced in France, Thuan. lib. 5.

Sic in sale vendensi, monopolia etiam hodie in Italia licite exerceri, e
Superiorum permissione. Scaccha de market. part. 4. N. 30.

Sic in Reipub. Lubecensi, certis quibusdam mercatoribus ob praedictas rations
Jus coquendi Sacchari, and salis speciali Privilegio concessum est. Marguard.
lib. 4. c. 7. N. 29.

And then as to the Usage.

Haec est communissima omnium, nullo prorsus reluctante Doctorum sententia,
quod jura hujusmodi Emporalia and Regalia possunt acquiri non modo per
concessionem summi principis sed etiam Consuetudine and Praescriptione. Lessius
de Justitia, lib. 2. c. 22. Dub. 21.

By the Imperial Laws, Commerce and Traffic have received several other
limitations; sometimes the Subjects of the Empire have been forbidden to trade
to certain places particularly named. And in general by other Constitutions
forbidden to export Coin, Gold or Arms to any of the barbarous Nations.

And that the Law or Custom of Nations is so, the practice does evince.

And first in Germany, where the Law prohibiteth all Monopolies; yet see how
the Law there stands in respect of our Case.

Circa Monopolia autem, quae exercentur adversus Cives, observandum, non esse
illicitum, si non cuivis quodvis negotiationis genus exercere conceditur, sed
illis duntaxat qui ad idem exercendum juxta instituta Civitatis sibi Jus
quaesiverunt, quemadmodum in rebuspub. Europaeis tecta quaedam praestitisse
oportet eum, qui mercatorium aut opificium aliquod t^ll^re vult.

This as to Corporations.

As to Trading Societies, thus:

Sed and fieri potest, ut a summa potestate Societati mercatorum indulgeatur
certum genus Mercium ex certis locis advehere, exclusis reliquis, cujus
privilegii concedendi variae possunt esse Causae.

I. Nam Commercia quae ad loca remotissima instituerentur, priusquam rite
stabiliantur, magnos requirunt sumptus and ancipiti eventui initio sunt
obnoxia; Ergo Authoribus talium Commerciorum cavendum est, Ne quod ab ipsis
constitutum magno cum periculo and sumptu sunt, alii gratis intercipiant.

II. Ac praeterea ejusmodi Societates privilegiatae opibus suis Reipub.
exigente necessitate, felicius possunt quam singula succurrere.

III. Videntur etiam meliori fide Commercia tractari, ac Majorem Copiam Mercium
hoc modo posse advehi, neque de tot fraudibus and compendiis cogitare necessum
habent, quorum lucrum in commune velut aerarium redactum aequalibus portionibus
distribuitur.

Puffendorf de Jure Naturae and Gentium, lib. 5. fol. 655. A learned Author
does more at large describe it.

It has been a Question sometimes debated, Whether the Society entered into by
the Hanse Towns were not against Law: Quippe quod speciem Monopolii prae se
far videtur, ut certis locis merces emant confaederati quae rursus pretio eo,
quo volunt, vendant.

This is the same Objection now made against the Charter at the Bar.

But the Answer given was twofold, and will come home to this Case.

I. That the Emperor Charles IV. has given his approbation, and made it lawful
by his Authority.

II. That they had continued in possession of this Society so long, that now
the length of time (together with the Prince's consent) removed all doubt
whatsoever, Carpsovirez de Lege Regia Germanorum, cap. 6. sect. 10. And the
Charter now in Question, and other Charters of like nature granted by the Kings
of England, which I shall have occasion to remember by and by, remained
undisturbed without the least interruption as long as this Society did before
this Question was stated.

And though according to the Rules of our Laws, such a length of time does not
obtain the Credit of a Prescription; yet by the Law of Nations and the
practices of all other Countries which are only adapted for this purpose, it is
otherwise. Praescriptio enim tam longi temporis vim legis obtinet, imo tollit
omne vitium.

Praescriptio temporis Immemorialis, quae privilegiata est, and ex vitioso
etiam titulo dominium and jus tribuit, omnesque Solemnitates, etiam
extrinsecus, negotio accessisse praesumit tanti temporis Antiquitas, number. 10.
n. Atque omnem Monopolii respectum Consuetudo Immemorialis vel Caesarum
approbatio excludit, n. 10. 26.

Quia Consuetudo Immemorialis Caesarum scitu and concessu haec antiqua societas
fulcitur omnis Monopolii respectus etiam minimus laeserat, Marg. lib. 4. cap.
7. n. 50.

And as these Hanse Towns were one of the first Corporations of Trade, I have
read of, so was it thought the Interest of England to support and encourage
them. I find above 60 (some say 80) Towns and Cities united their Stocks,
making Lubeck, Brunswick, Dantzick and Cullen, the chief places of their
Residence; and so great was their Trade and Credit under that Constitution,
that many Princes granted them large Privileges, and they kept Courts by their
Deputies and Councels at Bergen.

By the Laws of Spain, all Monopolies are forbidden, and under the same
Penalties appointed by the Civil Law: Yet there also a right may be acquired to
a sole Trade, by License obtained from the King, or by Prescription.

Quinta partida Tit. 7. leg. 2. membris hoc Commercium Maritimum exclusis
caeteris ad 20 annos concederetur.

Neque ulla re se magis prodidit Imperii odium Batavicae nostris diebus, (Deo
ita volente) constituti magnitudo, and felicitas, quam Navigationum in Indias
Orientales susceptarum Constantia and Successus, ad quas ut aerario parceretur
Societates institutae, Cautumque tandem, ut sub unam Societatem omnes coirent,
quod alioqui experimento constitisset, Aromatum pretia ab Insulanis ob emptorum
Frequentiam augeri and cum alii aliis praevertere and lucrum ad se aliorum
damno derivare satagerent, ubi concordia maxima est opus, aemulationum and
dissidii semina spargi.

I come in the next place to make it appear, that as well as the Law of
Nations, and the Practice of all other Countries, warrants the like Grants and
Restrictions with the Case at the Bar; so I conceive this Charter of sole Trade
to the Indies, excluding others, is neither opposed by the Common Law, or
prohibited by any Act of Parliament; but is supported by both, as will more
evidently appear by the practice and constant usage in all times.

Therefore, tho engrossing be a Crime, odious in the Law, and punishable; yet
all manner of engrossing is not.

Therefore in the Case of Foreign Trade, which is only applicable to the Case
at the Bar, it was resolved by all the Judges of England, 3. Instit. 196. That
Merchants may buy beyond Sea in gross, and sell here again in gross also; I
say, that all Monopolies are not unlawful. Generally speaking they are, and
therefore I will admit the Description of an unlawful Monopoly, made by my Lord
Cook, 3. Instit. 181.

A Monopoly, is an Institution or Allowance by the King, by his Grant,
Commission or otherwise, to any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, of or for the sole buying, selling, making, working, or using any
thing whereby any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, are sought
to be restrained of any Freedom or Liberty they had before, or hindered in their
lawful Trade.

Now if the Subjects of England had not before this Grant, a freedom and
liberty to Trade to the Indies, against the King's Royal Pleasure, the Charter
at the Bar will be no Monopoly within that Rule.

Now that they had no such liberty, has been sufficiently proved by the
several Prohibitions mentioned before, and the many more Instances thereof
cited by Mr. Attorney and Mr. Solicitor; and it would be very strange, that
the King might prohibit Foreigners from coming here into England, and not
prohibit his own Subjects from going into Foreign Countries.

And it is not denied, but if the King should Proclaim a War with the Indians,
that then it would be a Prohibition to all his Subjects to have any Commerce
with them; nay, and he might continue that War as long as he pleases, and by
that means all his Subjects would be as well prevented of any of the
Commodities of that Country: and also of exporting any of our Commodities
thither: So that surely this Charter, with these Restrictions, is much better
than a total Exclusion; and therefore Foreign Trade is not like our home Trade,
to which the word Monopolies is properly applicable; for that cannot be totally
excluded for any time, tho never so small by any Act of Prerogative.

Object. Ay but, say the Defendant's Council, tho the King can by his
Prerogative, prohibit all Trade to any Country upon such great Emergencies as
War and Plague, etc. yet to grant liberty to some, and exclude others, that
makes the Grant at the Bar be thought a Monopoly, which is still begging the
Question; for if the King by his Prerogative, have the power of restraining and
disposing Foreign Trade, where Acts of Parliament have not interposed, as by
the Presidents already cited I conceive clearly he has as inherent to his
Crown, and therefore, as he may restrain all, so he may restrain any part by
the same parity of Reason.

If the King proclaims a War with any Country, which is a general Prohibition
of Trade, and should order, that John a Styles, or a dozen or any greater
number of his Subjects, etc. and give them Instructions to treat for a Peace,
and the Persons so appointed should carry on a Trade, would not Mr. Sands, do
you think, have as much reason to murmur, that he was none of those
Ambassadors, as he has now by being not comprised within the Charters? And
would it not be thought an Arrogance and Sauciness in him to demand an account
of the Instruction given by the King to such Ambassadors? or durst he Trade
there till a Peace were proclaimed with that Country?

And the gloss upon that Law says Mercatores non faciant inter Monopolium de re
non vendenda nisi pro certo pretio, vel de non exercendo officium nisi per eos
recipiatur Officiales and Socios: Possunt tamen haec facere cum consensu and
scientia Regis and contra facientes perpetuo exulabunt, and eorum bona Regi
applicantur.

Ex Privilegio ergo Regis possunt similiter and Consuetudine vel
praescriptione, quia quod Privilegio acquiritur, etiam praescriptione acquiri
potest.

And there quotes ubi dicitur, quod potest concedi Privilegium; quod quis solus
piscetur in certa part Maris, and alias potest prohibere.

3. In France Monopolies are prohibited also, Sub poena Confiscationis corporis
and bonorum indict. Constable. Fr. 1. Art. 191.

Notwithstanding which, there are established several Corporations for Trade, I
will name but two, Anno 1657. The French King makes a grant of the sole Fishery
in his Dominions to a Society, excluding others upon pain that Interlopers
should incur the Penalty de Confiscation des vaisseaux and Merchantdizes and de
dix mill Livres d' Amends. Aytz. vol. 4. Page 207.

And in the Year 1664. the East India Company by his Declaration, with an
Exclusion to all others, like our East India Company p. 74, 75.

In the United Provinces, the Laws against Monopolies are the same, yet there
always were several Trading Corporations exclusive of all others, 3 June 1621.
In the Charter of the Dutch West India Company, it is granted thus; And in case
any one shall go to or negotiate in any of the aforesaid Places granted to this
Company, without consent of the said Company, it shall be upon pain and
forfeiture of such Ship and Goods, as shall be found to Trade in those Coasts
and Places, which being presently and on all sides on the behalf of the said
Company set upon, taken, and as forfeited, shall be and remain to the Use of
the said Company. Aytz. vol. 1. p. 62. Sess. 1.

And in case such Ships or Goods be sold, or fly into Lands or Havens, the
Riggers and Part-owners thereof shall and may be distrained to the value of the
said Ships and Goods.

That the aforesaid Company shall within the said limits make Governors,
Officers of War and Justice; and for the other necessary Services for the
Preservation of the Places, and maintaining of good Order, Policy and Justice,
and the advancement of their Trade, shall appoint, dispose and displace, and
substitute others in their Places, as they shall find their Affairs do require.

All Ships coming to any place where the Company have their Garrison and
Government, shall not transport thence any Men, Goods or Money, without leave
and consent of the Council, upon the pain and forfeiture of six Months wages,
etc.

In the Grant to the Dutch India Company, 20. Mar. 1602. That no body, of what
Quality or Condition soever, shall, for the space of twenty one years pass
Eastwards of the Cape of Good Hope, upon forfeiture of Ships and Goods. Aytz.
1. vol. fol. 157.

That the said Company may appoint Governors and Offices of War and Justice,
and for other necessary Services, for the Preservation of their Places and
Maintenance of good Order, Policy and Justice.

The said Officers to take the Oath of Supremacy to the States General, and of
Fidelity, as to what concerns Trade and Traffic to the Company.

And afterward, the 9th of Sept. 1606. a Placaet was published, That no body,
directly or indirectly, shall pass or trade beyond the Cape of Good Hope, upon
pain of Death and forfeiture of their Ships or Goods, which shall be found to
have done or to do so. And tho they should absent themselves out of the United
Provinces, yet the Sentence shall go on and be decreed and executed, with the
present Confiscation, and selling of their Goods, Actions and Credits.

Idem Page 158. And surely the Dutch have been always by us esteemed as our
greatest and most dangerous Rivals in Trade.

And as for the Reason and Necessity of establishing this way of Trading by
Companies, see the Judgment of Thuanus, lib. Hist. 124. and 130.

Where making mention of the East Indies, he says thus: Diversis itineribus
hujus Regionis Incolarumque Ingeniis cognitis tanta frequentia a privatis haec
ipsa Navigatio and Commercium exercitum fuit ut alter alterum fere ivisset
perditum.

Ad obviandum itaque huic malo, visum fuit, An. 1602. quibusdam hujus
Navigationis mercatoribus, praepotentum Ordinum consensu certum constituere
corpus cujus tantummodo, etc.

The Indians being Infidels are by Laws esteemed common Enemies, and the
Opinion of my Lord Cook in Michelboum's Case I think therefore to be Law,
notwithstanding the Objections that have been made against it, which none of
our Books warrant; Now the King by his Charter makes the Plantiffs as it were
his Ambassadors to concert a^ Peace, and Mr Sands murmurs because he is not
one of them.

The King may grant a Fair or Market to every Subject he has, but because he
grants that privilege to some of his Subjects, have the rest any just ground of
complaint; because the King may pardon every Offender, but will not pardon any
Highway-men now in Newgate; must those Goal-birds therefore think themselves
injured in their liberty and property? Because the King granted to his Town of
Hull, that no other Ships should be there freighted for Foreign parts, till the
Ships of that Town were first freighted, as he did Rot. Claus. 41. E. 3. memb.
25. did London, Dover, or any other Town of Trade complain? Would any of these
Gentlemen that contend for this liberty of Trade, adventure with their Fortunes
to Algiers, and when they are seized upon by the Algierines, tell them we are
Englishmen, and we have by the common Law of England, and many Statutes of our
Kingdom, which support the liberty of the Subject, a freedom to trade wherever
we please? Or would not they rather say, we have a Pass from the King of
England, and rely upon that which presumes Treaties, Leagues and Truces between
Princes; and in case that will not prevail, the King will see them righted: And
in the Charter that is now before us, there is a particular restriction and
limitation of Trade to any Prince in Amity with our King.

Now as the constant Usage and practice of other Countries, warrants such
Societies as these, so does ours too: for as I said, the Hanse Towns were some
of the first Corporations of Trade that we read of in History; so was it
thought the Interest of England to support and encourage them.

K. H. III. gave them great Privileges and the Still yards for their
Residence, which they enjoyed near three hundred years, managing their Trade by
an Alderman and Council called the Guild of the Hanse, engrossing the Trade of
England for Grain, Cables, Masts, Pitch, Tar, etc. and under that color the
Jacobsons at this day claim several Privileges.

It is observed by many Historians, that the most flourishing Trades have been
begun by united Stocks and Policies.

In this Kingdom a Patent was first obtained for the erecting the Staple, from
E. 3. before any Act of Parliament intermedled in that Trade, and proceeded
under several Regulations till the time of Queen Eliz. In the Book I cited
before Malyns Lex Mercatoria, fol. 150. says, this Company of Merchants are
above four hundred years standing, as that Book reckons from 1248. when the
said Merchants obtained Privileges of John Duke of Brabant, and were called
the Brotherhood of St. Thomas Becket of Canterbury, which were confirmed by
King E. 3. H. 4. H. 5. E. 4. H. 6. R. 3. H. 7. who gave them the Name of
Merchant-Adventurers, and after him confirmed by H. 8. E. 6. Q. M. Q. Eliz. and
King James, not without many Enemies and Opposers, especially, says that Book
of late, taxing them to be Monopolies and unprofitable to the Commonwealth,
being that all our Clothes are not Dressed and Dyed in England, yet it still
prevailed as being thought for public good.

And its observable, that Queen Eliz. did not only confirm what was done by her
Predecessors, but augmented and greatly enlarged the privileges of this
ancient Company, and confirmed the Charter on the Muscovy Company, granted by
Philip and Mary, and set up several other Companies, as that of Exeter
mentioned at the Bar; the East India Company, the Levant and the East-land
Company. And although that ancient and beneficial Company of Staplers was often
opposed by particular Persons, and complained of as a Monopoly intrenching upon
the liberty of the Subject in several Parliaments in the time of H. 4. H. 7. E.
6. and Q. Mary; yet all parties being heard, these complaints were fully
answered, and the Companies privileges ratified and enlarged.

Again, In Queen Eliz. time, the Cloathiers having prevailed against the
Company, the Clothing countries were almost quickly ruined and reduced to that
extremity, that the 29 Eliz. the Lords of the Council sent for the Members of
that Company, desiring them to reassume their Privileges, and cheerfully to
proceed in their Society, with assurance of all Countenance and Assistance from
the Government. And in the Reign of King James, after several Interlopers had
endeavored to destroy the Company, the King published his Proclamation to
restore the Company to its ancient Privileges.

So did King Charles the First 7. Dec. 34. Reciting, Whereas we have taken into
our Princely consideration the manifold benefits that redound to this Kingdom;
and finding how much Order and Government will conduce to the increase and
advancement of the same; We have thought fit with the advice of our Privy
Council, etc. There He gives an establishment to the Company, and prohibits any
to intrudeupon their privileges, upon pain of such punishments as the
Star Chamber shall inflict.

Since this it may be worth consideration, whether the breaking of this Company
has not occasioned the great decay of our Trade in Wool: it being agreeable to
reason, that as no Law can be effectual without Courts of Justice to put them
in execution, nor a straggling Army subsist without Discipline: so a straggling
Trade managed by particular persons, whilst every one strives to advance his
own private Interest, will ruin the Trade in general, especially such a
hazardous Trade as this to the East Indies, which already has been so
chargeable, and can only be prevented by the Conduct and Government of a
public Society: and surely to look after and settle these matters, properly
belongs to the care and prudence of our Governors.

Now I shall observe how the practice has been both in Qeen Elizabeth's time and
ever since, and that although many Charters like ours at the Bar have been
granted, and none ever demanded by any Judgment in Westminster Hall, or so much
as objected against, save only that of the Canary Patent, till this Cause at
the Bar, and tho several attempts have been made both in Parliament and in the
Courts at Westminster Hall against Monopolies; yet this Charter and others of
the like nature were never looked upon under that Character: for instance.

I. A Charter was granted 2. of Eliz. to the Merchants of Exeter for the sole
Trade of France, excluding all other Merchants of Exeter not of that Company,
continued undisturbed, and prevailed against a great opposition that was made
against it in Parliament. King Edward VI. and King Philip and Mary, having
granted a Charter like ours to the Russia Company, which continued in peace
till the 8. of the Queen, when the Parliament taking notice of that Patent,
thought fit to confirm it with all the commendations imaginable, and was so far
from thinking it a Monopoly, that it says, the Commonwealth before that time
had received great advantages by it, and grants, and inflicts greater and other
Penalties than were or could be inflicted by the Letters Patents: and it is
observable, that there were some Interlopers upon that Trade in those days, and
had been liable to the Forfeitures inflicted by those Letters Patents, and were
therefore forced to apply themselves to that Parliament, and did obtain a
special Proviso to excuse those Forfeitures, which had not that Act of
Parliament been made, they had been liable to, which I take to be an Authority
full as to the case at the Bar.

Queen Elizabeth during her Reign granted several Charters of the like nature,
which passed the perusal of her Attorney and Solicitor, learned Men in our
Profession. In the beginning of her Reign my Lord Chief Baron Weston was
Solicitor, Sir Gilbert Gerrard Attorney General, and passed those Patents both
to the Russia and Exeter Companies: 23 Eliz. my Lord Chief Justice Popham was
Attorney, and Lord Chancellor Egerton Solicitor, in whose times some few such
Charters were also granted like to this at the Bar: and then my Lord Cook was
Attorney General, and my Lord Chief Baron Flemming Solicitor General, who
approved thereof; and it is observable, that in the 43 and 44 of the Queen, the
Parliament took notice of many Patents of Monopolies, as it appears by the
Books cited at the Bar. Townsend's Collections 244 and 245. the Parliament
seemed to be as high as ever they were in any Age before, and particularly were
incensed by those Pattents: a list of all were brought in by Mr. Secretary
Caecil, that were thought grievous or prejudicial to the Commonwealth; and
though there were a Catalogue of forty or fifty, amongst whom that of Darcy is
one; yet the Parliament nor none other complained of any Charter granted to
Corporations, but they continued undisturbed. And by the way it is not amiss to
observe, that Darcy's Patent was not immediately damned in Parliament, but
referred to take its fate in Westminster Hall; the great reason that guided
that Judgment was the restraint that was put upon the Home-Trade; and so it
appears in More's Reports 672. and thus stood these Charters; the China
Charter, the Turkey Company, the Barbary Company, the Guiny Company, all
Charters of sole Trade, excluding others, remained in Trade during all Queen
Elizabeth's time.

But in the third year of King James was the first Act made for opening a
general Trade to Spain, Portugal and France, to all the King's Subjects, which
could not be done in Westminster Hall, as appears by the Preamble to that Act;
nor does that Act call those Charters Monopolies, or open a free Trade to any
other parts of the World, but leaves all Charters of Foreign Trade, save to
Spain, Portugal and France, to remain as they did before. And in the 4. Jac.
cap. 9. there is notice taken particularly of the Charter granted to the Exeter
Merchants of the sole Trade to France, and because it was thought to be damned
by the general words of that Statute D. 3. yet it is there enacted and declared
that the said Statute of Patents neither did or should dissolve, annihilate, or
impeach the said Charter, or the said Company in any of their Privileges,
Liberties, or Immunities granted unto them by the said Charter, any thing
contained in that general Act to the contrary notwithstanding; and from this
Act of Parliament. I observe two things:

I. That the Parliament thought that the Charter to Exeter for sole Trade to
France, exclusive of others, was for the public benefit and weal of that City.

II. That the Letters Patents were good in Law, and did not want the assistance
of an Act of Parliament to support them; for that Act does not confirm those
Letters Patents, but provides only that the Statute 3. Jac. should not by
general words be thought to Impeach or destroy them. Now had the Parliament
thought the Charter void or infirm, they might have confirmed or strengthened
it as the Russia Patent was; but they concluded, that had it not been for the
Statute of tertio, the Charter was good to all intents and purposes: and this I
take to be a full Authority in the Case at the Bar. But to proceed, the
Greenland Patent for sole Fishing exclusive of others granted by Queen Eliz. is
held good, Rolls part. 5. fol. 3. Tailor of Ipswich his Case, and the Case of
the Abbot of Westminster, is agreed to be Law in Darcy's Case, Moor 673. by Mr.
Justice Doderidge; and by the way, he gives good Advice to all Persons that
dispute the King's Prerogative; and for the friendship I bear to Mr. Sands and
others that are now in Court, and I think need the Advice, I shall read the
very words of the Book, He that hews above his Hands Chips will fall into his
Eyes: Et qui majestatem serutatur principis opprimetur splendore ejus.

In King James's time many Grants like ours were made, but particularly in 7.
Jac. the Patent granted to the East India Company by Queen Eliz. was the advice
of all her Council, as well as by my Lord Hubbard then Attorney General, and
Sir Francis Bacon Solicitor General, confirmed and allowed, with the same
clauses as the Charter at the Bar, and so remained undisturbed and
uninterrupted all King James's Reign, and was not thought to be any whit
touched or aimed at by the Proviso in the Statute 43 Eliz. cap. 1. sect. 9.
that Act only pointing at the Monopoly Patents complained of in that Parliament
of 43 of the Queen, which I mentioned before: Then comes the Statute so much
insisted on by the Defendants Council, commonly called the Statute of
Monopolies, Stat. 21 Jac. cap 3. which certainly does not at all affect the
Case at the Bar. For first, this Charter is not a general Grant for the sole
buying, selling, making, using of any thing within this Realm, which are the
very words of the Acts: nor does this Charter give the East India Company,
license or toleration to do, use, or exercise any thing against the tenor or
purport of any Law or Statute, which are the only things provided against by
that by Act. But the Parliament then seemed to take the same general care of
all such Charters as this at the Bar, as the Parliament did in 3. Jacob. of
that particular Charter of Exeter; and therefore to the end that those words in
the beginning of this Act of Monopolies might not be thought to extend to
Charters to Corporations for Trade; there is a Proviso, sect. 9. That that Act
shall not extend to any Corporations, Companies, or Fellowships, etc. erected
for the maintenance, enlargement or ordering any Trade or Merchandise, but
leaves the same as they were before that Act without any Immutation: and it is
observable, that the Parliament then thought a General Saving sufficient to
support those Charters that were then in being, to Corporations for Trade and
Merchandise, but made particular Proviso's for the saving of Patents for Inland
Commodities, viz. such as Salt, Gunpowder, Ordinance, Shot, and the like.

So that this Company was in full possession of their privilege of sole Trade,
exclusive of others, all King James, and K. Charles the first his time, till
all the Prerogatives of the Crown were invaded, and the crowned Head too was
taken off by Traitors and Rebels, but the Providence of God having restored us
our King, and reinvested him with all his undoubted Prerogatives, as well as
restored us to our ancient Rights and Privileges, and scarce, as I may say,
warm in his Throne; but amongst the other considerations that he had for the
public weal of his Subjects, he considers the public advantage of this
Kingdom arising by Trade, and amongst them one of his first thoughts are fixed
upon this Company: for the third of April, 1661. He by his Letters Patents
taking notice of the Charters of Queen Elizabeth and King James, granted to the
East India Company, and of the injuries that were done to them by the late
Troubles, with the advice of his Council, and approbation of Mr. Attorney
Palmer and my Lord Chancellor Finch, he granted and confirmed to them all
their privileges. The 27th of May in the 20th of his Reign, Lord Chancellor
Finch being Attorney, and my Lord Keeper that now is Solicitor, he confirms
this Charter, and grants to the East India Company other privileges by an
other Charter in the 28th year of his Reign; at which time the Lord Keeper was
Attorney, and Sir William Jones Solicitor: he confirms the former, and grants
more privileges: and in the 25th year of his Reign by the Charter now in
question, passed with the approbation of the present Attorney and Solicitor,
Men of great Ability in their Professions, and of whom, were they not present,
I should say much more, the Charter to this Company was confirmed with
additional Privileges.

Nor has this Charter passed only the approbation of his Majesty and Council
since his happy Restoration, but the Parliament has likewise taken notice of
it; the Statute 14 Car. 2. cap. 24. takes notice of it, to be of great
advantage to the Public. The Stat. of the 29th of this King for Pole Money,
Taxes them at twenty shillings for every hundred Pound in stock; in the great
Case between Skinner and the East India Company, the House of Commons defended
them, even to an eruption between the two Houses.

Mr. Jenks and some other Linnen-Drapers and Tradesmen of London, taking the
advantage of the Heats that too frequently possessed the House of Commons of
late years, especially against the Point of Prerogative, did furiously attack
the East India Company, but without any success; and this Company was never
assaulted in Westminster Hall till this Case at the Bar; I cannot help
therefore this Observation, that as the King by his Charter 1661, takes notice,
that the Charters granted by Queen Elizabeth and King James remain
uninterrupted till the late Rebellion; so the Interlopers against the King's
Prerogative in this particular, and the horrid Conspirators against the King's
Life in this last hellish Conspiracy, first appeared in Westminster Hall about
the same time.

As to the Objections I have not yet given answer to, I think they are but few:
my Lord Cokes Opinion cited by Mr. Pollexfen, 2 Instit. 540. where my Lord
observes new things which with fair pretenses prove hurtful to the
Commonwealth; and amongst them reckons that new Corporations trading into
Foreign parts and at home, which under the fair pretenses of Order and
Government, in conclusion tend to the hindrance of Trade and Traffic, and in
the end produce Monopolies, does not at all concern the Case at the Bar; for
this Charter that has continued for one hundred years without any interruption
till of late, can neither be thought a new Corporation, or hindrance of Trade;
and Sir Edward Coke when he was Attorney General, and past this Charter, was as
learned in the Law as he was when he published that Book, and was turned out of
being Chief Justice, did not think this Charter needed that Caution.

As to the Case of the Canary Patent between Horn and Ivy, that cannot affect
the Case at the Bar.

I. For first, The Judgment in that Case was given upon the point of Pleading,
and not upon the validity of the Patent.

II. That Patent was in perfect opposition to that Statute 3. Jac. that opened
a free Trade to Spain, and therefore could not be restrained by the King's
Letters Patents, but there is no such Objection to our Case.

The Council that argued for the Defendant seemed to allow the Charters to the
Virginia, Turkey, and Eastland Companies, which are exclusive of others, to be
good, because they are managed by a Regulation and not a Joint stock, which
surely can make no difference; for it is a Grant of a sole Trade to them
exclusive of others as well as the Case at the Bar, and it is as hard to get
into the Turkey Company as it is into this, and may be more chargeable: for you
cannot be a Member of the Turkey Company, but you must be a Freeman of the City
of London, and makes you liable to all the great Offices of Charge in that
Government, but a Freedom of the East India Company may be purchased at a much
easier rate; the Members of the East India Company are as visible as those of
the Turkey: and though it was said, the East India Company were sometimes
invisible, yet were the Turkey Company infected with so many Interlopers as the
East India Company have, they would not appear so glorious and spendid as they
now do, and as I heartily wish they may long continue. But the King by this
Charter has reserved to himself a Power to destroy and alter the whole Charter,
or any part thereof, so as to put it into a way of Regulation instead of a
Joint Stock, in such manner as he shall in his great Wisdom think fit;
therefore it becomes us in Duty and Modesty to wait till we receive his further
Royal Pleasure therein. And whereas it was objected at the Bar, because the
King cannot lay any Imposition upon Foreign Trade, therefore he cannot restrain
it:

I do not know to what end that Objection was made, because it does not affect
the Question at the Bar; but lest it may obtain the effect that I presume was
aimed at, I think not amiss to say, that even at this day there is much more
may be said in the maintenance of the King's Prerogative in Westminster Hall,
in that Case, than can be offered against his Prerogative in this; but in as
much as that and several other Objections against the Charter proceeded from
unreasonable as well as unmannerly mistrusts they have of the Crown; I cannot
but remember that his Sacred Majesty was not so mistrustful of them; for he
since his Restoration has bestowed upon his Subjects more than all his
Predecessors, put them all together since the Conquest ever did. Nay, he in a
moment frankly bestowed upon us more than ever he desires he shall be trusted
with again; for by his Act of Indemnity he bestowed upon his Subjects their
Lives, Liberties and Estates which were all justly and legally forfeited to him
by the late Rebellion, the consideration whereof will prevent all fears and
jealousies, and promote in all Loyal hearts a firm resolution to sacrifice
their Lives and Fortunes, so freely bestowed upon us by him, to maintain the
Crown and just Prerogatives thereof, so that it may have a perpetual
continuance in that Royal Family in a lawful Succession, which I heartily pray
may be so long as the Sun and Moon endures.

From what has been said, I hope it does plainly appear, that since the Law of
this Land and the Law of Nature and Nations, allow the Power of making
Companies to manage Traffic, exclusive to all others to be in the Prince; That
this is reckoned to be inter Jura regalia; That no Act of Parliament does
restrain this Prerogative; That the practice of all Europe has been
accordingly; That particularly such Companies have been erected in England, and
those Companies have been in quiet possession of their Privileges, for such a
number of years; That they have passed the approbation of so many learned Men;
That they have been thought for the public advantage of the Nation, by so many
Kings and Princes, with the advice of their Council both in and out of
Parliament; That all Statutes and Authorities of Law that we can meet with in
our Books affirm it, and none that I can meet with oppose it.

That the East India Company have solely run the hazard, and been at great
Expenses; In discovering Places,
Erecting Forts, and keeping Forces,
Settling Factories,
And making Leagues and Treaties abroad,


It would be against natural Justice and Equity (which no Municipal Law can
take away) for others to reap the benefit and advantage of all this.

Especially since all this has been occasioned by an Act of the Public, and by
the just Prerogative of the Crown under which they claim.

So that now supposing the matter had been doubtful at the beginning (as yet
the contrary is evident) yet after so many years undisputed, and uniterrupted
Prerogative of the King, and the possession of the Companies pursuant
thereunto; and yet the Laws having always been open to any Subjects who
conceive themselves grieved, that Speech which Josephus records of King Agrippa
to those Jews, who after many years endeavored to recover their lost pretense,
may be applied to these clamorous Interlopers.

Intempestivum est nunc libertatem concupiscere, olim ne amitteretur certatum
oportuit. Non amantes libertatis dicendi estis, sed subditi contumaces.

And so the Romans answered Antiochus (to show the injustice of his Demands)
That he required those Cities which his Precessor for so many years had never
enjoyed.

And Queen Elizabeth pleaded against the King of Denmark for the rights of
Fishing upon the coasts of Norway and New-Island, That neither his Great
Grandfather, Grandfather nor Father, had exacted any thing for it, and
therefore concluded it to be unjust.

Cambden Eliz, sub Anno 1600.

So that I conclude the First, and as I conceive the only Point in this Case,
that Letters Patents that give License and Liberty to the Plaintiffs to
exercise the sole Trade to the Indies within the limits of their Grant,
exclusive of all others, is a good Grant in Law.

II. I do conceive that the Defendant trading to the Indies contrary to this
Charter, may be punished by Information at the Suit of the King, and that this
Action by the Plaintiffs is also well brought; but in as much as I have
detained you so long upon the first Point, I shall trespass upon your patience
but a few words to this.

I. Therefore, I conceive the Plaintiff need not alledg any special Damage, no
more than the Grantee of a Fair, Market, or any other Franchise.

II. The Action is brought, and grounded upon the Grant of the sole and entire
Trade, which, as I conceive is a Franchise the King may grant, and is like the
Case of New Inventions, upon which Letters Patents, Actions are brought by
every days experience, and the prohibiting Clause is added only to make the
thing more notorious; and that Interlopers in case they should be prosecuted at
the King's Suit, should be more inexcusable, and until you can imagine there
may be as many East India Companies as there are Commoners and Schoolmasters
in England, Mary's Case, Cook 9. can never be thought an Objection. As to the
Objection in the 11 Rep. 88. Rolls Abridgment, part. 106. Darcy's Case, that
admitting the Grant or Disponsation to Darcy had been good for the sole
importing of Foreign Cards: yet that being only a Dispensation to the Stat. of
E. 4. and did only exclude Darcy from the penalty of that Act, he could not
maintian the Action; but if in case that Grant had vested an Interest, as our
Grant at the Bar does, he might have brought an Action, as my Lord Rolls says
in the next Paragraph, may be collected out of Darcy's Case.

The Case upon Patents of new Inventions are full Authorities in the Case at
the Bar; and so is that Case of the Abbot of Westminster, Re. fol. 107. Wherein
upon the Grant of the Market for thirty days, exclusive of others, is
particularly set forth in the Action; and the Salisbury man that brought Cloth
to London, and sold the same contrary to that Charter, is prosecuted in an
Action of Trespass upon the Case, at the Suit of the Abbot, and the Writ
concludes (supposing the Grant good) in nostri contemptum and praedicti Abbatis
grave damnum ac Fr. and libertatum suarum praedictarum laesionem manifestam,
which is an Authority full as to this Point.

Upon the whole matter I am of the same Opinion with my Brothers, and do
conceive that that Grant to the Plaintiffs of the Sole Trade to the Indies,
exclusive of others, is a good Grant, and that the Action is well brought: and
therefore let the Plaintiff take his Judgment.

FINIS.

