USURY STATED OVERTHROWN: OR, USURIES CHAMPIONS With their Auxiliaries,
Shamefully Disarmed and Beaten: By an Answer to its chief Champion, which
lately appeared in Print to defend it. AND GODLINESS EPITOMIZED

By Christopher Jelinger, M. A.

Beza upon Matthew. May a Man with a safe Conscience lend upon Usury? No surely.

And Holy Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, in his Body of Divinity, page 300.

Q. What is that which we call Usury? It is Lending in expectation of certain
Gain. So he well stateth it against Usury ill^stated by T. P.

Q. What do you think of it? If we speak of that properly, which the Scripture
condemns, it is a most wicked and unlawful Contract; which if we live and die
in, without Repentance, we are excluded out of the Kingdom of Heaven. Psalm.
15.1, 5. Ezekiel. 18.12, 13. and Chap. 22.

But there is much questioning, which is that Usury which the Scripture
condemns. Therefore it will be our wisdom wholly to forbear it, and not to
put our Souls, which are of more value than the whole World, upon nice
Discourses, and subtle Distinctions. Thus this Holy Man.

Plato in Gor. fol. 313. Non de rebus parvis instituta est Disputatio, sed de
his, quas and scire pulcherrimum est, and nescire (...), turpissimum.

LONDON, Printed for J. Wright, at the Crown on Ludgate Hill, and J. Sampson,
next the Wonder-Tavern in Ludgate Street.

TO THE Most High and Mighty Monarch, CHARLES II. By the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, DEFENDER of the FAITH, Grace and Mercy be
multiplied.
YOur Majesty's Acceptance of a Treatise of Your most humble Servant tending to
Immortality; and of a large Latin Poem, bidding Your Majesty welcome into those
Western Parts, in Your Royal Fort of Plymouth, emboldned me to offer and to
dedicate these my Theological Labors also, which are comprised in this Book;
hoping that they will be Graciously accepted, as the former were: and that so
much the rather, because this said Book brings to You, as to a Great King, that
Great King whose Name is Jesus, King of Kings, Rev. 19.16. to keep Your Majesty
Company in your Solitudes; and for Your Majesty to spend your time with His
great Majesty both Day and Night, according to this Book, wherein Godliness is
Epitomized; and wherein also are contained some Essays made against that
odious, and far-spreading Sin of Usury: which will need the Protection and
Support of an excelse and mighty Atlas to support such a weighty Frame, and
subject Matter, because it will meet with bitter and potent Adversaries which
will be ready to oppugn it, to keep their great Goddess Diana, Usury I mean,
and her Silver Shrines. Which has necessitated me, in all Humility, to betake
my self to such a mighty Shield as Your Majesty's great Power and Protection
is, under which a wary Combatant may lie invulnerable. Nor am I the first that
made so bold as to dedicate a Book of this Nature to a King. When famous Bishop
Downam wrote against Usury, upon Psalm. 15. as I do now, he dedicated his Book
to the King of Scholars, King James; and it was accepted: Answerably hereunto,
I promise my self a Gracious Acceptance likewise. But I desire to end with
praying to the King of Kings, that Your Majesty may be kept by His mighty Power
and Protection from all Treacherous Conspiracies; may long sway the Scepter of
your three Kingdoms in Halcyon Days; and after that Your Majesty has superated
the spaces of your Humane Life, you may, being elevated to the Horizon of
future Felicity, and entranced into Heaven, there reign also, as one of the
Kings of that other World, with the King of Kings, 2 Timothy 3.12. Rev. 2.20. far
scattering the bright shining Rays of your Inenarrable Glory. Amen.

Your Great Majesty's Obedient, Loyal, and Most Humble Subject, and Orator to
the Throne of Grace, Christopher Jelinger.

To His Grace, Christopher, Duke of Albemarle, Lieutenant General of Devon, and
one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Grace and Peace from Jesus
Christ, the Prince of Princes.
When Your Grace's and this Kingdom's Father was flourishing and living upon
Earth, It pleased him to cast a favorable Aspect on me, the unworthiest of all
God's Ministers; so as that I could not but mind you, his Honorable Son and
Heir, also, in the publishing of this Book, by a most humble Tender, and
Dedication of it to your Honorable Self, and to your great Name; and that so
much the rather for this too, because you are the General of our Western
Militia, and this Treatise consists of Fighting, and sets forth a Battle (a
Paper Battle I mean) fought in the West of England, whereof you are a General,
between two Western Warriers, Pro and Con, about the thing called Usury; of
whom, one, who is a professed Enemy to it, desires to put himself, first under
the great God's, and next under your Grace's Protection, by this most humble
Dedication: wishing withal, by a Digression, that, because such a Paper Battle
is too low for so great a Person to take any great notice of it; I say, wishing
that your Grace may mind much more that Spiritual Militia, which is called
Wrestling with the God of Heaven for Heaven, which is held forth in and by
Godliness Epitomized, which is a piece and part of this Book; so as to practice
it during your Natural Life here on Earth, for the gaining of Eternal Life
hereafter in Heaven.

But not being contented with wishing only, your Graces most humble Servant
desires to fall a praying for your Grace thus.

The Great Majesty of Heaven enable, strengthen and animate your Grace with his
Grace so successfully to wrestle for Heaven in Prayer, as that when you shall
have superated the spaces of your Humane Life, you may, being born in the Arms
of Angels, be carried up to the Head of Angels, the Lord Jesus, who is the
Generalissimus of all Generals and Christian Soldiers, and for ever shows
forth the Rays of his pleasant Face to the Vessels of Mercy which are
destinated to ever-during Glory. So ends with Prayer,

Your Graces Most Humble Servant, and Orator to the Throne of Grace,
Christopher Jelinger. A Palatine Exul for Religion's sake.

To the Right Honorable Lord, John Roberts, Earl of Radnor, Lord President of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Mercy and Peace from Jesus Christ
the Prince of Peace.
Right Honorable,
SO ancient is the Mode of Dedicating Books to Great Persons, that we shall
find it practiced even in the Apostles time, and shortly after; for Luke
himself, though he was inspired by the Spirit, yet dedicated his Book, called
The Acts of the Apostles, to Theophilus, Act. 1. And S. Austin dedicated that
most excellent Piece of his, which he wrote against the Epistles of the
Pelagians, to the Noble Bonifacius. Answerably whereunto, I also here dedicate
this Book, most Noble Sir, my great Favourer, to your Lordship, to manifest my
grateful mind for all your great and undeserved Favors extended to me, and
cumulated upon me, the unworthiest of all the Ministers of Jesus Christ:
hoping, that as your Lordship has accepted of the Dedications of others, so
you will be pleased to accept of mine; and that my God will bedew these my
Theological Sudors and Labors with his Celestial Benediction; so, as that when
your Lordship has perused and read the same, you will use them also for your
Eternal Good, laboring as for Life, to have that sweet Society with Jesus
Christ which Saints have both Day and Night, by an Holy Walking with his Great
and Glorious Majesty in his Celestial Galleries and Walking Places, Cant. 7.5.
and fighting the good and great Fight of Faith, as one of his valiant Warriers,
wrestling with God most mightily, to overcome God. O Great Sir! may it please
your Honor, to give your mind to these great things more than ever, and to do
them; for then how rich you would be in God on a sudden! and how sure of
Heaven! for Heaven would then not only be above you, but also in you: Romans
14.17. and you would be able to say truly, Now I have enough: for, lo what a
Life I now live, living by the Faith of the Son of God who loved me, and gave
himself for me! Gal. 2.20. and spending my whole time with my Love Christ, by
Night as well as by Day, to satiate my longing desire with his most sweet
Society! and Oh the unexpressible Peace that I now have within; being assured
in my Heart, that with everlasting Bliss I shall be blessed! and Oh the longing
Joy which does now surround me! and what a Globe of Glory becircles me^! Oh,
Noble Sir, it is true Nobility for a Man to be a Worshipper of God, a good
Reader of God's Book, a good Keeper of Holy Communion and Society with the
highest Majesty; for that will bring us to the greatest Riches and Felicity. As
for this World's Riches, you have enough of them, blessed be God: but one dram
of Spiritul Grace, one Glimpse of Jehovah 's Face, one Glance from one of
Christ's Love-like Eyes, one Drop of his precious-Blood, one Draught of his
sweetest Wines of Love, one Sip of his Divine Consolations, will do you more
good than all this World's Goods. And therefore, let that be thought upon, and
labored after, above all things: for then, I say again, you will be able to
echoe forth these Words from your very Heart, and from an undeceiving
Experience: Oh, what an Ocean of ineffable Delights do now overflow me, and
what a Mass of Heaven's Bliss surrounds me! But I intend to close up this
Epistle with praying thus. May Heaven's Blessing be dropped down upon my poor
Labors, and upon the Head of this Noble Lord to whom I exarate and write these
Lines; that he, reading and practicing the same on Earth, may reap the benefit
thereof above in Heaven; receiving an Eternal and Immarcessible Crown of Glory.

Your Lordship's Most Humble Servant, Christopher Jelinger.

To the Most Noble Charles Pawlet, Lord Marquess of Winchester, Grace and Mercy
be multiplied.
Highly Honorable,
MAy it please your Lordship to permit your most humble Servant to make this
Address to your Honor. And first to give an Account of my boldness therein
shown; Your Honor knows how long I have been a Tenant to your Noble Father,
and to your Honorable Self also; and I remember how ready you have been to
offer me a Spiritual Living for my Preferment; so that I could not but reflect
upon that, and all other Favors with Thankfulness, and to erect, as it were, a
Monument of my Gratitude by dedicating this Treatise to your Honor: hoping
that if you will be pleased to improve it, Godliness Epitomized, contained
therein, will bring you to be so familiar with Christ, that great King of
Kings, as that his Majesty and your self will seldom or never be asunder: and
that thereupon you will say like David; When I awake I am still with thee,
Psalm. 139.18. and, I am Prayer, Psalm. 109.4. (so it is in the Hebrew) being all
for Prayer, and spending a great part of your time in Prayer. I have read of a
Godly Minister, that of twenty four Hours, he spent eight in Prayer; which is
not expected of every body, nor required of your Honor; but that you, and all
Christ's Saints spend much time in Prayer: Pray often, and even by Night as
well as by Day, Luke 18.1, 7, 8. Well, Great Sir, I trust in God that he will
lead you into all the Truths and things which here you are pointed to: and that
thereupon you will lead such a Ceraphical, Celestial and Transcendental Life
for Holiness, as that being ecstasied in your Spirit, you will be able to say,
O! what a Heaven! what a Paradise! what a Beatity does circumscribe me! Heaven
being in my very Heart, and my Heart in Heaven. Heaven is high, I confess; but
not too high for Strivers, Wrestlers, for holy Livers: and therefore let us
strive, Great Sir, as for Life, to enter into Life by a sweet and holy Living
with our dear Jesus, whose Life was a most strict, most pious, most Heavenly
Life indeed; that we may live with his most blessed Majesty in Bliss and
Beatity, Greatness and Gladness, Peace and Prosperity to all Eternity. Which
that it may prove so, I humbly beg that the great and mighty Lord of Heaven and
Earth would write these Lines that are written in this Book with his own Holy
Finger, as with the Pen of a Diamond, in your Honor's Heart, and in mine too,
and in all the Hearts of those which shall peruse and pervolve the same. Amen,
Amen.

Your Honor's Most Humble Servant, Christopher Jelinger.

A FEW WORDS To the Courteous READER.
AND, 1. About some chief things which were omitted; or, at least, but slightly
touched in this Writing against Usury: viz. That the Expositors which have
written upon the Ten Commandments, and others, have brought Usury under the
Eighth; which says, Thou shall not steal: Making it a Moral Evil, and breach
of the Moral Law, which is eternal. At present I shall instance in Who makes
the Usurer a Thief, l. de bono Mortis. Usher, in his Body of Divinity, upon the
eighth Commandment. Dod, upon the eighth Commandment.
Ambrose, Usher; And two Germans; Piscator, in sua Catechesi, upon the eighth
Commandment.
Piscator, who, expounding the eighth Commandment, says expressly, that God in
the eighth Commandment commands us to lend to him that needs to borrow without
Usury. The other is a great German Divine too; famous Ursin, p. 910. Peter
Lombard may be added, saying, In the eighth Commandment is prohibited Usury.
Polanus also, in his Synt. And Bishop Hall making it Theft. With Mr. Powel, in
his Posit. Bart. Westhimerus, in Psalm. 15. And Mr. Smith; who says, Christ
expounding the Commandment which forbids stealing, says, Luke 6.35. Lend
freely.
Ursin: who, in his Sum of Christian Religion, page 913. reckoning up the Vices
forbidden by the eighth Commandment, names Usury; saying, That it has not the
lowest place, and is that which is taken above the Principal, in regard of the
Loan only. Besides whom a very great number of Expositors, besides those in the
Margin, will be brought hereafter, which in like manner bring in Usury as a
prohibited Theft by that Law. If now the Usurer will adventure upon the breach
of that Moral Precept, pretending that it is a prohibition of a political Law,
he may to his own peril.

2. About the great and So called by Dr. Bernard, in Usher 's Life, and Tho.
Hall.
most learned Spanhemius, my Cousin, because he is as much stood upon as any
Author, and extolled more than any by Usuries Patrons, as if he were one of
their best friends. I intended to set down his Opinion in my Title Page: but
upon second thoughts, resolved to reserve it for this place; setting down his
own words, which he wrote after he had said what he could say for Usury, to
show, it may be, his Parts, and the Acumen and greatness of his wit, for which
he was sent abroad of purpose by the Prince Elector Palatine, into Foreign
Countries, to greaten the same more and more. I say, that his own words I
resolved here to set down: viz. But this I shall freely say; that it must be
confessed, that it is far better for thee to bestow thy Money either in
Husbandry, or in Merchandising, or any other honest way to increase thine
Estate, than to lend it upon Usury. So that Spanhemius has left the poor Usurer
in the plain Field: which I greatly rejoice at because of his transcendent
Parts and Excellencies, which made him so famous, as that the greatest
Protestant Divines in Christendom (named in the Margin) desired his
Friendship, and were of his Acquaintance; besides many great Noble Men: To whom
may be added the renowned Clark, p. 511.
Queen of Sueden lier self, which saluted him by her Ambassador, and wrote to
him how much she was delighted with his Works, and Not to speak of Usher, Dr.
Tuisse, Prideaux, Moulin, Rivet, Garrisotius, Mestrosa, Drelincourt, Cameron,
Tossanus; all highly prizing him.
esteemed him.

3. About my future proceedings: That I intending to content my self with my
promised three practical Usury Books, to whom three or four more will be added,
I shall no more so immerse my self, as I have done, into the controversial Sea
of Usury, because I am so much stricken in age, and may, like aged Seamen,
well be excused from going to such a Sea again; as one which desires to labor
for Heaven above all Terrene Concerns, and to end the remainder of his little
time in a Calm; striving most of all to enter into that everlasting Rest which
is to come, by believing, and a practical maintaining of good works, according
to Tit. 3.8.

But if any shall oppose what I have already written against Usury in this
Book, and in my former, I may happily answer by a few Animadversions upon that
which was never before objected, and answered. And so I will close up this
third About, with that notable Saying of that most wise King; And further, by
these, my Son, be admonished, of making many Books there is no end; and much
study is wearisomness of the Flesh, [especially about controversial matters.]
Eccles. 12.12.

4. About this present Writing, let the Reader take this Advertisement. 1. That
altogether unexpectedly, I have been assaulted and abused by cruel mockings,
according to Heb. 11.36. and grievous charges of things which I never did or
practiced; and Usury it self by name: which made me stir for my defense, as the
least Worm that is will do when it is trod upon. 2. That his and other Men's
Letters about Usury sent to me, I shall not For just causes; imitating in it
Dr. Stillingfleet: who also would not answer his Adversaries Letter, but his
Book called Sure Footing.
answer here. 3. That I was sent unto by a certain Messenger which is yet
living; who told me expressly, that I must answer first such a one, who had
written against me, before I did print my other three Books which are to come.
So that I was even challenged and provoked to write, for the saving of my
Credit. 4. That being informed how the same Pamphlet which was sent to me, was
sent up to be printed, I still waited to see it published very near two Years,
that I might answer so as that we might not differ in Copies. But when I saw
that no such Pamphlet did come forth, I resolved to tarry no longer, being
ready, and much spurred on by others who did long to see my Answer to the said
Pamphlet, scattered up and down to my disgrace, I resolved to tarry no longer,
but to proceed to the publishing of my Answer to the said Manuscript: but in
civility, I would not divulge the Author's name, nor any others, which since
the publishing my Treatise against Usury, have written to me: imitating blessed
Bolton, who did the like; contenting himself with putting down of these two
Letters, M. S. only. I add, that I was willing to follow in this, B. Downam
also; who, in his most excellent Book against Usury, upon Psalm. 15. confutes a
great part of a Manuscript, without naming the Author thereof: and well known
it is, that a number of other Writers besides, have done the like. Now, my most
hearty prayer to God is, that he will bedew this my Confutation with his
Celestial Benediction; so as that his holy Name may be glorified, and many a
poor Usurer's Soul rescued from everlasting Burnings, and graciously entranced
into God's holy Hill, called Heaven; there to dwell in fullness of Jucundity,
unutterable tranquillity, blessed Immortality, immortal Felicity, to all
Eternity.

But upon new Incomes, I must,

5. Declare yet farther, that in this my proceeding, I am resolved to build and
to depend principally upon the sure foundation of the holy Scriptures; which my
Adversaries are destitute of: and not upon Man's Reason; though secondarily I
use Reason too. If there were a difference between me and my Antagonists about
Men's About which, no certain form is prescribed unto Christians. Revius, de
Usu Capillitii, p. 254.
Apparel, which the Scripture does not plainly inform us of, what form it must
be of, (As there was such a difference once between the Emperor Severus, who
would have a distinction of Clothes to be ordered for all sorts of Men; and his
Lawyers, Ulpian and Paulus, whose Reasons were stronger than his against it;
and made him yield to theirs) I should be apt to yield to the Carnal Reasons of
Usuries Defendants, as the said Emperor did to those of his skilful Lawyers:
but in such a weighty matter as Usury is, I dare not. For how far Reason will
go, and yet without deciding, that most learned Man, Doctor Cudworth, in his
True Intellectual System on the Universe, shows. For, notwithstanding his
indefatigable Labors and pains exantlated and taken therein, he must be a
Sceptick in several things and places. I will instance but in two.

1. Notwithstanding all which, says he, that has been here suggested by us, we
shall not our selves venture to determine any thing in so great a Point; but
sceptically leave it undecided.

2. He says; Now, how these Praeludiums of an immortal Body can consist with
the Soul's continuance, after death, in a perfect separation from all manner of
Body, till the day of Judgment, is not easily conceivable. Which thing
considered, minds me of a saying of great Erasmus Roterdamus; who says, I
could say something for Usury too (meaning that he could according to carnal
reason) but I dare not, because of those Sitting upon those Thrones, Rev. 20.4.
Videatur Tossanus, in Annot. ejus in Bibl. de illis thronis, quid sint.
immortal Souls, etc. In short, he durst not, because the holy Prophets, and
Fathers, and Martyrs are against it, and make me also to be against it,
notwithstanding all the carnal reasons which the Wit of Man does or can bring
for it; I am for the holy Scriptures before all them.

6. But besides, I cannot omit here a most memorable Narrative which was
brought to me after the writing of this Book, concerning a certain Usurer; who
living not far from the place of mine abode, and having got a very great Estate
by Usury, though (as I am told, he took Use but after the ordinary rate of this
Land, and no more) fell sick, and sent for a most Godly and learned Minister,
who was named to me; and confessing how heavy that Sin of Usury lay upon his
troubled Conscience, desired him, that as he would answer it at that great day
of Judgment, he would declare unto him his judgment concerning that Sin.
Whereunto the said Godly Minister returned this Answer; that, Except he
repented, and made restitution, he could not be saved. Whereupon he departed.
As for his Estate, that as the Relater told me, did melt away. Which I desire
may awaken Usurers, and deter them from their cursed practices.

7. I advise the Reader, if he be an Usurer, that he will no longer delude
himself with this, That multitudes follow that trade, and put out their Money
upon Usury: considering that multitudes also, both in England, and beyond the
Seas, in France, in Germany, and in Holland especially, break and profane the
Christian Sabbath, by working, shooting, buying and selling, as I have seen;
saying, that the Law which requires such a strict keeping of the Sabbath as
the fourth Commandment mentions, was given to the Jews, and does not bind us:
and that those which are so precise in the observation of our Lord's Day, do
Judaize: Even as Usuries Defendants and Committents say now, that the Law made
against Usury concerned the Jews, and does not bind us. Both which I refer to
answer for what they say, to that great day of the Lord, which is to come;
adding no more to this Paragraph now, but this; that we must not follow a
multitude to do evil.

8. I shall super-add this; for that because some may blame me because I stand
so overmuch in this Controversy upon the ancient Fathers, which, with Erasmus,
I call those Immortal Souls, joining the holy Prophets with them; I shall
therefore thus Apologize for my self. If I were to dispute of the Opinion of
the old Millenaries whom the new ones follow, or of the time of Antichrist's
coming: which two things I name, because of our late Fifth-Monarchy Men, and
those which hold that the Pope is not that Antichrist which the Apostle speaks
of; Which is confuted by Rev. 20.4.
(but the same is yet to come) in the end of the World; I say again, if that
were it, I should not much insist upon Fathers; because in both, they write so
one against another, and contradict one another. As, 1. In the Millenary
Opinion, Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 20. c. 7.
St. Austin writes against the Millenaries Opinion as fabulous: And contrarily,
Papias in Eusebius. l. 3. c. 33. Idem ibid.
Papias, who is held to be the first, Tertul. l. 3. contra Marc.
Tertullian, Justin Martyr, in Dial. contra Tryph.
Justinus Martyr, Nepos Ep. Egypt. confut. a Dionys. Alex. in Eusebius. l. 7. c.
10.
Nepos, Lact. l. 7. Inst. c ^. Irenaeus l. 7. c 5. Feuardentius in princ. op.
Lactantius, Victorinus.
Victorinus, Pictaviensis in Apocal.
Pictaviensis. Where, by the way, let me tell you how they contradict one
another in this. Some say, that Papias, the first Author of the Millenary
Opinion, was a Hearer of St. John, as if he had been so instructed by him, when
as he himself confesses that he never saw nor heard the holy Apostle. 2. As for
the time of Antichrist's coming and reigning, lo, how they contradict one
another also! Irenaeus apud P. in Apoc. Justin Martyr in Dial. cum Tryp.
Irenaeus holds (and it is said, he had it of Papias too) that in the end of
the World Antichrist should come, and hold it not full four Years. But
Justinus, who is elder than he; yea, as some say, the eldest of the Fathers,
denies it: and says he is (...), Even before the door. After whom, in comes
Tertullian, his (...), affirming the same, that Antichrist is even at hand.
Next to him steps in St. Cyprian, asserting, that the times of Antichrist are
appropinquant, and very near come. Thus they disagree in these two things; but
as for all Usury, that all the holy Fathers, with one mouth, one consent, one
spirit, condemn as unlawful, and interdicted by the holy Scriptures; and
therefore I am so for those immortal Souls, the holy Fathers I mean, which also
most sweetly harmonize with those immortal Souls which we call the Lords ^oly
Prophets, Sitting upon Thrones, Rev. 20.4.

9. But I must needs add this Codicil unto that which I have said already about
the holy Scriptures; that such is the power thereof, as that when holy Nehemiah
had spoken these words (which are part thereof) I pray you, let us leave off
this Usury, all the Usurers in the Commonwealth of Israel, the Nobles not
excepted, were convinced and converted; and so Usury then was (...) For they
said, we will restore them, and will require ^^ching o^ them: so will we do as
thou have said. So effectual was ^he word of God spoken against Usury there
called (...) a burden, as it is; and not (...) biting, purposely; because
Usurers stand so much upon Neshek, biting, which they say is only forbidden.

So how powerful have been those other places set down in holy Writ? as, Psalm.
15.5. Ezech. 18.12, 13. and in the new Testament, that famous saying of our
Savior, in Luke 6.35. Lend, hoping for nothing from thence; in that all the
holy Fathers and Councils, and all Antiquity have been convinced thereby of the
unlawfulness of Usury, and quoted those places still, and so put it down, as
that an Usurer then was, Rara avis in terris, A rare Man in the World, scarce
one in a City, because these places were still brought against them: and so,
since the Reformation, and when Luther lived, much above a hundred years ago,
Godly Ministers preached and wrote against it, As B. Down. upon Psalm. 15.
asserts it.
still bringing these very same Scriptures to bear upon them, so as that it was
put down at Augusta, by Charles the Fifth, and the whole Assembly of all the
States of the Empire. O wonderful! for on a sudden fell that great Babel called
Usury in all places of that great Empire, even as in one night all the Images
in the Netherlands fell, and by the people were thrown down, and even in
Antwerp it self, to the astonishment of the Popish Party; as appears by that
which Fabianus Strada has written of it, and that after and upon the preaching
of Gospel Ministers, which by the Scriptures cried them down. And may not the
like be said of England, wherein, in King Edward's time, all Usury was put down
by an Act of Parliament, which was empowered by the holy Scriptures so to do.
For so that Parliament grounds the forbidding of all Usury upon the holy
Scripture in these words, saying expressly, That Usury is by the Word of God
utterly prohibited, as a Vice most odious and detestable. Whereupon down
tottered Usury in England also, like the Popish Images aforesaid in the Belgic
Provinces: which shows the Power of God's Word seen in the putting down of
Usury, above all carnal and humane reason: Which makes me chiefly to stand upon
it, because I find it so experimentally, by my preaching and printing, how
thereby it is thrown down.

10. And whereas some may mislike my repeating of some chief and most notable
sayings of some renowned Authors by me quoted, I shall briefly apologize for my
self thus: That 1. My* Adversary has compelled me so to do, by his frequent
repeatings, and bringings in against me of Mr. Hughes, Dr. Rivet, Dr.
Spanhemius, and their ad nauseam usque reiterated distinctions and expressions.
2. And did not Christ himself repent his own sayings, Luke 13.3, 5. and
elsewhere? So Paul Gal. 1.8, 9. and John ^0.30. and 21.25. See also Eccles.
1.2. and 2.15. how that King of Preachers repeats the self same words: all
which puts me in hope that the courteous Reader will pardon my necessary
reiterations.

A POSTSCRIPT, ABOUT Two things left out in the Writing of this Book, viz.
PART I. NUMBER. 28.
I. ABout the Heydelberg- Catechism, which my chief Adversary pretends to make
for Usury against me; whereunto I have three things to say, having read the
said Catechism, and the Exposition of it; yea, having learned the said
Catechism by heart, when I was young.

1. The first is, that I find no such thing in the Catechism it self as favors
Usury; nor could there be, because Ursin, who made it himself, was against
Usury as well as my self, as in this Book I show it.

2. That the Author of the Exposition of it could do no other but write of
Usury as he does, and as others do, if he would be suffered there.

3. That I do highly commend him for all this, because he writ more precisely
for the strict keeping the Lord's Day than any of that Country, that I have
seen.

II. About the unjust charge, whereby I am charged with Popery; because the
Schoolmen, and I, with my Brethren, are jointly against Usury. The words of
the charge are these, The Man is become as one of them. Whereunto I desire to
answer a little more fully than yet I have done, and that three ways.

1. He might as well have said that I am become a Mohammedan, because Mahomet is
against Usury too.

2. That I am become a Heathen, because the Heathen and I agree in the point of
Usury: they writing against it, as I do; even most bitterly too.

3. I answer, Am I as one of the Papists? who, 1. Because I would not become a
Papist, chose rather, like Moses, to suffer Affliction with the people of God,
and to lose, and to leave all that I was owner of, and to live as an exiled man
in a strange Country. 2. And whereas some British Divines do question it,
whether the Pope be Antichrist, or whether the great Antichrist be yet to come;
have lately declared, and do declare, that it is as clear to me as the Sun,
that he is the Antichrist, and that Rome is Babylon: it being so evident to
others also, even Papists themselves, that it is viz. Alcassar,
Alcassar, Clemanges,
Clemanges, Rivera,
Ribera; yea, Bellarminus.
Bellarmine himself; little considering that in his name is the number of the
Beast, 666. in Rev. 13.16. if it be written in Hebrew thus. 1 9 10 1 6 60 70 10
60 6 50 10 40 200 30 30 70 2 And so the Hebrew Name, 400 10 10 40 6 200 makes
666.

III. About Erratas, I must beseech the gentle Reader to overlook them, and to
pardon me for letting any of them pass: for being a Stranger, and not able to
write so legibly as Natives can, I was necessitated to employ both Ministers
and others to transcribe my Copy: in which Transcription I found innumerable
faults, because the Transcribers could not well read many words and letters: so
that I was forced to take extraordinary pains, and much time, to correct so
many faults; which notwithstanding, many were left uncorrected, and could not
be mended by me, unless I would spoil all by correcting. Which puts me in hope
that those Erratas which are left will be imputed to transcribing, and not to
me; whose case is like that famous Authors, Jonas le Buy Sr. de la Perie, in
whose French Paraphrase upon the Apocalypse, I find 130 Erratas.

IV. About Prince Rupert, because I am jeered by one of my Adversaries for my
Prophecy concerning him, by me alleged in my Dedicatory Epistle to his
Illustrious Highness, out of a certain Author in Print; and did, since the
writing of this Treatise, meet with a far greater Encomium then given to the
said renowned Romana nimirum (...) Bestia (...) Romana Bestia, Jonas le Buy, in
Appeal. p. 443.
Prince my Gracious Lord, by Doctor Titus Oats, I thought it good to
transcribe it, and here to insert it. His words are these;

Doctor Titus Oats, our Preserver, under God, in the Dedication of his late
Sermon to Prince Rupert.
I have presumed to dedicate this Pl. Dis. to your Illustrious Highness, to
whom, under God, our Gracious Sovereign is chiefly owing a very considerable
temporal deliverance to this Nation. For, without your Highness's great Zeal
(and some miraculous Providence intervening) it had hardly failed, but that
Might and Craft had stifled the Truth in weak Hands, and brought a dismal
Deluge of Blood and Slavery upon the Nation. And a little after he says, It is
not for my weak Pen to recount the Merits of your Highness, etc.

V. About a certain brag, which one, since the writing of this Book, made to
me; viz. That five hundred to one of my friends would be against me in this
matter. For answer whereunto, though I could bring an infinite number of
Authors, and of other impartial men, to stop such a one's mouth, yet will I at
present quote but one, who is a Countryman of mine, even a chief one among the
Germans (whom yet some falsely give out to be for Usury) His name is Keckerman,
in his Oeconom. chapter 7.
Keckerman, a most learned and famous Writer; who confesses, That even all the
Greek and Latin Fathers, almost all our Reformed Divines, and all of the Romish
Church, do hold Usury to be a Sin. Where note that he makes no distinction
between biting and toothless Usury; oppressive, and harmless or moderate; as my
chief Antagonist would have me to make.

A Letter sent by a Godly Minister to the Author about this Treatise.
Reverend Sir,
I Have received your Lines, wherein you desire me to discover my Sentiments
concerning your Answers to the Usurer's Champion: and therefore I shall say
thus much; viz. That I am very well satisfied with them; and do heartily desire
that your success of them in the World might be answerable to your design. It
is to me a matter of great lamentation, that a crime (in my opinion so
notorious) should find any Advocate to plead for it: for I am sensible how much
greater influence those Arguments have on the credit of Mankind that comply
with their carnal interest, than those which design their greater benefit, and
to bring them into the obedience of the ever blessed God, and his Son Jesus
Christ. However, let your Examiner pass never so severe a censure on you,
whilst you plead the Lord's Cause, you have this comfort, that your reward is
with him. And though truth may be suppressed by its Adversaries for a while,
yet the force of it is such, that it will prevail at last. It were indeed to be
wished that men would open their eyes to behold it betimes: but if the World
has so far bewitched them, that they either cannot, or will not; sure I am,
that the day of Trial will make it clear. I pray God that men would suffer
themselves to be convinced, before the Judgment-day. Sir, I have no more to
say, but that I am and shall be an Orator at the Throne of Grace for you, that
the same holy Spirit that has hitherto moved you in the defense of so good a
Cause, would assist you still, both to the perfecting of this work, and what
else you may have designed for the Glory of God, and the profit of Mankind;
and that you may never want Champions for God's Cause in these famous Islands;
that Satan's Kingdom may not only be shaken, but altogether shattered, and
Glory may dwell in our Lands, that we may be the Field which the Lord God
delights to bless. Which must be the conclusion of the hearty Lines of him
who is sincerely,

Reverend Sir, Your assured Friend and Brother in the Work of Christ, J. W.
March 7. 1679.
THE CHIEF CONTENTS Of things added to this ANSWER. Viz.
1. A Citation for Usurers to answer at Christ's Tribunal for their Usury.

2. Bishop Babington 's Prophecy of Vsury's Downfall.

3. Two notorious Usurers buried by Satan in his own Chapel called Hell.

4. An Vsurer's last Will and Testament before his Death and Burial.

5. A Figure of two Ways: A Dangerous, which is the way of Usury, leading to
Hell; and a Safe, which is without it, leading to Heaven: for the Reader's
Choice.

USURIES CHAMPIONS AND AUXILIARIES SHAMEFULLY DISARMED, AND LAMENTABLY BEATEN.
PRELIMINARIES.
NUMBER I.
HAving received since the coming forth of my Usurer Cast, several Papers and
Letters sent to me by sundry persons, Ministers and others: some being for me,
to encourage me; and others against me, to daunt me:

I thought it necessary to vindicate the truth, and the The honor of our
Profession must be defended; Phil. Caesar. against Usury.
honor of my Profession, and to resolve tender Consciences too, by answering
what is asked of me, and also is objected against me; and especially, a certain
Pamphlet, wherein I am called, The Censurer examined. And that for these causes.

1. Facile est aliquem videri respondisse sr tacere noluerit. August.
Because it is carried upon the wings of fame, that thereby I am confuted,
because my Opponent would not be silent.

2. Because it was given out that I could not answer it. But withal, I resolved
to name no man or Author of that or any other writing, for great and weighty
causes; and also to omit what might put any of my adversaries in any danger:
contenting my self with this, that it is granted me by my chief Antagonist,
that the Bishops also decry all Usury. Which makes mightily for me, that such
learned, renowned and great men, of whom some have been glorious Martyrs, which
have given their bodies to be burned for Christ, have decried all Usury, as
well as my worthless self, and are on my side, and therein agree with me, as I
with them. But to the matter.

As for the Title given to my Book, Usury's Champions shamefully disarmed and
beaten, I shall now give this account for it.

NUMBER. II.
1. I style it so, and take my Examiner to be the chief, and The Champion* as
he calls me The Censurer; because he is, or at least will be accounted so, as
presuming to encounter with the most famous, holy and learned men which have
flourished in old time, and of late; viz. those of the Council of Nice, and
that of Agatha, and Bishop Hall: whom he goes to confute in his Pamphlet: and
famous Bolton too, and learned Trap, and Drexelius and Bertoldus also; as if he
were such a man as could examine and confute any learned man, though never so
much esteemed and admired by others, which are his betters. So that the Usurers
of our time, I speak Ironically, could not have such another Champion if they
had gone over all Devon, yea, all England: for none else does appear so against
such Worthies as he does: which compels me to style him The Champion. But I
subjoyn withal,

First, Shamefully Arma autem sunt exceptiones, replicationes, triplicationes.
Doctor Freig. in suis Rudim.
disarmed; like blessed Bolton's Adversary, M. S. of whom famous Bagshaw in
Bolton' s Life.
Bagshaw writes thus. That being a man of no great Note, and of less Learning,
he thrust himself upon the greatest infelicity of War: as first to be Disarmed,
and afterward to be killed in the Field with his own Weapons. [And with their
Auxiliary Forces lamentably beaten.] Whereby I understand Replies, Exceptions,
Allegations and Abetters: which being compared with those mighty and numerous
Forces and strength of Usuries Adversaries, are but as Pigmees and
Grass-hoppers to them, and therefore could not stand before them; but were
forced to put themselves to flight, And some to recant.
and so totally routed. For how can Error stand before Truth, and Stubble
before the fire of God's Word? which utterly forbids and condemns Usury to the
pit of Hell?

Thus much concerning this Title.

NUMBER. III.
Now, before I enter that Controversial Sea of Matter, I will do as I did
first, when I prayed, saying, O my God, do thou stand by me, a poor weak feeble
Creature, as thou stoodst by David; for I mean to go against this Goliath in thy
Name, etc. So I will pray again, because the Lord did then hear me graciously;
and this shall be my Petition: O thou Lord of Hosts, forsake me not in this new
and second encounter, for I put my sole and whole trust in thee; and thou have
formerly heard me graciously, when I cried unto thee, saying, Lord help me:
answerably whereunto, I will cry unto thee again three times, Lord help me,
Lord help me, Lord help me, against my Adversaries, as the people of As Fox
reports it.
Merindal once did cry against the Duke of Savoy's Armies; hoping to prevail,
as that people did then.

Thus I frame my Supplication here.

And thou, Lord, know; how, as I went on from time to time with the writing
of this Book; saying allusively, like David, as he went; O my Son Absalom,
would God I had died for thee; O Absalom, my Son, my Son, 2 Samuel 18.33. So, O
Absalom, Absalom* poor Usurer, who art a Rebel too, as Absalom was, against thy
Father by Creation; would God, I could persuade thee to die to that great, that
grievous, that loathsome, that damnable sin of Usury, that thou may not die
for it everlastingly.

And sometimes thus: Lord, let that good and mighty Wind, whose name is the
Holy Ghost, now blow upon me, a poor weak Vessel of thine; that being set upon
by mine Enemies, in this controversial Sea of Usury-matter, I may prevail; and
thereupon many a poor soul that fought under Usuries Banner may be overcome,
won, converted and saved: So that I cannot but expect a joyful issue; only be
thou my Helper, O my God and Deliverer. Amen.

And one thing more I cannot conceal from the poor Usurer cast; That when I had
ended this Treatise. I could not but, David-like, who fasted for his enemies,
Psalm. 35.13. observe a day of Humiliation for him also, that he may be
converted; which God grant.

NUMBER. IV.
In the next place, I shall, according to my usual proceeding. premise a
Preface, and place it next to my Prayer.

The Heavens, which are so clothed with shining light, so beautiful with a
Canopy of gayest colors, so bespangled with sparkling Diamonds, [the Stars I
mean] declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19.1. But so do not our Usurers. For they
do rather, as much as in them lies, unglorifie God; in that,

1. They [ I mean some of them] do lend their Money wittingly upon Usury to such
as will spend it upon their lusts, (some of them) and upon their drunkenness
(others,) and in playing it away in Carding and Dicing (others,) as long as
they can borrow any Money after Six in the Hundred, which they call moderate
Usury, to the undoing of their Wives and Children.

2. They are so far from declaring the Glory of God, and honoring that great
and glorious Majesty, as that they give great occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme, as did David by his Adultery and Murder, Both which, grave
and great Ambrose de Tob. c. 15. Cato in Cic. Calvin in Psalm. 15. Phil. Caesar
against Usury, p. 3.
Writers parallel with Usury.

2. In that they make men to blaspheme the God of Heaven, like those, Rev.
16.11. because of their Plagues, ver. 9. Because men do look upon usuries and
Usurers as the Plagues of the World, like these which God sent against, and
into the World, according to the aforesaid place; which makes men so to
blaspheme, and to Observabis ista Usurariis potissimum objici. Guat. in Amos 8.
charge these Usurers, with their pressures, to be the cause thereof.

2. They dishonor God; causing men to Unde Musculus in Psalm. 109.11. vocat
foeneratores, maledictionis Ministros. And Bishop Jewel, in 1 These. says,
Usury is always the Curse of God and the People.
curse, not only God, but themselves also, for their cursed Trade of Usury;
whereby they ruin themselves and their families, and many others besides,
according to Jer. 15.10. Every man does curse me.

I know my chief Adversary will be very much displeased with me for this,
[though others also say and write the same] as his Papers sent to me do
prognosticate it. Concerning which,

1. I will only say thus much in this Preface, that I do not regard his
displeasure at all manifested and discovered in it.

2. That when first I saw it, I wondered, that after so many mortal Wounds given
by so many sharp Pens of a number of holy and learned Writers, to that Absalom,
that Rebel, that damnable sin, called Usury, which so rebelleth against God;
yet it should perk up again, and lift up its head again, and be defended, even
by some Ministers of the Gospel, against the Gospel, for filthy lucres sake,
and contrary to so many sacred Councils which have prohibited it.

And I wondered also, that when all other Ministers were silent; yea, diverse
both Prelatical and Anti-prelatical Divines encouraged me by Letters and
otherwise, by and in discourses, he only should rise up in Arms against me, in
detestable Usuries Defense.

NUMBER. V.
But when I considered Which, what an unbeseeming thing it is for a Minister,
that of Eusebius, out of Apollonius, about Montanus, Does a Prophet exercise
Usury? does sufficiently declare.
how easy it was for a man which is enamoured with that profitable and
soul-destroying Evil, and for this young man, my Adversary, to collect together
some Arguments out of those new Writers, which defend a certain kind of Usury,
with Cautions, and then vent them, to get a Name, and to give out that he has
confuted me. And I was told besides, that this same young man himself also,
puts his Money to Usury. I left wondering, because I saw then the cause of his
writing against me, and entering into the Field of Mars with me, by his
contending with me, even as M. S. blessed Bolton's Adversary, did contend with
him about Usury, to defend it, by reason of a Sermon which that holy man
preached against Usury, whereof he was guilty; as that learned and noted
Parliament Man, Mr. Bagshaw, reports it. Aug. in Psalm. 15.
And so to go on with this my Preface, I resolved upon three things.

1. That I would not hearken to him, but God; as blessed Austin advises me,
saying, I have not written it; viz. what is written, Psalm. 15.5. He that
puts not his Money to Usury. Hear God, and not a Minister; He may be an
Usurer himself.

2. I resolved to value his sayings and barkings against me the less, because I
remembered what a most able and learned Author Mr. Moss.
writes in his Dedicatory Epistle, prefixed before his Book against Usury, to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, in these words: Your Grace is reported to be one
who neither lends nor takes upon Usury; which is not in this Age every such
man's commendation: and therefore, being free from that sin, you may the more
freely give sentence upon the ungodliness thereof. According to which saying, I
thought this young writer to be very unfit to meddle with this controversy,
and to judge me, and to pass sentence upon me after examination: (to reflect
upon his Title) and so resolved to slight his appearing for Usury against me;
who, together with a Cloud of able, holy and learned Divines, old and new,
appear against it, and all the Defendants of it.

3. I resolved also, that, seeing Providence has so ordered it most remarkably,
that this Champion should rise up against me in Arms, as it were, and to rowze
me up by all manner of provocations, given me from the beginning, and first
line of his Paraphrase, to the very end thereof, wherein he would fain make a
Usurer of me also, by a false report: I say me, who never lent any Money upon
Usury in all my life time, that by God's mighty help, I will now go to the very
bottom of that most deep dead and dangerous Sea of Usury, which has overflown a
great part of this and other Countries also, in our European Orb, to the spoil
and ruin of many thousands, thousands, thousands, who make a most sad outcry
about it, like those in Nehemiah. 5.1. so that their cry goes up, even to
Heaven.

The Lord my God strengthen, assist and enable me to go through with this great,
noble and mighty work As Daneus calls it.
with a prosperous success; so as that many a poor Usurer's soul may repent,
and not continue any longer in that great and griev^^^ sin; be saved, and not
damned; live, and not die to all Eternity, according to that most dreadful
sentence, H'as given forth upon Usury, (...), and h'as taken increase, (...),
mark, any increase, or overplus; not (...), or vehement biting only: shall he
then live? he shall not live, he shall surely die, his blood shall be upon him,
Ezekiel. 18.13.

NUMBER. VI.
But to the main matter it self, after this Preface; which I will methodize
after this manner: dividing it into four Sections, and distinguish each Section
into Numbers, as our new Casuists do; because my Adversary will needs make me a
new Casuist too.

The First Part will comprize his Examinations of the two first Chapters of my
Usurer Cast.

The Second, My Answers given to the Examinations of my third, fourth and fifth
Chapters; together with some certain Numbers joined with the rest, as
concerning the same Subject.

The Third, My Defense made against his and other Opposites, Impugnations and
Insults made against my Sixth and Seventh Chapters.

The Fourth, my Resistance made against his and other Adversaries encountering
with, and assaulting of my Eighth and Ninth Chapters.

And several Additions; viz. of a Narrative, and the Usurer's last Will and
Testament, mentioned in the Table of the chief Contents of this. Together with
sundry Exhortations, and some Transcripts; And a final Supplication.

THE FIRST PART.
NUMBER I.
HIS Title is, The Censurer examined: or, a Consideration of Mr. Jelinger' s
Usurer Cast.

The later part whereof I have nothing to say to; but the former I cannot but
discuss and deal with according to its desert.

And First, Not to speak much of the Name he bestows upon me, calling me The
Censurer; as if there were none like me: but only this more, besides that which
I have said already upon my Title which I give him; that those Judicious
Readers, which have read my Book, and Bishop Downam's, and Mr. Bolton's, have
given this verdict upon the three; that both the one, and the other have dealt
more roughly with the Usurer than I.

Secondly, In the second place, I shall observe in the word Examined, this Man's

1. Arrogance.

2. Boldness and Impudence.

1. Arrogance: That, being but one of the lower Form of Scholars, he will take
it upon him to I say, examine others, when he should have put an Answer first
to Mr. Smith' s Examination of Usury in his Second Sermon against Usury.
examine such as are passed and gone from Form to Form, and from University to
University; yea, (which I must needs add) will examine the Theses in the
University of Wittemberg disputed against Usury, so as to condemn them for
bringing Usury by their reasonings (as if his reasoning were better) into
greater credit and request than some are aware of, in his 97th Page. Which,
whether it be not height of Arrogance, let the Reader judge.

NUMBER. II.
2. Of his Boldness. That, being but a young Man, he would presume to examine
such a deep Subject; and to be Defender, yea, Judge of such a Controversy,
when all his other elder Brethren in this Country, and elsewhere are silent.
But I do, upon this Observation, remember, 1. What my old deceased friend, Mr.
Hughes did write of such another young Man, who would needs dispute with him,
and challenged him for it; that he was Omnium Juvenum audacissimus, Of all
young Men the most audacious. A Defender of that most odious sin of Usury,
properly so called, and now practiced by our Usurers. Where I desire to cite,
for the Impudency of this Defense, that Illustrious saying of Lavater, (
Cemment on Ezekiel. 2. Homil.) Our Age wants not Men of whom Usuries, and other
Crimes, ( Mark, he calls Usury a Crime) are most impudently defended.
Which may well and most fitly be applied to this also. 2. I remember also,
what I have read in a certain Author; who writing against Usury, as I do,
dedicated his Book to an old great Lord; saying, The Question of Usury being
controverted in these days among many Divines, requires an Arbiter of much
reading and experience. And if no Man chooses a young Man for a Judge, or a
Guide, because there is no sufficient evidence of their Wisdom; then should I
have shown my self a very young Man, if I had chosen any that is young to be a
determiner of this Controversy.

Let the Reader apply now this old grave Author's Saying to the present case.
I, for my part, will close up this Observation with that noted saying of
Occolampadius: Oecolampadius, Epist. 16. l. 1.
De Usuris judicare non est omnium: Every Man is not a fit Judge in this case
of Usury. And Aristotle's Verdict concerning young Men; Quod non constat ^os
esse prudentes: That it is not evident that they are so prudent. That is,
prudent sufficiently.

NUMBER. III.
Having done with this Man's Title, I proceed to his Premises, And,

First, I have this to say therein of this young Philosopher; who so begins
with his Philosophy, when he should inchoate (...), with God, and with his holy
Word, to make his matter good; that his wrong which he does me, charging me
with Confusion and height of uncharitableness, is so great, as that I must
needs vindicate my self in a more than ordinary manner, because he assaults me
so hotly in such an unusual manner, beyond the bounds of all Civility, and the
example of all others that have written of, for, or against that dreadful sin
of Usury. So that he must expect to have the like measure measured out unto
him, with which he measures unto me, in this my Defense. And,

1. Whereas he charge me with a Chaos, because I couple, as he says, the
grossest Oppression and most griping Exaction with the least Expectation; be it
a Mite, or Cup of cold Water, upon the account of Money lent: and because I do
not distinguish as he would have me, viz. between griping Usury and moderate. I
must thereupon needs retort, and tell him, that his Pamphlet is a Confusion and
a Chaos indeed. For, 1. Where are his Parts, his Sections, his Divisions,
throughout his whole Pamphlet? Is not the whole Body of it out of Joint? Which
caused one who read it to say, that it had neither Head nor Tail.

2. Does he distinguish between the several kinds of Usury as he ought (save
only between the most griping Usury and his moderate, which is for his tooth?)
No, no.

3. As for me: Because he finds such fault in me for not distinguishing, I will
therefore now distinguish more than yet I did, though I know he will not like
it.

And First, between that which is Qu^^ aperta facie est quod dicitur. Erasmus,
in Psalm. 15.
manifest, and the cloaked, which, in all likelihood, is omitted by him,
because palliated Usury comes too close home to his Lending. For Divines tell
us that it is committed thus.

NUMBER. IV.
1. When a man who is a Usurer takes any thing above the Principal without an
express Compact, but by a Tacit, custom it self tacitly making the Compact:
as between infatuated Harlots, and those that commit Fornication with them,
Custom makes the Agreement, themselves being silent. Thus my Author compares
Usurers to Harlots in this thing.

2. When a Man palliateth Usury with Partnership, in that he will be the
borrowers Partner: But how? In his Gain, but not in his Loss. Which this
Champion's own As Mr. Baxter, and others.
Authors in their Cautions disallow; because the Usurer is so unjust, as that
he will have the Borrower to take the pains, and himself will take the gains.

3. When the Usurer makes a Translation: that is, when he will not take Money
beyond the Principal, but bushels of Corn, of the Borrower, or his labor for
it, or some other thing, contrary to Deuteronomy. 23.19.

4. When the Usurer makes a Translation de persona ad personam, from person to
person. As thus: When the Usurer will not be seen in the taking of Usury,
because it is an odious thing, and will bring a scandal upon him (especially if
he be a Minister or Professor) but employeth another: as some do their Wives;
others some noted common Usurers, which can best put out a Man's Money upon
Usury, because they are still resorted unto: Yea, others there are who will
employ the very Jews, whom famous Pareus in R.
Doctor Pareus calls therefore Christianorum famulos, The Christians Servants.

Here now I distinguish indeed, but little, I suppose, to the Champion's
liking, though he finds fault with me that I do not distinguish in my Usurer
cast.

5. Palliated Usury is committed also, says the famous B. Downam, in Psalm. 15.
Bishop Downam, by counterfeit exchanging; which I, for my part, shall call
Exchange bordering upon Usury. The manner of its committing is this; When Money
is delivered upon Bills of Exchange, with mention of the places, not that the
Bills should be transported for the satisfying of the Creditor beyond the Seas;
but that the Lender, keeping the Bills at home with him, may have the like
Allowance which Merchants have for the same time, dealing by Exchange and
Rechange betwixt the places named.

The reason of this practice is, because their Gain is greater than any other;
which is tolerated by some Magistrates: Insomuch that they which put forth
their Money in this counterfeit Exchange are supposed to get after 16 or 20 in
the 100. So that therefore this Exchange may be called Cambium siccum, Dry
Exchange, because it is void of Charity.

6. There is also a kind of adventuring, which is but a cloak of Usury; When a
Man covenants for Gain in lending under a pretense of hazard, when all the
while he intends to ensure; and so the Principal is not hazarded. And so many a
Man lends fifty pounds, if himself and two or three others which he shall
name, or any of them, shall be alive at the twelve Months end, that the Debtor
shall pay him fifty five pounds; otherwise he shall pay but forty five pounds:
For if he should name but one, it were twenty to one that he should be living
at the Years end; but naming three, it is more than twenty to one, but that
some one of the three shall survive.

This famous Downam also judges to be a cloaked Usury.

7. There is likewise a kind of pretended free Lending, which is but a Cloak of
Usury. As, when a Man lends fifty pounds; much of it being light Money, and
such as will not pass; as being clipped, or Brass colored over, with this
condition, to pay him again so much in good and passable Coin. Such was the
Usury which some practiced in Ezekiel's time, a little before the Captivity.
For, as some write, they having ordained a new Shekel, exceeding the old thirty
two Grains; so that whereas the Civil, or Mosaical Law, which was but half of
the holy Shekel, weighed an hundred and sixty Grains, the new weighed an
hundred ninety and two: they would lend after the old Shekel, but they would be
paid according to the new.

More, much more could be said of this Palliate Usury: for it is just like one
Perielimenus; who, to beguile others for the enriching of himself, sometimes
would be like a Fowl, sometimes like a Be, sometimes like an Ant, sometimes
like a Serpent; yea, says my Author, -- (...)
(...).
so many shapes he had, as no Man can express. Answerably whereunto, Usurers
also appear sometimes in one shape, and sometimes in another: yea, they have so
many a quillity, and so many a subtilty couched in their distinctions, as no
Writer is able to discover. But I must be briefer than I have been, having much
other matter to utter: and therefore I will hasten to

NUMBER. V.
A Second Distinction, between Natural Usury and Unnatural. The Natural is,
Whereby a Man deals with Turner, page 12, 13.
Mother Earth, which the holy Fathers in old time used by God's own
Institution; and which Aretius de Usura.
Aretius says, is only lawful; excluding all other interdicted Usury. Which
also makes against my Adversaries.

2. Unnatural: viz. That which, against Nature, Usurers would have to come of
such a barren thing as Money is, and which that renowned and pious Bishop Ha^^
brings as an Argument against Usury, (see my Usurer Ca^^^ 44.) but hereof more
hereafter. In the mean time let me (...) that for this unnaturalness, Usury is
called by some, So^^^^ Naturae. The Sodomy of Nature. O abominable! And if any
do not like Bishop Hall's Reason, as this Champion does not, I prove the
unnaturalness of it thus; because the poor Heathens, by the Light of Nature,
have written and spoken against it: yea, because the Light of Nature, called
the Law written in Men's Hearts, accuses Usurers for the unrighteousness of
their practicing Usury.

NUMBER. VI.
Thirdly, I distinguish between Whereof the one gains Heaven, the other Hell;
says Christostome, Hom. 5. in Matthew.
Metaphorical Usury, and Proper; or, properly so called. The Metaphorical is
that of Gifts, and Graces, and Par^s; whereby we may gain some benefit,
increase and excrescency (as Aq^iras calls it) of good Works; as Almsgiving,
etc. to be understood by that Usury which Christ speaks of, Matthew. 25. gotten
by the Talents; that is, Gifts and good Works there mentioned. And some think
that Christ there meant Ministers and Pastors of the Church especially; that
they should so lend forth their Gifts and Parts, as that he may receive his own
with Usury; that is with a Spiritual Increase: as Marlorate, with others, is of
that mind. Whence is that of Origin, Homil. 3. in Psalm. 36.
Origin; Behold all ye to whom I speak these things, do take these my words as
Money lent to Usury; This is the Lord's Money, which you must use to Increase.
Thus he understood Christ's Parable. But of this also more hereafter. In the
mean time, this shows that this Parable does nothing at all favor Usury,
properly so called; which I must speak of next: showing, that it is not only
biting, but also Increase, called in Hebrew, (...). any Pleonasme, or Overplus,
Usurariously taken; Ezech. 18.13. H'as taken Increase. So that these two words,
Nesheck and Tarbith, are both one; that is, Usury. Which is so acknowledged by
Rabbi Kimki, upon Ezech. 18. that Nesheck and Tarbith are all one. So by Calvin
himself; that is, both Usury, forbidden Usury.

NUMBER. VII.
Fourthly, I shall distinguish between Mental Usury and Actual.

To begin with Actual: that is, A kind of Usury, whereby actually and
outwardly, increase is made by the Whence it is called Usury, from Using, jus
Canon. p. 466.
use of a thing. So it is by learned Men described: And it is that which has
spread it self, and is grown most common in the World; and of it (and not of
most griping Usury only, as the Champion would have it) most Writers (...) all
Countries do treat, says a most famous Author.

2. Mental: Which is a kind of Foenory, consisting in the mind, and hope of
Gain, without any Covenant (says a famous Writer:) Whence is the name Mentalis
Usurarius, A Mental Usurer; that is, one who commits Usury with his Mind. So
that if a Man's purpose, desire and expectation, note expectation, be, that the
borrower should not bring his Goods weeping home, but that he should render him
Consideration for the use of his Goods. Such a Man, in his mind, has committed
Usury before God, says a renowned Writer.

And the same was said long before of him by blessed Austin whose words I
formerly quoted in my first Book; viz. If th^^ lendest thy Money to any, of
whom thou expectest to receive more than thou did lend, thou art an Usurer.
And since, by another famous Writer; whose words in English are these: Ment^ is
committed without Covenant, when a Man lends with h^^^ of receiving somewhat
that is Moneys worth, above, or beside the Principal. Which thing I intend more
fully to confi^^ by the unanimous consent of the Schoolmen, and other Divines,
and their Scriptural Proof for it.

I know the Champion will mislike this as much as any thing I said yet: but I
must discover God's Truth; Will he Nill he.

NUMBER. VIII.
4. I will distinguish next between the several values of Usury, which are and
have been from time to time; and are al^ called Usury; and are, and have been
interdicted by God and Men: viz. 1. The Centesima: that is, A certain Usury
which was gathered Monthly, and amounted to twel^^ pounds by the Year. The
Second is called Semissalis, Six (...) the Hundred. The Third, Trientaria, Four
in the Hundred The Fourth, Exbesse, Eight in the Hundred. All which a^^ Usury,
and called so by all sorts of Writers; and as they al^ are so, so they are all
interdicted; as I said, 1. By God who forbids all Usurious Increase, Ezec.
18.12, 13. The have taken Usury and Increase. As if God should say, which thou
ought not to have done, because I have interdicted it Mark, Increase; any
Increase, as well as Nesheck, Biting Whereof more in a fitter place. 2. By Men:
All these kind have been interdicted, and taken away quite by degrees. Th^^ the
ancient Romans first brought Usury to one in the hundred^ and by the Laws of
the twelve Tables (which Bishop Hall al^^ cites) ordained, that if any Usurer
should take above O^^ in the Hundred, he should be punished fourfold; whereas*
Thief, by the same Law, was to be punished but twofold (Whereby you may gather,
says Cato, how much they esteemed an Usurer to be a worse Common-wealths-man
than (...) Thief.) Within one Year after that, it was Duilia Rogatione.
reduced ad Semuncias, says Tacitus, to half a pound in an hundred: and the
next Year after, that also was abolished, Genuncia rogatione, says Bodin,
whereby it was enacted, that it should be unlawful at all to lend upon Usury;
as Alexander ab Alexandro informs us. And Bishop Downam brings and names many
ancient and famous Philosophers and Lawmakers, who have absolutely been
against all such Usury.

But more of this hereafter also.

And has not the Champion brought his Ware to a good Market (by his Chaos)
which yields him such Returns. I hope we shall hear no more of his congealed
Water for the future: he may do better to keep it for his own Chaos.

3. But I do not desire to evade this way only, nor altogether; and therefore,
to show that I minded distinguishing, before he sent me to the Philosopher to
mind me of it, I will send him to the third Chapter of my Usurer cast; where I
distinguish between Usury compacted for, and expected: and to my fourth
Chapter, wherein I distinguish Usury, properly so called, from Inter-Usury, and
Interest, and Ship-loan, and Liberal Increase, held lawful.

4. And if this be not sufficient, let him pervolve the Writings of the holy
Fathers, and other learned Authors, as I and others have done; and see whether
they so distinguish still between the most griping Usurer and the more
moderate. I am sure they do usually speak in general, without such
distinguishing. And therefore why must I be so branded as I am by this
censorious Champion, and my Treatise compared to cold Water that congealeth and
hardens in the same lump things of a far differing Nature: if my Treatise be
so, then hundreds more of far greater Authors are so too.

5. Yea, are they not most famous and learned Men, who in very deed couple
together (to use his own words) even expressly and distinctly those which for
their taking of five Guilders for the Loan of a hundred Guilders: and
maintaining pertinaciously, that this quantity was to be lawfully taken for the
said hundred Guilders, they say are to be censured for Robbers and Heretics;
mark, ROBBERS AND So Archidiaconus, Q. 1.
HERETICS: and them (whosoever they be) that take any thing for Money lent,
though it be but a Mite, or a Cup of cold Water. -- In the Wittemberg Positions
disputed, where Mordesius proceeded Doctor.
So the University of Wittenberg couples them, not I; I do but quote them, as
also does learned Aresius de Usura.
Aretius: and therefore why does he so run out upon me?

6. But I Will go higher yet. Does not God himself couple those which take
Nesheck, In which word is a Dagesh for it in the letter (...), which denotes
much Biting, as I said.
(...), Biting, and them which take Tarbith, Increase, which is more than the
Principal, as learned As Ambrose l. de Tobia, c. 15. and in Levit. 25.
Expositors do aver it. Which has caused a famous Bishop Downam.
Author to say those words which the Holy Ghost confounds, Let not us
distinguish.

NUMBER. IX.
2. I pass on to Uncharitableness, wherewith this Champion most fiercely and
hotly charge me to defend my self against this his heavy, dreadful and
spitish Charge, and Imputation, set down by him in these words: That my not
distinguishing, whereby he means, as his words show it, my not distinguishing
between the grossest oppression, and the least Increase and moderate Gain, in
his first and fourth pages; wherein he wrongs me, as it is to be seen in my
fifth page: where I do distinguish Nesheck, Bi^ing, or gross Oppression, from
Tarbith, Increase; which may not be grossly oppressive, and yet is Usury too,
forbidden as w^ll as Nesheck, Ezech. 18.13. and threatened with death G. Powel,
p. 28.
and damnation in the same place I say, he says, that My not distinguishing is
the Inlet to all that monstrous Uncharitabl^ness that runs through my whole
Treatise. And how is that; In that I sentence all that are concerned therein
(Usurers he must needs mean) to Hell-Flames. Yea, he adds, that Within this
Scheme, I take in by far, the greatest part of the Nation. And not content with
these Tautologies, he adds a third, saying, by a direful Gradation; Thus
Doctrinally he damneth for this one practice the whole Nation, excepting few,
himself, no doubt, and two or three more, without Repentance: And to leave
little hope from the after Remedy, he tells us farther, Usurers seldom repent.

Which false and fearful Charge to answer, I shall first break out into this
Exclamation, because Non parva ros est aeterna salus and aeterna damnatio,
Lessius de Relig. c. 1. p. 2.
Eternal Salvation and Damnation are no small things.

Oh, that a Minister of the Gospel should so forget himself, as to draw such a
formidable and groundless Construction from my harmless and sure-footed
Expressions. God forgive him; for, as much as in him lies, he labors to
render me as odious as possibly he can to this whole Nation: Which, if this
Charge were true, and he could make it good, might justly stone me to death,
for sending such an infinite number of Men, Women and Children to Hell. But my
comfort is, that that famous and holy Archbishop Usher in his Body of
Divinity, p. 300.
Arshbishop Usher says as I say; that Usury is a wicked and unlawful Contract,
which, if we live and die in, we are excluded out of the Kingdom of Heaven;
Psalm. 15.5. Ezekiel. 18.12, 13.

3. I shall hasten to my particular Responses and Answers which I have fitted
for this heavy Charge, to defend my self against it.

NUMBER. X.
And First, Do I damn, and send the whole Nation, for this one practice, to
Hell, save my self and two or three more excepted? and that leaving but little
hope for the afterremedy, which he calls Repentance, because I say, that
Usurers seldom repent? How can he make this good? Because I say, that in my
Anatomy, which is to come, few will escape, as if he had seen the said Anatomy:
But I would have him to know, that when I say in my Anatomy few will escape, my
meaning there is not that Though in some other respect few will escape Hell,
because few are chosen, Matthew. 20.16. which yet are many thousands, Rev. 7.4.
few will escape Hell: but my Discovery, meaning Borderers upon Usury properly
so called, viz. such as are guilty of Usurious Dealings in Buying, Selling,
Setting, Letting, etc. and who may, and very many times do repent; as is to be
seen, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. whereas Usurers properly so called, whom I chiefly aim
at, and preach and write against (like blessed Bolton, whom I desire to imitate
therein) very So seldom as that we Saint a Man who does but give over this
Golden Trade of Usury, Capel in his Tempt. p. 264.
seldom repent. So as upon most of them we spend our breath in vain.

Secondly, Do I damn the whole Nation, excepting a few, two or three, besides
my self? how can he speak it? and how will he make any one that is in his
Senses believe it, that he speaks true? for, are all, or most Men Usurers in
every Parish throughout England? Do we not know, that in many Parishes there
are none, in others but two or three, in some but one; as Peraldus de Usura.
Peraldus tells us, that there was but one Usurer, who kept it very private
too, in a whole City. And if so, how can he say that I damn the whole Nation,
excepting so few?

Thirdly, But if I had Hyperbolically said such a thing as he charges me with*
which I did not, he might have more charitably construed my words, as that
great Apostles words must be construed; There is none righteous; no, not one:
and there is none that does good; no, not one: that all the World may become
guilty before God, Romans 3.10.

NUMBER. XI.
Fourthly, But I must come closer to the matter, saying, that I am so far from
damning the whole Nation, as that, contrary to his fearful Charge, which is,
that I censure and condemn many of his Brethren to Hell, page 2. I do Only let
me use St. Austin 's holy Admonition to my Brethren, that they be not moved
with the reasonings of vain Men, nor imitate them in this perverseness in
Opinion, c. 31.
exempt and except all those Godly Ministers, my dear Brethren, which, though
they are for some Increase (as I also my self am, viz. for a Gratuity) yet are
no common Usurers, properly so called: observing the Godly Cautions which
blessed Calvin, pious and learned Mr. Baxter, and Of whom I will name but one
more, Mr. Durham, who in his Exposition upon the Commandments, has these
notable Cantions. 1. We should consider what the Borrower makes of our Money.
2. And we should not be swayed by our own Gain only, as most Usurers are.
others prescribe; and which being observed, do make that which by some is
called Usury no Usury, but Partnership. As when Men are contented and minded to
share, not only in the Borrowers Gain, but Loss also, which the abovesaid
famous In his Directory*
Mr. Baxter and others require. And yet farther I say, that I hope in God, that
I shall meet with those holy and reverend Ministers in Heaven, and that there
we shall enjoy one another Society to all Eternity.

5. I answer, That I except also from that foresaid Condemnation, those Godly
Christian Hearers which observe the same Godly Cautions, which likewise make
that which by some is improperly called Usury, no Usury, but Factory; and would
not take any Gain for their Money if they were convinced that it is unlawful
for them to take what is proffered: for I shall still stick to that which I
have so often said with and after a number of other Divines, who say the same;
that it is lawful to take what is unexpectedly offered. I add, that I have a
very charitable Opinion of some Christians beyond the Seas also, which in their
simplicity and ignorantly follow Absalom, like those two hundred Men which
followed Absalom out of Jerusalem in their simplicity, knowing nothing of it,
that Rebellion was in it against David the King, 2 Samuel 15.11. I say it again,
that I do not condemn such ignorant Souls, because they are not convinced of
the Evil of all Usury properly so called, even as they are not convinced that
they offend God by not keeping our Christian Sabbath so strictly as we keep it
in England, accounting it Judaism: So that in the Netherlands they will carry
burdens, and do servile work without control, as I have seen it: and at
Geneva, after the Afternoon-Sermon, will go a Shooting in their Plimpalee, so
called, which mine eyes have beheld also; and which, if Christians, professing
Godliness, should do here, they would be censured to sin damnably. Which makes
me to judge charitably of such a People as sins ignorantly, not being
convinced: For the time of ignorance God winketh at; but withal, commands all
men every where to repent, Act. 17.30. Which has stirred me up to persuade all
Men every where to repent of Usury by name, and to leave it, with the very
expectation of gaining by it, lest that tremendous saying of Christ, Joh.
15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin, but now
they have no cloak for their sin, become applicable to them. Now, in this
charitable Opinion I am not alone; but there is Gabr. Powel.
one besides me, who writes as bitterly against all Usury as ever I did, and
makes it damnable, as I do, in one place of his Book; and yet in another
speaks thus dreadfully of it: The sin is heinous, and the danger desperate;
and the more dangerous when it is covered and shrouded: as a consuming Fever,
that cannot be espied before it grows incurable. And yet adds withal, these
words; I know there be many, otherwise good Christians, that entertain this
UGLY MONSTER, who would not do it to gain the World, if they knew their Trade
were damnable Usury. So says he.

NUMBER. XII.
Obj. You will say, Why did not you tell us of this first?

I answer, Because I feared that all common Usurers would abuse this precious
Cordial, intended for tender and troubled Consciences, and thereby be hardened
in their Trade of Usury; pretending that they also are not convinced about this
point, and therefore hope to be saved notwithstanding their most cruelly biting
Usury: when God knows it, that they are fully convinced in their own
Consciences, that their Usury is naught and damnable, because it stares in
their faces now and then; and they will not call it, nor have it called Usury,
but Interest, the Rent of their Money, and honest Profit, and Consideration,
and Satisfaction. Whereof more hereafter.

NUMBER. XIII.
Sixthly, And this brings me to those which I chiefly aim at in this my
Subject, viz. professed common, impenitent, resolute, obstinate, convinced
Usurers; who, though their Consciences check them, and accuse them for their
sinful practice, yet go on in that damnable Sin, and will not forsake it; of
whom (being compared and conferred with some good people, who observing the
Godly Cautions prescribed by Godly Divines, whom I shall ever highly honor,
lend their Money, and take some Profit as a Gratuity of the Borrower, or
ignorantly expect Gain for Money lent, as not being convinced yet, that even
the expectation of some Usury and Increase is Usury) I shall say as Joab once,
to the wise Woman of Abel said, of Sheba the Son of Bichrie, 2 Samuel 20.20, 21.
Far be it from me, that I should swallow up and destroy, meaning that peaceable
People of Abel. The matter is not so: but Sheba the Son of Bichrie has lifted
up his hand against the King, even against David. So, far be it, far be it from
me, that I should swallow up, by my preaching against impenitent Usurers, Death
and Damnation; or destroy, or go to hit the peaceable People of God, who truly
fear God, and intend no War at all against God by any wilful Usury. The matter
is not so; but Sheba the Son of Bichrie, the wilful and obstinate Usurer I
mean; otherwise, the common Usurer who makes a Trade of that Usury which God
interdicts and condemns, called Nesheck and Tarbith; that is, Usurious
Increase, Ezekiel. 18.13. who lifts up himself against the King of Kings, and
rebelleth against him, and his Commands concerning Usury; against him I preach
Damnation, as one who may well be called Sheba, because he has Seven
Abominations in his heart, as the Scripture speaks of the Wicked, as he is,
if any be among us, the Son of Bichrie, as some read it, because he is in
Aries, which is not only a Celestial Sign, but also a Warlike Instrument used
against a place or King besieged, and rebelled against, as the Usurer is, who
is an Instrument acted by Satan, and used against the Great King, against whom
he fights: against him, even this Usurer, I say, that I am; telling him, that
except he repent, he shall surely die; that is, he shall be damned, and burn in
the flames of Hell everlastingly, Ezekiel. 18.13. and never dwell in God's Holy
Hill above, as those who do not put forth their Money to Usury, Psalm. 15. Nor
am I alone in this; for, besides these holy Scriptures, I shall bring against
impenitent and common Usurers several Great, Learned, Pious and Renowned
Writers, and their Writings; who say the same, and condemn the Usurer to the
flames of Hell, as well as my self; viz.

1. Chrisost. in cap. 1. Math. Hom. 5.
St. Chrisostom, Who says, Usuries prepare Hell, without distinguishing, or
once naming Griping Usury.

2. Ambrose, lib. de Bono Mortis, and habetur, 14 q. Can. 4.
St Ambrose, If any Man takes Usury, he commits Rapine, he shall not live.
Which is also cited by others for such a purpose as well as by me.

3. Leo de Jejunio Decim. mensis, Sermon. 6.
Leo, We are to flee that Iniquity of Usury, because the Usury of Money is the
Funeral of the Soul. Thus he.

4. But why do I name but these Three Fathers.

Famous Bishop Bishop Downam, in Psalm. 15.5.
Downam tells us, The Fathers of the Church have with one consent condemned
Usury, even TO THE PIT OF HELL.

5. Adams, in his Works, page 15.
Adams also has these dreadful words against the Usurer, condemning him to the
Flames of Hell: Infinite Excuses, Evasions, Distinctions, Paintings, are
invented to countenance on Earth Heaven-exploded Usury. God says, Thou shall
not TAKE USURY: Go now, dispute the matter with God, HELL FIRE shall decide the
Question.

6. Next to this famous Man, let blessed Bolton, in his Discourse of True
Happiness.
Bolton pass his Sentence. Out of the wideness of the Conscience of some wicked
Men proceeds mincing and excusing in many Interpretations, favorable
Crnstructions and distinctions of Sin. As for example, That Usury is of two
sorts; Biting, and a Toothless, (as also says the Champion and his Brethren)
holding for it; when ALL KIND OF USURY IS MOST CERTAINLY DAMNED BY THE BOOK OF
GOD.

7. As his judicious Hearers informed me when I was putting forth this Treatise.
Francis Whiddon the Elder preached the same, that The Usurer's Portion will be
ETERNAL DAMNATION.

8. Add James Spotswood, in his short Discourse concerning Usury.
James Spotwood, who from Psalm. 15.5. tells us, that Usurers are excluded from
Eternal Life.

And I will add to those two Modern, most Learned, most Renowned, most Valued
and Pious Bishops.

1. Bishop Jewel, in 1 These. p. 145.
Bishop jewel tells the Usurer, How dare thou look up to Heaven? Thou have no
Dwelling there. And, Usurers shall die the Death, Ezekiel. 18.13. meaning the
Death of the Soul.

And 2. Bishop Sand* Sermon. upon Romans 13.
Bishop Sands, besides Bishop Downam, already quoted.

And 9. I will now close up this naming of Authors with that terrible Doom
denounced against the Usurer by Doctor Doctor Williams, in his true Church, p.
438.
Williams; who tells the Usurer, that The punishment of Usurers in Hell shall
be greater than most Sinners. O dreadful! Tremble at it, O Usurer.

NUMBER. XIV.
But when the Common Usurer, who takes and expects Use above his Principal,
hears this, that he is chiefly meant, he will be apt to make these two
Objections.

Object. 1. That these Writers may and must be understood, as speaking against
Oppressive and cruelly Biting Use and Usurers.

Whereunto I answer, That this cannot be their meaning, because they also show
what that Usury is, and those Usurers are, which they write against.

I Will instauce in two only, reserving many more for another Answer, which is to
come upon another account.

The first is, Ambrose, l. de Tol. c. 14.
St. Ambrose, whom but now I mentioned; and who says expressly, Et esca Usura
est, and vestis Usura est, and quodcunque sorti accedit Usura est; that is, And
Meat is Usury, and a Vestment is Usury, and whatsoever exceeds, or is taken
above the Principal, is Usury.

The Second is Brentius Comment in Levit. 25.
Brentius; saying, Men do define Usury to be a Gain that is added to that which
is lent; or, when over and besides the Principal, any thing is paid for
Lending. Which does not cross free Lending, and a free Gratuity, because it is
a Gain arising from the very Act of Lending; whereas a free Gratuity arises
from Thankfulness.

Object. 2. The condemned Usurer will object and reply; I hope that I cannot
be, nor shall be condemned to the flames of Hell, living under the New
Testament, though Usurers, living under the Old, were sent to those everlasting
Flames, because the New Testament neither interdicts Usury, nor condemns the
Usurer.

Whereunto I return these Responses.

1. That Usury is interdicted in both Testaments. In the Old first, by a
general consent; and in the New also, as well as old, by the Verdict of whole
Councils and Universities.

I Will instance in one of each. And,

1. In the Lateran Council, twice it is asserted by two hundred and sixty
Bishops, or more, That Usury is forbidden in both the Volumes of the Bible. And
again, The Crime of Usury is detested by both Testaments.

2. In the University of Wittenbergh: Whose words are in its first Thesis or
Position, Forasmuch as Usuries, not only by a positive Law, but also by both
the Old and New Testaments, are, as in themselves evil, prohibited by God, etc.
See the rest in my Usurer Cast, p. 47.

Whereupon it follows, that Damnation must needs follow, if what both affirm
be proved. So that,

2. It may be made good by Arguments and Proofs, that in the New Testament,
Usury is interdicted, as well as in the Old; and so consequently condemned as a
breach of God's Prohibition.

NUMBER. XV.
Now, to prove it, I shall

1. Lay down this Position, That that is Scripture which, by a necessary
Consequence, is inferred from the Scripture; according to a Maxim which we have
in Divinity, and which Gregory Nazianzen used against the Arrians; saying, That
some things are said to be, and are in the Scripture; and some are, and are not
mentioned in Scripture; that is to say, consequently. As for Example,

The profaning of the Christian Sabbath is not mentioned, nor interdicted
expressly, but consequently, because it is called The Lord's Day, Rev. 1.10.
Whereupon it follows, that we must do the Lord's Work; and not profane it,
by doing the Devil's work.

And the like may be said of Usury; that, at least, consequentially it is
forbidden; Luke 6.35. Lend, hoping for nothing again. For, as Beza worthily
reasons, if, as some say, we must not, by virtue of this place, look for the
very Principal again, then much less must we look for Usury. But yet let it be
^emembred, that by a great number that place is understood thus, ^oping for
nothing again, that is, no Usury. So that ^amous Mr. Mr. Pool, upon Luke 16.35.
naming his Author.
Poole in the opening of that place, places this Exposition first, Hoping for
nothing again; that is, NO USURY; whereof more abundantly hereafter. For I
shall, before I have done with this matter, in this very Book, bring a Cloud of
Witnesses, asserting that the meaning of that place in Luke 6.35. even now
mentioned, is this, Lend, hoping for nothing again; that is, No Usury.

NUMBER. XVI.
2. Second Objection answered.
I answer to that other part of this Objection, which is, I hope I shall not be
damned to the Flames of Hell, living under the New Testament, for Usury thus.
As that most Learned, most Pious, and most Famous Doctor PAREUS, my ancient
Friend of blessed Memory, who also was an Enemy to Usury, as many others are,
when he was writing his Learned Commentary upon the Revelations (the best of
all which I have seen) had a Prophecy sent him concerning the Destruction of
the Pope and Turk, with the Effigies or Description of that great Monarch who
should destroy both, Pareus upon Rev. 17.
which he inserted, and set down in his Book. So, as I was writing this Book, a
Letter was written by an Able, Noted and Godly Minister, living at a great
distance from me, after he had read my late Book, and therein, The Usurer Cast,
I say, a Letter was written for my encouragement in my proceedings, and sent me
concerning a late great Usurer's Damnation. Which Letter I will also, like
PAREUS, here insert and communicate, that Men may see, and Usurers especially,
what becomes of Usurers under the New Testament, as well as under the Old.

The Letter it self now follows, containing this Narrative.

Mr. Gresham, a Merchant, failing from Falerno, where dwelt the aforesaid great
Usurer, called Antonio the Rich; who at one time had two Kingdoms mortgaged to
him by the King of Spain (who is a great Borrower) and being crossed by
contrary Winds, was constrained to Anchor near Mount Aetna. Now, about Midday,
when for certain hours it accustomarily forbeareth to flame, he ascended the
Mount with eight of the Sailers; and approaching as near the Vent as they
durst, amongst other noises, they heard a Voice cry aloud, Dispatch, dispatch;
the rich Antonio is a coming. Terrified therewith, they descended; and anon the
Mountain evaporated Fire: but from so dismal a place they made all the haste
they could when the Winds were still. And desiring much to know more of this
matter, they returned to Falerno: and forthwith enquiring of ANTONIO, it was
told them, that he was dead; and computing the time, did find it to agree with
the very Instant that the Voice was heard by them. Gresham reported this, at
his Return, to the King; and the Mariners being called before him, confirmed by
Oath the Narration. In Gresham himself (as it was reported) it wrought so deep
an Impression, that he gave over all Traffic; distributing his Goods, a part
to his Kinds-folk, the rest to good Uses, retaining only a Competency for
himself; and so spent his time in a voluntary Devotion.

Oh dreadful! Oh, that the poor condemned Usurer would seriously mind all this,
and give over his damnable Usury, that he may not come and be cast into these
everlasting Burnings! for that will be the Portion of every impenitent Usurer;
after he has breathed out his last, most ugly Devils will immediately carry
his Soul into that Lake that flameth like Mount Aetna, and burns with Fire
and Brimstone, which is the Second Death, threatened against the Usurer, which
takes Biting and INCREASE, Ezekiel. 18.13. Confess I do, that the more cruel a
Biter any Usurer is, the hotter (if any can be) and the deeper Damnation he
will have for his Part and Portion: but he that shall have the least Torment in
that woeful place, and merciless fire, shall have so much as will make him cry
out with horrid and hellish Anguish; Who can dwell in these everlasting
Burnings. Isa. 33.12. And therefore, as that Merchant called Gresham, hearing
what was said of Antonio's, that great Usurer's, coming and bringing to Hell,
was quite changed and converted, so let the threatningly condemned Usurer
repent and live; for why will he die, poor Usurer? that to him I may apply that
in Ezekiel. 18.21.

NUMBER. XVII.
But I desire to answer yet farther to his charging me with monstrous
Uncharitableness; as thus, that I cannot but wonder how an Usurer can censure
one which is no Usurer for Uncharitableness, when in very deed THE USURER
stands deeply charged for his Cruelty and Uncharitableness by a number of
great and famous As Doctor Rainold, Who in his Book of Divorce, p. 8. holds,
that distinction between Biting and not Biting Usury, used by some late
Divines, to be but a mere flam.
Authors, which tell him that his Usury is directly against Charity, and that
there is no such Toothless Usury as is talked of by some, because either the
Borrower or Commonwealth is bitten; for which cause he is called a Biter,
(...), and the Borrower, (...), that is, Bitten.

Lastly, who will believe this Man, that I am so uncharitable toward the poor
Usurer as he makes me, and tha^ he is charitable, when he does his utmost to
harden him in his Sin? For, how do they rejoice that one is come to defend.
Usurers, by so many others condemned? taking themselves to be but moderate
Takers of Usury after Six in the Hundred; and how I am told, where I come
abroad, that my Book is answered and confuted? And how they name Grotius, a
Foreign Divine, who has written somewhat favorably of some Usury; as some few
others, with Cautions and Limitations; which none of our common Usurers do
observe, whereas they never heard of such a Man, before my Adversaries Pamphlet
was brought among them, which makes mention of him. So that my former Labors
would prove altogether fruitless and abortive, if I should not answer him;
telling the condemned Usurer, that my Charity toward him is such, as that
(...) labor to my utmost to convince, to convert, and Ministerially to save
his Soul from Hell, and his Estate from Ruin, according to my Cordial: So that
he will find in the end, that I am one of his best Friends which he has in the
World, because of both, and especially because of that which I have written of
Restitution, which will undo the richest Usurer in Devon, unless he be
forgiven; because, being an Heir to a departed Usurer, he must restore that
also which by Usury was gotten, as Mr. The Canon Law, l. 4. tit. 7. p. 469. And
Gregor. de Val. To. 3. Disp. 5. q. 21. punct. 3. Gabriel Powel, in his
Positions, p. 70. And Capel, in his Treatise of Usury, p. 268.
Powel gives his Reasons for it.

Of other Biters, which my Adversary speaks of, I intend to write hereafter.

All this while I have answered but one side and a little more of the
Champion's first Leaf, and spinning out the thread of my Discourse to such a
more than ordinary length, by reason of his extraordinary charging me with a
confused Chaos, and with monstrous Uncharitableness; telling the World, that I
send the whole Nation, except two or three, to the Flames of Hell. So that of
necessity I must crave the gentle Reader's Pardon, promising to study Brevity
for the time to come.

NUMBER. XVIII.
My next work will be to come to the strange Vision which this strange Man
writes of; saying, It ill becomes Mr. Jelinger, upon that late Vision, wherein
he was seen mounting Triumphant to Heaven (he knows what I mean) to be so far
lifted up with Self-conceit, as to censure and condemn so many of his Brethren
to Hell, for the things here under debate: to me its no doubt, but that of our
Savior meets with such as these, viz. Judge not, that ^e be not judged.
Whereupon he brings in, as he supposes, against me Mr. Vines, writing thus; To
render a Sin manifest and notorious, I suppose, first it is requisite that it
be manifestly a Sin; and this is Quaestio Juris: For a thing may be commonly
cried down under the name of an Enormous Crime, and yet indeed be very
doubtful: I instance in Usury, etc. Thus Mr. Vines; who, no doubt, had as much
skill and ability to weigh what was written on both sides concerning this
Subject, as Mr. Jelinger.

To all which I answer thus. And,

1. To the Vision.

2. To Mr. Vines Saying.

3. To what he says concerns my Skill and Ability compared with Mr. Vines.

1. As for the Vision; that I will relate first, and so clear up. Which done, I
shall add some Observations.

For the first, Let me tell the courteous Reader, that there was a certain Man
of great Parts and Gifts, for whom, being fallen sick, and like to die, I was
sent for to visit him, and to pray with and for him. Whereupon (to be short, he
being recovered the same Night, sent for me the next Morning to give me thanks;
telling me, that he had seen me in Heaven, etc. and wrote a Book of it, and
left it with me, but what became of his Book I know not. Which shows what
confidence I placed in it.

Now, let the Reader judge what fault I have committed in this. Suppose twenty
more should tell me the same, that they saw me Triumphant in Heaven, can I help
that?

NUMBER. XIX.
2. But I shall raise some Observations next upon this Vision. And,

1. I observe my Adversary's great Spite.

2. Great Indignation.

1. Spite, Which is such, as that by this Vision he thinks to render me and my
Book contemptible. Which I hope he will never be able to do, because I see the
quite contrary already; some of Quality being lately, as well as others
formorly, convinced by my first Book, and changed graciously.

2. I observe his Indignation against me, In that he labors by this Vision
to be revenged upon me for my writing against his DIANA, Being,

1. Like, therein, to his Grandfather, M. S. Who also was so angry (as he is)
as to pick a Quarrel, and enter the Lifts for Usury with that most Learned,
most Godly, and most Famous Man, Mr. Bolton, of blessed Memory, for a Sermon of
his preached against Usury, as Mr. Bagshaw reports it.

2. And like Demetrius and his Crafts-men, who so cried out against Paul, as he
against me, because he and they saw that by his preaching their Craft and Gain
was like to go down: for so said Demetrius, Sirs, you know that by this Craft
we have our Wealth; meaning his and their making of Silver Shrines for Diana:
which brought no small Gain unto the Crafts-men, Act. 19.24, 25. ^ven as Usury
does now to Usurers, who make a Trade of that great and grievons Sin. Moreover,
you see, cries he, that not only this our Craft is in danger to be set at
naught; but also, that the Temple of the gre^^ Goddess Diana should be
despised. -- And when they he^^^ these Sayings, they were full of Wrath, and
cried out, saying* Great is Diana of the Ephesians, verse. 26, 27, 28. Eve^ as
now also our Usurers, being full of Wrath when the^ and their Usury is spoken
against by God's Paul's, as it h^^ been of old by all the holy Fathers, within
the space of fifte^^ hundred Years, cried out against. I say, Great is our
Di^na, Great is our Gain which we make of our Usury-money. I^ the Vision-teller
apply all this as it may be applied, (I, for m^^ part, must be brief, because I
promised it) and let none bla^^ me for using this Comparison; for so famous Mr.
Bagshaw, (...) Parliament Man, makes use of the same in blessed Bolton'^ Case;
saying, The Gain that M. S. made by that SILVER SHRINE whetted his Invention to
maintain by Humane Arg^ment what he was loath to part with by Divine
Commandmen^* Where note withal, that he quoteth in the Margin this same, Act.
19.24.

NUMBER. XX.
2. As for his Citation of Mr. Vines; To that I answ^^ thus.

1. That I say, as he, that to render a Sin manifest and notorious, it is
requisite that it be manifestly a Sin; adding withal, that so Usury has been
manifestly proved to be a Sin; I mean, both Nesheck and Tarbith; that is, As
Doctor Kinchus upon Ezekiel. 18.12, 13. does make it clear, saying, that By that
place Usury is expressed what it is* namely, Increase: that is to say, what is
more than the Principal.
Increase, by God himself forbidding, and threatening both with Death and
Damnation, Ezekiel. 18.13. and by a World of holy Writers* New and Old, which I
shall bring against the condemne^ Usurer. At present I will name but

1. Greg. Nyssenus.
Gregory Nyssene, Apud Divinam Scripturam and f^^nus and Usura sunt prohibita,
(that is, both Increase, which the As says a famous Author.
Latins call Foenus Foenorios, and the Hebricians, Tarbith: And also, Usury,
which the Latins call Usuram; the Grecians, (...) the Hebricians, Nesheck) are
forbidden i^ the Scriptures.

2. St. Ambrose, upon Lev. 25. Generaliter omne sortis excludit augmentum: that
is, This Sentence of God does generally exclude all Increase above the
Principal.

Whereunto, Thirdly, may be Repetitionally added Bishop Bishop Downam upon
Psalm. 15.5.
Downam; (who, I hope, had as much Skill and Ability to judge of Usury as Mr.
Vines, and a little more) saying, My Assertion concerning Usury is this, That
all Usury (which I have defined to be Mutation, or Lending for Gain) whether it
be Mental, or Actual, whether Manifest or Covert, whether Simple or Compounded,
is simply, and in its own Nature, utterly unlawful: however, some Usury is
worse than other. And farther he says, Which Assertion I will not only prove
by Testimonies of Scripture, but also defend and maintain against the
Objections of those who hold the contrary Opinion. Which is more than ever Mr.
Vines did, or could do.

NUMBER. XXI.
2. And whereas Mr. Vines stands upon this, that its a Question whether the Sin
in Question be Usury, and what Usury is; I shall cite against his Saying so
cited,

1. The same Great and Learned Prelate even now mentioned, Bishop Idem ibid.
Downam I mean, whose words are these; In Luther' s time, and in all Ages
before him, although many practiced Usury, as they did other kinds of Theft and
Robbery, yet there was never any Controversy among the Learned concerning the
Lawfulness of Usury more than other kinds of Thefts, but all with one consent
have condemned Usury, and Usurers to the Pit of Hell.

With him blessed Bolton.
Bolton does Symphonize thus, The Covetousness of these times has made a
Controversy, which in former Ages mas never doubted of. And what Rational
Divine will not hearken to these two great Writers, rather than to Mr. Vines,
in this thing?

2. To Mr. Vines great Names of Learning and Godliness, who deny all Usury to
be sinful, I shall oppose far greater Names and Numbers, even I had almost said
thousands.
hundreds, and hundreds, and hundreds, of as Learned and Pious Men, assembled
in at least thirteen Councils as ever Doctor Vines was; besides an infinite
number of particular Fathers, Doctors, Viz. Emperors, Kings, Lawgivers.
public Persons, and Christian and Pagan.
Who have all generally condemned all Usury, properly so called, and by them
defined to be that which is Usuriously taken above the Principal, as I have
already shown it, and shall make good yet farther by these following Quotations
of some of them; who have been even super-eminent for depth of Learning, and
height of Holiness. As namely,

1. Renowned Doctor Fenton, p. 142. with whom I may join the Holy and Learned
Richard Capel, saying in his Tent. p. 5. Edit. p. 293. There is an English
Manuscript carried about from hand to hand, said to be written by a Great Man,
and Learned Clerk. He takes it for granted, that all Usury is unlawful; which
confutes, those that say the contrary, and justifies me. And so great Tostatus
too; who says, that All Modes of Usury are unlawful, in Levit. p. 516.
Doctor Fenton; There was never any Church or Churchman, carrying the name of
a Christian, who defended in writing ANY BRANCH of Usury, for the space of
fifteen hundred Years after Christ: Neither was this for want of occasion
given; for it has been both practiced and written against in all Ages. Neither
can we with modesty impute it to the ignorance of the Church: Her Writers in
Cases of Conscience, for matters of Morality, were most exact.

2. With this Pious and deep Learned Doctor, I join also that aforesaid great
and highly esteemed Prelate, Bishop Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15.5.
Downam: Who, speaking of our latter times, since the fifteen hundred Years
spoken of by Doctor Fenton, elapsed, has let fall these words, The Godly
Learned Divines of this Age; and namely, of this our Church, do for the most
part inveigh against it.

3. Oecolampadius, a German Divine, upon the Lesser Prophets.
Oecolampadius also declares his mind against all Usury, as simply ^evil: And
adds, And this has been the general Judgment of the Church for above fifteen
hundred Years, without opposition.

4. But lest Usurers should despise these Sayings, as coming from some
particular persons against all Usury, I will subjoyn the Judgment of a whole
English Jacobi, 13.
Parliament, consisting of a most Wise and Learned King, viz. King James, and
of most Judicious, Able and Erudite Bishops, and other great, and deeply
Literate Lords, besides hundreds of Commons, Gentlemen of great Piety and
Experience; who with one Consent made a most noble Act against Usury, to
restrain it: with this Introduction, Forasmuch as ALL USURY, being forbidden by
the Law of God, is Sin, and detestable. --

What can you say to all this now, Champion? Will you speak against all these
Holy and Learned Men, which are against all Usury; and against this Wise, Great
and Glorious Parliament too, as you are against me? Are the Names which Mr.
Vines so stands upon as great as these which I have named, and can name? Can
they compare with mine for Godliness and Learning? Here let the Learned judge.

NUMBER. XXII.
Object. If my Adversary object, That these are Humane Authorities.

I Answer, And are not his too? as blessed Bolton answered M. S. and only
Humane Authorities? But my chief Basis is the Holy Scripture.

5. I Answer thus, because the Champion adds to Mr Vines's Saying, these words
are added. First, With what a more tender Hand, and prudent candid Spirit did
Mr. Vines write. And afterward it is said, Mr. Vines, who, no doubt, had as
much skill and ability to weigh what was written on both sides, concerning this
Subject, as Mr. Jelinger.

That 1. I will not gainsay what he says of Mr. Vines's Hand, that it was
tender, and his Spirit prudent and candid: But whose Hand was more tender, and
Spirit more prudent and candid, must be left to God to judge, as himself faith
in his words foregoi^g.

2. That he had as much skill and ability to weigh what was written on both
sides, concerning this Subject, as Mr. Jelinger; yea, more, I must in modesty
acknowledge. But even therefore, that Mr. Vines may be equally matched, and
that the Truth which I am maintaining against the Damnable Sin of Usury may not
suffer through my Insufficiency and Inability, I will oppose against his citing
of Mr. Vines's words against me, the words of as great a Name and Divine as
ever Mr. Vines was, to match him indeed; viz. Gabriel Powel, a famous Man, and
great Scholar indeed: who, living at Oxford, in that Peerless and Famous
University, wrote his Position against Usury, which Men may see in Print, and
was never answered, as far as ever I could Learn, though there were then, and
are now so many Great and Learned Doctors and Scholars, which, as one should
think, would have taken the pains to confute him if they had thought it
f^isable. To be short, his words are; I have read all that ever I could come
by, Fathers, Canonists and Modern Writers, and made choice of wh^t I judged
best out of them all; which I have couched together concisely and methodically,
so as the Reader may compendiously, as it were, with one Prospect, take a view
of what has been written concerning Usury. After which words, he sets down
among his Positions, this Apodictical Syllogism in Barbara, A definitione rei,
From the Definition of the thing. All Gain, that contrary te the Word of God,
is expected, or exacted, above the Principal, for the very Duty of Lending, is
unlawful and damnable.

Usury is such a Gain.

^rgo, Usury is unlawful and damnable.

The Assumption he proves by six places of Scripture; Exodus 22.25. Levit.
25.37. Deuteronomy. 23.19. Psalm. 15.5. Ezekiel. 18.13. Luke 6.34, 35. Where let the
Judicious Reader choose whom he will believe; that great Oxford Scholar, who was
never yet Also Doctor Pie, writing a Book in Latin at Cambridge against Usury,
was never confuted: which is very remarkable, that in both the Universities
none should appear to take Usury's part.
confuted, as far as ever I could hear, being armed with his six holy
Scriptures; or Mr. Vines, who brings no Scripture along with him at all.

NUMBER. XXIII,
6. And against Mr Vines's great Names, of Godliness in special; who, as he
says, deny what I now, and others heretofore, have asserted, of the sinfulness
of Usury, properly so called, I can produce the Sayings and Names of Men as
great for Godliness as any he could name; who have proved this my Assertion in
Books at large. For, was not blessed Ambrose, who wrote that excellent Book of
Tobie against Usury; defining Usury thus, Whatsoever is more than the
Principal, is Usury. Which Calvin counts the best way of Arguing.
An extraordinary holy Man? Oh, yes; if we will believe his Master, the Emperor
Theodosius; who told his Courtiers, who would have him go to receive the
Sacrament of him, after he had been kept from it a great while; I know bim to
be such an Holy Man* that he will not admit me. He is such an Holy Man.

And what may we think of Hierom on Ezekiel. 18.
Hierom, who writes of Usury thus? Some think that Usury consists in Money
only; which the Divine Scripture foreseeing, takes off all that is over and
above that which is lent, from every thing lent, that a Man should take no more
than he gave. Was not he a holy Man? Oh, yes; if we will believe what he writes
of himself; That when, to live a more Godly Life than he could live at Rome, he
lived in Eremo, a Wilderness, and saw Visions.

So Great Basil Magnus.
Basil; who, besides many other things written against Usury, which, reading
him, I have extracted, has penned and published a whole Sermon, made upon Psalm.
15. against it: and more especially in his Homily against those that will be
rich, has let fall these words; What? Gold begets it self, in that by Usury it
comes to an Increase (which the Hebrew calls Tarbith.) Thus he. And was not he
a Godly Man? Oh, yes, an extraordinary one; for he sold his great Estate, and
by it relieved the Poor in a time of great need.

And what shall I say of blessed Bolton, who has preached so much against all
Usury, as that he was forced to defend his Preaching against it, in and by that
famous Book of his, called A Discourse concerning Usury; which I wish all good
people, and Usurers especially, to read. Was not he a Godly Man? Oh, yes, if we
may believe him who wrote his Life; and therein tells us, that he was wont to
pray six times a day; twice with his Wife, twice with his Family, and twice by
himself solemnly. And when he was dying, told his Parishioners, which were come
to see him, I am as full of Christ as my heart can hold. All which, I wish Men
would consider, and such as defend Heaven-exploded Usury especially; and that
for this Consideration also the rather, because a great Name, both for Learning
and Godliness, Bishop Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15.5.
Downam I mean, has left these words for the Patrons of Usury to pause upon:
And I will, ou^ of Holy Authors against Usury he means.
their Writings, manifestly demonstrate before their eyes, that the Usury which
is practiced in the World is not allowed of any GODLY DIVINE. Thus he.

6. I add, that because I am so much cried down and blamed by this Champion, my
Adversary, for being so much against all Usury, properly so called; and Mr.
Vines so extolled; I will therefore produce,

NUMBER. XXIV.
Yet more, two great and famous Writers indeed, who will speak as much for me,
as possibly he can say against me; and that by way of Commendation: viz. Beza,
and
Beza, and Pool upon Luke 6.35. Against whom some usually object, that he is
but a Collector. But then, why may not I quote him for my self about Usury, as
well as M. B. for himself about the Sense of the Spirit in Lev. 1.77. in his
Syn. p. 104. Part 1?
Poole. Both which join in one and the same Saying: The one speaking, or
rather, writing first; the other after. The Words are, and deserve to be,
printed in Letters of Gold.

Sed hac de re acturus (dicit Beza) illud primum praefabor probare me eorum
PIETATEM, qui totum hoc lucrandi genus sublatum vellent e rebus humanis quando
multa inde nasci mala manifestissimum est.

That is, (says Beza) Being to treat of this thing, viz. USURY, I will first
make this Preface. That I do commend their PIETY, who would have that WHOLE,
mark, Whole Kind of Gaining to be taken away from among Men, because it is most
manifest, that much Evil comes by it. Which way does the Champion now look,
when he reads these words? I, for my part, would not give them for much
Silver; and I value these two famous Men above an hundred Usuries Patrons. And
yet I cannot but confess that I have a reverend Esteem of Mr. Vines too; for I
knew the Man, and heard him preach excellently well, and hope that he and I
shall meet in Heaven hereafter; but yet I must prefer his Betters before him:
for what is one such Man to so many hundred Holy Men, met Which is also
Syllogistically said, and set forth by Philip Caesar plainly, and Rhetorically
by Ockerfor in his Orations, and made good by Doctor Wilson, that it is
commendable.
in at least thirteen Councils, which, in my answering of his Sayings, I hinted
at? And what is he to so many Godly Fathers, and Learned Writers more, both new
and old, which are on my side, being all against all Usury, properly so called?
And Lastly, What is one such Divine brought against me, to those two great
Names which I named last, Poole and Beza: Poole being a Man, whose Learned and
Laborious Commentaries upon the whole Bible will be famous over the whole
European Orb; which Mr. Vines never can, nor will be; because the one writ so
much, and all in Latin; and the other so little, and in Which beyond the Seas
they do not understand.
English, which few have yet seen, nor read in England? And as for Beza, who
can commend him enough? I, for my part, and so all my Brethren, which hold with
me in this Point of Usury, have cause enough to commend him as much as we are
able, because he commends them, and their PIETY, for being against all that
kind of Gain which comes by Usury, and because he is worthy of all
Commendation: For, Oh, What a Man is he for Learning, for Fame, for Piety! For
Learning first; For how his Learned Works are made use of in Printing, and
Preaching, by our Tribe, even almost the whole Tribe of Levi? And when a
Dispute was to be maintained against, and with the Papists at Paris, before the
King and Queen, Vivente Calvino, Calvin being yet alive; who must be sent to
carry on that Dispute, but Learned Beza: And, for his fame, how? Oh, how it
shines every where among the Protestants! And when the King of France's Army
marched into Italy through and by Geneva, how the great Commanders went to see
famous Beza? And Lastly, Such was his Piety, as that, when the Sabandian Army
had by a Scalade assaulted Geneva by Night, and was entered half way into the
City, Beza, with Old Men, Women and Children, did betake himself into St.
Peter's, and there prayed; and praying, so prevailed, as that the Sabandians
were beaten out again, and never returned As more of this I show in another
Treatise.
since. And thus much may suffice to be spoken about Beza's Commendation of
those Men's Piety, who are against all that WHOLE Kind of gaining by Usury.

NUMBER. XXV.
In the next place, I will view and answer the Champion's Charge, whereby he
charges me for being a Name caller. His words are, His Charity discovers it
self yet farther, in the Titles that he gives the Men of his Indignation:
Those Expressions that any of the Fathers, or other Writers, intended against
Oppressive Usury, and Exacting Usurers, he has been at the pains to collect (or
receive from others hands) and Crown the Heads of all such he calls Usurers
with: So that with him every Usurer ( i. e. every one that expects Advantage
upon Money lent) is like the Devil, is a Dog, an Extortioner, an unjust Person,
a Biter, a Thief, made equal with Adulterers, Covetous, a Destroyer, to be of
the Generation of Vipers, a Merciless Person, is not in Case to give Which I
have learned to say of the famous Phllip Caesar; who, in his Discourse against
Usury, says, that Alms received of Usurers is Abominable. So St. Austin, Dona
iniquorum non approbat Altissimus.
Alms, is a Murderer, a Baptized Jew.

Whereto I answer,

1. That I am not The Author of The Arraignment of Usury has been so taxed
also, p. 7.
the first that has been so taxed for calling Names.

2. That for such Names, I cannot only bring Fathers, and other Writers, but
their Definitions and Descriptions also of Vsuries, and Usurers, which they
call by these Names. As for Example,

1. Peraldus, that Learned B. in Spec. Avar.
Peraldus, having defined manifest Usury, what it is, viz. When a Man
delivers numbered Money, weighed or measured, with this Compact, that
something be given him besides the Principal. I say, having so defined Usury,
he says not only, that the Usurer is like the Devil, but very like him; his
words are, Est valde similis Diabolo: Which is more than ever Mr. Jelinger said
yet. And therefore, Why is this Man so angry with me?

2. So St. Ambrose de Tob. c. 15.
St. Ambrose having said, that Generally that place in Lev. 25. excludes all
Increase, and Augmentation of the Principal, makes the Usurer a Murderer;
saying with Cato, That to commit Usury is to kill a Man.

3. And St. Basil, having made Usury to be an Increase, calls Usurers Vipers;
and their Vsuries, Generations of Vipers, upon Psalm. 15.5. which is my Text.

NVM. XXVI.
4 And does not God himself, who makes, not only Nesheck; that is, Biting; but
also, Tarbith; that is Increase, Usury, call the Usurer an Extortioner in the
Original, Psalm. 109.11. and couple him with Bribe-takers and Defrauders, Ezekiel.
22.12. and with Idolaters, Ezekiel. 18 12, 13. For so Tremellius reads that place
by an Apposition, Has lift up his eyes to Idols, committing Abomination, (and
then it follows immediately) gives to Usury and Increase. Not Usury only,
called Nesheck; but also Increase, called Tarbith. which Coupling, St. Ambrose
de Tob. c. 15.
St. Ambrose also takes special notice of, saying, Lo, how the Prophet in this
place has coupled an Usurer with an Idolater, as if Usury did run equal and
parallel with Idolatry. Thus this holy Father.

I thought to end with God's Coupling and Calling; but because some other Names
afterward were brought to my mind, I hold it good to add them also, and so to
go on.

And 5. I will name St. Chrisostom, who calls him Cursed; saying, The Usurer
is, above all Merchants, cursed.

And 6. After him I will cite Mr. Wheatly, in his Caveat for the Covetous. p.
71.
Mr. Wheatly, who calls him Unjust, (which the Champion says, that I call
him.) His Words at full are these, The Usurer makes sure for himself to have
part only, and infallibly, in the Profit; and therefore serves himself alone,
and not also his Brother. And for this cause, the Usurer is set among those who
cannot dwell in the Mountain of God; which he should not be, were he not unjust.

7. After this good and famous Man, in comes the University of Wittenberg
again; which calls Usurers Robbers and Heretics.

And lest some should say, that it means Oppressive and Exacting Usurers, as
the Champion is pleased to make the Basil Homil. in Ditesc. p. 152. Making
Usurers also worse than Dogs.
World believe, that when Writers call Usurers such Names, they mean such; the
same University tells us, that those which take but Five in the Hundred are
Usurers, etc. Its whole Description of Usurers the Reader may peruse in my
Usurer Cast, page 5.

8. Lavater in Ezekiel, Hom. 5. Who also, in his 70th. Hom. defines Usury to be
Gain beyond the Principal.
Lavater couples Usury with Drunkenness and Adultery, and to make the Usurer as
bad as a Drunkard and Adulterer also.

9. And, as Austin, Jerome and Bernard made Usury Theft in old time, so Reverend
Mr. Dod did in his time: saying, In the same colorable Theft is that common
Sin of VSVRY: And so making the Usurer a Thief. After whom,

10. Mr. Williams in his True Church.
Mr. Williams makes the Usurer the worst of all THIEVES.

11. Famous Bishop BABINGTON calls Usurers Bishop Babington, upon Exodus 8. In
Latin called Melolontha; which are Worms very fair and green, but of a
devouring nature, as Calepinus writes: even as Usurers, in like manner, are
very fair also in their Speeches, making a great flourish, pretending much
Kindness and Good, but devouring Creatures.
Canker-Worms.

12. BALDVS the Lawyer calls the Usurer a Defamed Person.

13. I will add to these a few Heathen Authors too. And,

1. Plutarch, Hist. Natural, l. 33. c. 3.
Plutarch who calls Usurers Devils; saying, These cursed Usurers being turned
into DEVILS.

2. Aristotle apud Dr. Wilson.
Aristotle makes them Bawds: saying, Usurers and Bawds may well go together.

3. Julius Caesar, the first Emperor, I shall bring in hereafter.

By all which Names, the Reader may see how the Champion.

1. Wrongs me; saying, that I do so call the Usurer, as if none else but I did
give him such Names, when such worthy Men do so call him, and worse too.

Mr. Dod upon the Commandments, like Austin and Jerome, Bernard and
2. How, through my sides, he strikes at these great and famous Authors
(besides God himself.) Among whom I will now leave him, chiding them, why they
will call his dear Friend, Master VSVRER, such woeful NAMES. Adding,

3. But Philip Caesar in his General Discourse against the Damnable Sect of
Usurers, p. 3. Saint Bridget.
one great Author more, because he is my Countryman, a German, and will be
willing to second me in this Combat, as one of his own Native Country. His
words are, Usurers are called Wasters, Pollers, Thieves, Murderers, Idolaters,
Cousins to Fools, as ill as Madmen, worse than Pagans, which are without
Religion, Wicked, not believing there is a God. To conclude, They are likened
to poisoned Serpents, to mad Dogs, to greedy Worms, to Woolves, Bears: he adds,
yea, Luther does almost think to be very Devils. O sad! For Men to be turned
into Devils. In a word, They are like to Vessels full of stinking Carrion and
Filth. Thus he, not only seconding me, but outgoing me; for I did not call the
Usurer so many names as these.

I know what the Usurer will say, I warrant you, this German was no Saint; if
he had been, he would never have called any Man such names. Whereunto I answer,
that I can name a Saint, which also says, That Usurers do more stink in the
sight of God, than any Filth in the eyes of Men.

How uncivilly and causlesly he compares me with the Quakers, calling Mr.
Baxter Dog? for, did I ever call Mr. Baxter so; a Man whom I do most highly
value and esteem, for his Fame, Learning and Godliness.

NVM. XXVII.
I add, that he injureth me also very highly in that,

1. He casts this Aspersion upon me, that I have been at the pains to collect,
or receive from some other hand, those Expressions which the Fathers use
against Usurers.

For Answer whereunto, I must let him know, that I had no need to receive such
Expressions from some other hand, because I have my self read, not only Writers
handling this Controversy of Usury, but the Councils also, and the principal
Fathers throughout; and drawn them out of their great Volumes, into my common
places; tying my self, for the pervolving of them to so much an Hour, so much a
Day, so much a Week, so much a Month, so much a Year: which had almost killed
me, for it cast me into a desperate Sickness, wherein Physicians left me for
dead, but God, who had mercy on me, was pleased to restore me, having more Work
to do for me; and it may be this, which now I am doing.

2. As for the holy Fathers, and other Writers, how he injured them; asserting,
that they intended the Sayings which in my former Book I cited, against
oppressive Usurers, and not others. That I shall evidence to the World in my
following Answer to his Premise. Which is,

That there is a damnable Usury which is condemned in Scripture, etc. and has
been deservedly made infamous by Laws, Punishments, Restraints, and by the
Censures of Godly Persons of the respective Ages, and then this (...) in a
cruel Griping of the Poor, a merciless Exacting, etc. which is the Usurer's old
Song. So that I shall be forced to give some old Answers among new ones. And,

1. Seeing this his Premising consists of two Parts.

1. Of a Confession.

2. Application.

NVM. XXVIII.
To answer to his Confession, I shall

1. Acknowledge that I am glad to hear him grant, that there is a Damnable
Usury, because I know that he must prove it by the same Moral Law, and such
Scriptures which are quoted against all Usury, prohibited by the same
Scriptures.

2. And because he and some of his Brethren do not speak for or against any
Usury all the Year long, as their own ^earers tell me, whom I appeal to in this
thing. I, for my part, can witness this, that when I did preach once against
Usury, I was taxed for it, and told, that it was not usual to speak of such a
thing as Usury is in the Pulpit: and so I must preach no more in their Pulpits,
because they suppose that I will cry out against their DIANA, and her SILVER
SHRINES, like Mr. Bolton.

2. I answer, That, yet farther, I observe two things in this Confession, which
I must utter.

The First is, That this Champion brings out this Damnable with a (...), to
speak as the Hebrews do; that is to say, being low, and not very high nor
hearty, as others that are against all damnable Usury in earnest, and cry it
down indeed to the Pit of Hell, as Ministers ought to do.

The Second thing is, That he wrongs those Godly Persons which he writes of,
that they made this damnable Usury infamous in their respective Ages, if his
meaning be, that they were against excessive Usury As it is like, that it is,
to wrest these holy Men's Writings, as it is an easy thing for a Contentious
Person to do; as Calvin tells us of the Sayings of the Fathers. Inst. l. 3. c.
4.
only, which he calls a cruel Griping, a merciless Exacting of Money, a taking
of all Advantages, an exceeding of those Bounds which Law and Equity
prescribes, etc. Whereunto he adds, as it is taken notice of in the Exposition
of the Catechism, used both in the Low Countries, and in his own Country, the
Palatinate; wherein it is added, that we must make a difference between
occupying of Usury, and taking of Usury, etc. I say, if this be his meaning, he
is most injurious both to the Holy Scriptures, and those Laws, and Godly
Persons; for I can make it good by sufficient Proofs, that the Scriptures and
the said Godly Persons have spoken against all Usury and Usurers, properly so
called: and that accordingly, Laws, Restraints and Punishments were made and
ordained to suppress the same in all their respective Ages. Whereof my Proofs
are these,

First, Scriptural, From the Holy Word of God.

I. Psalm. 15.1, 5. Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? etc. He that
puts not his Money to Usury. Where,

1. Let it be noted, what a (b) famous Author writes concerning this
Scripture; because some did say of him, that in his preaching against Usury, he
alleged, nor could allege nothing but the fifteenth Psalm; If I could allege
no more than the fifteenth Psalm, yet were that alone sufficient to stop the
Mouths of all the Usurers in the World. Thus he. And well he might say so: for,
though some would shift off this Stripture, as if it did only make against
cruelly Biting, and Oppressing Usurers, because the word (...), is made use of
therein, which signifies Biting; yet does it not follow, that cruelly biting
Usury is only meant, but also Usury, properly so called, and commonly
practiced. For these Reasons.

NVM. XXIX.
1. Because Nesheck is the usual word, which signifies Usury, and also all
that Increase or Excrescency, which is taken above the Principal, for the Loan
of Money, which is soon to be demonstrated by the words Marbith and Tarbith,
which are usually joined with Nesheck by the Holy Ghost, (...), that is, by way
of Exposition, to show that they are Syn^nimas, as appears, and it can be
proved by Lev. 25.36. Prove. 28.8. Ezekiel. 18.13. and 22.12. where Marbith and
Tarbith are set after Nesheck, as words signifying the same. Which is also
confirmed by Doctor Kimchi, upon Ezekiel. 18. as I said formerly, That both are
mentioned together, and condemned. Mark, Condemned together. So that though a
Man do not so cruelly bite as some, yet if he takes but Tarbith or Marbith, he
is condemned for it, says this Author. Where give me leave to show what this
Marbith and Tarbith signifies, viz. An By the Hebricians also called (...),
that is, aliquid amplius, somewhat more than the Principal.
Increase; that is, Gain above the Principal, as famous. Which the Grecians
translate (...) That is, says Balsamon, Nysseni Shiolastes: when a Man does
lend any thing, to receive more than he gave. Thus he.

2. I find that in this Psalm. 15.5. Nesheck is not set down with a Dagesh for
it, as it is in some other places. Which affords us this Criticism; that it
holds forth two things. 1. Biting, any Biting. And 2. Such Biting also,
inclusively, as does not so cruelly and vehemently bite as some, and yet biteth
too. For we have a Rule in Hebrew, that when there is a Dagesh forte in a word,
it implies Vehemence: Whereof more hereafter.

All that which I have said yet concerning this Scripture is but a Touch,
whereunto I will add but this more.

That this one and first Scripture is so strong, as that from it, many, both
Councils and particular Writers, have, in their respective Ages, proved the
unlawfulness and damnableness of all sorts of Usury, properly so called. At
present I will instance only in the most famous Council of Nice, Can. 18. which
the Learned may peruse at their leisure: observing what it says, not only of
the Centesima, but also, de quolibet tali lucro, of any such Lucre.

2. My second Scripture Poof is, that in Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not lend upon
Usury to thy Brother. Mark, Brother, whether he be rich or poor; for still he
is our Brother, as he is either born of the same Parents, or a Christian of the
same persuasion, etc. as Clemens Alexandrine, Strom. l. 2.
Clemens Alexandrine expounds that Law-saying (as I have read it long ago in
him so expounded) The Law forbids to lend upon Usury, says he to our Brethrem,
under the name of a Brother; comprehending, not only him which was born of the
same Parents, but him also which was of the same Tribe, and of the same
Opinion, and partaker of the same words. Whereof more hereafter.

Not a word of the Rich, to which the Defendants of Usury hold it lawful to
lend upon Usury, because this Law admits an exception of a Stranger, which I
intend to clear up at full in another place, and another time, being contented
to say but a word or two about it at this time, viz. That if the Lord intended
it so, that it should be lawful to len^^ upon Usury to the Rich, here was a fit
time to mention the Rich, as well as the Stranger, because The Rich we have
always with us. But that Stranger, which there is meant, viz. one of the seven
Nations which God would have destroyed, were destroyed, and by degrees consumed
in David's time, as Divines from Holy Writ collect it: which now makes all that
Plea which Usurers plead from the Stranger void, and of none effect, as I shall
have an occasion hereafter to evidence it at full. Now, one Word more I will
add, that I take special notice of in this Scripture, of a Word which I find of
the Stranger, verse. 20. (...). Unto the Stranger thou shall lend upon Usury, as
Junius also renders it; not Thou may, as the English has it. Which shows,
that God commands it that his People should bite him; for so much the Hebrew
(...), signifies: as in another place the says, Thou shall consume, destroy
and cut him off, Deuteronomy. 7.20.

Where note also, that if it be Lawful to lend to the Rich, because of this
Exception of a Stranger, it will hold also, that he commands it, that the Rich
should be so Bitten. Which, how absurd it is to think so, let the Reader judge.

3. But because these places mention. Nesheck only, therefore I will produce a
Scripture, which makes this thing called Usury more plain, viz. Ezekiel. 18.13.
where Nesheck is joined with Tarbith, and joined thus, Has given forth upon
Usury, and has taken Increase, (...), (of which word I have even now
sufficiently spoken) Shall he then live? He shall not live.

Where note first, How the Lord places his words.

1. By way of Interrogation, and so the more Emphatically; as if he should say,
Is there any reason for it?

2. Most Comprehensively, Positing Lending upon Usury to be understood by
Giving forth first, and then Has taken Encreas^, to defeat those Usurers which
think themselves to be no Usurers, because they take no Bond, nor Bill, nor
Promise, and yet expectedly take it when it comes.

Note also what blessed Calvin here says upon this eighteenth Chapter of
Ezekiel, and concerning this whole matter of Nesheck and Tarbith, viz. That
whereas Usurers avoided the name Nesheck, which signifies Biting, as they do
the name Usury among us, as being odious; and therefore they took not Nesheck,
but Tarbith; as among us, they will not be thought to take Usury, but
Consideration, Usance, or Interest. Therefore the Lord forbids as well
Tarbith as Nesheck, whereby he condemns generally, Quamlibet sortis
accessionem, says he, Any Addition, mark, any Addition, or Increase above the
Principal. And, upon Ezekiel. 18. especially, he says, Not only Nesheck, which
signifies Biting; but also Tarbith, which he translateth Incrementnm,
Increase: Hoc est quicquid sibi avari homines conciliant ex mutuo: that is,
Whatsoever Gain Covetous Men do get to themselves by Loan. Thus Calvin. Whereas
some may wonder, because Usurers take him to be their chief Friend; and will be
ready to say, that I take out of him what seems to be for me, leaving out
that which makes against me. But to this I answer, that I can and shall give a
Reason hereafter, (when I shall come to speak more fully of Calvin) why he
writes after this rate and manner.

NVM. XXX.
And now* passing over many Scriptures, besides the forequoted, I shall pass
over out of the Old Testament, into the New; and, by name, to that noble and
famous place, Luke 6.35. Lend, hoping for nothing again From thence, and that
so much the rather, because some give out that Usury is not interdicted or
condemned in the New Testament at all. For Answer whereunto, one which is a
most famous and learned Writer, Gabriel Powel I mean, says thus: It is a
monstrous BLASPHEMY against the Gospel of Christ, to affirm, that the New
Testament gives more Liberty to sin than the Old. With whom I join the
renowned Mr. Capel, saying, We have Usury forbidden in the New Testament, when
Judicials were out of date, Luke 6.35. Thus he.

As for me, because I have already touched this place in this Book, I shall
therefore say the less now: but I intend to say much hereafter of it and in a
place fit for it. Only this I will boldly averr now, That it is to me as plain,
and as clear as the Sun, that Christ by it forbids Usury and Increase. Because,
1. He says; Lend, hoping for NOTHING, in Greek, (...). 2. Because he says
(...) which is a Compound, compounded of (...), A Bind, from thence; and (...),
I hope: So that the Sense of (...) must needs be, Hoping for nothing from
thence; that is, from your lending, non amplius, no Overplus; that is, no
Usury. 3. Because the words foregoing evince it: for in verse. 34. Christ says
thus, And if you lend to them, of whom you hope to receive, what thank have
you? for Sinners also lend to Sinners, to receive as much again. The Greek is
(...), which will bear a double Construction. As, 1. The like; that is, the
like Sum in the like Coin, though not the very same. 2. (...) that is, The like
Courtesy. As namely, for a hundred Pounds by you lent to them, an hundred
Pounds lent to you by them; which I like best. Whereunto, if you add the word
Hope, If you lend to them of whom you hope to receive, viz. the like, what
thank have you? The words following must needs be plain; but lend (ye) hoping:
as in the foregoing Verse, the word Hope is used with this difference only,
that (...) is joined with (...), hoping, to cut off Usury, even all Gain above
the Loan, by (...), nothing; and by name, even the Loan, of so much too;
another time, for the Loan of so much this time, which is worth Money too, and
a kind of Usury too. So that I do not wonder now, why most Expositors have so
explained that place, as I do here, not denying that Christ's words may be
extended in some Cases, to the Principal too; that a Man must not hope for the
Princcipal neither, if the Borrower be not able to pay it: Rich. Capel, of
Usury, p. 267. of Luke 6.35.
Nothing, not (...), None, as some have groundlesly read it, perverting the
Scripture.
Whereupon in comes that acception of the Compounded Word (...), Nothing
despairing, as some understand the word, that is, nothing despairing of a
better Reward than any Man can give you; which I hope will give content to some
pious Men, who are much taken with that Exposition, and that without any
offense given thereby by me to any, because the Compound (...) signifies also
to despair, though I, for my part, insist mostly upon my premised Exposition,
as most likely in my Judgment. But more fully I shall handle this Scripture
hereafter, showing the very Expositions of it, and bringing a Cloud of
Witnesses, witnessing for and to the true meaning of it.

NUMBER. XXXI.
At present I will only resolve one Case, which will be in all likelihood
proposed. As namely, whether a Man may no^ lend, and afterward crave the like
Courtesy in his need. Whereunto I answer, Oh, yes, provided he look not for it
when he lends, because Christ says, Lend, hoping for nothing again; mark,
Nothing at all.

Secondly, From these Scriptures, I pass to Godly Men and Authors, which, in
their respective Ages, have declared against Usury, properly so called, and the
Defendants of it: And withal, have made it generally DAMNABLE, as also do the
Scriptures.

And 1. I say briefly, because I have already said something to the same
effect, and shall say much more yet hereafter, in its most proper time and
place.
I will briefly recite what they have voted, being assembled in Councils for
their respective Ages against all Usury and Usurers, and their Defendants.

2. What they have written apart against both.

For the first, I will instance in Council. Carth. 6. and 7.
the Councils of Carthage, the Sixth and Seventh; both which having caused the
Council. Nicen.
Nicene to be turned into Latin, approved of it; and so, by name of the
eighteenth Canton against all sorts of Usury, condemned by it out of Psalm. 15.
So that thereby all these three Councils, joining together their combined
Forces, did put down Usury at that time, and for their respective Ages.

2. I will subjoyn the Council. Paris.
Parisian Council which has set it self as much as any against that damnable
Sin of Usury; declaring openly, that The Kingdom of Christ is endangered by it.

3. Next to the Parisian, I will place that of Council. Vien.
Vienna; which has discharged a most dreadful Canon against the Defendants of
Usury, whereby it condemns all for Heretics, who hold Usury to be lawful.

I name but these few, but could bring many more; and there is one, blessed
Bolton in his Book against Usury.
Bolton I mean, who goes farther, saying, I may oppose ( viz. against M. S.
his Adversary, eighteen Men quoted by him, as being for some Usury) all other
Councils that ever mentioned Usury: But there will be a fitter time for me to
make use of so many when my Third Book comes forth.

NUMBER. XXXII.
2. At present I advance nearer against the Adversaries Hold, which he calls
his Premise, by alleging those Godly Persons and Authors, which have
severally, and apart, let fly their most keen and sharpest Arrows against all
Usury, as it is, and has been generally and usually practiced in their
respective Ages. And,

1. I shall bring up with me some of the Ancient, most Learned, and Pious
Fathers, as chief Leaders in that great Army which has been Militating for
fifteen hundred years together, against that Enemy of Mankind, called USURY,
ALL USURY.

2. Next to them. I shall fetch some new Leaders also, who, since those fifteen
hundred Years past, are risen up to second them.

To begin with the old experienced ones, I shall let you see them, and you
shall hear them speak too. And,

1. Lactantius.
Lactantius, the Churches Secretary, who wroteof her Secrets more than any
other I know, says, Let a Christian take this Course, that in Lending, he take
not USURY; for that is against the Law of Lending. -- Lo, how this old Father
is against all taking of Usury.

2. St. Ambrose.
Saint Ambrose, in his Book of Tobie, chap. 14. says to the Usurer thus. If
Usury be lawful, why do thou shun the Name? why drawest thou a Covering over
it? If it be unlawful, why receivest thou ANY INCREASE? mark, ANY INCREASE.

3. You shall hear St. Hierome speak too, upon Ezekiel. 18. thus. He that takes
more than he gave (writing of Usury, cannot live, but shall die in his Blood.
Thus he makes what is taken beyond the Principal, Damnable.

Many more such holy Leaders and Fathers you will see (...) the Usurer's
Funeral, in my Third Book, which is to come. For the present I will educe and
bring up,

NUMBER. XXXIII.
2. Some chief Leaders of the new Army, risen against the same Enemy of
Mankind, after the aforesaid fifteen hundred Years expired: Usury, I mean. And,

1. Aretius, that famous and learned Professor of Losanna, De Usuris, p. 626.
Mark, Less than Six in the Hundred, and yet Usury.
Aretius: who says, Sit igitur Usura quicquid ultr^ sortem accipitur. Sors est
elocata pecunia utpote centum c^ronati, quicquid igitur ultra sortem id
qualecunque tandem sit Damn^bile esse censamus. That is, Usury is whatsoever is
taken above the Principal. As for Example, For an hundred Crowns, whatsoever is
exacted from thence, we account it Damnable.

2. Spotswood in his Short Discourse of Usury, p. 21.
Spotswood: Who says, Usurers are excluded from Eternal Life by Ezekiel. 18.13.
And shut out of God's Tabernacle by Psalm. 15. Thus he. And that is bad enough,
and Damnable indeed: yet this he says, without excepting the more moderate
Usurer, in General.

3. You shall hear again Learned G. Powel in his Posit. calling this Argument,
Syllogismum connexum primo modo a conjugatis.
Powel speak like a Scholar, as he was. If Usurers be excluded from Jehova's
Tabernacle, then Usury is a thing unlawful and damnable. But the Antecedent is
true, as appears by Psalm. 15.5. Ergo, The Consequent is true also.

Now, that you may see what Usury he means, his former Syllogism, by me
alleged upon the like Account, will show. For that runs thus, as, word for
word, I recited it formerly; All Gain that, contrary to the Word of God, is
expected, or exacted above the Principal, for the very Duty of Lending, is
unlawful: And Damnable Usury is such Gain (as he proves it) Ergo.

4. In comes after these, Doctor Smith upon Levit. p. 626.
Doctor Smith, speaking thus, That Opinion which condemns all Usury is
grounded upon evident Testimonies of Scripture, Psalm. 15.5. Prove. 28.8. Ezekiel.
18.13. and 22.12. What can be plainer?

5. I shall subjoyn the Author of The Death of Usurers, who speaks after this
Pathetical manner in the Close of his Book.

I would not wish the Usurer to stand upon such Cavils: but seeing, not only
the Word of God, but All Ages, Note, All Ages, Nations, Laws, Note, Laws too;
[which answers the Champion, who mentions Laws too] and sorts of Persons do
condemn Usury, as a Sin most odious and opprobrious. I would have him to loose
the Bonds of Wickedness, wherewith St. Jerome understands the Bonds that
Usurers wrap others in. So, getting Goods in the fear of God, they will be to
his comfort while he lives, and without prick of Conscience when he dies. Thus
he gives the Usurer this Godly Counsel (which I wish Usurers would follow) and
withal tells us, how Usury, in all Ages, has been condemned: Speaking of it
generally also.

6. And Lastly, I must needs again bring in blessed R. Bolton, I say Lastly;
though, if I would, and there were need, I could bring in, besides these, the
Testimonies of many Scores more, even of all the wise and truly learned Men,
who have flourished until this present Age. Wherein I am Seconded by that
famous Bishop Downam, who has a Saying much like this upon Psalm. 15.5.
Bolton, speaking and symphonizing with these Worthies, thus. If the Usurer be
pressed with this and other places, his most ordinary Answer is, They are to be
understood of Biting, not of Toothless Usury, etc. But what if those, and the
like, prove to be rotten Distinctions, and false Glosses upon their Beds of
Death, as indeed they are, what is then their Case? as they have leaned in
their Lifetime upon such broken Staves of Reed, their confidence in that
dreadful Hour will be but as the Spider's Web. Which Words of this holy Man,
how applicable they be to my Antagonist, let the Reader judge. I need not now
speak of Laws, which the Champion mentions, because there will be a fitter
time for it hereafter; and something concerning them, my fifth Author, even
now, did speak.

NUMBER. XXXIV.
But here I suppose my Adversary will be ready to reply, that all that which I
have spoken of Damnable Usury will signify nothing, nor convince Usurers,
unless I make it more plain yet than I have made it, What that Damnable Usury,
and those Usurers are which shall be damned, and against whom the Prophets, and
all sorts of Writers have written, to make them odious.

For Answer whereunto, I shall say, That if I must needs make it more plain to
my Antagonist, and all Usurers whatsoever, then I will send him and them,

1. To the Prophet Ezekiel again: who, not only shows what that Usurer is
which shall die, and be damned; viz. He that has taken Usury or Increase; that
is, (as Calvin himself expounds it, and as the old Latin Translation renders
the Hebrew Tarbith) more than thou gave: and as Ambros. de Tob. c. 15.
Ambrose, A^ amplius recipiendum, To receive more: But also, most remarkably,
has in the word Nesheck, a peculiar Note of Difference, scarce observed by any
yet; viz. a Dagesh forte, which is not to be found in other places; yea, a
Double Dagesh forte in it, and in the prefixed Letter (...), which denotes,
not only Vehemence, but much Vehemence and Strength; that is, strong and
vehemently biting Usury; yea, and an Hebrew Accent, called Darga. All which
plainly and remarkably ostends and clears it, what Usurer it is which shall be
damned: Namely, he chiefly, and first, which vehemently biteth, and cruelly
oppresses; and he also which takes more than he lends* Understand
expectedly (as it was formerly shown.)

2. I send him again to that famous University of Wittemberg (because I hear
that he has been but a little while in an English University) to see the
aforesaid Wittembergish Theses, and to learn out of them, what Usurers, by them
censured and condemned are. Their Words of five in the hundred are plain: I
need not repeat them, because I have already quoted them.

NUMBER. XXXV.
3. I send him to that famous Council of The Council of Agatha in France, kept
in the days of King Alaricus.
Agatha, which, N^mine contradicente, None contradicting it, then, when it
sat, nor sin^^^ determined and voted what Usury, by it condemned, was; thus.
Usury is, when any thing is demanded more than was given, or lent forth. As for
Example, If thou lendest ten Shillings (Mark, but ten Shillings, which is but a
small matter) and seek more; or lendest a Bushel of Corn, (which is a very
little thing too) and demandest more. So strict were the Holy Fathers in this
point of Usury, in their respective Ages.

4. I send him to his own Countryman, Mr. Adams in his Works, p. 454.
Mr. Adams, who most notably describes condemned Usurers: What some of them
are in respect of their Bodies, and in respect of their Souls; his Character is
this, The Usurer is known by his very Looks often, by his Speeches commonly, by
his Actions ever: He has a lean Cheek, a meager Body, as if he were fed at the
Devil's Allowance, his Eyes are almost sunk to the backside of his Head with
Admiration of Money, his Ears are set to tell the Clock, his whole Carkase a
mere Anatomy, (of which more hereafter in my Anatomy, or Second Book against
Usury, which is to come.) Some Usurers have fatter Carcasses, and can find it
in their hearts to Lard their Flesh: but a Meagerness is upon all their
Consciences. And then, with Leo, sends him to the Pit of Hell for ever.

NUMBER. XXXVI.
5. If this Man be not full and plain enough, though he speaks plain English, I
shall send him to another, and far greater English Author, who speaks more
fully and plainly; viz. Famous Bishop Bishop Jewel upon the First of the
Thessalonians.
Jewel: whose words are these; Usury is a kind of Lending of Money, or Corn, or
Oil, or Wine, or any other thing, etc. and then, as if I lend an hundred
Pounds, and for it Covenant (understand tacitly, or expressly) to receive an
hundred and five Pounds, or any other Sum greater than was the Sum which I
lent: This is that which we call Usury. Such a kind of Bargaining no Godly Man
ever used. He tells us of Five in the Hundred, and of any Sum above the
Principal, and of that which is commonly practiced. And in another place makes
this Usury Damnable; saying of the Usurer, who commits it, He that gives
his Money upon Usury, shall not dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord, which he
calls Heaven. Thus he, in that respective Age wherein he flourished, not only
made cruelly griping Usury damnable, but even Five in the Hundred, and any
other Sum beyond the Money lent.

And therefore, let my Adversary now seriously consider his words, together
with those which I formerly quoted, especially of expectation out of them three
great and learned Authors, and let all English Usurers whatsoever, especially,
be convinced, and hold their Peace hereafter; ceasing and forbearing to ask
this Question any more, What is Usury? We are not convinced yet about it, what
it is: and that such a thing as you call Usury, is that Damnable Usury which
you and others so cry down; and which Fathers, and all sorts of Writers have
made so odious. For, Lo, here is brought to you, to convince you, besides many
others, your own Countrymen, one of your Great and Learned Bishops; who has
discovered, cried down, and condemned that Usury which here he defines, and
which is commonly and generally practiced amongst us, and has been, besides the
most excessive and cruelly biting Usury committed in the Ages which are past.

I would not here obtrude mine own Words and Judgment, to show what Damnable
Usury is; because, if I had, then some would have said, as some do already, Who
but the old Jelinger says so? Whereas now, if they will find fault with that
which has been spoken, they must say, Bishop Jewel said so. So that I cannot
see how Usurers will be able to shun, and to keep off this mighty Blow.

NUMBER. XXXVII.
But it is high time for me to advance.

Secondly, To his My Answer to the Adversary's Application.
Application, wherein I take notice of three things.

1. That he says, In things of this, or the like nature, there is none of his
Brethren would scruple to join with him: that is to say, They would join with
me, if I would, against my Knowledge and Censcience, say as he says, that
Scriptures, Fathers and Writers have, in their respective Ages, deservedly made
odious his Damnable Usury, as he describes it to be a cruel Griping of the
Poor; as if that were the only Damnable Usury which they have written, and
spoken against; yea, Condemned: and so consequently, like a Transfuga, or a
Runaway, should betake my self into the Camp of the Enemies of Truth: Which I
cannot do, nor ever will do, by God's Help, because I know, and even now proved
the contrary, nor indeed, have cause so to do. For those holy Writers, I mean
the Penmen of the Holy Ghost, and those other Godly Writers which are against
all Usury, as it has been, and is now generally practiced, are those that will
hold with me hereafter, if I join with them here, being a numerous multitude,
at that great Day, when that small and inconsiderable number of Usurers
Defendants, which have spoken bitter words against their Brethren, for speaking
the Truth against Usury and Usurers, will be ashamed of their Craft, and of
what they have spoken maliciously; and when God's Holy and Faithful Servants
will, with much boldness, hold up their Heads, when Christ himself will be
Judge, to judge of what both have said, when himself being Judge, will also be
his Servants Advocate; when being his Servants Advocate, he will advocate and
call them to come near him, saying, Come good and faithful Servants; come, wear
your Crown; come, receive your Kingdom prepared from the beginning of the
World; come, dwell with me in my holy Hill; come, abide with me in my
Tabernacle, Psalm. 15.1. For you are they that bear about you the Marks of
Heaven's Citizens, and that by Name: And especially, which that sweet Singer of
Israel, here present, sets down in his most sweet Psalm, and Song of his, set
down in his Book of Psalms; He that puts not out his Money to Usury, shall
dwell in God's Holy Hill. And therefore lift up your Heads with joy, for ye
shall now enter into your Master's Joy.

NUMBER. XXXVIII.
2. The Second thing which I take notice of is, that he adds, But whilst he
over-doth it, and under the same Condemnation brings all others that take but
moderate and regular G^i^ (being ashamed to call it Use or Usury) of Persons
sufficient; (meaning the Rich, as all Usurers hold that Lawful, which must be
examined hereafter) yea, such as take but any thing above the Principal, be it
but a Mite, or Cup of cold Water. Wherein he frets his Malice and Spite upon
the University of Wittemberg, and that most famous Foreign Divine Aretius: for
these words, about a Mite, or a Cup of Cold Water, are their words, not mine; I
do but quote them, as many other Writers do; leaving the Readers to weigh them.
So that he wrongs me very much by this Expression (as he says) when they say
it, who, if they were now alive, would soon answer him, and stop his Mouth. For
what is such a Novice, to such Grave, Ancient and Learned Professors and
Doctors as they have been.

He goes further, and says, Yea, when there is but an Intention, or
Expectation of Gain, he must not think it strange if all Men are not of his
mind.

Whereunto I answer, That I do not much regard it, if such Men as he is be not
of my mind, as long as Elder, Abler, Better Men, and a far greater Number of
such Men, than the Number of his Men is, are of my mind. Where let the
Courteous Reader peruse what I have taken ont of St. Austin, Doctor Chemnitius,
Gabriel Powel, and others concerning Expectation, how it makes an Usurer, and
what more abundantly I shall bring forth When that Renowned Archbishop Usher
will be brought in, defining Usury to be Lending in Expectation of certain Gain.
hereafter, to prove this Expectation to be Usury, and Expecters to be Usurers.

At present I shall speak a little more fully of and against his Moderate
Usury, Thus.

NUMBER. XXXIX.
1. That the Holy Scripture speaks of no such Moderate Usury, much less
allows it.

2. That those beyond the Seas, which take but Five in the Hundred, as they do
in Helvetia, where I have been also; and in my Country, which is Germany, where
they also are contented with Five in the Hundred, will say of our English
Usurers, who take more, that they are Immoderate and Excessive. Yea, the very
Jews beyond the Seas, who are pleased with four Pounds in the Hundred, Besides
one of that Country, who lately told me the same.
as a great Merchant (who is a Usurer himself, and has been a Traveller beyond
the Seas himself also, and is, being yet alive, able to attest it) told me, I
say, that even those poor Jews will say of thee, that art a Christian Usurer,
that thou art an Excessive Usurer: and that thy Usury is Immoderate, it being
forty Shillings more than his in the Hundred.

3. And if this be not enough, hear what a great Doctor Fenton, p. 144.
English Doctor, far surpassing you, Mr. Champion, and me too, says concerning
this thing. I will name him, if you will know his Name, it is Doctor Fenton,
whose most Learned, most Sound, most Excellent, and Unanswerable Book against
Usury, I wish every one that will be fully satisfied in this Point of Usury to
peruse. His words are these: After the Defenders of some Usury have examined
the Point, and answered, as they think, the Objections which are usually
brought against Usury by the Schools; yet, in Conclusion, put all their
Limitations together, they can agree upon no Usury at all, as it is before
defined: Single them out one from another, there is not any one of them that
dares defend any such ordinary Usury as is amongst us practiced, with Greatest
Moderation.

Ah, poor Champion, where are you now? What becomes of your Moderate Usury now?

3. I, for my part, I will triumphantly charge on, and march up to your third
Thing, to overthrow that too, viz. And let him consider whether, by putting in
such Companions with them, he does not take the ready way to strengthen the
hands of Griping Usurers, whilst they find the greatest part of this and other
Nations taken in with them; and amongst those many sober, serious, pious,
learned Persons too. I say again, such confused writing of things and Persons
as here is, is a more likely way to harden the most greedy Cormorants in their
unjust Practices, than to abate the number of them. Where this Champion seems
to make a great Flourish, which yet will soon vanish. For,

1. He brings with him in this Charge, his old already beaten and scattered
Forces; I mean, his many vain and weak Expressions about my confused Writing:
So that I need not say much to that, because I have already said much
concerning that, if not too much, which the Reader may peruse if he please.
This only I will say again now, That if my Writing be a confused Writing of
things and persons, then what may we think of the Sacred Scriptures and
Writings themselves, who join, as I said formerly, Nesheck and Tarbith, which
is but an Increase (which some of the Defendants of Usury themselves very
simply call Toothless Usury, as more simply they call Nesheck the Lord's Rack
Rent) and make both damnable? Ezekiel. 18.13.

2. The like may be said of all other Famous and Learned Writers who make such
Conjunctions, as I have formerly shown at full; so as that I need not say the
same again over and over, showing my self to be a Lover of Tautologies, as he
does.

NUMBER. XL.
And whereas he adds, that this is the ready way to strengthen the Hands of
Griping Usurers, whilst they find the greatest part of this and other Nations
taken in with them; and amongst these, many sober, serious, pious and learned
Persons too.

I answer to this his Charge after this manner.

1. That I fear no more such strengthening of such Griping Usurers, than the
Ancient Teuthons, my Countrymen, feared Alexander's Forces (which were far
enough from them) when they said to his Ambassadors who were sent to ask them,
what they did fear; Metuimus ne coelum ruat, We fear lest the Heavens fall.
Which I say, because that which the Champion says is far enough from me, and
from any likelihood that ever it will come to pass. As also, that hardening of
them is, which here also he talks of in the Close of his Charge; because I have
already seen the contrary, since the putting forth of my first Book against
Usury, by the Conviction and Conversion of many; among whom, some are Ministers
and great Scholars; whereof more hereafter in due place. But let the Champion
take heed, lest he strengthen the Hands of the most greedy Cormorants, and
common, and most griping Usurers, as I hear he begins to do, in places, unto
which his Pamphlet, or the Report of it comes. Certainly God will call men to
an Account for such proceedings.

And Lastly, Whereas he makes this the Ground of his so charging me, whilst
they find, etc. See his words,

To which I shall answer now. And,

1. To the first part of his Ground, which he pretends to have for what he
says, viz. Whilst they find the greatest part of this and other Nations taken
in with them. Whereunto I have this to say.

1. That it is far from Truth that he says, they find the greatest part,

1. Of this Nation. And,

2. Of other Nations taken in with them. For,

1. How can he make that good, which he says of this Nation, when in many
Parishes there are no Lenders upon Usury at all, or but very few; as I can say
of mine, and so others of other Parishes, there being so many Borrowers every
where, which commonly go to some certain Moneyed and noted Usurers, who take
Six in the Hundred, and no more usually.

2. And, as for other Nations,

1. It is well known, that in some there is no Usury allowed or practiced at
all. As among the As the Learned and Well Red Aretius, in his Tract of Usury
reports it. Culverius and Speed. Because Mahomet, in his Alcoran interdicts it.
Indians; which, as some Geographers write, make up the fifth part of the
World. And among the Turks too, which claim half the old World, Usury is (b)
not allowed.

2. And of my Country I will say thus much, that they have a thing there,
called a Commissariat, with which they deal by way of Partnership, so as that
the Lender, or putter out of his Money loses when the Receiver and Employer of
it loses, as it happened in the late Germany Wars; for the Putters out of
their Money had nothing at all for their Money these twenty Years, because of
the Receivers Losses which the Employers of such Money sustained by Wars. And
many such Instances for that Country I could give. So that they need not there
be such Usurers as here they be, because they can be such Partners in Loss and
Gain.

Which does not contradict what I have formerly said of some Transmarine
Princes, which have espoused Usury, dealing upon Men's Money, as they do at
Frankfort-Mart twice a Year; because some deal in a way of plain Usury, not all.

NUMBER. XLI.
To the Second Part of his last Thing, or Saying; which is, And among those,
many sober, pious, learned Men are taken in: I shall answer next, and last of
all, thus.

1. That some Grave and Great Divines affirm the contrary. As,

1. Bishop Bishop Jewel upon 1 These. 4.
Jewel, having spoken against Usury, and shown what it is, said farther, that
No good Man or Godly Man ^ver used it, viz. as now it is practiced.

2. And before him, Great Lactantius de vero Cultu, l. 6. c. 19.
Lactantius said, that A just Man will not defile himself with such Gain.

3. Bishop Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15.5.
Downam. The Usury which is practiced in the World, is not allowed of any Godly
Divine.

Here are two great Bishops on my side, and an old Father.

Secondly, Men may be learned, and yet not serious; I mean, so serious as to
consider what a great and grievous Sin Usury is. And again, May be not only
serious, but also sober, and yet not truly Godly; Having but a form of
Godliness, and denying the power thereof, especially in these last times, 2 Timothy 3.5. So that no wonder it is if such turn Usurers in such an Age wherein
Men are so much carried with Gain: and that so much the rather, because even
some Ministers are become Usurers, and show them the way to it by their ill
Example. Which caused a very Able, Learned and Godly Minister to break out into
these Expressions after he had seen my Usurer Cast: Ministers now turn Usurers,
and therefore so many Hearers turn Usurers too: I am, and ever was against it.

3. But suppose Men be truly Godly, and lend and take Use or Gain, as my
Adversary calls it, then the words of the aforesaid great Authors are to be
understood thus, that no Godly Man ever used it as it is now practiced.

4. Those Godly Men may observe the Cautions which some Learned and Pious
Ministers, as Calvin, Farell, Baxter, Durham, and others give; thereby making
that which is said to be Usury, no Usury, but Partnership, as my Countrymen in
Germany, even now spoken of, is: they being Partners with the Employers of
their Money in their Loss as well as Gain: which common Usurers will not do.

NUMBER. XLII.
But Finally, I must super-add one thing which I had almost forgotten; as
namely, That I much wonder at my Adversary's having so much to do here with
cruelly Biting and Griping Usury and Usurers, to vent and to excuse his
moderate Usury by it. Because,

1. I understand by such as hear him, that in his preaching they shall not hear
him speak against any Usury. And,

2. Because it is well known, that there are not so over-many such cruelly
biting Usurers, who take all Advantages, Mortgages, etc. to use his own
Expressions: I, for my part, hear but of a few, and those few do not go untold
of it by me, and my Brethren; but rather a little more than by him and his
Brethren. And so they were spoken against by the Holy Fathers (but not only.)

I will instance in Holy Ambrose de Tob. c. 10.
Ambrose; who, when some Usurers were so cruel as that they would arrest the
very dead Corpses of their Borrowers, not only spoke against them, but also
caused the said dead Bodies to be carried to their very Houses: and yet, when
he came to show what interdicted and damnable Usury is, he defined it as I and
others define it.

NUMBER. XLIII.
3. And besides all this, because I observe generally, when I hear Men speak of
and against Usurers, they call every Lender upon Usury, and for Gain, an
Usurer, whether he be a small one, or a great one, that lends Thousands, and
is content with Six in the Hundred, which they call moderate Gain, alias Usury,
and craves and looks for no more: as also, they call thee, who art such a
Lender, and read these Lines, a Usurer, do what thou can, and say what
thou will of and for moderate Usury; and tell as much as thou can what a
damnable Sin excessive Usury is, and how cruelly it gripes the Poor, though
very few, if any, will lend to the Poor: Usurers being for the Rich only, that
can give them good Security, and pay them punctually. I say, Men will call thee
an Usurer, as well as the cruelly biting Lender, as long as thou live, and
live in the Sin of Usury; And so they will call any of thy Brethren that come
after thee, as long as Nesheck and Tarbith, Biting and Increase, stand coupled
together, interdicted together, and condemned together in thy Bible, and by
name, in Ezekiel. 18.13. This will be every Usury-taker's Name, from Generation to
Generation, to the World's end. I for my part, to tell thee the truth here, thy
Name, which is Usurer, told almost every Day, though thou art ashamed to call
thy self so, and not willing that any of thy Neighbors should call thee so. So
that I suppose that by this time my chief Antagonist's Flourish, which even now
he made, is come to an end. And that I may now, being out of that Labyrinth
which I was in, advance and come to a new Engagement, without any Let or
Remora. Thus,

NUMBER. XLIV.
And here he charges me first, saying,

His Text, Psalm. 15.5. He that puts not his Money to Usury.

I shall pass some Remarks upon the words of the Text which he has chosen. And
what are those Remarks, say I? (to answer him) doubtless, as he thinks, some
rare and choice ones: but that we shall see by and by.

[ Has not put.] The Hebrew word properly signifies Giving; which he must
prove, that properly. As for me, I grant, that sometimes it signifies Giving:
Besides which signification, it also signifies ponere, to To put, Psalm. 4.8.
posite, and to put, and to put forth, Lev. 16.13. and Joel 2. and to As
Paynine renders Lev. 16.13. Tradere.
deliver a thing over into a Man's Hand, as Josh. 6.2. where the Latin
Translation runs thus; Ecce, in manus tuas tradidi Jericho; Behold, I have
delivered Jericho into thy hands.

Again, it signifies To offer, says Joh. Reuchlius Papinianista, lib. 1.
Rudiment. Hebr. Anno MCCCCLXXIX. Impr.
one who was a most excellent Hebrician: which well befits Usurers, who will At
S. Basil shows it.
offer their Money to rich Heirs, to entice them to borrow of them, as holy
Ambrose reports it of them. Where, let me put this Remark upon my Adversary's
Remark, that (...) He has given or put forth, delivered and offered, suffers
a defect, sometimes in its Front or Beginning, sometimes in its End, sometimes
in both. For the first we have an Example, Genesis 24.35. and chap. 14.19. For the
second in Jos. 6.2. The third in 2 Samuel 22.41. Thou have given me or delivered
into my Hands also, the Necks of mine Enemies. All which most notably befits
Usurers also; who, when they put forth their Usury-Money, either cause the
Borrower to suffer a defect in the beginning of their Loan, as some of them,
who take Advance-Money; or in the end, when the Half Year is run out, as others
usually do; or both in the beginning and ending; making the Borrower to suffer
a defect in his Substance, whereof, both first and last their Usury bites off
somewhat with a witness, as the worst of Usurers, being cruel Biters, and
cruelly oppressive Usurers do; who will have Gain upon Gain, even excessive
Gain.

NUMBER. XLV.
2. But I see that my Antagonist, not being contented with this his Saying, in
his Remark, has a mind to charge up yet nearer toward me, and against me;
adding, And if Giving may be put for Lending. Mark what he says, may be: he
dares not say Is. Why may not Lending, Luke 6.35. be interpreted Giving?
Which, if granted, overthrows the whole Fabric he builds thereon. But of
that more hereafter. Which Check and Charge to repel, and to put off, I shall
return unto him this Response.

1. That he does well that he says still, If, If: which puts me in mind of a
Letter which a certain City sent to a certain King, summoning it to surrender
it self to him; writing no more in that Letter but If, If, If, in Answer to
his. Which I leave to the Champion to apply to his If.

2. That in Luke 6.35. Lending cannot be Giving.

1. Because of As Aretius also observes it.
Giving, Christ speaks expressly, verse. 30. and then after that, of Lending,
verse. 34, and so 35.

2. Because one should think that those grave Translators of our English Bible
had a little more Wit and Skill, and so other Translators also, than this
Novice, when they used the word Lend.

3. Because the Original, (...), makes it as clear as the Sun, that it must be
Lend, because (...) is a word, which in no Author I find to signify Dono, I
give, but Mutu^, I lend: only this some write, that the Grecians are ambiguous
about it: some affirming that it signifies to lend without Usury, as I here;
others to Usury. Which being so clear, I wonder with what face this Champion,
contrary to the Current of so many wise and erudite Interpreters, should put
Giving for Lending, Lending being a quite other thing differing from Giving:
for Lending is, as Heming. Com. in Jac. 5.
Hemingius tells us, a Contract which transferreth the Propriety of a thing
from one to another for no consideration of any Price or Recompense, but only
with a Covenant that the same kind of thing be repayed again.

But Giving is, when a man bestows a thing with this purpose, that he will
have it presently to become his that receives it, and never in any wise to be
rendered to him again, as Donarif, de Donationibus, and l. don. ff.
Donorif shows it.

Where note by the way,

1. That there are two Acts of Liberality; Dono dare, and Mutuo dare: To give
freely, and to lend freely: The one whereof is mentioned by our Savior in this
place, Luke 6.35. and not the other: but verse. 34. and that most uncivilly,
Usury is stepped into the Room of its contrary, Free Lending; and thus strangely
maintained by this my Adversary's Remark.

2. That, though we read sometimes this Phrase in the holy Bible, Thou shall
not give him thy Money to Usury, Lev. 25. And Psalm. 15.5. (in some
Translations) He that gives not his Money to Usury, instead of put forth: yet
we must not be so simple, as this Champion is, as to gather from such places,
that Lending is Giving properly; and that the Usurer practices an Act of
Giving, because he indenteth, expects, and looks for the Return of such
things as are delivered: And the Giver never looks for any such things as he
gave to be returned. For so Donation is by Doctor Fregius in Rudim. Instit. p.
327.
Civilians defined. Donatio est promissio aut traditio alicujus rei ea mente
facta, ut accipientis fiat and exerceatur liberalitas. That is, Donation is a
promise, or delivery of a thing, with a mind that it be his who takes it (and
so consequently, be not returned) and that thereby Liberality be exercised.

As for his bragging Addition, which, if granted, overthrows his whole Fabric
he builds thereon, I look on it as a mere Chimaera; and tell him aforehand,
that that which I shall build on that Fabric, Luke 6.35. will make his heart
ache before he will see it overthrown. But of that, as he, so shall I say, more
hereafter. So that all this while the Champion has gotten no advantage at all,
much less a Victory, by his Charge, but rather a mark of Disgrace; not being
able to make good his Assault, in which he has been shamefully repulsed, and
beaten back.

NVM. XLVI.
Next unto His Remark, my Adversary approaches to His Money (which the Usurer
loves with all his heart.) Not, quoteth Mr. Jelinger. As if a Man might put
out another's Money; as Children's Money. Mark his reason, for a Man must not
partake of other Men's Sins, 1 Timothy 5.2. which I understand not: for if putting
out to Use be a Sin, it is the Man's own Sin that puts out the Money, and not
the Child's, that is merely passive. Understand, for the present, while it is a
Child; which is my Answer partly, but not fully and wholly; for I observe, that
commonly Children, when they are grown up, live and continue in the same Sin of
Usury, whereinto those that did put out their Money brought them. And are they
not guilty of making themselves partakers of such Children's Sin of Usury,
though they do not put out their own Money to Usury? So that I am much afraid
that those Children, living after, and dying in that damnable Sin of Usury,
unto which such Guardians have enchained them, will, when, as Usurers, they
shall be, chained up by the Chains of utter Darkness in Hell, they will curse
such as have brought them to that unutterable Misery; saying, O cursed
Guardians! if you had not been, we had not been in this woeful and dreadful
place, nor in such Chains and Bonds, for you were the Men that caused
Usury-bonds to be made for us to make us Usurers, before we, poor Souls, knew
what Usury is. Thus it is to be dreaded, that poor fatherless Children will
curse these Men so in their misery, who have made them miserable. Even as Mr.
Smith in his Sermons, p. 105.
One says of a Man's own Children, that They will curse their Father; saying,
Cursed be you, Father; for you were the Cause of our Torments; for if you had
not shown us the way of Usury, by your Example, we had never gone that way to
Hell.

But let us see farther how the Champion goes on with his work; sad work
indeed which he is like to make. His Money, to show, says he, what a Man has
should be truly his, I mean, civilly his.

And how does the Champion answer this? I suppose he says, he had no mind on
this Text, and many other places of Scripture, when he wrote, that Worldly
Goods are not our own, to speak according to Scripture, Psalm. 24.1. Where note,

1. That I spoke this upon another Subject and Scripture; and that according to
that Viz. on Mat. 13.44, 45. handled in my Spiritual Merchant, by himself
mentioned in his Margin.
Scripture by me named, Psalm. 24.1. The Earth is the Lord's, and all that
therein is. And what fault have I committed and perpetrated in it, and by it? I
do thereof put a gloss upon the Merchant's selling all that he had, meaning, as
others also do, his Sins, and not his Worldy Goods, as Lyra in Mat. 13.
Lyra does; for this cause, because Worldly Goods are not our own: and how so?
According to Scripture, and that fore-alledged Scripture, which says it, Psalm.
24.1. I do not speak it with a respect had to the Law of Man, which is the
bringer in of Meum, Tuum; Mine, Thine, among Men; and gives a Man a Civil
Propriety in what he has and possesses, reserving for God his, mentioned in
that Psalm. 24. And whereas he would make me an Offender, because I say, what a
Man has should be truly his, and that this Saying is to show that: And says
farther, that I had no mind in my Text, etc. I answer, Whatsoever he may
wrongfully suppose, I minded my Text for all, and forgot not the last
Commandment neither, nor other places, as well as he; but withal, do and shall
still mind that never to be forgotten Saying of a greater, learneder, holier
Man than he is; St. August. ad Maced. and habetur 14. q. 4. Can. Quid Dicam.
Austin I mean; who says expressly, The whole World is a Believer's Wealth, but
the Infidel is not worth a Farthing. Intimating, that the one has what he has
as a Proprietary, as his own; but what the other has, he has as an Usurper,
though, according to the Law of Man, it be called his, in the tenth
Commandment, etc. And so he goes on, Do we not convince all Men, who seem to
rejoice in what they have gotten, and know not how to use the same (as Usurers,
who abuse what Money they have to Usury, putting it forth to Usury) that they
possess what is not their own (as Usurers also may be said to be such
Possessors, because what they get by Usury is not their own, but should be
restored to them to whom it belongs.) And so progresseth; adding, and
concluding at last, Omne ergo quod male possidetur, alienum est: that is, All
that which is ill possessed is not a Man's own.

2. Note that I say no more than other modern Writers said before me, viz.
famous It is required (says this great Man, Bishop Downam, upon this same
Psalm. 15.5.) of every Christian, that he get his Goods justly, etc. And
therefore why must I be so blamed, who say the same?
Bishop Downam. And therefore let the Reader judge what cause this Zoilus has
to pick such needless frivolous Quarrels, which do but recoyl to his own
Dishonor, Opprobry and Shame. See the Margin before I go farther.

But after all this, he comes at last to that which he loves most dearly too,
even, to Usury; which is the Vsurer's great Diana.

NVM. XLVII.
And what does he say of that?

1. The word signifies Biting, quoth he, and so it is commonly granted; and it
is thence argued on the other hand, that only Biting Usury is forbidden: That
there is a biting Usury such as deserves that name, and that is unlawful and
forbidden beyond doubt; but that any Emphasis is to be placed in the word
Nesheck, I cannot be persuaded, because Increase is frequently joined with it.
And whatsoever the import of the word be by derivation, yet it seems to me that
the Holy Ghost makes use of this word in a moderate sense. (And here comes in
his Darling again, Moderate Usury) without placing any Emphasis; as if it
carried Biting in it by way of Aggravation.

Quest. And what say you to this?

I answer,

1. That I deny what he says, that only Biting Usury is forbidden, if he mean
cruelly and vehemently biting Usury, because,

1. As I noted formerly, there is no Dagesh forte in the Original: so that it
might take in all Usury, though some does not bite so vehemently as some.

2. And if this Criticism be slighted, then I say farther in plain terms, that
all Usury, as it is commonly practiced, does bite, as Experience shows,
actually or potentially, and therefore deservedly is interdicted. Nor is it my
Assertion only, but many more besides me, affirm the same, as Bishop Downam,
Gabriel Powel, Mr. Smith, and others, as it will appear by their own words. And,

1. Gabriel Powel in his Posit. p. 29.
Gabriel Powel, who says, Usury in Hebrew is termed Nesheck, Exodus 22.25.
which signifies Biting: derived of Nashack, to bite, or to gnaw as Serpents
and Mice do. So Usury bites and devoureth a Man's Substance very speedily.

2. Mr. Smith in his first Sermon against Usury, p. 96.
So Mr. Smith, As the name of the Devil does declare what an Enemy he is, so
the name of Usury does declare what an Enemy she is. That you may know Usury
for a Biter, her name does signify Biting. If there were one biting Usury, and
another healing Usury, then Usury should have two Names; one of Biting, and
another of Healing: but all Usury signifies Biting, to show that all Usury is
unlawful.

3. And blessed R. Bolton in his Discourse concerning Usury, p. 13.
Bolton adds, Biting is individual and essential both to the Name and Nature
of Usury; it ever biteth and stings one or other, less or more; either the
Borrower, or the Commonwealth; either, like the Morning-Wolf, it sucks out the
Life, the Blood and the Marrow of a poor Man; or, like a Mastiff, it snatches a
piece and portion out of the Borrowers Substance; or like a Wasp, or the
Dog-Fly, it stings him one way or other in his Estate. All sorts of Usury, even
from that Centesima, the hundredth part Monthly paid, which Nehemiah
complains of, which is Twelve in the Hundred, unto that Semiuncianum, which
is Ten Shillings in the Hundred, has Teeth; some more empoysoned bloody than
other, but all bite. In every Tarbith there is a Nesheck, a Tooth in every
Usury.

Thus Mr. Bolton, that Holy and Learned Author, now triumphing in Heaven, after
his Glorious Victory won and gotten over his Adversary, M. S.

Ide^, p. 11.
Again he says,

Nesheck is the common and ordinary Name whereby all Usury is signified in the
Hebrew Tongue, etc.

4. I add Learned and Famous Mr. Trap upon Prove.
Mr. Trap, mentioned in my Usurer Cast.

5. In comes Mr. Turner in his Sermon against Usury.
Mr. Turner, There is no Usury but bites more or less: that which is but
moderated, or qualified (as Men think) perhaps Five in the Hundred; yet, what
is this but as it is in the Greek Proverb, to shave to the very Skin; and like
the Dog-Fly, to draw some Blood? So that although all kind of Usury bite not
alike, yet there is no Usury at all that is toothless. Thus he. Many more
Ancient as well as Modern Writers I could cite, but these few may now suffice,
because I must strive to be briefer than I have been.

6. Only one more comes now into my mind, which I must not omit, viz. Just.
Lipsius in Cornel. Tacit.
Justus Lipsius; who, writing Annotations upon a Heathen Author, called
Tacitus, which also was an Enemy to Usury, as a multitude of Christians are,
has this Expression; that By the Romans, after they had moderated Usury, and
brought it to Thirty Shillings in the Hundred, and saw the inconvenience of
that moderated Usury, all Usury was taken away. So that the very Heathens were
at last against all Usury.

NUMBER. XLVIII.
But I must and shall hasten to that which is yet to be answered, and uncloath
my mind therein with all possible brevity, because I have been too prolix
hitherto; and also, because most things of greatest moment are cleared up and
answered in my former Discourse: so that I shall not need to be so long as I
have been, hereafter; and especially, because he is full of Tautologies;
repeating the same things and Charges, which he charge me with, again and
again; and cites his Modern Authors, which are his chie^est Proofs (being
destitute of Scriptural ones) in words of a great length, and in much Latin,
only by him quoted; which, together with his frivolous Reviling, Jearing and
opprobrious Languages, so fills up his Pamphlet, as that of necessity I must be
the shorter.

Now, 2. I answer, that what I say of Aggravation is not my Saying only, but
blessed Bolton's also; so that with him he must grapple, because of him I have
it. His words are, Nesheck does metaphorically intimate and import the
Aggravation of the Sin, not a Distinction of the kinds of Usury: Epithets and
Originals serve more to amplify and exaggerate, than to distinguish.

3. As for the Stranger, I will say no more but this, (intending to handle that
matter more largely in its proper place) That whereas he takes the restraining
of the Stranger to the Canaanite to be a groundless fancy, I shall, besides
that which I have already written formerly about this, set against him first
three famous Men indeed, who give that sense of the Canaanite, viz. To which
three Fathers I add Paulus Fagius the Martyr, who, in his Annot. in the Chald.
Paraphr. understands the Canaanite. And Learned Mr. Pool, Extraneo isti, i. e.
reliquis Canaanorum quos paulatim consumi volebat, in Hebr. (...), And Gabr.
Powel, p. 42. By the name Stranger in that, are meant the cursed Canaanites,
and God does not license the Jews to take Usury of any but of their Enemies,
whom they might kill.
St. Ambrose, St. Jerome and Tremellius; which I believe every impartial Reader
will prefer before such a Novice as he is, as being better grounded than he is,
who calls their Exposition a groundless Fancy. And if this be not enough, I
will subjoyn famous Mr. Smith; who says in Answer to what he quoteth out of
Deuteronomy. 23. It is said, Of a Stranger thou may take Usury: I perceive no
Scripture speaks for Usury; Of a Stranger, says God, thou may take Usury:
but thou take Usury of thy Brother, therefore this condemns thee, because
thou usest thy Brother like a Stranger. Here Stranger signifies the Lord's
Enemies, whom they were commanded to destroy. Therefore, mark how much this
makes against Usury, which they object for Usury. God does not license the
Jews to take Usury of any but their Enemies, whom they might kill: They might
not be Usurers to any, but to them of whom they might be Destroyers: Whom they
might slay, of them only they might take Usury. Showing that Usury is a kind of
Punishment; and such a kind of Punishment, as if we were to kill a Man, it were
a very fit Punishment for him; and therefore the Jews might take Usury of none
but those whom they might kill. I hope Usurers will allege this Scripture no
more. Thus that renowned Author.

And will you, Champion, call this a groundless fancy too?

And Lastly, In my Margin I quote three Authors more, viz. Paulus Fagius, Mr.
Pool and G Powel, who second me, and make seven great Authors that hold with me.

NVM. XLIX.
4. That place in Exodus 22.27. does not patronize him, because it concerns the
Stranger converted, who is called (...), Advena, a Dweller among the Jews,
though he was no Jew; and therefore was not to be vexed nor oppressed by Usury,
as another Stranger of the seven Nations unconverted, and called (...), which
signifies Hostem, an Enemy, otherwise an Alien. See Obad. 11. and Lament.
5.27. and one whom they might kill, Jos. 3.24. contrarily whereunto, the
Proselited Stranger was not to be oppressed, because he was become a Brother,
Deuteronomy. 23.19. even as now also, a Convert is become a Brother by Religion. So
that I wonder with what face he could make this Addition after these words,
Thou shall not vex him, and yet they might take Use of him; when there is not
one word nor syllable there for Usury, and when the word Vex does absolutely
take off all taking of Use, because Usury is a vexing thing; because it
afflicts and brings low, as the Hebrew word (...), denotes it; because it
signifies to afflict, and to bring low: so the word (...), nor oppress him,
takes off all Usury, because Usury is Oppression, yea, Extortion; because the
Usurer will have his Use, and exact it. So as that an Usurer is also called an
Extortioner, Psalm. 109.11. an Extortioner in the English, and an Usurer by all
other Translators. The like may be said of Ezekiel. 27.7. His jeering me for my
Rabbinical Learning I pass by, being resolved to make use of the Hebrew
Punctations; not to make them my Foundation, but for Illustration, as my great
Friend and Instructor Buxtorfius, that great Hebrician, has taught me: Let him
jeer both him and me, we regard it not. What he says of my Doctrine, Chap. 2.
That no Usurer, living and dying in the Sin of Usury, can be saved: That it is
made up of strong Presumption, rash Judging, monstrous Uncharitableness, etc.
whether it be or no, let the Reader judge when he shall have read what I shall
say about it, and to it. As namely,

1. That it is such a Doctrine as has convinced and converted Souls. I will
instance at present in one or two. A certain great Gentleman of mine
Acquaintance, having heard this my very Doctrine, word for word, preached, and
pressed since my Book against Usury came out; was thereby so convinced and
converted, as that he left that damnable Sin of Usury, (though he took but Six
in the Hundred) and made Restitution: Whereupon, he died shortly after, and had
a Funeral Sermon preached; at which it was publicly related, how he was
converted, and restored his Usury again. Which remarkable thing was told me by
a Godly Man which heard both the first and second Sermon, and will assert it to
any for truth, and can bring many more that heard the same. And very lately, in
this Year, 1679. about Midsummer, another was thereby so wrought upon, as that
she, being a Gentlewoman, resolved to send her Restitution-money as far as
London, where it is due.

2. That I shall desire my Reader to peruse, and to read over what I have
formerly quoted. 1. Out of Ambrose, thus Reasoning in Psalm. 15. If he be
blessed that has not put his Money to Usury, then, doubtless, he is cursed that
has. 2. Out of Bishop Jewel, How dare thou (Usurer) look to Heaven? Thou have
no Dwelling there. 3. Out of Bishop Sands, God, as he has threatened, excludes
thee out of his Kingdom.

NUMBER. L.
Unto which three great Men, I shall add two more. As,

1. Gabriel Powel; who writes thus. It is impossible for them that wittingly
and willingly persevere in this Sin of Usury to be saved.

2. The pious Mr. Francis Whidden the Elder; who, having been an Usurer, as I
am informed, repented of it, and left it, and made Restitution, and afterward
preached many Sermons against it; and delivered this this very Doctrine against
it, The Usurer's Portion will be Eternal Damnation.

Now judge, Courteous Reader, whether these great and holy Men do not deliver
and maintain the same Doctrine which I have derived from my Text; and whether
this Champion, censuring me and my Doctrine so rashly as he does, do not judge
them so too, as well as me.

As for his Quotation out of Dixton, an obscure Author, I need not value it
much, as long as I have such greater, and more illustrious, and famous ones on
my side.

Nor indeed can Mr. Dixton's reasoning from the Judicial Law, disposing of
Commodities, and from the Year of Jubilee, and from the end of six Years, and
from lending to a Stranger, that obsolete, and so often and fully confuted
Argument convince me, that Usury is Lawful, and not Damnable; I say, me, who
have proved it, and can and will prove it more strongly hereafter, that the Law
against Usury is Moral, and not Judicial, than he can prove the contrary;
instancing in dispensing of Commodities, etc.

As for my dear Cousin, Doctor Spanhemius, his words by him quoted, I hold with
him in this; that David, in my Text, does speak, De foeneratore expilante
fratres Usura rodente; that is, of a Usurer corroding his Brother with
corroding Usury. But I add withal, not only because Nesheck, as I have already
proved it, does not only signify Corroding and Biting Usury; but all manner of
Usury. Nor does my Cousin's Addition make good what is said by him, that the
words must be understood Limitate; that is, Limitately; as many other Aphorisms
in the same Psalm; because he does not demonstrate and prove it, but only says
it. Where I cannot but mind what a greater Man than my Cousin, viz. famous St.
Austin, says; If I prove what I say by the holy Scriptures, believe me; if
not, believe me not.

And this I am the more bold to declare, because diverse Great and Learned Men
have so learnedly confuted and contradicted this; viz.

1. Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15.5.
Downam, Let not us upon this frivolous Distinction build our Practice, or
hazard the Eternal Salvation of our Souls.

2. Blessed Bolton in his Discourse of True Happiness.
Bolton, speaking of and against distinguishing of Sin, says, as for Example,
They say there are two sorts of Usury, Biting and Toothless; when all sorts of
Usury are certainly damned by God.

3. Mr. Smith in his first Sermon upon Usury, p. 105.
Mr. Smith, They say, because Usury comes of Biting, the Biting Usury (by
Spanhem. in Dut. Evang.
Doctor Spanhemius called Corroding) is only forbidden, and none but the biting
Usury: Why then all Usury is forbidden, for all Usury comes of Biting.

4. In comes next Learned Mr. Turner in his Sermon upon Usury.
Mr. Turner, in his Sermon upon Usury: Let not these poor Evasions of Biting
and Toothless Usury deceive us; they are but as Fig Leaves shapen by some
indulgent Wits, to cover the Nakedness of that which the Law of God, of Nature,
and Equity have discovered to be deformed and naked in it self: as if there
were some Usury without the meaning of God's Law; or, as if God had never meant
to condemn Usurers, but only to muzzle them.

Let me add, 5. Dr. T.
Dr. T. in his Progress of Saints, p. 96. Men deceive themselves in their
Distinctions.

NUMBER. LI.
To his Speech about my personating of David slaying Goliath, that it had been
better I had let it alone, lest I hit some that truly fear God, etc. and so be
brought to Confession and Recantation, with Job's Friends that spoke not right
of God, and to the Grief of his Servant Job. To this my Answer is, that I fear
no such thing, nor need to fear it, because To God's Glory be it written.
I hear from several Parts in England, and out of England, where they
understand English, by Letters, and by Confessions, Acknowledgments and
Relations, of the Approbations of my Usurer Cast, and of the Convictions and
Conversions of sundry Persons, both Ministers and private Christians, which
have declared it to their Which will be ready to attest it.
Friends, and to my self; giving me hearty thanks for it, and blessing God, who
has wrought so great a Change in them, as that they have made Restitution of
the Vsury-Money which they have taken. But of this more hereafter.

At present I will say a word or two concerning the two Disciples which,
Eliah-like, would call down Fire from Heaven upon the Samaritans, etc. because
he applies that Narration to me. And my Answer to it is this, That those two
Disciples did (as Calvin glosseth upon it in his Institutions, Book. 3. chap.
20. p. 549.) inconsiderately do it, desiring such a thing out of an Emulation
of Eliah; whereas I, for my part, had no such emulous thoughts; but did
considerately, and in the fear of God, I hope, and calling upon his Name (he is
my Witness) write what I wrote concerning this matter; as knowing what Spirit I
must be of, and how I must not rashly condemn my guiltless and innocent
Brother: The Usurer being the Man, who, because he puts his Money upon
Usury, shall not dwell in God's holy Hill and Tabernacle.

NUMBER. LII.
I add, Nor do I fear that I have not spoken right of God, because I have
written just according to this very Scripture, which is the Word of God, and
proceeded from the very Mouth of God, as an Oracle, or Answer to David's
Question, Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy
Hill? He that has not put his Money to Usury, Psalm. 15.1, 5.

THE SECOND PART. Taking in the Third, Fourth and Fifth CHAPTERS.
NUMBER. I.
ABout the several Names given to Usury he will not concern himself, he says:
Nor will I concern my self about many frivolous things, and Tautologies, not
worth the answering thereof. I will subjoyn only this; That whereas he says,
that all the Names given to Usury properly belong to that rigid Exaction and
Oppression in the World under the Name of Usury: My Answer is, that I have
answered that already formerly, denying it; and saying, that though chiefly
they do, yet not only; and that I also my self am as much, and chiefly against
that Oppression, etc. As when Men must pay so much to the Usurer's Agents and
Servants, to procure so much Money upon Usury, and so much to the Usurer
himself, viz. twenty or forty Shillings more. And when they must pay Use upon
Usury, which the very Civil Law prohibits in these words, Lib. 6. placuit, 29.
ff. de Usuris.
Usury of Usuries, etc.

But to the Name Interest I will say something, because he adds these words to
his former; But Interest he will not have it called. And why not? Surely that
is an Overplus above the Principal, which the ancient Doctors of the Church
call Usury: But Interest with him is lawful, because properly it is Damage,
etc. Whereunto I answer,

1. That not I only will not have Usury called Interest, because we may say,
Interfuit mihi haec habuisse.
Interest, but others also, far greater and learneder than he and I, will not
have it called so; I say, others; even both Civilians and Theologians, because
it is another thing, and not the same, as I will make it appear by and by;
quoting for it,

1. Civilians; and by Name, famous Doctor Doctor Vulteius, jurispr. l. c. 34.
so called.
Vulteius; who defines Interest thus, That it is an Incommodity which
happens ex mora, by a delay. And then showing what Mora, or such a Delay is,
a Culpa, or fault of him which does not answer the Convention, or Agreement
made between the Creditor and Debtor, for an Opportunity, Cinacius de
Paratittis.
Place and L. Si soluturus 39. de solutione.
Time where and when Payment is to be made.

It is also called L. Stipulatio ista, 38. S. alteri D. De Usura. D. Vult. l.
1. Jurispr. c. 34.
Poena, or a Punishment, in the Civil Law, which the Creditor stipulateth for.
Whence is the Appellation of Penal Stipulation.

As for Usury, that is defined by Hottomannus his Definition of Usury.
Hottomannus, Gain, which for Loan is required at certain times.

And, as Civilians do thus distinguish between Interest and Fenory, so do
Divines also apparently put a difference between Interest and Usury, and will
not have Usury called Interest; saying, Melanchton, l. de Difinit.
That whereas Men pretend to the honest Name of Interest to their gainful
Usury, it is pernicious Sophistry, says Idem ibid.
Melanchton; who also says farther, that Interest is a Debt, which he owes by
the Law of Nature, that has been to another an effectual cause of Damage and
Loss; or indeed has hindered his just and lawful Gain. But Usury to him is Gain
which exceeds to the Loan of Money, etc. As it is also with Selneccerus,
Hist. Christ. Relig. p. 2.
Selneccerus, Christ.
Doctor Chitraeus, Aquinas in his Sums.
Aqninas, Vignerius, Inslit. Sect. 3. Theol. c. 5. Lavat. in Exodus 22.
Vignerius. I add,

The Arraignment of Usury.
The Author of The Arraignment of Usury, who is more full; saying notably, The
way for the Discovery of the Usurer's Evils is, that howsoever the World is
wont to confound the Names of Interest and Usury: and Men are wont to say, that
they t^^ Interest, and lend upon Interest, when indeed they take Usury and lend
upon Usury: yet there are two manifest and essenti^^ Differences between Usury
and Interest, which do so disting^^ the one from the other, as that they cannot
possibly be confounded. One Difference is this; Usury is an Overplus* or Gain,
more the was lent: Interest is never Gain or Overplus above the Principal, but
a Recompense demanded, and due for the Damage th^^ is taken, or the Gain that
is taken, or the Gain that is hindr^^ through Lending. Another Difference is
this; Usury accrewe^^ and grows due by Lending, from the day of Borrowing,
(...) the appointed time of Payment: Interest is never due, but fr^^ the
appointed Day of Payment, forward; and for so long as I fubear my Goods after
the Day in which I did Covenant to recei^^ them.

And I add, that Usury is against Equity, Conscience and R^^son: Interest
stands with them all, says blessed Bolton, p. 58.
Boltn; whereof more hereafter.

So that if once I have lent freely unto a certain Day, (...) shall not demand
Interest for any Damage sustained, or Ga^ hindered, during that Term of Time for
which I have lent (...) another. But if at the Covenanted time I receive not
mi^^ own again, then what harm soever do betide me after the Day, for the
forbearing thereof, Reason will, that it be recompensed by the Borrower. Thus
he also.

Ah, poor Champion! What are you to these famous Men who, in this grand Point,
are so fully for me? And why (...) you blame me for this Damage, as they and I
call Interest, a^ if none but I did call it so?

NUMBER. II.
But he will have me prove it by Scripture.

Whereunto I answer two ways.

1. Retorting, And so let him prove his regulated and moderate Usury by
Scripture. As for me, I hope to prove Damage by it thus.

1. That as the word (...), though it was not verbatim in the Scripture, yet it
was generally received; because, by^ necessary Consequence, it was proved by
Scripture, and so approved as Scriptural by the Catholic Fathers. So, though
these very words be not in the Scripture, that Damage is to be paid for keeping
back a Man's Money, and delay of Payment; yet in general, Damage for Hurt done
is by the holy Scripture allowed and required. Whereupon consequentially, in
comes Damage for Money freely lent, but not paid at the time appointed, to a
Man's hindrance: As thus, Damage is allowed and required by God, if a Man be
hurted or hindered in or by any thing. As for Example,

1. Damage is required if a Man's Beast or Ox be hurted: Whereupon it
follows, that much more if himself be hurted by not paying what is due to him
at a Day, Exodus 21.22.

2. A King must not receive. Damage by his Subject, for Why should damage grow
to the hurt of the King, Ezr. 4.22. whereupon I infer, and why should Damage
accrue to one who is a Citizen of Heaven, and is a King too, Rev. 1.5. and
lends his Money freely, as God would have him, Psalm. 15.5. by the keeping back
of his Money so lent at the day nominated, to his great hurt and hindrance.

3. If a Man hurt another Man in his Eye, Hand, or Tooth, or Foot, Recompense
must be made for it, Exodus 21.24. And if so, why should not Recompense and
Damage also be allowed, required and given for any other hurt?

4. The Borrower, who borrows ought of his Neighbor, is to make good the
hurt which his lending Neighbor receives, Exodus 22.14. Money is not named, but
comes in by a Consequence.

As for my Cousin Spanhemius, whom he quotes, as speaking against the
Schoolmen, because they are for Damage because of Gain ceasing, I need not
dispute it with him, because he is against the Schoolmen, not me; and the
Schoolmen are of Age, and such able Men, as that they can and do speak for
themselves, and that at large, as my Cousin confesses, prolixe; whereas he is
but short. But if he had spoken against me, I am of Age too, and have read as
much as I could concerning Usury, and this matter of Damage: So as that I may
say after Gabriel Powel, I have read all that ever I could come by, Fathers,
Canonists, Councils and Modern Writers; and therefore can speak for my self;
yea, and for the Schoolmen too, viz. That they are not so simple as they are
made by the Exodus 21.24, 25. and 35, 36.
Champion; nor for Effugias of words, and shifts, as his Grotius is pleased to
upbraid them in his second Citation: which I therefore the less regard, because
he is unsound also in other things, and because so many Holy, Learned, Orthodox
Writers are for that Damage which I maintain. As, besides the above cited, I
could quote a World of them: But I desire to return to the Schoolmen, and to
let the World see how serious, and far from Effugias of words and shifts they
be in this Point, I will allege but one of them, instead of more, about
Damage, especially Covenanted for, viz. Gabriel Biel.
Gabriel Biel; which, because I have him, I do often make use of in serious
matters, relating to Usury especially: His words, being weighty, I wish were
written with Letters of Gold; but I will write them with Ink, which I hope will
be as much accepted as if they were written with Gold. If a Man lend any thing,
and take the Borrower's Bond for the Payment of it, with an intent, that at the
Day, the Penalty (of which I spoke even now, when I wrote of Interest) shall
pay for the forbearing of the Money; then certainly he is an Usurer. Now, it is
to be presumed, says the same Learned Biel, that the Lender imposes a Penalty
upon the Borrower, to cloak the act, or to avoid the danger of Usury; whereas
either the Lender wishes rather that the Borrower would pass his Day, and so he
might take the Forfeiture (or Damage,) than that he should pay him at his Day,
and so avoid the Penalty (or Damage:) Or else, when the Lender knows, at the
time of Lending, the Borrower is not like to make Restitution (or Payment) at
his appointed Day. Or Thirdly, If the Lender imposes (and so takes) a greater
Penalty (or Damage) on the Non-payment, than his Damage can possibly be for the
forbearing of his Goods. Which words I do with all willingness here subscribe
unto, for they are good and honest.

NVM. III.
Where note by the way,

1. That Damage is called (...), a Cord, because it binds a Man like a Cord to
make Satisfaction, and that with God's Approbation, to be made and determined
by Judges, Exodus 21.22. He shall pay as the Judges determine. Which, 1. Takes
off all Aspersions cast upon this Doctrine of Damage, to be given, if at the
Day nominated, the Money freely len^ be not paid; as if then a Man might make
his Market, and make the Borrower pay what he pleases, which is false; for as
the Scripture does, so do we put it to the Determination of others to be
Judges, (as also the Civil Law, according to God's Law, does, Tit. 47. l. 7. c.)

Whereunto I will add what blessed Bolton says to the same effect, page 57.
That the Estimation of the Interest must not be referred to the Creditor's own
Arbitrament, but to the Judgment of some other honest and discreet Men.

2. It serves as a Bridle for the Lender, that he may not exceed in his Damage
demanded. So that therefore under the Hebrew Word an Accent is put, which the
Hebricians call Meteg, a Bridle; as the same is to be seen in the Hebrew Text.

Let Panormitan, c. conquest. de Vsur.
Panormitanus be seen also of Damage arising from Gain, both emergent and
ceasing.

NUMBER. IV.
But here my Adversary will say, this makes for me, who am damaged by the
Borrower, if, keeping my Money for half a Year, he pay me nothing; because, if
I had had it, I might have gotten by it. But,

I answer, Not at all it makes for him; because Lending here must needs be that
which we call free, and is commanded, whereas his is Usurious and Interdicted,
Deuteronomy. 23.19.

2. But I have not yet done with the Holy Scripture, which makes just Damage
allowable.

Consequentially in the New Testament also; for, in 2 Cor. 8.13. that great
Apostle, speaking of Alms, says thus; For I mean not that other Men be eased,
and you burdened. Whence-from a great Writer deduceth this Inference, in these
words, The Apostle will not, that even in the Giving of Alms, much less in
Lending and Borrowing we should so deal, as other Men should be eased by the
grieving of our selves. Now, if I lend to pleasure another, and for want of
mine own at the appointed time, I am indamaged in my Credit, o^ hindered of my
lawful Gain.

Whereunto I add that great Downam in Psalm. 15.5. inferring and reasoning thus,
It is against Equity, as the Apostle says in a like Case, that to the Creditor
should be (...), and to the other (...). Recompensing Usury, alias Damage, is
due by the Law of Nature. Bolton, p. 54.
Downam, who infers the same from the same Scripture.

3. Damage is grounded upon Equity and Equality, which the Holy Scripture
requires of us, to be observed by us, 2 Cor. 8.13. But by an Equality, from
whence also Divines maintain by a Consequence the Doctrine of Damage; as you
may see in the Margin, who is cited for it.

4. It is due by the Law of Nature; for this is the Law of Nature, and Natural
Equity, Melanchton de Definit.
Nemo locupleretur cum alterius injuria, Let not Man enrich himself by hindering
of another, says that great Divine, Melanchton. And again he tells us, that
Damage, alias Interest, is a Debt due by the Law of Nature, etc. And again,
having asserted Damage arising from a Contingent Loss, and from Gain ceasing,
he says, that The Reason is drawn from Natural Justice.

And as for the Law of Nature, that is made Scriptural and Divine, by that
great Apostle, in two places. 1. Romans 2.15. where it is called, The Law written
in the Heart; that is, in the Wherein the Law of Nature rules says a Famous
Writer.
Conscience, The Law of Nature is a Dictamen, or a Dictate of Conscience, and
so a Direction by God himself, put into Men's Minds and Hearts, admonishing
them what they must do or omit. Bullinger. Decat. 2. Sermon. 1. So Musculus.
inscribed by God himself. And 1 Cor. 11.14. where he makes Nature a Doctress,
teaching us, that It is a shame for a Man to wear long Hair. Which is also
applicable to Usury, that even Nature teaches us, that it is a shame for a Man
to lend upon Usury, and to be an Usurer, which even Usurers themselves ate John
Bromyard, in Summa praed. Tit. Usura.
ashamed of, to be so called; as one, to shame them, writes of them, saying,
that Usurers blush, and are ashamed to answer for their Trade, that they are of
such a Trade.

5. We are to think upon whatsoever is just, Phil. 4.8. that is, so as to do
it; but to pay and to give Damage is just, because it is Justitia est suum
cuique tribuere, neminem laedere; Justinian. in suis Institut.
just to give every Man is due, Romans 13.7. and so consequently, Damage to whom
it is justly due. Where give me leave to subjoyn the words of a renowned
Writer, saying, that Panormit. de Usaris.
Damage (called Interest also) is justly due. And adding, Not only when a Man
has lent, and for want of receiving again of his own in appointed time, he
suffers Damage; but also, when, wanting his own to employ for his best
advantage, his Gain and Increase is hindered. As for Example, I lend freely,
mark FREELY, looking to receive mine own again at a certain appointed day. The
day came, I received it not; for want of it, I forfeited, at that day, a Bond
to another Man; and the Forfeiture is asked of me in part, or to the utmost: I
doubt not but Reason and Conscience will that I may demand such Recompense of
him to whom I lent freely, as I am compelled, for want of mine own, to make to
another, to whom my Bond and Obligation by that means is forfeited. Thus he.
And is not such Damage just? Is it not to give to all their dues, according to
the fore-quoted Scripture? Romans 13.7.

6. Damage here maintained is according to the Law of Nations (as Usury is
against the Law of Nations) which Quam a Natura processisse sacile intelligere
licet, Calepinus, p. 63^.
proceeds from the Law of Nature, and is like that written in Men's Hearts
and Minds also; and, by name, maintains a Rendering of Pledges and things
lent, and is against the keeping of such things back, because it thereby
becomes Damage. Whereupon it follows, that it is a Law founded in Scripture,
as the Law of Nature, Romans 2.15.16. it being the issue of it, as even now I
showed.

7. Damage is also grounded in the Hoc autem jus Scripto constat ut sunt leges
and plebisscita, Idem ibid.
Civil Law, which speaks according to the Scripture, and differs from the Law
of Nations, in that it is written Which is the same with the Law of Nature,
being deduced from it; and unless it be so derived from it, is no Law, but only
an Idol, or false pretense of Law, says a renowned Author,
as the Scripture is written, and says the same that the holy Scripture says
about Damage.

For Justinian the Emperor, Tit. 47.
Justinian the Emperor, who has written those famous Law Books, called his
Institutions, having distinguished certain Cases from uncertain, did determine
that the one should not exceed double, and the other should be determined by
Judges: which is also so ordered by Scripture, as I quoted i^ out of Exodus
21.22. All which shows how Scriptural Damage is.

8. It is according to sound Usury is against Reason, but Interest is not;
Bolton.
Reason, as Usury is again^ Reason; which the Scripture also approves and
allows, Act. 17.2. Chap. 18.14. Chap. 24.25. Romans 12.1. 1 Pet. 3.1^. Esa.
1.18. chap. 41.21. and according to which I may receive Damage, as it shall be
allowed me by Impartial, Godly and Just Judges, because there is reason for it,
and Scripture too, strengthening reason, that what one would have another d^ to
him, he should do to another, and which the aforesaid Law of Nature also
teaches: and on the contrary, therein no reason for it, that I having lent a
Man my Money freely* I should be harmed by him for my kindness shown him; (...)
forbearing to pay me, for my need and Indemnity, at the time appointed.

NUMBER. V.
Here let me subjoyn the Verdicts of other Divines also.

And 1. That of Gabriel Biel, in 4. Did.
G. Biel again; who says, If I receiv^ not my Money, freely lent, at a certain
day appointed, and forfeited at that day a Bond; Reason and Conscience will,
that I my demand Recompense.

2. The same words almost I find in the Upon Psalm. 15.5.
Author of T^^ Conviction of Usury, and desire may be remembered upon a ne^
Account; If, at the covenanted time, I receive not mine (...) again, then what
harm soever do betide me after that day, f^^ the forbearing thereof, Reason
wills, that it be recompensed (...) the Borrower; Meaning Reason warranted by
Scripture also: Which requires our Reasons, and strong Reasons too; as (...)
cited for it even now, Esa. 41.21.

But Reason persuades me now to make an end of this master of Damage, because I
have been somewhat long, if no^ too long about it, and to go forward; because
there remai^ for me another sharp Encounter, which I must enter into about the
Definition of Usury, which my Antagonist so much impugneth. Only these three
things I will first add.

1. That my very Adversary's own Author, Mr. Mayer, by him cited, and to be
read in this Book, 2. p. Number. 80. herein is for me: for he says thus, that If
the Borrower do not repay, so as that the Lender cannot have it again in due
time for his Maintenance, the Borrower Trading with it from Year to Year; it is
not against this Precept to require Recompense. He does not say Usury, which is
forbidden; but Recompense, which we stand for, and hold with him in.

2. That the very first two great and learned Divines which God raised for a
Reformation, Luther and Melanchton, aver the same, touching Damage, which my
Friends and I do here aver. Their words are these,

1. Luther's, To recompense a Damage is not to give or take more than the
Principal; but it is a hurt which comes to the Lender, contrary to his Will,
whereby he is compelled to ask a Recompense.

2. Me^ancht. in Philos. Morali.
Melanchton's, When a Debtor has given a Cause of Loss, if he make a recompense
for the hindrance which his Creditor is come to by his means; such Gain is not
Usury, nor unlawful. But that Gain is Usury, and unlawful, which is gotten only
for the Loan of Lending, when no danger or hindrance is come by the lending.

Idem ibid.
And again says that Phoenix of Germany, Melanchton, May any thing above the
Principal be demanded in consideration of the hindrance had by the lending of
the same? I answer, that is called Interest; which is either because he is
damaged, or because some Gain indeed is lost by the lending, etc.

I say, that that deep learned Scholastic, the renowned, and most highly
esteemed Aquinas, I mean, has written so fully, so groundedly, and so
satisfactorily of this thing called Damage, as that when his much and copious
Reasoning about it shall be balanced with that little of Whose All of Usury is
but sixteen Leaves, which some so extol abo^e Volumes.
Spanhemius and Grotius, by the Champion cited, and brought against Damage, it
will be but as a Candle set in the Light of the Sun.

NUMBER. VI.
But here I am desired to answer three Questions.

The First is, whether a Man may lawfully look for something again, when he
lends his Money upon this supposition of his delay?

Whereunto I answer, That the aforesaid Gabriel Biel, in the forecited
Decision, has answered it by that which he has said above of this thing,
whereto I subscribe.

The Second is, whether a Jew might receive this Damage of his Brother, if he
kept his Money, lent him, beyond his time, suppose a quarter or half a Year
longer?

I answer, Doubtless he might if he were much hindered and damaged by it,
because God did most eminently provide for the Jews Indemnity by a Law formerly
cited, and made for them Primarily, and for us Secondarily.

The Third Question is, Whether a Lender, that puts out an hundred Pounds for a
Year to his own Damage, may not as justly receive Satisfaction for that Damage,
as well as the next Year, suppose the time be expired, and Payment delayed, etc.

For Answer hereunto I have this to say.

1. That blessed Bolton, page 56.
Bolton has answered this fully page 58. 59. 60. See his Book.

2. That a Lender in some Case must be contented to lose his very Principal,
and look for no Satisfaction at all, as it has been formerly shown, to be
partly the meaning of that place, Luke 6.35.

3. That to Godly wise Men, who do not put their Money upon Usury, it is no
Riddle at all (as he says it is to him) to receive Money upon the Account of
Gain ceasing, or less arising; and yet to damn a Man that receives any thing
back for one, two, three or four hundred Pounds lent for several Years: because
the one is against the Law of God, viz. to receive Usury, Deuteronomy. 23.19. which he
calls Satisfaction, as Usurers use to nominate it, being ashamed to call it
Usury; and because God condemns it, Ezekiel. 18.12, 15. But as for the other, it
would be against the Law of Nature, which also is God's, written in our Hearts.
Romans 2.16. not to recompense a Man's Loss which he susteins by the Borrower,
after he has lent it for a certain time freely: Which because the Usurer will
not do, I shall bring one Learned and Godly Man or other to second me in this;
and blessed Bolton in his Discourse concerning Usury, p. 56, 57, 58.
Bolton shall be the Man; who says Interest or Damage may grow due, say
Divines, two ways.

1. By Loss arising.

2. By Gain ceasing, etc.

In which two Cases I may lawfully provide for my Indemnity, by exacting an
equal Recompense at thine hands, and thou art bound in Conscience to make good
this Use or Hindrance, which by thy default I sustein. And this, he says, is
no Usury, for there is a great difference between them. Thus this holy Man
seconds me.

He ends with Jeering, being full of his Jeers.

It is some comfort yet, he says, that Interest is lawful with this German
Divine. But what Comfort? A poor and cold One I am confident of; because this
German Divine, and so many English ones too, do combine together and symphonize
so as they do in this matter of Interest; making it lawful Damage, and damning
Usury and Usurers to the Pit of Hell, as it has been formerly ostended and
shown.

NUMBER. VII.
But Reason persuadeth me to make a full end of that great matter of Interest
and Damage, because I have been so long about it, if not too long: And to
hasten forward, because there remains for me another sharp Encounter, which I
must enter into about the Definition of Usury, which is Foundation-matter. So
that I must, before I enter, implore Heaven's Aid, looking up to the great God
of Heaven for his Support in this great Combat.

My fierce Adversary in this, begins his Combat thus.

His Definition of Usury runs thus; Usury is a certain and absolute Gain,
compacted for, or expected, and taken for the Loan of things, which may be
consumed in the use thereof; or whatsoeve^ is, more than the Principal
compacted for, or taken for the Loan of things, which may be consumed in the
use thereof.

From this last Definition, I shall say, Gain upon Adventure, which he holds
Lawful, is Usury, it being more than the Principal. Thus he goes to work, even
very confusedly, mingling the first with the last Definition: So that I shall
be forced to answer him accordingly. And to cut short, I shall,

1. Insist upon adventuring most, which he mentions first, and most; saying,
Whatsoever Gain so received or expected, is not absolute and certain, but
uncertain and conditional. Besides, And. to distinguish ours, I say, from
common Usury, as also learned Danaeus therein agrees with me, saying, that
This Ship Loan is just^y distinguished from common Usury, p. 208.
this Limitation of Absolute and Certain is not Scriptural, but added (it is
like) to salve adventuring from Usury, for all the other parts of the
Definition agree thereunto; So does Ambrose.

Whereunto I reply,

1. That I am for the whole first Definition, because the other is added for
Brevities sake, as the like is done by others; and so I shall,

1. Maintain absolute and certain Gain: which he denies.

2. Adventuring.

As also Usher, that great and learned Archbishop of Armagh, does; calling
Usury a certain Gain.
1. Absolute and certain Gain: which, to make it Scriptural, and to answer his
Negative, I bring that notable place, Pagnin^ and Tremel. translate it.
Exodus 22.25. Thou shall not lay upon him Usury, the Hebrew is, and signifies
thus much, Thou shall not impose; in Greek, (...). And Vatabi. in Ex^d. 22.28.
Vatabl. observes that it is verbatim from the Hebrew, Thou shall not impose.
Now Impositions are absolute and certain. As for example, Impositions imposed
by Law are absolute and certain. As when a Tax or Imposition is granted by the
King and Parliament, it is absolute and certain, and must be paid: and so must
Usury imposed be paid, and cannot be called uncertain, as the Champion is
pleased to say.

But he thinks to make good his Saying by Gain expected, or because it is not
imposed or compacted for.

Whereunto I answer, that though it be not imposed or expressly compacted for,
yet tacitly, and so as that it is sure and certain enough. Where, to make this
evident, let it be noted,

1. That by the Lawyers a Compact is called a Covenant, and made Lege 1. F. de
pactis.
both one and the same thing.

2. That there is a twofold Compacting.

1. Expressed.

2. Tacit.

1. Expressed, Which is also twofold.

1. Nudum, or Naked.

2. Vestitum, or Clothed.

1. Naked, or Bare, by a sole promise. As thus, I will lend you forty Pounds,
but you shall pay me so much for the Loan of it. I will, says the Borrower,
and thank you too. So they compact by a bare promise.

2. 1 Pet, 3.21.
Clothed, And that is done three ways.

1. By Deeds, as by a Pledge or Pawn.

2. By Words, as in Stipulations and Fidejussions.

3. By Writings, as Bill or Bond.

All which Compactings make Usury certain enough, as the World well knows; that
is to say, humanitus. And hereof more hereafter.

2. But besides this expressed, ^ there is a Tacit Compacting. As when an
Agreement or Consent is by necessary or probable Consequence intended, although
it be not expressed unto others. As for Example, Summa Angelica. Tit. Matrimon.
one uses this Instance; The Parents of two Children do, in their presence and
hearing, conclude a Marriage to be contracted and solemnized between their
Children: the Children standing by, hear the Conference and Conclusion of their
Parents; but neither demand any thing, nor answer any thing, nor object any
thing, nor reply any thing, nor affirm any thing, nor deny any thing that is
spoken. In this case is intended the Consent of the Children to the Conclusion
of the Parents; And why? Reason presupposes, that if either Party had been
discontented with the Match, they would by one means or other have signified
their dislike. Which I apply thus; So I come to a Man to borrow an hundred
Pounds: You shall Quod est contractus, quo res ita creditori obligatur, ut is
in credito eo nomine securior sit. Doctor Fregius, p. 333.
Unde fidej^ssor is added to a Stipulation; in novatione res, as Civilians term
it. Doctor Fregius Instit. p. 335.
have it (says he] as others use to have it, though I do not mention it. Here
the Borrower, and others, know that he looks for so much Usury; that is, Six
in the Hundred: and so takes the Money, and goes away with it, saying nothing
to it. Which, what else is it but a silent Compact? So that we have a common
Proverb for such Cases, Silence is Consent. And Plutarch. l. de Immod. Verecund.
Plutarch has a Saying to the same effect, Silence is an Answer to a wise Man.
And such a Compact, though not expressed, yet makes the Usurer's Gain usually
certain too. You will say, How? I answer thus; The Usurer knows by
experience, that Men which stand upon their Credit will not be worse than their
silent consent, and that they use to pay their Usurer punctually; because else
they know they shall have no more Money of the Usurer, what need soever they
have, if they falter: and they know also the Usurer's mind and practice, that
he uses so to lend, because he will not be reputed to be an Usurer, who
lends upon Usury, and puts down the Sum with the Principal: but only
expects it, and takes it when it is brought to him. And so accordingly brings
his Six in the Hundred as punctually and unfailingly as others which compact
expressly to pay so much Usury as is imposed by the Usurer.

NUMBER. VIII.
2. As for Adventuring, or Foenus nauticum, Nautical Fenory, to make way for
his cavelling about that, he says, This Limitation of Absolute and certain is
added (it is like) to salve Adventuring from Usury.

Whereunto I reply, 1. I grant that it is added to salve it from Usury properly
so called, not from Usury generally so called, and in a large senfe accepted;
as Gabriel Biel speaks, Gabriel Biel in 4. Sent. did. 15. q. 11. a. 1.
Bulling. Decaa. 3. Sermon. 1.
Usury is taken sometimes very largely, for any thing which is taken in
lending, above the Principal. Wherewith Bullinger [ c] also sympothizeth, as I
shall show when I come to my Antagonist's Authors, and to that Saying of some,
that All Usury is not unlawful. Upon which account it is called Foenus
nauticum, Ship Usury, though it be not Usury properly so called, because all
the parts of my larger Definition, which I have set down, and am now proving,
do not agree thereto; and by name, Absolute and Certain Gain, even now
asserted. So that his catching at St. Ambrose, and other Men's shorter
definitions (which will admit an Explanation and Amplification) will not stand
him in any stead, because I stand not chiefly, or only upon them, though I name
them as generally most received.

2. I answer, That whereas he replieth to my Saying, But the Gain thereof (viz.
of Adventuring) depends upon the Ship's safe coming and going. etc. And so does
the Gain of Loan, and the Principal too, depend upon many Men's single Honesty.
Whereunto my Answer is, that Usury-gain depends not upon Uncertainties and
Casualties which Navigation is subject unto, by reason of Tempests, Ice and
Pirates: whereas most Usurers will be sure to secure themselves by sufficient
Sureties to be bound with the Borrower, and by Pledges, Pawns, Mortgages, and
Lands bound, and Judgments to make sure both Principal and Use. So that by a
great Council. Later. Sect. 10.
Council Usury is interpreted and set out thus: This is the proper
Interpretation of Usury, when men labor to get Gain and Increase from the Use
of a thing which grows or increases not; and that with no Labor or Cost, no
Danger or Adventuring. Which has caused a great The Author of Usuries
Arraignment.
Divine to define Usury thus; Usury is, when a Man, not adventuring the Goods
which he lends, covenants to receive again more than he lends; even upon this
Consideration, because he lent them.

Which Definition is held to be the best.

NUMBER. IX.
But here the Usurer will insist upon his uncertain Gain thus. You tell of
Sureties, Bills, Bonds and Pawns: but what if the Borrower himself and his
Sureties break, or he and they for some Crime may have their Goods confiscated:
again, he or they may flee the Country, or keep the House; Evidence may be
stolen, or lost by Fire, or Wars, or otherwise caught out of my hands, as some
have been; and Lands may be mortgaged or engaged to others before me, I not
knowing it, and so I may lose all, as some lately, both Ministers and others,
have lost Hundreds by other Men's Breaking: and therefore how can you say that
the Usurer adventureth not, but is certain of his Gain.

Whereunto I answer,

1. That so every body adventureth all that he has; for he may lose all, as
Job; either by Fire, by Thieves, by Enemies in a time of War, as I did in the
German Wars: which notwithstanding, it cannot be said that he is such an
Adventurer as the Ship Adventurer is, who takes for it sufficient Pawns, or
who keeps it by himself, under Lock and Key in a Tower, or strong House,
Moated, and having a Drawbridge to it, as some have.

To make this more plain, I will illustrate it by this Example.

We have in England two sorts of Merchants, Merchant-Adventurers, and Merchant
Retailers. The Retailers cannot but hazard much, because he must trust often;
sometimes for round Sums, sometimes for a great while, sometimes upon the
Borrower's bare Word, or Hand to his Book: which Assurance no Usurer will take:
and yet no Man calls him a Merchant-Adventurer, neither is he assumed into
their Hall and Company. How much less then can an Usurer be called an
Adventurer of his Goods, who will neither trust to a Man's bare Word, nor for
any long time; but only from half Year to half Year, and then not without very
sufficient and Landed Men, bound with the Borrower, and such like Securements.

2. I answer to the Usurers pretended Adventuring thus.

There is a twofold Adventuring.

1. Quoad Eventum, In respect of the Event.

2. Quoad Media, In respect of the Means.

1. In respect of the Issue: So the Usurer adventureth, and no thanks to him
for it: for he can do no otherwise, because none can see the end of things when
he begins them, because the All-seeing God, by his overruling Providence, will
work as he pleases, sometimes beyond Means, sometimes without Means, sometimes
contrary to Means; so that none can tell certainly what will be the End and
Issue of things, and so the Usurer also cannot be altogether sure.

2. In respect of Humane Means: So the Usurer makes his Usury as sure and
certain as it can be made, and is no Adventurer, nor can be, in Humane Reason.
I will instance for the Dilucidation of this, in that which is written, Act.
12.1, 3, 5. where Herod is said to have apprehended Peter, and cast into
Prison, and delivered to four Quaternions of Soldiers to be kept, and bound
with two Iron Chains; and lastly, that he caused a Watch to be kept before the
Prison Door, and about Peter's Lodging, that he should not escape: which
notwithstanding, by the extraordinary Providence of God, he escaped. In which
case, who will say, that Herod, having used all such means for Peter's safe
keeping, did adventure Peter's escape. Even so, when the Usurer has bound the
Borrower with Bonds and Pawns, as it were with Fetters (as Plutarch de non
foeneraudo.
Plutarch speaks;) and when he has tied him as fast, and made him as sure as
his own Head can devise, or Laws will permit; it may be, that one way or other,
not forethought or foreseen by him, God, by his Providence, may defeat him,
as some have been defeated by the unexpected Breaking of some great Men,
thought to be as sufficient as any, and being accounted very honest Men too.
But can or will any wise Man say, that the Usurer adventureth as Adventurers
do, or means to adventure the Principal? No, no, For, because he will not
adventure, he will not lend but to the Pleading for such lending to the Rich so
much as he does for that very cause.
Rich, and such as can give him sufficient Security; and not to the Poor, who
cannot. Nemo foenerator pauperi, None will lend to Usury to a poor Man, says
the forementioned Plutarch, ibid.
Plutarch. Nay, therefore the Usurer will not lend two Years together to a rich
Man, but with new Sureties, for fear that he or they should be undone in few
Years by Usury; and so, not being able to pay, he should lose his advantage.

I close up therefore this matter with great Luther de Taxand. Usura, Tom. 7.
Luther's words. And yet will not the Usurer take upon him any Adventure or
Hazard, either in his Body or Goods: And with pious Bolton's, Usurers love not
to be Adventurers.

NUMBER. X.
The Champion adds to his Reply, That there is a proportionable Gain (in
Ship-Loan) that answers the Hazard, seeing that he that adventureth takes
three times the Gain, or more, it may be, than he that lends upon Use.

Whereunto I answer, And yet I have heard discreet Men say in discoursing with
me about this thing, that it is observed that Men, and Usurers especially will
rather lend for Six in the Hundred, than adventure their Money at Sea, because
of hazard. And I do observe it my self, that our great Men, which are great
Usurers, do generally and usually lend for Six in the Hundred upon the Land,
rather than for Twenty upon Ships for the same cause; not fearing that the
Debtor will break (which the Champion adds) because Usurers have so many
Strings to their Bow besides, if he should break.

But some will say, Who, besides you, is for this Ship-Loan?

I answer, both Civilians, and many pious, learned and able Divines.

1. Civilians, By whom it is called Foenus nauticum, Nautical Fenory, and
defined thus: De Naut. Fen. 22. D. 2. c. 33. vult. Jurisp. l. c. 34.
A Creditor's Gain which he gets by his Money lent to one which navigateth, and
goes over Sea, taking the hazard upon himself: where note,

1. That Justinian has stinted this kind of Usury at Twelve in the Hundred,
that none may be oppressed by its Excess.

2. That that great and Godly Lawyer Hottoman. l. de Usuris.
Hottomannus does not also approve of it; but also refels and confuteth those
which held Decr. Greg. l. 5. tit. de Usuris.
that the Canon Law is against it: showing, that either the Text in that Law is
corrupted, the word (Not) being omitted; because Gregory, who is the Author
quoted, as being against it, does expressly exempt Ship-loan from Usury, by him
condemned, together with two Cases more: or else, that their Law must needs be
very unreasonable, seeing where is Hazard, there may be Gain required, as the
due price thereof.

NUMBER. XI.
2. I subjoyn Divines. And,

1. Renowned and most learned Danaeus de Usuris.
Danaeus; whose words are, It is a Question put forth by some concerning
Nautical Fenory, whether it may be lawful? And my Answer is, That this kind of
Usury is justly distinguished by the Doctors of the Civil Law, because in it
the hazard of the Money and Principal is by the Creditor taken upon himself.

2. Pious and erudite Bullinger.
Bullinger, whom Danaeus nominates, as an A prover of it; quoting his first
Book written of that Subject.

3. Aretius; who says, The Nautick Fenory was granted to Merchants and Sea
Negotiators; and that either for their Navigation or for their Return too.

4. That great and famous Bishop Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15.5.
Downam writes thus, Usury is distinguished from three other things, to which
the name of Usury especially in the Latin Tongue is assigned, but are not this
gainful Usury whereof we speak. The first of these is Adventurers Usury,
improperly so called; which in Latin is called Nanticum Foenus, and is Gain, or
Allowance made for Money, which is transported beyond the Seas at the peril and
hazard of the Creditor, contrary to the Contract either of gainful Usury or
free Loan, and seems to draw near to Partnership. The manner whereof is thus,
I deliver to a Merchant, who is to travel beyond Seas, a sum of Money for him
to use in Negotiation, as he thinks best for his advantage; conditioning with
him, that if his Ship miscarry, I will lose, not only my hope of Gain, but also
the Principal it self: But if his Ship shall come safe to Land, by the Arrival
whereof he is sure of good Gain, I look for an Allowance proportionable to that
Hazard which I sustained. And this Hazard Men were wont to undertake, either
for the whole Voyage, covenanting for a certain Gain if the Ship arrived safe
at the same Point from whence it first set forth. Which kind the Grecians call
(...). Or else, for the one part of the Voyage, as from one Port to another, as
from London to Venice; which they called (...), etc.

And a little after he says farther; And therefore Adventurers Money may be
allowed, not only in trajectatia pecunia, in Money sent over Sea at the
Creditor's Peril; but also in other cases, wherein the Creditor susteineth the
like hazard.

Provided always, that there be an Adventure, or Hazard, in truth, and not in
pretense only. Thus this great Prelate.

Aretius de Usuris: with whom Rudaeus and Demosthenes, do symphonize and agree.
NUMBER. XII.
But is not the Scripture against this Adventuring? some will say.

I answer, No; because no such Prohibition: but it is against that Usury only,
which is not only more than the Principal, but bites too, Usura generaliter
Serpentis instar mordet, Arias Mont. Malvend. Besa.
as all common Usury does; either the Borrower, or Commonwealth, or Poor, as
has been formerly at large showed; and that wherein is no adventuring of the
Principal, as Divines take that to be the sense of that place, Luke 6.35. at
least in part, that a Man in some cases must not expect the Principal it self.
So that the best definition of Usury, which is going, takes in Hazard and
Adventuring, which the Usurer will not be at; as in the said definition by me
set down above it is to be seen.

I add, that the Scripture is so far from being against it, as that it commends
rather the virtuous Woman for being like a Merchant's Ship, bringing her Food
from afar, which makes her an Adventurer, adventuring in Ships at Sea, because
a Merchant's Ship is expressly named, and she is said to bring her Food which
she adventureth for from afar, viz. far from her home. I add, that her
adventuring must needs be by others too, because Women married to Husbands (as
she was) do not use to go in Ships (though she be compared to a Ship) but
adventure by others in their Ships, as it is well known how usual a thing it
is. So that we need not scruple this Adventuring upon this Account, and also
because it is a kind of Society, His words are, Which (Nautical Fenory) seems
to draw near to Society, Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15.5.
as learned Downam, in his fore-quoted place, declares it, provided,

1. That we do not Which to prevent, the Emperor Justinian, as I said, stinted
it.
exceed in the Gain we agree for.

2. That we do consider the Employer of our Money, if he be a Loser, and
cannot, when the Ship returns, pay so much as we expected. This I mention,
because I will not make my self guilty of other Men's Sins, nor justify any
Iniquity in Traffic, and in Adventuring especially, because I know that much
Oppression is committed by it, if these Cautions be not observed.

NUMBER. XIII.
But I must answer a second Question more fully.

And why may I not take Six in the Hundred, when the Adventurer takes Twenty,
or more?

I answer, No.

1. Because he may lose Principal and all, which is very usual, the Seas being
dangerous: whereas Usurers very seldom lose both.

2. Because Usury is expressly forbidden by the Word of God, and condemned,
Deuteronomy. 23.19. Ezekiel. 18.12, 13. and Adventuring is not, as but now it was shown.

NUMBER. XIV.
A third Question remains yet to be resolved.

And why may not I take Six in the Hundred, when the Merchant or Shopkeeper
gets I know not how much by my Money, which he borrows for so small a matter as
Six in the Hundred is?

I answer,

1. Because he is at a great cost, if he be an Owner of Ships, to build,
repair, and set forth his Ships.

2. His pains are great: but thou take no pains at all, Usury being a gainful
idleness, as Bolton in his Discourse of Usury.
one calls it, whereby men do eat of the sweat of other men's brows. For whether
they eat or drink, sleep or wake, work or play, be sick or whole, their gain
comes in by Usury alike; when the borrower must wake and work, and has scarce
time to eat his Meat many times when he is an hungered, and to drink with a
Friend when he is a-thirst.

3. His hazard is great; because if he be a Seafaring man, he may lose his
Ship, Goods, life and all by Tempel^s, Ice, Pirates, and Enemies: And if his
Dealings be upon the I and, he may be undone by bad Debts and Pay-masters, whom
he must trust: for his Debtors may break and run away; and then how shall he
recover his Money to pay thee thy Usury, or the Money which he has borrowed of
thee, and for which being arrested, he may be carried to Prison by Bailiffs,
not being able to pay thee? Whereas thou have Securities and Sureties and
Leases bound to thee for thy Usury-money, and therefore art in no such danger,
and in no such hazard as he is, unless God by an unexpected Providence cross
thee, which but seldom happens. I have read in S. Ambrose, that some poor
borrowers Corpse have been arrested for Debt by Usurers, and their Children
carried into Captivity: but never did I read (to my best remembrance) that
Usurers have been so used, because they use to make themselves as sure of their
Principal and Use as the wit of man can possibly do it.

NUMBER. XV.
Thus much concerning hazard and adventuring by Ships, etc. in the next place I
must come to Compacting: For the Champion proceeds, thus he goes on, it is
Gain compacted for; so much thou shall pay me.

Reply. Let it be remembered that the Law stints and limits the sum, and
ordinarily to take what the Law allows, I see no injustice, etc.

For answer whereunto I say, That I do utterly deny his saying, that the Law
allows to take what Usurers take; and lest it should be said I deny this out
of mine own head and presumption, let that be remembered which the Law it self
says, in the Statute of Jacobus 21. entitled an Act against Usury, Provided,
That no words in this Law contained shall be construed or expounded to allow
the practice of Usury, etc. Which Answer is given by Downam in Psalm. 15.5.
Downam also, who as a Bishop was one who was at the making of Laws in
Parliament, and therefore understood the Law better doubtless than this Novice:
His words are, by the Law it self it evidently appears, that it does not allow
Usury as good, but permit as evil.

NUMBER. XVI.
As for his telling again of Interest, and bringing in again of Spanhemius, and
repeating of his words ad nauseam usque I wonder why he will do so: But seeing
he does, I refer him to that which even now in this Tract I have so largely
handled, to answer him in that which he has formerly objected against it. He
adds (says he farther) or expects or intended, and then tells me (I think a
good definition should not be disjunctive) whereunto I answer. This shows
what a poor Logician he is, and how little his skill is in his judging of a
good Definition, bringing against him such like Definitions, which have been
made by wiser heads then his is. And

1. That of Dr. Sanders of Usury.
Dr. Sanders, Usury is all manner of gains, which is either bargained or hoped
for, (just as I say in my Definition) by the force of the Contract of giving to
Loan, whether Money be lent, or Oil, Corn, Wine or any like thing that is
spent, with the first Natural or proper use thereof; even as I say likewise:
where note, that no less than three Ors are in this great Doctors Definition;
so that if this great Doctor were now alive, I would desire this Champion to go
to Lovanium where he lived beyond the Seas, to learn of him to make Definitions.

2. So the Wittemb. in These. 2.
Wittemborgs in their Definition, have their two Vels, or ORS.

3. And Gabriel Powel, that great OXFORD Scholar, has his OR in his Definition
also, as thus. All gain that contrary to the word of God is expected or exacted
(just as I say) above the Principal for the very auty of lending, is unlawful
and Damnable; and then Usury is such: and for this he was never taxed or
confuted by any of that Famous University that ever I heard of. So that if that
great Scholar were living at Oxford now, I should advise my Adversary to go to
Oxford and to tarry there a little longer then he did, when he was there, to
learn of him how to frame Definitions, so as that they may pass for current and
not be censured as he censureth mine.

NUMBER. XVII.
But he progresseth farther, saying, This part of the Definition is pleaded
from our Saviors Injunction, Luke 6 35. And lend, hoping, or looking, for
nothing again. This is the place of Scripture he builds with so much confidence
upon, and so often quoteth to prove their state damnable that expect the least
gain from Money lent; in the sense whereof, if he mistake, then down totters
his Definition, and all the uncharitable Censures he builds thereon, etc.

To all which sayings of his my Answer will be several.

1. That not I only, but far greater Writers than my self, or he, do build upon
this place to prove their state damnable, that expect the least gain from Money
lent; at present I Will only name one of them again, viz. that great Oxford
Scholar G. Powel, who having said (as I quoted him even now) that all that gain
(be it much or little, the word all takes it in all) which, contrary to the
Word of God, is expected or exacted above the Principal, for the very Duty of
Lending, is unlawful and damnable, (Note, Damnable) and that Usury is such
Gain, See his Proofs, page 28.
proves it from Luke 6.35. besides others, as I do: And therefore why am I only
so harshly censured for uncharitableness?

2. It Is well for him that he puts in an (if), in the sense whereof, if he be
mistaken, down totters his definition; which I hope he will never see while his
Head is hot, as it is with Anger.

3. I add, That if I were, yet will not my Definition totter down, because it is
not only built on that place, but others also: As for example, that in Prove.
16.28. The Lord pondereth the Spirits; which a Alex. de Ales. G. Biel in 4
Sentent. Distinct. 15.
deep learned Author brings as a reason to prove; that the very expectation of
Gain, above the Principal, is unlawful, and Usury. For by Spirits, Wills, are
meant Purposes and Intentions: And not amiss is that place so explained,
because Solomon's meaning there is to show, says Doctor Sand. of Usury.
another famous Writer, that the Lord sees into the very depth of our ways,
and bottoms of our hearts; so that he not only beholds our works and words,
but discerns also, Lavater Com. in Prove. 16.
as Lavater tells us, the impulses, motions, and purposes by which we are
acted. Al. de Alex.
Eadem est voluntas lucri sperantis, and non pasciscentis (forte timore
Ecclesiae) and pactum facientis; that is, He that lends hoping for Gain,
though he enter no Covenant for it (for fear happily of the Churches Censure) has
the same will which he has which covenants for Gain when he lends: add Note
this, what a famous place it is, so clearly concurring with Christ's.
Nehem. 5.12. We will require nothing; just as Christ, Luke 6.35. Looking for
nothing again.

2. Because it is grounded on strength of Reason: For what says blessed Aug.
de m^r. Manich. l. 2. c. 13. to. 1.
Austin? There is so much power and virtue in the intention and purpose
wherewith a man goes about to do a thing, that if it be good, the action is
good; if it be evil, the action is evil also. So he tells the Manichees.

And this is confessed by all, that if a man have a lust and intent to commit
the sin of Uncleanness with a Woman, it is Adultery, because Christ says it,
Mat. 5.28. And so likewise Because the same words in Luke 6.35. which though
they be diversely read and expounded, yet in every sense they command the duty
of Free lending, which excludes Expectation.
it is confessed, that he which intends theft, is a thief, though he does not
steal, being hindered: Answerably whereunto it follows, by strength of Reason,
that intention makes a man a Usurer.

So that I may say and answer here, as one on Psalm. 15.5. When some said he had
nothing but that place against Usury, answered, That if it were so, that were
enough; so if I had no other place but this, Luke 6.35. that were enough: So B.
Downam in Psalm. 15.5. tells us.
and again, if there were no such place at all, yet there is Reason enough to
make good what I have said of Expectation.

4. I answer, As for my Austin and Chemnitius, which also make the very
expectation of Gain Usury.
two Authors, because he says he will bring several that put another
Interpretation, and more probable (mark, probable only, he cannot say
demonstrative) upon the Text, I cannot have the patience to stay for his
severals, but I will forthwith name several that shall second these two great
men, than which I know he cannot bring more able and famous men. And.

First, I shall name great Gratian, whose words are these; Not only every Gain,
but also the very hope of Gain, makes a man a Usurer: whereunto he adds, As
for a Patron to hope for Gain of the Clerk which he presents, makes him a
Simoniack.

Secondly, (f) Joh. Molanus Comp. Theol. Pract. tract. 2. c. 28. Consil. 6. 2
sect. 8.
John Molanus calls this Expectation mental Usury.

Thirdly, Barth. Fumus Aur. Armil. tit. Usura, sect. 37.
Bartholomaeus Fumus, who says, Mental Usury is committed without a Compact,
when a man lends with a hope to receive somewhat that is more worth above the
Principal.

Fourthly, Mutuo damus iis a quibus nos nihil accepturos esse speramus. Justin
Martyr.
Justin Martyr tells us, That the first Christians were so far from this
expectation, as that they would lend to them of whom they hoped not to receive
any thing.

Fifthly, I say, That all the Schoolmen and Canonists, as Raynerus, Gamfredus,
Hostiensis, Alexander de Ales, Gabrid Biel, and the rest, do agree in this
thing called Expectation. Let the Champion bring more, and more eminent ones,
if he can, hereafter.

Answ. 5. In the mean time I shall answer to his two Questions next: And,

1. To this, Whether this Expectation was Usury before Christ spoke those
words, Luke 6.35? That doubtless it was, that being an Explanation and
Amplification of the old Laws made against Usury, as the Saying of Christ
against mental Adultery, Math. 5.28. so this against mental Usury.

2. Expectation of Gain is included in For Lenders were required there to take
nothing, as these words do show it, [As thou say, so will we do:] We will
require nothing of them. Whereupon it follows, That they might expect nothing
neither; as those which must require no Bribes, must also expect none.
Nehem. 5.12. yea expressed, Require nothing.

2. To his other Question, Where Expectation was forbidden under the Law? I
answer,

1. That I have already given him a Scripture even now, viz. Prove. 16.28. so
interpreted as I delivered it by two great Authors; so that he needs not say,
Show it.

2. By undeniable Consequenees drawn from Scripture, as I have already shown.

NVM. XVIII.
Answ. 6. And whereas he tells me, that he will join closer; It was lawful then
to take Use from Strangers, and that therefore Gain expected did not lay open
this expectation to censure: I answer, 1. That I did already give my Response
at large about Strangers: And 2. shall now add a little more, viz. what Hieron.
in Ezech. 18. With whom I join learned Mr. Poole, that late and famous Writer,
whose words are to the same effect.
St. Jerome says: It Is said in Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not lend upon Usury to
thy Brother: but unto a stranger thou shall. Note here the going forth of their
Law in perfection: In the beginning of the Law Usury was forbidden to be taken
of their Brethren: In this Prophet Usury is forbidden to all. Note ALL. So
Jerome. But hereof more another time.

NUMBER. XIX.
Answ. 7. As for his Counsels, That if this be only a Definition under the
Gospel, it falls in with those that hold that Christ not only interpreted, but
added to, and perfected the Law by new Counsels: To that I answer, That there
is no fear of that: For, as Mr. Moss.
one said well, when one told him, being a Papist, That he thought the
prohibition of Usury to be rather a Counsel given in God's Word, to avoid the
extreme taking of Usury, than any such Precept as bound men to the obedience
thereof, under pain of everlasting damnation; he replied, Nay, that cannot be
so; for the Church has taken it to be a Commandment, which must be kept under
the pain of damnation: so say I. He adds (says my Examiner) And taken as part
of the Definition: Yea, and part of God's Word too, say I, according to Ezech.
18.13. has taken increase; to stop all gaps, that no use may be taken, neither
Nesbeck, nor Tarbith, as his words there declare.

NVM. XX.
But the Champion goes a step or two further, per se, aut per alium, directly
or indirectly, to jeer me, as his following Expressions show it: For he adds,
As if it were some Br^be or Simoniacal Contract: Which unawares he speaks
against himself. For a very great Gratian. Deer. Par. 2. Cause 19 Q. 3.
Writer having declared, That the very hopes of Gain makes a Usurer, adds, as
hope makes a Simooust: As for a Patron to hope for Gain of the Clerk which he
presents, makes him a Simonist, or Committer of Simony. Lo, Champion, how
this great Writer joyneth the Usurer with a Simonist, and coupleth Expectation
with Simony; as if he had foreseen what is here said against me, and would
answer for me. Of a Gratuity hereafter.

I Will superadd, says my Adversary, yet further FOR LOAN: for that is the thing
that leavens and And here he speaks against himself the truth unawares; for
usurious lending is by Divines called Venenum. So Bernard. Sylv. de cura rei
Famil. calls it. Venenum patrimonii.
poisons all. I may receive a Gift from a Rich man, be it Money, House, or
Land; but if I expect or receive any thing from the fame hand upon the account
of Loan, that is the sin of Usury. Who can believe this, save one that has his
Judgment tinctured and prepossessed? Lo, what he makes of me; but no matter, as
long as his own Friend, Car. Molinaeus, the chief Patron of Usury, says the
same, and so must needs be tinctured too, and prepossessed too, and must not
therefore be believed neither, as this Champion says of me. The words of
Molinaeus are these.

Car. Molinaeus de Vsura, c. 8.
It is the common Opinion of all, That Usury properly is not committed, but in
Loan: And yet farther he says, I^em ibid.
That Loan is the Subject of Usury.

With him Summa Angel. tit. Vsura.
others do harmonise, saying, That Usury, according to all the Doctors,
consists ONLY IN LOAN, or else cloaked under some other Contract, which may be
resolved or reduced unto Loan. And are all these tinctured?

I will name next a few more particularly, and so pass on to other Responses.

Chemnit. loc. Com. l. 2. tit. de Paup.
Chemnitius shall be a third man, whom I will cite, saying, Men say that Usury
is only committed in the Contract of Lending.

Brentius Comment. in Lev. 25.
Brentius shall be one more: Usura fit tantum in mutuo: Usury is committed only
in lending.

NUMBER. XXI.
Quest. But why may not I expect somewhat back for lending, says the Champion?
Because, says he, Loan ought to be gratuitous. Reply. Of a truth he is a free
Borrower, or rather a bold Beggar (Lo, what he calls me, now a Beggar, then a
Carrier.) in begging the Question. How proves he this, that all lending to men
of ability must be free? Or if lending must be free necessarily, then let him
call the Contract by another name, and let it no longer go under the name of
Lending, and then all is well, that fore is healed. Take learned Ames Judgment,
etc.

Whereunto I answer,

1. That if I am a Beggar in this, other great Men are so too, and by name
great Bullinger Decad. 3. Sermon. 1.
Bullinger, who gives the same Reason, saying, That Usury Lending ought to be
free, because it is one of the Contracts which Civilians call gratuitous, and
are called mutuation, commodatum, depositum, stipulatio, mandatum, negotiorum
gestio.
ought to be gratuitous (Mark, it ought to be so; that is his REASON, as it is
mine) is committed in Lending ONLY, and not in other Contracts: Where let me
add a sufficient Reason, showing that it ought to be so. Tutelae administratio,
pro mutuum and exhibitio, praeter quos caeteri sunt Mercenarii. D. Vast. l. 1.
c. 34.
See the Margin.

2. But I stand upon Scriptures chiefly: And,

1. That in Exodus 22.25. If thou lend money; for so it is read in all old and
new Translations, and the Greek Interpreter has it thus, (...).

2. That in Luke 6.35. where Christ uses the same word, which all men
translate Mutuum date, Lend, looking for nothing again. And is not that
gratuitous lending? Whether men be of ability or no, (to answer him) there is
no Exception added.

3. I answer, It Is not the calling of Lending by another name, that will heal
the sore; because Lending is defined thus by the Learned.

Lending is such a Contract (says Heming. Comm. in Jac. 3.
Hemingius) as transferreth the Dominion or Property of a thing from one to
another, for no consideration of any Price or Recompense, but only with
covenant that the same kind of thing he rendered and repayed again. Thus he of
Lending. So that if you call the Contract by another name, and call it no
longer Lending, the sore is not therefore healed; as if you call Usury by the
name of Interest, as men usually do, it is not therefore Interest, and must be
no longer called Usury, because Usury is one thing, and Interest another.
Answerably whereunto, if you call Lending by the name of another Contract, yet
is Lending one thing, and Lending still; and another Contract another thing,
and is defined after another manner. As for example; If you call such a thing
as Lending is, by the name of giving, as some do, it is not the same; because
Giving is defined after another manner, by a Donaris de Dona^.
Learned Author: Giving properly is, whereby a man gives a thing, with a mind
and purpose that he would have it presently become his that does receive it,
and never in any wise to be returned again to himself. The like I could say of
other things and Contracts. But note, That there is a twofold Giving, 1. Of
Loan. 2. A Free Gift, or Giving.

4. I answer, to the quoting of Ames, thus.

1. That Ames living in the Low Countries, That is, Three pounds ten shillings
in the hundred; which shows that Ames will little advantage my Adversary, and
his Usurers, because they will not take so little, but must have at least Six
in the hundred.
where some Usury is defended, and not in England, where Usury is so much cried
down by most (as Learned B. Downam tells us), writes as they use to write
there; whereof more hereafter; because there is no living there for a Dissenter
to have a Public place of Profit.

2. That my Brethren and my self in part say the same, That Usury (so called)
is not generally and absolutely unlawful: For we hold Nautical Fenory (so
called improperly) lawful, and Recompensatory lawful, and liberal too; though
we hold all Usury, properly so called, and commonly practiced, unlawful.

3. That if Ames held for that (which I hope he does not), I do not see him by
his few words prove what he says. The Sayings and Negatives of men, though
they may be good men, as he was, are no Proofs to me.

NVM. XXII.
Fourthly, As for his Clausula, or Close, which is, That Lending, if it be not
free, passes into another Contract, nominate or innominate, simple or mixed; I
for my part cannot mislike it: for it passes for Society, which we hold lawful,
as I quoted for it learned Bishop Downam; so that Ames is rather for me,
saying, That Lending, if it be not free, mark, if it be not free, as we say it
must be, nothing of that follows, but that it passes into another Contract;
for then the Case is altered.

5. I answer, That Ames does not well in it, when he says, It cannot be
proved, what we say, That all Lending, with what Circumstances soever it be
clothed, (Is his Addition not ours?) ought to be gratuitous: because our Men do
prove it. As for example; I can name as godly and well-read an Author as ever
Ames was, who proves this Point at full, That Lending must be gratuitous, and
not for gain; and that if a Man lend for gain, his Lending is Usury; spending
six pages about it, for the proving of it: whereas Ames writes but a line or
two, thinking it enough to say, That it cannot be proved that all Lending must
be gratuitous; when another Dr. Sanders, fol. 21. Otherwise it is no Loan at
all, but a selling, or setting to hire. Idem ibid.
Doctor, as great as he, says expressly, That Loan ought always to be free:
Mark, always, against Ames.

I, for my part, if I had no other Author at all on my side for it, yet should
make no question of it, because of these two sufficient Scriptures which
command it; Lend, looking for nothing again, Luke 6.35. and, From him that
would borrow turn not away, Mat. 5.42. which must needs be understood of free
Lending, because Usurers will not turn away from them that will borrow upon
Usury, giving good Security for the Loan, as Usurers do expect it: For, have
they not their Agents abroad to procure Borrowers? I add to these two Places,
that one most excellent Scripture, Psalm. 112.5. which commends it, A good man
is merciful, and lends, viz. freely: because he that lends otherwise, as
the Usurer does, cannot be either good or merciful, as it has been formerly
evidenced.

Before I go farther, I will mention one of the Usurer's Tricks, which is, that
he is for gratis too, as I and others; saying to him that comes to borrow of
him, I cannot forbear my Money so long; but to do you a Courtesy, I will lend
you so much for half a year gratis, as if he would lend it gratis, that is
freely, indeed: when in truth he means gratis the Noun, that is, such as will
be thankful, and pay him Use; and not gratis the Adverb, which signifies
freely: whereupon some Usurers call their Lending Giving, as I have formerly
declared it.

NUMBER. XXIII.
But I count it high time to advance farther, and therefore I Will spend no more
time about this.

My Adversary, in the next place, goes to answer my Citation for proof, out of
Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not lend upon Usury; and says, That it is elsewhere
limited to thy poor brother.

Whereunto I answer, That not only to a poor Brother lending upon Usury is
forbidden, but, in this place by me cited, to any Brother; because he says,
generally, Thy brother, B. Jewel.
whether he be rich or poor, there is no limitation. And by a Brother we may
understand any man, says Tho. Aquinas 2.2. Q. 79. a 1.
Aquinas also, (who is an abler man (I trow) to judge of the meaning of thy
Brother than this Novice) because every man we must hold to be our Brother. So
that learned Downam p. 202. and p. 202. he says, And in this general sense,
including both Rich and Poor, the Learned among the Jews have understood this
Law, and unto this day it is observed among them, says Rabbi Abraham.
Bishop Downam makes an Answer to such a Cavil, like mine, saying, This evasion
(of the poor Brother) is very frivolous; for in Deuteronomy. 23.19. there is no
mention of the Poor, but all Usury is forbidden toward a Brother, whether he
be rich or poor. Thus he answers: With whom I join famous Dr. Sanders, who
goes farther, even to all men, saying, But now seeing every man is both our
Neighbor and Brother, we may not take Usury of any man at all; meaning
doubtless Usury properly so called.

NUMBER. XXIV.
The Champion's next Onset, in the last part of his Definition, is, for loan
of things which may be consumed in the use thereof, from Deuteronomy. 23.1^. Reply.
And what if Money be consumed in the use thereof, seeing Houses and Fields,
Bargains and Wares remain, which were purchased by this Money consumed? View
this from another side, and you may take this Aspect of it. If you have 100 l.
you may not hire this out for gain; but if you will convert this Money into
Fields, you may hire them out, and take yearly gain for your Fields, though not
for your Money, etc. Thus he.

No more to the purpose is the selling of Wine, and the use thereof; forasmuch
as the Vintner does and may take somewhat for his Wine above the Price laid
out, and that is upon the account of his Money disbursed.

And here too Ames is beforehand with him; after whom he quoteth Rivet also:
and so ends with triumphing, as if he had gotten a notable Victory, and left me
in darkness, to come off as well as I could.

But (...) I hope to come off well enough, by answering all that he has to say
against me orderly. And,

1. Whereas he says, What if Money be consumed in the use thereof, seeing
Houses and Fields, Bargains and Wares remain, which were purchased with this
Money consumed? I answer,

1. That what I say herein, I assert, next unto that famous Scripture Deuteronomy.
23.19. where Money and Victuals are named, both which are consumed in the use
thereof, from more learned and renowned Men, than any he can name, or bring
against me: For, what a Man is Aquin. 2.2. q. 79. a. 1.
Aquinas, who writes the same? And so Doctor Sanders, fol. 3.
Dr. Sanders, speaking of things lent in Usury, names Money, Oil, Corn, Wine,
and then adds, Or any like thing, that is spent with the use thereof.

2. That here is a Confusion indeed: The lending of 100 l. upon Usury, is
called hiring it out for Gain, as Houses and Lands are, which are let out for
Rent: For, as one says notably, that is also a Phrase of Speech which they
have among themselves, namely, that they Let their Money, and therefore call
Usury the Rent of their Money. Now Letting, says famous Melancthon, lib.
Defin. Appell. and l. 2. F. locat. l. 1. Siquis servum depos.
Melancthon, is a Contract whereby a thing is transferred for a certain time,
for its use, but not as touching the Propriety; for a certain Price, and not
for its Dominion: Whereas Usury is no such thing, because the Money lent
becomes the Borrower's Propriety, as has been she^^ by Allegations; to which I
will now add L. 2. Appellat. si creditum F. si certum petatur, 3 Instit. quibus
modis.
one or two more. In Mutuation, or Lending, says the Civil Law, there is ^
transferring of the Property and Dominion of the thing lent, for a certain
time, from the Lender to the Borrower; whence Mutuum, or Lending, is so called,
quod de meo fit tuum, Mine, thine, So D. S. fol. 22.
Dr. Sanders; Money is of those things which are lent; and consequently, he is
not Lord of it that lent it, but he only which borrows it.

3. answer, That whereas the Champion stands so upon this, That by Money
consumed in the use thereof, may be bought Houses, Fields, Bargains, and Wares,
which may be hired out, and for which I may take yearly Gain, though not for my
Money. I answer,

1. That I may lawfully take Money for those Houses and Fields which I purchase
with Money, which I have, because I am not forbidden to do it by the Word of
God; and Saints have paid Hire for things hired, as is to be seen Acts 28.30.
which they would not have done, if setting to hire and letting had been
unlawful. And lastly, Because if a thing be hired and hurt, the Hirer of it is
not to make it good, if the Owner of it, who set it to hire, be with it; It
came for his hire, says the Lord, Exodus 22.18.

But for the Money which I lend, I may not take Gain, compacted for, or
expected, because that is interdicted, and Lending must be free, as formerly
has been proved; And I add, That though the Money borrowed be converted into
Fields, or Houses, therewith purchased, yet it is illicit, because the Usurer
does not mind that: whether a Borrower buy a House, Field, or Wares, or do not,
he will have his Usury, that is his sin: whereas the Borrower, who buyeth a
House, or a Field, or Wares, for his need, with that Usury-Money, sins not;
because borrowing, especially for need, (and not for I add, And to waste the
Money lent: For then the Lender is not to end at all, nor the Borrower to
borrow, as Stephen Egerton, who translated Virel, asserts it, saying, If it be
like that the Borrower will spend wastfully that which he borrows, Money ought
not to be lent, p. 137.
covetousness) is lawful by the Word of God, Exodus 22. and strength of Reason,
used by several Authors: of whom, at present, I will cite but one, viz. Gabr.
Powel, p. 102.
G. Powel, whose words are these. For necessity it was lawful for Adam 's Sons
to marry with Adam 's Daughters, because there were no other Women. For
necessity it was lawful to eat the Shewbread, because there was no other Food,
1 Samuel 21.6. For necessity it was lawful to work, to heal, to fight, upon the
Sabbath Day, which was not lawful but for necessity. Therefore for necessity
why may not a man pay more than he borrowed? Seeing no Scripture forbids to pay
more, but to require more.

Seventhly, I will add Hen. Smith in his second Sermon upon Usury.
Mr. Smith: It is lawful to suffer injury, as Christ paid Tribute, which was
injury: But it is not lawful to offer injury, because there are six
Commandments against it. Now to take Usury, that is, as it were, to offer
injury; but to give Usury, is to suffer, as it were, injury: and therefore
though I may not take more than I lent, yet I may give more than I borrowed.

Nor will his much ado about the converting of things lent, do him any good at
all; because seldom or never do men convert their borrowed Corn or Wine into a
Purchase, because they are things absolutely consumed in the use thereof; for
we eat the one, and drink the other, which is the use thereof. And as for Money
also, where one does turn his Money borrowed into Fields, hundreds do not, but
only spend it, and use it to save that they have, or to trade with it, though
they gain but little by it; which notwithstanding, the Usurer will have his Use.

NUMBER. XXV.
4. And whereas he tells us of the remaining of Houses, Fields, Bargains,
Wares, which are purchased with Money consumed in the use thereof: I answer,
True, they remain* but how? Not as things lent, but bought with Money lent, and
do differ from them very much; because Lending is only of such things as
consist of Number, Weight, and Measure, as the Civil Law tells us, saying,
Doctor Vuit. Jurispr. l. 1. c. 31.
Solae autem res in quantitate consistentes mutuo dari possunt, quae nimirum
ponderari, numerari, and mensurari solent and possunt: that is, But only those
things can be mutuated and lent, which consist in quantity, and are wont to be
weighed, numbered, and measured. Non it is evident, that in such things as pass
from man to man by number, weight, and measure, the use of them cannot be
severed from the propriety, nor the propriety from the use; but they must of
necessity pass together, without division or separation, says a famous Author,
who is as well versed in the Doctrine of Usury, as my Adversaries Authors; of
whom hereafter. For the present I will use an Example, to make plain what was
said even now. I cannot lend a man Money, or Corn, or Oil, or such like things,
but I must make them his fully, to do with them what he will; if I do not, he
can make no use of them, nor receive any benefit by them; so as he cannot have
the use of them, unless he have the propriety of them. And what shall he do
with the Propriety for a time, unless he have the use of them also? which I
make over to him with the Money lent, as one entire thing, because the use
cannot be separated from the Propriety; whereupon he buyeth, it may be, a
Living, or House to put his Head in, or Wares, which is lawful, and may be
called the use which he makes of his Money lent him, and is (as I said but
now) one entire thing with the Money lent him, though severed and
distinguished, as it were, in a manner; because otherwise (as Viz. By
purchasing things which remain.
Divines assert and show it) in Truth and in Nature, it is impossible to divide
the use of those things which are given to loan, from the property and
ownership of them, as being things which may be consumed in the use thereof,
which use is then gone, when the thing lent is consumed.

5. To his cavilling about Wine, by me instanced in, I answer, That as wise men
as both he, and his by-him-quoted Authors, have used the same Instance of Wine;
and one especially, above the rest, has written it in the compass of three
leaves three times, Dr. Sand.
as a thing considerable, and to the purpose mentioned; whereas the Champion
tells me, That the selling of Wine, and the use thereof, is to no purpose by me
mentioned, because the Vintner does and may take somewhat for his Wine above
the Price laid out, and that upon the account of the Money disbursed. Whereunto
I reply, And who denies that? the Vintener's Act and Calling (if I may call it
so) not being the Act and Calling of the Usurer, but of 2 Whereas Usury is not.
Buyer and Seller, who may gain by his Buying and Selling, not only because
Wine wastes, but also because Buying and Selling is not prohibited kind of
Dealing or Contract, as Usury is Prove. 31.
, but allowed by God and Man; and therefore is said to be Contractus Dr. Vult.
l. 1. c. 35.
Juris Gentium, A Contract allowed by the Law of the Nations. Where, by the
way, I bless God, that he has put me upon the study of that Law, and that
which is called the Civil, for diverse years together, with the study of
Divinity, that I might the better handle this noble Controversy, as having
collected the sum and substance of the whole Corpus Juris, or Body of the Law,
and of many other Civilian Authors, into a Manuscript written with mine own
hands, and very helpful and useful to me now in this Encounter about Usury.

NUMBER. XXVI.
6. But I long now to see what his Authors say to all this, and to answer them.
And,

1. Ames, of whom the Champion says, And here too Ames is before hand with
him; (of whose Replies, and many other learned men too, he takes no notice:)
wherein he wrongs me grievously. For I have read Ames too, and it may be a
little more too, long ago; and many other learned men's notable Pieces
concerning Usury, and extracted the quintescence of their Labors out of them;
and intend, God willing, to answer every one of them, before I get out of this
large, deep, and intricate Subject: For I am not afraid of them.

And to begin with Ames: Whereas he says he is beforehand, I wonder wherein he
is beforehand with him, who can well and truly say, that as great a Doctor as
he, yea, both his Authors are, Aquinas, whom I cited in my behalf, is
beforehand with Dr. Ames in two respects.

1. Because he is the senior, as being one who by the brightshining Lamp of his
Writings did inlighten and irradiate the World hundreds of years before him.

2. Because he is of so great a Repute, as that all other Schoolmen, and
Casuists too, light their Candles at his; which has caused a great Protestant
Writer, Dr. Boys in his Postill.
Doctor Boy^, to say, That all of them are but Aquinas upon Aquinas.

NUMBER. XXVII.
But to the matter: What says Ames? Here I shall set down his Words in Latin,
because the Champion does so, and not in English, for the Learned. Allegant in
rebus illis quae usu consumuntur non distingui dominium ab usu atque adeo nihil
posse accipi ultra valorem ipsius rei vel dominii ejus. Respondetur lucrum
accipi non simpliciter pro usu rei mutuatae, quoad substantiam, sed quoad
valorem, aut proventum, qui manet post substantiam consumptam. Whereunto I
shall now put my Answer thus.

1. That he does but briefly say, and not prove what he says; distinguishing
between the substance of the thing mutuated, and the value or profit which
remains after the substance is consumed.

2. That if that were granted, yet comes he short of his aim; for it does not
make Usury lawful: nor are those by his Distinction confuted, who hold, That in
things which are consumed in the use thereof, their propriety or dominion is
not distinguished from the use thereof; and that therefore nothing can be taken
for the use thereof, beyond the value or dominion thereof: Because,

1. Usury is forbidden Deuteronomy. 23.19. and Nehem. 5.
expressly, and therefore is not to be taken, if there were no such Reason given
against it, upon the even now mentioned account.

2. And also because what he says of a Revenue, or value of the thing
mutuated, will not hold, at least not generally; for when Corn, Meat, or Oil is
lent, that is eaten in the use thereof; so if it be Wine, that is consumed in
the drinking of it: because that is the use of both Meat and Drink. And then
what remains? Where shall one find it? And if it be Money that is lent, where
one purchases Land, or Lease, or a House, there are thousands that do not; for
most Borrowers are such as borrow for need, to keep themselves harmless, or to
get a Maintenance by dealing upon it, and oft-times lose and spend all,
Principal, and what they make of it, as I have said formerly. And then where is
the Profit, which they call that which I add, thirdly, That because they stand
so much upon Houses, Fields, Leases, Lands, which remain, where Money is
consumed and gone; God would have added such an Exception to his forbidding and
condemning of Usury, Deuteronomy. 23.19. Psalm. 15.5. Except the Money consumed be
converted into Houses, Fields, Lands, which remain; if he had thought it good
so, to clear this P^int thereby, to help those men who so stand upon remaining
Fields, Lands, and Houses. 2. That those remaining Fields, Lands, and Houses
may be gone with the Money distracted, being made away secretly beforehand, or
mortgaged, when the Usurer is sufficiently secured by Sureties.
remains? Surely these Distinctions are but Spiders Webs, which will not cover
the nakedness and shame of Usury; for what is so said for it here, is not able
to do it.

NUMBER. XXVIII.
As for Rivet, I shall be very civil toward him, because he was my very good
Friend in the University of Leyden in Holland; and so we parted friendly, as
his own Hand, wherewith he wrote his Motto in my Book of Friends, (which I have
to show for it) as a perpetual testimony of his Favor and our Friendship,
witnesses: So that I will only set down some Authorities of some of the wifest
men that ever lived in the world, to show how they differ from him in that
which is asserted by him, though in other things they may be good Friends
enough. That which he holds, is much like that of Ames; only he tells of Wine
in particular, that some say of it, (meaning Aquinas, whom I quote for it),
That it and the use of it cannot be severally sold. Whereunto he answers
generally, by a distinction of an ambiguity in the Word Usus, (as Ames also
does) which, says he, denotes either the distinction of Money, (watily leaving
out other things, which are absolutely and utterly wasted and consumed, so as
that nothing remains), or the commodity or benefit thereby gotten. Now though
the benefit of Money and the right of distraction, or the use, cannot be
separated; yet is the distraction it self one thing, and the commodity or gain,
arising from that distraction, another: the distraction is but once made and
computed, not twice; and gain is reckoned but once, the Principal is rendered
for the distraction of the Money, but for an undue Office of lending, and for
the time of the Money retained, and that the Creditor could not benefit himself
by it, a recompensation is not immerito postulated; mark, postulated or
required. If my Friend had said, That a recompensation may be lawfully taken,
provided it be not expected, against Christ's saying, Luke 6.35. it had been
worthily spoken. He concludes thus. Therefore the Reason that the Principal is
not twice sold, but a real utility by the Creditor relinquished, and the Debtor
received; which is but seldom: even as in the setting of an House, the use
thereof is separated from the House. Thus he.

Now to answer what my Friend asserts, and that much more fully than Ames, for
which I commend him, I will set down the Sayings of those Worthies, which I
shall quote, in answer to his, that the World may see how they differ, and
judge accordingly.

1. And first, I will begin with the aforesaid most wise and famous Tho. Aquin
2.2. l. 78. a 1.
Aquinas, whose words I will set down more fully than yet I have done; they are
these, concerning Wine, thus Englished. If a man would sell Wine severally and
by it self, and withal the use of that Wine severally and by it self, he should
sell the same thing twice, or should sell that which is not; and so he should
manifestly offend Justice: And by the like reason he commits Injustice,
which lends Wine or Wheat to another, and demands two Recompenses for the
same; one for the thing it self, another for the consideration of the use.

2. To answer Rivet more fully, I shall quote Chem. Loc Commun. to. 2. l de
Paup. c 8.
Chemnitius, who observes, how As also their Defendants do.
Usurers object, Because he can do with his Money what he pleases, and buy
what he pleases.
That they do not Mark, Sold, not lent.
sell twice over the Goods or Principal it self, but a real Commodity, which is
absent from the Creditor, and present with the Debtor, for the time he
borrows.

Which is answered thus: Grant that to be so, (for who will borrow any thing,
but in respect of the real commodity which is supposed it will carry with it?)
yet by that reason a man may take two Prices for many things that are fold: As
for example, I sell a man Bullion Gold: Now Gold, besides the Metal it self,
which is precious, yea, and besides the benefit which arises from it, being
coined, in Buying and Selling, it has also this real commodity, that it is
profitable many ways to Physic and Health, as a sovereign and cordial thing.
Shall I therefore take one price for the Gold it self, and another for the real
commodity of Gold? What Is now this, but to sell one thing twice, and to take
two Prices for one Commodity, and so to commit a monstrous Injustice, as the
Usurer does?

3. The most wise Senate of ancient Rome neither would nor did make Usum
fructum, as they word it.
Use and Fruit of those things which are consumed in the use thereof: for it
could not do it, as it is declared in the Pandects.

4. And what says Cajus in Pandect. de Usu fructu, l. 2.
Cajus? It is not effected by the Decree of the Senate, that there be a proper
use and fruit of Money; for Natural Reason could not be changed by the
Authority of the Senate.

5. I cite Ulpian concerning a Recompensation, which Rivet says, a man may
take for the distraction or lending, though a mere Heathen; to shame and to
convince our Usurers, who call themselves Christians; and to show how Rivet and
them differ: If I deliver Ten, for this end, to make thee Debtor of Eleven,
says Ulpian U^pian and Proculus in Pandect. l. ^. de rebus creditis.
; Proculus thinks, that no more can be certainly demanded or postulated (to
use Rivet's own word) but Ten. Mark how these wise Heathens speak against Usury.

I shall desire that great and godly Emperor Justinian* in suis Institur. de
U^u fruct. I am the larger in all this, because I cannot otherwise chu^^,
taking great delight therein, as having extracted the whole Corpus Juris, or
Body of the Law, wherein all these Expressions are extant.
Jus^inian to speak his mind, because some happily will reject those Heathens,
though never so wise. His words are,

Use and Fruit is assigned in Lands, Houses, and other things, saving those
which are wasted with the very use. For those things receive no Use and Fruit,
neither by Natural no^ by Civil means; of the which sort Wine, Oil, Corn, and
Garments are; to whose Nature numbered or ready Money approaches next, because
it is in a manner worn out in the very using of it, by continual Exchange.

Thus this great and pious Monarch delivers his mind concerning that great
Debate about things consumed by and in the use thereof, That they cannot
receive any Use and Fruit. Unto which words of his, I might add more, whereby
he confirms what he says by the Roman Senates example, saying. That it also
did not make Use and Fruit of such things, (as I also did even now:) So that by
this his saying it appears also, how he and Dr. Rivet differ in this thing,
and how he also is on my side.

7. There is also Doctor Sanders.
one who writes thus: Usury has its name from using, whereby is meant the
Price of the Use of a thing: And because we may use certain things, the
substance of them remaining safe, as when we hire another Man's Ground, or
dwell in another Man's House, in that case it is lawful to take or pay Rent for
the said House or Land; and he says it again, and goes a little farther,
thus: Those things that may be used and remain safe, may also render yearly
Rents or Fruits, and the Lord of them may give or bequeath the Property and
Ownership of them to one, and the Use and Fruit to another: I add, Because they
may be severed, which thing cannot be done in those Goods which are wasted,
because the Use does diminish the Substance it self; which may serve to answer
Dr. Rivet's last words. As in the Location or Setting of an House, the Use is
separated from the House it self; which is true in part, that in the Location
of an House the Use of an House may be separated from the House: Whereupon it
does not follow, that even so in the lending of Money or Victuals, the use
thereof and the things themselves may be separated, because the use of such
things as Money and Victuals is the extinction thereof, as the Lawyers use to
say.

NUMBER. XXIX.
8. But I must not omit the most reverend and learned B. Downam, p. 246.
Bishop Downam, who says, The use of Money is the spending thereof, as the use
of Victuals is the eating of it; and in all things spent, thou can not,
without great inequality, require one allowance for the thing, and another for
the use, which cannot be reckoned apart from the thing, or severed from the
property. If thou lend me Ten Loaves, thou should do very unequally with me,
if thou should require Eleven; or if having taken the price of the Loaves
themselves, thou should also ask a price for the use, which is the eating of
them: And in like sort, if having lent me Ten pounds, thou should require
Eleven, that is, Ten for the Principal, and One for the Use, which was nothing
but the spending of the Money. Which also, together with the former Citation,
answers, as one should think, Dr. Rivet fully.

NUMBER. XXX.
9. But the Champion will reply, That his Distinction of the Ambiguity in the
word Use, which denotes either the distraction of the Money lent, or the
commodity and profit thereby acquired, is not fully answered; and therefore I
will allege a few Authors more, as he does his two, to answer his Reply, and
apply them.

And first, again, I will allege the words of that pious Emperor Justinian.
Instit. de L^^r.
Justinian, saying, The Senate of Rome made not Use and Fruit of those things
which are consumed in the use thereof, but by a caution did, as it were,
constitute Use and Fruit.

2. So In Pandect. 2.
Cajus: By a Remedy introduced, there began, as it were, a certain Use and
Fruit of Money to be taken: Where note, That whereas it is impossible in Nature
to divide the use of those things which are lent, from the property of them,
the Civil Law has devised a way whereby it may be done, as the wit of Man could
invent it; as thus* That the Lord and Owner receiving a Caution for the Value,
should suffer him to whom the Profit was assigned to enjoy the same thing
frankly and freely in the mean season, which Caution did stand to him in stead
of his Propriety; and this is that the Emperor Justinian speaks of, That the
Senate made not Use and Fruit of such things as are consumed by the use of it;
but assigned it, as it were, after a sort.

Which I apply thus: Answerably whereunto, it should seem, they have found out
this distinction As some call the Romans device, and this Distinction may be
called so too.
and shift, to make that which That is to say, the severing of the Propriety of
a thing and the Use thereof, in things which are consumed in the use thereof.
cannot possibly be, by saying, That it may be done by getting Gain out of
things lent, and Money especially, turned into Lands, Houses, etc. which, say
they, may be severally computed, and so consequently separated from the things
lent. But what is to be thought of it, I Will now declare. And,

1. When the Romans devised such a thing as even now I mentioned, they did it
harmlesly, conceiving that no man would have injury by it, as Divines judge of
it, and not to establish Usury by it; for they are bitterly bent against it,
insomuch as that their Lawyers and Wife men confessed it, as D. S.
one asserts it, That Usury is against Nature; and do not allow it, but only
permitted it, as they permitted Fornication and Incest, says a worthy And that
Usury, if it shall become due, must be fetched about another way, which way is
not able to discharge any Man's Conscience, who shall take it upon him to follow
it, says a Learned Doctor.
Writer: but what harm may come of such Distinctions, God knows.

2. Besides, that it will not do the thing aimed at, nor demonstrate it, that
the things lent to Usury and the Use thereof can be severed, as by Reasons and
many Authors it has been proved.

NUMBER. XXXI.
Lastly, I will, after all this, put in but one Answer more to the Champions
Examination and Opposition made against my Definition of Usury, viz. That
seeing he so misliketh it, I will profer him sundry other Definitions, for him
to make his choice of either of them.

And 1. That of Cato, who being asked by the Roman Senate, what it was to
commit Usury, answered, as Cicero in Offic.
Tully has it, and Calv. in Ps. 15.
Calvin too, It was to kill a man. Or,

2. Sen. l. 7. de Benef.
Seneca's, What is Fenory, and a Calendar, and Usury, but Humane
Concupiscences, Names fought out extra naturam, without Nature? He could find a
place for it in the Calendar, but not in Nature. Or,

3. If he mislike these, because they were Pagans, I tender unto him Mr.
Turner's, who says, Rog. Turner in his Usury Sermon.
That it is terrestris Piratica, a kind of Land-Piracy.

4. If that be too harsh, let him choose that of B. Jewel upon 1 Thessalonians. 4.
Bishop Jewel, which was in his time the Honor and Ornament of our Church, as
Humphred. Epist. Nuncup. in vita Juelli, p. 4.
one styles him.

Usury, says he, is a kind of lending of Money, or Corn, or Oil, or Wine, or
of any thing, wherein, upon Covenant or Bargain, we receive again the whole
Principal which we delivered, and somewhat more for the use and occupying of
the same.

5. Or else that of great Tostatus; We commonly call that Usury, when any thing
is taken above the Principal.

6. Or that of the The Lateran Councils Definition of Usury.
Lateran Council, counted the best of all: This is the proper interpretation of
Usury, when men labor to get Gain and Increase from the Use of a thing which
grows or increases not, and that without labor, cost, or danger, or
adventuring. Thus that great Council defines Usury.

7. Or that of famous Archbishop Usher, in his Body of Divinity, page 300. What
is that which we call Usury? It is Lending in Expectation of Certain Gain.

8. Or God's own; ANY INCREASE (above the Principal, expectedly taken) Ezech.
18.8. Luke 6.35.

Now, I say again, let the Champion choose either of these Definitions, if he
will not adhere to mine, nor to that of the Council of Agatha, nor that of that
great man St. Ambrose, he shall have my good liking and approbation in his
Choice.

As Ludolphi de Vita Christi, part 2. c. 49. Pet. de Anchorano Consil. 49.
Glanvilli l. 7. c. 16. Viguerii Instit. Theol. c 5. sect. 3. Zegedini Loc. Com.
p. 457. Turnbulli Sermon. 4. in Psalm. 15.
Many more Definitions I could have added, but these may suffice.

NUMBER. XXXII.
But I see I must come to a new Engagement; for thus he sets upon me, with all
fierceness and incivility, which he shows in all his Pamphlet, occasioning
thereby a very learned and godly man to say, That he did not act like a Man,
nor like a Christian, much less a Minister.

I say, he assaults me thus.

Having made a short and jeering Preamble first, he adds, We are beholden to
him in the next place, that he would let us see what manner of thing Usury is,
by its Description. Then on he comes, charging me, That either I am misled, or
would mislead others, by my wonted confusion; and that I rake together
whatsoever was spoken by any against grossest Cheats, Oppressions, and
Exactions, that have passed under the name of Usury, and distribute the same
with a name and punishment attending equally to the most oppressive Usury, and
to the most moderate taker of Use for Money lent, with what conscience let him
look to it.

Whereunto I answer,

1. That I wish he were not misled himself, nor did mislead others, by his
wonted confounding of Rents, Setting and Letting, Buying and Selling, Interest
and Damage, with Lending upon Usury; which things are of a disparate nature.

2. I do no more rake, as he says I do, than the Holy Prophets, ancient
Fathers, and Authors and godly Writers newly risen up against that great Idol,
which they call Usury in general, not naming the grossest Oppressions, Frauds,
Exactions, that passed under the name of Usury, and that any Usurers have ever
practiced the same: I say, in As my Book shows.
like manner and as they distribute Blame and Punishments, so do I, as I ought,
giving to every one his due, according to 2 Timothy 2.15. telling Usurers, That
the more oppressive they have been, the greater will be their Damnation; and
the more moderate, the less: So that I shall not need to trouble my self about
the close of this his Charge, With what conscience let him see to it. But let
us see how he goes on.

Mr. Jelinger. 1. Usury is a most abominable thing. Reply. No doubt it is, and
has been, as some have handled it: but where is the abomination, or incongruity
to Reason or Nature, if my Money being improved by another Pains or Skill,
prove gainful to us both? What he brings here, and elsewhere, from the Fathers,
and Heathen, against Usury, respects the Practice of it in their days, which
doubtless was bad enough, etc.

Whereunto my Answer is, That I have cause and grounds enough to say, that
Usury, as it is spoken of and against, without his Addition and Interpretation
(as some have handled it) is an abomination, or thing to be abhorred, as the A
thing to be abhorred.
Hebrew is rendered by Dr. Luther, a Grewel in Dutch: (where note, that the old
Version also calls it an abomination, an offendicle, in Ezech. 20. even a thing
to be abhorred by all men) which that the Reader may not too much take notice
of, he conceals in his Reply the Lord's calling Usury an Abomination; as also
he Which will make me to deal so by his new Writers also, and not to set down
their Sayings at large, to be the shorter in my Answers.
leaves out the most remarkable Expressions of the Authors and Fathers cited by
me, viz. those of St. Austin, How odious and how execrable the sin of Usury is,
I believe Usurers themselves do know, (not telling us of Extortioners, and
griping Usurers.) And Bishop Jewel he leaves out also, who calls Usury the foul
and loathsome sin of Usury: And Petrus Cantor.
Petrus Cantor he omits, who tells us, That the Usurer's House (mark, the
Usurer's House in general) was in old time called the Devil's House, and his
Field the Devil's Field. Whereunto I will now annex a Codicil of more such
Writers, to render Usury yet more abominable: And by name I will mention these
three modern Authors.

And 1. Dr. Beard in the Theater of God's Judgments, page 476.
Dr. Beard: Seeing then it is ABOMINABLE both by the Law of God and Nature, let
us shun it as a Toad, and fly from it as a Cockatrice.

2. The Author of Usuries Arraignment.
One also writes of Usurers, not naming any griping ones, but Usurers in
general, (as I do) thus: Those that travel in the Low Countries say, That the
Usurer is so basely accounted of, (and consequently is so abominable and so
odious there) as that no body will be in his company; and you shall sooner get
one to a Brothel-house, than to a Usurer's.

3. Peroldus de Avaritia, to. 2. p. 68.
Peraldus, to make the Usurer and his sin odious, according to its deserving,
tells us, 1. That he is like a Toad which lives by the Earth, and will get out
of a Vineyard when it flourishes and buds, not being able to endure the sweet
odor of it: answerably whereunto, says he, the Usurer is for Earth, and
leaves the Church, because he cannot abide the hearing of the Word. Which we
know to be true by Observation; for they will not hear a Minister that
preaches the Word of God against Usury. They served me so, when I preached my
Fifteen Sermons against Usury, at my Kings-Bridge Lecture.

Now that it may not be thought that he speaks of and against griping Usurers
and Usury only, and not against the moderate, see his Definition quoted in the
Idem ibid. p. 6, 7.
Margin; and Cicero.
Cicero, who reckons Usury among odious Callings.

But I desire to bring more ancient Doctors, besides these later.

And 1. In Mat. 28.
St. Jerome, who, to make Usury odious, tells us, That there is no difference
between seeking after Usury, and Rapine, or Robbing. And lest men should think
that he speaks so liberally against griping, exacting, oppressive Usurers and.
Usury only, he says further, Lend to thy Brother, and receive of him again as
much as thou have given, and seek nothing over and above, (which he calls
Superfluum) because what is more, is computed to be USURY.

With which saying of his, 2. Peter Lombard, the Father of the Schoolmen,
sweetly symphonizeth, by a Sentence of his, which I have read in time long ago:
viz. In the Eighth Commandment, Exodus 20. Thou shall not steal, RAPINE also and
Sacrilege are prohibited, and USURY, WHICH IS CONTAINED UNDER RAPINE. So odious
was Usury in the Schools in old time; and so I leave it as it is, even as a
great ABOMINATION, which God hates, abominateth, and abhors.

Nor can his new Writers answer them, nor (in the second place) be able to stop
the mouths of such great and most Learned men (God's own especially) while the
World stands; because they neither do nor can prove what they assert of that
which intrinsecally is in Usury, and that which is plerunque, that is,
commonly, (which merely makes against those Authors) is present with it; and
because they would make us believe, that the Fathers had respect, in their
Sentences against Usury, unto that Usury which too much prevailed, and was
taken in all Ages, against Equity, Honesty, Charity, and Faith: when it is well
known to my Brethren, and my self also, who have diligently read, observed, and
extracted the Volumns of the Holy Fathers, from the beginning to the end
thereof, and have accordingly in this Tract shown it, what Usury they have been
against, viz. not only griping and most cruel biting Usury, but all Overplus
sought and taken.

As to that of St. Chrysostom in Matthew. There is nothing more cruel than the
Usury of this Age, nothing baser; it will not at all evince what he would prove
by it, viz. That the Fathers uttered such heavy things only against the most
cruelly biting Usury of their Ages; because, as other Fathers, so he speaks
against all, as well as that most cruel Usury which he mentions; yea, and
declares against Usury in general In Matthew. 17.
more than any of them all, as far as I could see, when I read him over;
insomuch as that,

1. He compares some Usury to a Id. ibid.
Serpent, called Aspis, which insensibly stings and poisons, and so brings a
man sweetly asleep; answerably whereunto, he says, that when a man has once
taken up Money upon Usury, he lives pleasantly upon it (Mark, PLEASANTLY) for
a time, etc. which a man cannot do when he is cruelly bitten; but at Si^ in the
Hundred, which they count moderate Usury, some may and do.

2. But this is not all: for he says withal in general, USURY was ever judged
a token of extreme Impudence, etc.

3. He speaks further; Ibid.
A great Sickness, and needing much study, (which makes me study as hard as I
can, I am sure) namely, Usury. Mark, Usury in general, which he calls a great
Sickness. And,

4. The Learned may read all that he writes against Ujury there, p. 437, 438,
439.
He says, What more IRRATIONAL can be found out, than for those (he speaks to
the Usurer) to contend to plow without a Field, without Rain, and without a
Plough? for those causes, those that sow so, shall reap Tares, which shall be
delivered up to the aeviternal Fire. And,

5. He ends thus: Are there no other ways of living JUSTLY to be found out? He
might have said, if he had been for moderate Usury, as this Champion and some
of his Brethren are, Cannot you leave that griping Usury, and practice that
which is more moderate? But he does not; he is against all.

NUMBER. XXXIII.
2. But is it not high time to come to the second Description of Usury, That it
is a most dangerous thing? O yes; and therefore I will now see what the
Champion says to that. Reply. Not so, surely, where no Rule of Charity,
Equity, Justice, Faithfulness, or Honesty is broken, when it is not by Law kept
in due bounds and limits, says the same Author.

I answer, And when is that, say I and my Friends, which are many to his one?
Will ye hear them about Justice?

1. First hear Lactantius dc Vero Cultu, l. 6. c. 18.
Lactantius, who says, That Usury, so called by him in general, is against
Justice. His words are, To receive more than is lent, is injustum, an unjust
thing. And so say many others.

2. Melancthon lib. Defin. Appell.
Melancthon, that great Ornament of Learning, as Fagius Ep. ante Chald. Par.
Fagius calls him, says, It is against Equity, and no man ought to make Gain
of another man's Goods. But he that takes Usury makes Gain of that which is
another man's; because the Lending has transferred the Dominion of the Goods
from the Lender to the Borrower: therefore it is no equal Gain.

3. So Barthol. Capet Tract. Comel. 125.
Barth^l. Capet makes this want of Equity the principal cause of Usuries
unlawfulness:

4. Turner, p. 9. With whom I join Dr. Beard, who says, in his Theater, p.
473. That Usury is so contrary to Equity and Reason, that all Nations, by the
instinct of Nature, have always abhorred and condemned it.
Turner. Here is no Equity: The Usurer receives great Gain, clear Gain, without
Labor, without Cost; certain Gain, without peril, out of the Industry, the
Charges, the mere Uncertainties of the Borrower. A cunning Alchymist, that can
extract much Silver, and waste nothing in the Smoke. These are the Kine of
Bashan, that feed upon the Commons, Amos 4.1.

5. And what says Beza in his Annotat. upon Matt. 19.8.
Beza of Charity? Christian Charity forbids to lend upon Usury. With whom Ursin.
Ursin agrees, thus writing, The Question about Usury may be determined by
this general Rule; Do not to another that which thou would not have done to
thy self: Then may it easily be concluded what is to be thought and judged
concerning this Case of USURY, namely, That it will not nor cannot stand with
the general Rule of CHARITY. So Hemingius Comment, in Jacob. 5.
Hemingius; Establish Usury, and the Rule of Love is everted, which God would
have to be sempiternal.

6. To quote one concerning Law, mentioned by the Champion and his only
Author, I will bring Beza in his Annot. upon Mat. 19.8.
Beza once more, to give his Judgment in that thing: Many Magistrates do see,
that in respect of Traffic and Dealing among men, they cannot simply forbid
Usary: Therefore (which is the only thing which remains for them to do,) they
stint Usury: But MAY A MAN THEREFORE WITH A GOOD CONSCIENCE LEND UPON USURY?
NO, VERILY: FOR THE RULE OF OUR CONSCIENCE IS TO BE FETCHED NOT FROM THE GIVIL
LAWS OF MEN, BUT FROM THE WORD OF GOD. NAY, THE CIVIL LAWS THEMSELVES DO NOT
ALLOW, BUT RATHER CONDEMN THAT WHICH THEY ONLY, TOLERATE, FORCED THEREUNTO BY
THE WICKEDNESS OF MEN. THUS ALSO THE LORD BY MOSES MAKING CIVIL LAWS, DOES NOT
COMMAND DIVORCES, (for so he should have been contrary to himself;) but to such
as could not be got to retain their Wives, he commanded them to give their
Wives a Bill of Divorcement, that provision might be made for them against
their Husbands cruelty: And yet for all that, they which put away their Wives
ceased not to be Adulterers before God. What more clear to stop my Adversaries
Mouth, than what Beza says here? But I must not be so brief in such a
dangerous thing, as he is; leaving out (as his manner is) what makes most
against him: and therefore I will now show how and wherein it is such a
dangerous thing; as namely, in that it dreadfully endangers not only a Man's
Soul, and whole Estate, and the very Kingdom of Christ it self, (as for that I
quote the Council. Paris.
Council of Paris, at which my Adversary does not touch with the least Finger
here) but also the Earthly Kingdom wherein Usury is commonly committed, and the
Usurers Life, which he lives here upon Earth. Of both in order.

NUMBER. XXXIV.
1. It endangers the Kingdom wherein the Usurer lives. For how many Kingdoms
and Countries have been destroyed and overthrown by Usury? To instance in some:
Was not Egypt, if we may believe Alex. ab Alex. l. 1. c. 7.
Alexander ab Alexandrinus? Was not the Doctor Wilson in Epist.
Roman Empire then brought to a decaying Estate, when Usury did overspread it?
Was not Aret. in suis Probl. and Dr. Luther.
Germany, my Country, (which durst oppose it self against the usurping Romans)
then brought low too, when Usury came to be high and common in it, and did
begin to live in sensual Delights, and wasted themselves by Usury, had lost
their Warlike Valor? And was it not almost quite lost in the terrible Wars
which were therein in my time, because of Usury? What think ye? And is it not
now again almost ruined and burnt by the French* for the same great sin of
Usury, which reigns there mightiy in diverse places? I, for my part, must needs
think so, because I know the Country, and am not inscious of that horrid grand
Evil called Usury, which is there so boldly committed by some, because there be
no such Luthers, such Melancthons, such Chemnitiusses, such Aretiusses, such
Parcusses, such Didericusses, living there now, as there were in old time.

And may not Spain also, though it has more Land in the World than any Monarch
upon Earth possesses, (as a great Abbot.
Archbishop of England, in his Cosmography, asserts it) be brought as a sad
Example and Participatrix of the same lamentable Misery and Decay, which with
other Kingdoms it is fallen into, by reason of Usury, which is paid to the
Venetians, and Genoways, and others? So as that all that Gold and Silver which
is imported from the rich Gold and Silver Mines of the West Indies can hardly
support it. So that for this cause Centur. 13. cap.
Lewis King of France Teturning from Alias Memphis. Joh. Bocinus. Aubanus de
Rit. Gent. l. c. 5. number. 34.
Dameata, caused all Usurers to depart out of his Kingdom.

2. As for the dreadful danger of the Usurer's Life, that I will make out by
Similitudes and Examples.

NUMBER. XXXV.
1. Similitudes. For,

1. Usury is like Poison, as Cited formerly.
Authors resemble it: And how dangerous that is, all men know it.

2. Like a pestiferous Coelius Secundus Lect. Antiqu. l. 12. cap. 2.
Tabes: And is not that dangerous too?

3. Like a Sext. Decretal.
Whirl-pool, which does devour and swallow men up.

4. Like a Doct. Wilson, fol. 62.
Cancer it is, says Peraldus: And is not that dangerous also?

Perald. page 67.
And the Usurer himself is like one who has a drawn Sword slenderly hanging
over his Head, and ready to cut him asunder: For so the Justice of God holds a
naked Sword over the Usurer's head, dreadfully to cut him asunder; and there is
nothing but the slender Thread of his Life, which for a little time he has to
live, next to the infinite Mercy of God, which hinders it, and keeps it back
for a short time. O dreadful danger!

6. The Usurer is like a man who has an Asinary Mill tied: to his neck, drawing
him down into the depth of the Sea: for so his Usury-money, like a Millstone,
is tied with the Cord of his Love, which he bears to it, to his neck, as it
were, drawing him down to the Pit, his Grave, I mean, and so to that other
bottomless Pit called HELL. And is not Usury a most dangerous thing then?
Ezech. 11.12, 13.

NUMBER. XXXVI.
2. I will add Examples. And,

1. I have read of a Usurer who in the Bishopric of Collen died after this
DREADFUL manner: Discip. de Temp. who speaks this of an Usurer, without any
distinction; and Swinock relates such another dreadful History.
Lying upon his Deathbed, after he had been a Usurer of some standing, and
taken good store of Usury-money, he moved up and down his Chaps and Lips, as if
he had been eating something in his Mouth; and being demanded what he did eat,
he answered, his Money, and that the Devil thrust it into his Mouth perforce,
so that he could not choose but devour it: In which miserable case he died,
without any show of Repentance, and so his Usury killed him dreadfully.

2. And I remember an Usurer, says Doctor Beard in his Theater of God's
Judgments, p. 471.
Doctor Beard, dwelling in a Town called Argentall, nigh unto Anovay, under the
Jurisdiction of Tholosse in High Vivaria, who being is Hay-time in a Meadow,
was stung in the Foot by a Serpent, or some other venomous Creature, unto
death: and that according to Job 20.15, 16. He swallowed down Riches, etc. as
Usurers use to do, the Vipers tongue shall slay him: In the (...).
Hebrew it is, the Serpents or Basilisks tongue shall slay him; for so much the
Original also signifies.

Methinks this should make our Usurers fear, lest when they go out into their
Fields and Meadows, they be stung and bitten so too, by a Viper or Serpent,
even unto death, for their BITING.

But here some will be ready to object (as their usual manner is so to do) when
Ministers go to make Usury dangerous, That all this concerns not moderate
Usury, but cruelly griping and oppressive Usurers.

Whereunto I answer, That as God himself makes Tarbith, that is, any Usurious
Increase, dangerous, as well as Nesheck, which is rendered Morsura, or Biting;
so our godly Divines do likewise: as for example; The As also Martin ab
Alpiscuet does, Enchirid. c. 17. number. 207.
Wittenberg Doctors make the taking of Five in the Hundred, which is counted
MODERATE, Heresy; and censure the Takers of it for HERETICS: Which, I am
sure, is so dangerous a thing, as that the Apostle tells us, that they which
are such shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Gal. 5.20, 21.

NUMBER. XXXVII.
But the Champion proceeds, saying,

Mr. Jelinger here by the way, speaking of those in Nehemiah contended with
upon this account, has these words; For they had promised him that they would
leave Usury, and restore, as I would wish you to promise so too. Reply. I have
heard of other Advice he gave lately to one concerned on the same score, viz.
Go to the Parties, and ask Forgiveness; though the Party were sufficient to
make Restitution. Whereunto my Answer is:

1. That I do not advise Usurers to ask Forgiveness, as in other Cases; nor ask
one another Forgiveness, when they have offended, in WORDS: but to have the
Usury money, which they have taken, and are to restore, forgiven them, in case
they be not able to restore. Which Advice I give as I am verlatim advised by
greater men than he, the Champion, is, even famous men indeed, whose Consent I
have in this, and shall nominate in its proper time and place.

2. That the truth is, that there is one, a Minister's Widow, which is
concerned in this thing, and has been convinced by my late Book against Usury,
(as others also, both Ministers and private Christians, have been both
convinced and changed by it) blessed be God, and has rendered me hearty thanks
for it, and has made Restitution, as all the Country about me knows, and
talks of it, though she was hardly able to do it, as her Neigbours tell me.

3. I answer, That this Convert took but Six in the Hundred, which is, as they
say, Moderated Usury; and yet repented of that, and made Restitution of about
Thirty pounds, not being dissuaded by me from so doing.

4. That being a Widow, and so consequently not so well able to employ her
Money as Men; and being told, that it was lawful for Widows to lend their Money
upon Usury, ye^ she would leave it, and made Restitution, as aforesaid.

5. That this Friend of mine was much blamed for it, and falsely reported to be
distracted, by some who should rather have encouraged her; and yet would not be
discouraged by them, nor taken off from her Godly course, which she took for
the easing of her troubled Conscience, for her former taking of Usury.

6. That I take special notice of it, that such a one should be so converted
and changed, that very time when my Treatise of Usury came forth, for the
confirmation of it, and encouragement and drawing of others to do as she did.

7. That I look upon it likewise as a remarkable ordering of God's all-ruling
Providence, that such a thing should happen in the very same Parish and Village
wherein my chief Adversary dwells, but a few doors from him, to convince him
that God's Hand is in it, and that he approves of my Proceedings, making it
evident to all that see and know this Change and Success, and how she reproves
my chief Antagonist for defending Usury.

8. That I have given my Advice to others too, and to some of my nearest
Relations, to make Restitution, as she made; which also they did, as I can
prove it, to stop my Adversaries Mouth.

NVM. XXXVIII.
Descript. 3. But I must speed it, to advance to the Third Description of
Usury, which is* That it is a most infamous thing; to defend it against my
fierce Antagonist, who replieth, Mr. Jelinger quoteth. That whereas others in
Writings under-write themselves either Husbandmen, or Spinsters, from their
Callings; the Usurer is ashamed to call himself an Usurer. This part concerns
only those that make a Trade of Usury, and have no other Calling to take up
their time and thoughts with: and such were they whom Austin calls shabbed.
After which Words, the cites Rivet again to the same effect. Whereunto,
together with all that he says besides, I shall answer, I hope, fully. And,

1. That partly it concerns such; for, my Qui ex professo Foenerat non serri
debet in Ecclesia. Poole in Ezech. 18.8.
Brethren and I say the same that Rivet says, in part, That such as will lend
out of a lazy humor, because they will not be taken up with a Calling, are
much to be blamed above others, and not at all excusable. But whereas he goes
farther, and adds, But such as out of an impotency of Merchandising, or
Necessity, as Widows, Orphans, aged Students, and the like, who are otherwise
taken up with other Functions; if they enter such Compacts as offend The rest
the Learned may read in Rivet himself.
not etc. I cannot assent to that, because I do not see it proved, what is
said, as it should be proved, quia sub Judice lis est, because it is a thing
controverted, what is said for Orphans and Widows, and must be disputed when
Objections come to be answered, and by name that which concerns Because some
Learned men plead for Orphans much, as Calvisius, Simler, and others.
Orphans and Widows. At present I will cite blessed Bolton, p. 48.
Bolton, against my Adversaries Citation out of Rivet: But what say ye to the
Case of Orphans? What shall become of Fatherless Children, Widows, and
distracted men of their Wits? Suppose all these for their Maintenance have a
Stock of Money left them, and they be not able to employ it. (as Rivet writes)
how shall they be maintained, but by the Use of it? For if they spend of their
Stock, what will become of them when their Stoc^ is gone?

To this that holy man Bolton As I also do in this Tract.
answers,

1. I might well be excused from answering this Objection at this time, because
our common Usurers, against whom I no^ purposely deal and dispute, are not
Babes and Madmen, ercept it be spiritually, but many times of great
understanding and wisdom.

2. If Usury be sinful in it self, it is evil in all, though in some more, and
some less: If it be forbidden in God's Book, as it is in many places directly
and clearly, what Circumstances Good meanings, Motives, Ends, or any thing, can
ma^^ it lawful, except the Royal Prerogative of the mighty Lord of Heaven and
Earth, who is the Lawgiver, and whose holy Will is the Rule of Justice,
interpose, and declare the contrary.

Though therefore the Relief of the Fatherless and Widow^ be good, yet must it
not be done by USURY; for that is to do evil that good may ensue which is
condemned by the Holy Ghost, Romans 3.8. Thus far blessed and learned Bolton; wh^
also proves Which is also so proved by Bishop Downa^n.
what he says by the Word of God, whi^^ neither the Champion nor his Author
does. Now let the Reader choose whom he thinks and judges to be in the right to
follow.

2. I answer what he says of St. Austin's skabbed Usurers, That they were such
as lived without a Calling, desiring him to prove it, that he speaks of such,
and no other; which I know he cannot do: for some Ministers in his time were
Usurers too, as he says upon Psalm. 15.5. even as now also some are, who take
up a double Calling, the Ministerial and the Vsurer's Calling: So that St.
Austin calling the Usurer skabbed, doubtless calls him not so because he is
idle, as some are, living without an honest Calling, but for some other cause
also, because he takes no pains for the Gains which he gets by his Money, but
leaves that to the Borrower; and because he infects, by his lending upon Usury,
others, as a skabbed Sheep infects many; for though he be a Pastor in some
respect, yet he is a Sheep too in another. And how does he infect, you will
say, others, like a skabbed Sheep? I answer,

1. By his Doctrine, being a Defendant for and of Usury; so he spoileth many,
who will believe him rather, speaking for their Worldly Gain, than holy Bolton,
who cries out against their unjust and unlawful Gain, which they get by the
Silver Shrines of their Goddess Diana, Usury, I mean.

2. By bad Example: for men, for the most part, are like Jacoh's Sheep, Genesis
30. led by the eye, and conceive as they see, and say, If Usury were such a
grievous and dangerous thing as some make it, such wise, able, and learned
Ministers would not practice it. [Here they name thee, that art a Minister and
a Usurer too, and so art, I will not say a double-beneficed man, because happily
thou have not one, but a man that has a double Calling, the Calling I mean of a
Preacher, and the quasi Calling of an Usurer: so I speak to any Minister that
is an Usurer; and therefore let no particular man take exception at my word,
for I name none, but others do name some.

NUMBER. XXXIX.
3. I answer; Though the Champion says nothing directly to my Speech
concerning the Usurer, That he is ashamed to call himself an Usurer, whereas
others in their Writings underwrite themselves either Husbandmen, or Clothiers,
or Spinsters; yet will I say a little more to and of that, viz. That others
also, as well as my self, have used the like Language, to show what an infamous
thing Usury is: For so Dr. Fenton; He that is an Usurer, if you ask what he is,
or of what Profession he is of, he will not gladly own that Name: Men's
Consciences are more troubled at the Name, than at the Practice of a Sin. But
most commonly he is called (and so will be called, say I) one that lives by
his Money; and that is without all exception: For, as the Gentleman lives upon
his Rents, the poor Labourer upon the Sweat of his Brow, the Merchant and
Tradesman upon their Adventures, Skill, and Industry; the Husbandman and
Grasier upon the Increase of the Earth, and Breed of Cattle: so the Usurer
lives upon his Money, that yeans, and foals, and calves to him, once in Six
Months at ^arthest. What a Fool then was Aristotle, to call Money barren, which
yields a double Harvest at the least every Year, and the form ^r Crop makes
the Seed-corn for the next?

4. I say, That because the Champion takes no notice to diverse other things
also, which I mention, because he is lot^ to hear of them, I will say a little
the more yet, besides all that; as namely, That whereas they say, that I only,
and some few morose and simple Ministers, that do not know what belongs to
City-Trade, and Merchandising, and the Worlds Affairs, go to make Usury so
infamous, so that the Champion does not think it to be worth the answering what
I have said; I will therefore cite some of the wisest Heads that have been in
the World, who make Usury as infamous as it can be made, viz.

1. Plutarch de non Foenerando.
Plutarch says, That the Publican was a most infamous Person, and that Usurers
play the Publicans.

2. Petrach. de Remed. utriusque Fort. l. 1. dial. 56.
Petrarch also writes, as I have read it in him, That there is not a more
filthy Study than that of Usury; and that in former times Usurers were
separated as Lepers from the Society of Man. And I am ashamed to tell what
woeful Names Copernicus.
Copernicus calls Usurers, and therefore will not relate his words.

3. Geminianus Sur. l. 8.
Geminianus tells us, That even the Notaries which make Usury-Bonds and
Writings, by it are made infamous, and lose their Office.

4. Lutherus de Taxanda Usura, To. 7.
Caesar himself, who, as a General, was versed in all Military Affairs, and did
march through many Kingdoms and Countries, and subdued them, and came to know
thereby all their Dealings and Affairs, and, as an Emperor and Supreme
Magistrate, ruling and governing the whole World, could not but be insighted in
all Civil Affairs too, did make a Decree, That a Usurer should not be counted
an honest man; So that I hope, that as Geneva was conquered and subjected by
this Caesar, in the days of The Chief Leader of the Swizers rising against the
Romans in Caesar's time, as Carrion reports it in his Chron.
Orgentorixe; so Usury, which was of late years so set up and defended by some
at Geneva, will be made more infamous than it has been yet, and so consequently
much left, conquered, and put down, by his Authority, Sayings, Sentences, and
Decrees, in the World hereafter, when his Fame shall be so spread abroad,
together with his Successors Decree against dishonest and infamous Usury.

NUMBER. XL.
Answ. 5. But this is not all that I have to say, to make Usury infamous: for
this is also yet behind to be spoken, That if the Champion shall think that
though Usury has been so infamous in the days of Caesar, and of old Writers,
yet it is not so now in our time, wherein Usury is so common; I, and thousands
more, can tell him, that it is as infamous now also among us; for one shall
hear both Ministers, that lend their Money upon Usury, and other rich men,
though they look never so big, called Usurers by way of disgrace.

1. Ministers: For what do the People say, when a man discourses with them
about Usury? Such a Minister, says one, is an able man, and preaches well;
but he is an USURER, for I know where he has out so much in such a man's hands,
who pays him use for it; and such a Minister has lent so much, it may be
Forty, or Fifty, or a Hundred Pounds, to such a Tradesman, and such a
back-handed man, who pays him Usury for it, who can hardly pay it, says
another. And such a Minister, says a third, is an Usurer; for I had Hundreds
of him, and paid him Use for it; (This I have heard with mine Ears confessed.)
I must confess that he abated me somewhat, he adds: But yet, for the
Courtesy shown him therein, he calls him Usurer: And so they do all call
such Lenders of Money Usurers, that is the nickname they give them, though
some take no more but ordinary Usury, or somewhat less.

2. The like is said of other rich men in common talk, if they be Lenders of
Money upon Usury, Such a one is an Usurer too, though he takes Use but after
the ordinary rate and stint, yea, even those that take much less: for I am told
of one, by a Friend who borrowed Money of him, that he took but Three in the
Hundred for Hundreds, and yet is called an Usurer for all that, because he
lends upon Usury; that is a nickname, the disgraceful style and reproachful
nuncupation, which is put upon every Lender upon disgraceful Usury; even as in
old time also those were called Usurers who took but Five in the Hundred for
the Loan of their Money, or much less; for some had but Four in the Hundred,
which was called led Usurae trientaria, that which an Emperor of Rome
practiced; as Six in the Hundred was called Semissalis Vsura, and Eight in the
Hundred, Usur^ ex Besse: All which kinds by godly Divines are held to be
improbous and unlawful, and condemned by Has species omnes judicamus improbas
^ure divino and humano damn^tas. Aret. de Usuris, p 625.
Divine and Humane Right, and so are justly called Usurers, by God's own Word
condemned Usurers, as here by my Citations it appears: And how Usurers will
help it, that they may not be called so, by such an infamous and reproachful
Name, I see not, unless they will repent, restore if they be able, and leave
off this Usury, as Nehemiah prays them to do; N^hem. 5.10.
I pray you let us leave off this Usury.

My sixth Answer is, That whereas he makes me a Carrier and Bookseller, to be
avenged on me, saying, (after other Passages) Unless upon the like grounds we
shall call Mr. Jelinger a CARRIER or BOOKSELLER, because he carries his Books
from County to County, from Town to Town, and from one Gentleman to another, to
get vent for them; I cannot but, 1. break out into this Exclamation; O spite! O
bitterness! O spleen! which is and lodges in this Man's Breast, for no hurt or
harm that ever I have done to him, unless he count this to be a great injury
done to him, that I have published my late Book called The Usurer cast, because
he lends upon Usury; for which thing I not once named him, as here he names me
by a reproachful Name, to disgrace me, if he could: The Lord forgive him; so I
prayed when I wrote this.

2. I answer, That he wrongs me grievously; for the truth of the matter is
this: I went indeed into a neighboring County, and there bestowed Four Books
upon my choicest Friends, which were Persons of Honor, and great Quality, but
sold none. To London also I went* where I printed some of my Labors, and took
a course for printing more, and presented my Books, which I had dedicated to
that Illustrious Prince, and to another Eminent Person more, to which The
Usurer cast is dedicated, but Though I was much follicited to se^d some of my
B^eks, by a Stationer, upon that account.
sold none. And in this County of Devon I gave Six or Seven to some certain
Gentlemen and Ladies, to whom I was much obliged, and had formerly dedicated
the fruits of my Ministry, but sold none in any Fair or Market, (as it is
slanderously reported by him, and some other Usurers, who would gladly cast an
Odium and Aspersion upon me, for writing against their DIANA:) for there was no
need, because I was sent unto from Towns, and by sundry Persons, to send Books
for them, and to them, which I can prove sufficiently: Only this I add, That to
some in that City, unto whom I had dedicated my Labors, I gave (not sold) some
of the said Books, as others of my Brethren that print Books do likewise: and
must I only be called a Carrier, above all others?

NUMBER. XLI.
Answ. 7. And whereas the Champion brings in some noted Authors in the close of
his Reply, saying, It Is not so infamous a thing, that a Man may be ashamed to
own it, seeing so Reverend Divines as Mr. Baxter, Hughes, Perkins, and Calvin,
have not been ashamed to plead the Lawfulness thereof; I shall now, in the last
place, answer his naming of these great Names. And,

1. In general, That neither of these godly Men, nor any other, did ever plead
for that Usury which my Friends and I plead against, viz. Usury properly so
called, and by the Word of God condemned.

2. That I will here set down the Words of famous Dr. Slater: Dr. Slater upon
Romans 13.
May not this Sin wind it self into their Affections, and from thence into
their Intellect, till it have caten out all soundness of judging and discerning
between Good and Evil? Usury being a Trade so easy, so gainful, so pleasing;
this advantage the Devil has got by it, that it being so easy, it is easily
believed what these Divines say for it. Thus that Learned Doctor: with whom I
will join B. Downam on Ps. 15.5.
Bishop Downam, who having alleged Dr. Luther upon Psalm. 15.5. saying, That
that Verse against Usury had no need of expounding, but fulfilling and
pr^ctising, makes this application of his Words; If Luther were living in these
our Times, and understood, besides the common practice of Usury openly, and the
cunning Shifts whereby it is cloaked, the open DEFENSE also thereof undertaken,
not only by Usurers themselves, but also by diverse DIVINES, etc. who have
either spoken or written more wittily than truly in favor of Usury, assuredly
he would confess, that there is scarcely any one Moral Point which needs more
fully to be expounded, and more exquisitely to be discussed; which makes me so
to enlarge my self upon it.

3. That I, for my part, if I might win the World by it, would not defend it,
much less practice it, considering, 1. How dangerous a thing it is for a man to
make himself a partaker of other men's sins, contrary to 1 Timothy 5.22. And, 2.
How a whole Council, Viennense.
Council has condemned all for Heretics who hold it lawful, even as the
Protestant University of Wittenberg does likewise.

NUMBER. XLII.
Secondly, and more particularly, I will now deliver my mind about his Authors.
And,

1. Concerning Reverend and Renowned Mr. Baxter, That I shall freely and
willingly subscribe to his Definition, as I have declared it formerly, and hold
with him in this too, That all Usury is not unlawful; because there are
Fenories improperly so called, which my Brethren and I approve of also, as I
have already said before now: though they and I do speak against all Usury
properly so called, and by God himself, and all good men, condemned. And
lastly, I do with heart and good will assent to diverse of his godly Cautions by
him Richard Baxter.
given, and especially this, That a Lender must as well bear a part in the
Borrower's Loss as Gain, which makes such a kind of Dealing Partnership indeed.

2. As for Mr. Hughes.
Mr. Hughes (who was my Colleague and Fellow Laborer, and whom I have read, as
well as Mr. Baxter) I have this to say of him* That he is a little too short to
decide such a great Question, and to make Usury lawful, (as also Mr. Together
with R. T. a late Champic^ for Usury.
Ames his third Author is, whom I have read too, and formerly answered) and
that I have heard enough by the report of others, who will swear it, how he has
declared his mind against Usury, to a godly Minister, Mr. B. Cl. since
departed, and has kept some from the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper for their
Usury; which I hint at now again, because my Adversary alleges him so often.

His fourth Author, next to Ames, is Perkin^.
Perkins; which will do him but little pleasure: for in his Exposition on
Christ's Sermon upon the Mount, he does (as blessed Bolto^* p. 7^.
Bolton observes it) ONLY approve Liberal and Recompencing Usury (which my
Brethren and my self also approve of, as even now I intimated, speaking of Mr.
Baxter) and not of Usury truly and properly so called, and commonly practiced
in this Kingdom, which I here speak against and oppose, I say, with Blessed
Bolton.

NUMBER. XLIII.
His fifth and last Author is Calvin Epist. Resp. de Usuris.
Calvin, who will do him less good: For,

1. Idem in Ezech. 18.
Himself having delivered his Opinion concerning Usury, would have no man to
stand upon his Judgment for the full and absolute determination of this
Controversy.

2. He says, Idem.
That it is more than a rare thing, that the same man should be an Usurer and
an honest man.

3. Idem.
We must always hold it to be a thing scarce possible, that he which takes
Usury should not wrong his Brother.

4. Idem.
It were to be wished, that the very Name of Usury were buried, and utterly
blotted out of the memory of men.

5. And he wishes, that none would write to him any more about it.

6. Dr. Fenton.
And it is believed, that if it had not been for the French Exuls, that flocked
and fled to Geneva, being persecuted out of France, we should not have heard of
such defending of Usury. For then it was when Calvin was asked, What those poor
Exuls should do with their Money, that they might live, because their Lands
they could not carry with them, but only their Money, which they could not
adventure at Sea for a Livelihood, because Geneva is no Sea-town, but far from
the Sea, standing upon a Lake only, (For I lived there as a Student and Exul
too, and therefore can speak it.) and which would be soon spent, if it should
not be employed, for a maintenance, one way or other? I say, then it was that
poor Calvin was put to it to resolve them; so as that he was driven to advise
them to a quasi Usura, that is, to a kind of Usury, which was so cautioned by
him, as that it was rather Partnership than Usury. So that Usurers have little
cause to stand upon Calvin, because of his godly Sayings, I add, and Cautions,
which they do not observe, and which I intend to mention hereafter, together
with more of his Sayings.

But I desire to return again to this blessed Calvin, to vindicate him, because
I love him dearly, and read his Institutions, as near as I can, daily, being
advised so to do by a godly Divine, when I lived in the famous University of
BASEL in Helvetia; I say, a godly Divine, who told me that he did so himself*
so as that I wish that others would do so too, it being such an excellent Book,
as that one made these Praeter Apostolicas post Christi tempora Chartas, Huic
peperere Libro saecula nulla parem. Surius Basti^gius, to the Reader, upon his
Comment upon the Catech. in the County Palate.
Verses upon it, which I set down in the Margin; and that one may say of it,
that which Doctor Fabricius.
Fabricius says of Tully, Let him know, that he has profited much, which is
much delighted in Calvin.

I say again, That I desire by this to vindicate Calvin, because the Videatur
Lorinus in Psalm. 15.
Papists do brand him with this, That he and his Calvinians hold for that Usury
which is every where so much spoken against, and by God's Word condemned; which
is false: and because a late Protestant Doctor, a Cousin and Countryman of
mine, has written a Book, wherein he calls Calvin That Saboudian Innovator,
to please some, by way of reproach; which I dare not, nor will do, though he be
alleged against me in the Point of Usury, which he is as much against as I;
Usury, I mean, properly so called, and commonly practiced in the World.

NVM. XLIV.
Lastly, I superadd, That if the Champion should bring Forty more to these
Four, and Forty to them over and above, I should be no more troubled at it,
than at the having of One only; because these holy and learned men, who have
somewhat favorably written of some Usury, have, like Mr. Baxter, and Calvin,
spiced it so with such Cautions, as make it no Usury, properly so called, but
another Contract, and commonly that of Society: I will instance in famous Virel
(in his Cat^^h.) who holds this Usury lawful, if, 1. The Borrower besprinkle
the Lender with part of his Increase, rather out of his voluntary thankfulness,
than by way of exaction. 2. If the Lender be context to bear part of the
Borrowers Loss, as well as of his Gain. 3. If the Principal do miscarry without
the Borrowers fault, the Lender will not only remit the Principal, hut also
lend him afresh; which I think never any Usurer in the World did. So that here
I will end with the Words of deep-learned Powel, (in his Posit. page 52.) NO
Writer that ever I could see, or hear of, ever allowed of USURY. And presently
after he explains his Saying: There are many strong Poisons, which the learned
Physicians can so qualify, that a sick Person may take a Potion wherein some
of the Poison is: so holy men of God have done and do temper and qualify the
Usurers Poison, that they make thereof a wholesome Medicin^ for many distressed
Persons: For by their h^ly and religious Caveats and Lessons, they alter the
quality of the Usury, and make it indeed no Usury at all, but a lawful kind of
Trade and Dealing. Thus he. Whereby it appears, that my Adversary has gotten no
advantage at all by his Authors, (though Usurers mostly stand upon it, and some
others) because their holy Caveats are not observed by them.

My Fourth Description opposed, and my first answer to it.
MY next task will be to defend my fourth Description of Usury, Numb. 41.
viz. That it is a most mo^^ strous increasing thing, wherein my examiner holds
himself and his, not to be concerned in, but only those Monsters which I name,
adding that he which takes but a mite for a 100 l. passes with me under the
same Condemnation: whereunto I answer,

1. That not a word or syllable of a mite taken for a 100 l. is to be found in
all my description: let the Reader peruse my Book p. 15. In these. Wittenberg.
Some famous men, indeed have mentioned a mite upon another account, and their
words were quoted by me as theirs, not mine, and they doubtless will be able to
give an account, of their words upon the great day of Accounts, and such men
have named five in the 100 too, and made it heresy; and so damnable, as the
Wittenburge Doctors, whom upon several accounts I have often quoted.

My Second Answer.
2. That, tho in a special manner, I brand some notoriously oppressive Usurers
with monstrousness according to their deserts, yet do I not exempt others: no
more then both Fathers and Modern Writers, besides the holy Prophets, as my
book p. 15. evidently shows it: for therein I quote Basil, who speaks of
Usury in General, thus, that it begets it self, and becomes bigger then it was
by increase:

3. I answer, that because my Antagonist takes but little notice of what I say
to confirm my assertion, I will make my Description to grow a little bigger by
some addition to its stature, seeing I am now upon increasing, as thus:
Declaring,

That it is a monstrously increasing thing three ways. 1. In that like a
Monstrum est contra naturam. Cornel Fronto, de Differ. Vocab. and donatus
qucque, And a Monster in nature.
Monster which is against nature, it swells and superabounds in parts and
members; there was of late years a Child brought forth in a Town, where I was
Preacher, with double and superabunding parts and members in his infantile B.
Jewel in 1 These. 4. an ugly Beast. Aristot. 1.7.
A swelling Monster, Suidas in Ar^stoph de Nubibus.
body and was called a Monster, and here was a A; I also desive in this Book to
write of the Monste^, called Usury. Whereof Mr. Smith writes thus, this word
moi^^ is like the sixth finger, which makes a monster because it is m^^ than
should be p. 95. And as he, which first devised the breeding up Mules, in
Genes^, joined those things, which God would (...) have joined, and so brought
forth a Monster: so he that f^^^ joined gain with lending brought forth that
Manster, called Usury.
book written and published to the world. Answerably whereunto, Usu^ also may
be called such a Monster, because against For in all Usury, a barren thing
brings forth, says a fam^^ Doctor. Et Vsuraria acquisitio est maxim contra
naturam, dicit Aristot. 1. Pol. c. 7. Et Cicero in 3 Offic. Est magis contra
naturam quam mors.
nature i^ brought forth, and because the Usurer is all for double, that is for
Principal and Use; And many times for other pleonasmes and excrescences and
superaboundings* also, not being contented with the single principal repaid,
which is according to nature. As for advance money; and for bribes besides six
in the 100. a bushel of Corn now and then, or something else; for some Usurers
will first deny men to lend, pretending the they shall have occasion for their
money to use it, but to do a man a pleasure they will let them have it, and so
they loo^ for somewhat for their Courtesy, besides their Use, and their
Servants must have somewhat too, for the procuring of it.

2. In that, whereas the Cum parere in rebus, quae non vivunt, esse non habent,
iste tamen vult nummus suos qui non vivu^^, sirgulis diebus vel mensibu; alios
nummos parere, quod contr^ naturam est. Peraldus De Avar. p. 66.
dead cannot beget or bear As a great Doctor calls Usury gains as well as my
felf.
Children, the Usurer by his money will bring forth in a monstrous manner other
money, tho the said money be a dead thing and does not live, which is against
nature, says, Peraldus; so that Usury must needs be a monstrously increasing
thing.

3. In that against nature some Usurers will bring forth by their Usury
hundreds, others thousands of Children, as it were in a short time: one Writes
of some, that they know how, by a 100 pounds to gain forty or fifty pounds in a
year; and who knows not, says he, that money continually put forth to Usury
after ten in the 100. (as it was in his time) does in seven years almost double
the principal, and in every seven years double the former Sum, so that a 100
pounds ^et out after this rate, from three months to three months arises in
seven years to almost 200. O monstrously increasing Usury: There is another
great Person, who has made the like Computation in a Tract of his presented to
a Parliament in England, against Usury, whose words I will not now rehearse,
but rather set down a little more of that, which the foresaid Author adds to
the words even now mentioned, who would not sell his lands and Goods, and all
that he can spare, to raise a stock of money, that thereout he might by Usury
reap so great and so certain a gain, if once in his Conscience he were assured,
that Usury is lawful? Thus he, and as he says this in General, so say I of my
self in particular, that I would sell all that I have, and bring it to a sum of
money and lend it out upon Usury too, as others do, if I were sure that Usury,
which brings such a monstrous increase were NO SIN: For then I should be freed
from all care, trouble, charge, hazards of lives, taxes, reparations, which men
that have Livings, and lands are liable unto.

I add, and truly, truly, the world might well call us all, that will not put
out our money upon fenory, FOOLS, and mere SOTS, that we will not do what
lawfully we might do, to get such exceeding great gains.

Numb. 42.4. To go on gradatim, higher and higher, it is a Monstrous increasing
thing, in that against nature, the Usurer by it (as barren as money is) does
beget, not only hundreds and thousands, as his lending may be as so many
Children in infinitum, even to infinite numbers, which is much more then I said
yet, as thus:

Whereas a Debtor borrows but Forty or Fifty pounds, he makes himself a
debtor not only of so many, (in case he come not off with his payment) but no
man is able to tell of how many, tho he pay but six in the 100. which because
it may seem to be incredible, I will set down the words of a great Doctor
instancing in ten Crowns borrowed, when money was lent out after ten in the
100. A borrower receives ten, or some such certain number of Crowns, and
thereby makes himself debtor not only of so many, but no man can say how many
more if the borrower pay but two Crowns over, by the year, in one 100 years he
shall pay for ten Crowns 200 Crowns: and yet shall he still remain debtor for
the ten Crowns also.

And shortly after he says further, that those ten Crowns may from Age to Age
be only said to continue in the bank, as in some places it chances, and so
within a 1000 years they make increase of 2000 Crowns; add hereunto that in
case the borrower do not pay his Usury in ten years, he is then debtor of
twenty Crowns, of ten for the Principal and of other ten for the Usury, which
the Usurer begets and ingendreth (as it were) to the intolerable loss to
the borrower, and the excessive gain of himself, and yet these ten Crowns be
not his own all this while, although he pick out so great advantage of them,
yea, all this while they be no where at all, for in one moment they were Nor
could he purchase with them.
consumed and spent by him that borrowed them, and in place of them an idol is
conceived which idol does Without Lands (...) Fields bought.
remain refusedly, not any where in nature b^^ in name and imagination: for its
feigned, that the ten Crow^^ lie still in a certain bank, and there do beget
little ones, which again have other little ones, and whereas all other things
die and perish, and many beasts which nature made apt to increase, by
casualties prove barren, yet these ten Crowns, which by nature were barren, and
in truth were spent, remain still so fruitful in the USURERS vain imagination,
and in the borrowers most grievous pension, that if the world should stand for
ever, they also should be immortal, and should neither die, nor ever become
barren.

5. In that against the nature of lending he will needs gro^ rich and great,
and yet so much as I have mentioned by lending, which ought not to be mercenary
but free, for so all N^tions and unbyassed Writers, Greeks, Latins, Jews,
Philosophers, Lawyers, Divines, and generally all Heathens, and Christians that
have soundly Written of this subject; take that to be the true definition or
description of loan, that it is to deliver to the borrower such things as are
spent with the first natural and proper use thereof, with Bond to repay him so
much again and so good again, and no more, as I have formerly shown it: And, 2.
So Christ himself would have it, saying, lend, looking for nothing again, Luke
6.35. Where note by the way, that Christ no where bids us to buy and sell, as
men ordinarily use to do, or to follow the usual way of Merchandising because
he knew that men were and would be of themselves willing to do that, but to
lend freely, which they are unwilling to do.

6. In that the Committant of Usury against the natural Use and end of money,
which is a foremost equality, does introduce into the World a monstrous
deformity, odness, and inequality, where let me discourse a little of the
coming in and using of money, and apply what I shall say concerning it, to the
present matter of Usury, but before I go on with this subject, I will first
premise the saying of a wise man concerning money, when money is given to loan
(as in Usury it comes most times to pass) there is a special DEFORMITY also in
that behalf: And now for a fuller handling of this matter of money, let me
declare here, that money was first invented by the common consent of men,
especially to serve man's necessity and commodity in chopping and changing
things to and fro; for in the beginning he that lacked any thing, as for
example, a new garment he went to another man, that had vestiments enough, and
brought him such stuff whereof himself had store, as Cloth perhaps, or skins,
or some like matter, to make an equal exchange between them both: So that thing
for thing was exchanged: and that was the most simple and natural kind of
Traffic between men: but experience declared that this at length was
incommodious, and would not serve every man's turn for sometimes he that had
shoes, which I lacked, had also cloth and skins* as well as I, and then he was
loath to take my cloth for his shoes, seeing that he had does enough of his
own. For which cause wise men devised that some certain metal should serve the
turn of all me^^, so that who so needed any stuff, he should take such a kind
of metal, or Coin, to wit lead or leather, and at length brass, and for that he
should receive of any other man whatsoever he needed. Thus metal was at the
first esteemed by consent and delivered by weight: so that a pound of brass
should be (for example) the price of a pair of shoes: And when it was found
troublesome also, especially for them that went abroad to carry such weight of
metal about them, and to stand long in weighing it, instead of a great deal of
brass, a little Silver and less Gold was at length invented; yea, then it was
also further devised, that a certain Coin or print should be set upon Silver or
Gold so that we should not need always to weigh it, but that the very form
should straight show the value thereof; money therefore was made to serve all
exchanges and to be the price of all other things, and to set forth a form of
equality in the world, and not a deformity as Usury does, together with a
monstrous inequality, whereof^^ have spoken formerly, at present I will but add
what a great Doctor Sand. In his Treatise of Usury.
Doctor says concerring this matter: it is utterly against the end for which
either any other exchange or money it self was made; for it was made to bring
all things to an equality, and to be, as it were a rule and measure, whereby
the value of all things might be quickly known and easily counterpoised, but
now Usure^ make money to serve for the greatest inequality that can be devised
of man, his words are too large to be inserted wholly.

A Reply to my fifth Description.
BUT I must go onward and see how the Champion goes on Number. 43.


Mr. Jelinger. Fifthly, A most cruelthing it is.

For its always biting, day and night, Winter and Summer, etc. Reply, (to omit
his odd comparison, as not argumentative at all) it is great pity he had not
been by the Parliament men, when they were passing the Act concerning Usury to
have exempted at least the Nights and Lords days through the year from paying
the Use: But does not the Adventurer at Sea his gain go on too at the same
rate, and he that Rents a Tenement; or Houses, do not Nights and Lords days and
Winter come into computation with other times, for which they pay? had his
arguing been his own, we should have counted it very weak and dregs, but he
borrows freely, and then makes a show as if it were his own goods.

My Answer.
Whereunto I shall Answer thus.
1. Retortingly about the Parliament; that it is a great pity that he had not
been with the Parliament men, when they made that famous J^c^bi 13, c. 8.
Act against Usury to advise them.

1. That they should not entitle it an Act against Usury because all men would
see by that, that they are not for Usury.

2. That by no means they should use these words. FORASMUCH AS ALL USURY, BEING
FORBIDDEN BY THE WORD OF GOD IS SIN AND DETESTABLE, mark, ALL USURY as I also
say, for that would spoil the poor Usurer utterly, and make his gainful trade
to decay irrecoverably.

2. Concerning adventuring and setting of ground and houses, I have this to
say, that there is a vast difference between both these and Usury, because the
former are not interdicted by the word of God, but the latter is, as I have
already shown, And 2. because they are no where in Scripture called Biting, as
Usury is, and therefore cannot be said to bite night and day, Winter and
Summer, Lords days and Week days, as Usury does, which is called Morsura in
Hebrew (...). Some oppression may be thereby committed and so it may be called
when it is so, but Usury properly so^ called cannot be, because that is
otherwise designed, as has been formerly ostended.

3. I answer, that whereas he tells the World, that I am a free borrower, etc.
I am not ashamed of borrowing, because it is lawful, but he may be ashamed of
lending, I mean upon Usury, because that is unlawful, Deuteronomy. 23.19. but that is
not all that I have to say. For I can sufficiently evidence it, that he is both
a lender and borrower to himself, a borrower I mean, which freely borrowes of
others, what they Write, and then makes a show as if it were his own, to use
his own words.

Where give me leave to add, that the same thing happened, when I read his
Pamphlet, which happened when * Doctor Fenton (that Malleus or Hammer of
Usurers) read a Manuscript for Usury, as this man is, he wondered where and
whence he had it what he wrote, but afterward found it all in Bullinger;
answerably whereunto, I wondered also whence he had his skill in the Oriental
tongues, Syriak, Arabic, and Persick upon Luke 6.35. but soon after found the
same in the Polyglotte which some body lent him.

Number. 44.4. But I desire to come more closer to him, and to answer him more
fully, becausehe relates my words but slightly, and does not answer that which
is most material, but leaves out that which makes mostly against him, as
namely that proof of mine which makes it clear that Usury is always biting,
in that the Usurer is called in the Hebrew (...) a biting one, in the
participle, because he is always biting. O cruel biter! So that I am now
resolved to show more abundantly what a cruelly biting thing it is, in two
Respects.

1. In that biting it wounds and thereby creates and multiplieth cruel pain and
sorrow.

2. Causes many cruel and bitter Curses and Cursings.

For the first; I shall make it evident how cruelly biting it wounds, paineth
and puts to abundance of sorrow, four sorts of sufferers: as namely.

1. The Usurer himself.

2. His Children, and Posterity.

3. The borrower.

4. The Poor and Commonwealth.

1. The Usurer himself, because biting cruelly it wounds his Conscience:
because he takes it against the checks of his Conscience; as therein I appeal
to his own evil and wounded Conscience, which has caused a great and Learned
Powel in his posit. p. 26.
Author to let these very words drop from his Pen, Usury does daily torment and
assault his Conscience, that takes Usury, I add, s^ that Usury sads, and that
sadness which comes by its biting and wounding, may well be resembled to Abel
and Cain. Cain signifying possession, and Abel mourning and sorrow, I superadd
that this pain and sorrow does then especially come upon the Usurer, when he
lies upon his death bed, as I have read of diverse Usurers how sadly they have
ended their days, and what for anguish they have said, before they died. And it
cannot well be otherwise, because Usury is a birth called (...) in Greek,
because it causes pain trouble and sorrow as our Savior tells us, that a woman
when she is in travail, has sorrow, John 16.21. answerably whereunto a poor
Usurer must needs have sorrow, especially when he thinks he shall die; because
then that saying of David, Psalm. 15.1.5. Lord, who shall dwell in thy holy
hill? he that has not put his monney to Usury, and that of Ezekiel. Cha. 18.12,
13, 36. Has given forth upon Usury, and has taken increase, shall he then live,
he shall not live, etc. and verse 30, after this, therefore I will Judge you, O
house of Israel, mark; Judge you, every one according to his ways, (and so the
Usurer by the name, according to his Usurious ways) says the Lord, which when
the poor wounded Usurer makes a reflection upon, must needs exceedingly
trouble his mind and perplex his wounded Spirit, his Conscience telling him,
that as soon as he shall be unmanned by death, he must forthwith come to his
p^rticular Judgment, and Answer for all the Usury money which he had taken, and
that at that Great day of the General Judgment he must appear again and be
judged for that great abomination which is called Usury in Usury; see and
compare for it, these Verses the 13. and 14. in Ezekiel 18. and let me tell the
Usurer, that the Very Where note that a Sibyl was and is so called quasi (...)
after the Aeolian language, a consiliis deorum, as Lactant. has it. l. 1. de
falsa Relig. c. 6. and that those Sibyls did foretell things divine afflatu
miri^ico, by a miri^ick and divine inspiration, as Justin Mart* info^^s (...),
in Mocum patrum, Sibyl, O^ae. l. 2.
Sibyls have foretold of the coming of the Usurer to Judgment, as I will
instance in one whose words are these, -- -- -- (...)
that is, (...)


Then shall come before him Murderers, Adulterers, Drunkards with the VSVRERS.
So that this remembrance of both these Judgments cannot but make the poor
Usurer lie down in sorrow, crying out and saying within himself: O woe is me
that ever I was born to be an Usurer! for now, I must come to an account for
every Penny, Shilling, Pound, and for all those hundreds of pounds which I have
Usuriously taken, and after that my Soul mu^c die, die, die, to all Eternity,
and when Christ shall come to his General Judgment, my Soul and Body both will
be cast into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the Second
death, Rev. 21.8. which I must die by virtue of the unerring word of God, who
says in express words of the Usurer, he shall surely die his blood shall be
upon him, Ezekiel. 18.13. And how! O how shall I be able to dwell in those
everlasting burnings! Esa. 33.^4. O Eternity, how formidable is the very
thought of thee! for when I have lain in that lake of fire so many thousand
years, as there are hairs upon my head, piles of Grass in the colored Fields,
Sands on the Sea shore yet even then, it may be said, now Eternity begins:
Ah poor Usurer think upon this long, long, long, duration of Eternity, how the
thoughts of it will torment thee in the hour of death, and how thy cruelly
biting Usury, and all thy bags and pounds of money which thou have gotten by
it, will not yield thee one dram or drop of comfort in that sad and sorrowful
time.

Number. 46. 2. But I must be briefer next in my second branch, which concerns his
Children and Posterity, Which it so cruelly, wounds, and hurts, as that
commonly,

1. They die after him, I mean such as being led by his example follow the same
trade, as it is written in Ezekiel. 18.10, 12, 13. If he beget a Son, that is a
shedder of blood (as the Father is or was) and does the like things, etc. and
has given forth upon Usury, and has taken increase shall he then live? He
shall not live, etc. he shall surely die, I confess the Prophet speaks of a
Son, that is begotten of a Father that is no Usurer verse 8. but if that Son
which is begotten of a Father which never put his money upon Usury, shall die,
so that his Fathers righteousness cannot save him, then how much more shall the
son of a wretched Usurer die, who lies both under the guilt of his own Usury,
which he has taken, and of his Fathers Usury, which he has taken, and should
have restored together with (...) own, and did not:

So that I would not be the Son of such a Father for a world of Wealth: But I
desire here chiefly, to aggravate the sin of a Father, which is an Usurer and
cruelly bit^^, wounds, and hurts, yea * kills his Children, as * one faith, and
that in two Res^ects.

1. In that his Idem. So that he deserves to be beaten and to suffer, which
made Diogenes so beat a Father when his Son had committed a f^ult, because his
Fathers example made him do what he did. Which Crate; also did, as Quintilian
asserts it.
example makes them Usurers.

2. In that the money left them is unto them the cause of eternal death, says
the same Author*: Pliny writes of the Woolf; that he brings forth blind
Whelps, and so does the Usurer commonly bring forth blind Children that cannot
see what their Father left them, and then when the Father is gone to Hell for
gathering, they follow after for spending.

2. But if this do not happen, because they will be no Usurers as their Father
was, yet commonly the Usurers Children and Postcrity lose, by one means or
other, that which he has wretchedly gotten, and come to poverty; his Goods
being brought into the possession of others, for the relief of the Poor,
according to Prove. 28.8. He that increases his Riches by Usury and increase,
gathers them for him that shall be merciful to the poor.

Hemingius instances in one certain Usurer, who dwelt in Chersoneso Cimbrica,
and grew exceeding rich by lending upon Usury, died, having abundance of
wealth, and yet after his death, the children that he left behind him, fell
into extreme poverty: in so much, that a daughter of his was found to have not
so much as a Coat to cover her nakedness: And innumerable examples and
instances more might be given, and such as I have observed in my times of many
rich Usurers Posterity, who have lost that Land, those Livings, those Estates,
which their Fathers and Grandfathers have purchased with Usury money, and are
now possessed by others, and others can and do testify the same: Where let me
mention but one godly and learned Minister more, who told me that with his
eyes, he saw a Widow, whose Husband was worth 12000 pounds gotten by Usury, beg
a dish of Porridge, which affected him very much, because he had known them
both in their Prosperity; and that must needs cause sadness: So that Usury may
well be assimilated to Tire and Sidon: For Tire is said to be the daughter of
Sidon, and Tire signifies Affliction and Sadness, and Sidon, Venation or
hunting, which may fitly be applied to Usury, which is a kind of hunting after
wealth, and to Usurers. which are hunters after the Gain that comes by Usury;
and then begets Tire, that is much affection to such as are begotten by them,
and to their Posterity: So that I may well tell what a cruelly biting thing
Usury is in respect of this hurt it does to the Usurers Children and Posterity.

Numb. 48.3. And does it not cruelly bite, and biting wound, pain, hurt, and
make sad necessitous Who for that cause is called in Hebrew (...) that is,
bitten, even as for pain and dolor Usury is also called (...), which in it is
primitive signification signifies a birth, next to which is the issue of it,
namely dolor as Ambros. takes it. lib. de Tob. 1. c. 12.
Borrowers? O yes, I appeal for it to you Borrowers, who are in the Usurers
Books, do not you find it so? Does not Usury, though it be but Six in the
hundred make sad, yea almost break your hearts? does it not make you wake and
fetch many a deep sigh, when others sleep and take their rest? Do not Usurers
arrest you, if you come not off to a day? and make you sell your Cattle, your
Goods, and sometimes your fields or means to half price, or at least to your
great loss?

Some I believe do not feel that which others feel for the present, but
afterward they cannot choose but feel it, so that diverse Authors as Pliny,
Baldus the Lawyer, Powel Turner compare the Usurers to the worm which is soft
to a man's touch, but biteth deep and after a while will be felt to some purpose.

But I have a mind to name two Authors more. And 1. Chrys^stome, even as leaven
which is put into meal infecteth the whole lump and drawing it to it self,
turns it into the nature of leaven: so when Usury enters into any man's estate
it draws his substance to it and turns it into debt.

2. Basil, when the Usurer seems to have relieved a man, he casts him into a
deeper want; and cruelly it hurts, wounds, and sads the poor and Commonwealth
(to join them both) I begin first with the poor, whom he hurts and wounds
grievously. How? the poor, some will say, is not the Usurer all for the poor,
when he quoteth these Scriptures, Exo. 22.25. Lev. 25.36, 37. And would not
have the poor oppressed by Usury, I know he is for the poor in words, but not
in his practice: For he cares not what becomes of the poor, Chrysostom. 12.
to. 3. Where note again how for that holy man is from speaking against cruelly
biting Usury only.
when lending his money upon Usury, he makes the borrower sell his Corn and
ware the dearer to pay him his Usury, and to make benefit of it for himself,
whereby the poor usually are bitten cruelly.

Number. 49.2. The Commonwealth is so much bitten hurted and sadded by it, as that
diverse Commonwealths have banished and driven out all Usurers out of their
Territories, Countries, and Cities: as Scicily, Sparta, and Worms that great
imperial City within a mile of which I was born, who write this, and have seen
six thousand Jews (as it was said) driven out for Usury, which examples, with
the consideration of Usurers cruelty, has caused Dr. Beard to publish to the
World this wish of his. It is to be wished, that some would examine the Usurers
Books, and make a bonefire; that some Lucullus would deliver Europa from that
contagion, as the Romans did Asia.

And now Secondly, I will speak both of the poor and Commonwealth together, and
for both quote famous Bishop B. D^nam upon Psalm. 15.
Downam, whose words are, Usury is hurtful to the Commonwealth and especially
to the Commonalty (whereby I understand the poorer sort) which pays it, for
whosoever thriveth by occupying money borrowed upon Usury, he has pitched so
the prize of his commodities, as that, besides a competent gain, raised for the
maintenance of himself and his charge, he also has gathered up an overplus, and
tenth part for the Usurer: And thus by Usury the prices of all commodities are
inhanced, while the Sellers borrow upon Usury, if they will thrive must needs
make the buyers to pay two shillings in the pound more then otherwise were
sufficient, thus he.

I am necessitated to bring such Authors, because my Adversary makes such a
market man of me, as if none were like me, whereas now he may plainly see, that
so great a man as this Bishop is, Writes after the same rate of markets, as I
do, so that I shall leave him now to dispute it with great Downam, why he will
busy himself so much about Market affairs, to make the Usurer a biter of the
poor and commonwealth.

Lastly, I say, that Usury is a cruelly biting wounding sadding thing, because
it causes most cruel and bitter cursing, for what says Jeremiah, I have
neither lent upon Usury, nor men have lent to me upon Usury, yet every one of
them does curse me, Chapter 15.10. which has caused Which occasioneth me to mention
an expression of a godly man, which, as he told me, heard a pious man say, that
it was pity but that man's tongue should ^ot in his mouth, who defends Usury.
Dr. Luther to say, That the Usurer is the curse of God, and of the people:
where give me leave to declare. How he causes three several curses, for,

1. The poor do curse him, because, as I said, he is bitten through his
occasion in Markets and Wares, which he buys, and because he will lend no
money to him though he be full of money: but only to the rich.

2. The necessitous borrower curses him, because he must pay Use for his
money, tho he neither buy an estate with it nor get by it, but only for bare
need borrows it; to free himself from an Arrest, or to save, and keep what he
has, that it may not fall into D^^^or Williams in his true Church, p. 43^.
the Lords hand, or else to buy provision, when it is reasonable to maintain
his Wife, Children, and Family: tho Christ has said expressly, lend, looking for
nothing again, that is, no Usury for it, as expositors expound that place.

3. Both Fathers and Children, (which imitate their Fathers in the taking of
Usurie, or else riotously do spend what their Father has wretchedly gotten by
Usury) do curse one another in hell, when they are there, most bitterly and
everlastingly: And there is a famous Writer who describes their mutual cursing
most pathetically thus, that in that infernal punishment Usurers and their
Children will p. 16.
curse one another, the Father saying, cursed art thou my Son, because for thy
sake I am tormented in this flame; for I became an Usurer lest I should leave
thee a beggar, I gathered wealth that thou should not be poor, and I was
contented to be poor in grace, that thou might be rich in goods, and
therefore am now poor in all things, but in torments: and the Son on the other
side will say to the Father; nay rather, cursed art thou, O Father; because
that thou gatheredst thy wealth with iniquity and leftest unto me with a curse
which has consumed it, and destroyed my Soul; and now let the Usurer open his
eyes and see what a cruelly biting sin Usury is, that he may leave it, and
live, and not be cursed here and hereafter for ever, which God in mercy grant.

Number. 50. * The Champi^ns next work is to examine my inquiry how Usury differs
from other contracts and dealings, as interest, inter-usury, Shiploan, etc. and
to tell me. 1. That Regulated Usury has the same plea from reason, that either
of these has. Take three definitions, says he, which he mentions together:
whatsoever is more then the principal (says Ambrose) and all that a man takes
over and above the money lent, etc. Take either of these definitions, without
supplements, and you shall find, interusury, Interest, and Shiploan to be
Usury, these being each somewhat above the principal: whereunto I answer,

1. That my three Definitions taken out of Ambrose, and the Council of Agatha,
etc. tho short, yet make it evident in part what Usury is, viz. an overpins
beyond the principal, which cannot be denied, because God himself calls it an
increase, Ezekiel. 18.12. and to show that they are not only against excessive,
oppressive, griping Usury, but that also which my Adversary calls moderate;
they add for example five in the 100. which also may serve to stop his mouth,
for what he says, that we must take these definitions without glosses, because
this Council, which is chiefly alleged by me, uses this gloss as others also
from time to time have (...) used theirs, after their setting down of their
short definitions, as for example, Balsamon in M. M. p. 43.

Bolton, p. 45. Dr. Fenton, and Turner especially, p. 5. having thus briefly
defined Usury, that it is a gain by a compact for loan, expounds his short
definition by parts, saying there are five things belonging to Usury. 1. A
Principal. 2. Lending. 3. Gain. 4. A chief purpose by lending to increase the
stock. 5. A Covenant for that; but I desire to say a little more for the famous
Council of Agatha which I mostly aim at for its Antiquity, and Authority, that
some Translate it is words thus.

Given, or LENT FORTH: which makes it is slot definition more full and plain,
and others also, for seeing that brevity breeds As says my old Master, that
most learned Logician, Mr. Hopsius in his most excellent Logic Dum brevis esse
laboro, obscurus fio.
obscurity, have therefore added loan in their short definitions expressly, as I
will instance in one of the Ancient ones, who defines Usury thus, Vsura est
id, quod ex mutuo ultra sortem accipitur: that is, Usury is that, (mark, that;
(whatsoever it be) which is taken above the Principal for LOAN, whom the Modern
Writers do follow. Ludo^phus de vita Christi. c. 49.
I add, that neither I nor my Brethren will be confined to such short and
somewhat imperfect definitions only, and therefore beware of, or give other
fuller definitions for men to take their choice.

To close up this answer with God, I must send my Opponent to Gods own
expositive way for condemning Usury in Ezekiel. 18.12. he forthwith explaineth
himself, and calls it INCREASE, and more fully again glosseth upon it in Deuteronomy.
23.19, 20. And much more fully ANY INCREASE, Ezekiel. 18.8. for which glossing and
enlarging I send my Reader to that which I have written about it in my first
Book against Usury, p. 37

2. These things premised, down totters what he infers, that we shall find
in the said

3. Definitions, Inter-usury, and Shiploan, to be Usury too, these being each
some gain above the Principal; because I hope that I have sufficiently proved,
glossing in short distinctions to be admitted, tho by him causelessly they be
oppugned.

Number. 51. More could I say, how he by him mentioned Interusury, and Shiploan,
are not Usury properly so called, though in each somewhat be taken above the
Principal, but that I shall defer to declare in its more proper place, only
this I will mention here about Shiploan, that what is taken, is taken not so
much for loan, as for hazard and adventuring.

3. As for those exacters in Nehemiah 5. I need not trouble my self about them:
because that case will fall in the next when I come to answer him about
Inter-usury, which next follows to be treated of: only this I will say for the
present that his thoughts, that they came under some incommodity, cannot oblige
me to think so too, and that therefore it is needless for me to answer him to
satisfy him whether they might take Inter-usury, sufficient it is generally to
assert, and to prove that damage, alias Interest, may be taken, in case lender
of money be really damaged by the borrowers not paying his money at the time
appointed, and that according to the determination of a Judge, or Arbitrators,
as I have formerly from the holy Scriptures shown it.

Now 4ly. I will step forward, even step by step to trace my Antagonist,
saying, that he will trace me in each of the forementioned definitions. Mr.
J^linger, says Inter-Vsury is money received for an incommodity, etc. Retly:
as if man that lend money do not feel an incommodity too in the absence of
their m^^^ for months and years, etc.

Whereunto I answer, that I cannot but take notice of his ignorance, out of
which he so mistakes Inter-usury, as that he utterly confounds the
incommodities which a Usurer may feel in the absence of his money for months,
or years, and the incommodity which he that takes Inter-usury does feel, and
for which so much money is by a Judge adjudged to him and for him: For so
civilians define it, that it is interest cause, an interest of a cause Exodus
21.22. By which Durham who yet seems to be for some Usury) proves damage
also as my self in his treat upon his Command.
which consists in giving or doing.

Number. 52.2. He wrongs me, saying, that I define it to be money taken, for I do
not say so, nor name money, but an incommodity as also Civilians do.

In the next place the Opponent progresseth to interest properly so called: Mr.
Jelinger: Interest is money taken for the payment of money due to a day delayed
or neglected: Reply. It seems then for money delayed beyond the day of
payment I may take interest, (whether the forfeiture of double bond he tells
not) but for money lent, this side that day I may not take any thing, salva
conscientia.

This is such discourse or reasoning as I understand not: I am sure such
niceties have little foundation in Scripture, which he pleads to be his
guide, when in any thing it seems to serve his turn; and here he brings in
Rivet, as if he were on his side.

For Answer whereunto I say.

Number. 53.1. That I do not tell whether a man may take the forfeiture of a
double Bond to secure the Principal.

1. Because I together with many others and even such as are of his own side,
do hold that in some cases I must be contented to lose the very Principal.

2. Because a man must be ruled in such a case by Judges and Arbitrators, as it
has been formerly declared out of Exodus 21.22. And my second Answer is for the
lawfulness of taking interest or damage after the not paying of money lent for
a certain time nominated, that, tho such a thing is a discourse or reasoning
which he understands not, how after the day of payment delayed, one may take
interest, and this side the day he may not take any thing, yet others that
understand * the Scriptures, which are for damage applicable to such delays,
as it has been proved, do understand such reasoning well enough, and therefore
have left their sense wherein they harmonize with me, as I shall show it,
before I have done with my answer.

As for Rivet by him quoted, I shall not concern my self to answer what he
says, because he has to do with Tollet, not me.

He goes on and says,

Ship loan, says Mr. Jelinger, is distinguished from Usury, for as much as
that is upon adventuring upon a Ship Principal and all, so as that if the Ship
be lost all is lost.

Reply, Seeing he sends us to Scripture for a proof of the lawfulness of
lending to the Rich for gain, let him prove from the same expressly, the
lawfulness of his Ship loan, etc.

Whereunto I answer,

1. There is no express Scripture for Annuities neither, which yet are held
lawful, because Annuities are new things, and so adventuring is likewise,
unless we will suppose that there were Adventurers, which adventured in
Solomon's Ships and the Kings of Tyrus, which sailed to Tarsis for Gold, and
that therefore no express Scripture is to be expected.

2. That it is sufficient for us to know, that adventuring is not interdicted,
because men take such great gair, nor for their loan, but for their Vnde
condictio certi pro eo datur, Doctor Freigerius p. 333.
hazard, which is so exceeding great, and makes the gain of it so uncertain,
whereas lending upon usury is certain.

3. That those which call the Gain of adventuring money Foenus Nauticum,
Nautical Fenory, call it so not properly but equivocally, as a dead man, a man,
and not Usury neither, but Fenory, because there is a difference betwixt Usury
and Fenory, as some say, Fenory being a more milder name than Usury, as Peilic.
in Comment. in Prove. 28.
Pelican would have it to be, whereof more hereof in liberal Usury, by some so
called.

4. And whereas the Opponent mentions Grotius again, I shall very little
regard what he says, because he is Heterodox, and therefore not much to be
credited, as failing in other great points, and being deceived. Nor do his
words much contradict that adventuring which I am for, as being a mixed
contract, as himself calls it, mixed I say, of Partnership, which by all is held
lawful, and of laying out so much money for so much gain, upon the safe return
of such a Ship having made a good and gainful Voyage, and not ootherwise. So
Rivet my ancient Friend differs but little in this;

For, 1. He tells us, having spoken of trafficking between Party, and Party
(under which comes negotiating by Sea, in ships, and upon ships) that such a
Contract is lawful so counted on both sides.

2. He says, when such gain comes, something is Given, mark, given, (not as a
mercenary Usury) but as a recompense to him that laid out the same, I add, upon
a Ship; For that is here in Question.

Lastly, I add, that I am not alone for this adventuring, but many worthy
Writers, besides me, are for the same also and give it their approbation; and

1. The Dr. Vult. in sua jurispr. l. 1. C. 34 de Naut. fen. 22. D. 2.4. C. 33.
Justin Constable. sub. Tit. 6.
Doctors of the civil Law, who thus favorably define it, that it is the gain
of a Creditor, which he has for his money credited to a Sailor for the danger of
his money which he takes upon himself; mark, for the danger, even as I said even
now for his hazard; where let it be noted withal, that the Civil-law stints
this gain for hazard, which is most just, that it should be so cautioned.

2. Let me add blessed Bolton Con^. Usury p. 43. See Doctor Fenton also p. 95.
Bolton, speaking of twenty in the hundred by Sea; There is great difference in
the Merchant's Negotiation, there is hazard, etc. Then speaking of the Usurer,
he says, does he bear any hazard? it is no part of his meaning?

Where by the by, I must needs answer this Objection, why then is Usury called
sors in Latin, that is, chance.

I answer, no otherwise then (...), that is, when men speaking one thing will
understand the contrary, as a Wood is called lucus a non lucendo, because it
gives no light,; so Usury sors, or chance, a non sortiendo, because he hazards
not]

3. And lastly Bishop B. Down^m. upon Psalm. 15.5.
Downam (who is fullest) once more, because my Antagonist does so vehemently
urge me to prove ship-loane to be lawful by positive Scripture, which is silent
in it, because there was not in old time so much traffic by Sea as now there
is, and so consequently such adventuring upon ships, as far as we can perceive,
unless we will guess it, as I said already, by Solomon's and Hiram's
Navigation: So that such a worthy, learned and pious man's Opinion, will afford
as much light, and satisfaction in this case of adventuring and maritime
increase. His words are these Maritime fenory is again or allowance made for
money which is transported beyond the Seas, at the peril or hazard of the
Creditor, contrary to the contract either of gainful Usury, or free Loan, and
seems to draw near to partnership; after which words he sets down the manner
of it; and brings in that most Godly and learned Lawyer Hottoman, approving and
clearing it, by his distasting of Gregory's words concerning it, and affirming,
that where is hazard, there may be gain required at the due prize thereof: and
then concludes thus, and therefore adventuring Usury may be allowed

I add, that I wish such Adventurers to be very cautious, that adventuring
their money, they do not adventure and loose their darling Souls by excessive
gain exacted, especially if a Voyage prove unprosperous, and by merely
pretended hazards.

Number. 55. From Nautical Fenory he passes to liberal increase.

Mr. Jelinger, Usury is different from liberal Increase, in that it comes
unlooked for, and not the other

Reply. What he quotes afterward out of Polanus for another purpose, seems to
thwart what he says of the lawfulness of a gratuity, mutatio debet esse
gratuita absque lucri alicujus captatione. Mr. Jelinger is forced to piece this
sentence of Polanus with his own Interpretation, but to me it seems to condemn
all talking of gratuities, and so makes work for ingratitude, which is no small
piece of inhumanity, unless Polanus mean both one and the other with respect
had to the poor.

For answer whereunto, I say,

1. That this Opponent by his, it seems, invalidates what he so inconsiderably
asserts.

2. Let the Reader peruse Polanus, and then judge, whether it be for my purpose
or no what he says; his words are these: Polan. Syntagm. Where, because
Polanus is for me, let it he considered what a friend I have in him, he being
styled Europ's Ornament, and most eximious pattern of Holiness in Clerks lives.
Vsura lucratoria est furtum quod committitur cum quis lucrum accipit solius
mutationis causa. Lucratory or gainful Usury is Theft, when any receives gain
only in lieu of lending; mark, only in lieu of lending; not denying, that
something may be taken as given out of gratefulness; so that his words, without
exaction and captation of gain or acceptance of a gift do not thwart what I
say, because he explains himself, when he says, that Usury is gain taken only
in lieu of lending, whereby room is left, and liberty given for taking of a
free, unexacted, uncapitulated, unexpected gift, given as a gratuity due ex
officio gratitudinis, by virtue of gratitude, which this Opponent need not
press so much, as requisite out of Cicero and Hesiodus. For I together with my
Brethren am for thankfulness, as much as he is, or any other can be.

2. As for his question about the poor, whether a rich Jew might take a
gratuity of a poor Brother: I wonder why he will put forth such a question,
when all without his questioning will grant, that the Rich should rather give
to, then take from a poor Brother, both under the Law and Gospel.

3. To his assertion, that what is lawful for the Borrower to give, no doubt
must be lawful for the lender to receive, and then he may lawfully take
increase. For this gratuity is no other. I answer thus, that this is a fallacy
of consequence: for it is as if a man should say, that it is lawful for a Thief
to take a man's purse, because as Divines say, it is lawful for a man to give to
a Thief his purse to save his life, for which he is thankful too, because he
saves his life, so that some have offered to give their purse and all that they
have to Theives to save their lives; I have done so my self, when in the German
Wars, I was beset by the Enemies Horse, which threatened to pistol me in a Wood.

Where let it be remembered what Polanus said but now, that Usury is Theft, when
any receives gain only in lieu of lending, which mainly thwarts my Adversaries,
saying that the Lender may receive increase for his lending, for this gratuity
is no other.

Numb. 56.4. As for his quoting of Perkins, that which the Debtor may give,
having himself an honest gain besides, and no man any ways endamaged, the
Creditor may lawfully receive.

To that I answer,

1. That his words following show his meaning, viz. That its convenient, that
he that is benefitted by another money, should show all possible thankfulness
to him by whom he is enriched, which I say likewise, yea farther, that the
Lender may take what so comes, I mean comes unexpectedly.

2. I add that holy Perkins is so far from being against me, as that in his
Writing upon Christ's Sermon upon the Mount he does evidently declare to the
World, that he is only for recompencing and liberal Usury, as that holy man Mr.
Bolton p. 5, 4.
Bolton observes it also, who likewise, together with others, asserts the same
thing, that liberal increase is lawful, saying,

Liberal Usury is only a gratuity, or free gift, which the Borrower finding
himself much benefited by the Lenders courtesy, does of his own accord, in
testimony of his thankfulness, freely give to the Lender, though neither
intended when he lent, nor expected any gain, much less covenanted for it.

And then says further,

But in this case, although the Lender receive some allowance above the
principal, yet he commits not Usury, because neither the contract, which he
made, was lending for gain, neither is the overplus, which he receives gain
for, either covenanted or intended, or required for loan, but a gratuity or
thankful courtesy, which may with a good Conscience be given and received from
an able and willing giver.

With this worthy man will I join two more. And

1. Bishop Downam, who calls it a voluntary increase and free gift and
gratuity, or reward, which the Borrower having gained by the money borrowed,
voluntarily, and freely gives to the Lender in testimony of his thankfulness.

2. I will quote the words of the Author of that excellent Book called a brief
Treatise Of Usury.

Not only the taking of any thing above the principal, but also the looking for
it does make him guilty before God, who hopes or looks for it by reason of the
loan: but it is otherwise, if any man give or offer any thing not in respect of
the loan, but to show himself mindful of a good turn received. For that which
is so offered may be lawfully taken without any Usury committed: so that there
be no fraud used therein, but that the intent and conscience of the Receiver be
upright, and free in that behalf, which last words cause me to subjoyn

3. Famous Doctor * Chemnitius, who writes thus, even just like Mr. Perkins, If
the Debtor have gained much by his borrowed money, or escaped a great loss, he
is certainly obliged by the office of thankfulness, and mutual respect of
Charity to antidotes, and retributions; for its truly said in the office of
charity, that in the first place, we are bound to those of whom we acknowledge
to have received a benefit. Nor does the creditor sin if he take a gratuity.
For the offices of charity and Usury differ one from another (just as I say
also) but so by most slight occasions and praetexts are sought for Usury: For
if either a compact or intention preceeds, so that the creditor would not have
lent his money, Downam upon Psalm. 15.5.
Dr. Chem. loc. com. de paup. p. 5.8.
if he should not receive something above the principal, its cerainly Usury,
whatsoever name you call it by.

But here the Opponent oblatrates and fain would set my old friend Rivet and me
by the ears, whose words by him quoted, ho they be so me what large, yet are
soon to be answered.

For 1. He brings Syracides an Apochryphal Author for his assistant, which
invalidates and enfeebles altogether what he says, and 2. Comes in with his
videtur, it seems, which weakens his assertion also, as the Reader will see
it presently, if he weigh in an even balance what Rivet brings for his proof,
and what Anti-usurarians allege for themselves, having the Canonical
Scriptures on their side, when the defendants of Usury, as blessed Bolton tells
them, cannot bring one Scripture rightly understood to make for them; if
learned Rivet could have brought one, he would not have cited an Apochryphal.

3. I can name a greater man then Rivet is, who militates for me, viz. great
Beza, whose words I will commit with Rivets, who insists on public authority
moderately prefixing a recompensation for which the Creditor may stipulate or
come to a compact with the debtor, which Beza answers thus, as I said once
already.

That Christian charity forbids to lend upon Usury, which notwithstanding,
because many Magistrates do see, that in respect of traffic, and dealings
among men they cannot simply forbid Usury. Therefore (which is the only thing
which remains for them to do) they stint Usury; but may a man therefore with a
good Conscience, LEND UPON USURY? No SURELY: thus this great and renowned
author. Now whom shall a man believe? The Senior or Junior Author? The Greater
or the Lesser? The more renowned or the less renowned? One that has maintained
a public dispute against the Church of Rome before a great King and Queen, and
the Peers and People of France in that great City of Paris, or him that has
not?

As for me I do and shall ever honor my great and old friend Rivet, who has
been pleased to Write his great name and pious motto for me in my book of
friends among other great and learned persons (which then were the luminaries
of Europe) for a perpetual testimony of his favor and respect which he had for
me, but yet I must needs prefer famous Beza before him, having lived in both
Leyden and Geneva.
Universities, where both did flourish: because I have heard such extroardinary
Encomiums See Downam, p. 306.
of that learned man Beza in the latter of these two Universities Leyden and
Genevah I mean, which Brightman calls Harmageddon, that is a Mountain of
delight, according to Rev. 17.

Number. 57. Pardon me courteous Reader, that I do so expatiate, I cannot rule my
self, when I come to speak of either of the now mentioned places, or persons,
or both.

Now having said so much to answer great Rivet, my great friend, I am the less
solicitous to answer so obscure an Antagonist as mine is; for what he says
deserves no other answer then this, that whereas he says, that the Creditor
is bound not to hope or expect some recompense for his money lent, and by which
he has gained, is as much as to say, that the creditor is bound to hope or
expect that the debtor will not prove an honest man, or do that which by the
rules of gratitude he is obliged unto: Christ himself freeth me from so great
an absurdity by his own words saying, lend, hoping for NOTHING AGAIN, or, FROM
THENCE, and so do all these holy men whom I have cited, affirming, that in
lending we must neither hope nor expect nor intend any gain by our lending, and
that if we do, it is most certainly Usury, by what name soever men may call it
(to use the very self same words of learned Dr. Chemnitius, which I formerly
quoted.) But let us see what the Chapter says farther,

Number. 58. Mr. Jelinger, Usury is differenced from letting and setting, because
such things are (properly) not lent as Usury money is, but hired or put out to
be occupied, as ground. And why may you not as properly say such money put out
is hired, or put out to be occupied. He knows what is commonly said in this
case, and never solidly answered, etc.

Not solidly answered? who will say it, but one, who has not read the hundred
part of what has been solidly written concerning this thing. As for my part, I
shall answer him that says so, presently and thus briefly. 1. That we may not
properly say of money lent to Usury that is hired, because hiring and so
setting and letting is lawful as being no where in Gods word prohibited, and
condemned, but rather approved and by Gods Saints used, as it is to be seen,
Act. 28.30. how Paul hired a house.

But lending and putting out money to Usury is unlawful interdicted and
condemned by the law of God and man.

1. By the law of God, viz. Deuteronomy. 23.19. Exodus 22.25. Luke 25.35, 36. Neh.
5.10. Psalm. 15.5. Ezeck. 18.12, 13. and chapter 22.12. Luke 6.35. And many more,
which I shall bring to condemn Usury, where let it be noted, what blessed Not
only the law of God but also Lawgivers and Philosophers have utterly condemned
Usury. Bodin de Rep. l. 5. c. 2.
Bolton quoting such places, says to his adversaries now against these many
places condemning Usury, bring you so much as one to allow it: you are not able
to bring one rightly understood: thus he, which words I also say to mine.

2. By the law of man: where, tho I could be prolix to my hearts contentent,
yet I will cite but one Act, which I did not quote yet, viz. Queen Elizabeth
which (tho some abuse it as making for Usury, because of ten in the 100, yet in
truth it does not so much as permit it, much less allow it) I say. 1. It does
not permit it, because it is an Act against Usury and only restrains it.

2. Much less allow it, calling it a sin, yea, and a detestable sin, and adding
that all Usury is forbidden by the law of God.

2. I answer to his addition, suppose a man hires a field worth 6 l. what
matter is it whether he pay six pounds for the field, or for the money lent
him, or, where is the oppression in the one more than in the other, or am I
bound to lend him my money gratis, when I may my self buy the field field
therewith, and so let it out to hire? to this I answer thus,

1. It is a matter, whether I pay six pound for the field, or for the money
lent; because the one is for lending, Usury I mean, which excludes men out of
heaven, to use the very words of Bishop Sanders, according to Psalm. 15.5. and
which has been from time to time counted theft, yea worse then other theft, as
says that other great and famous B. Downam, whereas they that bestow their
money in a field to buy it, and then received rent for it, were never counted
thieves, nor can be, because they do the thing that lawful is, and commended
too in the word of God, as the virtuous woman in the Proverbs will serve for
the proof of it, for is she not commended for seeing a field and buying it,
Prove. 31.16. but where will y^u find any man or woman in all the Bible
commended for Usury, which is oppression, Ezekiel. 22.12. There is the Bol^* in
his Dis^ourse.
oppression, and extortion enquired after by the Chapter saying, where Anno 13.
Elizab. c. 8.
Bishop Sanders on Romans 13.8, 9.
Bishop Downam on Psalm. 15.5.
Because he has greedily gained, as Usurers use to do. ^oidem.
is the oppression? so Nehem. 5.7. you exact Usury. He tells us farther, am I
bound to lend him my money freely when I my self may buy the field therewith
and so put it to hire? whereto I answer also thus. O yes, the Champion must
lend his money gratis freely: for so Christ will have it, as some render his
words Luke 6.35. lend freely.

And because he goes a step farther, telling us, that he might himself buy the
field and put it out to hire, I ask him, and why will not you? seeing it is in
your power to do so, and to keep your money as Peter said to Ananias, and
bestow it your self, which is lawful? must we needs run and adventure upon
things which are unlawful and prohibited, when we may safely employ our money
by buying and purchasing, as the virtuous woman did? but I know where it
sticks, when the Usurer lends his money he is sure of six in the 100. if he buy
a field or living, lives may die, and then he is a looser, which he will not be
if he buy Land that will not yield him six in the 100, he knows, for it is
valued at five in the 100. and charges and taxes must be undergon, so that I
have heard wise men say, that they can hardly make four at the 100. clear,
which causes the Usurer to put out his money to Usury rather, because then six
in the 100. flows in without labor, without taxes, without charges, without
repairs, and by this I suppose I have hit the Usurers right vein, which must be
hit, if he shall be let blood duly and successively for the saving of his life
and soul that he may not die as he is menaced, Ezekiel 18.12, 13.

But it should seem he has some Physicians about him, which speak him fair and
put him in some good hopes, that without this blood letting he may live, and
therefore he tells me, take reason from men that understand it.

And so brings against me again Rivet, and Windelin.

Whereunto I answer. And so let him take reason from men that understand it, as
well as his men do, and it may be a little better.

For, 1. Rivet comes in again with his non vi^ctur, it seems not to be so:
but not with Scripture, which is sure: and says positively thou shall not lend
to thy brother upon Usury (whether it be to buy a farm or field by the contract
of Emphytensis, or any other thing to receive for it so much money or Corn
yearly) Deuteronomy. 23.19. where note, that this word Emphytensis makes for me not a
little, for it is for ever as the Doctors in the Civil Laws tells us, so as
that a certain rent must be forever paid for it, whereas things rise and fall,
and changes happen and may happen to the great detriment and loss of the
occupier, which notwithstanding the lender or Usurer which lends the money,
which buyeth this field, or living, by the contract of Emphytensis est
contractus quo predium perpetuo fruendum alieui traditur, ut quam diu Domino
pensionem, seu redituum ^anonem pro eo praestat, tamdiu neque haeredi. ejus
auferre id liceat. Doctor Frigius Rudim. Instit. p. 335.
Emphytensis must and will be paid whether he grow backhanded or no his six in
the 100. which they count moderate Usury and profit.

2. As for Windelin, who also is of the same mind, that it is Which is 4 s. 6.
d.
all one to buy a farm for an 100 Dr. Vulteius De Contr. Adjunctis l. 1. c. 34.
Rixdollars, or to lend so much to another, and to receive so much yearly for
it, I wonder how he can be so confident us to assert such a thing: Scripture he
has not on his side, for that is against it, and so is reason: for what reason
is there for it that the Usurer, who is loath to adventure his 100 Rixdollars by
buying a farm for lives, which may die, or land, wherein he may be deceived,
because of morgages or other conveiances, will lend those 100 Rixdollars to
another, who must adventure upon all hazards to pay him six in the 100. which
is the general and usual pension by the borrower to be paid, whether he win or
loose; is this Windelins perinde est?

Number. 59.2. Now take reason from men that understand it.

And, 1. From Lawyers. 2. Divines.

1. Lawyers, and

1. From Dr. Vulteius, who

1. Makes lending a Idem c. 35.
free contract, and setting and letting mercenary: See the Contractuum quidam
sunt gratuiti, quidam mercenarii: Gratuiti sunt, mutuum, Commodatum, promutuum:
Caeteri mercenarii, and in his alii magis alii minus, magis ut locatio,
conductio, minus reliqui.
Margin

2. Doctor Frigius, p. 335.
Defines location, and conduction, that is setting and letting and hiring
thus, that it is a contract of consent, concerning a certain thing to be done,
or used for a certain hire, which shows what a great difference this great
Civilian puts between lending, which must be free, and location and conduction
which is and may be mercenary.

2. From Dr. Frigius, who defines lending to be a contract, whereby a thing
which is mine becomes thine, so as that the same thing, which consists in
number weight and measure is Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15.
not to be rendered: but that which is of the same nature, and quality, whereas
in location and conduction, that is, in setting and letting, and giving, the
same thing is rendered, as for example, the same horse, house, field.

2. He also makes setting and letting mercenary, which lending is not, so that
his definition of location is this, it is an obligation of consent for a
certain thing to be done or used for hire.

2. From four Divines.

And, 2. Bishop Downam.

Usury is distingnished from lawful location, or letting to hire, which is the
rather to be observed, because some imagine, that money and other things, which
are lent upon Usury, may as well be let as other things; and what say you to
this Champion? is not this your opinion? but hear what this great man says,
who understands reason as well as you, or your two Authors, but he goes
farther this my great Author, as thus: 1. They differ says he in the Subjects,
Usury is in those things which are spent in the use, and consist in quantity,
standing in number, weight, and measure. Location is in such things as are not
spent in the use, neither stand in number, weight, and measure. 2. The subject
of Usury are such things as have no fruitful use in themselves, but the gain
raised by it is to be imputed to the industry and skill of the employer. The
subjects of location have a fruitful use in themselves naturally. 3. The use of
things lent upon Usury cannot be severed from the property and dommion. In
location the fruitful use may be severed and valued as land, houses, etc. 4. In
Usury the borrower is bound not to restore the sum but so much in quantity, or
full value in the same kind without diminution or impair. In location he that
takes a thing to use is bound to restore the same particular, which for the
most part is impaired and made worse. Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15.
5. In mutuation the hazard wholly appertains to the borrower. In location
the thing if it shall miscarry without the fault of the hirer, belongs to the
letter and not to the hirer, because it came for his hire, Exodus 22.14.

Thus by Scripture he proves it, whereas my Adversary has no Scripture on his
side. For the very contract of mutuation includes in it an obligation, binding
the borrower that he shall restore the full value thereof at the day appointed,
etc.

2. From blessed Bolton,

Whose words I shall set down but in part, because Bishop Downam has some of
the same things, with him.

The 1. Difference between Usury and setting and letting (says he, is this.
The land has a fruitful use in it self answerable to rent: both without man's
help, as in Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Mines, etc. as also in arable grounds,
where the rent is proportioned, according to the fruitfulness thereof. But
money being spent in the use thereof, the gain that is raised thereby is not
the Sea Fenton, also p. 93, 94, 95*
fruit of the money, but of his skill and industry that employes it, and
therefore must needs be uncertain. So thou demandest thy gains our of the fruit
of his pains and industry, not out of the fruit of the money, etc. let the
Reader himself read the rest.

2. They often instance in the letting of an house, saying, why may not a man
as well take ten in a 100. for a year, as well as 10 l. for an house in some
great City, which cost him an 100. I answer, the use of the house is
habitation; and tho it be kept tenantable, yet it grows worse, and toward
ruin in the more substantial materials. But in money its otherwise, etc. see
the rest in his own book, p. 27.

3 A thing that is hired if it perish without the default of the hirer it
perishes to the owner. 1. Because he is the owner, 2. Because it went for the
hire according to the equity of Gods law, Exodus 22.15. thus he also proves
what he says by Scripture, which the opponents two Authors do not. After all
this he concludes thus.

But if there were nothing else its more then sufficient, that letting land to
Tenants is not disallowed by Gods word, or any other learning in any time or
Age. But lending for use is condemned by God; book, and all other learning, and
in all Ages, thus holy Bolton.

The 3. is holy Greenham alleged by B. Bolton p. 27.
Greenham who says, Recompense is to to be made, where the thing is the worse
for using (as in Location) But money is not the worse for lending, therefore
nothing is to be taken for lending of it. Geminianus l. 8.1.78.
Geminianus also says the same with these, in his Sum fol. 225. Now let the
Reader judge and choose whom he will follow, the Chapter two Authors, or these
whereof two give their opinion for law, and two being great and godly Divines,
who together with the two commodating Legists understood reason as well as the
Opponents two Authors; thus overmatched both by number and strength of reason,
as their expressions show it.

Number. 60. I should have differenced it also from commodating and society: But
there is yet time for me to do it. And therefore I will begin with the first of
these viz. Commodating, which is as D. 13. C. 23. P. 2, Sent. 4.
Civilians define it, a contract whereby he to whom a thing is freely granted
to be used, is bound to return the self same thing, which is not Usury: as has
been already ostended and shown.

And its Doctor Vult. jurispr. l. 1. c. 33.
twofold.

1. Properly so called, whereby a thing is given for a certain use and end, to
be used, after which end it is to be returned and not before.

3. Precarium or precarie is, which is given to a man to be returned whenever
the Commodator pleases.

And the difference between the two kinds of lending is, that when I lend such
a thing as is not spent ordinarily with the first use, the thing lent remaining
still my own, as a house, or horse, it is called commodation, but when it is
spent as Corn, and Wine, and Money, it is alienated, and such a contract is
called mutuation, whereby the property of the thing lent passes from one to
another, even to him that borrows it, and good reason why. For all such
things are so principally made of God for one certain use (as bread to be
eaten, wine to be drunken) so as that the use differs not from the thing it
self; because they cannot dure any longer when they are once used, but straight
are consumed, and become either another thing, or at least another man's goods:
Inconsideration whereof he that lends me such things, by the lending loses
the very propriety of them; for else I should spend another man's goods to his
injury; which is both against reason, and also against his will and intent: For
as he would have me take the commodity of his Goods by using them: So would he
not hinder himself therewithal. But if I should borrow a bushel of Wheat of
another man's, and yet the same bushel of Wheat should still be his, I should
either not use the Wheat at all in making bread thereof, or occupy it otherwise
(and then it does me no service) or else I should spend it being his, and
thereby he should sustain farther loss than himself would agree to: For if I do
spend another man's Goods by his consent, I am answerable unto him for them, no
more than I should answer him his Oil again, who should bid me throw it in the
fire.

Number. 61.2 I come to Society, which Institut. de Societ. l. 3.26.17. D. 2.4. C.
37.
Civilians define this.

That it is a contract of consent concerning the having it by some* in common

And it is about either Things and Goods, or Doings.

1. Things by one or all Partners to be looked after, and that both in gain and
loss.

And it lies wholly in Negotiation, says the Civil Law: And is two fold,
First all Goods, and so is called general, or secondly some, and so is special.

2. Doings in society, are pains, and the industey of partners.

They have another distinction also, saying, that there is 1. an accidental 2.
conventional.

But I desire to show, as speedily as I may, how Usury and Society do differ.

In the Contract of partnership, as a learned * Author writes of it, a man,
having perhaps no skill in Merchandise, commits a stock of money to another,
being a Merchant or Tradesman (some name a Tucker) to the end, that he may
employ the same in some lawful traffic, and covenants with him not only to be
partner with him in a proportionable part of his gain, if it please God to make
him a gainer, but also to partake with him in the loss which without his
default he shall sustain. And here, although there be expectation of gain, yet
there is no Usury: For in partnership the property of the money is not
transferred unto him that receives it, but remains in him which did deliver
it, and at his hazard and peril it is employed; and therefore in partnership
there is not so as much loan, and B. Downam upon Psalm. 15.5.
much less Usury: For, as Molinaeus averreth it in partnership the subject of
Usury cease, viz. loan, for in loan the property is transferred to the
Borrower, and with the property and hazard; so that if the Principal miscarry,
it miscarrieth to the Borrower: It is safe to the Lender by the very contract
of mutuation or lending, wherein the Borrower secureth the Lender by such
security as the Lender thinks sufficient, whether it be his Word, Bill, or
Bond, or Pawn or Surety for the repayment of the Principal. In this contract of
partnership he that delivers his money to the other, does not covenant
absolutely for the restitution of his principal, much less for gain; but
conditionally, according to the event or success of the Negotiation,
covenanting as well to be partaker of the loss as of the gain; but the contract
of the free lending binds the Borrower by an absolute covenant to restore the
principal; and the contract of Usury binds the Borrower by an absolute covenant
not only to repay the principal, but also to yield the overplus covenanted for.

So that whether there be a covenant or intent of gain by loan, whether it be
in the first act of lending, or afterward in forbearing, it is USURY, says
that renowned Bishop, and contrariwise where the is neither a covenant, nor
intent of gain in lending, or forbearing, there is no Usury; tho there be
overplus or increase received over and besides the Principal.

And this absolute Covenant (says that renowned B.) is not an abuse besides
the nature of this contract, as some have imagined, but as the absolute
covenant of the restitution of the principal is included in the contract of
mutuation, so the absolute covenant not only of repaying the principal, but
also of paying Usury is included in the contract of actual, or, as they call it
formal Usury: For if there be a covenant only in eventum lucri, to gain, if he
gain, or have expectation of gain for loan, without any further covenant, but
for the restitution of the principal, then is the former not formal Usury, tho
it be mental, and actual in part, and the latter is but mental Usury and not
then neither; if as on the one side there is a covenant of partaking gain, if
there be gain; so on the other side, if there be a covenant of partaking loss,
or as there is expectation of gain if the Borrower gain, so there be an
unfeigned bearing part of the loss which the In contract u S^cietatis cessat
subjectum Vsur. and M^lin.
Borrower without his default shall sustain. For then the former is the
contract of partnership, and the latter in respect of the outward act is the
contract of lending, but in regard of the purpose of the heart, intending gain,
where there is gain, and purposing to bear part of the loss where there is loss
it is partnership.

Thus much concerning the difference, which is between Usury and Partnership.

Number 62. In the next place the Chapter examineth Usurie's age.

Mr. Jelinger 5. How old is Usury? What generation and kindred has it? For its
Father, quoteth he, it has the Devil, whose work it is, being Murder. Reply.
Whether he that takes any thing above the principal from a person sufficient be
a Murderer, will admit an use of Addubitation, that is, none at all. Whereunto
I answer.

1. That, whereas here he jeereth me for mentioning In my severally Printed
Books.
sometime such an use of Addubitation, I would have him know, that I have this
Addubitation matter from that famous and serious man P. RAMUS, who died in the
Parisian Massacre a glorious Martyr, and therefore is infinitely to be
preferred before a Jeerer at godliness.

2. That I shall send him to renowned Calvin for an answer, saying upon 15.
Psalm. 5. verse, concerning Usury which in Ezeck. 18.12, 13. called Tarbit,
increase, that Cato did not without cause place committing of Usury very near
in the same degree with Murder. Now why and wherefore they both, Cato and
Calvin do thus make Usury Murder, they will answer him at that great day, when
both must be responsible for this name, which they have given to Usury,
animating me thereby to call it so too.

But the Devil was a metaphorical Usurer from the beginning to Adam and Eve,
says Mr. Jelinger. Reply. Strange arguing! My answer is, as strange as he
makes it, With whom I could if I would join HUGO who attributes to the Devil
two Daughters, Avarice and Luxury besides Usury; in Gloss in Testivet.
better and abler men than he use it, who also if they were now alive would
stop his mouth, which now he opens against them and it: As for me it is enough
to me that I have But the two Authors by me cited may suffice.
two such seconds on my side as Ambrose and Austin (which names he conceals)
who by all learned men will be preferred and believed before him, and all his.

And I hope that these holy Fathers may very well make the Devil a metaphorical
Usurer, as the defendants of Usury make that The Usury here in the text is
taken metaphorically, as Aquinas observes, for spiritual thriftiness and the
increase of spiritual tifts and graces 2.2. q. 78. a. 1.
metaphorical Usury in Matt. 25. Usury properly so called, quite contrary to
Christ's meaning, who called the well employing of gifts and parts, and the
spiritual gain gotten thereby Usury, as being like it. Where let the Reader
give me leave by the by, to mention what a famous (...).
Preacher in Print does say concerning the metaphorical Usury viz. Because this
text (Thou ought to have put out my money to the Exchangers, otherwise
Table-mates, Campsores or Usurers, as some render the word, and then at my
coming I should have received mine own with USURY) has been urged by some to
prove the lawfulness of Usury, and that I have so opportunely met with this
sin, so frequently practiced, so seldom preached against; nay some that should
tell Juda of his faults, and Israel of his transgession, Esa. 5.8.1. are such
as the Prophet speaks of, where the Prophet is very bitter against men
looking after their own wages, every one for his own advantage, and for his own
purpose, are practisers thereof themselves, so I shall not go far beyond the
limits of the text, if I a little prosecute this sin. Thus learned Mr. Turner
with whom my opponent must bear, if he hit him for one.

As for his saying, Scriptura symbolica non est argumentum, we that are against
Usury do not deny it, but use it as well as he, in the interpreting of Matt.
25.27. as even now it was shown, so that he might have forborne to bring in Mr.
Turner upon Matt. 25.27.
Christ as a metaphorical Usurer; only let, me add that the Arabic renders
that expression with Usury cum lucro suo with its gain, not Usury,

As for the Mother and Sisters and Daughters, he counts it but froth of
uncharitableness, and not worth spending time and Paper in, etc. but I would
have him know that it is such froth (if I must needs call it as he calls it) as
has been made use of by better men then himself, viz. R. Turner a late Writer
and * St. Basil, an ancient one, who makes (...), the only Powel makes the
devil the chief, and principal cause of Usury.
Fathers of Usury, St. Augustne and Ambrose the devil, and BORROWERS the only
As Wit. in his Commonwealth, p. 291: makes covetousness Vsuries Mother.
MOTHERS, to bring forth this unnatural brood of Vipers, which eat through the
entrals of their Mother, for so does the borrower bring forth Usury to the
Usurer, to the destruction of himself and family, says my last Author.

Let my Adversary now disprove and check this great and holy Father, if he
think it to be his best way, for using such a frothy comparison, and so others;
to me it is enough, that I have such a Kingly father on my side, in this thing
to free me from frothiness: and whether it be for my purpose, what I say, let
these same holy men be consulted with, who agree with me in Usuries definition.
But he mislikes Vsuries Sisters also, Mrs. GREEDY especially: For so he adds,
only a word to what he says concerning Greedy, telling her Sister Usury still,
we must not let our money lie idle.

Reply. I wonder how he finds Greediness in the inquiry it self, wherein there
may be so much charitableness unto others, etc.

Whereunto I answer, 1. That I find this greediness in Gods own word: Ezekiel.
22.21. Thou have taken Usury, and increase, and have greedily gained, etc. see
the place.

And I find it in those Authors, who make the Usurer a greedy Dog, as
Accounting it doubtless but froth, tho other Writers as well as my self, and
famous Smith by name, who says, that bribery and simony are her Sisters,
goodly Sisters indeed. Smith in his. 1. Sermon. p. 73.
Basil, yea, worse an old Dog, as Mr. Trap.

Number. 63.2. And whereas he tells so much of the good, which the Usurer does by
his lending to such as redeem estates and purchase and buying for their
families seasonably, etc. I will cite such learned and famous Authors, as will
tell him the quite contrary, etc.

1. Plutarch who compares Usurers to Vultures, and Ravens, who pick out the
guts of a man's belly.

2. Coelius Secundus, who calls Usury a deadly and contagious Ague.

Basil in Ps. 15.
Mr. Trap in Prove. 28.
Plut. l. de non faenerando.
Caelius secundum lect. Antiq. l. 12. c. 20.
3. B. Jewel who, B. Jewel: Sermon. in These. 46.
defines Usury as has been declared, tells us that Usury undoeth households,
draws dry hundreds, yea, thousands of people, and is the utter destruction of
infinite families.

Thus B. Jewel; now let the Chapter shake his boasts of the great good, which
Usurers do, some good they may do sometimes, but that is not their chief aim,
but their own gain, and enriching of themselves, whether the borrower win or
loose, which caused Leo the Great to say, what event soever betide the
borrower, gain he or gain he not, the course of lending upon Usury is, EVIL and
UNGODLY.

3. And seeing the Champion does ask me, whether I let my money lie idle by me,
or whether I do well in so doing, etc.

I answer, that as my case stands now, I cannot have money lie idle by me,
livings being brought so low by these dead times, but when I had any, I
bestowed it in means, which now must maintain me and mine, and which is lawful.
But, I perceive that the Champion is most of all displeased with and about
Usuries two Daughters LOW and WOE, because he fears that they will be
chargeable unto him, charging him still, the one being able to bring a man low
indeed: and the other crying continually, even day and night within; woe, woe,
woe, to him that lends his money upon Usury, and increase: For he shall die,
die, die to all eternity, and his blood shall be upon him, Ezekiel. 18.12.

His great mislike he discovers two ways.

1. Mr. Jelinger, p. 19. Tells us, that in Lev. 25.37. and Deuteronomy. 23.19. over
brother and money there is an accent put, which shows that, as Hebrecians say,
the word must be sung with a low voice, because Usury afflicts and brings low.

Number: 65. Reply, to one that contended about a word 'twas replied, that Caesar's
fortune did not depend thereon, whatsoever this punctation or accent be, I hope
that the souls eternal salvation does not depend upon Criticisms, etc.

Whereunto I answer, that I do not by mentioning this, collocate or place man's
eternal salvation in a dependence upon criticisms, but only make use of
criticisms, as other divines also do, who have Written whole Books, which they
call Critics, and which may serve to illustrate things, which appertain to
life and salvation: where let it be remembered what the ^eo i Sermon. 6 de jejun.
10. Mens^s, c. 3.
Hebrew Rabbis write concerning accents, as I quote them in my Usurer cast, p.
6.

2. He adds to show his mislike and to disprove, me I confess, that it is the
first time, that ever I heard, or read, that these books were marked out to be
sung.

Whereunto I answer, that this very thing will disgrace him, more than any
thing he wrote yet, for thus it is.

By this he bewrays his shameful and gross ignorance, even in Grammar
principles, tho he be a Schoolmaster.

Hebrew Grammar principles, I mean, amongst which there is one (as the greatest
of Hebrecians Buxtorf. in suo Thesauro Grammat. l. 1. c. 5. p. 33.
Buxtorf my old friend and instructor has it, in his Grammatical treasure,)
(...) accentuum triplex est; primus designat musicam sive rationem cantus apud
Judaeos, qui textum Biblicum non legunt sed cantillant, That is, there is a
threefold use of accents: the first designates music or the manner of singing
among the Jews, who do not read but * sing the Bible text, mark, he does not
say, that they sing the Psalms, but the text of the Bible, and so this book
also.

So that, if this great Hebrecian were now alive, I should advise him to leave
his teaching of his Scholars to Write, and to travel to the University of
Basil, where I have been and taken this great man's advise about the Hebrew, and
to learn of the same famous Hebrecian the Hebrew a little better, that he may
write of Hebrew better himself than here he does, to his foul disgrace I write
it.

Number. 66. I should have said something concerning Caesar's fortune by him
mentioned, but that will and does come elsewhere to his confusion.

Chap. 5. He is considering, says the Champion, what reach Usury has; and he
grants it reaches very nigh over all the World. For

1. Where he leaves out Worms, Asia, Italy, Germany.
The Jews who are scattered over the world are great Usurers.

2. Particularly it reaches By Spinola the Spanish general.
to some great Scholars, as Seneca, and to some learned men in the Church in
Chrysostom's time.

2. Some Princes and great Lords in Germamy do espouse it, some whereof were
well served in the German wars when they I have heard them do so my self in
their Synagogues.
lost their Usury money.

Reply, What remarkable providence or wonder was it, if they smarted by those
Wars, under which the Country groaned, and he adds: that at such times the good
and bad are commonly involved under one common lot, or rather the former smart
most, mark, the good smart most, speaking thus favorably of the Usurers by me
mentioned: For Usurers will take one the others part: where before I go
further, I must do right to Seneca, whom I fear I have injured, quoting the
words of Reynolds concerning him, that he was the greatest Usurer that ever he
read of: For since that time, I met with such passages of the said Seneca
formerly cited, which will evince the contrary, and because he was one of the
stoics, which were so exceeding strict, as that they would speak most bitterly
against all sorts of vices; and lastly, because diverse Fathers, as That very
ancient Father, who lived near to the Apostles time
Tertullian, Austin, and Jerome write, that he was converted by Paul, and did
for two years before his death withdraw himself from Rome to his Country house
for his souls good. As for Tacitus, who says, that, dying he called upon
Jupiter, to that I answer, 1. That Tacitus, as it is observed in him, Writes
many lies. 2. That some excuse him saying, that his words were misprinted,
naming Jovem for Jesum.

Number. 67. Mr. Jelinger, it reaches also many great * professors of Godliness.

Reply, And yet all these censured by him to damnation too, without a
particular repentance if they took but a mite above the principal.

Whereunto I answer, that I never pressed the taking of a nine as he has often
charged me, for I do not think, that any ever took or gave a mite. Only I
quoted others, very learned men, who use that expression to show that
whatsoever is taken above the principal by a compact explicit or implicit is
Usury.

Number. 68.2. That some such professors may profess that they know God, and deny
him in their deeds, as those in Tit. 1.16. He adds, Mr. Jelinger. I hear that
some such are lately departed this life, and have left behind them their money
lent upon Usury for their posterity. O sad! sad! for they have plunged thereby
their poor Children into the same gulf of the damnable sin of Usury.

Number. 69. Reply. They are more beholding to him for his pity than for his
charity: and why so sad? if according to his now casuistical divinity they do
but ask forgiveness of the parties concerned, all is well.

Answer. 1. That my casuistical divinity concerning forgiveness of restitution
to be made is not now, as he makes it, nor mine only; for I shall hereafter
bring mine Authors for it, which are old and able enough to answer him, and to
maintain what they and I assert in this matter, the Doctors which write upon
the Canonical law especially.

2. That other grave, learned, and godly Divines also have their most pitiful
and lamentable expressions concerning Usurers and their Children that imitate
their Parents, whom I mean cursing one another in Hell: The words of one of
them at present shall suffice.

In HELL, says Mr. Non inducit liberam remissionem Joh. Baptista in Jus Can.
Smith (who also defines Usury as it is in the margin) the Usurer shall cry to
his Children; You were the cause of these torments: For lest you should be
poor, I was an Usurer, and robbed others to leave riches to you; to whom the
Children shall reply again (in hell) Nay cursed be you. Mr. Smith, like Doctor
Williams formerly cited in his second Sermon. upon Usury.
Father; For you were the cause of our torments, for if you had not left us
other men's goods we had not kept other men's goods. I add, and we had not been
Usurers too, if you had not put out your money upon Usury for us to take up the
same trade, and to do as you did, and therefore I may well say again. O sad!
sad!

After all this the Champion comes to examine my Reason^^ Mr. Jelinger. What
Reasons has this Doctrine?

Now we come to try his strength, and indeed he needs to have good Supporters
to bear up such assertions as he has laid down. etc. Answer, I need not fear
that I shall want supporters, I have at least thirty Arguments and Reasons more
to come.

Mr. Jelinger. 1. Reason because this, Usury, which is here treated on is
prohibited in both Testaments*

1. In the old, 2. in the new.

1. In the old, Exodus 22.25. Lev. 25.36, 37. Deuteronomy. ^3.19. Reply. 1. To these in
general: It will be hard to prove his difinition of Usury condemned by him
from these or any other text in the old Testament.

Whereunto I answer.

1. That it will be no more hard for me to prove what I Idem ibid. Usury is
that gain g^tten by lending for the use of the thing lent, covenanting before
with the Borrower to receive more that was borrowed.
The you were a great Professor.
say, that this Usury, which here I treat of, is condemned in both Testaments
and first in the old, then it has been for others before me,

Whole Councils have said the same. And

1. The Council of Nice has these words, because many Clergy men Council. Nic.
c. 18.
following after filthy lucre out of covetousness, have forgotten the divine
Praecept, which says Psalm. 15.5. he that has not put his money to Usury, turn
Usurers, etc. Mark, they call David's words a Divine Precept, which forbids
Usury

2. So that great Council of Paris sets down this dreadful sentence: Among many
and innumerable evils, whereby God is highly offended, there is extant one
especially most execrable, and to God a detestable kind of Covetousness,
whereby without doubt he is highly provoked to anger, because thereby men
insult over his precepts, mark, Precepts and arguments of damnation are
prepared, in that some Clergymen, mark, Clergymen, and some Laics (note that
too, because that some say that Ministers only are forbidden to become Usurers)
take such most filthy gain etc. forgetting that PRECEPT, which says Thou
shall, not give thy money to Usury, nor exact any increase for thy fruits etc.
(mark, nothing above the principal) Any Increase as it is in Ezeck. 18.8. And
again in another Chapter says the same Council: For the Lord does most
horribly and minaciously prohibit Usury both in his Legal and Prophetical
Oracles etc. And lest men should think, that they speak against oppressive
Usury; they cire St. Jerome. defining Usury thus: some think that Usury is
committed only in money, which the Scripture, mark, Scripture foreseeing, takes
off all that, which is over and above the principal, that thou take no more
then thou gave or lendest. Lo, how this holy Council conspires against thee,
O Usurer, and brings in Gods Word to condemn thee, as more fully yet it will
appear by that which they say farther.

Of Usury not to be committed, etc. we have left us the Oracles of Both
Testaments (just as I say, so say they, so that I am not alone) and the sayings
of the Holy Fathers, which say, that they which follow after Usury shall not
live nor dwell in the holy Hill, but rather because they have not been
merciful, shall be punished, with that purple and covetous Dives; and Here let
those many Clergymen, and Ministers, which now are Usurers also, ponder these
words of this holy Council,
Council. Paris. l. 1. c. 53.
so ends that holy Council thus tragically, so sad a Tragedy concerning Usury,
and Usurers.

And therefore how dare thou, being a Minister, who above all men should
not be an Usurer by this same Councils prohibition, live in this execrable sin
of Usury, as it calls it, and thou also that art a private Christian, how can
thou read those words without trembling? me thinks thy knees like Belshazers
Dan. 5. should smite one against another, and thy guilty heart should ache
within thee, when thou perusest such dreadful expressions, uttered and thundered
out, not by a despicable Minister, nor any other simple person, but so many
Godly Fathers, and learned men against thee from the holy scriptures. But this
is not all: For not only these ancient Councils and Divines, but latter ones
also, and even an whole University of learned men, I mean, that already
mentioned of Wittenberg, says the same.

Whereas Usurers are not only by a positive Law, but also by both Old and also
New Testament, as in themselves unlawful, are forbidden of God etc.

And then: But these are Usurers, whosoever by a compact take five in the
hundred etc. I cut short because I made use of this determination above already.

Blessed Bolton Where note that in the Hebrew Usury is not called (...) biting
but (...) a burden as indeed it is, to cut off that cavil that only biting
Usury is forbidden in Scripture, and that the Defendants of Usury say, that by
Mashah moderate Usury is signified which also they hold to be all wed. B. D. P.
97. contrary to this Scripture.
I shall quote last, tho he be not the least, his words are, But let us come to
Scriptures, and dare you indeed M. S. stand to that trial of that pure and
heavenly touchstone? Answerably whereunto I say to my Adversary so too; and
dare you stand indeed to that same most sure and heavenly touchstone?

Consider then these places, with the same holy Authors, even as I do also;

Exodus 22.25. Lev. 25.36. Deuteronomy. 23.19. Ps. 15.5. Ezekiel. 18.13.7. and 22.13.
Prove. 10.8. whereunto I now add, Nehem. 5.10. I pray you let us leave of this
Bolton speaks it, not I.
Usury. Now M. S. against these many places condemning Usury bring you so much
as one to allow it. How do you like this Champion?

Number. 71. Secondly The Chapter replyeth, that these texts for bid lending to the
poor only upon Use either explicitly or implicitly.

I answer, No such matter: for 1. Deuteronomy. 23.19. forbidds lending upon Usury to a
brother, and so to the B. Jewel.
rich, as well as the poor, because both are brethren; so B. Jewel expounds the
place, and before him that most learned and most ancient Father Clemens Alex.
From l. 2. formerly alleged also. To both these may two more be added 1. Dr.
Tailor, who in his progr. of Saints p. 96. says about the poor, thus: Men are
deceived in their distinctions; for God does not distinguish in the case of
Usury between Rich and Poor in Israel, but between Cananites and Israelites.
The word poor in Exo. 22.25. does not restrain the law, but is set down for
example.
Clemens Alexandrinus, saying, The Law forbidds to lend upon Usury to your
brother, under the name of brother, comprehending not him only which was born
of the same Parents, but also who was of the same Tribe, and of the same
opinion, and partakers of the same Word: Now whom shall a man believe in the
expression of the name brother? this Novice? or these far more abler Divines
which I have cited? Let the Reader judge; considering withal how in the Chaldee
there Uusury is not called (...) Biting but (...) a burden, or oblivion as
indeed it is.

2. Not only in Deuteronomy. but also in Psalm. 15.5. and Ezeck. 18.12.13. The poor are
left out of purpose to prevent mistakes, as if only to the poor we were not to
lend upon Usury.

3. If the law of Usury did only forbid men to lend to the poor upon Usury, and
allow such lending to the rich, who will lend to poor decayed tradesmen and
others? so that such a law so to be understood would have proved to the hurt
and ruin of such poor decayed persons.

3. He says this law was political, and the Jews intrest was peculiarly heeded
in it etc.

A. Soon said, but not so soon proved; I have on my side (besides Scripture,
which makes it moral, reckning Usury still among the sins which are committed
against the moral law, as Ps. 15.3.5. Ezeck. 18.11, 12, 13. and Ch^
22.9.10.11.12.) at least two most ancient, most renowned, most learned Fathers,
Authors and Writers, who assert and prove it to be moral and not political. viz.

Origin. Clemens Alexandrine, Gregory Nyssene, St. Basil St. Chris. St. Austin,
St. Jerome, Tho. Aquinas, Dionysius Carthus, Gabriel, Biel, Lyra, Raynerus,
Luther, Melanchton, Brenchius, Musculus, Chemnitius, Aretius, Hemingius,
Wigandus, Zegedinus, Molanus, Viguerius Wolvius, enough for the present.

Mr. Jelinger. 2. It is forbidden in the new Testament, Luke 6.35. lend freely,
hoping for nothing again.

Number. 72. Reply. There are several interpretations of this, that to me carry a
greater probability, than that he pleads for: but if taken in his sense, I
shall prove it will not reach the sense he drives at; that is, to a
prohibition of all Usury etc.

He drives at 1. to a prohibition of all Usury etc

Whereunto I Answer, I know it well enough that there are several senses given
of this place by several Authors: which notwithstanding in every sense they
command the duty of free lending; says famous B. Downam in Psalm. 15.
Bishop Downam, whereby it follows, that all Usury properly so called is
thereby forbidden, which I drive at, and shall demonstrate more and more before
I have done.

But 1. If this text be understood of a free gift, says the Chapter it quite
spoils his market, and overthrows his definition; and so there be those that
understand those words without any wresting of them: and here he brings in the
old translation, Lend freely, which makes altogether for me, and Psalm. 37.21.
which I do not deny, and then cites Jeremiah Tailor, the learned Casuist, whose
words are, give, looking for nothing again, and Deodate, interpreting the words
of a perpetual giving, and after him Rivet, affirming that Christ does not
immediately here speak of Usury etc. and Spanhemius, asserting the same of
giving, all which quotations the inquisitive Reader may read over himself
(because they are too large to be inserted) if my Adversary print them, or in
his written papers, which he has sent abroad, giving out far and near, that he
has confuted me. But my Answers for my self herein are these.

1. Answer. That he may well say thus doubtfully, by way of if; if this Text be
understood of a free gift, viz. generally, because there are more that deny it
than there are which assert it, as it will be made to appear.

Number. 73.4. He names for himself, Tailor, Deodate, Rivet, Spanhemius.

1. Tailor. Whom to answer I shall commit Doctor Tailor in his progr. of Saints
p. 96. with Bishop Tailor.
Doctor Tailor* with B. Tailor, saying, in my behalf as much against Usury as a
man can say, as namely, Men deceive themselves in their distinctions in case of
Usury. And yet farther, if learned men allow that Usury, which is commonly
practiced, I oppose the word of God against them, and 2. A far greater number
of late learned men, besides Fathers and Schoolmen who do not. 3. if those
Divines be Usurers themselves, then no wonder. This by the by, to show how much
this great man is my friend in writing against Usury, as contrary to this place
in hand.

2. To answer the words cited against me, I must needs confess that they are
not to be misliked by a charitable giver, but that they cross lending I cannot
see at all.

2. Deodate is another, which he quoteth against me, a man whose memory is
precious to me, because I have heard him usually both preach and read his
Divinity Lectures at Genevah, when I mansioned in that Academy, and know what a
Godly life he did live, but why he should oppose him against me I wonder,
seeing he requires no other thing, but that we should lend with intent to
loose whatsoever we lend, if our Neighbors wants do require it, etc. which no
good man can mislike, yea, which Land my friends require also.

3. As for my ancient friend Rivet, he also does not much cross me: For I shall
easily grant, that as he says, Christ does not immediately forbid Usury by
this Scripture; but I add that consequently he does, as Beza also, who is
greater than Rivet, does averr the same, as I have formerly shown.

4. So my dear Cousin Spanhemius and I do not disagree so much as the Chapter
pretends: For he does not say that Usury is not to be understood in that place;
but that Christ in and by that place would have us to erogate our money to the
poor, when they need it, even them from whom we can have no hope to receive
either gain or principal; which shows that he understands Christ's words of
lending properly so called, and not of giving properly so called. For when a
thing is properly given, there can be no looking for either gain or principal:
and besides, if my Cousin Spanhemius should confound one with the other as to
make lending giving, and giving lending; he cannot evince it by an un
undeniable demonstration, that Christ means Alms giving.

Lastly. Whatever his meaning then was, he is now on my side.

We must lend not only freely without gain, but also, tho it be to the loss of
the money lent. Powel p. 4.
As for that place in the Prove. 19.17. it does not prove it, because that
speaks of a metaphorical lending; and Christ's words of that which is proper.

Number. 74. But what does Mr. Jelinger say against this interpretation, says the
Chapter

Mr. Jelinger. It cannot be understood of giving, because giving to the poor is
spoken of there distinctly from lending by Christ, who would not use a
tautology.

Reply. And yet he can bring in God speaking a tautology within six lines after
this passage. But by his leave it is no tautology; For what more common in
Scripture than for the same thing to be laid out in various expressions etc.
Here is the whole, that he has to say to weaken that solid interpretation, or
strengthen his own, what force or cogency it is, let it be considered.

I answer.

1. Do I bring in God as speaking a tautology? because I say he would not use a
tautology? Here let the Reader judge in which of the six lines I say it.

2. I would have him know that this is not the whole that I have to say to
weaken his Interpretation.

For 1. It cannot be that by lending must be understood giving, because lending
is another thing, distinct from giving: For lending is a real contract whereby
we deliver a thing consisting in quantity, so as that he which receives it is
to return it in kind and not in its species.

So Dr. Vulceus in sua Jurispr. l. 1. c. 31. And Paulus that great Lawyer
writes the same.

That we lend with a purpose to receive idem genus, the same in kind. For if we
receive again another thing, a^ Wine for Wheat, it is not mutuum or lending,
says he.


Civilians define it.

And it is twofold. 1. vera, true. 2. quasi, as it were.

1. True, which is in the beginning by and by perfected by the tradition and
reception of a thing.

2. The other, tho at first it was not, yet afterward is introduced, and that
two ways. Either by man, or by law, so the law sets it forth.

But giving is when a man bestows a thing upon another, with this intent,
that he would presently have it become his that does receive it, and never in
any wise to be returned again to himself (whereas money lent is to be returned)
So Donariff. F. de donationibus et Donot F. de Reg. Jur. and it is twofold 1.
mortis causa, for deaths sake. 2. inter vivos among the living. Dr. Fregius in
suo pedagogo p. 226.
Donariff the Lawyer defines it, where it will concern me to occur two
objections.

The 1. Objection is, that some of my own friends call lending giving, as Dr.
S. and others, which I answer thus.

I know some do, but they call it giving to loan to difference it from other
giving; the one being a giving for a time, as for a half year or so, the other
a perpetual to use my Adversaries own word.

Number. 75. To make this a little more plain, I will add two things.

1. That the Lender can do no other then so give away what he lends, and that
is to say, to make it his for a time to whom he lends it, as for that cause its
also called in latin Mutuum quasi de meo tuum. Sic Calepinus. Mutuum dicitur ab
eo quod de meo tuum sit,
mutuum, because of mine it becomes thine, the reason is because if it should
not be his, but he should be forced to render the same money in kind, and in the
very same pieces which he has received, he cannot use it at all, seeing that by
using it, he changes it, and puts it away from him: which has caused one to
say, that when money is delivered to be used by a man, its not possible that the
Deliverer should remain still Lord and Owner of the said self same money.

2. That the Lender will no other but give it, that is, alienate it, and make
it his to whom its lent, because else the danger of loosing would be his; and
this is the greatest ground of Usury says he, in that men will not hazard at
all their principal sum of money (otherwise perchance they might have more gain,
and that lawfully too, in the trade of merchandising, either by themselves or
in fellowship together with others) but whiles they will by all means be sure
of their principal, and will adventure nothing; they are doubtless of this
mind, not to have it lost, and perish from them; but will have it made his own
money who borrows it, (and so to give it, as it were, making it a mutuum
quasi, as Civilians call a kind of lending, as I said even now) and to have him
Debtor not of the very same again, but so much in quantity, so as that Usurers
money is still safe and cannot perish in that respect; For no general quantity
does ever perish, but only the particular things, which are within some certain
place, or circumstance; and has not my Adversary well gotten by his giving?

Number. 76. The second Objection is, that the Scripture it self calls lending for
gain giving in several places, as namely, Lev. 25.27. Thou shall not give him
thy money to Usury, and Ps. 15.5. He that gives not his money to Usury, as
some translations have it: and Ezekiel. 18.13. Has given forth upon Usury.

Whereunto I answer first, we must not be so simple as to gather from thence
that the Usurer practiceth the contract of giving properly so called, for as
much as he intends for the return of every, 100 l. and for six over and
above: So that the Prophet Ezekiel notably adds to giving taking, even taking
of increase, which shows what a GIVING is meant, viz. such as carries taking
again with it, and a returning again of the principal with an increase, whereas
in giving properly so called there is no returning.

2. I answer, that as the Opponent brings his four Authors, as making against
me and being for him in the sense of GIVING, so I shall adduce more then four
as able Divines as any of his, which really are for me (whereas his do but seem
to be so) And, 1. Powel, in that Christ says, LEND, he bids not to give but he
would have the principal restored.

2. A learned professor of Losanna, called Aretius, whose words are these upon
Luke 6.35. which sentence all do not take aright, for there are which judge
that the very principal is not to be recalled for, nor to be expected (which
implies GIVING) whose sentence I do not approve.

For of gratuitous beneficence Christ had spoken before, sed quod mox additur
(...), that he by and by adds lend, he speaks not of the same species now, but
expressly of loan whether the pricipal be to be recalled, or not to be hoped
for, it is not now lending, and Christ should not speak RIGHT (mark what he
says) lend, hoping for nothing from thence, but that should cheerfully be
granted to him, without hoping for any gain counting it sufficient for thee to
receive the principal in its proper time and place, etc. Thus Aretius. [Unless
some intervening cases require it to be otherwise as has been formerly shewn]
which exegetically I add.

Aretius probl. Theolog. loc. 50, p. 627. With Aretius I may join Powel against
giving upon Luke 6.34. If you lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, supple
non sortem, supply, not the principal, else it would be a gift, not a loan.
2. And does not Saint Jerome render Christ's saying, (...), in the same sense
lend, not give, in his old version.

3. So all manner of Translations do they not so too, as namely. 1. The
Ethiopick, lend, not give. 2. The Persick, lend, not give. 3. The Syriack,
lend, not give. 4. The Dutch. Leihel, not give. 5. The French also. 6. The
English, lend, not give.


4. I add, the famous Author of the brief Treatise of Usury, who not only uses
the same version lend, but also tells us, that to lend is to deliver presently
to another man such stuff as is spent with the first natural and proper use
thereof with a bond to have him repay so much and so good again. And thus the
Greeks, and the Latins, the Jews, the Philosophers, the Lawyers, the Diviness
and generally all the Heathens and Christians take that to be the nature and
true definition or description of loan: So that by this his saying he makes it
to appear that lending here required is not giving, because in giving is
nothing repaid

5. With this Author I join Gratian, saying, that in lending I say do, ut des,
do ut satias, I give thee that thou may give me, or I give thee that thou
may do to me that, which is not so in perpetual giving: So that I wonder,
when I consider what this Author and others write of Lending, how they can say
that giving by Christ is meant.

4. And yet I have more to say: viz. That other places also of holy writ do
evince it, that lending and not a perpetual giving away is meant by Christ, as
namely

1. Luke 6.30. And then verse 35. where Christ distinctly speaks of giving
first v. 30. and then of lending next, which shows what he meant when he said
and lend, not And Doctor Vultius the Lawyer whose juris prudentiam I have
extracted and learned by heart, I cannot ommit here, who, to avoid this mistake
of giving, has changed the name mutui datum, into mutuation l. 1. c. 31. And
Phil. Melanchton I must needs superadd in the Margin too, to second Aretius.
Christ says Luke 6.35. lend, looking for nothing again thereby, which saying
should not be so perverted, or foolishly understood. Nor that one might reason
thereby that the principal should not be rendered: For then it would be giving
and not lending, in his Annot. upon Matthew.
lend, but and lend, requiring somewhat more besides giving: viz. lending also.
2. v. 34. Where lending is twice mentioned, from whence I gather, that lending
and not giving is to be understood verse 35. also, as answering the lending of
sinners, only with this difference, that in lending we must not expect any
thing from thence, as they do.

3. Deuteronomy. 15, 8, 10, 11. If there be among you a poor man, that is one that is
decayed, not a beggar, of one of thy brethren, (by an high pallage) etc. Thou
shall surely lend to him sufficient for his need, in that which he needs.
There is lending (and no giving) and lending requires restoring, and that, as
Authors say, after the seventh year, because else it would be a mere donation,
says Lyra, which cannot be granted in so great a plenty after the seventh
year: But then after this lending in comes Giving v. 10. Thou shall verily
give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him. Where
note that giving is mentioned twice in English, and three times in Hebrew, and
that with a dagesh sort, to enforce the Notableness of it.

4. Matt. 5.42. Give unto him that asks thee, and from that would Borrow of
thee turn thou not away: Where AND comes in again, distingishing giving from
lending, and requiring both, just in the same manner, as in Luke 6.34, 35.

Number, 77.2. But there is another interpretation of this text, says the Chapter
which serves not his turn any more than the former. v. 34. If you lend to them
of whom you hope to receive, what thanks have ye; for sinners also lend to
sinners to receive as much again. This is not to be understood of increase or
Use, but the like kindness again. (...) aequalia, as suppose they should lend a
horse to their Neighbor from whom they expected to be befriended in the like
kind, and so instances in a sum of money. Thus to do was lawful enough, yet
Christ thinks it not enough for his Disciples; they are to lend not only to
such as will lend to them again, but also to the poor and necessitous, yea, to
their enemies if straightened and pinched, from whom there was little ground to
expect an equal favor again, and here he quotes Grotius, Jansanius, Zanchie,
and the Aethiopick version.

For answer whereunto I say,

1. That the Chapter is much mistaken in this, that he says, Tantundem quantum
dedit, ut patet ex seq. that is so much as was given or lent as the words
following show. Piscator. in Loc.
that this interpretation serves not my turn more than the former, v. 39. For
this very verse makes altogether for me; For sinners therein are so just, that
they will lend without Usury, desiring nothing but their own again, (...) that
is, For in mutuation we do not look to receive the same particular again, as in
commodation, but (...) so much aequivalent thereunto B. Downam. p. 228.
the like sum, as Powel. p. 50.
Divines expound that expression, out of which place says a most learned
Author, we that bear the Livery of Christ's name, and have undertaken an holy
profession, may learn how we ought to lend unto our needy brother, and whether
we ought to take Usury of him or no^ (The Persick leaves out (...) but who can
like it? This by the way.)

So another, Which is when a man lends something and looks to have the same
again in his own individual property; as if I lend a horse, I look to have the
same horse again, and not another: Whereas Mutuation is, when a man lends any
thing and looks but to have his own again in the same ^ind. Powel 10.11.
The Gospel makes these sinners (Usurers) worse than other sinners, when it
says sinners lend to sinners, to receive as much again, but these to receive
more:

And how it makes for me besides, by the word LEND not give, I have formerly
shown; so that I cannot by any means mislike this 34. verse.

2. Both he and Grotius are mightily mistaken in a horse by confounding Trap.
upon Prove. 28. p. 328.
commodating with lending: and the same horse minds me of a certain sort of
Usurers, which call Usury horse money, by the name of a beast, answerably
whereunto these two men cloak Usury by the name of a horse, making that lending
properly so called, which is not but commodating.

3. As for the same Grotius his saying, that the Usury Question does not
properly belong to this place, I do not weigh much, because he is not only an
erroneus Writer, but also confesses against himself, that by most of the
ancient Fathers the matter of Usury is handled and spoken against by them upon
the said place; as learned Pool also treats of Usury at large upon the same,
and sets down Usury, as meant in the very first place; where let the Reader
choose whether he will stick to the Chapter and his Grotius, or to Pool and all or
Luke 6.35.
most of the holy Fathers, besides our As Erasmus, Melanchton, Xistus, Be^^^eus.
chiefest Protestant Authors, who prove Usuries unlawfulness by Luke 6.35. As
for Jansenius I do not see why he should be brought against me, so Zanche both
of them, extending Christ's words to the ungrateful, and the poor, and enemies,
and saying, that it does not follow that we must not love those which love us,
because we are to love those which do not love us etc. For who of us reasons
so? and besides, do not the greatest Anti-Usurarians say the same, that is here
said? I Will instance only in one now, We are to lend not only to our friends,
kinsmen, and brothers, but also unto strangers,, yea, and to our enemies, Luke
6. Matt. 5. Thus Gabriel Powel.

4. Nor does the Aethiopick cross me at all, which the Chapter foreseeing, makes
him speak so faintly, That it seems to intend this sense. Yea, I say farther,
that the same Aethiopick version does rather make for me, especially in these
last words, not hoping for a retribution, which self same thing I assert most
stiffly, that in lending there must be no retribution expected, but if any thing
comes thankfully, freely, and unexpectedly, it may be received.

Number. 78.3. says the Chapter The word (...) hoping for nothing again, has a quite
contrary sense put on it by the learned men who render it desparing or causing
to despair. This latter sense the Syriack, Persick, and Arabic, versions
favor.

1. Siriack, Do not frustrate the expectation of any. 2. Persick do not make
any desperate, because great is your reward. 3. The Arabic, do not frustrate
any ones hope, with which versions he joins Spanhemius and another Author
besides, affirming, that Christ by these words would not have us to cut off the
hopes of any, considering the reward set before us; whereunto I answer.

1. Suppose all these versions be yielded unto, and what his two Authors say,
what hurt can it do to me, who by that which I have red in Critics and
Grammarians, cannot see that (...) signifies so much as the versions and his
Authors would have it, and am not inscious of this too, that if it were so, it
does not follow that the word signifies the same in this place too, and this
only, and no other thing, there being those, which put other constructions upon
this place, as the Ethiopian and several other versions do, of which hereafter.

2. I add, that one word overthrows all that these versions say, viz. that
little word (...), nothing; if Christ had said, (...) none, as the Syrick has
perverted his words, than that had been something, to establish that sense, but
seeing it is (...) nothing, hoping for nothing and not for none; I do not see
what sure footing they have for their sense and meanning if to it they stick,
for what a strange sense is this causing nothing to despair: For it is (...)

3. I observe how he would fain be counted a man skilled in the Oriental
tongues, but he may thank the polyglott for it, which some good man let him see.

He goes on and says, some, as aforesaid, render it which is a little better
rendered, nothing desparing, because Chriticks and Lexicons tell us that (...)
signifies sometimes to despair, as Lucan shows it, l. 5. but not always.
desparing intransitively, and brings in Dr. * Hammond, saying others translate
it, not any way loosing all manner of hopes, viz. of a just retribution: But to
no purpose is this also; because

1. (...) signifies to hope, which I and other likewise say.

2. Because I do not deny what he affirms, viz. that Christians should not be
diffident, but expect God to be their remunerator: But that it only is meant
how will any one prove it?

Number. 79. Passing on he says moreover, passing by others, you see how many
favorable interpretations this place is capable of, and those more probable
than his nihil inde sperantes, hoping nothing from thence taken from the
Vulgar, the emphasis being placed in the preposition (...) tho not (I confess
an emphasis as he places In his spiritual Merchant p. 4.
elsewhere in the same preposition in the word (...) Matt. 13.46. as it is in
the Original, that is, he overcame, namely himself.

Whereunto this is my answer.

1. How more probable are those other interpretations than mine? because they
take (...) for (...) which is Christ's own word, which is worse, than to expound
and parallel (...) with (...) as I do in the spiritual Merchant, for which here
he jeereth me, tho he has no just cause, the Printer after my correction
misplacing these two prepositions in my lines and in the margin both.

Because these two prepos. being paralelled make (...), he passingly overcame
himself.
But suppose his reading be the best, says the Chapter viz. lend, hoping for
nothing again from thence, by way of use this may be, and yet not at all taking
of gain for money lent here condemnned.

For proof hereof I shall give you Mr. Magers sense upon the place.

To which quotation I answer, I have read him and it, and find that that good
man would have us to lend freely, yet so freely as that we should lend it but
for as short time as we can want it, and that, if the borrower do not repay it,
so as that the lender cannot have it again in due time for his maintenance, (to
use his words) the Borrower trading with it from year to year, it is not
against this precept to require recompense therefore; Mark recompense, let the
Reader read his own words upon this place, for they are too large for me here
to insert, so that what the Chapter says here makes nothing against me.

What he subverts as from himself, and from my old friend Rivet, concerning
three sorts of People, does not thwart me neither; For my Where note, that in
our greek Grammar both (...) and (...) signify of and from
friends use to make such distinctions also, without granting that we may
expect, exact, and take Use of the third sort called the rich, because Christ
makes no such exception in this place by allowing us to lend for gain to the
wealthy. This we grant that they are bound to consider the Lender, and that he
may lawfully take what they freely, and thankfully offer, as See B. Downam upon
Ps. 15.5. p. 223.
Trescabald the Florentine Merchant did when the Lord Cromwell for sixteen
Ducats lent him, gave him one thousand six hundred gratefully.

Number 80. But he quoteth Bishop Hall too against me, which I much wonder at, how
he can, because in this his Pamphlet he confutes him (such a great man he takes
himself to be, as can confute so learned a Bishop and so famous).

But to answer more punctually I say, what Bishop Hall asserts is concerning a
man that borrows to enrich himself, or out of a wanton expense and for his
pleasure, that there can be no reason why you should vail your own just
advantage to another man's excess, which is by him so warily spoken, as that by
virtue of this place Luke 6, 35. As Mr. Clerk in the Lord Cromwels Life reports
it p. 22. (...) G. Powel. p. 59.
No just advantage can be taken by his words: For the good Bishop well knew,
that to such as he describes, we are not to lend at all, viz. such as borrow
out of excess, and for their pleasure, which is his own expression, because
much evil comess of it: and how much he was against Usury, I have formerly
shown; so that it is not nor can be imagined, that in this saying of his he is
for it; I add, that the Champion himself confesses that the Bishops of
England, of whom himself was one, descrie all Usury, I superadd that this
famous Bishop was so great a friend unto me when as an exiled Minister I lived
in Exceter, as I have else where declared and so continued, as that I am
confident that he would not now become an enemy to me in this matter of Usury
which he himself so much warreth against, as I also do: But of him more
hereafter.

Number. 81. To advance yet one step higher in the consideration of the Text
before me. The things Sinners are said here to do, are at least lawful, and I
think commendable in their kind etc. and then there is a double mistake in
these words of Mr. Trap. (by me quoted p. 4,) Let the Reader peruse them and my
present Opponents Opposition made against them in his Pamphlet, and pretended
confutation thereof, which is so tedious as that I am loath to insert them, but
shall deal therewith as he deals with more than twenty nine lines of mine,
which he does not touch at all, but wholly passes over.

Only thus much I shall briefly answer thereunto.

1. That we all say the same with blessed B. Downam upon P^. 15.5.
Downam, that we may not so understand our Savior Christ as tho he did forbid
men to love their lovers, or to do good to those that have deserved well at
their hands, or to lend to such of their friends and acquaintances as will
restore what they have borrowed; for they that do not thus much are worse than
the very sinners of whom Christ speaks: But he requires a higher degree of
Christians to lend -- not only them that love us, but also them which hate us,
to lend not only to them who will repay, but also such of whom we connot hope
to receive that which we lent: and in this very thing Bishop Downam and my poor
self agree with learned Zanchy, by him quoted:

2. That he shows in this his habitual pride and arrogance, in that he
emboldeneth himself to show this great Author his mistakes, himself being but a
Novice.

3. That I shall desire the Reader once more to peruse the words of Mr. Trap,
in his own writing upon Prove. 28. p. 320 etc. for that very writing is enough
to answer for it self. As for me, I shall not undertake to answer to every
thing that is excepted against those many Authors which I do quote, for that
would run on in infinitum: Nor indeed does he.

Only this I will add, 1. That they must needs be sinners, whom Christ calls
sinners, tho they were not Let this be well observed, that neither Mr. Trap nor
I think them to be sinners for lending to receive (...) the like for quantity,
or for courtisie; but only mention these sinners, to show that Usurers are
worse than they, because they lent to receive only the like, ^ut Usurers more.
sinners in that they did lend to their friends and kinsmen, Luke 6. unless
they did lend for Usury, which Christ frees them from, saying, that they did
lend only to have the like again, that is, the like sum again, which is lawful:
Their fault was that they would go no farther, their lending to their friends
not being enough.

2. That in very deed and without mistaking it may be asserted that Christ gave
it in charge to his, to lend not expecting any gain or overplus for their loan;
because he says expressly, lend, hoping for Nothing; which an abler man than
this Novice understands that Luke 6.35. lend, looking for nothing again, in
that Christ says so, he commands that nothing should be exacted more than was
lent. Number. 82. I conclude as the Chapter Consider what I have answered: Yet I have
two things more to say and superadd concerning the same text, viz.

1. That I have sufficient Supporters to sustain and to support my exposition
[hoping for nothing from thence] which I have only touched yet, but now intend
to insist upon, because its a thing of great concernment.

For upon two Accounts this translation and sense is embraced.

1. Because (...) is, a compound compounded of the * preposition (...) from and
(...) I hope, and signifies hoping from thence, or from it.

2. Because I have at least fifteen famous Authors on my side who render
Christ's words in that manner, hope for nothing from thence (ab inde) which I
defire the Reader to take special notice of, because my adversary is not
ashamed to tell this falsehood, that this exposition and version, hoping for
nothing from thence, I have taken from the vulgar, as if I had only the vulgar
on my side for it, which would be but a weak support Two things more added
which I have (...) to Luke 6.35.
for me in so momentous a Subject.

Now my first Author I confess is St. Jerome, who has studied the Hebrew twenty
years, and learned it of a Jew, and lived in Judea at Bethlehem, and therefore
most able to translate the Bible; and also was so holy a man, as that he heard
the Angels sing in the Wilderness, wherein he lived, as he calls God to witness
for it, and appeared to St. Austin, being dead, and told him, (as Mr. Brook has
it) what a glory he was in.

And 1. His translation is this, Nihil inde sperantes, hoping for Nothing from
thence.

2. So Beza, Nihil inde sperantes, hoping for nothing from thence.

So Stephanus in his Marginal notes.
Stephanus, that admirable and most rare Grecian, Nihil inde lucri sperantes,
hoping for no gain from thence.

4. So Aretius p. 627.
Aretius, that famous and learned Professor of Losanna, Nihil inde sperantes,
hoping for nothing from thence.

5. Yea, Zanchy as one observes it in him.
Zanchy also, sometimes so reads it with this addition, ob officium mutuationis,
for the duty of lending.

6. B. Downam in Luke 6.35.
So famous B. Downam so renders Luke 6.35. looking for nothing thence.

7. That Renowned and ever honored man Dr. Luther. in Luke 6.35.
Dr. Luther in his Dutch version of the holy bible, so renders the same words
of Christ, Luke 6, 35. in Dutch thus, Leihel, das iter nights dafeir hottet,
that is lend hoping for nothing for it or from it:

Seconds enough for its poor weak creature, which writes these things, and had
need of Supporters, having so many enemies, which would even eat him if they
could, like bread:

But because I spoke of fifteen famous Authors to be my seconds in this
translation; I will therefore name four more, as namely, 1. Erasinus
Roterodamus, 2. The Tigurines. 3. Castalio, 4. Mr. Pool, which makes the number
of P. Caesar upon Luke 6.35.
eleven.

And then Secondly I have this to declare yet, that there Beza in Luke 6.35.
Besides which eleven I can bring, four more who render the words thus, hoping
for nothing thereby, as namely Melanchton in Luke 6.35.
Brentius in Luke 6.35.
And the French Bible, which makes up the number of fifteen.
is one interpretation more, which is received by most, and will mainly sustain
my fabric, which I have superstructed or erected upon that famous place, Luke
6.35. viz. That Usury by this place is evidently prohibited, tho it be not
named, at least consequentially. For

1. If our Neighbor be to be helped without regard of recovering the stock, as
Beza asserts it; then much more all Usury in contracts are by that place in
Luke 6.35. prohibited.

2. Because Christ by that place commands free lending, which word free, by way
of explanation added in some translations, the old especially, and by Bishop B.
Sands sermon. upon Luke 6.35. And again God says lend freely, and look for
nothing again, Luke 6.35. But will the Vsuver whose money is his God, remit his
intrest because of this? Thus he
Sands upon Luke 6.35. lend freely

3. Because the word (...) nothing, enforces it:

4. The word from thence shows that from the loan we should hope for nothing.

5. Most Expositors and Writers have therefore with one consent expounded that
place of Usury by name, as namely

1. The ancient Fathers for the most part have so handled, and understood that
place, which is confessed by Grotius himself, that a plerisque -- as has been
declared already.

2. And learned Poole in his Syn. upon Luke 6.35. sets own this i. e. Nullum
foenus Mr. Pool in Luke 6.35.
expositinn first, as I hinted it formerly, hoping for nothing, that is no
Usury.

3. So Langius in sua Polyan. p. 14.25.
Langius in his Polyanthea.

4. Renowned Bishop Downam has this expression for it; that most expound that
place Luke 6.35. so, that I must lend without respect of my own profit, or
without any expectation of any benefit or gain thereby. And

5. Blessed Bolton affirms the same, saying, as they Powel p. 33. And in his
pract. Catechism. with whom I join the Phoenix of my Country P. Melanchton in
suis Annot. in Matt. This is the proper sense and true interpretation of those
words of Christ. Luke 6.35. So lend, that yoou receive as much money back again,
and for the lending hope for no gain above the principal
most expound that place. p. 25.

6. But I must needs add the learned G. Powel's Syllogism.

The Commandments of God are necessarily to be obeyed.

But God has commanded to lend looking for nothing, Ergo

Downam p. 226.
And seventhly Renowned Dr. Hamond, who upon Luke 6. insists upon that place as
much as any man, to prove by it the unlawfulness of Usury by comparing the
septuagints greek interpretation of Nehemiah with the greek in the new
Testament and the old, which are his own words; I do not set down all his
discourse, because it is too large high and deep for ordinary capacities:
referring the learned to his whole most learned discourse against Usury upon
the 6. of Luke 35.

8. To close up this interpretation, I am minded to allege the forenamed most
worthy But I have not fully done with my first Reason: For I have one Text more
from the new Testament viz. 1 Cor. 6.10. Extortioners shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, which Extortioners by the Translators of the Bible are also
translated Usurers in Psalm. 109.11. in Hebrew (...) and in the foresaid place 1
Cor. 6.11. where also the Usurer is expressly named, instead of Extortioner by a
certain translation which I have seen
B. Downam once more,

In this sense all Authors almost that have in former times written against
Usury understand this place so; for according to this (which as I said before
is the most common mark, the most common interpretation) all Usury, whether it
be actual or mental, is by these words most plainly condemned: and whereas some
of these latter times understand this Nothing of the principal, others affirm
that you might as well put out the word lend, and say give (as my adversary
would have it) because the contract of lending presupposes both in the Lender
an intent of alienating the principal, but for a time, and in the Borrower a
covenant to restore after a time the principal. Thus he; Let M. P. consider
what I have answered him upon this text, and if he return a solid answer
hereto, he shall be mihi secundus Apollo, but that I expect not save ad Graecas
Calendas.

I have * done with his first Reason, his next follows. Says he

2. Reason. Because the Usurer stands expressly condemned by Gods own mouth etc.

Number. 84. This is easily granted, but with the foresaid limitations, Who are
those Usurers thus condemned? such as transgress Gods political Law, such as by
griping Usury oppress the poor and indigent, of whom it is forbid to take Use.

I answer 1. Lo, how he maims my words with an etc. that the nervousness and
weightiness thereof may not appear by my proofs Ps. 15.5. Ezekiel. 18.12, 13. and
may not I serve him so too hereafter, by cutting short his words to make this
treatise the shorter? Well, his example will make me do so.

2. It will be easily granted, that griping Usurers which oppress the poor and
indigent will be damned, but not, that such only, tho such will receive the
greater damnation; for as I prove my reason by Ezekiel. 18.12. such also shall not
live, but die, who take increase, Where note farther, that Nesheck it self also
is, as Gel. tells us, supreans illa pecunia, quae ultra sortem repetitur that
money which above the principal is required, or asked.
any increase or overplus as well as Ambrose l. de Tol. c. 15.
Nesheck. The words are, If he beget a Son-that has given forth upon Usury, and
has taken any increase in Hebrew (...) Tarbith, which the old Latin translation
renders more than thou gave, Luke 25 36. Thou shall not take Usury of him,
nor more than thou gave, and v. 27. thou shall not lend him thy money upon
Usury, nor thy Victuals for increase, that is, as Danaeus in sua Eth. Christ.
l. 2. c. 15. et 39.
Ambrose reads it, receive more.

And again, this sentence excludes all increase above the principal; The
Septuagint also call Tarbith (...) supradundantiam, and others an augmentation;
and so most Translators upon Prove. 28.8. Increase (and Tremellius Le^ Juda,
Lavaterus, Vatablus, Pagninus, Mercerus, Foenory, as distinct from Usury, and
which signifies a Child or thing begotten, foenus quasi foetus, because it is
begotten, as it were, by the Usurer, and brought forth by the Borrower, and
Iadd, that Tarbith is sometimes put before Nesheck increase before Usury as
Prove. 28.8. to show that Usury is not only biting, but increase, any increase
also, and that in Ezekiel. 18.12. all the old versions render increase, amplius,
somewhat more.

And what says blessed The Septuagint. upon Prove. 28.8.
Austin? If thou have lent money to any man of whom thou look to receive more
than thou gave, whether it be Wheat, or Wine, or Oil, or any thing else; if
thou expectest to receive more than thou gave, Thou art an Usurer. How does
the Usurer like this think ye? So St. The marginal note upon Prove. 28.8.
Jerome, speaking against Usury says, thou must receive no more than thou
did give. So Gratian, Which Targam Jonathan follows upon Ezekiel. 18.12. putting
Increase before Usury.
The words of the version are, has given to Usury and taken more. etc.
Augustine.
Et Hieron.
Whatsoever for loan is exacted above the principal, is Usury.

But after all this I must needs subjoyn the words of the famous Writer
Danaeus, they that insist on the Hebrew hold that there is a great difference
between the words Tarbith and Nesheck and so think that not all Tarbith is a
Vice, but is sometimes allowed: But all Nesheck is forbidden that is, biting;
but this their distinction is to be taken off, and to be confuted; for both are
mentioned together and condemned together. Luke 25.36.

Number. 85. Of Political laws by him here mentioned I have spoken already.

He says farther, as for his additional reasons I shall consider them
according to their strength they have, but I see they must consist in giving of
hard names etc. and in this Art no Quaker could have exceeded him, I mean in
foul language.

Whereunto I answer, What does he make then of other grave Writers, who give
such names too: and especially and by name of Gab, Powel p. 40. And I am even
ashamed to tell in English, what Coprovicus that great Mathematician calls him
to 2. p.
G. Powel, who says, an Usurer is a Thief, a ravenous Vultur, a Murderer, an
Idolator, and like unto the Devil, who continually seeks whom he may devour:
For so the Usurer night and day still devoureth the Borrower. Is he such a one
too, whom no Quaker has exceeded, I mean in in foul language? And what will he
say to the Authors of Usuries Arraignment his words? These are hard speeches
and comparisons I confess, and such as might make a man loath the very name of
Usury; yet there have, wise, and learned men written against it: If they say,
that such names by such are intended or of right belong to oppressing Exactors,
and greedy Cormorants; I answer, how can this be, when the same Author does
plainly declare what the Usurers are, upon whom he bestows such Liveries, and
to whom he gives such names and what their Usury is. viz. all gain or increase
unlawfully exacted or hoped, for the very duty of lending above the principal.

Mr. Jelinger. Number. 86. The Usurer is a biter, for his sin is Nesheck biting.

Reply. Let what his friend Bishop Andrew says on the same word, serve for an
answer to this, who asserts from Galen, Powel p. 4. and 2.
Etymologiam esse testem sallacem, that Etymology is a deceiptful witness;
whereunto

My answer 1. is, a poor and often repeated come off: For we all say the same.

2. And besides he does me a kindness, saying, that such a worthy Bishop is my
friend: Whereunto I add, that the rest of the learned and grave Brethren are
also, by his own confession in that same thing my friends.

3. I Reply, that, because the Chapter says so little against this strong Argument
I will say the more for it, as namely, that the Usurer ^s a biter; in that

1. He bites holes in a man's Estate, biting, like a dog, yea, like an old dog,
as a famous Writer calls him.

But here I must answer a Question, which will be proposed, whether all Usurers
bite, yea, or no?

Whereunto I answer, that all, so as that a Usurer by a general name is called
in the Hebrew (...) a biter, and the borower (...) the bitten; which has caused
Divines to deliver it for an undoubted truth that all Usury bites.

2. I add only this, that all do not bite a like, but some more and deeper than
others: For if they be griping Usurrers, they will take not only above the
principal, but also above the ordinary Usury of six in the hundred, and Use
upon Use, and advance money, and forfeiture, and arrest men, if they come not
off at the the payment day, and make them sell their Goods to their great loss
to pay them: But if they be more mild, they will content themselves with six in
the hundred, and crave no more; which notwithstanding they bite holes still,
tho lesser ones, like lesser dogs; but without are dogs, all dogs, Rev. 21.8.

Number. 87. Where I shall be necessitated to answer two Objections.

Objection 1. And 1. that those, which set and let make holes too:

Whereunto I answer. That their holes are no Usury holes interdicted by God, it
being lawful to take Rent, and not Use, as I have fully proved it already.

The 2: Objection is, When the Usurer sees himself thus condemned, he snarles
and barks and says; I am no Usurer, no biterr, no dog; for I do not wrong or
bite any body, but rather do much good with my money, and the borrower tells me
how much he is beholding to me.

Answer 1. Why then does every one that knows thee to be a lender of money for
six in the hundred call thee an Usurer?

2. And why does the foresaid most famous Council of Agatha call thee Usurer,
if thou take but five in the hundred?

3. And why does every body curse thee for thy lending upon Usury, as Jerome
tells thee, if thou wrongest no body?

4. And why does the Politephnia compare thee to an Asp, which tho it bites but
softly, yet kills finally: For so as he which is stung with an Asp dies
sleeping, so sweetly does he consume himself which has borrowed upon Usury.

5. And why does the learned renowned and voluminous CALPEINE say of thy
lending upon Usury, that it is properly Usury?

6. And why do the very Heathens say, that such lending as thine is upon Usury
makes the borrower thine enemy: as I will instance, but in one at present viz.
Plautus who asserts it: So that I wonder how the Usurer can truly say that he
does much good with his money, and that the borrower gives him thanks; happily
with his mouth he may give him thanks -- when the same time he curses him in
his heart, Jer. 15.10. The Lord convince the poor Usurer by this: So I prayed
for him the night before I penned it, and when I wrote it by day; and so I pray
for him every day, saying, moriatur Vsurarius ne moriatur, let the Usurer
before he dies* die to his sin, that he may not die for his sin: and so I
shall end this Paragraph with this clausula or close; Even so, Lord Jesus, turn
him that he may be turned I humbly beseech thee.

Number. 88. The Usurer is an Exactor, or Extortioner.

Reply. A man may require his due, I hope, and yet be no Exactor or
Extortioner? I answer, a Spade may be called a Spade, and so the lender taking
Use for his money, which the Chapter calls his due, when it is not his due, it being
utterly forbidden, may be called an Exactor, especially when the Scripture
calls him so: Where, Psalm. 10.9, 11. Let the Exactor or Meaning thereby the
Usurer, B. Downam upon Ps. 15.5.
Usurer catch all that he has, as the words are rendered by all translations
almost, except the English as I said formerly, and Exo. 22.25. where the Usurer
is called an Exactor also.

2. The Chapter adds, he goes on and taking many times excessively more increase
then he ought to take.

Reply. Then be like some increase he may or ought to Idem ibid.
Thou shall not be to him an Exactor, Hebr (...) Sicut Usurarius five
foenerator, qui accipit augmentur^. as a Usurer that takes an augmentation.
Poole.
take such as take excessively more we call them Extortionners.

Answer. When I say more then they ought to take, my meaning is, more then they
ought to take according to their own opinion, which is that they must take no
more then the Law stinteth.

Number. 89.3. He is an unjust person.

Reply. What is not against the Rules of charity and equity cannot be unjust
etc.

I Answer. 1. And how will he prove it that Usury is not?

1. Against charity, which is B. Downam upon Psalm. 15.5. And I heard this very
day when I wrote this, a friend tell me, that Usurers are observed to be the
hard heartest and cruellest people in the world, and that himself found it so.
kind, whereas Usury is inhumane and unkind, as it appears by his unkind
dealings and denyings of lending of the smallest sum of money freely, which has
caused an Humfred in vita Juel. p. 282.
eminent writer to let fall these words; Evident and lamentable experience
teaches that whereas in the days of our Forefathers, when Usury was counted
a deadly sin, a poor man or a young couple might easily borrow of a rich man
forty or twenty Nobles freely, and pay it again at convenient leisure, a man
cannot borrow five shillings, no not twelve pence for a week, but he must pay
an egg for Usury, thus he, and I found it so, when I could not have five
shillings lent me by a great and rich Usurer.

And Hugo C. in Psalm. 11.
another has this saying, Christian charity puts not forth to Usury.

And Heming. Comment. in Luke 5.
another counts that Usury is directly against charity.

So Dr. Fenton against Usury.
another, establish Usury, and the Rule of Love is quite overthrown.

2. How can he demonstrate it that it is not against equity?

He quoteth here Jer. Tailor, and B. Hall, and Rivet, for himself.

But I answer.

1. That I shall cite for my self four Authors too. And. 1. Babington Quest.
and Answers upon the Comm. p. 3.
Dr. Fenton, and 2. B. Babington, and 3. John Knewstub together, saying, that
Usury is against the equity of lending; forasmuch as the Usurer will be at no
hazard in lending: But whether the borrower sink or swim, lose or win, he John
Knewstub 8. in Exo 20.
will be no looser, but have both his gain and use full home,

The fourth is R. Turner, whose words are: So you see here is no equity, the
Usurer receives gain without labor, clear gain without cost, certain gain
without peril, out of the industery, the charges, the mere uncertainties of the
borrower, a cleanly Alchymist that can extract much Silver, and wast nothing in
smoke, these are the kine of Bashan that feed upon the Commons.

2. But especially I shall allege for my self the word of God it self, Exo.
22.14. If a man borrow ought of his Neighbor, and it be hurt, or else die, the
owner thereof not being by, he shall surely make it good, where it is clearly
to be seen, that God in lending provides only that the lender should be no
looser; for the borrower was but to make good that which he had received, but
the Usurer will be sure to have not only his own again, but his use too, and is
that equity?

As for his three Authors, and,

Number. 90 1. Tailor. I do not see that he names Usury at all or contradicts me.

2. B. Hall, as he is my friend elsewhere in his writings, and was my great
friend, when I came first into England by preaching a Sermon purposely for me
and one Exul more at Exeter to stir up the Citizens to provide for us a
competency, wherein he himself joined with them, and after that was exceeding
kind to me, and familiar with me in frequent Latin discourses; so in this point
of Usury he is my very good friend too, holding with me, which has caused my
Antagonist to quarrel with him too, for his agreeing with me: whereunto I add,
that even in this my Adversaries citation he is for me, being for a voluntary
satisfaction, mark, a voluntary satisfaction, which is no other then a gratuity
by me and my brethren allowed.

3. So my old friend Rivet also is for gratuities, and stands upon the same
terms that some others do, viz. that so far as our brother be not hurted by
lending and equity be observed, it is not contrary to charity, nor to the law
etc. which makes nothing against me, who am for gratuities, and would have no
body hurted, and therefore am so much against Usury, whereby men are so much
hurted, and the Law of Equity so Roger Turner in the Vsurer's Plea. p. 9.
so much violated, as even now it has been demonstrated, so that Rivet must
needs have respect to such a kind of lending as actually does no hurt to any,
which when it can be made to appear, as by a free gratuity, in case the
borrower be really and justly a gainer, it will be evidenced, and no man can
contradict it or speak against it: 2. I answer, that Usury is called Prove.
28.8. and Ezekiel. 18.8. If a man be just and has not given forth upon Usury:
Whereupon see Tho. Aquin. 2.9^9. So the Syriack upon Psalm. 15.5.
unjust gain, and that there is so much injustice in Usury, as that God thereby
makes it so unlawful.

4. And whereas the Chapter adds, that Usury may plead a License from civil laws
etc. I do wonder how he can so soon forget what he said so lately, that he will
not vindicate those that keep not within the bounds of Equity, when all the
while he takes upon him to plead for Usury, and for Usurers from the
Civil-laws, and that most wonderfully.

1. Because the Civil-laws are all for Equity, and Usurers are not wrongfully,
because the Civil laws do not allow it, as by and by I will prove it. And that

1. By Justinian the Emperor, who says expressly, that the Senate of Rome did
not constitute use, and fruit in things, which in their using might be
consumed; as Wine, Oil, Corn, Cloths; next whereunto is money numbered, nec enim
poterat, for it could not do it, but in ground and houses, etc.

2. Cajus says, it was not effected by the decree of the Senate that there be
a proper use and fruit of money, for natural reason could not be charged by the
Senate.

3. Baldus, put the case, my brother make an Usurer his Heir, I may break his
Testament, and by excluding him, be admitted my self, by complaint of a
Testament made against Office or good Right.

4. And what says a great Modern Doctor, The civil wise men of Rome did not
allow Usury, as a thing that did either naturally belong to the contract of
lending, or else that might be annexed thereunto: But they permitted it
otherwise, as also they permitted Fornication and Divorces.

He superadds, We expect that he answer what Mr. Baxter in his Directory has
said to prove that some Usury is neither against Charity nor Justice.

Whereunto I answer 1. That I have red Mr. Baxter, and say so too, that there
is a Usury which is neither against Cajus in pandect.
Baldus de Infam.
The Author of the brief Treat. of Usury.
Charity nor Justice, as namely the liberal and recompensatory, and when Mr.
Baxter's cautions are observed, which because by a So called by Civilians.
Novation they alter Usury, I like exceeding well for my part, but not one of a
thousand observes: So as that Godly and famous man will do our Usurers, by all
men so called, no pleasure at all, because not one of a thousand observes them.

2. It is expected also that one or other of Usuries Defendants do answer
Doctor Pie against Usury, which was never yet answered, and Bolton. Mr.
Jelinger (he says farther) some make the Usurer an alienator of that which is
other men's not his own.

Reply. The borrower has no more right to the lenders money and the use
thereof, than the lender has to that increase, which is now spoken against, yea
not so much, etc.

I answer. 1. I thought he would have flatly denied my assertion, but if he
had, I should have brought Calvin, and famous B. Hall to make it good: For he
says expressly; He that by virtue of such translation, or contract, (as also he
calls it) does but in a mannerly and legal fashion (which is for six in the
hundred) rob the borrower.

2. As for his right he stands so much upon, I wonder how he will prove it, by
the Scripture, which must warrant it, and does not, but rather disanulls it by
its forbidding of Usury Deuteronomy. 23.19. etc. The Laws and Compa^^^ etc. are Crambe
his cocta, and have been often by me answered already and therefore will save
me some labor to refell the same things again.

3. What he says of B. Hall is soon to be answered, for B. Hall speaks but
by way of If. If, you can find a way whether by loan or sale (mark sale also)
to adventure your stock, that may be free from all oppression (mark, all
oppression) and extortion, and benificial to others as well as to your selves,
ye need not fear to walk in it; and who will I say Calvin, who writes expressly
upon Ezekiel. 18. St. Ambrose, Jerome, Austin, Bernard, (...) B. Hall, with famous
Mr. Smith asserts the sane, saying, p. 991. Christ expounding the Commandment
which forbidds st^^ling says, lend freely, showing that Usury, because she
lends ^ot jreal^ is a kind of Theft, and the Usurers a kind of T^^^ves: For
else this exposition were not right. So G. Powel, p. 40. The Usurer is a Thief,
etc. So Barth. Westhinerus in Ps. 15.5. Usury i^ Theft etc.
gainsay it if such a thing may be? But where is that Usurer, which is free
from all oppression and extortion, since by the word of God he is called an
extortioner, as I proved it formerly? so that he cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Which famous place makes also for me, because the Usurer
is also called an Extortioner.

Number. 91. Mr. Jelinger 5. The Usurer is a covetous person. Reply. To which I
answer in the words of B. Tailor. Covetousness is to be cured by the proper
motives to Charity, and by the proper rules of Justice, which being secured,
the arts of getting money are not easily made criminal. I answer 1. But how are
they secured by a Usurer, who as I proved him to be, is so unjust, and
uncharitable; and whose Usury is by great Psalm. 109.11. In most translations.
Authors made a very species of Covetousness upon Psalm. 15.5. So that by no
means he can be saved except he repent: Because it is expressly written, that no
covetous person, which is an Idolator, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ and of God, Ephesians. 5.5.

Mr. Jelinger. But he looks for his gain at the half years end.

Reply. And why not as well as the Hireling for his wages, when due, and the
Adventurer for his gain at the return of the Ship, or such as have set out
their Tenements, expect their Rent at their proper Seasons? Answer, Because the
Usurers gain is forbidden in the word of God Deuteronomy. 23.19. Neh. 4.10. etc. But
the other contracts are not. The very Heathens allow Rent, and Use, and Fruits,
for Lands and Tenements, as I proved out of Cajus in the Pandects, and
Landlords may expect it; but the Usurer cannot lawfully expect gain for his
money lent. God as well as the heathens being against it, Luke 6.35. But let us
see what the Chapter says next.

Mr. Jelinger. Usurers seldom repent. Reply. They that exceed not the bounds of
humanity and Theoderet in Psalm. 15. With whom I conjoyn Wits, saying in his
Politeuphnia p. 290. Covetousness looks out Usury, and Usury nourishes
Covetousness, and p. 291. Usury is the Daughter of Covetousness The subordinate
cause of Usury is Covetousness G. P. p. 9.
equity, need not repent.

I answer, 1. That all Usurers exceed both, has been sufficiently proved,
because all Usury bites more or less. etc. Usury is against all equity and
Conscience and reason. Towel p. 15. And all Usury bites ibid.


2. I add that, because the Champion speaks so slightly and Pharisaically in
answer to my charge, I will more fully show it, how it comes to pass that the
Usurer so seldom repents, tho he have great need of it indeed: and

1. Usurers seldom repent, because of their hard And B. Downam upon Psalm. 15.5.
Usury has turned lending into an act of inhumanity and cruelty: and Usury is
unequal and uncharitable.
heartedness as being like Crocodiles (as As the wrath of God, and the
subjection of goods to malediction. G, P. p. 38.
Gabriel Powel resembles them) which if a Cart go over their backs, feel it
not: for so Usurers are senseless, tho a most powerful Sermon with a most heavy
load of Usury does harden the heart. Downam upon Psalm. 15.5.
menaces and judgments, hanging over them, be preached against them, and go
over them, which has caused Divines to let fall such passages concerning their
hardness of heart and usual impenitency.

Their Consciences are cauterized as with a hot iron, there is such a thick
skin grown over their hearts, that they will hardly be circumcised in this
point, and this senslesness seems to proceed from these causes.

1. From the examples of others. 2. From a perverse affection, says Mr. Tailor.

2. Usurers seldom repent because of restitution, for they are told by Gods
word, that they must make restitution, Neh. 5.11. Restore I pray you, etc. and
by holy Writers which have Written against Usury in these last days also,
according to the word of God that they must restore, I will name but three at
present.

1. The Doctor which has penned the short treatise of Usury: when any man has
committed Usury he is bound to make restitution, except, etc. whereof more in
another place.

2. Mr. Smith, that you may not die in your sins, it is necessary to make
restitution before you die, etc. suitable to that of Austin, sin is not
remitted, unless that which is taken wrongfully, be restored.

3. Rog. Turner p. 15.
Powel, who says. 1. It is not enough that the Usurer take no more Usury, but
that he must restore that which he has taken. 2. That the heirs of an Usurer
may not keep it in any case, what the Usurer has gotten, because it is none of
theirs.

Mr. Smith in his second Sermon of Usury. G. Powel. p. 68. and so Capel in his
Usury Book.
4. Vsurarij dumdum aliena retinent, a Diabolo retinentur Seminianus l. 9. c.
90.
Seminianus, Who says that those which back what is not theirs is kept back by
Satan. And thus; O what a hard saying is it to the Usurer, so as that he seldom
repents, because he says in his heart, suppose I should give over this sin of
Usury, what shall I be the better for it, unless I restore, and that, if I
should do it, would undo me: so that very seldom we shall here of an Usurer
that repents, * and some For I hear Usurers generally say, in discoursing with
me, such an eminent Minister is so.
Ministers and my Adversaries present answer and defending of Usury by his
Pamphlet, is the ready way to make the Usurers repentance yet rarer; (which is
the sense and saying of good men) unless it be timely prevented, which thing I
am about to do, partly by my appearing against Usury in general and partly by
facilitating the Usurers repentance, when I shall come to show what the poor
Usurer must do in that weight case of restitution, as partly I have limited it
already; and shall declare in its proper place more fully being seconded
therein by most learned and able Assistants, being both Divines and Lawyers.

In the next place I will trace my Antagonist in that which he says for it.

Mr. Jelinger. 6. He is a Destroyer. 7. A Merciless person 8. Does not walk
Honestly.

Thus he hurleth these weighty things together, shipping over twenty eight
lines, and slighting them as much as he can; For he says no more but this
Reply. Those intended against all persons he accounts Usurers are but the
products of a mistaken Zeal, or purblind rashness; so that I shall therefore
relate those things, which he so slights and abbreviates, to render them so
considerable to all men as in themselves they are.

1. The Usurer is a Destroyer; whereof I have spoken elsewhere as well as here,
as there was cause, which notwithstanding I will now say a little more upon
this new occasion, and provocation given me, showing more fully

1. How he destroys himself and his. 2. others also.

As in Luther's time it was defended and commended: For so he says, Usury is
commended with full mouth -- as a most reasonable trade, without which the
commonwealth cannot stand -- Luth. de ^sur^.
1. Himself and his. 1. Himself by his covetousness drowning himself in
perdition and destruction, 1 Timothy 6.9.10. his Usury being to him as a Gulf.
says a And is guilty of his own overthrow, the Lord having threatened, that he
shall not dwell in his holy Hill, Psalm 15.5. Numb. 16.38.
learned Writer, which devoureth souls; I add that a Malefactor may be said to
cast away himself and is guilty of self-murder, as Korah and his Fellows, so
the Usurer casts away himself.

2. He destroys his I mean his own issue and posterity, whereof I have spoken
already, so that for the present I shall only add what Jo. Juel Sermon. in 1
These. 4.6. G. Powel. p. 29. and p. 39.
Hemingius, that famous foreign Divine relates of a great Usurer of a mean
place, dwelling in Chersoneso Cymbrica: This man grew exceeding rich by lending
upon Usury, and died, leaving abundanee of wealth, And yet after his death the
children that he left behind him fell into extreme poverty, insomuch that a
daughter of his was found to have not so much as a whole Coat on her back to
cover her nakedness, and was many times seen to do most base and servile work
to get her living and yet could not keep her self thereby from beggary. So his
other Daughter came to the like poverty, of whom hereafter.

2. Others besides, even 1. Whole households, as appears by that tragical
Scripture, Neh. 5.4, 5, 7. which caused that pious Sextus Dicret Number. 92.
Objection answered.
Bishop Je^uel to say, that it is utter destruction of infinite families; with
whom does simpathize the learned G. Powel, saying: As Serpents do sting and
destroy the body with their poison, so Usury DESTROYS, biteth and devoureth a
man's substance very speedily.

So Sextus, Usury like a whirlepool utterly wastes the Commonwealth.

But I know not what the Usurer will say. How can man say so? There be those
which have grown rich by my money, and gotten great estates by it, which
objection that great Father * St. Basil answers most notably thus. Thou will
say unto me, that men have grown rich by Usury; But I answer that I suppose,
more by that means have come to the Gallows. Thou look to these and
repeatest those that have grown rich by Usury: but thou namest not those which
have Sextus Decret. apud Dr. Wilson fol. 92.
Hemingius Comm. in loc. 5.
Basil. in Psalm. 15.
grown desperate, and faint hearted, and have come to their end by Usury.

I shall close up this answer with great Dr. Wilson fol. 189.
Dr. Wilsons pretty narration concerning this thing. A man coming into a
certain Church, and seeing it full of Images made of wax, demanded, what might
be the cause of such an unwonted sight? answer was made, that those whom these
images did represent, were certain persons, which in a time were saved from
drowning, by calling upon our Lady. Nay then, quoth he again, where are the
images of those, I pray you, that called upon our Lady, and were drowned
notwithstanding? So say I in this case, if any man will set before me the
images of those which took up money upon Usury and grew rich thereby; I would
demand on the other side, that he show forth the hundreds and thousands of
those who by that means have utterly been impoverished, and overthrown theirs
own estate: they will be found a million for one, yea, to be without all
comparison. Thus this great Divine.

2. Usurers destroy and ruin the Country or City wherein they live, which has
caused Magistrates, Countries, Kingdoms, and Cities to suppress them and drive
them out; so Nehemiah did put them down, Chapter 5.7, 8, 9, etc. and Sparta, Worms,
and others, because they said they were oppressed ruined and consumed by them.
For as great Haymo Episc. Halberstatensis.
Luther tells us, as a worm in an Apple, or Nut, consumes all that is within,
so an Usurer devoureth the substance of the City by wonderful and secret means.

And what that great Presul * Downam says concerning this consuming ruining
and destroying of Countries and Commonwealths, see his words upon Psalm. 15.5.
p. 256.257, 261. And therefore how can this destroyer be saved, unless he
repent and come to be a Lamb of a Lion, and a harmless Sheep of a ravening
Wolf, and do no more hurt or harm, nor destroy, as it is the property of all
the Citizens of Sion (who shall dwell with God in his Heavenly mount Sion,
where no Usurers ever will be admitted to take up their habitation, Psalm.
15.5.) I say again, it is the property of all the Citizens of Sion, not to hurt
nor to destroy in all Gods holy Mountain, Esa. 65.25. which is his Church says
Haymo that ancient Doctor and Bishop of Halberstat.

Number. 92. Mr. Jelinger, he is a merciless person, which saying, Luther in
Decalog.
B. D. upon Psalm. 15.5.
because it is so slighted also, I will, for its dilatation declare how it
comes to pass that he is so merciless, etc.

1. Because he wants that charity which he should have.

2. Because he is of a Serpentine nature.

For the 1. I say, he wants charity, and my reason why I say so that the
Usurer wants charity is this, because if he had that charity, which he
boasts of, he would not be an Usurer, for as much as charity is, 1. Kind, 1
Cor. 13.4. and he inhumane, as by holy But Basil who says Usury is an
excessive Inhumanity. And yet farther he says whatsoever becomes of the
principal, whether it be lost by fire, or be taken away by Thieves, or miscarry
by any other calamity, the Usurer by virtue of his Covenant is to demand his
gain as well out of the loss of the Borrower as out of his gain.
Writers he is called, and unkind, 2. Seeks not her own, v. 5. whereas he
seeks his own, as much as any man, if some will not believe me, I hope they
will believe a far greater person, then my self, famous Bishop Downam, I mean,
whose words I will here rehearse; lending was ordained of God to be a contract
whereby the lender should seek the good of the borrower, without respect of his
own profit, so far should he be from doing wrong therein, but the Usurer has
made lending a contract, wherein he SEEKS FOR his OWN GAIN NOT ONLY
UNCHARITABLY without respect, of the borrowers either profit or loss, but also
UNJUSTLY, seeking gain where he bears no hazard, and taking another man's goods
without his good will. Thus he, * and yet farther he says, and the Usurers
sometimes do vaunt, how KINDLY they deal with their debtors in forbearing them
from year to year, yet the truth is, the longer they forbear the greater is
their gain, and tho they defer the borrowers misery, yet indeferring it they
increase it. See the Margin also, and let me add,

And therefore by some are not unfitly compared unto the greedy Cat, which, tho
for a time she plays with the silly Mouse, yet in the end she will be sure to
devour it. But if that which I said, and that, which that Author even now told
us, will not suffice to make good what was said of the Usurers unkindness,
uncharitableness, and self seeking, contrary to 1 Cor. 13.4. and so to make to
make him a merciless person I will subjoyn what others also write besides as
namely, 1. Renowned Smith in his first Sermon upon Usury p. 95.
Mr. Smith.

All the Commandments of God are fulfilled by LOVE, Romans 13.1. Which Christ
notes, when he draws all the Commandments to one Commandment, which is, love
God above all things and thy Neighbor as thy self, Mat. 22.37. as if he should
say, he which LOVES God will keep all the Commandments, which respect God, and
he which loves his Neighbor, will keep all the Commandments, which respect
his Neighbor, therefore to maintain love God forbids all things which
hinders this love, and amongst the rest here he forbids Usury as one of her
deadly enemies^ FOR A MAN CANNOT LOVE and be an USURER (as I also said even
now) because Usuries is a kind of cruelty, and a kind of persecution (O sad!)
and therefore the want of love makes Usurers; for if there were love there
would be no Usury, no deceit, etc. but we should live in peace, and joy, and
contentment, like the Angels.

Number. 93. Object. If it be objected, that he means oppressive Usurers and Usury?

Answ. I answer, that cannot be; because he says, p. 96. All Usury signifies
biting, to show, that all Usury is unlawful.

2. He defines Usury thus, Usury is that gain, which is gotten by lending, for
the use of the thing which a man lends, covenanting before with the borrower
to receive more than was borrowed. And therefore says he farther, * one calls
the Usurer a legal Thief, because before he steals he tells the party how much
he will steal, as tho he stole by Law, and so B. Hall calls him, as I have
shown it.

2. Another defining Usury, calls it the contrary to Charity; for Paul says,
1 Cor. 13.^.
Love seeks not her own, therefore Usury is far from Love; but God is Love, 1
John 4.8. Therefore Usury is far from God.

A Powel p. 48.
Third says, at the beginning Usury is mild, but in the end its merciless.

Now 2. I come to my other Reason, why a Usurer is a merciless person, viz.
because he is of a serpentine nature, the Hebrew word which signifies Usury,
viz. (...) being derived from a verb, which often in Scripture is ascribed to
the biting of SERPENTS, so that diverse Writers have compared a Usurer to a
SERPENT, as Chrisostom, Powel, and others, with whom I Join Pagnine, who
calls Usury the biting of a SERPENT, because the Usurer will show no more
mercy to a Borrower than a Serpent to a man, but kills him, there being such an
Antipathy between it and man Genesis 3.15.

So that a great Author which knew what he spoke, might well say, foenus
interficit misericordiam, Usury kills mercy. And therefore how can the poor
merciless Usurer be saved, except he repent, it being written expressly in Gods
Book, he shall have Judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy, Jam.
2.13. Again I say, how can any enter into the Kingdom of God, who is so far
from God, being so far from Love.

Number. 94. But here, the Usurer seeing himself thus condemned as a merciless and
uncharitable person, will plead for himself thus: I a merciless and
uncharitable person, who so supply my Neighbor's necessities upon all
occasions with my money, which is always ready for him to help him? Whereunto
let first the Author of the imperfect work upon Matthew ascribed to St Chrysostom.
Answer,

Crist therefore commands us to lend, but not upon Usury: For he that lends
upon Usury, at the first sight seems to relieve a man's necessity, but indeed
casts him into a greater necessity, he loses him of one bond and binds
him with more: Neither does he lend for the Righteousness of God, but for his
own gain: For the Usurers money is like the biting of the Of which somewhat has
been said former^^.
Asp; for even as he which is bitten of the Asp goes to sleep, as if he were
delighted, and through the pleasantness of his sleep dies; so he which
borrows upon Usury is delighted for a time as one that had received a good
turn, and so through the pleasure of the imagined benefit, he does not perceive
how he is taken Captive: For even as the poison of the Asp secretly conveigheth
itself into all members, corrupts the whole body: So Usury dispersing it self
through all the Borrowers Goods converteth them into Debt (so that he must
needs feel it at last.)

I will Join G. Powel with him p. 48.

Author operis imp. in Matthew. Attrib. Chrysostom. Tom. 3. Tom. 12. in fine.
The Usurer pleads Love, not for thy sake but for his own sake.

The Eight Argument against Usury. That he does not walk honestly, he slights
also, so that I shall go to bring it to that estimate which is due to it, and
to free it from my Adversaries slighting by showing again,

1. How plainly God himself speaks of the Usurers dishonesty, saying thou
have taken Usury and Increase Ezekiel. 22.12. Mark, not only Usury called (...)
biting, but also Increase, that is, more than thou lendest; and then v. 13.
Behold therefore I have smitten my hand against thy dishonest gain, which
makes perspicuosly for what I say, that the Usurer does not walk honestly.

2. Showing how, next unto God, some of the wisest men that have, since Christ,
and his Apostles, lived and flourished in the world have made the Usurer a
dishonest person, viz.

1. Calvin. Epist. resp. de Vsuris.
Calvin, who says it is more than rare that one and the same person should be
both an honest man and an Usurer.

2. Luther de tax. Vsura Tom 7.
Luther, one of the wisest and worthiest men in the world, agrees with Calvin
and by him is brought in.

3. A great and wise man indeed, even Idem ibid.
Caesar himself, that mighty and first Roman Emperor, of whom the said Luther
writes thus; Caesar made an Edict that an Usurer should not be counted or
adjudged in Law, for a good and honest man, as I cited him formerly. Now are
all these, all these sayings of God and men also, as the Champion says of
mine, the products of mistaken zeal, or purblind rashness?

In short if this be so, as it is asserted and proved; then, how can the Usurer
be saved, unless he become an honest man indeed? For as much as God has
expressly said, that he has smitten, that is, will smite his hand at his
dishonest gain, to show his great displeasure against him for his dishonest
Usurious gain, verse 13. so as that he must not look to inhabit that holy and
heavenly Tabernacle, wherein none but honest men will dwell, who do not put out
their money to Usury Psalm. 15.1.2. Which has caused a great B. Downam Psalm. 15.5.
Author to say, that the Usury which is now practiced is not allowed by any
Godly man.

Number. 95. In the next place he advances to my cloud of Saints against Usury,
saying, I acknowledge, if that must needs be Gospel, which Councils, Fathers,
and Schoolmen, (I mean some of these) have determined, then he has the
advantage: but we are come, etc. Let the Reader peruse the rest of his words if
he have them either in Print or Writing: For my Adversary has scattered them
and sent abroad his Pamphlet (as I am told.) They are too large for me to
transcribe, with his citations of Spanhemius, Windelin, Zanchy, and Gerard in
Latin: and the truth is, he has shown me the way which I must take by his
skipping over sometimes thirty-three, and sometimes more lines of mine; but yet
I will do him so much right as to answer his most momentous responses, and
quotations, which kindness he does not show to me, in that he neither answers
my words, nor the sayings of my learned Authors, but passes by many of them
altogether.

Number. 96. My Answers. Now my answers will follow at large upon and after a
serious invocation of the name of God for a blessing first craved to be powered
down from above upon my poor endeavors.

1. Answer And First in general I say, that my Adversaries Reply to my cloud of
Saints is so advantageous to me, as that what he says, for the most part
makes most happily for me. For

1. Whereas he grants that by the determination of Councils, Fathers, and
Schoolmen, I have the advantage; does not that make for me, that so many
hundreds (because Councils consist of hundreds commonly) of such holy and
learned men as the Fathers are for me? As for his Addition, if that be Gospel,
does not hurt me, who do not equal what they say with the Gospel (as the
Council of Trent asserts it) that their traditions are to be accepted pari
pietatis affectu, with the same pious affection with the Scriptures, but only
approve of what they say according to the Gospel, and for example, according to
Luke 6.35. Lend, looking for nothing from thence, as Grotius, his Author
himself confesses it, that a plerisque most ancient Fathers that place is so
handled, and understood, as making against Usury: I will add one saying more
which my Adversary has concerning Fathers, and also does exceedingly make for
me, viz. That they dsecry all taking of Use, which makes me to break out into
this exclamation; how happy then am I that have such Saints and so many on my
side, and what a friend is my very Adversary to me by his own confession? The
like whereunto I may say of the deep learned Casuists, and Schoolmen, one of
which, Aquinas I mean, admired above all his fellow Scholasticks, for his
transcendent learning.

1. In that he says that the Fathers opinion deserying all taking of Use for
money generally passed for current among the Schoolmen, being backed too with the
Authority of Councils: He thereby also pleads for me, as much as I can wish;
because he faith now GENERALLY, having said before (I mean some of these)
Schoolmen. Councils, and Fathers immediately before mentioned) which shows
how he contradicts himself, and is even forced by the evidence of Truth to
averr, that Councils, Fathers, and Schoolmen are generally for me, O
advantage! advantage!

3. Whereas he adds, I think that All taking Use for Money was never more
exploded than under the present darkness of Popery: But since the time of
Reformation, that hidden things have been brought to light, this among other
things has been discerned to be an ERROR, which Addition also militates for me:
For as much as

1. Learned and well read men can confute him presently, and show him to be but
a mere Babe and Idiote in the knowledge of Antiquity: For that with a sonourous
and loud voice he declares, how the holy Fathers before the grossest Popery
came in, were as bitter and eager against Usury and did as much explode it, as
ever the Papists did since, thinking (as the Chapter himself tells us) they could
not run far enough etc. but by discrying all taking of Use: which I am sure
makes as much for me as I can desire.

3. This Addition militateth for me, in that he would make the world believe
that since the times of Reformation this discrying of all taking of Use has
been found an Error: Because wise and observing men are able to refell what he
says presently, and to show that his opinion since the times of Reformation
that hidden things have been brought to light, it among other things has been
discovered to be not only an Error, but called Heresy: For no sooner did the
light of the Gospel break out at Wittemberg, where Luther fixed his Theses
against Popery; but theses also were disputed against all taking of Use in the
same University (as I have already shown it) and withal it has been asserted in
the same positions to be plain Heresy, and that those which take any thing
above the principal, are to be accounted Heretics, which has been likewise so
judged by others, Wilson fol. 144. Archidiaconus 1. q. 1 Card. de Vsura.
especially if any defend Usury; See my margin.

Martin ab Alinserict Enchirid. c. 17.
All which must needs make for me, and make the world see who is in an error,
he and his, or I and mine, and who speaks true and lies not, he, or I, and
whom men may believe hereafter, him, or me;

Number. 97.4. Whereas he boasts so much of Calvin, Bucer, Martyr, Zanchie,
Rivet, Junius, Salmasius, Wollelius, Windeline, Hornbeck Spanhemius, Brentius,
etc.

That they are for a Regulated Usury, even that makes for me also. How for
you? O yes, it does. For

1. The word which himself uses, calling Usury, which they are for, regulated
Usury, is and can be no other but well cautioned Usury: For these men have
their godly cautions, which I will name and set down fully hereafter, before I
end this matter, and which so alter that which he calls Usury by a Novation (as
they term it) as that it is not Usury See Dr. Hamond's Practical Chatech. p.
315.
properly so called, but another kind of thing and contract: Where give me
leave for the present to set down some few of their religious In my 2. part of
this Book.
Cautions.

1. They say that a man must take nothing but that which his Debtor can get by
good and lawful means.

2. He may not take more than the gain, nay not all the gain, nor that part of
the gain, which drinks up the living of him that uses the money.

3. He must sometimes be so far from taking gain, that he must not require the
principal, if this Debtor by inevitable and just causes be broughe behind hand,
and it be also plain that he could not make, no not by great^d ligence any
commodity of the money borrowed: With G. Powel. p. 3.
which cautions may be joined the most excellent ones of Fabricus, and of
rever^nd Mr. Baxter in his directions concerning Usury.

3. Answer 3. I say, that if these Authors should defend Usury properly so
called (which I will not grant) it would be the same thing with their opinion
of our Christian Sabbath, which they hold is to be observed not by a Divine but
the Churches Institution, and not to be so strictly kept as we keep it, calling
it Judaism, so that I have seen all manner of servile and worldly work done
upon the Lord's Day in the Netherlands, where the Ch Authors, as Spanhemius,
Rivet, Gretius, Ametius, Salmasius and others lived and tolerated it: So in
Geneva, I have seen them in Sermon time sit one over against another, selling
their commodities, and so passed through them, not being then convinced of the
unlawfullness of it, as many others also are not at present, no more than of
Usuries sinfullnes; which discovery by the Chapter occasioned, makes very much for
me.

4. Answer. 4. It causes me to declare, how his transmarine Authors cannot
agree among themselves, Lutherans and Calvinists, warring one against another
by Paper battles about consubstantiation, the ubiquity of Christ's body, and the
five Articles, so much discussed abroad; and how the most obstinate Defendants
of Usury cannot accord among themselves neither, I mean some of his Neighbors
and diverse more who could be named.
some holding a compact lawful, Where they live together about Eighty of them
Families and Persons, as one told me, who being very godly is acquainted with
them.
others not, and some by Nesheck understanding the Lords rack-rent, others
oppressive Usury, and some taking Tarbith to be moderate Usury, others not.

Now if they be thus divided about these things, holding that such and such
among them be out therein, why may they not be out in that Usury it self, which
they hold lawful, and does not this make for me?

5. Answer. 5. It occasioneth me to mention a thing which few know or have
heard of, viz. that there are some risen up be yond the Seas (where Usury is
most defended and practiced by some) I mean, John de Abiah and his companions,
who say, that they are all out there (even the very Protestants they mean) and
therefore have set up their own way which they aver to be the right way in a
certain Of whom I hear that my Opponent is one.
Duchy there, where they gained that famous and learned Virgin Lady, called
Anno Maria Schureman, which is now dead, but before her death, has set forth a
certain Latin book which I have seen and read. The name of it is Electio
melioris partis, the Election of the better part, because her name is Maria,
whereof I make this use. That if it should be so as they say, that they be so
out beyond the Seas in other things, why may they not be out too in the thing
called Usury?

Number. 98. 6. I answer, that I shall set down the responses and answers of my
friends, which they have made to the alleging of Authors for Usury, lest men
should think, or say, that I only go to shift off those great and grave Divines
which seem to favor Usury, when they do not: And,

1. I Will recite the words of Bishop Downam. Not only Usurers themselves have
found out many subtle distinctions and instances to justify Usury: but also
diverse Divines have either spoken or written more wittily than truly in favor
of Usury.

2.Dr. Tailor, if learned men allow that Usury which commonly is practiced, I
oppose the word of God against them.

3. Dr. Slater, if those Divines that are for Usury be Usurers themselves, then
no wonder: if not, then to resolve others they set down such cautions as make
it no Usury.

4. Dr. Fenton shows how those Authors, which are for Usury take what they
write one of another, as an instance is given in a manuscript for Usury taken
for a great part of it, out of Bullinger.

5. Gabriel Powel answers this plea from some learned Divines who Write in
defense of Usury, thus, as I said once before now.

1. No Writer that ever I could see or hear of, ever allowed USURY.

2. There are many strong poisons, which the learned Physician can so qualify,
that a sick person may take a potion, wherein some of the poison is.

3. So holy and godly men have done and do temper and qualify the Usurers
poison that they make hereof a wholesome medicine for many distressed persons.

4. For by their holy and religious caveats and lessons they alter the
qualities of the Usury and make it indeed no Usury at all, but a lawful kind of
trade and dealing: thus he, his ac ter quod pulchrum est.

6. Answer. Sixthly I shall answer thus. That whereas one of his Authors called
Windelin sticks not to say, that a plerisque modernis Theologis, by most modern
Divines etc. The question is affirmed duabus observatis cautelis, it will be
proved, that contrary to truth two things are asserted by him.

1. That a plerisque by most modern Divines, the question is affirmed (for
Usury.) 2. That but two cautions only are to be observed.

G: Powel 52.53.
For the first I shall prove it to be contrary to truth, by such Authors as may
be believed before his Windelin, as being free from Usury and so unbiassed,
whereas many I will not say all, beyond-Seamen are tainted by and with Foenory.
And

1. I shall cite again famous Dr. Slater, whose words these are: If learned men
allow that which is commonly practiced (Usury he means) A far greater number
of late learned Divines, besides Fathers and Scholasticks do not. Now let
Englishmen choose whom they will believe, their own English Doctor, or this
Foreign Windelin.

2. With him I shall join the most renowned and most learned Bishop B. Downam
upon Psalm 15.5.
Downam, who first tells us that he could add unto Scripture-proofs, the
testimonies of all wise and learned men, (mark, all wise and learned men, who
have lived until our age, mark again, until our age, because some falsely say,
that now in our age Usury is not so spoken against as it was, and that I only,
and one or two more, are so much against it) The Philosophers, tho Heathens,
have written and spoken against it, the Fathers of the Church have with one
consent comdemned it, even to the Pit of Hell.

Number. 99.2. He adds, The Godly learned Divines of this age, and namely of this
our Church, do for the most part inveigh against it; those few that seem to
defend Usury do in substance differ little from the rest, erring especially in
this, that under the odious name of Usury, they defend and maintain a lawful
contract of partnership.

3. Council. Arelatense. Agat. Terraconense. Nicenum. Elebertinum, Turonense,
Lateran. Laod. Paris.
So the Author of the Conviction of Usury. By the Church of England Usury is
simply and generally prohibited.

4. I will procure the most confident saving of famous ALCIATES concerning the
infinite multitude of Usuries enemies.

Totus mundus militat pro nobis, the whole world militates for us, as I quoted
him formerly.

And well he might say so, for, besides the holy Scriptures, and ancient
Councils already so much spoken of and the holy there is, which with one comsent
have condemned it to the pit of Hell, as says that great B. Downam, and the
sharp The Author of the Conviction of Usury in his Dedie. Epist.
Downam in Ps. 15.
sighted Schoolmen, who, tho corrupt in many things else, yet herein do, as he
says well, retain the doctrine of the Primitive Church, I say; besides all
these a world of modern Divines are of our side, blessed be God, viz. the
British Divines, Bishops, and Churches, as even now it was proved, and by name
Bishop Jewel, Bishop Babington, Bishop Sands, Bishop Downame, Bishop Hall,
Bishop Lake, Bishop King, Archbishop Usher, Bishop Andrew, Doctor Wilson,
Doct. Beard, Doct. Slater, Doct. Smith, Doct. Tailor, Doct. Kimhus, Doct. Pie,
Doct. Web, Doct. Fenton, Doct. Wilkinson, Ainsworth, Fr. Whidden the Elder, Mr.
Hirn, Mr. Saunderson, Cartwright, Swinock, Ambrose, Turner, Mr. Pool, Mr. Vdal,
Mr. Bolton, Mr. Smith, Mr. Adams, Lightfoot, Nosworthy, Hakins, all of them
being famous English Divines, to whom I may add Mr. Dod. Mr. Capel, Mr.
Whately, Doct. Sutton, Mr. Bains, Mr. Greenham, Rogers of Dedham; After whom in
came Foreign Writers, viz. Doct. Luther, Melanchton, Zuinglius, Doct. Paraeus,
Beza, Erasinus, Doct. Chemnitius, Doct. Didericus, Doct. Mordesius, Doct.
Welleus, Doct. Ludder, a Civilian, Hottomannus, Camerarius, Lipsius,
Oecolampadius, Brentius, Musculus, Aretius, Piscatus, Vrsinus, Pomerianus,
Doct. Saunder, Doct. Vulteius, Doct. Frechius, P. Fagius, Hen. Stephanus,
Magdenbergenses, Pastores Manseldenses, Postores Gallici, Vrbanus, Rhegius,
Justus Jonas, Cuiatius, Calepinus, Albertus Blankenberg, Phil. Caesar,
Kekermannus, Keckerman in his O economicks, c. 7.
who says, that almost all but reformed Divines hold Usury to be a sin
Langius: where Note what a huge number here is, to his small number, which he
musters up being about two, so that he cannot by any arithmetical skill he has,
make it good that most Moderns are on his side: and so let him go with his vain
boast, and boast of it to those, who know nothing, or but little of this matter
by reading or experience; wise and well read men and such as have been abroad
in the World, and have eyes in their heads, will not believe him, but rather
those learned men which I have named.

2. So for his two cautions only, let me show how contradictory to truth it is
what his Author VVindelin says, for I can cite against him far greater Writers
than he is, who reckon up many more: One I have already B. Downam upon Ps. 15.
p. 274.
named, and another I shall mention now, who numbers up seven more, as

1. That a man must not be a professed Usurer.

2. That gain be not required of men, who being in want do borrow for the
supply of their necessity.

3. That they do not require it of him which borrows for gain, unless he be a
gainer.

4. That he which lends for gain must not only require no gain, but also must
be content to bear a part of the borrowers loss, if without his own default he
prove a looser.

5. That the end of this lending must be charity, whereby the lender is bound
to seek the borrowers good rather than his own (and who does so?)

6. That in this contract he respect the good not only of the borrower, but
also of the Commonwealth, and therefore that he require not so much gain as the
party cannot raise by lawful means.

1. That this lending, be answerable to natural equity, which is to be judged
of not by men's practice, but by the word of God: so that here five times two.

I add what a famous Author Writes of such cautions.

Now how far Usury differs from this kind of dealing, if our common Usurer will
not confess, woeful experience daily teaches.

Number. 101.6. About Perkins, Mayer, Vines, Baily, Hughes, I have given an
account formerly, to which account I refer my reader; and Gataker, I must
likewise reckon among those other Divines which are here likewise named,
because they and he Write to the same effect.

As for his fate (not to name it) to that I answer.

1. That this fate has infatuate him so as that, 1. Against his will he did
show me the greatest friendship by making such learned men, as those, whom he
names my friends in this point of Usury, acknowledging them to be on my fide,
and so consequently by name Bishop Jewel (and what a man was he) Bishop Downam,
Bishop Hall, Bishop Babington, Bishop King, Bishop Lake, Bishop Andrews, Bistop
Sands, and so all the rest.

2. It infatuated him so, as to mix ceremonies, which are no foundation things,
with Usury, which concerns life and death, even life and death Eternal, Psalm.
15.5. Ezekiel. 18.12, 13.

3. It infatuated him so, as that he takes off the charge, M. ^. p. 54.
wherewith Beyond Sea Divines are In which charge I for my part must needs
except the Author of the Heydelberg Catechism, because he is as strict as a man
may be in his pressing the most strict observation of that holy day.
charged, viz. that they are against the strict keeping of the Sabbath, which I
can testify by sight, and to lay it to their doors, who will not, as I suppose
own it, because in Divine truth the ancient Council, whereof the Parisian is
one, which is as strict for the keeping of the Christian Sabbath, as any of us
in England; For they take more than ordinary notice of the Judgments of God,
(like the practice of Piety) shown upon the Prophaners of it, by fire from
Heaven, which has burnt them; and did charge the Emperor then reigning, to see
the said Sabbaths strictly kept; so that I was much taken with it when I read
it.

8. Answer. Eighthly to his insisting upon Emperors, I answer, that I have
already cleared up that, showing, how the Leges Civiles si been sunt
constitutae nihil quidem praecipiunt quod Deus prohibuerit, et nihil prohibent
quod Deus praeceperit. Beza Annot. in Mat.
Civil-laws and those pious Emperors hold with me, and Justinian especially,
whose very words I have cited: and as for the sum beyond which no use must be
taken, that is no more than our English Parliaments have done, which have
discried all Usury as a detestable sin and interdicted by the word of God. viz.
Jac. 13. and Eliz. 13. C. 8.

9. Answer. Ninthly Concerning C. Molinaeus the Lawyer, I have this to say 1.
That I put against him Hottoman, that far more famous and pious Lawyer too,
who, as I have already evidenced it in this book, is on my side.

2. That Molinaeus has many frivolous and strange things (because he is no
Divine) but a Lawyer about publicans epecially.

Which does very much disparage him: But I will say no more of him but this,
that he is held to be the first Defendant of Usury, and not Calvin (as some
have said of him) for they know not what to make of that holy man Calvin,
because of his bitter sayings against Usury by me quoted, and his holy cautions
which make that Usury which he is for, no Usury.

I am the larger in this answer to Authors, because those Authors which they do
so objectate, are their chief Pillar Hottomanus in suo lib, de Vsur.
Molinaeus de public. etc.
which their defense of Usury relieth upon: as as it is observed by wiser men
than my self, of whom at present I will quote but one, viz. the learned and
most famous Bishop B. Downam upon Psa. 15.5.
Downam.

And because the judgments of those learned men, who do not seem to condemn
all Usury, are of such force with Usurers, that they seem to build their
practice upon their authority, I will also take this hold from them, and out of
their Writings manifestly demonstrate before their eyes, that the Usury which
is practiced in the world is not allowed of any godly Divine: thus he, and so
he goes on to prove it, and if so, what shelter have our poor Usurers then
both Ministers and people, having neither Scripture nor good men on their side.

10. Answer. Number. 102. Tenthly, I answer to that which he says of the reformed
Churches.

1. God forbid, that they should be all guilty of that damnable sin of Usury:
for I was born beyond Seas, and know the tenants of my brethren, and fellow
Divines there, how far some hold some Usury improperly so called lawful with
such cautions, as even now I named, which our Usurers here do not observe, God
knows I leave them to the Judge of quick and dead, I am no Judge, but only
declare the Judgment of God against all unrighteousness and all Usury properly
so called, and usually here practiced, as himself also does, Psa. 15.18.

Eleventhly, I answer to what he says about The Eleventh Answer about Luther.
Luther, that he was more moderate in his latter Writings in his opinion
concerning Usury, which he partly names, as quoted by my old friend Rivet, thus.

1. That I can see no allowing of Usury properly so called in all that he
says, but that he would have Usury stinted by the Magistrates, advised by
Divines and Lawyers, conceding and yielding to a Nobleman four, to a Merchant
eight, to others, six Florens or Guilders in the 100. which has been B. Downam
upon Psa. 15. p. 268.
proposed long before him, as one who was himself a lavv-maker asserts it,
saying, (to confute I say, fal^ly he says it, that the Civil Law allows it,
because in the Novellis, so called, it forbids it utterly.
C. Molinaeus who falsely affirms that the Civil Law allows of Usury) that the
law does not allow it, as good, but permit as evil for the avoiding of greater
inconveniences; and then he shows, how the law stints the Merchants Usury at
eight, and the Noblemans and Gentleman's at four, and the Usury of other men at
six in the 100. so that Luther did no more then the Bishops in England do in
Parliament, stinting Usury at six in the 100. together with the Lords Temporal
and the Commons, which notwithstanding they descry all taking of Use, as the
Champion says, and together with the whole Parliament call it a detestable sin
and forbidden by the word of God, and call their act an act against Usury,
Answerably, whereunto Luther might be for a stinting of Usury and Usurers, that
they might not take above the foresaid sum, and yet be like our Parliament as
bitter again Usury, as in his Writings he shows himself to be The Author of the
conviction of Usury quotes him for it, p. 170
exhorting Ministers to be bitter against it, and I could never read in any
Author, that he did reclaim or repent (as Austin, and others have done) of what
he had so bitterly Written, but on the contrary I see that all Divines and
Authors that since him wrote against Usury, cite him against Usury, as a chief
enemy to it, nor is there any likelihood for it, if we consider how he could
not, but be a headman and chief approver of it in the Wittenberg theses or
positions against Usury, as the chief Doctor and Professor in that famous
University.

Number. 103 My Adversary next progresseth to my last reason, which is, and what
should the Usurer do in Heaven. etc.

And I dare say no books written against Usury. Whereunto I answer, but such
that wrote against it are doubtless there, as Moses, David, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Cyprian, Lactantius, Basil, Ambrose, Austin, Chrysostom, etc.

As for his jeering at me, that it is well that Mr. Jelinger is not Key-keeper,
and that this he takes to be one of his Antelucane Meditations, I am so well
used to it by his For a very Nautulus he is.
often jeering, as that I do no more regard it than the dirt under my feet, it
being but dirt coming out of a foul mouth, and a dirty pen.

Nor have I cause to be troubled at it, especially at the least, about my
rising before day to meditate and to pray, because I use to pray then as
fervently as I may for his and other Usurers conversion, and find that God
hears his poor servant; prayers then poured out, and converts poor Usurers
souls, whose gain is of more value to me, than if I should ^in the whole world,
and which are coming in still. Wherein I desire to imitate a certain holy man,
who, meeting with the Emperor his Enemy, asking him whither he was going,
returned this answer, I am going to pray for thee and thy Empire: Semblably
whereunto, if an Usurer being mine Enemy, should ask me what I am going to do,
when I rise mornings before day, I should tell him as I now tell this my
Adversary, I am going to pray for thee, and thy poor soul, that it may dwell in
Gods holy hill, and not go to hell, there to burn, burn, burn to all eternity.

Number. 104. I thought to have superseded, and ended here the confirmation of my
Doctrine by Reasons, but because my bitter Adversary does so exceedingly slight
my four last Arguments especially, therefore I will superadd four arguments
more, which I am sure will be strong enough. And

The First is that Usury is the Evil of Evils.

1. Transcendentally, as Solomon's song is called the song of songs, because of
its transcendentalness, as I show in my Rose of Sharon; so this great Evil
called Usury, may well be called the Evil of Evils, as transcending other
Evils, and being Which I know my Cousin Spanhemius denies without any
sufficient proof of his denial, alleging only Deuteronomy. 23.19. concerning the
Stranger, so often and so substantially answered: See his words, Ps. 27.14.
in it self not only simply evil, but exceeding evil, even like man's deceitful
heart, desperately evil, and wicked, Jer. 17.29. and deceitful above thousands
of other things, so as that for that cause it is called not only deceitful, but
even deceit it self, yea deceits in the plural (...) from (...) Prove. 29.13.
because as a great M. P. p. 30.
Writer observes it, Usury is never without deceits, so that commonly by the
man of deceits in that place foresaid, Prove. 29.13. is understood the Usurer,
as also by (...), which is Vsuries Greek name, is understood deceit, as being
derived from the Hebrew (...).

Whereby it appears what a great transcendent evil Usury is, being so
deceitful and desperately wicked, for its being deceit it self, yea deceits.

2. It is the evil of evils, as it is the cause of all manner of evils, viz.

1. Grief, For which cause also its called (...) in Greek, because it is as it
were the monstrous and unnatural breed of what is borrowed, and causes such
great grief in the Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15.
The effects of Usury are, poverty, grief, death. G. P. p. 29.
heart of the borrower, as is answerable to the pains of Child birth* and so in
Latin it is call faenus quasi faetus a brood, as Nonius Marcellinus, and others
aver it; some add to grief poverty and death.

2. It is the evil of evils, as it is the cause of many other sins, as

1. Theft. 2. Murder which two great sins Authors so bring within the Circle
and Compass of Usury, as to make them not only kinds, but also issues of it,
and it self there upon a breaking of both the sixth and eight Commandments,
and so consequently both theft and murder: See the Margin.

3. As Idolatry, because the Usurer is a covetous man, as has been
demonstrated, and covetousness is idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. So Cyprian, Basil, and
others.

4. Oppression. See Ezekiel. 18.12, 13. Where oppression and Usury are joined:
because, if the Usurer be not paid, according to his time, he will trouble and
arrest the needy borrower, and make him sell his goods to his loss, as by such
as have been sufferers in that case, I have been informed: but yet I will not
charge all Usurers, with this alike, but only such as are so cruel, as the holy
fathers have done likewise; at present I will name but one of them, viz. For
the Usurer is even a Thief and a Robber, says Calvin upon Ezeck. 18.
St. Chrysostom, who for this cause calls Usury a pestiferous womb, because it
brings forth such pestiferous brats: with which holy Father I will join a great
King of England, who said, that he heard it spoken in the Court of France, that
Usury is the root of all evil, as well it might be said so, because of the love
of money, which the Usurer so dearly loves, and which the sacred Scripture it
self calls the root of all evil, Tim. 8.10. And therefore how can he who lives
in so great an evil, live in the heavenly Tabernacle with the greatest good,
which is God blessed for ever, it being expressly Written, Lord who shall dwell
in thy Tabernacle, he that has not put his money to Usury, Ps. 15.1, 5.

Number. 105. 2. Usurers And the Usurer is a Murderer says Mr. Powel, p. 40.
for the most part are convicted of the evil of Usury in their own Consciences,
and therefore living and dying in that sin, they cannot be saved.

To prove this, that Low what a livery and language these two great and godly
men bestow upon Usurers.
great disputant against Usury uses this Syllogism, in Celarent, ab
impossibili, from that which is impossible: Chr^^^^. in Matthew. hom. 57.
I cannot say all.
Gab^ Powel.
It is impossible that faith and an evil conscience should at the same instant
be joined together in the same man.

All Usurers have an evil conscience.

Ergo. No Usurer having an evil conscience has faith, and so consequently has
no faith, and so its impossible for them that wittingly and willingly persevere
in that sin to be saved. Thus he.

I add, For without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.

But to prove that the common Usurer stands convicted in his conscience of
the evil of Usury I shall bring and adhibit twelve Mediums.

1. Because there is a light, even the light of nature, or the Which Divines
say is meant by-the-law written in the heart, Romans 2.15.
law of nature Written in his heart, Romans 2.15. flushing as one uses that
expression, into their consciences, and so illighttening them as that needs
they must be convinced by it, and come to see the evil of that cursed sin of
Usury, as when a light shines in a dark place, to use blessed Peter's own
words, 2 Pet. 1.19. that which there is amiss must needs be seen and discerned
by it: and the place it self must also be illuminated by it. So that, I dare
upon that account ask any Usurer, whether that light which is in his conscience
do not so far illighten him, as that he cannot but see and know that his
practice is a sin. Observe what I say, I do not ask thee now, Usurer, whether
Usury be an evil: for that happily thou will grant, understanding Usury in
thine own sense, and equivocating with me, as my Adversary does: but whether
thy practice of taking Use by a compact, whether it be six in the 100 or less
be not a sin and evil thing in thee? here let thy guilty conscience answer.

2. Because people generally say of thee behind thy back, that thou art an
Usurer, though thou take but six in the 100. and thou can not but know it,
and hear of it by others; and vox populi, vox Dei: the voice of the people when
it speaks according to the word of God, condemning Usury, as E^ek. 18.12, 13.
is the voice of God: and I believe that does much convince thee.

3. Yea, do not some cast it in thy dish, and tell thee to thy face, that thou
art an Usurer, though thou take but six in the 100 or five? I am sure I am
told so by some, that J^^. Wigand^^, Syntag. part. 1. col. 45.
have heard it with their ears, and say that they have told thee so to thy face.

4. The Usurer will not be known to be an Usurer. The Magdeburge Cent.
Magdeburge Centuries tell us of a Usurer, who, living in a certain place and
lending his money upon Usury, did charge his borrowers by no means to tell of
him that there was such a one in that place; but what befell him, when it was
known, I shall not mention here; another time and place being fitter for it to
be told: thus Usurers will not have the World know it that they are such.

5. The Usurer will color and cloak his Usury by some other contract.

6. Usurers will not by any means call themselves by that name, as other men
will call themselves Merchants, or Husbandmen, etc. according to their
callings, but Usurers will not do so, being Conscious to themselves of the evil
of their employment.

7. Usurers are convinced of the evil and baseness of Usury, because if one
should call any of them by that odious name, Sir Usurer, as others are called
by their Names and Titles, Sir John, Sir Henry, etc. he would be very angry
with him, and tell him, Sir my Name is not Sir Usurer, but a lender of money?

8. The Usurer will not call his Usury by that name neither, but Vsance,
interest, consideration, the Rent of my money, etc. being ashamed to call it
so, which also evinceth his conviction.

9. Usurers will not only deny it, that they are Usurers, but some of them, as
Id. (...)
one says, swear deeply that they are none.

10. Some Usurers will take a certain note, as it is reported in Print, or as
some call them, Letters Patents, Confined with the borrowers hand, in which he
shall make it known unto all men by these present that the Usurer has lent him
freely and without any mention of increase.

11. I am confident that if a question should be made by a Godly Minister in
his Pulpit whether there be any Usurer there, because he would willingly speak
to him, not one would answer to the question that he is an Usurer, though sorty
should be there: and that which confirms me herein, is this, because I have
read of a certain Preacher, John Bromyard summa praedict. Tit. Vsura.
who knowing that M. M. p. 107.
there were many Usurers among his Auditory, broke out in his Sermon into
asking of the question, whether there were an Usurer there? when every man held
his peace, he demanded again, whether there were a Scavenger there? One rising
up, and answering for himself said, yea, here is one, and I am that one; the
Preacher thereupon infers this invective against Usurers, behold, you may see
hereby how vile a thing Usury is, for this man answers for himself in the
defense of his filthy employment, Usurers are ashamed to answer for theirs, and
thus they are convicted in their own Consciences.

12. And may I not bring in at last St. Austins testimony too, saying, how
detestable a thing it is to lend money upon Usury how odious and how execrable,
I suppose Usurers themselves are not ignorant of. So then upon and after all
this I may well end here, with that dreadful saying of another learned Author,
so then the Usurers sin willingly, and of set purpose they follow a practice
contrary to the light of their own conscience, etc. I add.

3. The Usurer is, as it is to be feared, not only convicted, but also
condemned of himself in his own conscience: for there is, as it were, a Court
kept, and there is accusing, witnessing, and condemning, according to Romans
2.15. Their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts mean while
accusing, or else excusing one another. In which respect August. in Ps. 36.
some have called conscience forum, a Court, a Consistory, because in it men
are convented, and convicted, and condemned upon witnessing and accusing
passed, so that, even as an Heretic is condemned of himself, because with an
evil conscience, or against his conscience he sins wilfully, and of purpose,
as Tho. Langius de vita Christ. tom. 3.
Calvin expounds the place, so I am afraid, it may be said of Usurers, that in
their sinning they are condemned of themselves, because wittingly and willingly
they follow a practice contrary to the check and rouch, and light of their own
conscience, did I say, I am afraid? I know I did: but I can tell you, there is
M. P. 35.
one who says positively from that place in Tit. 3.11. that they are damned of
themselves, being counted by learned men to be Heretics. And there is a famous
Doctor called Doctor Beard, who Writes of a certain Usurer, who being
condemned of himself made his last Will and Testament: as word for word it is
set Philo. Greg. Theol.
John Calvin Inst. l. 4. c. 10. Sect. 3.
Idem in Tit. 3.11. M. P. p. 35.
Doctor Beard in his Theater.
^own in the end of this Book. the Part. 4. Number. 18.

Number. 106. My fourth additional Argument is.

That the Usurer is an enemy to God and man.

1. To God, and that, 1. Because he rebelleth against him by yield^^g and using
all the faculties of his soul and members of his body, (...) Weapons of
unrighteousness against him, that I may use the great. Apostles words, Romans
6.19.

And, 1. The faculties and powers of his soul, as for instance ^. His mind he
uses against God to Usury, minding his Goddess and great Diana, Usury, I mean,
more then God, who is seldom and little in his thoughts: for if he were, he
would not be an Usurer. 2. His will, in that he will be an Usurer, tho God will
not have him to be one, Neh. 5.10. 3. His love, loving his Usury money more
than God, like a covetous wretch, as he is, who will needs be rich, 1 Timothy, 6.9,
10. and like an Idolater, as he is also, according to that famous saying of
Lactantius, whatsoever a man loves more than God, that is his God.

2. So the members of his body, as namely,

1. His eyes he yields as weapons of unrighteousness against God, by his most
earnest looking after, and for his Usury money from half year to half year
contrary to Luke 6.35. Lend, looking for nothing from it again. 2. His tongue
he uses as a weapon of unrighteousness against God, by his enticing young rich
heirs (as Basil describes him) and others, to borrow money of him upon Usury.
3. His hands he uses to take Usury money therewith, according to Ezeck. 18.12,
13. He has taken Usury and increase where Calvin in Pentat. p. 355.
Calvin note: That God, to cut of cavils, joineth both names, and condemns all
necession to the principal. 4. His feet he employeth as Weapons of
unrighteousness against God. by his running after covetousness. For what else
is his Usury but co^etousness, as has been abundantly declared? at present I
will cite but one great friend of mine, viz. Great Luther de taxanda Vsur. to.
7.
Luther, who may be instar omnium, instead of all: saying, expressly, that Usury
is covetousness, his words are, Usura est detestabilis avaritia. Usury is
detestable covetousness, mark, covetousness it self it is, and detestable
covetousness after which the Usurers feet so run, see Ezekiel. 33.31. where
running may be extended to feet too, by which the heart runs as well as by its
thoughts.

2. The Usurer is an enemy to God, in that no kind of people, as Nullum de Deo
hominum genus pejus sentiunt quam Danistarum. Roger Turner p. 10.
one says notably, think worse of God then Danists, Lactant.
that is, Usurers; for they slight and vilipend his providence, so as that they
of all others will least trust him. The Mariner looks after the wind, which
way it blows, and prays to Go^ that it may blow fair for him, and so does
the Wimster, and so does the Miller that has a Windmill: but the Usurer
thinks that he has least need to say his prayers so, let the Wind blow^ East,
West, North, or South, its all one to him: his Mill, I mean, his Usury Mill
grinds for him still, I will not say Corn, but the face of the borrower; his
fanning, sifting, and Wimbing of that which is in the borrowers purse and barns
go on, he taking the substance which he has, and leaving the chaff, which is
nothing and an empty purse to him.

2. The Usurer is an enemy to man too, and to a world of men, even as a worm is
to a round fair Apple, eating it out and spoiling it.

So is the Usurer by his Usury to this round and fair World, I mean the men
that are in the World, by eating out and spoiling so many men and households
with his most sharp teeth.

And the multitude of Usurers is like so many locusts, which are called in the
Hebrew tongue from the same verb, that Usury is called (...) viz. (...) to
multiply, because locusts Psalm. 14.4.
multiply as Usury does, and did a great deal of mischief in Egypt, as it is to
be (...) in Exo. 10.15. answerably whereunto Usurers do a World of hurt in the
World to a World of men, eating up men which borrow of them like bread, as it
is G. P. p. 48. in his posit.
Written of some, they eat up my people like bread which is applied by a Bolton
in his Discourse ^^^erning Usury.
great Writer to the Usurer thus: the Usurer is a soft beast at the first to
handle, but in continuance of time the hardness of his teeth will cat a man up,
flesh and bone, if he have not a special care to shun him: with this learned
Author who makes the Usurer a man eater, I shall join two or three more,
whereof,

1. Blessed Luther.
Bolton shall be one, who makes him a Cannibal also, saying if Usury find a
man rich, yet it brings with it a pair of CANNIBAL chops and many cruel teeth
to eat out, etc.

2. The great Luther, who calls the Usurer the blood sucker of the people, as
also G. Powel, p. 48.
one more calls him so saying, as the I^y ^ulleth and claspeth the Oak, as a
lover, but thereby it grows up and overtops the Oak, and sucks up the juice
and sap of (...) Locusta, quia est species multa. Pagnin. in Lexic.
Oak, that it cannot thrive nor prosper, such a blood sucker is an Usurer,
says he, and besides him Roger Turner in his plea answered, p. 15.
one more, these (Usurers) are cursed flies, suckers of men's sap, the drinkers
of their blood. So Adams says the same.

3. That grand enemy of Usury Bishop Downam, who says, wise men, when they
have considered not only the wrong, which is done to particular men, but also
the manifold inconveniences and mischiefs, which come to the commonwealth by
Usury, they have confidently affirmed, that Usurers are worse then theives and
that it were better for the commonwealth that there should be a thousand
theives in it, then an hundred Usurers; what a remarkable passage this is
against poor Usurers, coming from so great a Prelate.

4. Cato who speaks very near to the same effect, that whereas by the twelve
Tables, it was ordained, that if any Usurer should take above one in the
hundred, he should be punished fourfold, whereas a Thief was to be punished but
twofold, whereby we may gather how much they esteemed a Usurer to be worse than
a Thief.

5. Chrysostom cited by Bishop Downam, p. 261.
St. Chrysostom, who did not doubt to say that the Usurer is to be esteemed,
AS A COMMON ENEMY TO ALL MEN. All which if it be so that the Usurer is such an
enemy to God and man, how can he dwell with God in his Kingdom? will an earthly
King suffer enemies to be in his Kingdom with him therein to live? no, no, he
will have them slain and dye rather: So God, for so, he says, But those mine
enemies bring hither and slay them before me, Luke 19.27. and lest men should
say that this concerns not Usurers at all, but others, and that therefore he
will not have them dye, he speaks more plainly in Ezekiel. 18.12, 13. concerning
the Usurer, who has taken Usury and increase, any increase verse 8. shall he
live? he shall not live, his blood shall be upon him, and being asked by the
holy Prophet David, Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall dwell in
thy holy hill? he returns this answer, he that puts not out his money to
Usury; and is not this as clear as the Sun, who dares slight it?

Bishop Downam in Psalm. 15.5.
Number. 108. But here I must answer two Contradictions.
One concerning my Authors mostly, and me in part.
The other mostly me, and my Authors in part.
The First Contradiction. To begin with the first, some hereupon will say, your
men whom you quoted even now, are too harsh, too bitter, too severe against the
poor Usurer, giving him such language, and taking up such comparisons against
him, and making an enemy to God and all men: One would think that such wise,
learned, holy, and grave men should not have such hard thoughts of him in their
hearts, nor divulge such sayings against him to the world with their pens, the
world speaking hard enough of him already; and we wonder why you will mention
them.

Whereunto I thus answer in their behalf;

1. That God himself gives the like language to all the Wicked, Matthew. 7.6. 2
Pet. 2.
whereof these are some, saying, that they are 2 Pet. 2.21.
Dogs, Romans 3.13.
Sows, Matthew. 3.7.
Asps, John 6.70.
Vipers, John 3.10. Deuteronomy. 23.20. Vti est bis (...) Vnde Vsarius (...) Morden.
(...)
a generation of Vipers, yea, * Devils, and the Children of the Devil, and the
Usurer a biter like a Dog, and therefore why should any man blame them, for
saying what God says, and calling them what God calls them, biters?

2. As God makes them so bad, to make them better, so they.

3. That they do but speak the truth and do not belie them, calling a spade, a
spade.

The second Contradiction.
4. As for me, I am but the Echo of these men, and mention their bitter
sayings, because I look upon them as wise, learned, and Godly men (Christians I
mean) whom one may safely make use of, and without any disparagement, and
because I would have the World to see how I am not the only man, who deals so
hardly with the poor Usurer, as to give him such language now and then, but
that others, being my betters by far have given him the same or the like before
me: but of this much has been said formerly, and therefore I shall say the less
now.

Number. 109.2. The second Contradiction concerning me mostly, and my Authors in
part is this, (as methinks I hear it whispered.)

If these reasons, which you have given us, be the best you can show, and in
that, which out of Authors you have quoted to us, your strength be supposed by
you to lie, as it seems so to us, because you reckon up so many, you might
well have superseded, sat still, and not troubled the world with your Usury
Books: For we look for strength of reason and not for railings, of which your
Writings and Sayings and theirs are full.

1. Answer, Whereunto I answer thus.

1. That I and my Assistants (called Authors) need not to be ashamed of what we
hold forth, because we let all the world see it at home in England and out of
England beyond the Seas, where many of my Authors like flowers did flourish in
Gods Eden, and shine, like Stars in the Firmament, as Luther, and Keyserberg,
Cruciger, Wesselius, Capito, Wittenvachius.
Zwinglius, who preached the Gospel before Luther in a place called Clarona, and
many Monsieur Hotton my learned Brother in law makes it out in his Concordia,
reports it.
others formerly named; and as for my poor labors lately published, and the
Usurer cast by name, (I can produce a Letter written to me from the Belgic
Orb concerning both some of the Ministers themselves, and many private persons
too. So that I do not regard what some may say against me, and against my
brethren, which agree with me in this point of Usury, and are a numerous
company; nor do I count my labor badly bestowed, and I hope withal that no
judicious Reader will say so, that if the reasons, arguments, and sayings,
which I and my friends use and have used against Usury to make it damnable, are
so simple and weak, as that I might well have superseded and forborne to trouble
the world therewith; ignoramus's may say it, but true learned men will not.

Not to say much of and for my reasons, sure I am, that some of my Authors
especially, have shown as much reason as men can, being admirable Logicians, so
as that they touched their mediums in unanswerable syllogisms, Dictick and
Ap^dictick, fetched from all manner of Logical terms, internal Of whom my friend
being a Stationer Writes thus: Our Citizens (which understand English) are much
taken with your book (wherein the Usurer cast is concerned): and our Ministers
still come to me to know whether I have any more of the same Authors labors,
thus he.
and external and consequences, and from comparatis, or comparisons,
definitions, and divisions, and ab impossibili, from that which is impossible,
and from testimonies both divine and humane, and did with much exactness make
use of Barbara, Celarent, Darii, that is Logical Figures, so called, whom also
I did trace as near as I could all along, being backed by them still, tho not in
syllogisms (for that, if need be, I reserve for a peculiar Latin Treatise
syllogistically penned against Usury) yet by Logical mediums, as also the holy
Fathers, Schoolmen, and other Writers by me cited do, without railing, without
jeering, without slandering, seriously, soberly, satisfactorily: which is not
so to be seen and observed in my Adversary, and his Second. For I do not
remember that I met with one syllogism in any one of them, they supposing that
(...) was enough for them.

Who is best skilled in jeering and knows how to do it artificially. Only one
made a syllogism since this his book was penned and gave it to me in Witten,
which I will answer next in a proper place.
THE THIRD PART OF THIS BOOK now follows.
Containing Objections made by Usurers in the 6th: and 7th: Chapters of my
first Book, and replies put to my Answers thereunto, by my chief Opponent; and
my several Answers to his Replies.

Number: 1. I now advance to the Vindication of my answers put to the objections
made by Usurers, in Usuries behalf.

The first Objection is, Biting is in your text condemned: I am no biter, ergo,
I am not concerned in this matter, the Psalm speaks of Nesheck that is biting.

His answer is, every Usurie biteth naturally, either actually, or,
potentially, directly, or consequentially.

Reply. Let Spanhemius answer him; whereunto I answer. Here let the Learned
Reader read Spanhemius in his Dub. Evangel. p. 870. For to no end it is to set
down his Latin words, as the Champion does, because unlearned men cannot
understand him.

And because he would have Spanhemius to answer me, I will say the same to him.
Let another grave Author answer both Spanhemius and him, and first the learned
Christophorus Cartwright, Christophorus Cart-wright upon Psalm: 15.
late Minister in the famous City of York, whose words are. 1. It is falsely
supposed, that Nesheck only denotes one Certain Kind of Usurie, as if there
were some Usury not biting (as Spanhemius asserts it giving instances) whereas
it sets forth the Nature of all Usurie (to wit) that it does bite and take away
something with it.

2. To exclude this Cavil, As Calvin also, who is greater than Spanhemius) To
be looked upon as but a weak one; as pious and learned Mr. Capel proves him to
be, in the matter of Usury, in his App. conc. Usurie. As he is no Divine, so
his judgment is not very great in matters Divine says he. So Thomas Hall in
his ^ouchs. of long hair p. 12. shows him to be out in saying that no where in
Scripture long hair in men is condemned, contrary to Ezech. 44.21.
observes it, in diverse places, where Usurie is called Nesheck, biting, is
condemned, there Tarbith, which signifies increase is condemned also, as the
Notation of the word, and the Interpretation of it in all Languages does show:
Salmasius himself, tho a patron of Usurie, grants Nesheck, that is, biting, and
Tarbith, increase, to be Synonymaes and to signify the same thing in diverse
respects; In respect of the Borrower, whom it bites, and in respect of the
Lender, who is increased by it. And my Country man Mollerus upon the 15. Psalm:
can make nothing else of Nesheck, here, but the taking of any thing above the
Principle in respect of loan.

2. I add, That as Spanhemius speaks of An ti-Usurarians; that they say, and
do not prove; so the same may be said of him here, and most times and so do
his associates; For how will he prove it, that none is bitten, when the
borrower pays his Usurie money; suppose he deal in Merchandising, as he
says, or buy in Provisions, how will he prove it, I say, that neither the poor
nor Common wealth is bitten, if himself be not, which is very rare; but hereof
more hereafter.

3. This only I will grant, that all are nor bitten alike, nor presently feel
it alike, some are bitten more, some less, as by several sorts of Dogs greater
and lesser, for Usurers are compared to Dogs by diverse Divines, and by Mr.
Bolton, and Mr. Trap by name, as it has been formerly shown. I say again; that
some bite more, as those in Nehemiah did, and as we read of others that did so,
and more too as a certain Author writes, that the Jews Usurie has been so
abominable as that what I have red of it, is incredible. And Graftus in Ghrom
s^is.
Graftus writes, that in the 47. year of Henery the 3 d. 500. Jews were slain
by the Citizens of London, because one Jew would have forced a Christian to pay
more than two pence a week for twenty shillings, and such a like thing I have
heard of a wretched woman living in a City near unto me, and various instances
more might be given.

But then there be others who take less, some, 4. some 5. some 6, in the 100.
And this I know, and can say upon experience and observation, that even such as
have paid but six, have bin so bitten (tho less than others) as that they,
that came to look after their Estates, when they were deceased, were glad to
sell their Land and Lease, which they had bought to pay debts, which, paying
Usurie still, they had Contracted.

Number. 2. But my chief Adversary goes on, and jeers at my proofs, from the
Market, and from B: Jewel, as the Reader may see, that will not count it
tedious to read his jeering expressions; saing, that I speak like a man that
understands the Market, and write Stilo veteri; after the old Style, whereunto
I answer:

1. That it is well known, to all my Neighbors how little I have to do with
Markets, desireing to live like Jeromie 15: 10: and studying as hard as a man
can both day and night; what I write of Markets I take from B: Jewel and With
wh^m I join famous Capel: in his App: to Usurie p. 289.
Mr. Bolton, let him blame them if he can justly; as for his expressions of the
old style, I shall quickly stop his mouth for that, telling him, that all that
which he can make of my saying is that when men pay but six instead of 8. or
10. in the hundred, that there is the less biting, but biting there is, say I,
and my Friends; as when the Borrower takes up 400 l. and buyeth land worth 20
l. per annum, he biteth the Borrower, who must pay the Usurer 24 l. and cannot
make 20 l. free, all out-going discharged: and still he rises actually or
potentially.

The Reply which is made, is but a lame one; the Suppositions which he makes,
signify but little; for when shall one meet with such a bargain that he tells
of, and some body else did before him, I mean a bargain upon which is so much
timber, that in a short time he is able to make up his 400 l. which it cost
him; such purchases are Rara avis rare Birds.

What he writes of me is to jeer and to disgrace me, as his manner is, so to do
all along, is a mere story and false report.

I add, however things be carried, the Usurer bites the Borrower potentially,
because he may loose many ways, which notwithstanding he will have the six in
the hundred, whether he win or loose, sink or swim, and whether there be timber
upon the Barton, or not.

And tho he bring my Coosin Spanhemius again to be his Second in Latin, which I
will not set down here, because the Vulgar do not understand it, yet will not
that help him in any wise, because he imputes all the Mischief that is done by
such as have the Usurer's money, to the borrowers, whereas the poor borrower
must needs make up his Usury money, which he is to pay to the Usurer by selling
his things, if he be a Seller, as that he may both satisfy the Usurer, and
live too himself by his trading, which causes biting, wherein I will not excuse
the Borrower neither, if he do oppress any, being fore pressed by his necessity
which may be great, but rather shall tell him with that great Apostle, that the
Lord is an avenger of such wrongs, 1. These: 4.5. Which Vengance doubtless will
reach the Usurer also, who by his Usurie is the cause of such things in the
first place.

But here says Mr. Jelinger, the Usurer will reply that some other Contracts,
as by buying, selling, setting, a man may be bitten and wronged too.

Reply. And I add, that B: Hall makes these the worst of Usurers.

Whereunto I answer.

1. I plainly see, that this man would fain set Bishop Hall my old Friend (as
himself calls him) and Mr. Bolton, and me by the ears to make sport for him;
but I trust he will never be able do it as long as his head is hot; for, 1.
That good Bishop has already shown his Enmity against Usurie sufficiently,
which has so netled this man, as, that it made him forget himself, so much as
to offer to confute him as his Pamphlet shows it.

2. And I am also as apt to run down such as oppress men in buying, setting and
selling, as much as the said honest Bishop.

But let us go on, as he goes on, saying what does Mr. Jelinger say to the
aforesaid objection? So it may fall out, but herein li^th the difference, that
those foresaid contracts are in themselves lawful, but Usury is in it self
unlawful.

Reply. This is (...) and some of his Fathers that condemned Use as unlawful,
do also condemn Merchandising for gains sake, as Chrysostom. so Cassiodorus, and
Bishop Hall: Whereto I answer.

1. That he needs not make a petitio principii of that which has been
sufficiently demonstrated.

2. That if Chrysostom and Cassiodorus should be against all Merchandising,
which I know they are not, and are not because God is not against it, with whom
such men will not fight; but I say if they should be, I should reject them, as
being to be believed no further, than they prove what they say Mr. B. p. 49.
by the Word of God, which in this case they cannot do, because the Word
commends honest Merchandising, and Merchants; for else what means that which is
said and storied of the Virtuous Woman, Pro. 31. and Lydia a seller of purple
and yet a worshipper of God, Acts 16.14. So that Bishop Hall, whom he alleges
does not hold Merchandising unlawful, as also I believe, that that Holy Man
Chrysostom neither would or durst hold it unlawful in it self; but only spoke
against Merchants, a^ likely they were in his time, and as he found them, to be
most of them very unjust, oppressive and dishonest in their dealings, as Riches
in the word are called the unrighteous Mammon, by Christ himself, not because
that all Riches are so, as being unrighteously gotten; but because commonly and
by most they are so gotten; otherwise it would follow, that he spoke against
Abraham, Lot, and Job, and their wealth as unjustly gotten, which cannot be
said of these holy men, See Luke 16.9.11.

Numb. 4. But let us see what he says next. Lending must be free, Luke 6.35.
It being reckoned among the liberal Contracts.

Reply. This seems to be one of the great mistakes, that runs through his and
Mr. Bolton's discourse; That all lending or laying out of money to supply
another occasions must needs be free etc. Whereunto I answer.

1. Little strength can be put into a saying, which begins with It seems; an
expression often used by him and his Authors, which shows their feebleness.

2. And so it is well for me, that he joins Mr. Bolton and me, showing thereby
that I am not alone in this assertion, That lending must be free; where I could
heap up Authors both Divines and Civilians asserting the Law, but sufficient it
is that Christ himself has said, as some Translations have it, Lend freely,
Luke 6.35.

3. As he refers the Reader to that which he had said already, so do I both
for Luke 6.35, and for calling lending by an other name, concerning which last
particular thing I intend to say more hereafter.

Object: 2: Mr. Jelinger. The Law against Usurie is Political, concerning the
Jews only and not us, therefore we cannot be condemned for it.

Mr. Jelinger, this is a Fallacy, and the contrary cannot be sufficiently
proved: Let us see his proofs. 1. The Prophets enumerate Usurie among the
transgressions of the Moral law, Ezekiel: 18: 8: 15: Jer: 15: 10: and so does this
Psalm 15: 5: Reply, as for Jer. 15: 10: It makes little for his purpose. A. Nor
do I make any great matter of it here, but upon an other account I shall make
something of it. That which is asserted of Ezekiel. 18. that it contains only
Morals, may admit of an use of Addubitation, thereby he jeers me; because I did
in my last Book often mention such an Use of Addubitation, which I have learned
from a better man than he is, Viz. of that glorious Martyr Peter Ramus, who
dyed for Christ in the Parisian Massacre, and has it in his Works; and there
he goes on, and says, It seems to me there are Judicials and Ceremonials
too, expressed and referred to, etc.

A 1. It seems he says doubtingly. 2. But suppose it were so, there be
Scriptures for certain wherein Usury is placed among Morals only, as Psalm. 15.
Ezekiel. 22.7, 8, 9. As Bishop Bishop Downam upon Plal. 15.
Downam also has observed it; saying, There remains the last Testimony if such
Exceptions can be taken: For here is no mention made either of the Poor, as if
it were committed against them alone, or of the detaining a pledge, as if Usury
were matched therewith; for it is matched with murder, Idolatry, incest, and
other such abominations; neither is it in this place, so subject to oppression,
as a species thereof, but generally and simply it is condemned as a grievous
abomination. So then this place will hold it, to show that Usury is reckoned
among moral Evils, to make it self a moral Evil. As for the places by him
quoted, Lev. 15.14, 18, 35 and 36. and Acts 15.29. to them I have this to say.
1. That he infeebles again what he says, by this It seems.

2. That as one Sun is sufficient to give light to the whole World, so that one
place in Ezekiel. 22. is sufficient to give light to all the rest, to all them
that went before, and comes in after such a manner, purposely to show what a
moral Evil it is, being so placed among moral Evils only, to take off the
Cavils of Usuries Champions.

3. That his Assertion is false in Levit. 25. wherein Usury is forbidden, ver.
35, 36. placed as he says, in the midst of political Laws, there are no other
Laws mentioned but such in that Chapter. For there are mentioned, ver. 17.
these moral Laws, You shall not oppress one another, that is one, but thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, that is another, and the same is repeated to
convince this bold and impudent Assertor with a Witness, ver. 43. Thou shall
fear thy God, and one moral more there is in the same verse: Thou shall not
rule over him (namely a Servant there mentioned) with rigor; who therefore can
believe a man that will say so, as he says when it is not so; this utterly
cracks a man's credit, and puts men upon a Use of Addubitation sure enough in a
matter of such concernment as is the present Controversy; about the Law of
Usury, whether it be Political or Moral.

4. From that place, Acts 15.29. Where Fornication is placed among Ceremonials
it does not therefore follow that as Fornication is reckoned among Ceremonials,
and yet it self is a moral Transgression; so Usury may be reckoned among Morals
and yet be Political, this I say does not follow. 1. Because these Ceremonials
there mentioned, were to be observed only for a time; as we see that they are
not now observed; because there is no such reason for it now as there was then,
when the Christians lived among the Jews, who were highly offended by such
things as are there prohibited for a Season, whereas Usury is a sin for ever
prohibited, being a moral Transgression as has been partly proved, and shall by
and by yet be more proved.

Number. 5. 5. And because he brings his Authors asserting the Law of Usury to be
political, as Calvin, Hughes, Rivet.

I Will allege Authors too, and I trow a goodly company of Famous and Learned
Men indeed: Viz. Besides Doctor Fenton and the many famous Bishops of England,
St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Gregory Niscene,
Ambrose, Ciprian, Austin, Hieronimus, Thomas Aquinas, Peter Lombard, Dionysius,
Carthusianus, Gabriel Biel, Lyra, Rainerus, Aquileius, Luther, Melanchton,
Brentius, Musculus, Themnitius, Aretius, Hemingius, VVigandius, Zegedinns,
Molarcus, Viguerius, VVolvius, (and many more) to which names formerly named, I
shall add the Names and very Words of many more very worthy men; as namely Mr.
Moss first, who says in his conviction of Usury, I see no reason why those
precepts of Moses concerning Usury should not be reckoned among the judicial,
and not amongst the moral Laws; for sure I am most learned men of all Ages, and
of all kinds have numbered them among the morals.

2. Mr. Powel frames this syllogism for the morality of the Law against Usury,
in Barbara, from Exodus 22.25. You shall not oppress him with Usury, Oppression
is a breach of the moral Law; Usury is oppression, Ergo Usury is a breach of
the moral Law, p. 43.

3. The Learned and famous Bishop Downam proves the morality of it from Luke
6.35. Lend, loking for nothing from thence, and so I chiefly prove it from
thence.

4. Great Basil tells us, that therefore it is moral, because Usury is reckoned
(...), the greatest of Evils: Ezekiel. 22. His words in full are these (...), he
places Usury and increase among the greatest of Evils, therefore it must needs
of it self be a Moral Evil, and a great one too; with which Authors I join the
learned Capel in the Capel. of Usury. p, 267. Neither can the law against
Usury be thought to be Judicial (Otherwise Political) law of Moses. For such
laws as such, are known only by some intelligence from the Books of Moses: But
Heathens of all sorts, who never once heard of Moses his writings have with one
voice cried sin upon Usury, and shame upon Usurers (Poets, Orators,
Historians, Philosophers, all) they have condemned by the light of Nature: and
therefore it could not be a Political law of Moses. Besides we have it
forbidden in the New Testament when judicials were out of date, lend, looking
for nothing again. Luke 6.35. so Capel.
Margin.

5. And now to answer his Authors, what are those few to so many, say I, as was
said of the Loaves, what are these few among so many: He names 3. or 4. and I
name 29. and could name many more, and how inconsiderable is their authority
all things considered. For to begin with Rivet. He tells what might be the
causes why the Jews might not lend to their Brethren upon Usurie, but proves it
not that they were the causes, and besides Christ in the 6, of Luke 35.
Overthrows all that he says, and Hughes says, and Calvin says. But a little
more of Mr. Hughes first that he was too short in so great a matter, and wants
Scripture for what he says; and 2. I know the time (for we were Ministers
together in one and the same Parish) when he was bitter enough against Usury,
and others there are who can tell and satisfy, how he kept them from the Lords
Supper for Usurie.

As for Calvin, I confess he was a glorious Sun in the Firmament of Christ's
Church, and one whom I admire and reverence as much as any one Protestant
writer; but this must be confessed withal, that he is but a man, and therefore
may err as well as other men, and does err in the Doctrine of the Christian
Calvin. Epist. respons. de Vsuris.
Sabbath; and therefore is to be commended for this, that in the Doctrine of
Usury, holding it to be forbidden by a political law, he would have no man
take his Opinion for an Edict; as his words do declare it, whereby he requires
that no man should stand upon his judgment for a full and absolute
Determination of this Controversy.

Whereupon a great Author makes this Inference; that unjustly Mr. Calvin is
cited as a Patron of their unlawful party. So that I have no reason or cause to
be of his Judgment, whilst he himself would not have me stick to it. Rivet is
also for me; for he is against Injury in the place by the Champion quoted; and
so am I, and so against Usurie, which is an Injury.

6: And why should not the Laws of Usurie be reputed for Moral, as well as
those which concern incest, of which no Divine ever doubted but that they ought
to abide perpetual as precepts of the Moral law? For if it be objected that the
laws of Usurie have received some exceptions (whereof hereafter) it is most
evident that the laws of Incest have received exceptions, and dispensations
too. In the Law one Brother was permitted, yea commanded to raise up Seed unto
another, Deuteronomy: 25. Contrary to Lev: 18: 16: Thou shall not discover the shame
of thy brother's wife. Yea in the beginning of the World when the Moral law was
written in Man's heart.

Cain married his Sister 4. Gen: 17: I say his Sister, because he could marry
no other, there being no other woman in the world but his Mother which he could
not marry, and his own Sisters of whom Josephus Joseph Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 3.
writes, that there were also Daughters born to Adam and Eve. And if it be
objected that there was an absolute necessity for it; I answer, that there was
no such absolute necessity for the brother, but now mentioned, to raise up seed
to his Brother; because the Children of Israel did multiply exceedingly unto
several hundred thousands; and besides I say there was no simple or absolute
necessity for Cain neither, but a necessity only ex hypothesi or Supposition as
Logicians speak; for what necessity could compel God to Create only Adam and
one Eve, when he might have many women of many ribs, he having abundance of
spirit. Mal: 2: 15: Thus I reason a Pari, from the comparison of this Equality.
The laws of Incest are Moral and yet have received Exceptions, and why not then
may not the laws against Usury? Tho they received exceptions semblably whereto
we instance in Moral laws against Murder, and Theft, which received exceptions
in Abraham; and Isreal's Case, of which hereafter.

This for the present may suffice to stop my Adversaries mouth, and to answer
Spanhemius, and others who stand so much upon Exceptions to prove that the law
against Usurie is not Moral but Political: The very Atheists, which now call
themselves Theists, confess that the Scripture is against Usury, and make a
great matter of it: so that their Confuters have no other way to answer them
but that it is against it, by a Political law, which they little regard;
because they cannot prove it. More I could say of these Theists about Usury,
but this may now suffice.
Only one thing more I will add in the Margin.

7: Suppose it were Political, yet does the Equity of it hold still.

8: It is true, that a Political tolleration is annexed to the law as an
Appendix, which does not therefore make the law against Usurie Political, but
leaves it in its morality, even as the tolleration of Incest, leaves the Moral
law against Incest, in its morality as perpetually to be observed and even now
under the Gospel by name, as is evident from the Incestuous. 1 Cor: 5: 1.

9. Yea; even my very Adversaries concession strengthened by Doctor Tailor,
Rivet and Spanhemius makes for me, saying, that tho Usurie among the Jews were
immediately and directly against a Judicial law; yet it might be Moral
secondarily. I must not be an Usurer; because this follows, that I must not be
an Usurer, because Usurie is a Moral Evil, at least secondarily. And thus
Usurers strangle themselves by their own distinctions, and that especially in
the great and weighty controversy of, and about the Morality of the law of
Usurie; whereabout I have been the longer and larger, because the Objection is
a chief one, intending to be briefer in my Answers to the rest.

10: In answer to that there is an Usurie, which the Champion says is directly
and immediately a Moral Evil; let Bishop Downam's Sylogism and Inference upon
it be seen upon the 15* Psalm. 5. I cannot now enlarge being bent to abridge.

3. The very law of Nature is against it. Reply. I grant if meant of biting and
oppressive Usurie, etc.

Number: 6.1. Lo, how he does, ad nauseam usque, repeat his thread bare and near
worn out distinction; between biting and toothless Usurie, and if there were an
Usurie which is a harmless thing and wants teeth, a distinction which he has
not from God but men; his new men which have coined it: and Dr. Rainold in his
B: of Divorce p. 8.
which as a learneder man than he is, Doctor Rainold I mean writes, is but a
mere flam. For where does God distinguish so; let us look to his principal law
against Usurie, in Deuteronomy. 23.19. Where he gives Usurie two names; the one is
Nesheck the other Tarbith:, (which Salmasius himself, as was formerly shown,
Calls synonymaes, and which without any distinguishing between biting and
toothless Usurie, God makes both damnable, and unlawful, and sinful, 18: Ezekiel:
12, 13. I say abominable, because of increase, saying. Has he taken Usury, or
Increase He shall not enter Heaven, who takes more then he gave, says Dr:
Sanders
shall he then live, he shall dye; tho he take but increase. 2: Unlawful and
sinful both because, else it could not be damnable.

2. As I say it is against the Law of Nature, so greater Christian men than my
self, say it: and not only say it, but also syllogistically prove it: I will
now name great Melanchton in Epist. Philoso. morum. Anno 1542.
melanchton, the Phoenix of Germany, whose syllogistical Arguments do prove
that Usury is against the Law of Nature, are these;

It is unlawful to exact money where there is no exchange for any thing, (that
is when for nothing we exact money).

An Usurer keeping his Stock does exact Usury for nothing; because his stock is
whole, but only in respect of lending.

Therefore to exact Usury is unlawful; thus he goes to the Law of Nature.

2: A thing by nature barren, is not to be used as if it were fruitful.

But money is by nature barren, Ergo.

3: The price should not be ware: ergo, money should not be ware.

The Antecedents proof. Because at what time the prior is made ware, there does
always something above the price come to the Usurer, whereby for nothing
something is gotten, and an inequality is done; so a few Usurers bring the
wealth of many Cities to themselves; For the exchanges cannot be continual when
no Equality is observed.

Number: 7: Now to exercise Usurie is contrary to Nature; it is for bidden by
ancient Laws and godly Preachings. Thus my Author Melanchton.

Yea, eminently great Heathen men say the same viz:

1: Great Plutarch quod non oporteat faenorari.
Plutarch, who says. The Usurers also mock at the laws of Nature, just as some
of our Christian mockers do, which affirm that of nothing nothing can be gotten.

2: The very Heathens find therefore two great faults in Usurie committed
against Nature. The first is, That the Usurer will make a barren thing (as
money) to bring forth, as it were Children; that is to say, as a wise man
says, pence and shillings. 2: That he exacts Usury so long, that at the last
the debtor pays Usury not only for the principal sum, but also for the use
of it.

3: As for Cicero and Proculus by my Adversary cited and named, tho he would
make them mine enemies, yet are they my constant and faithful friends still. 1.
Cicero, Cicero, Offic.
whom I read all over in my youth and extracted; and who I am sure is as much
against the Usurer as my self, as by these his words it appears, that he brings
in Cato thus, That being asked what it was to lend out money upon Usury; he
answered it is no better than to kill a man; which (as says a great Mr. Moss.
Author) Tully rehearses in the dispraise of Usury; nor does this Tully, in the
words by the Champion quoted, make against me at all.

Nor 2. The words of In Pandict. de pactis l. 5. and l. 11.
Proculus; who that I may let men see how he is for me: holds thus, If I give
or deliver to thee ten to make thee debtor for eleven. Proculus thinks, says
Ulpian, that no more can be certainly demanded than ten, his reason is, for an
obligation cannot be made touching a thing, but so far forth as it is
delivered, and in the very words against me alleged, he says no more, than I
can say my self for my self, viz. that is Dolus Malus, for a man takes to make
gain of another loss, where the word signifies all that which is repugnant to
all natural right and equity, as Usury does; which is contrary to natural right
and equity. Here hear what Wisemen say, That if I deliver ten pounds to my
neighbor with this intent that he shall pay me the same ten pounds, and also
ten shillings more by the year, so long as he keeps it, and I either take or in
my heart look for the ten shillings as my debt, I do injury and sin against the
command of God, who forbids me not only to steal, but also to covet another
man's goods, says Doctor Sanders, who also fully proves it, that Usury is
against the Law of Nature, and that Wise men and Lawyers, whereof Proculus is a
chief one, confess Usury to be against nature, and so against Right or Natural
Equity, which I have formerly proved sufficiently.

I end with Arist. l. 1. p. 60. Polit.
Aristotle, who says expressly, The Traffic of Usury is worthily hated;
because it seeks gains upon the penny; and seeks not for that which money was
invented: for money was invented to make exchanges withal, but Usury exchanges
not, but increases the penny, whereof also it took its name in Greek. Now
those things which are begotten, are like to them by which they are begotten;
In Usury money brings forth money, wherefore that kind of gaining is especially
against Nature.

Number. 8. And so I have by Authors and Reasons made it evident, how Usury is
against Nature and natural Equity, and how it is an injury, and how well
Proculus and I do agree, and so I will go no further.

The Second Reply is, that God permitted his people to lend upon Usury to a
Stranger, and that therefore the Law against Usury is Political, for if Moral,
how could they lend to a Stranger. Deuteronomy. 22.19.

Answ. Some say one thing, some another, I for my part shall cut short what I
have to say, and go to that most notable and emphatical expression, Deuteronomy.
23.19, 20. (...), unto that Stranger thou may lend upon Usury, the
Canaanite, namely, whom it was lawful to kill, so blessed Ambrose: Reply, A bad
shift is better than none, and so forth, let the Reader read the rest of my
Book, page 33. and in his Pamphlet, which he has sent abroad, and is either
printed or like to be, page 57, 58. till he comes to Mr. Bolton page 59. and
take and peruse also my several Et videatur etiam Testatus in Deuteronomy. 23.19. p.
217.
Answers, which I shall give: As 1. to the sayings of my Opponent; to be seen
in his Book, and to his Authors: And whereas he says, that a bad shift is
better than none, and so forth; I answer, that I hope I shall make a shift,
(but no bad shift) to make good what I say and said concerning the Stranger,
that it is the Canaanite, and that this saying is a better man's shift than
either he or I, Viz. St. Ambrose de Tob. l. c. 11.
Ambrose's, whose words I Will now set down a little more at large; that he may
not say it is the same which I said already, because I say more; St. Ambrose's
words at large are these, (for I have read him all over long ago and therefore
can quote more yet out of him) as namely, Perhaps you will say, it is written
thou shall lend upon Usury to a Stranger, etc. who then was the stranger but
the Amalekite, but the Amorite, but the Enemies of the People of God? There
exact Usury whom thou desire to hurt worthily, against whom thou go to
make war lawfully, on him thou may impose Usury lawfully, whom thou can
not easily overcome by war, on him thou may easily wreak thy self by Usury:
Take Usury of him whom thou may kill, against whom there is a right to wage
War, against them there is a right to take Usury. Let me add learned Rich.
Capel in his Appendix of Usury, added to his Tentations. With whom may be
joined Ainsworth saying the same.
Capels words, Some plead for Usury, that it is not unlawful, for that God did
permit it to the Stranger, if it were permitted indifferently to all and every
Stranger, than there were some color for it. But it is only to the Stranger,
that is to the Strangers of those cursed Nations, whom they were bound to bite
and to eat out, and if this permission were not looked upon as a punishment,
why is it denied to a Brother, Deuteronomy. 23.18. were it a favor then of all they
should have been permitted to lend unto their Brethren. I add lastly ne are
forbidden to lend to a Brother, and now all Christians ar^ Brethren, and
therefore we must not lend to any Christian upon Usury as Usurers do.

Now let all true English hearts judge and choose, whom they will follow, this
Novice or Calvin, who Calvin in his 134 Sermon in Deuteronomy. 2.3.
thinks, that by the Stranger are meant all the Nations and Countries adjacent
to Palestina or Egypt, Syria, the Isles of the Sea, and such like, or this
learned and holy man Ambrose, who was so transcendently godly and able a Divine
and Preacher, as that the most pious Emperor Theodosius said of him, that
there was but one such Bishop in the whole World.

2. But lest men should say that I must not think to carry it by Authors only,
and by this man's greatness, we look for strength of Reason. I will go to
Reason, and rip up this matter of the Stranger, so far as that the unbiassed
Reader shall be constrained to confess, that the truth is on my side. And first
I will go to the Hebrew word, which is (...), and signifies not every.
Stranger, As Bishop Downam says upon 15 Psalm. 5.
which is not an Israelite by birth, or on him that was either Ger, (...),
that, Advena, a Proselite, dwelling among the Jews, who tho he was a Stranger
by birth, yet was a Brother by religion, or Qui diu habitavit in aliquo loco
Pagnin.
Toshab (...), Inquilinus, one that was a Stranger by birth, but lived freindly
among them, though not circumcised, as appears by Exodus 12.43, 45, 48. usury
was not to be imposed, Lev. 25, 35. but only on him that was Nocre, Extraneus
or Hostis, an Enemy, see Obadiah ver. 11. Lam. 15.2. as formerly I mention the
same thing, and in this sense may be meant any alien, or especially the
Canaanite; but doubtless we may more rightly understand the Canaanite for these
reasons.

1. Because as I said already, the word in the Hebrew is not (...), but (...),
that Stranger, that is observed not only by me, but by far greater and abler
men than I am, as namely by those two famous men Jun. and Trem. in loc.
Junius and Tremellius, who translate that Text thus, Extraneo isti, That
Stranger, that is to the relics of the Canaanites; What can be plainer? So the
famous Bishop Bishop Downam 12 Psalm. 15.
Downam; observes it, saying as I, the words are not lenecro, but lanecro, the
Stranger. And so that learned Man Mr. Moss, saying, I am sure Junius and
Tremellius so understand the place, for they translate it to the Stranger. And
one says, to this stranger as if even by it he did point at him. So Dr. Doctor
Tailor in his Progress of Saints.
Tailor, the word is not lenecro but lanecro the stranger. So Capel.

2. Because this stranger was appointed to destruction Deuteronomy. 7.2. Thou shall
smite them and utterly consume them: So also Jos. 9.2. It was certainly told
thy Servanns how that the Lord thy God commanded his servant Moses, to destroy
all the Inhabitants of the Land from before you, meaning the seven Nations,
Deuteronomy. 1.3.

Which very reasons the two forenamed great men, Junius and Tremellius also
give as well as I; their words are set down expressly thus, after they had
rendered the Text thus, to this stranger, that is, these remainders. Illas enim
Deus exitio destinaverat.

For them he had ordained to destruction.

3. This stranger was to be Pool in Deuteronomy. 23.19: Mr. Moss.
consumed by little and little. Deuteronomy. 7.22.

Whereupon one Glosseth thus, and because he saw that Usury was a means even
to EAT them up, (by little and little) he permitted Usury.

4. And it could not be any other stranger and every other stranger, because
God is just and will not destroy a righteous Nation Genesis 20.4. But those
Canaanites and Nations spoken of Deuteronomy. 7.1. had greatly and greviously sinned
against God, and his people, as namely the Amorites, Genesis 15: 10. Compared with
Deuteronomy. 7.1. and so the rest of those Nations, did all conspire against Israel,
(which we do not read of the Syrians, Egyptians, and Isles spoken of by Calvin:
That they be the stranger) Jos. 10.1, 2. The Hittite and the Amorite, the
Hivite and the Jebusite, the Cananite, the Perizite, gathered themselves
together to fight with Joshua and with Israel with one accord; the Hebrew is
with One Mouth. (...) Crying, down with Israel, down with them, we will
certainly and utterly consume them, and eat them up; so that it was just with
God that they should be consumed and even eaten up, partly by War, and partly
by Usurie as St. Ambrose has it; but I must needs desire men to parallel this
place in Joshua with Deuteronomy: 7: 1. Where those same Nations and one more called
the Girgashites and their Neighbors too, are named viz. The Amorites and the
Cananites, and the Perizites, and the Hivites and the Jebushites, seven
Nations in all with the Girgashites, and ordained to destruction to be consumed
by little and little, and eaten up which is a thing very remarkable for the
proving of my subject matter.

5: And besides, these Nations were so near as that they would be a great snare
to the Jews by their Idols, if they should not be utterly consumed by the sword
and Usury. Verse 4. Wherein God himself gives this reason, why they should
consume them, and make no marriages with them, even because of their Gods and
Images. So that no wonder it is, that besides me, and the aforesaid men, and
other grave and great Divines have been of the same opinion, that I am of,
concerning this stranger; as Namely Petrus The Martyr dug up to be burnt.
Tagius; who writes that there are those which are of this opinion, that the
Usurie here spoken of was granted to the Jews, to be exercised only upon those
seven Nations, all whose Goods (whereby Usurie comes in) God had given to
Israel; so that by this grant they might take Usurie of them.

Number: 10.6: Nor can other Nations which were farther of, be understood with any
likelihood; because of securities and conveyances, which must be made and given
in Usuries case, which cannot be done when men live far asunder in Isles, to
use Calvin's expression; for how can men with any convenience or security of
the Principal, not to speak of any Use, send out of England into France, or
Germany, and indeed who does so?

7: But suppose it were so as they say, that we are to understand every
stranger, yet has my Adversary not gotten the day, for his saving and exception
of lending to a Stranger is but a Or a thing permitted to the Jews by
privilege, as their spoiling of the Aegyptions was, Zeppeon.
permission of a lesser evil to avoid a greater, says famous Lyra in Exo. 22,
and in Deuteronomy, 33.19.
Lyra: God was contented to suffer the Jews to take Usury of a Stranger, lest
being covetously minded they should exercise that tyranny toward their own
Brethren, and lest for want of gain they should have refused to lend to any,
and so let their money lie and rust, which is a great evil also, as it is
mentioned by St. James, your gold and Silver is cankered, James 5.3.

Now this lending upon Usury was permissive only for a time and not to endure
for ever, appears from this, that Galatinus reports, as I have once before now,
said it out of the Jewish Talmud that it was the Judgment of the Jewish
Rabbis, That in that place in Psalm. 15, 5. He has not given his money to
Usury. God did not only forbid Usurie to the Jews, but also toward him that
was a Gentile, and what says St. Jerome: it is said in Deuteronomy; 23: 19. Thou
shall not lend to thy brother upon Usury: In the beginning of the Law, Usury
is only forbidden to be taken of their brethren in the Prophet Ezech. 18: 12,
13. It is forbidden toward all, Hieron: in Esech: 18.
A sentence so excellent, as that it deserves to be repeated again and again,
yea to be engraven with letters of Gold upon a Pillar of Marble.

8: But I must needs confess, that this law is imperative also, and not
permissive only, tho so for a time: Thou shall lend to a Stranger, even as he
says Thou shall destroy this Stranger. Deuteronomy: 7: 1: In which respect God is
both an Indulgent Father, and a severe Judge, and a Legislator; an Indulgent
Father, by his permitting of Usurie to his Children for their benifit, and a
severe Judge and Legislator, in respect of the Stranger, whom he will have
consumed by Usurie; saying, thou shall lend unto that Stranger, upon Usury,
and so kill him.

9: And let it be noted. That we lex de extraneo est politica: Wallitus in
Deuteronomy: 23: 19.
grant the law of Usurie to be Political, in regard of its Appendix: Unto a
Stranger thou may lend upon Usurie: Tho in it self it is and has been
proved to be Moral: So that Chemnitius: loc. com. de paup.
Chemnitius also might well say, that God in the old Testament, shows himself
to be a Divine and Legislator, which I also shall presume to say after this
fashion; that he shows himself to be a Divine by forbidding Usurie, and a
Legislator or Politician, by granting liberty to his people to lend to the
Stranger.

10: And I cannot but wonder why the Patrons of Usurie, are so earnest for this
Stranger, which will do them no good at all upon three accounts. For 1: Are we
not all brethren; as many of us as are Christians and no Strangers, and so
consequently ought not to lend one to another, by virtue of that famous place
concerning Brethren and the Stranger. (2.) It does so plainly appear by the
aforesaid arguments, that that Stranger is the Cannanite, and those Nations,
which are worn so, as that all Usurie is now absolutely forbidden toward all,
without any exception of any, as Psalm: 15.5 Pro 8. Ezech: 18: 12, 13: and 22:
Which is confessed by the Jews themselves, Rabbi Solomon (as Lyra reports it in
Exo: 22: 25.) Denies it to be lawful for a Jew to take Usury of a Stranger,
and the Hebrew Gloss says the same.

Number: 11. 11: Even that which they so much urge as an Exception* that Usurie is
permitted to a stranger makes against them; For if it were lawful in it self,
it had not need to be permitted; as the putting away a man's Innocent Wife,
being in it self and simply evil, was notwithstanding permitted to the Jews.

12. And whereas Quoted by the Ch: p: 59.
Ames and Spanbemius and others of his Authors presume, to prove the immorality
of the Law against Usurie by the Stranger thus. That if it were Moral, and
simply and in it self Evil; it would not be allowed to a stranger. I answer,
that the exception of a stranger does no more upon the Law against Usurie not
to be Moral, and Usurie not to be unlawful in it self; than allowance of
Manslaughter in time of War does prove the law forbidding of Murder to be
Judicial. For although the law condemning Usurie be Moral, yet as all the
Commands of God, so it is to be understood with this Limitation, unless God
otherwise determine, it is a Moral law, which forbids Theft as well as Usurie,
which is Theft too, yet if God by his special Prerogative and Warrant will have
the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians, they may lawfully do it; if the Lord bid
Abraham to kill his only Son, he may and must do it, and so it is an Usurers
Case here.

But some will say that these are extraordinary Cases; I answer, so is this
matter of this stranger.

13: But I had almost forgotten one thing which is, that whereas Usurers
Champion tells me that what I say is but a bad shift, I must tell him that it
is such a shift as has made one of Usuries defendant so bold as to wrest the
very Scripture, saying, that lancecro is put for lenecro, as not being able to
bear the weight of such a mighty Argument which is taken from that noble Hebrew
Expression, this stranger pointed at, viz. the Cannanite, which is Scripture,
and no humane invention.

14: In answer to a saying of his, that my proof overthrows it self; I shall
tell him that it does not; if I may explain my self that I mean the Cannanite
Unconverted, and not continuing an Enemy; for a Cannanite might live among the
Jews, Civilly and Friendly: and his case was altered then, as Divines do show
it, he going under the name of a Proselite at large.

14: His saying p. 57. Concerning lending to an Egyptian, as a stranger, and
that lending to him is not against the Law of Nature, to me is strange, because
it is an extraordinary Exception, that he is lent unto Ames, which he makes
his second here, I have answered in my second Answer.

Number: 12: 15. To his other Authors I shall answer; 1: Severally 2: Jointly.

1: Severally, and to pass by Ames whom I answered in my 2: Answers.

1: I shall answer a few words to his Grotius, that he does not very
excellently, well and fully clear the point as the Champion says, for 1: The
Anti-usurarians do not place the strengh of their Opinion, in a permissive
right of fact only, and chiefly, but in other more weighty grounds and reasons,
besides given in my Answers premised. Nor does he speak true, affirming that
all the Rabbines do otherwise understand that which is said of the Stranger
then the Anti-usurarians do. For I have clearly proved the contrary by Besides
whom, others are of the same Opinion, says Dr. Willet.
Rabbi Solomon. (out of Lyra) who denies it to be lawful, for a Jew to take
Usurie of a stranger, and the Hebrew Gloss which understands that. 15 Psalm: 5.
Has not given his money to Usury thus: No not to a Gentile, (says he.) And as
for Josephus and Phil^; he does not tell us what both say, so that I should be
loath to trust to what he says: and especialy of the Text that it will not
bear the sense by me and others given, when as the quite contrary has been
even now most clearly proved: To end what I have to say of him, I wonder how
Grotius can make it good that Christ has left no Prescript for us in this
thing, when the quite contrary can be proved by Luke 6 35.

But I desire to say a little more about Josephus and Philo, tho he say but
little, and can say but little, I perceive by him By whom Conscience is called
a Court or Consistory, wherein Usury is condemned says a learned Writer.
Philo lived in Christ's time, and I am sure could not see his Jews lend upon
Usurie to strangers, which were either Romans or Samaritans; not to Romans,
because I have formerly shown it they were against it. Not to Samaritans;
because it is written, the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans, which
were of all Nations. John 4: 9. 2 Kings 17: 24: 29. and Josephus lived shortly
after, when Tiberius and Cajus, had put down Usurie; so as that the Jews durst
not lend to strangers, nor do we read that they did, and besides, Josephus in
the mane I am sure is for me; for thus he writes. We have a Law among us, that
the lender shall take no Usury; making no mention at all of brother, or
stranger.

Number: 13.16: I thought to have ended here, but because the Champion has a
little more to say, I will be saying a little more too, he says p. 58: think
on it again, what an unlikely story it is, that they might lend to those
Nations whom they were bound utterly to destroy, and charged to make no
Covenant with them, and so forth. whereunto I answer. 1. God foreknew that they
would not do as he would have them, being a stifnecked people, but would let
them live among them, and make Covenants with them, in Marriages and otherwise;
and that (to instance in what Grotius mentions) that they and their posseritie
would be employed by them to do them service, and therefore seeing they would
needs have them live among them and make Covenants with them; he lets them
indeed make covenants with them by Usurie, Contracts, having reserved to
himself his Royal Prerogative to dispense with his Moral laws at his pleasure.
And then 2: I say that, that which Grotius says, that the command of
Extirpation was particular to the men of that Generation will not hold, because
that long after Moses, and when that generation called THIS present STRANGER,
so Extraneo isti. Poole in Deuteronomy: 23: 19. Vbi addit, which the it be unlawful
says he, yet has God by the power of his supreme do^^^^on granted and thereby
made lawful (for this stranger) B.
pointed at, was dead, as Moses also was in Joshua's time, and the Judges time
after Joshua they were extirpated, and to be extirpated still by little and
little, and by degrees till they were worn out, as it clearly appears from
Judge: 1: 2, 3: 4: 5.

3: And that they were to eat them up, consume, destroy, and kill them, and so
by Usurie, even gradually is clear to me by this. Because Usurie is Murder,
Calvin in Psalm. 15: 5.
Calvin himself makes it Murder. Yea God himself makes it Murder. Where? L^w
25: 35. Where God speaking of a stranger sojourning ^^ a Friend, friendly among
his people, that they should take ^o Usurie of him: adds That he may live with
thee, as if he should say; for else You kill him: This is by the by. And

17: Whereas the Champion adds: For a farther proof take a Parallel place,
Deuteronomy: 16: 2, 3.

And what does he make of it? a mighty Matter, for there is in the Hebrew as
Emphatical a (...) with stranger as that which Mr. Jelinger translates That
Brother. And whoever did make it so Emphatical besides him; as Mr. Jelinger's
is made by many famous Writers by him named? But to the matter. What can he
make of it? and yet I think none understands it barely of the Cananite; I reply
thus. That is the same Cananite, because other Nations did not so live among
them as they did.

18: As for Diodate, whom he brings in to confirm what he says, to that I
answer, I have heard him many times read his Divinity Lectures, and preach
too: but never did I hear him plead for Yea Diodate my friend says expressly
upon Luke 6: 35. Lend, without any respect to your selves to exspect a
recompense.
Usurie, or for this Stranger, or Foreigner; and as for this place by him
quoted, he does not so much as mention a Cananite, or the word of a Stranger;
but in general Israel and Proselite. See the Of whom grave Authors give out
this report.
Margin also. So that I cannot see, or any one else I think, what the Champion
has gotten by his jeering of me; and by speaking so much for any stranger: and
I add, that he has rather made himself like unto those few p: 59.
Rabbines which plead for any stranger and by that for Coveteousness and
Usurie, that it is lawful for Jews to take Usurie of Christians as of
strangers; for so do Usurers and many defendants of Usurie, take Usurie of
their brethren and fellow Christians, which the very Jews will not take of
their brethren.

Number: 14: And now the Champion goes to confute that famous and holy man Mr.
Bolton, saying I shall make bold, (bold sure enough) to look into Mr. Bolton,
to see what he replies to this Objection, taking from the Lords permitting
them to lend to strangers etc. whereunto I answer. 1: That I do persuade my self
that, if that great man were now a live, he would disdain it as much to answer
this saucy young man, as Mr. Hughes, to one M. E. and other such, and therefore
that I may not be so weak as to offer to defend such a man as Mr. Bolton is, of
whom it may well be said as John 9: 21. He is of age and able to speak for
himself, and to defend himself. Let the Reader but read both, and he will soon
see that this Novice has not spoken right of this thing, as the Lords Servant
Bolton; whose Who also gave me ample thanks for my Usurer Cast, even as another
great Divine did likewise.
memory is and will be blessed, when the name of that man who defends Usurie
will be Cursed Jer: 15 10.

2: I add that this godly and learned man Bolton is so esteemed, by learned and
godly men; as that * one of above fourscore, being a great writer himself, and
an able Preacher, did say to me, that if but Mr. Bolton had written against
Usurie it were enough

3: I say that this reverend man was so highly favored of God, and so well
visited by Jesus Christ his Son, as that he could tell his Parishoners, coming
to visit him, when he lay upon his death bed: I am as full of Christ as my
heart can hold. So that any honest Reader will infinitely rather believe what
he says in this Usurie matter, then one that cannot tell us of such an
experience of Christ's love, and I do verily believe, that the end of this man's
present assaulting of this grave, godly and gracious man, will prove like M. S.
assaulting him; who by chailenging Mr. Bolton, thrust himself upon the greatest
infelicity of War, as first to be disarmed, and afterward to be killed in the
field with his own Weapon, for we hear no more of M. S.

Only this I must super-add, that diverse things which this Champion goes to
confute, are answered in my 17 Answers premised, and that I count it an honor
to have such a worthy Champion in this War, in which this defendant of Usurie
would fain overthrow me, if he could, yea, thinks that he has overthrown,
confuted and fully answered him and me, as it appears by his brags in the
close of this digression, which is this Diversion may serve to evidence, that
Mr. Bolton is not unanswerable. But I resume to answer Mr. Bolton in Mr.
Jelinger. And is not this a Champion indeed, that can so bravely wage war
against so great a warrior against Usuries Army, and not me only?

Number. 15 3. Object. Does not Christ allow of Usurie when he says, Matt. 25.27.
Thou ought to have put my money to Usury. His Answer is; The words are part
of a Parable, and Symbolick Scripture is not Argumentative. Reply. I hope he
will grant from hence, that Christ is at Metaphorical Usurer etc. whereunto I
have answered already but he proceeds, saying, that he never thought much
strength to he in that text for Usurie. Whereunto I answer 1. He grants me as
much as I can desire; and 2. Makes his Doctor Against whose single judgment I
oppose the joint judgment of the godly Ministers of France, who in a French
Treatise against dancing. p. 131, Couple Usury with dancing, and say, that
those laws in Matt. 11.16. and Luke 15.25. proves no more the sinfullness of
Dancing than the words in Matt. 25.17. concerning Usury, do prove the
lawfullness of Usury. And the Geneva Professors and Ministers of their French
Annotations appro^^^^e said place in Mat. 25.17. they likewise exspresly that
not thereby approve of Usury.
A mesius, who stands upon that place, a weak man not to be trusted unto very
much in this Usurie matter. Whereunto

3. I Will add this only, because some of the vulgar sort of Usurers insist much
upon the word Usurie, used in that Text, that the Arabic leaves out that word
Usurie, and in the room of it renders the words thus, cum lucro suo. With its
gain, and that the ancient Fathers did call their very Preaching Usurie: and 3.
that Ames himself makes it only probable that Christ meant Usury there as we
understand it in common speech.

And 4. That Expositors understand grace even to be employed and the yealding
good works and gifts.

5. Usurie by God is forbidden to the Poor only; but lending to the Rich is
lawful etc.

Orig. Hom. 3. in Psalm. 31. Dionis. in Psalm. 15. Theophil. in Matt. 25. Mr.
Jelinger.
I answer, this is a very specious plea, I confess, but yet I hope through
mercy to overthrow it.

1. The most wise God foreseeing how some would abuse poor people, leave out
the poor in the repetition of his laws Deuteronomy. 23.29. Thou shall not lend to
Usury to thy Brother. And is not the rich our brother too? Reply. I commend
his after sight in finding out such an answer as this, it showing his skill in
secrets etc,

For answer whereunto I say that, tho he deals jeeringly with me, I will deal
seriously with him, and tell him, that if it be a fault in me to tell of Gods
foresight here; he is guilty of the same fault in his Pamphlet, making use of
the same foresight as I do here God, foreseeing in his wisdom how men would
cavil at the word Nesheck, has properly exspressed his meaning by the
Exegetical word Vetarbith Doctor Fenton.
and that a wiser man than he or I used the like Expression; see the Margin.

2. That I make rich and poor alike in this; that they are Brothers and not as
he feigns, that I do, for I know as well as he that there is a vast difference
between rich and poor in respect of their outward Estates, and so grant that we
are not to lend to the rich, for them to oppress others in bargaining, as he
alleadges my words, and so with heart and good will subscribe to Solomon's words
Pro. 22.16. And again I confess that I make them alike in this, that we must
not lend to either upon Usurie, because God has no where in all the Bible
allowed Usurie, to be taken and exacted of the rich, if the Champion can show
me any, let him. Which has caused In haec verba, absque usura id quo indiget
commodabis, dicit p. 218. Non solum pauperi, sed etiam Diviti. Not only to the
poor but also to the rich thou shall lend. Sic Tostatus. So Capel. in his App.
p. 292. Nor can they show a place where Usury is granted to a rich man.
Tostatus also to say as I do, see my Margin for it.

Number. 17.3. Whereas he Adds. But to show further that the man is out in his
reckoning, and that God did leave out the Poor in the repetition of the law
concerning lending upon any such account, you shall find express mention made
in the business of lending in this same Book Deuteronomy. 15 7, 8. etc.

I answer 1. That it is enough for me; that in his Repititional laws, and in
the chiefest concerning Usurie he leaves out the poor, one such great Sun is
sufficient to give light to this great thing, and that very place Deuteronomy. 15.7,
8. Which I have formerly alleged for myself as making for me, and Bishop
Downams concerning the same place may be seen p. 279. And to come nearer home,
that expression in Deuteronomy. 23.19. concerning victuals makes not for him; so as to
conclude that the poor is intended, as having most need of borrowing Victuals,
because it is added Usury: Of any thing that is lent upon Usury. And the word
Victuals, by others is rendered fruges, or frumentum, Corn, which people of good
fashion borrow too. And lastly that place in And in the 12. verse, the poor
comes in with Violence, with the Pledge, and with Idols before Usury c^mes in.
18 Ezech. 17. Will not serve his turn neither, because; The taking of the hand
from the Poor is one thing, and the taking of Usurie and increase is another,
tho joined together in one verse, even as Luke 21.34. Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, and Cares; where Surfeiting is one thing, Drunkenness another,
Cares another and not the same, and see also Heb. 13.4. Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will Judge. And 2. I answer, and do not men usually rather give
then lend victuals and bread to poor people?

3. Neither Zanchie nor Rivet do his business; for neither of them prove what
they say, but only confine the Text, in Deuteronomy. 23.14, so as he does, to
victuals, only leaving out Corn and Bread, which are as I said, is and may be
lent to such as is well to pass, and is also to be understood (as greater men
than themselves are) avouch it, viz. Great Austin twice and great Dr.
Themnitius, who has examined and confuted the great Council of Trent, and great
Dr. Sanders, and others.

4. Whereas he Adds. The law says, Thou shall not lend to thy Brother, that is
waxen poor with thee. i. e. Says Mr. Jelinger in his Comment upon it; Thou
shall not lend to the poor or rich upon Usury. This is a Comment indeed. My
Reply is this. That he wrongs me in it, Bishop Jewel in his Comment upon that
place, couples rich and poor, so saying: He is thy Brother, whether he is rich
or poor.

My words are these upon Deuteronomy. 23.19 Mark, Brother, and is not the rich thy
brother too (who can deny it) I pray tell thou, who do so stoutly defend thy
Usury, and hear what learned Bishop Jewel even now says in this Case, and
which this Champion fathers upon me, as if I should say, as he says, upon the
law, which as he tells us says, thou shall not lend upon Usury to thy brother,
which is waxen poor with thee, when I speak upon Deuteronomy. 23.19. and is this fair
dealing?

2. He wrongs me, leaving out here near 80. lines untoucht, and unanswered in
p. 35, 36, 37. So that he gives me just cause to deal with him so too.

3. And besides, because he puts me so to it to defend my self, as well as I
may in this weighty matter, so overskipping what St. Basil, Lira, and Bishop
Jewel say, I will now say a little more than I thought to say, to answer more
fully to his preceding Replies. And first, That, tho in places by him named,
express mention is made of the poor, yet in others (besides Deuteronomy. 25.15.) as
namely in Psalm. 15. Prove. 20.8. Ezekiel. 22.12. and Luke 6.35. there is noted.

2. That it is confessed by Josephus contra A. vion.
Josephus, that the Jews have a law, as I said once already, that the lender
shall take no Usury, making no exception of the poor at all.

3. And why should those places which mention the poor rather restrain the
other which make mention of them, than the other, which make no mention of them
should enlarge them which name them, especially if we consider, that those
places which mention not the poor were the latter written, and that Divines
have a Rule; which says, that latter books were written somewhat to this
purpose, that they might be Interpreters and Expositors of the former.

Where Note, how I go to work to stop gaps and mouths by this rule, and by an
observation of mine too, that the Psalms and so the 15. and Ezekiel especially
those 2. and the Proverbs, and Luke 6.35. Were written after those which
mention the poor, so that now I do not only stand upon Deuteronomy. 23.19. where
mention is made of Victuals, which some of the Church great Authors so much
stand upon, which I wonder at, that wise men should do so; I say again, I do
not only Insist on that, but to cut off all other Cavils whatsoever, upon
others also.

4, I say farther, that there is great reason for it, why there should be so
often mention made of the poor; because 1. That shows what care God takes of
the poor, even as he does for Orphans, and Widows also and Strangers. And 2.
because they are so much and so often oppressed by the men of this wicked
world; where let me recite the words of the famous Doctor Chemnit. Loc. Summum
de paupert. a. 6.
Chemnitius to second me.

Whereas, (says he) in some certain Testimonies of Scripture concerning Usury,
there is mention made of the poor by name, that is done for the same reason for
which in the sixth and eight Commandments the Widows, Orphans, and poor folks
are commonly recited by name, that no injury should be offered unto them; yet
it follows not from thence that an injury may be done to married persons, to
mighty men, to rich men etc. is no sin; Even so it is in the Case of Usury.

Number. 19.5. And that it may more fully appear, who is meant by the brother in
Deuteronomy. 23.19. I will at present name two great men more, to balance his lesser,
who tell us, what that brother is.

The first shall be that foresaid great and ancient Father, Clemens Alexand.
Strom. l. 2. Tho.
Clemens Alexandrine, who lived near to the Apostles time, and says, The law
forbids to lend to Usury to our brother under the Name of a Brother,
Comprehending not only him which was born of the same Parents, but him also
which was of the same Tribe, and of the same Opinion, and partaker of the same
word. I must repeat his words, because the Chapter repeats his.

2. Great Aquinas. part. 3. q. 79 a 1.
Aquinas upon Deuteronomy. 23.19. We ought to count every man to be a Brother.

3. Dr. Sanders. The Carnal Jews had certain Infidels to their enemies, whom as
they might kill, so might they oppress them with Usury; but now seeing every man
is both our neighbor and our Brother, we may not take Usury of any man at all.

5. And, because they stand much upon a needy brother and decayed, I will set
down here, the words of Renowned Bishop Downam, The signification of a needy
brother is not to be restrained to them which are of base condition, but is to
be extended to all those who, being of good callings, are come behind hand, or
fallen into need, not having means of their own to supply their wants; I add, and
such are many which Usurers lend unto. The Bishop goes on and says, for if men
have means of their own, they ought not to borrow, which makes against those
vile wretches, which will borrow and lend the samd money again to profit, for 8.
in the 100. themselves paying but 6. which is oppression.

Number. 20.6. I hope the Chapter will let me note also the 3. expressions by him
noted Levit. 25.35, 36. concerning the poor and decayed brother, and the reason
thereunto annexed, as namely, this that he which is called our brother and poor,
is also called one fallen in decay, mark, a decayed brother not a beggar, which
must be relieved by Alms; but back handed, as a Gentleman, or Farmer, by
borrowing and other mishaps may come so to be, and yet have Land or Lease, as
those in Nehemiah, of whom next.

2. That of such a one we must not take any thing above the Principal, for so
the words run, of such a one thou shall not take more then thou did deliver,
as some Translations render the same, whereupon a great Author says, Hear whom
we are forbidden to bite, we are now forbidden to take any more than was
delivered unto him; for he that takes one Penny more than he delivered; wrings
and bites him as much as that Penny comes too.

3. And upon the 36. verse containing the reason, Note what may be the meaning
of it; that he may live with thee; as if he should say, for else how can he
live? Usury will kill him, if thou take Usury of him, therefore take no Usury
of thy decayed brother.

7. The several other laws which he speaks of in the same 68. page, are not at
all against me, nor for him, because the laws for the poor are not denied.

8. But as I said, let him prove by any place of Scripture in all the Bible
that because we must not lend to the poor upon Usury, therefore we may lend
upon Usury to the rich; let him show the place.

9. And here, because he takes his advantages by Authors which he cites, as
holding it lawful to lend upon Usury to the rich, because we may not to the
poor.

I will take advantages also, and match his Authors with Authors far exceeding
his for age and Renown.

As Namely 1. of the Old Holy Fathers and of our modern Writers.

1. Saint Austin by Humfr. in vita Jewelli. p. 22^
some called the wisest man in his time, is against all Usury without any
exception of Usury taken by the rich.

2. And Saint Downam. upon Psalm. ^^.
Basil, who was such a holy and self denying man, as that he gave all that he
had to the poor, and being a bitter enemy to Usurers, describes them thus:
Usurers go thus to work, to entice rich young heirs; they employ their own
Creatures to understand their domestic affairs, and necessities, They tell
them there is such a Barton to be sold, and an ample house, they extol its
revenews, persuade them to buy it; They answer that they have no money to buy
it; Thereupon they offer their own, saying, use it as your own; you will pay us
of the incomes of the same Barton; They pretend to other men's land to entice
the young Gentleman to spoil him of his own. Thus holy Antiquity has been
against lending upon Usury to the rich, and so are and have been our best new
writers, viz.

1. Famous Bishop Jewel, as Humphries has it, writes thus, what manner of
Logic is this, a man may not take Usury of the poor; ergo he may take Usury of
the rich, non sequitur: It follows not in art, let us see the like in other
examples, Solomon says, Prove. 22.22. Rob not the poor because he is poor,
(just as I say so says he) shall I thence conclude, therefore I may rob the
rich, because he is rich; so when Moses says lend not to the poor upon Usury;
does it therefore follow, Therefore I may lend upon Usury to the rich, nothing
less, it carries no Consequecne at all.

2. Bishop Tostatus in Deuteronomy,
Downam Deuter. 23.19. There is no mention made of the poor, but all Usury is
forbidden toward any, either Israelite or Proselite, or as Clemens Alexandrine
speaks, (...) and in this general sense including both rich and poor, the
learned among the Jews have so understood this law, where note that here is now
Antiquity and Authority.

3. Moss. If the law of lending to the poor without Usury, should Infer the
lawfullness of lending to the rich upon Usury; then it is evident that Gods
intendment in those laws for the benefit of the poor, should rather prove a
hurt and hindrance unto them. For who will lend to the poor for nothing, that
might lawfully lend to the rich for Usury?

4. Tostatus. * Not only to the poor, but also to the (...) thou shall lend
without Usury.

5. Powel Answers that Objection from Exo. 22.25. Lev. 28, 35. For not lending
to the poor upon Usury thus, ergo, we may lend to the rich, This is no good
Consequence. The law says Deuteronomy. 27.24. Cursed is he that smites his Neighbor
secretly, ergo it is lawful to smite him openly.

6. Capel, in his App. conc. Usury p. 292.
Capel. No opression is like to this to oppress a poor man; yet I hope it is a
sin to oppress the rich because he is rich.

Number. 22. In the next place let us go on with him to Nehemiah: and what were
those Usurers which Nehemiah so condemns for Usury, were they not such as lent
to them that had Lands, Vineyards etc.

Reply. Whether they were to be called poor or no, it seems they were for the
time Necessitous and much straightened, they would not else have morgaged their
lands to buy Corn and things necessary for a livelihood, nor have suffered
their Sons and Daughters to have been brought into bondage: Here I consult
Rivet. etc. and then to answer once for all, let it be considered, whether the
case were not extraordinary etc.

Whereunto I answer 1. That his reply is a poor come of, because, tho they were
necessitous yet were they landed, and landed even then, when they borrowed, for
their land they morgaged when they borrowed verse. 3. and then others come which
said, we have borrowed money for the Kings tribute, and that upon our lands and
vineyards; Mark 1. our lands and vineyards in the Plural, which may imply that
they had much land some of them, if not all, tho morgaged.

2. Our, because the propriety was theirs in the land tho morgaged.

3. We borrowed money upon our lands and vineyards verse. 4. Note, they which did
not morgage, borrowed and took up money upon their lands, binding them to the
Usurers, as many Necessitous landed men do now, and therefore where is the Chapter
now?

O says he, Rivet is of my side. Reply, but you cite him in Latin, and I do
not mean to translate him for you, so that he can do the vulgar no good; but if
he were Enlished, it would be the same, for he is not against me, who say, as
he says, even the very same that we should lend freely to the necessitons,
which those Usurers in Nehemiah would not do, but would have Use of such
Necessitons, landed men, which our Usurers also will have.

Powel p. 42. mihi p. 218.
Number. 23. But he has one shift more, that the Case in Nehemiah was
extraordinary, and how was it extraordinary? it is as if Ordinary Christians
should be pressed to praying seven times a day, because David said so often he
would pray, or to require of every one solemn prayers three times a day because
To which devotions he might have aded the great devotion of the Eunuchs, which
to go to Jerus;alem to worship, went 4000 miles as Doctor Cave computeth it in
his lives of the Fathers.
Daniel did so, all which makes against him, because neither the one nor the
other is such an extraordinary business, because there have been of late times
those, which have prayed six times a day usually, as blessed Bolton, Bagshaw in
his life.
witness his life; and as for Daniel, of him it is said that he prayed three
times, which shows that it was his ordinary practice.
as he did aforetime, Dan. 6, 10. So that by these very examples he makes the
Case in Nehemiah, but an ordinary thing, but me he aims at, in all those
extraordinory things, which he speaks of, to disgrace me, and make me a
spectacle to men and Angels, and a sign and wonder in Israel, and the Drunkards
song; for so he goes on with his extraordinary things and wonders, as to rise
at midnight, or before day because I desire to do so, as David did, and my
Savior did, who rose a great while before day and prayed Mark 1.35. me, me, he
has an aim unto, I say, as being the man of his indignation, because I cry down
his great Diana for so he goes on; some such extraordinary Zeal has prompted
this Author to exhort his readers in Prayer, to reach forth their arms as high
as they can, or to fall all along upon the ground in prayer in their own houses
and in their several rooms, where they are wont to poor out their prayers,
because he was wont to do so himself; these being gestures becoming none but
persons of a Giant like affections etc. And the like affection induced him to
will every ordinary Christian to resolve thus; fasting and humiliation days I
will keep by the same divine power to the Lord my God at least once a month,
and before the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and when there is great need, and
at other times also; but where to find an example for this (as for some before)
I know not, unless it be taken from the Pharisees that fasted twice a week etc.
Whereunto I answer. Lo, how Ismael-like he mocks me, and also Censures both me
and all the godly ones that fast so, pray so, resolve so, as others before them
have done. But I hope to come of withhonour after all his disgracing jeers and
cruel mockings, so called Hebr. 11.36.) cast after me, with the help of my God,
whom I serve, and do resolve to serve day and night.

And 1. the reaching forth of the hand or arm in challenging God to make his
promises good; I have from those worthy men Doctor Matt. 26.39. he fell upon
his face.
Abbot, and Mr Bolton, who in his Direct. for right comforting afflicted
Consciences, writes of one Sprot who did so, when he died. See the Which also
fell down flat before the Lord.
Margin for it.

Now let the Chapter go and challenge Mr. Bolton and Doctor Abbot why they would
write so.

2. For often praying and lying on the ground and upon the face, I have from
Abraham Genesis 17.3. from David, yea from His words at full are these George
Sprat Notary in Aimouth at his death said thus to Christ, Thou have left me
this comfort in thy word, Matt. 11.28. come unto me all etc. And Lord I am
heavy laden with my sins, I am ready to sink even into Hell without thou in
mercy put out thine hand and deliver me; and with that thrust out one of his
hands, and reaching it as high as he could, with a loud voice and strained,
cried I challenge thee by thy promise, which thou have made, that thou perform
it unto me. Thus this great Doctor reports this.
Christ himself who so fell upon the ground, and prayed: from all the Elders of
Israel who so fell upon their faces before the Lord, joining with Joshua in
that posture praying, as you may see Jos. verse 7. Alas O Lord God etc. And
from Moses Numb. 14 5. Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the
assembly of the Congregation of the Children of Israel: and from that good
people in S. F. p. 24,
in 2. Match. 10.4. and from a certain holy Minister whom his wife, which was an
excellent woman often has found by night lying on the ground, weeping and
wrestling with God, even in cold winter nights, (as says my Author) and from
that wonderful Minister P. S. in S. p. page 37. who by a Convert of his was
found by night lying in a garden upon the ground, and praying so earnestly as
that God sent an Host of Angels to him to bring him an answer from the Lord,
which made him cry out and say, O what am I, being Dust and Ashes, that the
holy Ministering Spirits should be sent to deliver a message and an answer to my
prayers. Let the Chapter now go, and jeer these holy Ministers, which care not for
him, being above him in endless glory* But let me tell my Readers, that I do
not For I know that our acceptable service consists not in external gestures,
and in serving God within, as that Author Potho Prumiculis well inculcates lib.
5. de dono Dei. Intus Deo offertur omne Deo acceptabile munus.
press all this upon any, tho I mention it, and tho I desire to imitate such
pious souls my self.

3. For resolving to fast monthly, or weekly, I have (besides Matt. 9.15. Then
shall they fast, and the 2. Cor. 11 27. In fasting often) this ground when it
pleased God to reveal his Son to me in Germany, and I returned home from a
Sermon after joy unspeakable, I resolved to fast twice a week, and therefore
dare not do otherwise, and as for others I force none, but only advise men so
to do, even as I do not force any to rise before day, tho I desire to do so;
And to say a little more of fasting, I can bring against this Champions cruel
mockings, and censurings, great In my twelfth Resolut. set down in my
Resolution Table,
Calvin, who did fast Ten years together, abstaining from meat till Even, and
spending his time in Preaching, Praying, reading, and writing, which is more
than once a week, and therefore by my great friend Doctor Rivet is so extold,
as that he brings in a great Jesuit for it, saying, that Calvin was Un Grand
jeuneur, in french, that is a great faster, and will the Chapter say that he was a
Pharisee too?

And besides, I know a godly Minister living not far from me, who fasts every
week, as well as my self, and is highly applauded and commended for it, and by
no body accounted a Pharisee; Unless he be so looked upon by him that accounts
me so: With whom I may join the Lord Harrington, who was a great and Renowned
Father too, fasting not only monthly before the Sacrament, but other days
likewise. Clark. in his life p. 60.61. So Picus Mirandula, who was such a great
Faster too, as his Nephew, and Boesardus in his Bibliotheca reports.
see the Margin also.

Well, this I will say now last of all, concerning all this that I meet with
such comfort, such delight, such joy, such experiences I add that if this man
had but read Ferbis, and Figurius, extolling a Cousin of Cardinal Baronius
fasting and praying three days together, when he was irresistably moved to
discover a Plot for which he had received Commission from the Pope to all
Popish Kings and Princes for the extirpating of the Reformed Religion, he would
not have jeered me for this Fasting so.
of Christ's love; such gyantlike affections, as he jeeringly calls them; as
that if the whole world were turned into a lump of gold, and I might have it,
if I would give over such practices, I would utterly reject it; and I trust in
God, that I shall never give them over, during my natural life, for all the
jeers and censures of any scoffing Ismaelite, because of that sweetness and joy
which I find and feel therein. So help me, O my God.

But I desire now to return to Nehemiah (from whence the Chapter has drawn me by
his cruel mockings) fetched and forcably drawn in by the hair, because he is not
willing to hear much of him.

And that which I have to say of h im is this;

1. That he is such an eye sore to Usurers, and their Defendents, as that they
have attempted to make him an Usurer too, falsely rendering the holy Scripture
thus, as Bishop Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15. p. 215.
Downam sets down their wrested Translation thus, So the Author of the English
Treatise reads ver. 10. For even I, my Brethren and my servants did lend them
upon Usury, money and corn. O dreadful, to prove the lawfulness of Usury by the
Example of Nehemiah, which makes me exclaim, Good Lord, what man will not do to
uphold cursed Usury, they will wrest thy holy Scripture for it; and falsely
translate it: well thus Usurers abuse Scripture it self, as in lenecro for
lanecro, so in this also to make Nehemiah, that bitter enemy to all Usury an
Usurer too, even as they will needs make me a Usurer too, who never lent one
pound or penny upon Usury in all my life time.

Numb. 26. And because the Chapter would fain set him against me, by saying that
they had mortgaged their Estates, and suffered their Sons and Daughters to be
brought into Bondage, etc. to make them poor, therefore I will now let him see,
that he is one of the best Friends that I have, because he furnishes me with so
many mighty arguments against Usurers and Usury, as I shall now set down.

For first tho he tells of Mortgages and bondage of the borrowers Sons and
Daughters, yet still he makes them owners of their Lands, as I have shown
already; and as for the bondage, we know, that men's Sons may be in bondage,
being taken by Turks and other Foes, when their Parents are landed men, but
want money to redeem them, and cannot be called poor.

2. He forbids Usury expressly and absolutely, without excepting the Rich,
saying, I pray you, let us leave off this Usury, ver. 10.

3. He says to the Nobles, rebuking them, you exact Usury every one of his
Brother, ver. 7. without naming rich or poor, but Brother only, which might not
be poor, and calling Use exacting, to denote the cruelty of it.

4. He shook his lap, and said, so God shake out every man from his house, and
from his labor, that performs not this promise, which was that they would do
as he had said, let us leave off this Usury, ver. 10. O dreadful, this methinks
should make Usurers tremble for fear, lest they be shaken out of all too.

5. It is not good that you do, he says further to them, to show that Usury is
an evil, and therefore unlawful.

6. He tells them, Ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God? intimating by
it, that Usurers do not fear God, ver. 9.

7. Adding, because of the reproach of the Heathen our enemies, he shows what,
a reproachful thing Usury is, because Gods enemies reproach such for it, as
profess themselves to be the people of God, and yet will be Usurers*

8. He calls Usury, (...) a Burden, because it is a Burden to the Borrower
indeed, and to defeat that Cavil, which Usurers use, pretending they are no
Usurers, because they are no biting Oppressors, and that the Usury in the 15
Psalm condemned and so in other Scriptures, is Nesheck, which has caused a
defendent of Usury to write a little Book, called called the execution of
Nesheck, that is biting, which, because the Spirit of the Lord foreknew
Nehemiah must call Usury (...), a burden, and not Nesheck biting, to cut of
that new distinction between biting and toothless Usury, and that after Moses,
and after David, and after Solomon, and that after Ezekiel, and the rest of the
more ancient penmen of the Scripture, which is very remarkable.

Number. 27.9. He commands the Usurers to make restitution, and they promise him
to do as he had said, and add we will require nothing of them, as thou have
said, ver. 12. Mark 1. we will require NOTHING. 2. as thou have said, which
shows that he would have them take nothing, because they say expressly, as thou
have said, see also, ver. 10. let us leave off this Usury, as if he should say
this taking of more then was lent, ^s this verse makes it evident; besides many
other Scriptures: So they agree then both, even Nehemiah and the Usurers upon
NOTHING to be usuriously given, or taken for money lent, as Vsura agros and
praedia onerat intolerabili exactione, Aretius.
if they had seen or heard the words of Christ, when he spoke them, Luke 6.35.
Lend, hoping for nothing from thence; which makes as much for me also as any
thing I have yet said of Nehemiah, only let me add by the by, that those
Usurers as bad as they were, yet are not so bad as Usurers are now, for they
made restitution, even a full restitution of lands, and moneys, and other
things, which they had taken, ver. 12. which our Christian Usurers will not do.

10. And here because I am fallen upon restitution, I will say a little more
about it, Viz That after restitution made of their Lands, Vineyards, Houses,
Money, Corn, Oil, they were landed men indeed, not only de jure, of Right, but
also de facto, really and indeed, and so consequently well to pass indeed,
which notwithstanding the said Usurers would require NOTHING of them, as
Nehemiah has said; O how plainly therefore Nehemiah is for me. O what a friend
he is to me among so many enemies, that are against me!

11. But yet lastly I will be so courteous to the Christian lender, as to grant
that it is all the reason in the world, that the Rich, which has well gotten by
his money, should be thankful, and let the honest lender have part of his honest
gain, and that he may lawfully take, when it comes freely and unexpectedly
offered and given to him, as I have formerly shown, so that at present I will
only add what a worthy Author says to the same effect. But it is otherwise if
any Man give or offer any thing not in respect of the loan, but to show himself
mindful of a good return received, for that which is so offered may be lawfully
taken without any usury committed, etc. So that there be no fraud used therein,
but the intent and Conscience of the Receiver be upright and free in that
behalf.

But let us go on with the Champion.

1. What Mr. Jelinger says is a fallacy.

Whereunto I answer, so both his replies avail nothing; Not that to the 1.
Fallacy, because what he says, that the Usury in Scripture is forbidden only
with respect to the poor, is false, as it has been shown.

So that concerning the Rich he lacks proof;

And so is his reply to the fallaey of Consequence, for as much as it has been
by me sufficiently proved, that all Usury properly so called is a moral evil,
and against the Law of As Tostatus asserts it in Deuteronomy. 23. p. 3 18.
Nature, and whereas be says, that I do prudently leave out the reason why the
poor should not be robbed, because he is poor; I answer, that I left out,
because I saw there was no reason why I should enlarge my self upon it, as a
thing making against me, when it does not, for I hold with old Mr. Who also
holds with me in Deuteronomy, 23.19.
Diodate, whom he quotes upon it, only this I add, that as he says of Robbery,
that, as it is forbidden to all, so is Usury, as it has been proved out of
Deuteronomy. 23.19. where that which is moral in that Law, runs thus, Thou shall not
lend to thy Brother (mark Brother, whether he be rich or poor) upon usury.

And what he quotes out of Rivet avails him nothing neither, because Rivet
takes this for an absolute verity, that the things mentioned by the English
Bishops, and by him opposed are in themselves evil, (which is not denied) but
as for Usury that is not so, when that which he names last, Usury I mean, is as
much in it self evil as the former, as it has been convincingly demonstrated:
The whole sentence taken out of Rivet I shall not write, because it is set down
in Latin, and I do not owe the Chapter so much service as to translate it.

He tells us from Deuteronomy. 23.19. That the Stranger is excepted and not the Rich,
whereas, if God would have granted it lawful to lend to the Rich, there had
been a fit place to be named as well as the Stranger: His reply is, What shall I
call it but sauciness, etc. Answer, Not such sauciness as that of his Brethren,
which wrest the Scriptures, and put lenecro for lanecro in this same place now
in hand, Deuteronomy. 23.19. and none for nothing in Christ's own saying lend looking
for nothing from thence, Luke 6.35. which is sauciness indeed, yea, the highest
injury offered to Christ: But in my Saying, how can there be any sauciness or
injury, when God might have so easily done it, but would not, because there was
no need, no more than there was for Christ to say lend without Usury, when he
spoke plainly saying, lend hoping for nothing.

Numb. 29.2. Usurers reply, Diverse Presbyterian Ministers allow of use taken
from the rich.

1. Answer, I have named several before, and diverse others might be named,
Rivet names several, Zanchy says their number is almost infinite. Windeline
affirms, it is held by most modern Divines, etc. even by B. Hall, the Pillar
he leans on, fails him, and so forth: Whereunto I answer.

1. That I also have named several before; and more I will name now to
^allance, yea, to outballance his; which methinks speaks either too little, or
too fast. Too little, as naming but a few, or not relating what they say, or
speak too fast; as when one of them says their number is almost infinite: for
which almost I will not blame him, because I know what else I should have said;
and so when Windeline affirms it; as held by most modern Divines, which I much
wonder at, if he mean Usury properly so called; for my friends will tell him,
and prove the contrary, as for example, Dr. Fenton, p. 259. Whom Filburn by his
catches at some of his sayings is not able to confute, as the learned Reader
may easily see it.
Dr. Fenton, that famous London Minister, who writes thus of Usury.

A practice, which has no approbation of God in Scripture, nor any Church that
is, or ever was upon the face of the Earth.

And Mr. Gabriel Powel p, 52.
Gabriel Powel, No Writer, that either I could see or hear of, ever allowed of
Usury.

So Keckerman, All the Greek and Latin Fathers, and almost all our Reformed
Divines hold Usury to be a Sin.

And to answer Windelines brags especially, viz. It is held by Lawyers and
moral Philosophers, that learned Oxford Scholar Powel says thus, Philosophers
have condemned it, Poets have exclaimed against it, the Civil Law forbids
lending upon Usury, by the Where the Words of the famous Jer. Tailor in his
Ductor Dub 1. 196. is remembered, The Church forbids Usury, and in this Case the
Canon Laws are to be preferred.
Canon Law also it is forbidden.

Now let the Reader choose, which he will believe an English Scholar which is
his Country man, or this Stranger.

So the renowned Bishop Downam, which says this of our English Divines, in
answer to the Champion about Episcopal Divines. The godly learned Divines of
this Age, and namely of this our Church, do for the most part inveigh against
Usury; th^se few among us, that seem to defend Usury, do in substance differ
little from the rest, erring especially in this, that under the odious name of
Usury, they defend and maintain a lawful contract of partnership, thus he. I
quote him again, being urged to it by this man's repetitions.

Numb. 30. I add Alciates, who speaking of Usuries Opposites has this
expression, Totus Mundus militat pro nobis: The whole world militates and wars
for us; meaning those that are against Usury, as well he might say so; for
besides the holy Scriptures, all the ancient Fathers have abhorred and written
against it, says the foresaid Gabriel Powel, p. 52. With whom join R. Capel,
p. 202. The best and best learned of our Prelatical, and anti-Prelatical
Divines have taken good and great pains, to prove Usury to be a thing utterly
unlawful.
Powel, and the ancient Councils are against it, Schoolmen men and Casuists
against it, and modern Divines against it; and the earned Bishops of England
against it; as the Champion himself in his Pamphlet confesses it. As for
Geneva and the Helvetians, they are of Calvin's mind, who was so wary in his
opinion, as that he would not determine any thing absolutely concerning it; but
only cautioned it, and so doing made it partnership; so that his boasting of
Geneva (which I know better than he) out of B. Andrews my friend, will do him
no good. As for the Germans my Country men, they have a Which I will not have
understood of all but many: having already granted it, that some in simplicity
follow Absalom, and took a kind of Usury, which they should not, out of
ignorance.
Commissary, which takes up money, and deals with it at Franckfort Marts, and
gives part of the gain, which is gained by it, but as for Usery properly so
called, none dares to defend it, but a great many of their Divines have written
and are against it, whom I have formerly named, as namely Doctor Luther,
Melancthon, Brentius, Musculus, Philip Caesar, Dr. Didericus, Hemingius,
Mordesius, Mollerus, Aretius of Helvetia, Vniversitas Wittenbergensis,
Hottomannus, Doctor Luder, Dr. Pareus, Dr. Vulteius, Vrsin, the Preachers of
Mansfield, Albertus Blankenberg. Conradus Paulus Brunswicensis, Justus Jonas,
Wellerus, Pomerianus, of all which some are Lutherans, others Calvinists The
Gallick Ministers in a French Treatise against Dancing, p. 131. So in their
Annotations upon Mat. 25.27.
.

As for Abulensis in Levit. 25. (...) Deuteronomy. 23.19.
Abulensis, who has written more Volumes upon the Bible than any man, him my
Adversary only names, but I do own him as one of my chief Friends; for he
writes against all Usury: All modes of Usury are unlawful. And Usury is to be
understood according to all its modes, when namely any thing determinated is
taken above the Principal p. 516.

And in Deuteronomy. 23.19. he says, p. 317. It was permitted unto the Jews to lend
upon Usury for the hardness of their hearts, as Bills of Divorce, because if
they might have lent upon Usury, they might either not have lent at all, or
stolen: This makes for me. And as for the Heathens, by him and his friends
clamed to be for them: I do deny it, because I am sure that the chief ones
among them are for me, As Cicero, Plautus, Plutarch, Columella, Aristotle,
Plato, Lucanus, Ausonius, Cato, Proculus, Vlpian, etc. For the proof of my
assertion, I will set down some of their assertions: Cicero de Offic. l. 1.
Cicero says, such things are to be blemished which are odious, as namely that
of Usurers, and Collumella de re ^^st. l. 1.
Columella says, that Usury is odious even unto them which it seems to help.
And Plautus,
Plautus says, There is no worse kind of men this day to deal with, than the
Usurers. Hugo Grotius, I do not value at all, because of his unsoundness; that
he tells of Schoolmen to be for usury I wonder at; because my Cousin Spanheimus
himself takes it for granted they are Anti-usurarians.

What he says of all the men, by him supposed to be for usury, that I deem
them to be damned, he wrongs me in that; for I take them, that are truly godly
among them, to be such as will be truly glorious Saints in heaven, and such as
here are far enough from that cursed usury, which is practis^d among us, as
allowing no other usury, but that which is recompensatious, and liberal, and by
godly cautions become another kind of thing, viz Partnership. What he faintly
speaks of my Country men the Dutch, is not so, for what says Aretius, One
shall often hear these words come from cordial men (in Helvetia, which is in
Germany, where he lived) that those usurary Instruments are one time to be
corrected as the Popes Bulls: (which shows how weary the German Divines are
of usury) nor would friends be wanting, if but an apt Adis or Lycurgus, or Cato
did appear once.

Number. 31. But my work is not fully done, for I cannot but find fault with the
quoting of his Authors, because he only mentions men but not their words; and
therefore I will now name some of our best Divines, and recite their very words
at large, that the World may see how false it is, what some of his men say;
that most modern Divines are for usury; and the English too.

And I will begin with Perkins, who says (as I and my friends do defining
usury) Usury is a gain by covenant above the principal, only for loan and
recompense of the lending of it.

2. I will name Adams, who says, The Usurer is a man made out in wax, his
Pater Noster is a Pawn, his Cree^ is the Condition of his Obligation, his
Religion is all Religion, a binding of others, and a binding himself to the
Devil: Infinite colors, mitigations, evasion: are inve^ted to countenance on
Earth, Heaven exploded usury; God shall then frustrate all, when he shall pour
out wrath his upon the naked Conscience.

3. Aret. de usgra.
Rogers of Weatherfield, That common dealing for ten in the hundred, or nine,
or eight, or any such like. Note ANY, without M^^estella.
Perkin: upon 2. Co^.
Adams in his Works, p. 55.
Rogers of Weather ^ld.
consideration of the Commonwealth is utterly to be condemned, which if well
considered, will soon answer all conscionable men about the question of Usury
and Oppression, and he adds that there is no use of them in the Church, and
the Christian Commonwealth.

4. Mr. Dod (and O what a man is that man, even one of a thousand) Usury is not
a Calling appointed by God, but a humane invention devised by Worldly men to
gain filthy lucre to themselves, whereby they live of the sweat of other men's
brows.

5. Mr. Mr. Wheatly in his Caveat to the Covetous. p. 71.
Wheatly, Usury is a notorious injustice, where a man makes a gain of lending,
and binds the Party borrowing without consideration of his gain or loss to pay
the principal with advantage. And again he says, Christians must serve one
another in love and not serve themselves in self love, both which principles
are directly contrary the trade of the Usurer, for he makes sure to himself to
have a part only and infallibly in the profit, and therefore serves himself
only, and not at all his brother, and therefore the Usurer is set among those,
that cannot dwell in the Mountain of God: (Just as I say in my Doctrine, so
says he) which he should not be, were he not unjust.

6. Dr. Dr. Sutton in his Lectures.
Sutton, There is no Sin be it never so prodigious and foul, but his Master has
a plea for it, Usury has; Deuteronomy. 23.19. unto a Stranger thou may lend: Mark
this thou Usurer, who defendest thy filthy Usury by this.

And yet further he says, Those that live by Usury let them remember this, my
heart trembles to think what calling these men have, my Soul mourns how they
glorify God in them: O Usurer, do thou tremble and mourn too, as this great
Doctor does.

7. Mr. Sanderson upon 1 Cor. 7.24.
Sanderson, that great Oxford Scholar says, The Texts of Scripture are so
express, and the grounds of reason so strong against all Usury, that when I
weigh these on the one side, and on the other side how nothing all that is,
which I yet saw, or heard, [and he could not but have read much, being a
Batchelour in Divinity in Oxford] alleged to the contrary, I cannot find
charity enough to absolve ANY kind of Usury from being a Sin: And of the Usurer
he tells how bitterly he is inveighed against by Heathens, how universally
hated by all men.

8. That great and famous Archbishop Usher's opinion, and condemnation of
Usury, is to be seen in the front of this Book.

And I have in readiness other learned Men, and even a Cloud of British Divines
more, but I shall forbear to name them now for brevities sake, and only
persuade all true English hearts to hearken to those their own holy Countrymen,
which they have either heard or read, or can read in their own English Tongue,
rather then look after, and unto such others as are cited to them in the Latin
Tongue, which the Learned only understand, considering that this Usury matter
concerns the Salvation of their Souls, which as that foresaid holy man Usher
tells them should not be adventured upon wild Discourses, and subtle
Distinctions, as being more worth than all the World.

9. Mr. Old Mr. Vdal in his Obed. to the Gospel, 2. Sermon.
Vdal says. That it is as clear in the Word, that usury is a Sin, as that
Christ came into the World to save Sinners.

Dr. Azoar.
Fenton, p. 154. An absolute contract for money lent for 10. 9. 8. or 6. in the
hundred, N.B. 6. in the 100. is without warrant or authority, even among those
Divines, who upon sifting and examining this point, have concluded most
favorably for the Usurer: And this he says also, Ah poor Soul whether will thou turn thy self for succor, when thy best friends forsake thee? How do
thou think to die a Christian, if thou live an Usurer. Here consider, Dear
Reader, what those few inconsiderable Ministers are in our Country, being
compared with such holy and learned Doctors.

Numb. 32. But I have a great mind to return again to that famous saying of
Alciates, That the whole World militates for us, and war against bloody usury,
as well he might, if we farther consider what a world of men and countries
there are against the same hateful usury; as namely those under the Mohammedan
Empire, which the Great Turk says is half the World, because Mahomets Law is
against usury in his Alcoran, as Azoara, the Magdeburg. Cent. 7.
Centuries, and Bishop Downam upon Psalm. 15.
Downam assert it, his words are Even Mahomet and his Alcoran has forbidden ALL
VSVRY. O wonderful the very cruel Turks abhor usury, all usury, and shall
Christians redeemed with Christ's precious blood practice it?

Again, The Papists also condemn usury, all usury, insomuch as that the Pope of
Rome does every month excommunicate all Usurers, as one also of our Ministers,
Mr. Mr. Turner against Usury.
Turner affirms it: And O what a World of Countries there are under Popish
Kings and Princes? where let it be thought upon too, what great Scholars the
Casuists and Schoolmen are, which stave most learnedly and profoundly written
against deservedly abominated usury, though in other things are out, are so as
that yet they could not be carried away with this foul error of usuries
lawfulness, but rather join with those, which war with their pens and tongues
against that Enemy of Mankind, Usury, as it is justly called; fighting against
it also as well as they. See Lorinus upon Psalm. 15. and shall Protestants fight
for it? O for shame, for shame, let it be no longer reported, as the aforesaid
Jesuit Lorinus relates it of Calvinists and Reformed Writers, that they write
and are for unlawful Usury.

What the Champion says of Bishop Andrew my friend too, I do not regard at
all; for I know what a Book he has written. Quod Vsura licita est illicita,
that even lawful usury (so counted by some) is unlawful.

12. But I have not yet done with Alciates, who says that all the World fights
for us, that fight against that sin which is an abhorring to all flesh; for
what says Jeremy 15.16. (that I may end with Gods word) I have neither lent
upon usury, nor men have lent to me on usury, yet every one of them does curse
me. Mark, EVERY ONE, and may not I well say that, well might Alciates say, that
all the World fights for us against the Usurer, seeing every one hates an
Usurer: O sad man that every one hates and curses thee: Should not this, if
there were nothing else against thee, make thee leave that hateful dreadful
Sin? Now let every body that reads all this, consider who has most on his side;
whether the Champion and his few Authors, or Alciates my friend. As for me I
stand upon this most; that I have God and his holy Prophets on my side, whereas
he and they have not one, but only a little handful risen of late since Carolus
Molnaeus the Lawyer, their first Founder, whose Followers are not for them
neither, as they think; having and proposing such cautions and limitations, as
scarce any Usurer by report, does observe, so as that my cousin Spanhemius, on
whom the Champion and other Defendents of usury do most quote has wisely left
them to their ingenious confession formerly mentioned.

Now in what case is the poor Champion then here. Readers, what think ye? Does
he not stand like butter in the Sun? How does he look think you in this s^d
defeat, whereby his men in whom he trusted, and his own arms too are taken away
from him, being over run and over-matched by the holy Prophets first, and a
multitude of men besides, holy Fathers I mean, and modern Authors, yea Turks,
and Papists too, falling upon him, and his poor, by him defended Usurers. O
sad, I say once more, though he mislikes it, for so he discourses himself (he
cannot choose poor man) saving of his men that are for regulated usury, What
shall we think is become of all these men? Damned doubtless for their usury, O
sad! I answer, No, no, I cannot think so; for they most of them, I hope, are
safe, and they and we that are against all usury shall meet in glory, because
of their godly cautions, which makes that usury, which is supposed to be but
partnership, or some such like harmless Contract.

Numb. 33. As for the burden, which every man shall bear at that great day,
when he thinks mine will be the greater for my uncharitable censure of my
professing brethren.

To that I answer, I need not fear it because I do not condemn my professing
Brethren, as appears by my precedeing words, but let him look to it, that
looks and is for (...) Usury I mean so called, because it is a Burden, which
sinks the Usurer into hell, for he must die, Ezech. 12, 13. and be buried too
in that bottomless pit, as I shall ostend and show hereafter, God vvilling in
my next printing.

Numb. 34. The Champion goes yet further and says, I vvonder at his confident
expressions, etc. Time was when he was far from such confidence, nay I
wondered says he how others could sing so merrily in their Congregations
beyond the Seas, Luthers hymns, which are so full of considential expressions,
when I durst not, nor could sing so with them, unless I would lie?

Whereunto I answer,

I bless God, that it was so with me then; for then God did prepare and fit
my troubled Soul for ensuing joys, which were after such troubles of mind so
great and glorious, as that I went home one day from a good Sermon preached in
the country, where Luthers confidential Hymns were sung, into the City where
then I resided, in a triumph.

The Champion goes on (but very confusedly) and says, seeing he sends us so
often to the Council of Nice, I vvish he would read and weigh, what the
learned Author of the naked Truth has written of Councils, and of this in
especial, etc.

Whereunto I answer, I have read the Author of the Naked Truth, and vvish he
had written more discrectly; for not to speak of other things, he goes to
bring preaching in contempt, by his going to work; advising such to preach as
are not called to it: If he had advised them to instruct those which are
committed to their charge, by Catechizing, etc. I, and many others should have
liked it better. But,

2. I wish the Champion had read Beza, a better man than his Author, who says,
that the Sun never beheld a more divine meeting since the Apostles time, than
the Council of Nice.

3. I wish he had read Bolton, p. 4.
Bolton concerning it, for he would have told him that those 318 Fathers which
met in that Council, were the learnedest and greatest Divines in the whole
Christian World. And I add, that there were those in it, who had lost their
eyes for Christ, whose holes the great Constantine kissed, and this Novice will
go to confute this grave, learned, and holy Council: O Sawciness! Sawciness
most base and abominable.

4. Methinks he should have learned more wit and modesty of pious Calvin in his
Institutions.
Calvin, which he takes to be his Tutor, and speaks after another better rate
of this famous Council, as namely thus. I do embrace those Ancient Councils,
the Nicene, the Constantinopolitan, the Ephesian, the Chalcedonian: Mark how he
embraced, not slighted, this sacred Synod.

5. When I first saw this man's boldness and sawciness in this thing, I wondered;
but when I considered how sometimes a young contemptible Scold, will scold, if
she be a little provoked, with one of the best and antientest women in a Town
or City; I ceased wondering: Let the Reader apply it. This old Council is
against Usury, and therefore this young Champion picks a quarrel against it,
and scolds with it, God forgive him. As for me, I bless God for so holy and
glorious an Assembly, so happily met after so long and sad a time of
persecution which preceded it, and for its condemning of Usury.

Mr. Jeling.
Reply, We must not make more sins than God makes. I confess it, says he, but
does God make lending to the Rich no sin? where is that place, show it if you
can?

Reply, That is not needful, let him show some proof against it, etc. I answer,
1. In so great a matter which concerns the Souls salvation, it is needful. 2. I
will make a Syllogism of the Chapter Reply thus.

Those things which God has not forbidden, we may safely do without hurt of
Conscience.

To take Usury of Rich Men God has not forbidden.

Therefore of them lawfully without hurt of Conscience, we may exact Usury for
our lending.

My Answer is, I deny the Minor; for it is plainly said, Luke 6.35. Lend,
looking for nothing thereby. If they be rich men they have no need to borrow,
and yet we ought to show our charity to all if need require, but if rich men
out of covetousness, and to maintain pride and filthy prodigality, will borrow,
and others lend to them upon usury, both of them offend; of which thing
Pomerianus in suo comment. in Deuteronomy.
Pomerianus speaks thus. The Borrower asks for his filthy pleasure, and the
Lender lends for unlawful lucre, this lending is not friendship but enmity, far
differing from honest contracts, because Usury is contrary to Nature; for it
takes away equality, and brings one party to extreme beggary, etc.

Dr. Tailor in his progress of Saints, with whom I will join the famous Richard
Capel of Usury, p. 292. show a place that it was granted to put money to a rich
Jew or to a rich Christian, else all they say is as much as nothing. See also
what follows, p. 293. and Greenham p. 41. To the Poor give freely, they use to
say, of the Rich take usury, the Lord was never the Author of this distinction.
Dr. Tailor goes this way to work to answer this matter about the rich, Some
Divines have undertaken the defense to lend to the Rich, which he answers thus.
1. The Moral Law forbids all Usury. 2. Never any Divine that ever I could see
or hear of, ever allowed Usury, but with such cautions as alter the case of
Usury, and makes it indeed no Usury at all; just as I said before, what the
Chapter says concerning civil Contracts, needs proving and clearing.

Numb. 35. I have been somewhat long about this matter concerning the Rich, and
Authors, because it is a chief thing, but hereafter I must and shall be briefer.

M. J. Obj. 5. I show charity to my Neighbor, by my Loan he preserves his
Estate, etc. I answer,

1. Charity is kind, but Usury is cruel. Reply, Dictum sed non probatum. The
thing is plain and undeniable, being every days experience, etc. And must we
not believe what our eyes see, and ears are so often witnesses unto? This hold
he cannot keep, therefore he adds,

2. Charity should be free in lending, Luke 6.35. Reply, So Charity should be
free in giving too, where it is most conspicuous, etc. both require due Objects.

To both I answer thus.

1. To the first: That we have eyes too, to see how many Families are ruined by
Usury and quite undone; and I do appeal for: it to the Country, whether they
have not seen diverse of their Neighbors put from house and home by and for
Usury, and so we have heard the cry of those which have been quite spoiled by
Usury: I for my part can truly say it, with these ears of mine I have heard it,
etc. which has caused famous Dr. Wilkinson to cry out in his debt book; of many
thousands it has been the ruin in our Nation.

2. To the Second I answer: I shall easily grant, and have granted, that
Charity should be free in GIVING, to use his own phrase, that is, we should
freely bestow a gratuity upon the courteous lender, if we be gainers.

Mr. Jel.
Obj. 6. I will never be persuaded that God will damn that man who does as he
would be done to, it being Christ's command, Mat. 7.12.

I would be willing to pay, etc.

Ans. 1: Nor will I be persuaded that the Usurer would be willing by an
absolute free will.

Reply. I believe so too, if any would so far befriend him as to lend him
freely to purchase a bargain. Whereunto I Reply, 1. That to the Q. which he
proposes here, of what Right Reason dictates; as namely, that it is reasonable
for me that have borrowed an hundred pounds to enlarge the Estate which I
already have, or to drive a Trade to get gain, that he should have a due
proportion of the gains, etc.

I answer, That I say so too as he, that it is reasonable the Lender should
have a proportionable gratuity, or that the Borrower should part Stakes with
the Lender, and let him be a partner of his new Purchase or Profit, gotten by
Negotiation. For I am all for Partnership, but not for forbidden Usury, so that
my advice still is, that if a Rich Man will needs purchase more means, he agree
with the Lender to let him have his proportionable part in the purchase, for
there is no reason for it that he should have all the profit of his money, and
the Lender none: Let them divide, and so let neither the Lender in this
purchase offend God by Usury, nor the Borrower by Ingratitude, but rather
forbear to purchase.

Number. 36.
He adds, Would he be willing with an absolute and free will to pay interest,
if he were in many a borrowers case?

Reply, I think so too, but this will not do his work, etc. Whereto I answer,
that this has been answered already; his second Answer takes that for granted
which is still in question, Dr. Wilkinson in his Debt Book.
and therefore I pass on and shall look into the Rule laid down by our Lord
Christ, of doing as we would be done too, which is the Rule of all civil
Trading and Commerce: and here he brings in B. Tailor and Zanchy in Latin, and
Rivet in Latin, and B. Hall, and Mr. Burton, and Cicero, and Grotius and Rivet
again, and all the three last in Latin.

To all which I answer thus.

1. That I have examined all that he and his Authors say, and find that what
they say does not cross me, for they make it unreasonable that another should
get by me, and I loose by him, but he should have part of my gain, and I do
yield to it, though I cannot yield to Usury, because God will not yield to it,
as men may see, Nehem. 5.10. Luke 6 35.

2. That I cannot mislike my old friend Rivet especially, whose expressions are
very considerable, as namely, That he is for a Recompensation, which they call
Recompensatory Usury, and hold lawful, and is for a participation twice which
makes way for Partnership, which I do exceedingly approve of, and am glad for,
but not a word he has for VSVRY. And I insist upon him the rather, because the
Chapter says, that he answers more fully than the rest; granting that they do not
answer fully though they are many: His Latin I do not translate because I am
not bound to it.

3. I answer, that the Assemblies words do not hurt me neither, for they are
very harmless, and I can safely say the same, that those commands require the
lawful procuring and furthering of the wealth and outward estate of our selves
and theirs, and besides the Assembly does so much befriend me, as that it
defines Usury just as I and my Friends do, and what can I defire more?

Number. 38.
After all this the Chapter comes in very confusedly with some remarks, formerly by
him omitted; which therefore I shall slight as he me.

1. Reply, That Usury is not named by Christ, Luke 6.35. nor any where in the
New Testament, etc.

M. J.
1. Answer, Nor is Sodomy committed with a Beast.

Reply, The Reason is not the same, this Sin being of rarer practice, etc.

Whereunto I answer, Though it be never so rarely practiced, yet might it have
been named as well as those sins, Romans 1.26, 27. committed by men with men, by
women with women, which also are to be abborred, without any ones crying out
fie, fie, upon Paul, who names them.

2. But if this Sodomy be such an abhorred sin, as that I should not have named
it, then I hope I may instance in diverse others which are not so: as namely,
Biting Usury by them so called, Polygamy, High Treason, nor the profanation of
the Christian Sabbath, which Usurers Defendants and Usurers are very much
guilty of in Holland and High Germany, where let me allege what Dr. Pie says,
which has never yet been confuted, as Who also was never yet confited, says,
R. Capel. p. 288.
Bolton tells us the same, that many other breaches also of the Moral Law are
not forbidden in the New Testamenr, though they be in the Old; as for example,
all degrees of Incest save one, Removing of our Neighbors Landmark, and the
profanation of the Sabbath.

2. Answer, Other famous Writers shall resolve them*

Reply, I have said enough to take off this before.

A. And so have I, and so Mr. Trap, and therefore I will let it go, and say no
more but this: That whereas Reply is made to what I said, Usury was suppressed
by the twelve Tables, and by Tiberius Caius, and Vespasian, etc. that my reason
is but weak, I hope I shall make it strong enough by and by. And

1. Bishop Hall my friend (as the Champion himself calls him) who makes it
strong enough, for he reports it from approved Authors.

2. By Alexander of Alexandria, who goes to the very time, when Tiberius did
suppress Usury, viz. in the latter part of his Reign, and that Usury was so
effectually suppressed by him, as that it is supposed that it was not practiced
in Judaea.

3. By Bishop Downam, to make up a threefold cord which is not easily bro^en.

4. I shall make my Reason and all the rest that goes with it, strong enough by
other Emperors also; as Leo, who utterly suppressed it, as Poole upon Luke 6.
Mr. Poole and others affirm it, and by Justinian, as the corpus juris makes it
good, and Charles the Fifth at Augusta in Germany.

5. I add, And whereas the Chapter makes a matter of it, that I make such a halt
between Claudius and Vespasian, I answer, that it might perk up again as often
as it did, and so be put down from time to time.

6. About Seneca I have this to say, that I was misled by one, who made him so
great an Usurer, from which Aspersion I have since freed him.

N. 35. But the Champion Replies here, did the twelve Tables, Tables, or these
Emperors reach Judea, that it was needless there to preach against it. etc. and
does he not consider that Christ in his Gospel delivered rules not only for the
present, but also for after times of his Church?

Whereunto I answer, That doubtless the twelve Tables, and Emperors Edicts
reached Judea also, yea all the conquered World, for Luke 2.1. It is said, that
there went out a Decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the World should be
taxed; and did not Pilate in the days of Tiberius, govern in Judea by the
Roman Law, so as that Christ was judged and condemned by it; and Paul examined
and committed by it afterward; thus in general: And of Usury in particular, it
is said by Authors, as it was said before, that usury was not practiced in
Judea, as it must needs be so, for to whom should they lend? to their Brethren
the Jews they durst not, because of Deuteronomy. 23.19. To the Romans they durst not,
because of Tiberius, who had interdicted it.

As for after times Christ's law in Luke 6.35. was and is sufficient to suppress
usury at any time, but to be more plain, is not the Scripture plain against
usury, both in the Old Testament and also in the New, the Usurers deny it; yet
can we sufficiently prove it; partly by the forequoted place, Luke 6.35. lend
hoping for nothing from thence, and partly from other Scriptures; namely by a
necessary consequence, as thus, we must not be covetous, Luke 12, 15. and
therefore not lend upon usury, for that by most Expositors upon Psul. 15.5. is
counted covetousness. See Mollerus, upon Psalm. 15. Again we are forbidden to
steal, Matthew. 19.18. and usury is accounted theft by most Authors, and Writers,
and we must not wrong one another in bargaining, 1 These. 4, 5, 6. and usury is
wronging, because it is biting, so that by a consequence it follows, that we
must not be Usurers.

And to be more plain yet, Edm. Binny,
Some translate that place in 1 Cor. 5.11. expressly and even by name, Usurers,
and not Extortioners, which may be made yet farther good by Psalm. 109.11. Where
the Extorti^ner by The English excepted.
most Translations is rendered Usurer, let the Usurer take his substance. Now if
these Both Translations I mean. Psalm. 109.11. and 1 Cor. 6.10.
Translations be in the right, in what case is the poor Usurer then? being
named by his very name Usurer in the very new Testament, as I can show it, and
in Psalm. 109.11. also. So that the Usurer is thereby caught and condemned,
which way soever.

Numb. 40.2. What needs so much ado about the prohibiting of Usury by Name in
the New Testament, seeing that many other great and damnable sins forbidden in
the Old Testament, are omitted also, and not named in the New, viz. besides the
Christian Sabbath, Oppression condemned, Ezekiel. 18.12. Bribery, Job 15.34. Esa.
33.15. Going after W^zards, Lev. 20.6. cursing Father or Mother, ver. 9. a man's
lying with his Sister, his Fathers Daughter or his Mothers, v. 17: with his
Mothers Sister or his Fathers, v. 19. or with his Uncles Wife, v. 20. So
marrying with the Fathers Wife, Lev. 18.10. thy Sons Daughter or Daughters
Daughter, v. 10. thy Fathers Sister, v. 12. thy Daughter in Law, v. 15. all
which are not named in the New Testament, as also the worst kind of Usury,
called griping Usury by the Patrons of Usury, and vexing the Stranger, Exodus
22.21. and afflicting any Widow or Fatherless Child, v. 22: and lending to the
poor upon Usury, v: 25. So that if any, hereafter shall presume to lend upon
Usury, saying that he may because it is not by name forbidden by Christ and his
Apostles; it will be as if one should plead that a man may venture upon any of
the horrid Incests even now named, and lie with his Fathers Wife, etc: and
curse his Father, and oppress his Brother, and afflict Widows and the
Fatherless, because such horrible sins are not forbidden in the New Testament.

But I have not yet done with this great thing, but I shall say yet farther,
that whereas he says, that what I say is weak, I answer him thus: Not so weak
as what he says, in that

1. He says forth and back, blaming me for saying, that the all-wise God,
foreseeing that men would abuse the mentioning of the poor in the Law of Usury,
in Deuteronomy. 23: 19. left out the poor, and yet saying the like here, and will he
not allow the same all-wise God the like foresight here, as to foresee, that
Usury if it were suppressed for the present, would perk up again, and therefore
there was need of severe rebukes in the Gospel, which is easily answered thus.
That by the places even now named, it is by necessary consequence, and even by
name, as some render the Apostles words, prohibited and condemned, and that the
like may be said of Poligamy, which some even of late and in print, would have
perk up again, and so of the profanation of the Sabbath, which though it was
suppressed in Nehemiah's time, yet in our time perks up again as much as ever,
especially in these Countries where Usurers swarm, and the defendants of Usury
do wink at it, as in some part of the Netherlands, where it was formerly
suppressed, and in the Palatinate, where by Dr. Fenton.
Vrsin and Bishop Downam:
Pareus it was written down.

I add, Nor is my saying so weak, as many are which, one of Usuries great
friends has in a Manuscript of his, since published in part by one of Usuries
enemies, For Paraeus published Vrsin's Books, wherein he wrote against Usury,
and so approved ^his writing against it, as Clerk asserts it.
who of thirty two Reasons of his for Usury, could find but seven that looked
like a Reason, and were also, being as weak as water, overcome by and by, and
confuted.

Number. 41. But the Chapter thinks that the case is not the same now, since regulated
Usury came in; and adds, that some wiser Emperors coming after, did not
absolutely forbid, but limit Usury, instancing in Alexander, Severus, and
Antonius Pius, which practiced it as I taught him. Whereunto,

I answer thus:

1. That it it true, the case is altered from taking no Usury to take fix in
the hundred, which they call regulated Usury, but should rather call stinted.

2. That the said Emperors seeing a necessity of tolerating some Usury to help
many which could borrow no money, because men would not lend freely, being hard
hearted, would lend themselves money at such an easy rate as theirs was.

Number. 42. Mr. Jel. Obj. 7. The Laws of Men and even Chris^ians, the Civil Law,
the Canon Law and Statute Law do all allow of Usury; and do you think they
would if all Usurers should be damned as you say?

His first Answer denies the assertion, viz. that those Laws allow of Usury,
they do but tolerate, permit, and restrain it, for some civil good to avoid
greater evils.

Reply, Greater evils! what greater than the damnation of so many millions of
Souls? Neither can I be persuaded, etc.

For answer whereunto, I say,

1. That he confounds temporal evils with eternal, not meant.

2. That what great evils soever the damnation of many millions of Souls be,
yet so it is, that Usurers let them be never so many, must die, that is, be
damned, by virtue of Ezekiel: 18.12, 13. as Divines expound that place: I will
name but one or two, and 1: Dr. S. p. 7.
Dr. Sanders upon that place, he shall not live, that is, he shall not enjoy
heaven: And Bishop Downam:
Bishop Downam from that place speaks to the Usurer thus. Thou Usurer take
increase, and therefore thou shall, if thou continuest in this sin, DIE
ETERNALLY.

3. As for his assertion that the Law not only permits and tollerates, but
allows Usury, because men may recover the use that Laws prescribe; I answer,
that it cannot be an allowance, because the Title of the Law is, An Act against
Usury, which is seconded by Beza, saying as I said once already. Nay the Civil
Laws themselves do not ALLOW, No, not allow [contradicting the Chapter to his very
face] but rather condemn that which they do ONLY TOLERATE, forced thereunto by
the wickedness of men.

2: I answer, That the use of money is not to be recovered by Law, as Use; but
as a debt upon another account: wherefore it is, that the Usurer has his Use
added to the Principal, for which thing he is highly condemned by Authors.

The third fault in Usurers is, says one, When to avoid the penalty of the
Law, they color the matter in that they write in their Bills of debt, one to
have borrowed so much of them, when it is not so much: And again he says,
There can be no obligation of Usury, no not so much as by the Civil Law in the
contract of Lending; and Usury cannot be recovered by force of lending, And so
the Pandects hold it.
but another way.

3. All that which he tells of Lawmakers power to regulate Contracts,
alleging Grotius and Luther's (...), learned Beza answers in a few words,
saying: The only thing that remains for Magistrates to do is, they stint Usury,
and so down totters all that the Chapter said for allowing.

4. I cannot but highly commend Rivet for some of his sayings, viz. That the
Magistrate is not to be blamed, that for the ending of strife he does for a
yearly Rent grant a certain pension, (as is done in these Provinces) for money
by the Subjects offered thereby to reward them, which intimates a gratuity, and
no Usury, and disarms the Champion.

Number. 43. And because some will hardly believe it, that the Law does not allow
of Usury, I will once more recite two Acts of Parliament, viz. Jacobi 21. An
Act against Usury, and provided that no words in this Law contained shall be
construed or expounded to allow the practice of Usury in point of Religion or
Conscience a dreadful Thunderbolt from a most learned Ring, and a wise
Parliament. 2. And Eliz. 13. Forasmuch as all Usury being forbidden by the word
of God, is sin and detesiable, O sad again! that that worthy Parliament also
should prove such a bitter enemy to the poor Usurer! but so it is, who can help
it?

6: I say that a simple construction it is, that some weak defendants of Usury
do make of those words, (as Dr. Fenton reports it) all Usury, which is
forbidden by the Word of God, when the Law never said so, but being forbidden
by the Law of God; which shows what simpletons they are several of them, who
defend weakly guarded Usury.

7. And because some will say, why then does the Law tolerate Usury, if it be
the damning sin of so many millions of Souls? I answer, 1. That therefore it
will not own the practice of it in point of Conscience, as it says. Nor 2.
Does it more than Moses did in the case of Divorces, which Divines instance in,
and Beza by name, clearing Godly Magistrates in this thing thus; by reason of
the wickedness of men, they are compelled only to moderate (mark moderate, not
allow or defend) many things else, and then adding, as in Usury, which many
Magistrates are compelled to permit, because they see that it cannot be utterly
abolished.

8. And forasmuch as some think that the Law allows of Usury, because if a man
takes but six of the hundred, the Law has nothing to say against him; I answer,
that it does not follow from that, that it allows of Usury, because it condemns
all Usury as sin and detestable, but only this may be said, and is said by
great Divines about it, that it remits the punishment which is to be inflicted
on such as take more.

2. Yea so far is the Law from allowing, and favoring Usury in the least, as
that if an Usurer offend but in the least clause of the Law, he is punished for
it: As for example, if he take his money but a day before it is due, he suffers
for it upon complaint made; so if he takes any thing above the stint. I will
give two Instances for it.

1. The death of Usury, p. 23.
A Borrower came before the day of payment, desiring the Usurer to take his
money and use, because he dwelt a great way off, whereupon he took it, but the
Borrower procured a treble mischief.

2. And Ibid.
one lent two hundred pounds to two men for a year, the day being past, they
brought the money, and use, and a Gown for a free gift, which he took; but how
these two men were served, is too tedious here to relate.

9. But defiring to be more full yet, and show how far the Law is, and has been
from time to time, from countenancing and allowing Beza in Mat. 19.
heaven exploded Usury, I will give forth a rehearsal of Englands Laws against
Usury, in the days of Anno 3. c. 5.
Edward the Third, the cognizance of the Usurer deceased was allotted to the
King, in King Anno 11. c. 8.
Henry the Seconds time: Also all the Chattels and Movables which the Usurer
deceased, had, were to be taken for the use of the King, in King Anno 37. c. 9.
Henry the Sevenths time: All usurarions Contracts were made void and of none
effect, and by another, Usurers were punished with the forfeiture of the moiety
put forth by the Usurer. In Anno 5. and 6.
Henry the Eights time, those that took above ten in the hundred, were punished
with the forfeiture of treble, and of the goods put forth to Usury; the which
Act says the Parliament assembled in the Reign of Edw. c. 20.
Edward the Sixth, was not meant for the maintenance and ALLOWANCE of Usury, as
by the Title and Preamble of the same Act it plainly appears. Then in comes
Edward the Sixth, a Protestant King, in whose time, by an Act of Parliament,
were condemned all kinds of USURY, and measures of Usury, and it was confirmed,
that Usury is BY THE WORD OF GOD UTTERLY PROHIBITED AS A VICE MOST ODIOVS AND
DETESTABLE. This was done since the Reformation, not in Poperies time. After
him in Q. Anno 13. c. 6.
Elizabeth's time Usury was stinted, because of necessity, and a relaxation was
thought upon by reason of Usurers breaking out into their wicked ways and
courses which they took up.

Number. 44. Mr. Jel. What he says of the Civil Law makes nothing to his purpose,
but rather against him; since it declares that a mediocrity may be found out
between a Lender and Borrower. But more fully

I answer this, showing him by and by how it makes for me. Philip Caesar, page
20.
Philip Caesar a German Divine writes thus: I can say with a good conscience in
this place, that traveling by that notable Lawyer, Dr. Ludder's house, to the
Earl of Mansfield, being sent for; he showed me many Books of Lawyers most
excellent and learned, written against Usury; (and that is one hundred years
ago) which, says he, will in the day of Judgment condemn the Patrons of Usury.
O dreadful, dreadful again!

2. The Civil Law, I say, (which I have read all over as big as it is) is
divided as it were into three parts.

The first contains those Laws which were made before the Roman State became a
Monarchy, and with them those which were made after, from the time of Julius
Caesar unto Constantine the Great, and are called Pandecks.

The second contains those which were made from Constantines time to Justinian
the Emperor, and those are called the Codex or Code.

The third contains those Laws which were made by Justinian the Emperor, also
called Nouellae and Authenticae, or Novels and Authenticks: Now before the
Authenticks, Usury was sometimes wholly prohibited, and sometimes stinted, but
at last by the Novels which abrogate the former Laws, it was and is altogether
forbidden; for Justinian among other decree, enacted this also. We decree, That
the holy Ecclesiastical Canons, which were published and confirmed by the Which
Calvin also allows.
four holy Councils, that is, by the Council of Nice consisting of three
hundred and eighteen Bishops, by the Council of Constantinople, consisting of
an hundred and fifty learned Fathers, by the Council of Ephesus, and by the
Conncil of Calcedon, shall have the power and place of Laws: So that thereby
Usury is prohibited, condemned, and put down in the world, as being condemned
by the Council of Nice, which the said Imperial Decree in the first place
names, establishes, and sets up for Law: Whereupon it is that my Adversary
cannot abide that holy Council, because it and its holy three hundred and
eighteen Fathers are against Usury, and because its Canon against Usury was
made a standing Law by this excellent and learned Christian Emperor through
the world. O brave Council!

2. For Canon Law, the Doctors, says he, use this Argument, That one inferior
Law cannot take off the Law of a Superior: His answer whereunto has been
answered before now. 3 Statute Law, Jac. 21. Provided, That no words in this
Law shall be construed or expounded, to allow the practice of it in point of
Religion or Conscience. Reply, Allow it then they do civil Converse, neither is
it fit the Parliament should take it upon them to determinate things as lawful
or unlawful in the Court of Conscience.

Whereunto I answer, 1. Let a better man than he here speak, they slander the
Laws, who say they allow of Usury.

2. I see he would fain quarrel with the Parliament too as well as with me,
because it makes it unlawful by the word of See Dr. Jer. Tailor in duel, dubit:
l. 3: c. 3.
God, but what God says and the Parliament says, that all Usury is unlawful
and sin, being forbidden by the Word, will stand for truth, when his Carcass
shall rot as other men's.

3. What he says all along till he comes to the question, whether, if a man
sell a Commodity and allows time for payment, he be bound to sell it as cheap,
as if he had sold it for ready money, p. 85. I suppose I have already answered
it as far as need required it in my preceding lines; only this I will add about
Law.

1. That I cannot by any thing said by the Chapter be convinced, that the Laws are
bitter against oppressive Usury, because the P^rliament says expressy, That
all Usury is sin.

2. That any one may see how angry he is with the Civil Law too, calling it
uncivil, because it is against him and his Usurers, but vana sine viribus ^ra.

3 That the Emperor Leo is against Usury too, makes for me who am against all
Usury as he is; and that I have formerly proved it, that the first Christ ans
neither did, nor durst lend upon Usury, by Authors which are a little more
Authentic than his Grotius.

4. I confess that by the Code it appears, as I said before, that sometimes
Usury has been stinted, and sometimes wholly prohibited, and till by Justinian
it was quite put down in the Grounded upon the Council of Nice, which
Constantine the Great who was present at it, also approved.
Novels.

5. I observe also, how much he is displeased with Ecclesiastic and Canon
Laws, depriving Usurers of the Sacrament, saying, that this began under a
degenerated antiquity, when as I can tell him, that my Colleague Mr. Huijh,
whom he cites as his friend, has kept Usurers from the Sacrament also, under
the Reformation, even lately; as I intimated it formerly upon another account.

6: What he says to undermine Randulphs de Glandevils Authority, (whereby he
proves that Usury is committed, when a man, having lent any thing consisting
upon number, weight, or measure, takes any thing over and above the Loan)
bringing in his Oxen in a jeer, I look upon as a mere shift and frivolous
answer; because there is a difference between things (...) utuated and
commodated, as it has been formerly manifested.

7. Now to the Question I will answer for all, (though I may choose, because it
concerns not the matter in hand which is Usury) that there is a great
discrepancy between lending upon Usury, and taking something for wanting my
money and staying for it till the time be come for which I lent it, and selling
the thing the dearer for staying a year till I can be paid: For doubtless that
is lawful, because Selling is a lawful Contract; and I am one that lives by
selling if I be a Merchant. And if I want it so long I cannot trade with it,
but am forced to borrow, it may be, and there are hazards in it besides; as
Bishop Tailor well mentions it: so as that I may lose it by men's death or
otherwise; whereas lending upon Usury is illicite and forbidden, and not so
hazardous neither, because the Usurer will make all as sure as a man can by
sufficient Sureties besides the Borrower, and by Morgages, Pawns, Extents, and
but from half year to half year; and by changing Sureties. Only this I will
super-add, that the Seller may sell the dearer for giving so long time as a
year is, yet he must not sell too dear, for there is a conscience to be made of
all such things; because we must not wrong one another in bargaining. 1 Thessalonians.
4.5.6.

And because else we commit some kind of Usury too, as diverse do assert it; I
will name but one at present, viz: Augustinus, who says expressly: He that
sells dearer than the just price of things requires, commits Usury.

Number. 46. I could name and allege Bishop Hall too, but he has been quoted
already:

Mr. Jel. Obj. 8. Diverse modern Divines allow of Usury, if it do not exceed the
Sum appointed by Law, and be moderate, etc.

I answer, I know some few do so. Reply, I doubt not there be many more than he
knows of; I have spoken of this before, etc. Answer. And so have I, and
therefore let that serve for him and his Grotius also.

He says, He has brought many witnesses already, and threatens to bring many
more against the poor condemned Usurers burying.

Reply, But I desire in the behalf of the poor Usurer, that he may have a fair
Trial, before he be condemned, and dead before he be buried; and when dead and
buried, he that prophesies what great things Prince Rupert was destinated to
from Eternity, cannot foretell whether the Usurer may have a Resurrection, etc.
Whereunto I answer,

1. Here the Reader may see how this Champion loves the poor condemned Usurer,
for lo, how he begs for him that he may have a fair Trial; so as that a man
cannot choose but grant him his request, and promise him as fair a Trial as
possibly he can desire, because he begs so pitifully: And the truth is,
I^ntended it before he begged it, that the poor Wretch should have as fair a
Trial and Proceeding as any man whatsoever: For my purpose is to invite,
besides the holy One of which called Ezekiel, chapter 18.12, 13. says expressly,
Shall he live? He shall not live, he shall surely die: which very words, as all
men may see, strike the poor Usurer down dead to the ground, yea, under ground,
even into hell.
Prophets, whole Councils, even thirteen at least, consisting of hundreds, and
hundreds of godly Fathers, and an incredible number of other single Doctors and
Writers, old and new; (able to make two Armies) to pass their direful Sentences
upon the Usurer in order to his condemnation, and after condemnation to his
Grave, called the Pit of Hell; which notwithstanding I promise, profess, and
declare withal before hand, that he may, yea shall have a Resurrection, by my
fourth Book of his Resurrection, in (...) he will be ruled and repent; for I
shall but threatningly bury him, that room may be left for his joyful
Resurrection; which God in mercy grant unto him.

2. Lo how he jeers me again, and far greater ones than my poor self, about
Prince Rupert, of whom a great Writer (whose Book I have seen and read, being
dedicated to the same Most Illustrious Prince, Son to the late Pious King of
Bohemia, my Gracious Lord) has this Prophecy; That he was destinated to great
Achievements from Eternity, which also was fulfilled in part (not to speak of
Land-Fights) when he was Lord Admiral of two great and formidable Fleets, the
English and French upon the British Seas, and gallantly rescued the English,
and repulsed their Adversaries *. If, not to write here of some late most
remarkable deeds which, by Report, he did, now the Ch: has a mind to go on
with his jeering and scoffing, let him take his belly full of it, but let him
take heed withal, for God will not be mocked.

As for his eighteen men, that are said to be for Usury, and have been answered
by R. Bolton, he might have saved that labor, and have Reprinted but only Mr.
Bolton, but if he have a mind to try his strength, I should desire him to
answer Dr. Rivet upon the Q. written since Mr. Bolton; also what Mr. Baxter
writes of this Subject in his late Chr. Direct. Whereunto I answer.

Wherewith I shall join part of a Poem called Rupertismus, concerning this
valiant Prince, by one C. p. 158. Ingredients of his virtue threat the Beads,
Of Caesar's Acts, Great Pompey's, and the Suedes:
And it is a Bracelet for a Rupert's Hand,
By which that vast Triumvirate is span'd.



1. That this makes for me also, for if what I have written be Mr. Bolton's,
then he fights all this while against Mr. Bolton, and I go free and may fit
still: As for Rivet, he never troubled me being still my friend, and why should
I trouble my self about him? But let him try his strength upon Dr. Pie against
Usury, which was never yet confuted.

Or if he be too old for him, upon that Learned Man, viz. Christophorus
Cartwright late Minister in York, who wrote a Treatise against Usury since
Bolton too, about twenty years ago. As for Mr. Baxter, I have read what he says
in his Directory about Usury, and like his cautions so well, as that we two
need not fall out about this matter, because the said cautions practiced, free
him from Usury, making for Partnership.

Number. 47: Mr. Jel. Bishop Jewel, But what speak I of the ancient Fathers? There
was never any Religion, nor Sect, nor Profession of Men nor State, but they
have misliked it. Reply, May it not be said concerning all those, there have
been some of them that have approved of it by their practice or pleading.

I answer, 1. Who be they that have pleaded for it? Some indeed have practiced
it among the corrupt Clergy Men, and for that the Council of Nice, and other
succeeding Councils have made Canons against them, that they might be removed
and punished: And St. Chrysostom, and St. Austin, and others, have written most
sharply against them, but never did any of the holy Fathers, whom I read or
could hear of by others, plead for Usury.

2. Nor is it to be proved by Grotius substantially, that Leo was the first
Emperor that did forbid all Usury, and that the first Christians did practice
Usury for four in the hundred; for I have proved the contrary before now by
substantial Authors, viz. Bishop Hall, and Alex. ab Alex. and others, that
Tiberius and Caius did put down Usury before Leo, yea by Luther himself, how
the very first Emperor Julius Caesar was against Usury, and proved how the
first Christians did not at all practice it; so then I leave it to true English
Hearts to choose, whether they will believe their own English Divines, Bishop
Jewel, Bishop Hall, Bishop Downam, and such like; or this Stranger Grotius.

3. But see the boldness of this man, who also will confute and affront
Englands Jewel, And was a Prophet too that foretold Q. Mary's death and his own
too unto a precise day, Clerk p. 320: and said of Usury by him so cried down,
if I be deceived in it, thou Lord have deceived me:
who was a sufferer and exiled man in my Country, and there had time and
opportunity to converse, and to confer with German Divines, about Usury at
full, and is extolled to the Sky by Peter Martyr for his Apology, and was as
great a Scholar and Antiquary, as ever England bred, Great Usher excepted; and
has as famously confuted Popery, as that his Confutation of H. is to be
procured to be read in every Parish Church.

4. As for the fifteen-hundred years for which Bishop Jewel says, Usury was
not defended by the ancient; I would have him to know, that not he only, but
two or three great Divines more have afferted the same; let him bring but one
Ancient Father or Dr. ( Maniches the Heretic excepted) who has defended Usury
as now it is practiced: I challenge him now to do it if he can, even as Bishop
Jewel challenged the Papists to prove their Religion and Opinions to have been
maintained in such first Centuries as he named.

Of his sophistical representing of Bishop Jewel's words I forbear to speak,
let Readers note it.

Number. 48. Mr. Jel. Bishop Hall, Nature teaches that metals are not a thing
capable of superfaetation.

Reply, I shall consider more distinctly what is here said.

Whereunto I answer.

1. This Champion having beaten, overcome, and confuted, as he supposes,
renowned Bishop Jewel, thinks to beat Bishop Hall too, out of Mars field, by
several assaults made upon him which shows his peremptoriness, sawciness, and
impudence, yet more abundantly, that he will offer to confute such a great
famous man as Bishop Hall was, who as one said, was able to keep a better man
than he to wait upon him, and whom King James sent to the Synod of Dort against
the Remonstrants, and whose most excellent Books have been translated partly
into Dutch, as upon my knowledge I told him, and partly into French, as one
born in France lately informed me.

So that if that most pious and learned Man were now alive, he would disdain to
answer such a Novice, which makes me to do here as in blessed Bolton's case,
for I do not see how I can presume to defend such an able Bishop, who has
fought so well for himself against his Adversaries when he lived, and in this
matter of Usury has done so well, and therefore is well able to defend himself
without my poor help, his words being of that weight, as that of themselves
they are able to defend themselves, and being seconded also by what Aristotle
of old, and Bishop Downam, and Dr. Sanders of late, have written to the same
^ffect: And this I must needs add, that whilst he lives, he will never be able
to overthrow what these three and others have said and proved of moneys
barrenness in and of it self; if any profit comes of it, it comes from and by
the industry of him that employeth it, and not by it; whereas ground set brings
grass of it self, and Trees fruit of themselves, Genesis 1.11.

As for that great Dr. I add, that the same great Pareus was so graced with the
Spirit of Prophesying too, as that seeing three Moons over the City of
Heydelberg, foretold its taking, and the troubles of Germany as a Prophet.
Pareus my ancient friend, under whom I lived in the University of Heydelberg
in the Palatinate, where God took him away to himself before that City was
taken, as he took St. Austin from Hippo before it was taken; him also he serves
no better than the foresaid three great persons, because he is against Usury
too, laboring to defeat him by Hornbeck, though he be not able to do it,
because Pareus will be believed before him, being a far greater and more able
Writer, and one of a thousand, whom God did remarkably own upon his death bed,
in that calling for Pen and Paper, he wrote these confidential words when his
speech was gone: This Catharre has taken away my speech, but shall never take
away my faith and love to Christ: which very words were related in his Funeral
Sermon, which I heard my self being at his Burying; all which I relate the
rather, because he was a chief man in the New Army risen up against Usury,
which has moved questionless this Champion to rise up against him, and to get
Who lays the fault of Israel's not coming in upon Christian Magistrates,
which Pareus lays upon Usurers.
Hornbecks help to defeat him, and to show what a man he is that can confute
these four mighty men.

To that which he says of me, that if I should be put to prove the whole, if
any be a Thief or Usurer, 1 or. 6.10. I should have a hard Task of it; I must
now tell him, not so hard as he supposes, for VSVRERS are named expressly by
some in their Translations in the same place, as I formerly showed.

Number. 49. Mr. Jel. I will set down the Theses of Wittemberg against Usury, a
little after Luther was risen.

Reply, 1. It could not be expected that men lately come out of Popery, should
on a sudden shake off all the errors held in that Church, etc:

2. And Luther himself became more moderate, etc.

Whereunto I answer, 1. As he leaves out the words of that Universities Theses
or Positions, because they do extremely make against him, so shall I leave out
the many words which he uses here, and Rivet too, because they cited in Latin,
and so I will only 1. Show the occasion of those Wittemburg Positions again
Usury so famously known; as I have it of a certain German Philip Caesar.
Divine, who lived near Wittemburg in Saxony, and informs me by his writing
against Usury; that the said Theses were affixed in Wittemburg, disputed and
approved when Mordesius proceeded Doctor in Divinity, and that Luther himself
was a strong condemner of Usury.

2. I will refel what he says that it could not be expected, etc. after this
manner: When Luther had set up his positions against the Popes Indulgence,
spread by Terdius, then Mordesius set forth his Theses against Usury at
Wittemburg, that both Popery and Usury might fall together: And to let men see
that it was not only in the beginning of the Reformation, but afterward also,
and ever since to our present time, the ablest Wits and holiest of men, both
Ministers and Writers, have with one voice cried down that loud crying sin of
Usury. So that it is a mere and vain boast that most modern Divines, Lawyers,
and Moralists have received the opinion favoring moderate Usury; for all that
which those Divines so much talked of, I do say is, that men must use such and
such cautions, which are eight or nine, and make that which some call Usury no
Usury, whereupon what he says of Gesner and Windelin, Professor of the School
(not University) of Anhalt and of Which pious and renowned Polanus left being
infected with dangero is Tenants, as Clerk relates it.
Tubinghen an obscure University to my knowledge, in the Duchy of Wittenburg,
where I have been my self also, and of Wollebius whom I have heard often preach
and read his Latin Divinity Lectures in the University of Basil, but never any
one for Usury, and who has written his worthy Name and Motto, as my friend, in
my Book of Friends: So that all that which here this Champion says, will stand
him in no stead, because he is none of them that follow their godly cautions,
as I understand. And because twice in his Pamphlet he tells of Luther, that at
last he became more moderate, he must prove substantially, which will be a hard
task for him to do: For other great Divines make light of it, and Dr. Fenton
especially, and one more; so that still he is quoted by all Antiusurarians as a
bitter enemy to Usury, which would be very injurious to him, if he had recanted.

Number. 50. Mr. Jel. I am ashamed, quoth he, to see and read how our Lor^^us upon
Psalm. 15.
Adversaries the Papists, who scorn to appear for Usury cast it into our teeth,
that the Spanhemius in Dub. Evang.
Calvinists allow Usury, etc.

And will you be such Calvinists and Heretics?

Reply, The man is become as one of them, etc.

I answer, 1. How can he be as one of them, who even now called the Papists our
Adversaries, though not in the doctrine of Usury, wherein we agree as we do in
the Doctrine of the Trinity.

2. As for that which my Friend Dr. Rivet tells of the Popes public banks, and
of Scotus and Maldonate, that they speak as much in effect as the Calvinists;
what is that to me, who know what limitations and cautions they have, and how
they are for money given as an instrument of Negotiation? Mark that, as
Maldonate speaks, and that they are for damage, as Scotus says, but not for
use.

3. I am not bound to justify all that any holds or writes, concerning Usury;
if he defends what is true, I assent, and am for that truth, if not, I leave
him; as also then I do when Papists defend Theft in any person, or any sin
committed with the eye, or any other evil, as many such things one may meet
with in Tolet and in the Enchiridium of Navarra, and in Sa, Filiutius, and
Estobar, Jesuits.

4. But this is most certain that the Scholasticks, the Canonists, and the
Casuists, are generally against all Usury, by Spanhemius in Dub. Evang.
Spanhemius own confession; for these are his own words, The Schoolmen, the
Canonists, the Casuists decisions we do not regard.

And Idem ibid.
again he says, A wonder it is, that they do so anxiously and scrupulously
proscribe ALL USURY, even moderate ones too, though circumscribed with due
cautions, etc.

Number. 51. Whom shall one believe now, Him or the Chapter

Mr. Jel. Will these few Divines bear you ou^ at the Tribunal of Christ?

Reply, These few Divines (how few soever) have been famous for learning, and
men of known integrity, and their reasons so strong, etc.

Whereunto I answer, 1. Who denies it that several are so?

2. But who knows not this too, that they have their great errors too, about
and against the morality of the Christian Sabbath some, and others being
Lutherans, erring in their doctrine of Consubstantiation, and the ubiquity of
Christ's body.

But 3. I will say a little more of that which he speaks but little of. Will
those few Divines bear you out before Christ's Tribunal? viz. 1: That I say so,
because they will leave him there saving themselves by their godly cautions. 2.
That in this very thing I have a great Dr. and famous London Minister, Dr.
Fenton for my Second, his words to the Usurer are these.

Alas poor Soul, whither will thou turn thy self for succor, when thy friends
forsake thee? What will thou plead for thy self when thou come before the
Eternal Judge upon thy Trial? This methinks should make the Champion's and
every Usurers heart to tremble.

4. As for his saying, that the practice of his regulated Usury is under the
allowance of public laws; to that I have answered formerly proving the
contrary, whereunto I will now add again the saying of the foresaid great Dr.
Fenton, viz. An absolute contract for 10, 9, 8, or 6, in the 100, is without
warrant or Authority even among those Divines which have most favorably
concluded for thee: Observe 6 in the 100.

Lastly, To his additions, these be some of his men, some bad Papists he means,
which will rise in judgment against our Usurers. I answer,

1. He wrongs me if he says that these be the only men which I mean, when I say
that they would rise in judgment against the Usurers: No verily, I do not
honor those men so much who are very scrupulous in the matter of Usury, and
yet are for Whoredom and other grievous sins; but I mean those Schoolmen,
Canonists, Casuists, and learned Doctors, which are both against all Usury and
all other vices too, will rise in Judgment.

2. And I can name one who names the foresaid men, viz. Philip Caesar, that
eximious Saxonian Divine, who said the same of the very Papists by name, about
an hundred years ago, (for his Book against Usury was printed, Anno 1578.) and
his words are these, The Papists will condemn our Patrons of Usury in the day
of Judgment. Which he said after he had read their Books, and the Lawyers Books
against Usury, which he met with in Dr. Ludder's house, as he was going to the
Earl of Mansfield.

Number. 52. Mr. Jel. Diverse modern Divines are against the strict keeping of the
Christian Sabbath.

Reply, Yea, and these many of his Divines that have pleaded against all Usury.
I answer, where and which are they? let him name them.

But says he, we will grant it, that it is their sin though not the sin of
Usury, yet we censure them not as damned for this sin, etc. Whereunto my answer
is,

1. Nor do I damn them, because damnation is not denounced against them as
against Usury. Ezekiel. 18.12, 13. Psalm: 15. (...) 5.

But 2. The morality of the Christian Sabbath denied, is alleged to show, that
as those Divines are out in the Sabbath, so they may be in Usury.

3. Though I dare not say that they are damned, yet I will be bold to say that
God has most severely punished the prophaners of his Sabbath in this life, with
fire from heaven and otherwise too, as the Practice of Piety and Council of
Paris tells us; so that by such dreadful examples in England and elsewhere
shown, I for my part being newly come from Geneva and Holland, etc. where I saw
the Lords day most horribly polluted, was mightily convinced, and to the strict
keeping of the Lords holy day induced; as also by the reading of the most rare
writings of the Bishops, Doctors, and godly Ministers of England I was fully
made to see the unlawfulness and odiousness of Usury, and so began to preach
about thirty years ago in a Town called Kingsbridge, to all the Country round
about; coming to my Lecture, which weekly I there preached upon Psalm. 15.5. the
substance whereof with several enlargements is contained in my Usurer cast;
which upon the earnest entreaty and approbation of some of my brethren and
others, I published, and am now defending, but I must hasten onward.

Number. 53. Mr. Jel. Is it not the best way, where two ways meet the one doubtful
and the other sure and safe, to choose the best?

Reply, If he had followed this Rule, he would not have condemned the
guiltless, let him read Psalm. 15.3. whereunto I answer.

1. Is it guiltless for a man to commit murder, for so Calvin himself makes
Usury to be, upon the same Psalm. 15.5. and Cato too, a mere Pagan, by Calvin
quoted upon the same Psalm?

And again, Is a man guiltless that commits Theft, as Usury is called also by a
number of learned men, of whom I will cite but one, viz. Dr. Williams in his
true Church.
Dr. Williams, who speaking of Usury, says expressly, This Theft transcends all
other Thefts, and proves it; and here I could bring in a world of Divines
writing upon the eighth Commandment, and making Usury Theft, which also proves
the morality of Vsuries prohibition, as another time, and in another place, if
God permit, I shall show, and have partly shown in my Preface to the Reader.

Number. 54. But says the Champion, let him hear Mr. Baxter and Calvin, and then
he sends me to my friend (as he calls him) Bishop Hall, and to Grotius, and so
ends with his own bravado, whereunto I shall briefly answer,

1. That Mr. Baxter speaks not a word here, for that Usury which is commonly
practiced in England; but in the same Directory sends us very wisely to larger
Volumes, wherein I desire to follow him, Spanhem. in dub. Evang.
approving withal of his godly cautions so much, and so of his * other most
excellent Books, as that this man shall not make me, by all his malice he has
against me, fall out with such a man.

2. As for Calvin, he leaves me to my liberty elsewhere, and would not have me
tied to his judgment, as I have formerly shown.

3. And Bishop Hall is not against me neither in his sayings, that if we can
find a way [mark if] free from oppression and extortion (as Partnership is,
when we lend with a condition that the Borrower and we will divide the purchase
equally, and be partners in loss and gain) we may take that way.

4. As for Grotius, I will say as Spanhemius concerning Schoolmen; I do not
regard the Schoolmen, etc. so I do not heed much what he says, as long as we
do not reach farther than God reaches, who is not only against Nesheck, but
also against Tarbith, any increase, Ezekiel. 18.8. Note any increase.

5. Nor do his words clear the point, or satisfactorily answer the thing
mentioned about the two ways, a doubtful and dangerous, and a sure and safe,
concerning which I shall say more before I end, showing them plainly to every
ones eye.

Number. 55. Mr. Jel. seventh answer, Those very Divines which you lean upon, will
be but a broken reed to you in this respect; because they use so many
limitations as scarce any Usurer in the whole world does observe, and at last
make it no Usury at all, I mean as it is commonly practiced.

Reply, It may be presumed then in his account, that there is some Usury
lawful, etc.

Whereunto I answer, [passing by many of his words to be read in his Pamphlet,
as he does by mine, thirty three lines at a time and more] after this manner.

1. That what I say in this case, many other greater Divines than he and my
self say likewise.

And 1. Dr. Fenton, as I have shown already.

2. Bishop Downam having rehearsed nine cautions, prescribed by those Divines
which are for some Usury, concludes thus. These cautious men must observe, or
else they may not build their practice upon the Authority of godly learned men,
who have by these and such like conditions so qualified Usury, as that when
they are observed, there is no Usury, or at least no actual Usury committed.

3. Mr. Bolton, Divines pretended for Usury deal with it as the Apothecary with
Poison, working and tempering it with so many cautions and conditions, that in
the end they make it no Usury at all.

2. What he says of other contracts and failings committed therein, and of
preaching and praying, and infirmities and swervings from the rule of Gods
Word, will not answer what is said of cautions not observed, to make that which
God calls Usury no Usury; for the contracts by him mentioned are lawful, and
preaching and praying lawful and commanded, but Usury is a thing unlawful and
prohibited.

3. Nor does Gee take him off, nor justify what he says, as not saving one
word for Usury.

4. Nor will the Casuists by their dolus malus help him, for they are against
his Usury altogether, as I have proved it.

5. And because he says that it may be presumed that I account some Usury
lawful, I will now tell him what Usury I hold lawful, viz. that which Divines
call Recompensatory, of which Gabriel Biel speaks thus. Usury is taken
sometimes very largely, for any thing which is taken in lending above the
principal, and so all Usury is not unlawful; for voluntary thankfulness has
been pro^ed lawful formerly.

Number. 56. Of * Weems, The Primitive Church ordained that no man should eat or
drink with Usurers, nor fetch fire from them, etc.

Reply, I hope Mr. Jelinger does not practice by this rule, and if all other
among us should be bound to it, I know not what work it would make, especially
in Cities and Towns, whereunto I answer,

1. See its parallel, in 1 Cor. 5.11 if any man that is called a Brother be a
fornicator or extortioner, (and so consequently an Vsu^er) etc. with such a one
no not to eat.

2. Let it be noted, how this grave Author's Speech by this his Inferior is
slighted, and though it be the more momentous, because it shows how odious
Usury was in the Primitive Churches eyes.

3. Let him know that as he slights what Weemes relates of the Primitive
Christians, so I do and shall slight what he curso^^ly speaks till he comes to
Orphans and Widows, and by name ^^ther's being become more moderate, and of the
Wittemberg ^^eses, because I have sufficiently spoken of the same things
^^rmerly, whereunto may be added what he says about the dissent which he
conceives to be among the Anti-usurarians, who to my best knowledge do agree in
the main matter and form of Usury, so as that he cannot justly upbraid them
with and for any notable difference in their opinions: So for the matter of
Covenants and Bills and Bonds, put forth to answer what I said to a Reply by
him made, because he comes so sillily off with, as I THINK Mr. Baxter says,
and as I remember, HE SAYS too, so in Tenements, making the Usurer like one
that has a Tenant, which the Usurer is not. I slightly pass over that too, and
in like manner I take little notice of his words about a silent consent, as if
it were hatching some secret mischief, which some are very well acquainted
with, because malice dictates, and calumnies utters what he says; but the
truth is, as he says, some are too well acquainted with secret mischief.

As for Amestus, by him quoted, he does not trouble me, nor can, because he
proves nothing; so what he says of my Saying by him set down, that he
understands it not, signifies nothing to me, because others do, of whom I have
asked; but enough and enough said to so little of matter.

Number. 57. Mr. Jel. 9. I am a Widow says one, I am an Orphan says another, and
God knows that some cannot employ their money as some, etc. whereunto I
answer, that now being past those things, which I valued as little as he valued
Reverend Mr. Weemes's Report, and come to more serious matters about Orphans
and Widows, I intend to be more serious also, and large withal. And

1. I say, If God did intend to exempt the Fatherless and Widows, he would have
said something of them, when he named Usury and them together.

Reply, Whether Widows or Orphans in Israel might take Usury of any, I shall
not stand here to enquire; but as to the poor and the indigent, etc. And then I
wonder at Mr. Bolton here, etc. whereunto I answer.

Here he has a fling again at that worthy man, because he cannot abide his
Writing against his Diana, even as his Adversary M. S. could not abide his
preaching against his Usury; so that I will let them two battle together a
while, and return to mine own defense.

Mr. Jel. The sum of his second Answer. They should rather trust God, etc.

Reply, Here it is taken for granted what is in debate, God has taken care for
them, but this should not take them from u^ng due diligence, and from all
lawful means within their power for a subsistence.

A. But is Usury a lawful way? who will say it that it is, b^^ an Usurer,
though he cannot prove it?

Number. 59. Mr. Jel. As for them that put out their money to Usury, and say what
will become of them else, if we do not put it out for them, I return this
answer; they should rather ask what will become of them that have no money left
them?

Reply, Though they that have Wives must be as if they had none, and so
consequently those that have money as if they had none; yet this must be
understood of affection and not otherways, for these that have Estates must be
as those that have Estates, and those that have money must improve their money
for their livelihood.

I answer, But how? by Usury? God forbid; for God forbids it: Let Grotius
moderate between us, says he.

I answer, A Godly Moderator! I do not intend to yield to his Moderatorship,
for he is a man that can err and I am sure does, even God shall be a Moderator
for me and my friends, who cannot err, and gives no toleration for Orphans and
Widows: But if it be fit for me to hearken to men too, I will hearken to men
that are sound and Orthodox, and will not be for Sabbath breaking and looseness,
and wink at Sports used on Gods holy day; and I will quote but three at
present, viz.

1. Philip Caesar, p. 55.
Philip Caesar, Seeing Usury is contrary to the word of God, and against the
faith which we should repose in him, and therefore no doubt it is unlawful for
Orphans and Widows to use the same. And again he says, What a wonderful
company of Widows and Fatherless is there, which having nothing of their own
yet are sustained? And yet farther, Let these which are their Guardians and
Keepers of their money, if any come to them, buy ground, and the Revenues
thereof let them bestow on their maintenance the same money; or if that cannot
be done, he that will convert it to his own use, and distribute to their
sustenance, does like an honest man, etc.

2. Gabriel Powel, p. 55.
Gabriel Powel, If Usury be in it self evil and condemned by the word of God,
then it cannot be good in any, Romans 3.8. it is said, We must not do evil that
good may come of it, therefore we must not relieve Orphans and Widows by Usury.

3. Mr. Moss.
Mr. Moss, In the days of King Edward, men being more careful to provide for
the poor than now, the Orphans were well and sufficiently provided for, even
when Usury was altogether and utterly forbidden.

What Grorius says, that Christ has not left a peculiar precept of this
thing, signifies nothing to me; seeing we have his mind plainly set down in
general, Luke 6.35. my supposed case he slights, p. 100. and therefore I slight
him, and what he says.

Number. 59. Mr. Jel. Obj. 10. God knows that I cannot live else, because I do
not know how to employ my money otherwise. I answer,

1. Are there no other ways in the world to live by, but Usury?

Reply, Let Mr. Baxter answer this. As for them that say it may be as well
improved otherwise, they are unexperienced men. To this, 1: Let St. Chrysostom
answer. 2. Spanhemius. 3. My self for my self.

1. Let Great Chrysostom answer Great Mr. Baxter, Chrysostom, I say, who being
so great an Archbishop, res^ding in so great a City as Constantinople, the
Metropolis of the World whereof he was Archbishop, and so one that must needs
have had great experience, his words are: Are there no other ways of living
justly to be found? Is there not Husbandry and Tillage to be taken in hand?
With whom

2. I join Great Spanhemius, who after he had disputed for a kind of Usury (as
I showed once already) a good while, at last broke out into this confession, as
I said before now. It must neeeds be confessed, that it is far better for thee
to bestow thy money either in Husbandry, or Merchandising, or any other honest
way to increase thine Estate, than to lend it upon Usury. Showing how men may
employ their money otherwise than in Usuries way, and to my knowledge he was a
very experienced man, which I can speak, because he was related to me and we
lived together at Genevah first, from whence he removed into Holland to Leyden,
and I into England, where he has been a considerable time also; so that having
been in so many Countries, as High Germany, part of Italy, and in France also,
and Holland, he could not be a Which caused many Nobles to make use of his
advice in Civil (...). C^^rk in his Lise, p. 50^.
Stranger to the worlds affairs, but one that could wri^e from his great and
manifold experiences, what a man may do with his money without Usury.

3. As for me, though I must confess that I am one of the meanest Ministers,
yet some small experience I have gotten by my being in so many Countries,
Kingdoms, and Universities as I have been in, in my time; wherein I have seen
and observed what use men make of their money; so that upon request I wrote and
intend hereafter (when my other Usury Books promised by me shall come forth) to
Publish very many ways whereby men may lawfully and without Usury employ their
money, besides the ways of, at least, ten great and learned men more, leaving
men to choose either any of their ways or of mine, as they please; hoping that
if my poor experience be not sufficient, theirs will make up what is wanting in
mine.

Number. 60. Mr. Jel. How do they live that have no money to lend? Whereunto his
Reply is not worth the mentioning, it is so short and inconsiderable.

Mr. Jel. How do they live in those Countries where Usury is not known, in the
Indies. etc.

Reply, There too Gold and Silver are not current money, no wonder then that
Usury there is not exercised in the loan thereof: We have heard of Nations that
have had no Houses but Tents, but what is that to us that have Houses?
Whereunto I answer.

1. That the Gold and Silver there was not coined as it was here in former
times, yet it may be now since the Spaniards arrival, and so plentiful Gold has
been there, as that an Indian King had his house full of it, and was slain by
the Spaniards for it; and likely it is that they deal by way of Exchange, as
now also they do, and it may be they would deal now and have dealt formerly in
a way of Usury, if they had not thought it to be against Nature, as indeed it
is.

As for the Tents by him spoken of, they signify nothing; for they served
instead of Houses, as in the Patriarchs time, Genesis 18.1. and Heb. 11.9.

Mr. Jel. From Chrysostom, etc. I need not trouble my self about him any more,
having spoken enough of him already even now.

And as for the hazard which the Champion takes an occasion to speak of,
bringing Grotius again with him, and Dr. T^yler to bear him company, of that I
have spoken at full, so of Chrysostom speaking against Merchandising.

Number. 61. Mr. Jel. Obj. 11. I lend for pities sake, and do good with my money,
etc.

I answer, Do thou good with thy money? Thou do but furnish many men with
sinews to do mischief, to oppress others in bargaining, and forestalling, etc.

Reply, If this be said of all that lend, it is a notorious calumny.

Answer 1. He cannot but see that I speak not of all, because I speak of many.

2. As for his occasionally, it makes against him too, for we must not give men
an occasion to do evil.

3. And whereas he says, that such ill accidents may befall giving too; I
answer, It Is true, but then there is not an occasion lawfully given as by
unlawful Usury, but taken by lawful giving.

Mr. Jel. Nay many Families and men are undone by Usury, or at least so
entangled, oppressed, and put down, as that, etc.

I answer, True, they may thank themselves partly, and the Usurer chiefly, who
by and for his filthy usury brought them to so much misery and mischief.

Mr. Jel. But the Borrower gives thanks and is glad.

I answer, Being forced, he gives that and is glad, because he is necessitated
to go to the Usurer.

Reply, If the necessity be of Nature's making, and he borrow that he may live,
and Traffic here, lending ought to be free.

I answer, Here now is something to be commended, and I say still that there is
no reason for it, that a Purchaser growing rich by my money, should not freely
and thankfully make me a partaker of his free gain, which thing Divines call a
gratuity, which may be taken.

Number. 62. Mr. Jel. But being forced, he gives thanks.

Reply, Who forced him? Nothing but his own convenience drew him to it, and I
pray may not a man gain by the money he pays me reasonable use for? And if so,
then he owes me thanks for the moneys he has gained by means of mine, and then
Demosthenes will tell him, etc.

I answer, His convenience sometimes may, but commonly necessity makes me to
borrow money. 2. He might get and not get. 3. He is bound to give thanks, not
use. As for Demosthenes, he is for me, calling and making Usury odious, and the
Usurers Name odious; for he would have a man so wary in his dealings, as that
he may not g^t the odious name of an Usurer, as his words do show it.

THE FOURTH PART OF THIS TREATISE, CONTAINING
The Eighth and Ninth Chapters of the Usurer Cast; and four Additional
Objections answered, and Replies put thereunto, answered also; and the Nine
Chapters Applications by Exhortations proseented, and several Additions, viz.
Of a Citation, A Narrative, and the Usurers last Will.

ADditional Objection. 1. Number. 1. Mr. Jel.
1. Usurers plead, that Countries and Kingdoms cannot subsist without Usury.

I answer, It is false; for did not Isreal's subsist without Usury?

Reply, It is likely they did not, seeing they might lend to Strangers, etc.

I answer, 1. The Stranger was the Canaanite, or seven Nations, which were
about them, not of them.

2. The Chapter himself weakneth what he says by his, it is likely, which shows
that he is not sure of what he says, as indeed he could not well be, because
the holy Fathers and new Writers also say, that in David's, and the succeeding
Ages and Prophets time, that political exception of the Stranger ceased to be
in force as I formerly proved it.

Mr. Jel. And happy was the State of Germany before it knew Usury, etc.

Reply, And so it might be before it knew Printing and Guns, but was Usury the
cause of these mischiefs it groans under? Not, I dare say, not that regulated
Usury which is here pleaded for.

I answer, 1. Lo how he leaves out Sicily and Sparta and Egidi^s his
Commonwealth, because all three make against him.

2. And because he tells of Printing (invented by a good man called Gottenberg)
I will say a little more of it, as namely, that I wonder that he brings in such
a good thing, invented by a man whose name imports goodness, because it is
derived in the Dutch Tongue from Got, in English God) with such a bad business
as Usury is: I call Printing a good thing, to which I and others that Print are
much beholding; because much good is done by us in it to many poor Souls which
are converted by it from that abominable sin of Usury, and many other enormous
vices, but for Guns he hits right, for they were invented by one Berchtold
Swartz, which Dutch word Swartz signifies black, as invented by a black man,
who may well be called an inventor of a black Art, producing black, sad, and
dreadful effects, even the killing and destroying of poor men after a fearful
manner, and so consequently well befitting Usury, which in Hebrew signifies
also hostile weapons, Isa. 22.8. Psalm. 78.9. and befitting also the Usurer
himself, who fights as it were, by his Usury, with Gu^s and hostile weapons
which kill many; for which cause Usury by Calvin is made as bad as murder; so
that it might well be said that Germany was happy before those Guns called
Vsuries came in, because so many thousands have been killed and destroyed
thereby in my time, during the wars which were there then, and since I came
away; or rather was persecuted away for Religions sake, by the Papists, who
have burnt and destroyed many Towns, besides a number of men.

3. As for moderate Usury, which with him is six in the hundred, let him prove
that such Usury is lawful, and that Germany is not unhappy for such a kind of
Usury, yea for less; for there they pay but five in the hundred to my
knowledge, and yet poor Souls what do they suffer for it, and have suffered?
Aretius de Vsura.
Aretius tells us, that Germany learned the evil of is by the Rustican War, and
foretold what would follow it.

4. As he says, that where Merchandising i^, there must be lending; so say I,
but not upon Terrestrial Usury, there is no need of it; because there may be
adventuring, which is held lawful, and is most practiced in Holland. To answer
him for that too, because I can say a little more of Holland, having been
there, than he who was never there; The King of Bohemia (in whose Court I have
been when he resided there) adventured upon the Sea his money, and by
adventuring the Hollanders have gotten their wealth, and not by Usury, which
has made the King of Spain poor.

5. The Words of Grotius by him cited in Latin, I do not intend to translate
for him to answer him, because they deserve it not; nor does he answer all that
my Authors say, and why should I answer all his?

Number. 2. Mr. Jel. 3. I grant there is a necessity which, not God has brought
upon Kingdoms, but men's sins, etc.

Reply, And are not some of these sins found on the borrowers part? etc.

I answer, 1. Lo how here he cuts off my many words indeed, because as I am apt
to think, he is afraid of the Egyptian Lice and Frogs, and Locusts, which God
sent as a just Plague upon the Egyptians for their hard-heartedness, Semblably
whereunto, B. Babington and I say, that God brings the Usurers upon a Nation
and People for their sins, viz. Hard-heartedness, Prodigality, Lavishness,
Luxury, Drunkenness, Pride, Lasciviousness, and suffers them to enter into men's
houses and fields morgaged, etc. Where Note, that he cuts off thirty three
lines, that men may not see by his Writing what at large I say in this place
especially, which also will cause me to serve him so too; only this I will add,
that I will not excuse Borrowers, for many deserve to be blamed very much, for
spending their bo^rowed money very idly and lavishly, in drinking, whoring,
and playing at Cards and Dice, and such like unlawful vvays, whereof the
Usurer commonly is the cause, because he lends to such as he should not lend
unto for filthy lucres sake: Where let me add the words of that grave and
learned Helvetian Writer, Aretius de Vsuris.
Aretius, Professor of Losanna in Helvetia, which is well known ^o me. By
Usury, says he, Men are called away from their labors, and abuse and spend
their borrowed money in compotations and drunkenness, and other acts of
idleness.

Number. 3. Mr. Jel. 2. Obj. Addit. Divines themselves which speak against Usury,
allow of diverse sorts of Usury, as Shipfenory, Recompensatory Usury.

I answer, I vvish that some had abstained from such expressions, there being
other sitter names to be given them, as Adventuring money, Damage, a free
thankfulness, etc.

Reply, Usury by its usage has gotten an ill name, he says, it is the name
that frights people, etc. And so he cites Spanhemius and Calvin in Latin,
which I will not translate, having enough else to do, but thus much I will say,

1 Usury has gotten an ill name sure enough, and that deservedly, it being such
an odious thing, because the Usurer will have his six in the hunred, and
sometimes more, whether the borrower win or lose.

As for Calvin^s word and wish, I will go a little farther with him, saying, It
were to be wished that ALL VSVRY, yea and the very name of it were banished out
of the world: And again, I say with Calvin, we must always hold that it is
scarce possible that he which takes Usury should not wrong his Brother, and yet
farther, I will say with the same godly man Calvin, that it can hardly be that
an Usurer may be found in the world, which is not given to unjust and filthy
Lucre. Thus far Calvin and I agree, for all the Champions endeavor to set us
at variance.

As for my Cousin Spanhemius by him here cited in Latin too, I wonder why he
will quote him any more, seeing he has after his writing for some Usury several
leaves, given up Usuries cause, so that he and I are now agreed.

Number. 4. Mr, Jel. 3. Addit. Obj. Why may not I get by my money as well as
others by their ground, etc.

Answ. Because the one is expressly forbidden, but not the other.

Reply, So is the Usury of Victuals, etc.

But the Question still is, whether universally?

Answ. That all this has been answered sufficiently.

Mr. Jelinger Answers farther, Lending is a liberal Contract, whereas setting
and selling is mercenary.

Reply, Why may not Lending be mercenary too?

I answer, 1. That our Masters and Et arti^ici pe^it^ in sua art credendum.
Shoppius in sua Logica.
Doctors in the Civil Law, whereunto such Contracts properly do appertain, do
teach us so.

2. And because he will say this is but men's saying, I add, that our Great
Master Christ himself makes lending freely, saying, Lend freely, as some
Translations have it, Luke 6.35.

And 3. I answer, that all that which the Champion here says till we come to
p. 107. has been so largely answered formerly, as that his Grotius with his
limitations, cannot confute and overthrow it, I am confident, appealing to the
Reader for it.

And whereas the Champion says, that I have given but a lame account of Exodus
22.14, 15. I answer thereunto, that he comes off but with a lame Charge,
wherewith he charges me, because he cannot make it good; and therefore betakes
himself to a new, being gone of a sudden.

Number. 5. Mr. Jel. Of no greater force against Usury is what he adds, and
according to the Law of man also, which says, that the Commodary is not bound
to a fortuitous case, or accident, unless he have bound himself.

Whereas to money lent, the Borrower stands to all hazards, and the Usurer to
none.

Reply, But has not the Borrower bound himself too? And does not the Lender
stand to no hazard? Even the same that a Seller does, that gives days of
payment: Whereof Bishop Hall makes mention. But I desire to answer more fully,
And,

1. That it is the Borrowers misery that he must be so bound to a wretched
Usurer for unlawful Use, and the Usurers sin that he binds men to all hazards,
and to pay forbidden Usury too. And

2. To the Usurers hazard let Dr. Luther answer: And yet will not the Usurer
take upon him any adventure or hazard. Whereunto another great Mos.*
Author adds this, Will any man say that the Usurer adventureth, or means to
adventure, or thinks that he does adventure the Principal? No assuredly, for
because he will not adventure, he will never lend upon Usury to a man that is
not sufficient. No Usurer will lend to a poor man, says Plutarch de non f^en.
Plutarch, nor he will not lend to a rich man for two years, but with new
Sureties, for fear, I trow, that he or they will be undone in few years by
Usury, and so not being able to pay he should lose his advantage. Thus he, I
superadd, yea from half year to half year Usurers bind now, and put in extents
into their Usury Writings and Bonds, whereas those that sell to a day never
make this so sure, and therefore are at great hazards. So that Bishop Hall here
can do the Champion but little good, nor Bishop Tailor: But of this I have
spoken already sufficiently.

Number. 6. But I find him mistaken, says the Chapter concerning the account he gives
of the Law of man, concerning the Commodary; if Grotius speaks true.

Whereunto I answer, I will set down the very words of the Law, for then I
cannot be mistaken. The words are, The Commodary is not bound to a fortuitous
case, unless he have bound himself to balance his Grotius, whom himself thinks
not to be very sure, because he says, if Grotius speaks true, I will balance
a surer, viz. blessed Bolton, who says as I say, A thing that is hired, if it
perish without the default of the hirers, it perishes to the owner.

1. Because he is the owner.

2. Because it went for the hire according to Gods Law, Exodus 22.15. See the
Videatur etiam Tostatus in Exodus 22. p. 419. de Commodatario and in l. 3, 4.
and in Digest. de regul. in l. contr. de Actionibus and obligat. l. 1.. 15. qui
and Foroneus apud Isidor. Eth. cap. 18. Foroneus in ^iam de hac re qui prim is
Iraecis leges dedit, and pauco tempore ante Israelitaerum exitum ex Aegypto
fuerat ut id. asserit. August. de Civ. Dei, l. 18.
Margin also.

Now let all true English Hearts choose again whom they will listen unto, this
Grotius who whom they never read or heard of before now, and who is one of them
that are against the strict keeping of the Christian Sabbath, and therefore
unsound in Doctrine and in practice, differing from them in their godly
practices; or to that sound and holy man, Mr. Bolton, whom they do and can read
in their Mother tongue, most learnedly writing against Usury, (even as others
also do) and of other excellent Subjects tending to Godliness, and made a most
godly end; To use the words of Diavelarius in his Alt. Damasc. and Rob.
Bruss^s, anima mea cum
and to whose pious Soul mine also desires to go when it goes hence, that as
we have warred together here against execrable Usury, so we may live together
hereafter, and be Crowned together with the Crown of Glory.

Number, 7. But I see this Adversary would have me answer to thirteen Questions,
to which bold and saucy proposal I shall say thus much.

That as Christ said once when he was asked, By what Authority do thou these
things? Matthew. 21.23.24. So I will ask him but five Questions also, to which if
he answer me solidly, I will answer such of his questions as are worth the
answering next, thinking it necessary and fit to answer but one of the thirteen
now.

The First of my Questions is, How this Champion can justify the putting out
of his money upon Usury, without any allowance of any express Scripture, making
it lawful for him so to do?

The Second Question is, Whether he have ever made any restitution of all the
money which he has taken for the use and loan of his money, since he first began
to be a lender upon Usury?

The Third Question, Whether his Conscience does not check and smite him, when
he receives his Usury Money of such and such? He knows whom I mean.

The Fourth Question, By what Scripture he will prove the lawfulness of his
moderate Usury by him maintained? Seeing that not only Nesheck, biring, but
Tarbith, that is any increase, is by the word of God forbidden as a sin, as a
Great Parliament of England declares it, saying: That all Usury being forbidden
by the word of God, is sin and detestable, etc.

The Fifth Question, Whether he that does not observe the godly cautions
prescribed by godly Divines, may be excused and escape in that great day, by
Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all.

As for that one Question, which at present I will only answer, is the very
first.

Whether I have made restitution of three pounds for money put into a
Tradesmans hands.

Whereunto I answer, That I have no need to make such restitution, because I
never lent to a Tradesman or any man else in the whole world, any money upon
Usury; God is my witness, let any prove it if they can. I add, that this has
been sufficiently sifted already by those which have heard of it, for I have
proffered before many witnesses to a person which gave out such a report, a
great sum of money, if he could make it appear that ever I lent to any person
upon Usury in all my life, but it could never yet be proved.

And no new thing it is for the Servants of God to be so used, Athanasius for
Writing against the Arrians, was accused and charged with murder and
uncleanness: Calvin for Writing and standing against Popery had a Book written
against him by Bolsecus an Apostate, charging him with Sodomy. So Luther in his
life time had most heinous things laid to his charge in Print; and one of the
Champions Friends whom I forbear to name, and Mr. Moss, for writing against
Usury, was said to be an Usurer himself, as he writes himself: Yea Nehemiah
himself, who was such a notable enemy to all Usury, has been made an Usurer
himself by some Usurers Translations, as out of Bishop Downam I have proved it:
So that no wonder it is that Satan that old Liar, plays his old Game of Lying
against me the least of all Gods slandered, belied, reviled Servants also,
after my laborious Writing and setting my self against his great Idol, which he
has set up in the World, Usury I mean, the Usurers Great Diana, but confident I
am, that my God, whose Truth I am vindicating, will deliver me and clear mine
innocence graciously, To whom alone be all Honor and Glory.

Number. 9. And now I have no more to do, but to Exhort and to Pray,

1. To Exhort. And

1. My Brethren in the Ministry, that

1. They themselves above all men should abstain from that great and grievous
sin of Usury, Which caused a famous Writer to say, we Ministers are to be
blamed for many of the exorbitancies of our people, because of our example we
harden them in their sin.
because by their practice and example, so many thousand Souls are led and
drawn down to hell, when they see them which should show them the way to Heaven
and Salvation, I mean those Ministers only which are Usurers.
show them the way to Hell and Destruction by their taking of Nesheck and
Tarbith, Usury and Increase, contrary to Gods own Inhibition. For what do they
say when I and others do Preach and Print against that odious sin? If Usury
were such a damnable sin as some make it, such and such a Minister (naming thee
that art a lender upon Usury, by thy very name) would not lend his money after
that manner. Whereupon, says one, I know where he lends so much to such a one,
who pays him according to the usual rate; nay says another, I had hundreds of
such a Minister, and because I paid but five in the hundred, he was not
contented because I paid not six, when of another, who though he was a Usurer
too, yet let me have it for three in the hundred. Thus they talk of Ministers,
which caused a Godly Minister in discoursing with me about it, to say to me,
that he did ever hate Usury, and would not take any though never so little, if
he might gain the World, because of the bad example which a Minister gives to
others: And again he said, Many of our Ministers now turn Usurers, and their
Hearers turn after them, making that the cause of it, why there are so many
Usurers now; whereas some years ago, men counted Usury to be so odious a thing
as that few would venture upon it.

Number, 10. The consideration whereof impels me therefore to beseech you, dear
Brethren, for the Lords sake, and for your own dear Souls sake, and for the
sake of those precious Souls which Christ has redeemed with his own blood, and
are committed to your care and charge, and guided and led by your Even as they
are led by the examples of their Magistrates, being always apt to receive
either good or bad impressions, according to their deportment, as Tamberlain
told Axalla. Clerk p. 218.
example, that you will not have any hand at all in Usuries filthy and
abominable trade and occupation, by lending your money as many do upon Usury,
as being most deeply charged by that faithful and pious Servant of God,
Nehemiah 5.10. I pray you let us leave off this Usury. He does not call Usury
Nesheck, biting, as if biting and oppressive Usury were unlawful only, but
(...) a burden, because Usury is a burden indeed, as poor Borrowers find it and
feel it, though they pay but six in the hundred, when out of their Estates they
must pay ten, twenty, or thirty pounds for Usury by the year, which to my
knowledge has undone many who have been forced to sell their Means.

I am the more earnest in this, because Priests and Clergy men in all Ages have
been ever spoken against and censured for Usury, if they were guilty of it; it
being thought to be a thing above all other men, most unbeseeming and
unbecoming them: I will instance only,

1. In the Jews, among whom as Lira Writes, their Priests might not so much as
lend to strangers, though others could. And

2. In the holy Council of Nice, (besides which I could nominate many more)
which did most severely censure such Clergymen as were Usurers.

And 3. I will quote Gregory the Great, who says expressly, That they are not
to be ordained for the Ministry, who are convicted that they have taken Usury:
Which saying of his is also cited in the Decretals.

Number. 10.2. And I must yet farther desire all godly Ministers, to join with
their Brethren which are against all Usury, and cry it down as they do,
harkening to that learned Dr. Dr. Welleius upon Pfal. 15.
Welleius thus Writing. Teachers and Pastors are to be admonished, that
vehemently in their Sermons, they inveigh against Usury, and that they lay
before men the threats of God, and show them how horrible a Monster an Usurer
is, which is worse than any Thief, Robber, or Murderer. I add, and that they
will imitate therein Moses, that man of God, and Ezekiel, and Nehemiah, who so
cried Usury down in their time, and all the holy Councils and Fathers in their
time, and Luther who did the like in his time, Which I mention twice because it
is so notable.
exhorting Professors in Universities to read it down in their Lectures,
Ministers in their Pulpits to preach it down, and Schoolmasters in their
Schools to teach their Scholars to hate it from their youth up, and when they
are grown up to labor every where to put it down. But I must go yet farther,
endeared Brethren, beseeching you that you will go and join to throw it down,
as that holy, incomparable, and wonderful man, Archbishop Usher, did go to put
it down in his Body of Divinity, seven times Printed, p. 300. where he says as
I said once already, That it is a most wicked and unlawful contract, etc. which
if we live and die in without Repentance, we are excluded out of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which he proves by Psalm. 15.1, 5. Ezekiel. 18.12. Chapter 22.

Again, I must desire you to join with the famous and most learned Bishop
Jewel, the Jewel of England, and the Renowned Bishop Downam, and that mirror of
all manner of Learning, Bishop Andrews, of whom a very able Divine gave me very
lately this Character; that he was the learned man that ever England had, and
who has written, as I said formerly, a Book purposely to show that even Vsura
licita est illicita; and for his excellency in all manner of Learning, is
extolled by great Spanhemius himself, in his Evangelical Doubts, and by Name in
his Dispute of Usury: So that you need not to be ashamed to Preach and to press
this great and noble Truth of Vsuries unlawfulness, which has been preached,
published, proved, and maintained by such Worthies: Nor should you count it
needless, because the whole World is concerned in it, especially upon the
account of Trades, wherein men commonly make Usury their Standard, and because
those many thousand, thousand Souls which are in the World, and are more worth
than all the world, Matthew. 16.26. (and are blindfoldedly led into that grievous
sin by commoness and When they see Ministers practice it, whose sin therefore
is the greater? As Salvian, quo sublimior praerogativa eo major culpa. De Gub.
Dei. l. 4.
example and ignorance,) should be made to know what it is, and how unlawful
and execrable it is in the sight of God and good men, and how damnable, that
they may not be unexpectedly and suddenly cast into that formidable Lake (which
burns with fire and brimstone) for this very sin of Usury, which God in mercy
prevent, by giving them true and speedy Repentance.

Well, me thinks I cannot but hope that many good Ministers will hearken to
good counsel, and cry down this great and grievous evil, as their Predecessors
have done heretofore, because some are and have been awakened of late already,
and begin to Preach it down very much, saying as I am told, that whereas some
speak against Ceremonies as evil, they do that which is worse, by lending their
money upon usury, and desending it against the express Word of God, which in
plain terms forbids it; and I have heard of one noted Minister especially,
whose Son is a Learned Bishop, that to make that odious sin of Usury yet more
odious, he called it that whelping of money, as he was Preaching a worthy
Knights Funeral Sermon, before a great company of Hearers, saying in the
commendation of that eminent Knight, that he was no Usurer, for he could never
abide that whelping of money.

Whereunto he added, Pardon me for using this expression, it was his own when
he lived, that he could never abide it, and therefore he never lent any of his
money upon Usury: For the certainty of which remarkable Report, I did ask the
Preacher himself being in his Company very lately, and he owned it; so that I
say again, that to be hoped it is, that more Ministers will follow, which that
it may prove so, is the prayer of him that has written these Lines; wishing
that he might write them with his Blood and not with Ink, if it would please
God, and he might do any poor Soul good thereby, and free it from that bloody
sin of Usury, called Murder, even by Calvin himself and many others. And
wishing farther, that the Great God, which hates and forbids both Nesheck and
Tarbith, Usury and all Increase, would be pleased to write the same which is
written in Deuteronomy. 23.19. and hereto, with his own Finger as with the Pen of a
Diamond, Jer. 17.1. in men's hearts, putting the point of it upon their hearts,
and especially the hearts of those that practice Usury and defend it, their
hearts being made truly penitent and deeply sensible by himself, that being
dissuaded they may wholly forbear all Usury, as himself would have them to do,
Ezekiel. 18.8.

Most Great God, Fulfill this thy Servants Vote, and hear him graciously, for
the sake of thy Son, who is also against that mercenary kind of lending, called
Usury, saying: Lend freely, hoping for nothing from thence, Luke 6.35. Amen, So
be it.

And so I have done with Ministers first.

2. AND You, Gentlemen, whatsoever you do, do not put your money to usury; for
you have Estates to live by comfortably, and if that which you have be not
enough, you may buy more, and you have no need at all to live by Usury, as many
others plead that they must, because they have no Lands, but Moneys only to
employ for their maintenance. Oh that you would hearken unto me in this! Oh
that you would do as other great ones, even Heathens have done, those great
Emperors Tiberius and others I mean, who would rather lend freely to others to
prevent Usurers, than to be Usurers themselves.

Oh let not these Heathens rise up in Judgment against you.

2. And you Old Men, who have one Foot in the Grave already, do not take up
that cursed Practice of Usury, because Age does disenable you from following a
lawful Calling, lest with both Feet you be made to go into Hell, when Christ
comes to Judge the World in Righteousness, and to adjudge Usurers to
everlasting destruction for their unrighteousness, and for despising and
disobeying his righteous Commandment, Luke 6.35. Lend, hoping for nothing from
thence.

4. So you Young Men, do not you live in that great sin of sins, for as that
great Apostle wrote of you, 1 John 2.14. so do I say to you, You are strong;
and can employ your selves and your strength in lawful Callings, Trades, and
ways of Living, and have no need to take up such a lazy Trade as this of Usury
is, which even a poor Heathen calls Quaestuosam segnitiem, a gainful laziness:
You may take an example from other young ones, which since my first Book
against Usury came out, did promise me faithfully that themselves would come
out of that detestable sin, entreating me to direct them in it, which also I
did.

5. To Orphans and Widows I say, O let not those to whom God all-gracious has
made such gracious promises, and for whom he has made a special Law to secure
them, become Transgressors of the very next Law to it, Exodus 22.22, 23. Nor let
them for whom he takes such special care by his Providence, be so ungracious
and ungrateful as to mistrust him, that he will not provide lawful ways and
means for them, whereby their portion and moneys may be employed for their
maintenance, and support, and let them not provide for themselves Usury Bags,
therein to put their Usury money for their sustenance, for fear lest they put
it in Bags that have holes; and will not hold their dishonest gain long; God
smiring at it with his fist, as he has menaced it, in Ezekiel. 22: 13. and so
their money perish and they too with it for ever.

I add, Orphans are coming into the world, Widows, who intend to continue, are
looked upon as going out of the world, and shall these two Ages which above all
other ought to be made heavenly, the one for Innocence, the other for Devotion,
be stained with Usury? Christ is Alpha and Omega unto us, the first and the
last, the beginning and the end; and shall the Alpha of our Nonage, and the
Omega of our Dotage, be dedicated to Usury? Christ calls himself by the name of
the first Letter in the Alphabet, that Children may learn Christ so soon as
they are able to know their Letters; and shall we suffer our Children to be
died in the Wool of their Infancy, with the Scarlet Sin of Usury? And will our
Widows be tinctured so too? God forbid.

O that poor Orphans and Fatherless Children would all do as some of them have
promised me, that they would leave that filthy sin of Usury from henceforth,
being convinced by my Usurer cast, and never more have to do with it, desiring
me to show them a way whereby they may lawfully and without Usury employ their
money, which I promised and did: The Lord give a blessing to it: And what I say
of and to Orphans, I say to Widows also.

O that you also would do as that Ministers Widow, which having read and well
considered what is written in the said Usurer cast, left that detestable sin of
Usury, and made a full and free restitution.

Number. 13.6. To such as profess Godliness and bear the name of Good People, I
shall speak next: O do not you embark with that sort of people which are called
Usurers (forsooth) in the same brittle and dangerous Vessel called Usury, lest
together with them you also be cast away in the Sea of Wrath, called Hell,
otherwise the very Pit of Hell, to which Usurers and their Usury are condemned
of old by the Scriptures, Ezekiel. 18.12. by Councils, by the holy Fathers, B.
Down, in Psalm. 15.
By Schoolmen, and all sorts of wise and holy Writers, as one has made it Idem
ibid. The Schoolmen retain the Doctrine of the Primitive Church about Usury:
and deep learned men they are, for I have heard them, read their learned
Lectures in the Sorbone of Paris.
good, whose words I will relate. The Philosophers, tho Heathens, have written
and spoken against Usury, and will you Christians practice it, say I? The
Fathers of the Church have with one consent condemned it, says the same great
Author; yet farther I add, And will you do what these holy men (who have lived
so holily and so angelically, as that they heard some of them the Angels sing)
condemn to the bottomless Pit, preferring what some young Divines tell you,
before the grave and Scriptural Sayings of those Aged Saints?

And let this be minded by you too, what hurt you do to many other poor Souls
by your practice: For what do they say of you? If Usury were so bad as some
make it, what will become of such and such, who I am sure have as good Souls to
God, as those which prate and preach so much against it?

Ah poor Professors, you did not think upon this it may be heretofore, but now
give your minds to it, and say as Psalm. 4.17.
David, What have these Sheep done? So what have those poor filly creatures,
whom we draw in by our example, done to us, that we should bring so much evil
upon them? And so though ignorant and silly creatures do offend in this kind of
harm, by bringing one another into the same condemnation by their example, yet
do not you so go to Hell with those whom they draw to bear them company.

Again, Let this be thought upon by ye, my Brethren, that if you shall refuse
to leave and shun that filthy sin of Usury, you will make all men that know you
to live in that sin, say of you, that you have but a form of Godliness, and
deny the power thereof, as it is said that some shall do in the latter days, 2 Timothy 3.1. Because no truly pious man will defile himself (as says Lactantius*
that ancient Latin Father) with that iniquity.

And therefore for the Lords sake, do not cast in your Lot among the Lots of
Usury-mongers, whose sin is Lottery, unlawful Lottery, because their Principal
is called sors, that is, Lottery, whence comes Usury, which therefore well may
be called Lottery. I say again, do not cast in your Lot, your Portions, your
Money among and with theirs, lest though you seem to win, you Which what an
extreme folly and desperate madness it is, for Usury, which is not the tenth
part of a man's money, to cast away his Soul; which thou ought not to hazard
for the gain of the whole World. See Matthew. 16.26.
lose your immortal Souls, and heaven it self for ever, as every one does who
lives and dies in the sin of Usury, though he get by it a little painted
earth, see Psalm. 15.1, 5.

The Lord awaken poor deluded Souls, that they may depart from the Usurers
Tents, and from that foul destroying sin of USURY, before they depart out of
this present World, being deprived of the use of Light and Life, and before the
decree be gone forth against them, that they shall die the second death, which
is burning, burning, burning in a Lake of Fire for ever and ever. See Ezekiel.
18.12, 13. Rev. 21.8.

Number. 14.7. And Lastly, What I say to those which even now I named, I say to
all: O let them all leave that horrid sin of Usury, and hate it and shun it
like a biting Serpent: For a By Pagnine and others, morsura serpentis.
Serpent it is and has been called before I was born, as I have formerly shown
it. And let this be also taken into consideration, (for consideration is here
allowed, which if Usury be meant it is prohibited) that it will be your wisdom
to choose the safest; for which advice I will name six great Divines at
present, who say it.

1. Antoninus sum. part 1. number. 1. tit. 20. de regul. juris.
Antoninus, It is a Maxim in Law, faith he, that in doubtful cases we must
take the safest way.

2. Andreas Alciates, respons. l. 1. council, 3. cap. 24.
Alciates, When it is a doubt or question, whether a thing be a sin or no, it
is to be held that it is a sin, because that it is the safest opinion. So he,

3. Dr. Ham. in his Pract. Cat.
Dr. Hammond, In matters of this Nature, I conceive it to be our duty to take
the safest course.

4. Archbishop Usher in his Body of Divinity, p. 300.
So Archbishop Usher, It will be our best way to take the surest course, which
is wholly to forbid it (speaking of Usury.)

5. Mr. Fr. Whidden the Elder, in his Topaz. p. 85. So Mr. Nosvvorthy.
So pious Mr. Francis Whidden says the same, In doubtful things take the
surest and safest way: Instancing in this.

Which 2. Manuduceth and brings me to the Figure mentioned and promised in the
said Title Page, and here set out and represented in the next Page, for a
Christian Traveller to make his choice of one of the vvays lying before him in
the said Figure, which now immediately follows.

Of Two Ways; One Safe leading to Heaven, the Other a Dangerous and Deadly,
leading to Hell.

The Safe Way is not to lend upon Usury, according to Psalm. 15.5.

The Dangerous and Deadly is lending upon Usury, as Ezekiel represents it, chapter
18.12, 13. whereby a Christian Traveller is put and left to choose one.

A Wide Gate, and coming in, Mat. 7.13. A Little Gate, Matthew. 7.13. The Left
Hand Rosy Hedge. The dangerous and deadly way is a broad way called Usury,
hedged in with two pleasant easy hedges, one at the right hand the other at
the left; and having at his Entry a very wide Gate, Mat. 7.13. and ugly Devils
called Murderers, walking in it, and the lake of fire, Rev. 21.8. at the end
of it, into which the Devils called murderers do cast Usurers, that walk in it,
therein to burn and die to all eternity, according to Ezekiel's words: He has
given forth upon Usury and has taken increase, shall he then live? he shall not
live he shall surely dye, chapter 18.12, 13. The Right Hand Rosy Hedge. Here choose
Christian Traveller thy way, and take either the left hand and dangerous way,
if thou dare adventure among Devils and murderers which will surely cast thee
into the lake of fire, in case thou walk in the way of Usury, therein to suffer
the vengeance of eternal fire, or the right way which (though a narrow way) yet
is safe being without Usury, and full of holy Angels which will conduct thee
into Gods holy hill called heaven there to dwell to all eternity, in that 15
Ps. of that sweet Singer of Israel. Or thus, Judge thou therefore which is the
safest wa, says reverend Mr. Fr. Whiddon in his* Topaz. p. 86. The Lord of
heaven and earth direct thee into this way, inclining thy heart unto it. Amen.
So be it. The Left Hand Thorny Hedge. The fafe way is the narrow way, Mat. 7.14.
without Usury, shown by holy David Psalm. 15.5. in these words, Lord, who shall
dwell in thy holy hill? He that puts not his money to Usury: being hedged in
with two thorny hedges, one at the right hand the other at the left hand, and
having a very strait gate to it, Mat. 7.14. and the holy Angels meeting those
that walk in it, and Heaven at the end of it. -- The Right Hand Thorny Hedge.

Number: 16. A Citation annexed.
WHich cites all the Commitants of that odious sin of Usury, to answer for
themselves before Jesus Christ, (who has said, lend, hoping for nothing from
thence ( Luke 6.35.) at that great and terrible day, when Moses, and David, and
Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, and Nehemiah will appear against them, and stand with
great boldness before them, to bear witness against them; together with very
many Ancient Councils, and a Multitude of particular Fathers, which have most
bitterly written against them; and a numberless Company of School Divines,
Casuists, The civil Lawyers and Papists, which have written so much against
Usury, will condemn the Patrons of Usury in the day of Judgment. Phil. Caesar.
p. 20.
Civilians and a world of Protestant Writers and Preachers, Lutheran, and
reformed, Danish, Polandish, Dutch, French, Scottish, Irish, English,
Helvetian, Belgic, besides Heathenish Poets, Orators, Philosophers,
Historians; and when Mahomet himself also whom his Alcaron is against Usury and
forbids it, and with his blinded Mahometants will arise against Usurers, and
testify against them: As the Lord Jesus Christ tells us that the men of Ninive
With whom we may join other Heathens too, which do abhor Usury, the they never
heard Christ speak against it, but their Philosophers only by whose witness
their Pains in Hell shall be increased, which in so great a light of the Gospel
have remained impenitent. P. Caesar p. ^5.
will rise against that generation, which then lived and heard him, and saw his
wonders and would not repent, Mat. 12.41. Even as that sad Generation of
Usurers which hearing him in his Ministers saying, let us leave off this Usury*
Nehemiah 5.10. And will not repent tho guilty of a sin which is called Sodomy
in nature, by great Hugo. Comm. in Psalm. 15.
Divines. I add, and when the Jews also themselves, which from time to time
have been great Usurers, yet will rise against the Christian Usurers, otherwise
The civil Lawyers and Papists, which have written so much against Usury, will
condemn the Patrons of Usury in the day of Judgment. Phil. Caesar. p. 20.
baptized Jews, because they will not lend to their brethren, which are Jews,
and they, being Christians, would lend to their Christian brethren upon Usury
and condemn them, O sad! sad! sad!

Thus that faithful Martyr and Witness of Jesus Christ, John Huss who was burnt
at Costnich for Religion, cited the Council of Costnich, which condemned him;
saying, after a hundred years hence ye shall answer God and me; which fell out
accordingly, when one hundred years after great Luther rose against the Pope as
he did the same time rise against all the Usurers of the world by his writing
that famous Book De Taxanda Vsura, of Taxing Usury, answerably thereunto, I am
risen also now, to tax Usury, and Usurers in and by those Books which I have
written, and shall write against the same; and do tell Usurers to their faces,
by this Citation, that they must and shall answer; I will not say an hundred
years hence, but very shortly, because the end of the world and that great day
are at hand, and the Judge stands at the door, ready to judge them: Answer, I
say they must; those learned and great men, which in great numbers have spoken,
written and testified against them, and their wicked and ungodly trade of
Usury, and me also the unworthiest of all the Lords servants* who have written
several books against them, and Preached at least fifteen Sermons besides at a
public Lecture in a certain Town called Kings-Bridge, to reclaim them, but
could not work upon them (some few excepted, which were then converted by Gods
blessing) and do now tell them, that they must prepare themselves as well as
they can; if they will needs stand it out to defend that detestible sin of
Usury, as a great Parliament of England calls it, and that they bring with them
their strong reasons, Papers, and Writings, if they think they will be able to
endure that terrible fire, which will devour before that formidable Judge, who
will judge them and me, and thereby put an end to this great Controversy which
is between them and his Godly servants; which together with my dispiseable self
will make their appearance against them, and with great animosity testify
against them, whereunto shall be added no more than this. And who, being a
wretched Usurer, whom his own Which diverse learned Writers do therefore call
Forum or a Court wherein Men are Convented, accused, condemned. Philo. Gregor.
Theol. Langius in Justin Martyr.
Conscience has before hand accused and condemned, even in this world, and
abide his coming; and with his Usury bills and bonds stand before him and that
devouring fire. Oh dreadful! dreadful! dreadful! Oh that these poor deluded
Creatures, whom we call Usurers would hearken to this, and be persuaded; would
burn their Usury books and Papers: As a certain Minister did cause to Order his
Usury Papers to be burnt after his decease (as one of his near Relations told
me) Execrating Usury, would not live one half hour longer in that evil of
Evils! would listen no more to their former Leaders, which misled them, and
trust no further to their nice discourses, and subtle distinctions (as that
renowned Arch B. Usher in his Body of Divin. p. 300.
Lord Primate of Ireland Arsh-Bishop Usher calls them) as they tender the
Salvation of their immortal souls, and would be ruled by the unerring word of
God, which prohibits all Usury, properly so called, Deuteronomy. 23.19. And shows
what it is, even any Usurious increase, Ezekiel. 18.8. Which cuts in pieces all
frivolous Effugies, Shifts, and distinctions used by the Defendants, of
shameless and opprobrious Usury. The Lord my God awaken them, and all their
Adherents by this direful Citation; that they may repent and turn, and not be
cast into the bottomless Pit, therein to burn, burn, burn, to all Eternity.

This Citation is added by reason of some, who being Usurers and Vsurerers
Champions, will not be answered; nor convinced of the unlawfulness of Usury, by
the strongest arguments from the holy Scriptures deduced, and by the greatest
Wits and holiest men in the World; such I mean as the Holy Fathers, and Godly
Protestant Writers, were, and are, managed Syllogistically and otherwise, which
has enforced this Citation to come forth, citing them to answer to that which
is laid to their Charge about Criminal and detestible Usury, before Jesus
Christ, who will impartially decide this grand Question, whether Usury properly
so called, and is now practiced in the world; with his own sacred mouth,
according to his Gospel lend freely (as some render his words) hoping for
nothing from thence, Luke 6.35. To stop all Usurers mouths who then and
thereupon will be judged to Aeviternal Death and Flames, except they now
repent. O direful, direful, direful, Desire!

Number. 17. I superadd; and because some will condemn me for being singular, as
if none did proceed so harshly against Criminal Usury: I will take Bishop
Downa^. upon Psalm. 15.5.
Downam for my second (as I am wont in all matters concerning Usury, to bring
some of the holiest and learned men, that have flourished in the world,
through the ages past, to stand by me, next unto God, and his holy Word) His
going to work is this.

1. He frames a Sylogism to prove the Usurers most certain Damnation without
repentance, out of Psalm. 15.1, 5. Lord who shall dwell in thy holy hill -- He
that puts not his money to Usury.

And his Syllogism is this.
He that shall inherit the Kingdom of God, does not put forth his money to Usury.

But thou (say) to the Usurer, or him that lends for gain, do put forth thy
money to Usury.

Thou therefore (unless thou repent) shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven,
but shall be cast out of the heavenly Jerusalem, and Revel. 21.8.
shall have thy part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone: Thus
famous and learned Bishop Downam, Syllogiseth and writes as bitterly as I;
yea, much more against the wretched Usurer, which shows how my Doctrine
concerning the ^^surers Damnation is confirmed by this great man.

2. He Cites him to answer him at Christ's Tribunal, saying; Unto which
Syllogism, let every Usurer Consider how he shall be able to ANSWER BEFORE THE
LORD. Mark this, poor Condemned VSVRER.



So that here two of us thus bring this Citation against the said miserable
Usurer, and we have a Proverbial saying. Ne Hercules quidem contra Duos.

Hercules himself cannot stand before and against two. And to make this a
threefold Cord which cannot be broken, I can add a third viz. Doctor Fenton,
that famous London Minister.
Doctor Fenton who says, alas, poor Soul, whither will thou turn thy self for
succor, when thy best Friends forsake thee? what will thou plead for thy self,
when thou come before the Eternal Judge upon thy Trial?

But if God himself, besides us, be against him, and for us, as indeed he is,
(as has been sufficiently proved) it must needs be worse for him to subsist,
and to stand it out; for if God be for us, who can be against us, Romans 8.31.
Where let this be thought upon also, What a dreadful day that great day of
Judgment will be to the Usurer so cited; if that which some write of that
terrible day should be true, viz. That it will last thousands of years, I say,
if not the termining any thing about it, but contenting my self only with the
naming the Authors of that Opinion, which are, Gemera. Sank. Cap. Col. Israel.
Gemara, All Cabalists, Carpentarius.
Carpentarius, Rabbi Ketina. Though I do not deliver it as a Scriptural Verrity.
Rabbi Ketina: And lest it should be thought strange that I mention this thing,
I must and shall make this Apology for my self, that the famous Mead also
mentions the same in his Writings upon the Revelation. The poor cited Usurer
may do well to pause a little upon this Citation.

The Usurers Last WILL and TESTAMENT, Foregoing his burial which is to come,
added, out of Thomas Beards Doctors of Divinity Theater of Gods Judgments, p.
476.
MY Soul, Number. 18.
quoth the Usurer, I bequeath to the Devil who is Owner of it, my Wife likewise
to the Devil, who induced me to this ungodly trade of Life, and my Deacon to
the Devil, for soothing me up, and not reproving me for my faults, and in this
desperate persuasion died incontinently; which occasioned me therefore to
reprove Usurers so sharply as I do, and to deal with Usury so roughly, and to
Condemn it to the Pit of Hell; lest one Usurer or other that heard, or read
me, should like this Usurer, bequeath me also, when he is dying, to the Devil,
for soothing him up in his sin, as doubtless many Usurers do and will so
bequeath, when they lie upon their death beds, those Ministers, which defend
Usury, for soothing them up in that abominable sin, and not speaking, or
preaching against it all the year long, as their Hearers tell me, who Condemn
them for it here on earth, as God. will hereafter in the place of his dreadful
Judgment.

The NARATIVE, Promised in the Title Page of an Usurers burying by Satan. Out
of Lodowick Lloid in his Pilgrimage of Princes, p. 107. Superadded.
AN Usurer being dead, no man would bear his Corpse to be buried by the Law of
that City, but such as were of that faculty; all the just and good men of that
City could not heave up the Coffin; at length came four of his own Science, I
mean Usurers, which easily took up the Coffin, and bare it; to whom one of the
City said; behold four Devils can carry the fifth easily. (Note, they call these
four Usurers Devils, and the dead Usurer a Devil too) and being brought to
Church, the Priest knowing what he was, said, that he should not be buried in
the Church, for that the Church is the house of God, and not a Grave for wicked
men: His friends carried him unto the high way thinking to make his grave
there; There the King's Officers withstood, and said, that the Kings high way
was not meet to bury any man in. In striving between themselves, the Devil
appeared, and said, If they would give him leave, he would bear him into a meet
place: They being well contented therewith, the Devil took him out of sight,
and buried him, where he uses to bury, in his Chiefest Chapel, in HELL.

This is inserted to make way for the Usurers future burying, which is to come,
when my other Usury books come forth, and to show, what dreadful thoughts they
had in old time of Usury; that the poor and Condemned Usurer may fear, and
repent and not be buried in that woeful place of torment, called Hell.

Which God in mercy grant.
MY Final Prayer now is to my God, Number. 19.
who has carried me all along through the boisterous and controversial Sea of
Usury, and graciously brought me to my desired Haven, that in mercy he would
look upon poor Usurers Souls, and influence the Contents of this Book with his
Celestial Benediction, as that they may look up to him therein, as calling them
out of Darkness into his marvelous Light and so may repent with speed and live,
I say with speed, because all men's lives, and so theirs too, do run not upon an
Helixe, which still increases, and enlarges but a Circle, where arriving to
their Meridian, they decline again, and at last fall under their by God
destinated Horizon, which to they all press amain; so that their sitting and
living here cannot be long, nor their sitting afar off, because their breath is
but short of it self, also themselves make it daily shorter by their execrable
Usury, which will bring them, except they repent, quickly to their by God
predestined Doom, which is Death and Destruction Dolor and Damnation, to an
endlels Duration. O my God let Usurers and their Defendants imbibe this, and
digest it thoroughly, that they may not dye and perish suddenly, falling as
Idolaters, into that Lake of Fire, which burns with Fire and Brimstone
everlastingly. Rev. 21.8. For thou have said of the Usurer that takes increase
and gives forth upon Usury, (Or dying still) he shall dye, in Hebrew (...)
meaning thereby Eternal Death. Down. in Psalm. 15.
Shall he then live? He shall not live, he shall surely dye: His blood shall be
upon him. Ezekiel. 18.12, 13.

O dreadful God, what a dreadful death, this death needs must be; because the
poor damned Usurer will be always dying, and yet living in pains, in pangs, in
torments, in flames of fire and insufferable burnings world without end. And
therefore O most merciful God, have mercy upon him that truly and from the
bottom of his heart he may repent, and not fall into that bottomless Pit, and
suffer the vengeance of Eternal Fire. Amen. Amen. So be it.

TRANSCRIPTS Annexed against USURY: Stated, 1. Out of the Institutions of the
Which is so old as that that Ancient Emp^^our Justinian in his time did
comprize it in a little Book says Franc. Mancinus ad Gambarum. Who so highly
prizeth it.
Canon Law reviewed by John Paul, Lancelot the Perusine. The 4. Book. The 7.
Title of Usury.
USury is whatsoever beyond the borrowed Principal is taken, Number. 20.
that is, says the Joh. Baptis^^.
Expositor of this Description, is taken by a compact for loan. And

The Sacred Canons do prosecute Usurers with a multiplicity of punishments.
For, besides that they brand them with Infamy, they do not admit them to the
T^^t is to the receiving of the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Inn. And the
Expositor adds, that an Usurer must not be present in the Church when Sacred
things and Services are there performed. Cap. 1. Eod. in 6.
Communion, nor will they let any receive Oblations at their hands. And if they
be of the Ministry, they shall hazard both their Office and their
Ecclesiastical Benefices.

And yet farther, None may under the punishment in the Quid sit satisfacere,
vide (...). 1 F. qui sat. cog.
Gregorian Constitution comprised set unto Usurers any houses, or if any be
set, let them have them. And if any dye in that Crime, they shall be deprived
of Ecclesiastical Burial. And this holds so firm, as that if Usurers, when they
are dying, shall in their last Will require Quid sit satisfacere, vide (...). 1
F. qui sat. cog.
satisfaction to be made for Usury taken, expressing a certain quantity, or
indistinctly, yet till satisfaction be made they shall be unburied. But if any
contrary to the said Sanction shall dare to bury them, they shall be liable to
the punishments by the Lateran Council promised. Their last Wills and
Testaments also made Scilicet nonfacta satisfactione nec Idonea praestita
Cautione. John Bap.
otherwise than according to the foresaid Constitution, shall be of no
Validity, but Ipso facto shall be void: * nor will it avail any thing, if any
do allege that to redeem Captives, or to give Alms he lent upon Usury.
Forasmuch as the Usurer is not to be dispensed the more for that, because a man
may not lawfully make a lie to save another life, nor to rob. So bitter this
Law is against the Usurer; What the Canonical Law here says next, is of
Restitution to be made, not only by the Usurers themselves, but also by their
Heirs; Where this Law says further thus: That if a man have borrowed money upon
Usury, and have sworn to the Usurer not to call for it again; yet the Judge may
by an Ecclesiastical censure, compel the Usurer both to desist from exacting
Usuries, and to remit the Oath, and also to restore what he has exacted, that
none may gain by deceit and fraud, so exceeding strict is this Law: But yet it
does not take away a Non inducit liberam remissionem. Idem John Bap.
free forgiving of Usury money to be restored, says the Expositor of this Law.

2. The second Transcript is out of the famous Doctor Jer. Tailors Duct. Dubit.
added to the Canon Law, because some will be ready to say, observing the
dreadfulness, and bitterness of this Law, what are these Canons to us
Protestants? therefore I subjoyn this great and renowned Protestant Doctor, his
Doctor Jeremy Tailor. in Duct. Dubit. L. 3. C. 3. mihi p. 196.
words are: In things permitted for the hardness of men's hearts, or for public
necessity, the permission of the Prince is no absolution from the Authority of
the Church, supposing Usury to be unlawful. Civil Laws permit Usury (meaning
some, not all) and the Church forbids it, in Case the CANONS are to be
preferred. For, tho it be permitted, yet by Law no man is compelled to be an
Usurer. Let the Reader read the rest in the third Transcript out of holy Mr.
Greenham p. 41. In his Works.
Greenham, who says: Usury is the Devil's Mystery to turn Silver into Gold: It
is a sin that has many Advocates and Patrons. They say, to the poor give
freely, to the mean lend freely, of the rich take Usury. The Lord was never the
Author of this Distinction. Which is proved by Scripture Romans 3.8.
Deuteronomy. 23.19. The Jew of a Jew might not take Usury; but the link of a
Christian is nearer than of a Country. Their brotherhood was by Country, ours
is by Redemption. See the rest in his Works.

A Fourth, Out of the renowned and pious R. Richard Capel. in his Oppon. to
Usury.
Capel. saying, Ainswoth observes that Usury is fitly called biting, because it
biteth and consumes the borrower and his substance, and very few takers to
Usury save their own by it, but the most of them are utterly undone and bitten,
as it were, to Death by it. Doctor Rainhald (then whom the world hardly ever
saw a better man and a better Scholar,) in his Book of Divorce. p. 8. Holds
this Distinction between biting and not biting Usury, used by some late
Divines, but a mere Flam. The best and best learned of our Prelatical and
Antiprelatical Divines, says he, (naming in his Margin Jewel, Andrew, Doctor
Py. B. Downam, Fenton, Bolton) have taken good and great pains to prove Usury
to be a thing utterly unlawful. Mr. Dod makes it a breach of the eighth
Commandment; even As also does the Canon Law.
Theft. And Vddal in his Obed. of the Gospel is so severe and sharp against
Usury, as that there he says, that it is as clear in the World, that Usury is
a sin, as that Christ came into the World to save Sinners. Now here if any
being contentious, and a Defendant of Usury; let him quarrel with these holy
men, and the ancient Canons of the ancient Fathers. For their words I
transcribe here, they are not mine, and therefore let them chide with them why
they will be so bitter, so censorious, so harsh in their Writings against
Usurers: Let him contend and dispute it with Ainsworth, the old Mr. Dod, with
the learned Capel. with B. Jewel, B. Andrew, B. Downam, with blessed and holy
Bolton, with the the unanswered Doctor Py, with that incomparable Doctor
Rainols, with the renowned Doctor Tailor: With all the best learned Prelatical
and Antiprelatical Divines in England; and with Vddal especialy, why he will
offer to say that it is as clear that Usury is a sin, as that Christ came into
the World to SAVE SINNERS.

And so I will leave him quarrelling with these men, let him come off as well
as well as he can, and I will say no more but this: As David in old time. Psalm.
139.5. Thou have beset me behind and before: So the poor Usurer whom David
condemns, may say to the Lord, now thou have beset me, O Lord, now, behind, in
the end of this writing against me, by all these men, who bring not only their
own words, but thine also against me; and before too, thou have beset me by
that which in the beginning of this Writing is said out of both thy Testaments,
even new as well as old, and ont of all sorts of Writers ancient and recent.
Good Lord, deliver me from this Usury, I humbly and heartily pray thee, Amen,
Amen.

A fifth out of the Famous Edward Cook in his 3. part of his Institutions of the
Laws of England Edit cap. 70. Eliz. 13. And Jac. c. 17.
Edward Cook, by whom Usury is thus well stated against Usury ill stated, by T.
P. Usury is directly against the Law of God, Psalm. 15.5. Deuteronomy. 23.19. Ezekiel.
18.12, 13. And chapter 22. And the reason why it was permitted to an Hebrew, or to
an Infidel, was because it was a means, either to exterminate them, or to
depauperate them. Thus he.

And again against all Usury he writes thus; and its adjudged by Authority of
Parliament that ALL VSVRY, being forbidden by the Law of God, is a sin and
detestable; and he adds that also it is enacted by Parliament, that ALL VSVRY (
N. 3. twice) is unlawful, that is to say against the Laws of the Realm.

GODLINESS Epitomizd IN TWO TABLES, VIZ. FIRST, THE RESOLUTION-TABLE: EXHIBITED
BY CHRISTOPHER JELINGER, M.A. WHICH May be fixed on Men's Chamber-Doors for a
Memorial.
CONTAINING Twelve Gracious Resolutions for Walking in Newness of Life, every
Morning to be taken up, as comprizing the Duty of Man.
I. I Will arise now, and by the grace of God, seek him whom my Soul loves, in
my Closet by private Prayer, and even wrestle with him as Jacob did, Genesis
32.24. and not leave him till I have an answer of him; and after that I will
join with my Family in the same duty.

II. I will read the holy Scriptures likewise, at least two Chapters a day, one
in the morning out of the Old Testament, another out of the New in the evening,
to my Family and apart; and I will mark the chief contents thereof, and turn
them into prayer, to help me in praying.

III. And I will delight my self this day and every day in my dearest Lord, as
I am required, Psalm. 37.4. and as his Father delighted himself in him from all
eternity, Prove. 8.30. walking with him in my Chamber or elsewhere, Arm in Arm,
as a Bride with her best Beloved; and talking with him and looking upon him by
faith, Isa. 45.22. Heb. 12.2. and giving my loves unto him, Cant. 7.12. even my
love-desires, love embraces, love-kisses, Psalm. 2.12. Psalm. 73.25. and craving
his loves of him, Cant. 7.13. Thus by the Grace of God I will live the life of
love with my dear Love, the Lord Jesus Christ.

IV. And because I do daily break Wedlock with him, by breaking his
Commandments, I will daily return again unto him, he inviting me graciously
thereunto, and saying, Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return
again unto me, Jer. 3.1. and I will even anew espouse my self unto him, in
faith, in righteousness, and in truth, desiring him to return again unto me,
and to espouse himself so too, according to his most kind promise, Hos. 2.19.

V. And I will not so neglect as I have done, Meditating; but by the assistance
of my God, Meditate this day and every day on the four last things, Death,
Judgment, Heaven, Hell; and will have my Conversation in Heaven day and night,
according to Jos. 1.8. Phil. 3.20. and when I awake in the morning, I intend to
be still with God both then and all the day long, according to Psalm. 139.18.
When I awake I am still with thee* which makes me to break out into this
acclamation, O sweet time so spent with God and Christ both day and night.

VI. And whereas my talk heretofore has been but idle, vain, foolish, or
impertinent, I will hereafter by the power of God. bridle my tongue, Psalm.
39.1. and speak as my Savior of Heaven. and the things that appertain to the
Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. and that at my Table especially, Deuteronomy. 6.7.

VII. And by the same power I will keep my self from every evil way, like the
same holy David, Psalm. 119.104. and like that Parabolical Merchant, sell all
for the Pearl, for Christ's sake, Ma^th^ 13.45, 46, for it shall never be said
that Christ and I parted for an odd Groat, I mean one sin or other, allowing my
self in one odd ill favored iniquity or other.

VIII. And I will make diligent enquiries, whether there be any in the place,
or elsewhere about me, whom I may remember, relieve, and show kindness too for
Jonathans, I should say, for Christ's sake, like David, 2 Samuel 9.1. Since God
has given me an estate to do good with: so say (if thou have this worlds
goods) I am resolved to cast my bread upon the waters, and to provide my self
Bags which wax not old, a treasure in the Heavens, which fails not, where no
Thief approaches, neither moth corrupts, Luke 12.33.

IX. The Lords day I will observe, when it comes by Gods help, so strictly and
so holily, as if I were in Heaven with Christ that day; and there shall not
come any worldly talk from me, nor will I do any evil or worldly work, nor have
any earthly thoughts, but I will spend it wholly to and with the Lord, whose
day it is, in holy exercises, as Reading, Singing, Praying, Hearing,
Instructing my Family, and such like; being with blessed John wholly in the
Spirit, Rev. 1.10. and when I may conveniently, I will on the same day receive
my blessed Savior in the Holy Sacrament of his blessed Supper, laboring to be
duly prepared for it, that I may not receive it unworthily to mine own eternal
condemnation, 1 Cor. 11.29.

X. Fasting and Humiliation-days I will keep also, by the same divine power, to
the Lord my God, at least once a month; and before the Sacrament of the Lords
blessed Supper, and when there is great need, like pious Queen Esther, which so
resolved likewise, saying, I and my Maidens will fast also, Esther 4.16. and at
other times also, yea always I will strive to be as sober, humble, and lowly,
as God will enable me.

XI. I will moreover examine my self every Evening before I go to Bed (besides
Praying, Reading, Singing, which at that time must be done also, with my Family
and apart) what evils have I thought, done, and spoken, and what good I have
done, that I may bless God for the one, and ask him forgiveness for the other,
upon my humble confessions and deprecations made to his Heavenly most Sacred
Majesty, Lament. 3 40. Hos. 14.1. Jer. 3.13.

XII. And I will not rest here neither, but by the help of God I will labor to
be as chaste, just, meek, patient under the Cross, as possibly I may be; and any
other New York that I have not yet done, and God shall command me to do in his
Word, and by his Ministers; besides the forementioned, I will labor to do
vigorously, constantly, and to his only praise and glory, and in faith, and out
of my unfeigned love which I bear unto him: And when all is done, I will by the
Grace of God not trust to any of my doings, they being all defiled and
imperfect by reason of sin, Isa. 64.6. but only and wholly to my dear and only
Savior, and to his blessed merits for life and salvation: For there is no
salvation in any other, Acts 4.12. And in his name shall the Gentiles trust,
says the Lord, Matthew. 12.21.

I add, But O let these good and gracious resolutions be endeavors also; and
as a Merchant, when he is resolved to go to such a City, there to Trade, Jam.
4.30. goes and does so; so do you, being so resolved to live so, to trade so,
to walk so; go and do so, through Christ strengthening of you, Phil. 4.13. and
my most humble prayer to God for you is and shall be, that he will be your good
speed, strengthen, settle, and stablish you, that you may hold out to the end,
1 Pet. 5.10. Amen, So be it.

Deuteronomy. 6.9. And thou shall write (these words) upon the Posts of thine House,
and on thy Gates:

THOMAS a KEMPIS de Imit. Christi, l. 1. c. 19.
Omni die renovare debemus propositum nostrum, at q^e dicere, Adjuva me, Domine
Deus, in bono Proposito, and Sancto servitio tuo: and da mihi nunc hodie
perfect incipere, quia nihil est, quod hactenus feci. Et paulo post, Justorum
propositum in gratia Dei potius quam in propria sapientia pendet, in quo and
semper confidunt, quicquid a^^ipiunt. In English thus:

Daily should we renew our Purposes and say, Help me my God, in this my good
purpose, and in thy holy service, and grant that I may now this day begin
perfectly; for that which I have done hitherto is worth nothing. And a little
after, The purpose of just men depends upon Gods Grace, on whom they always
rely for whatsoever they take in hand:

I superadd, But rest not here: but read over my whole Spiritual Merchant, in
which this is included. Which may be had at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard.

SECONDLY, THE EXAMINATION-TABLE, OR Examen Conscientiae, OR, SELF-EXAMINATION,
Containing Twelve IN QUIRIES.
I. WHat Evils have I thought, done, and spoken this day: and what good have I
done and received?

II. More particularly: Have I not abused mine eyes by wanton looks, my tongue
with vain, unprofitable, foolish, or unclean and filthy talking, and jesting,
and by causing my angry voice to be heard on high, or by lying, backbiting,
slandering, swearing, calling of Names or speaking evil of others? And have I
not polluted my hands with uncleanness, or by taking Usury, or by stealing, or
some fraudulent dealing, or by smiting therewith wickedly? and have I not been
exceeding angry* proud, lustful, worldly, covetous, taking too much care and
labor for and about the world? Is not my whole Nature vitiated, corrupted,
disordered, by sin original, so that my heart is even desperately wicked?

III. Have I not misspent much precious time about and in idle and needless
visits, Playing, Carding, or Dicing, or too much sleeping? and when I rode or
did go abroad, by little or never minding God and his Word, and Heaven in all
my journey, and going to and fro? and did I not exceed in eating, drinking, and
company keeping?

IV. Have I not been shamefully brief, cold, dead, formal, customary, and
exceedingly carried away with wandering thoughts in all my duties, and
especially in prayer? do I not make a show of godliness, denying the power
thereof?

V. Have I prayed so often as I should, at least in the morning and evening
solemnly, wrestling with God, and darting forth many ejaculatory prayers upon
all occasions, besides joint prayers with my Family, and was I thankful in
prayer for the mercies of this day? nay took I any notice of them?

VI. Did I read Gods holy Word, at least evening and morning time?

VII. What time did I spend this day in meditating on my latter end, Judgment,
Heaven, and Hell? any or none?

VIII. What mercy did I show this day to any, for Jonathans, I mean Christ's
sake? did I succor any by any corporal alms? or did I not cruelly shut up the
bowels of compassion against some? did I visit any that needed it, according to
my duty?

IX. And what have I been in company? did I reprove, instruct, admonish? had I
any good communications with any of heaven and heavenly things? and what have I
been in my house, place, and calling? and toward my Relations, Wife, Husband,
Children, Servants, Neighbors, in order to the saving of their precious souls,
as more worth than all the world?

X. And if the day did afford matter of Sorrow, did I fret or did I lie in dust
before the Lord my God?

XI. Have I wrestled against Satan, and stroven against sin to overcome it, and
his temptations, and that with success? have I left any sin, prevailed against
any temptation, or have I not been shamefully rather foiled and defeated by
this and that temptation?

XII. Was I careful to live by faith, and to be found in Christ, not having
mine own righteous, but the righteousness of God in Christ this day? Phil. 3.9.

I add, first, that this same directory may serve also for private Confession
to be made upon this examination, as we shall be found guilty.

Secondly, I add, Not only the Philosophers have used the Examination of
Conscience, as Pythagoras, Seneca, Plutarch: But poor Barbarous Indians, by the
relation of Apulejus, took an account every evening of the good and evil they
had done each day: and therefore for shame, Oh for shame, let not Christians,
professing godliness, come short of these poor Heathens in this matter of
Examination.

Thirdly, I add, One Sermon de Consc.
Deliro, a noted Interpreter of the Scripture, and after him, the Author of the
Holy Court, relate both, the Vision of a Wise man, who on a day sought for the
Court, or House of Conscience; and it seemed to him, he beheld a City built
with goodly Architecture, beautiful with five Gates, which had as many narrow
paths, ending in one large way: Upon this way stood a Register, who took the
Names of all passengers to record them: Beyond that, he saw two Tribunes
attended with a great concourse of Common People, who governed the inferior
parts of the City: Above was beheld a Citadel, wherein a great Princess
commanded, who had a Scepter in her hand, and Crown on her head: By her side
was a Lady very ancient and venerable, who in one hand held a torch, wherewith
she lighted the Princess; and in the other a goad, wherewith she pricked her,
if she governed not according to her discretion. The wise man amazed, asked in
his heart, what all this meant? and he heard a voice within, which said unto
him, Behold, Thy self, ere thou art aware, art arrived at the House (or Court)
of Conscience, which thou soughtest for. The five gates which thou saw, are
the five senses. The way wherein they all meet, is common sense. All the people
which thou saw enter in by heaps, are the objects of the Creatures of the
world, which first touch our senses, before they pass into the Soul. The
Register is Imagination, that keeps record of all things. The two Tribunes
are the two Appetites; the one called the Appetite of Concupiscence; the other
the appetite of Anger, extremely striving to oppose all obstacles which oppose
its good, real, or pretended. This Mass of people are the passions, which make
ill work in the inferior parts of the City. The Princess in the Citadel with
a Crown and Scepter, is Reason. The ancient Lady by her side is Conscience. She
has a torch to show the good way, and the goad to prick those that wander: all
which I apply thus: Answerable hereunto, I say to the Courteous Reader, who
shall read this Table, and happily never was yet at this Court of Conscience
here described, and at this Examination here prescribed; and so, just so art
thou ere thou wast aware, arrived at the House or Court of Conscience; and
therefore being thus entered into it, examine thy self, according to this
Examination-Table, and according to the Order of the Court of Conscience here
described, lying low in thy very shame, as Jeremiah 2.26. Before the Lord; and
yet, sitting withal like a Judge upon thy self, according to 1 Cor. 11.31. For
this sitting and self-judging, and self-examining, this Court permits, and
no other besides it. And that thou may do it effectualy and successfully, is
the most hearty prayer of thy most affectionate Friend, who has penned these
lines for thee, and who, when they dropped from his pen, besought God in thy
behalf that the same may be written by himself in thy very heart, as with a pen
of a Diamond, Jer. 17.1. And that as Justice sits in the foresaid Court of
Conscience, and even of thy Conscience, inscribing all thy sins, so Mercy may
sit by her, blotting out all that Justice has therein written, putting the
point of its pen upon thy tender heart, it being become truly penitent by its
self-judging and self-examining, and Gods blessing and mighty working going
with it. So, even so be it.

Unto which twelve Resolutions and twelve Examinations are now added twelve
Holy Experimented Instructions, which this Author together with the foresaid
two Tables Humbly Dedicates to the highly Honored HENERY CORNISH one of the
Sherifs of London and the Worshipful JOHN UPTON Esquire Whom both God bless and
Preserve.
THE 1. Instruction is, Be much with God in Praying, and praising. (1) in
praying and as it were all prayer, as David was, who says in Psalm. 109.4. I am
Prayer, that is to say, be praying as Gods Elect, even day and night, Luke
18.7, 8. Crying to God by Night as well as by day; which I for my part cannot
but practice still, according to Lament. 2.19. Arise; cry out in the night;
and that which is storied of Christ, in Mark. 1.35. He rose a Great while
before day, and prayed; For then none can hinder me, and then I shall have time
enough, to perform all my Noctural Exercises, and to get an answer by craving
a token for good, Ps. 86.7. Which to me commonly is Triumphant shedding of
leaves, which in such solemn praying I seldom miss, and to Gods Glory here
do mention that others may do so to; and glorify God thereupon, because that
assures them that their Prayers are heard, I add; that after such praying, we
should still lay up something in store for the poor Saints according to 1 Cor.
16.9. And 1 Timothy 6. And St. Chrisostomes pious Advisement.

2. In praising God; for how full are David's Psalms of such praising, viz.
Psalm. 92.95.96.98.110.150. And others, so also Rev. 5. and Rev. 19. So that I
for my part, though I am but a poor worm, yet am emboldened thereby to get up
to Heaven and to sing, as it were with those Heavenly Quiristers which there
sing the Song of Moses and many others? and that by Night as well as by day, as
also at Constantinople they were wont to do in the days of Ennadius; Anno 459.
For which end I have learned sundry of David's Psalms by heart, that in the dark
I may sing them like Paul and Silas, Act. 16. to the praise of my Maker, as
well as when it is light, which I intend to do as long as I live; and so till I
enter ternity there to sing the Songs of Zion to all Eternity; and I have read
of an Eminently holy man, which scarce had his like in the time wherein he
flourished, that most of his work was Singing of Praises, and that, when he was
near his end he cried out, bring the Bible, and let us, sing the Psalms of
David; and that, when he came to Halelujah, he doubled and trebled it, yea four
or five times he would say it, and that when he did sing, the Angels would sing
too by his Bedside in the Chamber, which made him cry out I hear the Angels
sing, and after a few hours are over, I shall stand in Mount Sion, and sing the
Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, answerable whereunto, I also, who am but dust
and ashes, yet hope, that I shall shortly, because I am grown Ancient, sing
also with that multitude of singers which now sing in Heaven their Song, which
is Hallelujah, praise the Lord our God, all ye his Servants both small and
great, Rev. 19.5. and my most hearty wish is that all my Readers may hereafter
sing so here as that holy man did, that they also may hear the Angels sing, if
God think it fit, as he, and before him St. Jerome did, who calls God to
witness, that he heard the Angels sing.

Secondly, Meditate Night and day, according to Jos. 1.8. Psalm. 1.3. and
especially, upon Eternity as Paul was wont to do 2 Cor. 4.18. For Oh how that
will keep you from sinning against God; I for my part do use my self to this
Meditation, very much; if there were a law made, that whosoever shall
perpetrate and commit the sin of Adultery or be drunk or swear an Oath, or
steal, or lie, shall lie upon burning Coals for an hours space, and so be
roasted like Laurentius, who would dare to sin any such sin, now the God of
Heaven has made such a Law, that he who commits any such evil, shall lie in
Hell fire it self, called unquencheable not for an hour only, but for ever and
ever, Rev. 21.8. Esa. 66. O dreadful! for this Eternity is such, as that it
exceeds all number, numbering and numbered, so called by the Learned; and that
after the damned wretches have layen in that formidable and tremendous fire so
many Millions of years as there are leaves upon all the Trees in the world,
Hairs upon all men's heads, Piles of grass in all fields, dust upon the whole
surface of the earth, sands on the Sea shore, it may and will even then be
said, now Eternity begins! now Eternity begins! and therefore who should
not beware of the foresaid, and all such like transgressions! O mind the fire
still.

3. Let your eyes be Doves eyes! Cant. 5.12. They write that Doves love to look
into Christaline Rivers, because therein them they epsy their mortal Enemy
the Kite, and evade him, semblably whereunto do you so look into the holy
Scriptures and read you three Chapters a day, that thereby you may see and
escape your mortal Enemy the Devil and his snares, which he lays over all the
world, 2 Timothy 2. but be sure to turn all your Chapters into Prayer, which will
mightily help you in Praying, and the worlds and sins conquest in your fighting
against both.

Fourthly, Be much in Love with God Deuteronomy. 6.5. and with his Son Jesus Christ 1
Pet. 1.7.8. 1 Cor. 16.22. I have read of one, that he was so in love with
Christ: as that he would cry out, he has Ravished me with his Beauty; Oh how
glorious is the blessed Jesus! Oh what shall I do to speak the hundereth part
of his praise! Oh he is sweet! he is altogether Lovely, O for words, O how
Glorious, How Glorius is this precious Jesus! Ah he is sweet, he is sweet, and
now I am sick of Love, and shall die sick of Love, see Cant. 2. Thus he, and oh
that all my Readers would be so taken too with this most fair, most sweet and
precious Jesus! be in fastings often, as Paul was 1 Cor. 9.27. 2 Cor. 11.27.
But I will not press you with Holy Calvines example; who fasted from his dinner
ten years together, spending his time in Holy Exercises, so as that even a
Jesuit calls him a great Faster, it will be well for you, if you can Fast once
a week, which I desire to do, if God help me, till death; let your talk be of
Heaven and Heavenly things as Christ's was, Act. 1.13. After whom I will name
Ignatius Jordan, who would Always be speaking of Heaven too, and with him I
will Join an other most eminent Servant of God, who would talk as if he were
in the third Heaven, thus did the Holy men talk, and so do you, and if you can
meet no body to talk with, then talk with your beloved, Christ, I mean, as his
Spouse in the Canticles; Walking with him Arm in Arm as it were, either in the
feilds as Isack, Genesis 24.33. or in your Chambers, yea in Heaven it self
(mentally) where his Celestial Galleries and Walking places be, Cant. 7.5.
which sweet exercise I also desire to use daily for my delight, going as it
were upon the Streets of Gold above, Rev. 21.21. When I walk on the Streets of
a City or Town to avoid the wanderings of my mind, and I wish also that all the
Saints of God would do so, as also holy Fulgentius did.

7. Be much for Celestial visits, for Oh how pleasant they be! when the day
Star from on high do visits us, Luke 1.79. Where give me leave to give you the
words of a so visited gracious Soul; O Friends, stand by, and wonder, was there
ever such kindness shown and such manifestationss of rich grace made: Christ's
Armor and kisses and smiles turn Hell into Heaven: Oh he is come, he is come,
and how sweet is the Blessed Jesus.!

8. Be as strict, as precise, as pure, as Seraphical spenders and Redeemers of
your time as you can possibly be, Ephesians. 5.15.16. 1 10.3.5. where let me add
these two Councils, (1) Live as you will wish you had lived when you come to
die, (2.) Leave such and such sins, as you shall wish you had left when you
must leave the world.

9. Whatsoever you do for God, do it with all your might, and with all speed,
as some Translators read the Hebrew, in Ecclef. 9.10. because there is no
working in the Grave unto which we are all going.

10. Labor to be always ready to depart, by waiting for your change till it
comes, according to Job. 14.44. and Mat. 24.44. That is to say, from hour to
hour, which both places do import, which makes me so to insist upon such an
hourly preparing for death, because we know not what hour the Son of man will
come, by death or Judgment, so as that I desire to put my self also upon the
practice of it daily, as one that looks for his change hourly, and dares not
promise himself one next day after the present, where give me leave to join
with my self, 3. Noted men more and, 1. Messodamus who as Guido Bituricensis
reports it, being invited to a Dinner for the next day, returned this Answer, I
never promised my self a next day, looking for my change every hour. The second
is Ignatius Jorden who, when he went from home, took his leave of his Wife
still, as if he should never return to her again. The third is Mr. Janewa^ who
when he went to his bed, took leave of his friends every evening, hoping to see
them no more till the morning of his Resurection! and Oh that all my Readers
would be such waiters and preparers too!

Omit nothing of all things here mentioned, and which God will have done
besides, and the imitation of Christ by Name; which is grounded upon Matt.
28.20. Gal. 3.10. Psalm. 15.5. So that I for my part am exeedingly for the not
omitting, and so much the more, since I read the dreadful saying of blessed
Ambrose; a slight neglect becomes an everlasting loss: So as that I dare not
omit the practice of that famous saying of that sweet Singer of Israel, which I
use every night, as I awake out of my first sleep; when I awake I am still with
thee, or as the Hebrew also will bear it, I will be still with thee, Psalm.
139.18. And I must even marry my self anew to Christ, because I do daily break
Wedlock with him, and he bids me to return to him again, Jer. 3.1. Which makes
me then say, I will return to my first Husband, for then it was better with me
than now it is, Hos. Nor can I leave undone any of my other Nocturnal
exercises, but must also feed by Faith upon the bread of life, which is my
Savior Christ, both for my delight and strengthening, that I may be able to go
through so much as I have to do: Which makes me cry out with that good People;
Lord, evermore give me that bread, and a mouth to eat it, even the mouth of
faith I humbly pray thee, John 6.34. And because I do still meet with Enemies
and Oppositions, I must needs fight also and wrestle with sin and Satan,
having before wrestled with God himself, see Genesis 32.24. with Ephesians. 16.11, 12.
And I must even ascend into Heaven it self, and there sit down in those
heavenly places in Christ Jesus, as the holy Ephesians did in their time,
Ephesians. 2.6. And cry out again, Lord Jesus, make me also even now to sit down in
those Heavenly places as thou made the Ephesians sit -- and not being
contented with this, I must cry again with Moses, show me thy glory. Exo.
33.18. for I must needs see it, and thy face too before I have done, that I may
be able to say with Jacob: After all my wrestlings I have seen God face to
face; and the life of my soul is now preserved, Genesis 32.26. O sweet sight: O
that all my Readers might see it and be able to say, we have seen his glory, as
the glory of the only begotten Son of God John 1. And is not the sweet work to
be done by might, and the Reward of it sweet?

12. And above all things (...) be much in believing, and even live by Faith,
Gal. 2.20. That you may rejoice thereupon with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory, 1. Pet. 1.8. Now this, Oh this is the principle thing, and without this
all other things we need are as nothing, for without faith it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11.6. Nor can we truly rejoice without it, but with it we may,
and its done; for proof whereof, I will bring one, who in our time did so
rejoice, even to the admiration of all that were about him, so as that a godly
Minister that saw him and heard him, said, I never saw, never read, never heard
the like; for thus he spoke of his joy in believing, I am as full of joy as I
can hold, O that I could but let you know what I do feel: This is a kin to
Heaven, and if I were not to enjoy any more than this, it were well worth all
the torments that men and Devils can invent, to come through, yea even a Hell,
to such transcendent joys as these: I stand, as it were, with one foot in
Heaven. I hear the melody of Heaven, I see the Angels watching for me etc.

But here a most needful Question comes to be answered. How shall I come by
this Faith and rejoicing? I answer as the wise Virgins did the foolish, craving
some of their Oil, whereby we may understand Faith, which, like Oil makes
cheerful, 1. Pet. 1.8.2. Go to those that sell, Mat. 25.9. And who be they?
Secondly I answer. 1. The Holy Trinity, and first the Father sells it freely,
for he gives it, Phil. 1.29. And therefore you must go to him for it, saying,
Father sell unto me this Oil of Faith, giving it unto me, that I may rejoice
with joy unspeakable. 2. The Son sells it; for he is the Author of it, Heb.
12.2. So as that to him you must go and say also, sweet Jesus sell unto me that
Oil of Faith, that I may rejoice with Joy unspeakable. And thirdly to the
Spirit, who freely and givingly sells it, 1. Cor. 12.9. You must cry also,
blessed Spirit, sell unto me also that holy Oil of Faith, that I may rejoice
gloriously! But hereupon another Question arises, How a man may know that he
has that precious Oil of Faith and holy Joy which comes it? Whereunto I
answer, first if it purify his heart, Act. 15.9. And secondly if he become a
true Saint, and live a truly holy life, Acts. 26.18. And thirdly if his faith
work by love, Gal. 5.6. And makes him love the Brethren dearly and unfeignedly.
See 1 John 3.14, 15. And fourthly if his joy be a glorious joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. So
as that he needs not be ashamed to speak of it, how gloriously it works in him
and by him; and what glory is brought to God by it, and by the life which he
now lives, living by the faith of the Son of God, and being crucified with
Christ to the world, Gal. 2.20. And yet I must answer one Question more: You
said even now, that a man must imitate Christ too; and how and wherein may that
be done? Whereunto I briefly answer, 1. in his godliness: For first, how that
holy Lord Jesus went about doing good to souls by his powerful Preaching, Mat.
4.23. Secondly, and how he fasted Mat. 4. Wherein, though we cannot follow him
for so many days, yet may we according to strenth given us from above, for a
day now and a day then, and even as often and as long as God shall direct us:
and the like may be said by his praying whole nights upon a Mountain, Luke 6:
12. And secondly we should imitate him in his meekness, and not be so angry and
provoking as many are. See Mat. 11.29. Thirdly in his humbleness, for how he
humbled himself by counting himself of no Reputation, and by coming in the form
of a servant etc. Phil. 2.7. and how he lay upon the very ground with his holy
face; when he prayed Mat, 26.3. Like Joshuah and the Elders of Israel, Josh.
7.6. Which makes and moves me, a poor Worm to do so too, by night in duty, as
he did by night, counting it as nothing for me to lie so, when I consider how
many of the most Eminent Saints did usually, and for many years together (some
twenty, some thirty, some always till Death) did use themselves to such
hardness; and so to lie upon no bed at all, having a stone for their Pillow,
like Jacob, meditating upon, and scoping at their everlasting rest to come, and
so forgetting, as it were, their natural ease and rest, which yet I do not
press upon any, but only mention, as much thought upon by my poor and
inconsiderable self, who am very much taken with the strict lives of such
glorious Saints as have been Practitioners of such humble gestures and hard
lyings; St. Basil I mean, who was as strict, as holy, and as zealous a man as
any of all the ancient Fathers, so as that when one wished he might but see that
wonderful man, he was shown him, in a bale of fire, and it was told him this is
Basil; with whom I conjoyn Vdalricus, Lupus, Edmundus, Master Simpson; Clara
and Brigitta, weak and tender Women, which yet would lie so: But again I add,
that I do not urge this as necessary for all; and so I shall end with praying
that my good God (whom I desire to serve day and night in the best and humblest
manner I can. by his enablement) that he will so bedew these lines with the dew
of his celestial Benediction, to such as shall pervolve and read them, as that
they may meet in them with that inennarable, glorious unexpressible Joy, which
is mentioned, and sparkling forth therein, and thereupon may break out every
one of them into the holy and triumphant Epiphonema's and Exclamations! is this
reward and remuneration of believing and holy living, then do not I care how
little else I do, for now Heaven is in my heart, and my heart in Heaven,
welcome, welcome, unspeakable joy, long thirsted after, and longed for, thou
have ravished me by thy coming. For Oh the extatical leaps of my transported
soul! And oh what an Ocean of unutterable delectations do now overflow me; and
what a Globe of heavenly glory becircles me! O I do not care now, how soon I be
unmanned by Death; that after my dissolution, I may be entranced into the joy
of my Lord and Master, Mat. 25.23. and may bath my self in that River of
pleasures, and drink my fill out of that fountain and fullness of Joy which is
at Gods right hand to an endless duration. Psalm. 16.17.

To God alone be all Glory to all Eternity. Amen, Amen.
This little Book was so contrived upon the request of some Noble Persons, and
others, which desired me so to epitomize Godliness, that though it was printed
with my book against Usury, yet it might be bound up by it self, to be carried
as a little pocket Book, and read daily, by such as cannot so carry about and
read larger Volumes; written for and of the practice of that gainful trade of
ever-blessed Piety.

FINIS.
The names of those Writers which this Author desired to Inspect for his own
and other fuller satisfaction about Usury, besides the Holy Scriptures and has
cited in this Book, are these following.
A
ABulensis, alias Tostatus ARabbi Abraham Augustinus Agathense Consilium
Aristoteles Aelianus Antoninus Andronetius Acro Apostolius Agellius Aquilejus
Ammianus Marcellinus Ausonius Aesclopiades Auclor de imperio Mavis Anianus
Thomas Aquinas Aristarchus Archidiaconus Ambrosius Aleasar Allericus
Aristophanis Interpres Scholiastes Aristophanis Alphonsus Mantuanus Aristotelis
Paraphrastes Aristotelis Interpres Arias Montanus Aretius Azoar Arcadius
Grammaticus Agricola John d' Abbia Doctor Abbot Mahomets Alcoran Alex. ab Alex.
Tho. Annotat. of the Assembly The Arraignment of Usury Aubanus Andreas
Episcopus Ainsworth Axalla Anna Maria Shureman
B
Basilius Magnus Babington Episcopus Bagshaw Basilicorum Interpres Baine Bayley
Balsamon Beroaldes Beza Doctor Barnard Bartholomeus Cepolitanus Doctor Beard
St. Bernardus Bernardus Sylvester Bellarminus Bartolus Binny Bro^^s Betulcus
Bolsecus Albertus Blanenberg Petrus Plesseus ali^s Mornay Bromyard Bruce
Ber^fardus Bodinus Br^mle Brentius Br^sius Budeus B^llinger Baxter Bolton
J^^^^nes Boemus Brigilla Burratius Ponto Brumicensis Bu^torsius Bla^ue^na
Boisardus Suriu^ Bastingius Johannes Baptista Brisonius
C
Cabalistae Caesaris de bello Gallico Interpres Gr^cus C^jus Imperator
Calepinus Castalio C^etanus Castro Clara Camerarius Carpe ^arius Canisius
Calvinus Cau^^n Jesuita Carrion Christophorus Cartwright Centurae Magae William
Chapel Cicero Cato Doctor Chitraeus Conradus Paulus Brunswicensis Cruciger
Conviction of Usury Clemanges Copronicus Caelius Secundus Columella
Chrysostomus St. Cyprianus Clemens Alexandrinus Constantinus Magnus Imperator
Clerk Camphield Crasius Cujacius Crafrus Doctor Chemnitius Christiani Kumpt
Codex
D
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus Dionis^ Halicarn. Duodecim Tabulae Dionis
excerptorum ex libr^ Constable (...) Int^rpres Downam Episcopus Dalecampius
Dionysius Areopagita Dionysius Carthusianus Demosthenes Demosthenis Interpres
Demosthenis Scholiastes Dalmasius D^neus Dod Democritus Discipulus de Tempore^
Dioclarius Donarif Durrham Diogenes Donatus Diodati Doctor Didericus Deering
Dike
E
Elibertinum Consilium Edward Cook is so bitter against Usury Eusebius Elias
Rabbinus Elephanus Egerton Erpenij Interpres Etymologici Magni Author Eustatius
Eusebius The Enlish Usurer Escobar Jesuita Erasmus Roterodamus Edmundus
F
Fulgentius Fabianus Fabus Fagius Farelus Dr. Fabricius Favorinus Fox Festus
Gratianus Comicus Fabricius alter Floid Dr. Fenton Filborn Filliutius Jesuita
Fevardinus Ferguson Forbos Foroneus
G
Galasius Galatinus Galenus Gamfredus Genianus Glossarum Nomin. Author Glossa
quaedam Antiqua Haebr. Glossarum Author Glossarum Admirabilitas, et Admirator
earum Gei Gratianus Greenham Gruterus Guallerus Gregorius Magnus Gregorius
Theologus Franciscus de Gambara Glanvil Gregorius de Valentia Geminianus Gemara
Guido Bitriconsis
H
Hal Episcopus Hamond Haymo Halburgensis Episcopus Hadriunus junius
Harmenopolus Harmenopoli Interpres Harpocration Harpocrationis Glossator
Hemingius Hirn St. Hireonimus Hildeshemeniss Synodus Hostiensis Herodoh
Interpres Hesychius Horatij Critious Godofredus Hotton Hugo Humphrey Thomas
Hall Huges
I
Jacobus Rex Angliae Juellus Episcopus Josephus Inscriptionum Interpres
Isidorus Julius Caesar Imperator Justinianus Imperator Justinus Imperator
Justinus Martyr Jus Canonicum Jus Civil Jonas le Boy S. de la Revie Justus
Jonas Janeway
K
King Episcopus Keekermannus Ketina Rabbinus Doctor Kimbus Johannes Knewstub
Keiserbergius Rabbi Kimhi
L
Laurentius Ladantius Laertius Langius Lipsius Legis Rhodiae Interpres
Lampridius Lavater Legum Atticarum Enarrati^ Leucrotarius Lateranense Concilium
Lupus Lake Episcopus Comes de Leicester Leo Juda Leo Imperator Leo Magnus Lira
Laertij Interpres Lorinus Jesuita Petrus Lombardus Ludolphus Lucanus Ludericus
Galliae Rex Doctor Lutherus Doctor Luderus I C. Johannes Paulus Lancellotus
Lessius Lactantius
M
Malvenda Manichaeus Mansfeldensis Conscionatores Marloratus Muriana Manchester
Petrus Martyr Macer Moses Gerundensis Mave Martoratus Nonius Marcellus
Melanchton Mercerus Moad Mayer Mozia Carolus Molincus Mollerus Monlanus
Mostellar Doctor Mordesius Musculus Picus Mirandula Fransiscus Marianus
Maldonatus Mesodainus
N
Nepos Episcopus-Aegyptiacus Nicenum Concilium Novellarum Interpres Novellae
ipsae Novellarum Intitulatio Gregonus Nyssenus Nosworthio Navaria
O
Oecolampadius Ockerfoe Orator Oniro Criticon Interpres Origenes Owenus Poeta
Doctor Titus Oats
P
Pandectae Papias Pagninus Paulus Logiska Panormitanus Parisiense Concilium
Doctor Pareus Petrarcha Perkins Philips Piscator Pellicanus Peraldus Petrus
Cantor Plato Plautus Prophetia de Vsurae et Vsuriorum ruin. Prophetia de
Friderico Reg^ Bohemiae Powel Poole Pomorianus Polanus Possidonius Plutarchus
Philo Phrindalus Petrus de Anchorum Polytophnia Doctor Pie Pastores Ecclesiarum
Gallicarum Ponto Brumensis Philippus Caesar Pollux Porphynus
Q
Quintitianus
R
Rusardus Robertus. IC Reynerus Petrus Ramus Martyr Ribera Jesuita Reuchetinus
Papinianus Rivelus Thomas Roger Rogers de Wakenfield Marcus Rutitius Doctor
Robrug Doctor Renold Richardus Cumberland Revius
S
Salviainus
Doctor Sanders Salernetanus Episcopus Sands Episcopus Sanderson Septuaginta
Interpretes Scapula Seneca Salmasius Sanhedrim Sintleger Surrius Shoppius
Suetonij Commentatorers Simler Solneccrus Sextus Doctor Scursius Doctor
Spanhemius Swidas Spotswood Swinock Mr. Smith Spellius Solomon Rabbinus
Sybillae Sylburgius Scotus Doctor Slatter Doctor Smith Speed Simpson Famianus
Strada Synopsis Basilicon
T
Tacitus Talmud Targum Jonathani Theodoretus Theophilus IE Tertullianus
Theophrasti Interpres Tozolius Tribonianus Turner Tremellius Turnelus Trorig
Tridentinum Concilium Tamerlaine Jeremias Tailor Toletus Trescabald
V
Varro Fa erius publicola Vatablus Vdal Valentin Victor Vticensis Vitruvius
Virellus Vlpianus Doctor Vultejus Vlpiani Scholiastus Vrsinus Vitruvi Interpres
Vignerius Victorinus Pictaviensis Vdalricus
W
Doctor Wallaeus Fransiscus Whiddon, Senior Doctor Willel Doctor Willkinson
Wessellius Doctor Well Wittenbergensis Vniversitas Secretarius Wilson Mr.
Wheatly Wigandus Wolvius Doctor Williams Weemse
X
Xistus
Z
Zabarella Zanchius Zonaras Zonarae Interpres Zegodinus Zwinglius Zopperus
FINIS.
The TITLES, of the several BOOKS, which this Author has in English and Latin.
1. THE Rose of Shoron.

2. Christ and his Saints spending their time together Day and Night.

3. A Cluster of sweetest Grapes, or the Saints Assurance.

4. Fifteen Conferences with Jesus Christ, about the World's and Sin's
overcoming by Faith, and about the Life and Joys of Heaven.

5. New and living way of Dying, in and by Faith.

6. Heaven won by Violence.

7. A New and heavenly Cannaan discovered, wherein a man may live with great
Delight, as the Children of Israel did in the Earthly, flowing with Milk and
Honey.

8. The Spiritual Merchant.

9. The precious Pearl Christ.

10. The Usurer cast.

11. A Latin Disputation, of and about the Lords Supper, and the Popish Mass,
publicly Disputed by the same Author at Geneva, and turned into English.

12. And now Usury Stated overthrown.

13. And Godliness Epitomized.

14. And lately also a sacred Union in Enlish, proposing a way whereby the
English Protestants agreeing in fundamentals, and dissenting only in Rituals
and Ceremonies may Unite, bearing one with another in the said Ceremonials.

15. And the same in Latin, mutatis mutandis, changing what is to be changed,
for the Protestants beyond the Seas, yea all good Christians besides in the
world, which accord with us in the faith of Christ, persuading them all to
Unite against that man of sin, which is against us all for the good and
conservation of us all.

16. And the Protestant Religions Fundamenal Doctrine.

17. And four Tables containing Popish Religion at large, that all may see what
an absurd Idolatrous and bloody Religion it is, and nigh to that the Grecian
and Armenian, and Muscovian, and Habesine, or Abysine, that men may know how
far they may Unite and have common with those Churches, that is to say, as far
as they accord with the truth of Christ's Gospel and no further, whereunto is
added lastly the Confession of the Ethiopian Christians faith, published by
Claudius King of Aethiopia, and a Description of the Abysine Empire, wherein
the African Christians are, showing also what their Religion is, in short, and
what a goodly Country it is, so as that the Reader may read it all with great
Delight.

FINIS.

