THE Lord Chancellor's PETITION To His Highness the Prince of Orange, On his
Entrance into London.
Most Humbly Shows,
THat your Petitioner, who was once Lord High Chancellor of England, is now
become the Lowest of your Supplicants; and from the first and chiefest
Councellor about the Throne, a miserable Dejected Captive in the Tower.

I do not presume to justify my Integrity, that would be an Arrogance as black
as my Crimes. I confess, I am as unworthy to Live, as I am unwilling to Die;
and therefore I prostrate my self to the Footstool of your Grace and Clemency,
that Fountain of unparalleled goodness, whence only Mercy can flow, upon so
Vile and Notorious a Delinquent.

To Innumerate my Crimes, would be as numberless as the Enemies I have created
by them; nor will I presume to Profane your Sacred Ears with so black a
Catalogue, whose precious Minutes are more happily Employed in the weightier
Affairs of the Nation; the Restitution of those Laws and Liberties which I, by
my biased and Precipitate Council, endeavored to Subvert.

What could be more pernicious and destructive to the Fundamental Laws of the
Nation, than to Establish a Power in the Monarch, to dispense with them?

Whet greater Inlet to Popery, than to take off the Test and Penal Laws? What
deeper stroke to the Protestant Church, than to Erect a Court of Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, to pull down her Pillars? What sharper Persecution of the
Prelates, than by publishing an Arbitrary Declaration; for the Non-obeying of
which Illegal VVarrant, so many since have been treated as Criminals in the
Tower: Nor could there be a more Irregular Method than the late Regulating of
Corporations for a free Election of Parliament. In all which, and many others,
(to my Shame, I must confess) I have been all along a principal Counselor and
Instrument.

These (may it please your Highness) are the Crying Crimes, which, were they
yet greater, is in your Power to mitigate, by your Intercessions to the
Parliament, having already the King's Pardon. If you vouchsafe this Mercy to an
humble Supplicant, I will promise in some measure to make Retaliation, by
Discovering some Arcana Imperii, or Intriegues of State, what I am Capable of;
which may highly concern your Highness's Interest in this Kingdom.

IRELANDS Wonders from the Skies: OR, A Warning-piece TO ALL PAPISTS.
WE have had so many Miracles of this Kind, Specter and Phynonima's in the
Air, that I would not offer this Subject to the World, if I had not more than
common Authority to confirm it. I will not insist upon the person of quality,
from whom the Letter (which implys the Contents of this Paper) was
Communicated, nor instance the Person to whom it was Writ; though of sufficient
Credit, to affirm the Truth of what is inferred.

The Letters bear date November. the 18th wherein are such Prodigies expressed, as
would exceed all Belief, if it had not proceeded from a person of so much
integrity, and confirmed since by so many persons of undeniable Authority.

The LETTER.
IN the Town of Youghall, near Kingsail, in the County of Cork, upon the 18th
of November. last, about Nine of the Clock at Night, my Aunt, the Lady L. going
to see her Sister, discovered a strange and unexpected Vision, viz. The Moon,
which was then in her Increase, all Red, with a cross Gules in the middle; upon
which, being surprised, she called her Servants to be Spectators. This suddenly
disappearing, another succeeded; which, changing the former Figure, bore the
Emblem of a Lion; By which time all the Town being alarmed, came out to behold
this wondrous Prodigy. No sooner they appeared, but both those Wonders
disappeared.

The two Moons, over-cast with a dark Cloud, appeared dismal to the Speclators;
when, on a sudden, the Cloud dispersed, and all the Firmament appeared serene
and clear. After this apeared a more prodigious Spectre, viz. Two Armies, in
visible and distinctive Habits, one Red and Blew, the other White and Yellow;
betwixt which two, seemed a most deep and deadly Engagement; insomuch that a
shower of Blood dropped from the gathering Clouds; but most discernable in the
White and Yellow. Afterward the two Moons appeared as visible as before, with
the same Figure, till the morning; which put a period to the Combat, and drove
us, (who were Spectators with Horror and Amazement) to our respective
Habitations.

The truth of this surprising Relation, is testified by Sir William Parry,
Mayor. Derras Hynde, Collector. Thomas Osburn, Sheriff. Robert Hapkins, Vimner.
Henry Davis, Churchwarden William Dawson, Ministor of the Town. Thomas Davis,
Town-Clark.



Printed in the Year, 1689.


