A LETTER TO A GENTLEMAN of NOTE, GUILTY OF Common Swearing.

Recommended now to all such of that Rank, as are under the same Guilt.

And fit to be perused by all Their Majesty's good Subjects, that would please
both God, and the King, in helping to suppress this Crying Sin.

By B. J.

LONDON: Printed for Randall Tailor near Stationers Hall. MDCXC.

A LETTER to a Gentleman of Note, Guilty of Common Swearing.
Worthy Sir,
THO this comes not from one that can pretend to the Honor of your intimate
Acquaintance; yet one, nevertheless, your Friend in the greatest sincerity;
yea, much more your Friend, than such as can be unconcerned, any further than
to laugh at that which threatens the Ruin of a Gentleman so well accomplished
with more than ordinary Parts and Ingenuity.

To deal freely with you, Sir, (since I have lately heard you make so bold with
One that is infinitely more your Superior, than you are mine) That which you
might reckon the Grace and Emphasis of your Talk, was to me so extremely Noisome
and Grievous, that I found it a very difficult Task to be your Patient so long
as I was. And because I then spoke so little to interrupt the profane Humor,
I think my self obliged in Conscience, to signify the more in this Paper; yea,
the rather did I prevail with my self so much to stifle my Resentments at that
time, because I resolved now to pour them out more fully in this manner, as
hoping I might do it with less Offense, and better Effect, to propose the
matter to your calm Thoughts, when cool and retired, than if I had offered to
Ruffle before that Company, who might peradventure have stomach'd me as
injurious to their Meeting, had I there solemnly entered the Lists to dispute
that Cause, which I am going to plead with you at present.

It Is to me, Sir, a most astonishing thing, to see one whom the Bounty of
Heaven has raised so much above the Common Level, both for Endowments of Mind,
and Enjoyments of the World, so far forget himself, as to fly in the Face of
his Sole Founder, and Supreme Benefactor, and at the most daring rate, Tear and
Blaspheme that Tremendous Name, which he has declared, He will not hold him
guiltless that takes in vain. When it is not only the most irregular inverting
the end of your Creation, (as if you were made only to dishonor God) but the
very height of Ingratitude, so to turn the noble Faculty of Speech against him,
without whom you could not so much as speak at all.

Can you choose, Sir, but discern what an Absurdity it is to own the Christian
Name, yea, and bow at the very mention of Jesus; and yet so slight and play
upon the Great Lord of Christians, as to Swear even altogether, when he Charges
every one of his, not to Swear at all. And what does it, but still add to the
Absurdity, when it is readily confessed to be a scandalous Evil, which you ought
to renounce, and yet you will as confidently persist in this Guilt, as if you
did not believe the least harm to be in it?

What sort of Christian is that, who Acts as 'twere in spite of Christ? And I
may ask, What kind of Subject too, that is so cross to his Sovereign, as boldly
to keep up that horrid Ungodliness, which our truly Christian Prince has used
the utmost care to suppress? Letting all the World know, it is after another
rate now, he would have Men express their Loyalty to him, than to Swear and
Drink for him. As being a great deal Wiser, than to expect they should ever be
true to him, who stick not so notoriously to Rebel against an Infinitely
Greater. And were it at all possible, they could thus be Loyal, yet how would
he abhor their Service at the cost of God's dishonor; counting it no
commendable Reflection at all on his Sacred Person, to own such bold Pretenders
to his Grace and Favor: Who (if his Signal Example will not at last shame them
into better Manners) must go Stigmatized as worse Affronters of his Laws and
Majesty, even than any that take upon them to dispute the Right of his Royal
Authority. For tho I do not think, that this admits of any just Scruple at all;
yet as to the Profane Customary Swearing, there is not the least Controversy
with any whatsoever, But that he, who allows himself in such a known
Wickedness, openly Resists, and Defies the Crown of Heaven and Earth both
together.

Whatever, Sir, be your Station, Revenue, Titles, and Dignity, you cannot
imagine, sure, that you have any Authority to be a Common Swearer, as you are a
Gentleman, a Magistrate, or a Soldier.

First, As a Gentleman, how utterly should you scorn such Boarish Manners, as
infinitely below you! That which is a Badge of Infamy to the very scum of the
People; arguing no better Rank and Quality, than to be of the Hissing Lineage
of the Old Serpent, who is for Spitting his Venom most against him that is
absolutely the Best. Can it become your Dignity, or ever be reckoned as any of
your Bravery? Be sure, that Lamp of Reputation which is fed with God's
Dishonor, will cast but a very ill Smell in any Nostrils, except such as
prefer the nastiest Dunghill before the sweetest Garden. The Svearing which I
now make bold to capitulate with you concerning, but like an Imposthume issuing
out of a dead Man's mouth, speaks you even Dead in Sin, and so rots your Name,
and lays all your Honor in the dust.

But the most unaccountable thing it is, that ever Swearing should be reputed a
Mark of fine Breeding; or any gentile, graceful Property, which in truth is so
contrary to all good Manners, and a rude Entrenching upon all Orderliness and
Common Civility; a Nuisance and Affront to every Ingenious, Sober Company; and
the greatest Offense to all that fear God, and make any Conscience at all of
his Word; who had rather you should spit in their Faces, than so outragiously
abuse and mock the Sovereign Object of all their dearest Love, and highest
Regard.

Next, as a Magistrate; Are you not obliged, Sir, to Check and Punish this very
thing, which your self have been so deep in the guilt of? And which your own
Practice so tends to Countenance and Embolden, that the Vulgus take no small
Pride to be in your Fashion, thinking to ingratiate themselves with their
Betters, by licking your Ulcers; yea are afraid to be hissed off the Stage as
Squeamish Precisians, should they be so Cowardly as not venture to Copy out
such Presidents; and so even to save their Credit, it seems necessary to
transplant their Shame into your Soil. Thus instead of exerting your Power and
Interest to quash that Profaneness and Blasphemy, which makes the Land to mourn,
and cries aloud for Vengeance; How do you sadden the Souls of the Righteous,
strengthen the Hands of the Wicked, and express the greatest Spite and Enmity
to your Country, in doing still so much the more Mischief, by how much the
larger is your Influence? For this makes the Wicked Swagger, and tumultuously
walk on every side, when the vilest Men are exalted. When such possess the
Places of Honor, Trust and Power, as not only stand for Ciphers, to let the
most obnoxious escape with Impunity; and dare not shame that which Dishonours
God, lest it should put themselves to extreme Confusion; but also serve for a
Back and Skreen to the Blasphemous Rout, to make them scorn the Parson, and set
every Reprover at defiance, when as they have such big Names to quote for their
Justification and Warrant. O! Sir, How do you think the Eternal Judge of Quick
and Dead, will in the final Audit, look upon this sort of Magistrates, that
gave such singular aid and furtherance to his Ministers?

Again, as a Soldier; Can you think it your Valor, Sir, to hector God
Almighty? And that you are a stout Man, because you dare make so bold (as no
one in his right Wits would do) with the Supreme Majesty? Whom to contemn, the
very Heathens have counted it no better than Fool-hardiness and Madness: Or is
there any thing like a wise Conduct in the Case, when as you are engaged
against other Enemies, to go strive with your Maker, and so make him your Enemy
too? O! Sir, if you would approve your self truly Great and Courageous, here is
a Combat worthy the faithful Soldier and Servant of Christ Jesus, even to
encounter with all your might this reigning Sin of Swearing, that like another
Mighty Goliath, sends out Challenges against Heaven, defying not only the Hosts
of the Living God, but even the God of Hosts himself; yea* that Marches through
the World, Great and Terrifying, Insolent and Domineering, to dishearten, even,
the Zealous for their Lord's Interest, from venturing to resist it.

When this Party of Rebels is grown so big, that the Injustice of the Cause
even cease to be questioned, and their Numbers pass for Arguments on their
side; and therefore do so many take the boldness to list themselves into the
Hellish Regiment; taking it for a piece of Cowardice to fear an Oath; when he
that will not Swear at all, is ready to be pointed at, with ((...)) yonder is he!
star'd at as a Prodigy, and scoffed for a Pedant. When you hear your Company,
Sir, grow so Malapart and Saucy with God himself, to toss in their unhallowed
Mouths, as a thing of naught, his Tremendous Name; and at every turn cite the
Glorious Majesty, and Dreadful Judge of all the World, to vouch all their
impertinent Prate; as if their Tongues were touched with a Coal from Herl, and
their Consciences seared with an hot Iron out of the same Fire; that even as
fast as they fetched Words out of the abundance of their Hearts, so fast this
putrid Scum boils up into their Mouths from the same corrupt Fountain: yea,
when they can Swear and Rant, not only out of inadvertence, but avowedly, for
the Gallantry of the business, as if they were the braver Men, because they
dare be such Sinners with a Witness, and take Hell by violence, scorning to be
stopped or restrained, trampling under foot the Blood of Christ; if but to make
themselves sport, piercing his Side afresh with Oaths, sharper than the
Soldiers Spear; and playing away the Virtue of that Name, which alone is able
to save them from the Damnation they imprecate. Here! here is a Field, Sir,
wherein to acquit you as a Man, and approve your Conduct and Prowess in making
a worthy Opposition, and daring to appear for God, when such multitudes have
the Foreheads to let fly at him, and discover themselves against him. Here Is a
Warfare where you have the best Cause, and the best Call; and if you shrink
back, you fall under a Curse too, even that of Meroz, for not coming to the
help of the Lord, against such mighty Adversaries of his Glory.

Do but think with your self, Sir, what an unpardonable Affront would such a
one as you account it, to be called a Bastard? And the most indelible Brand of
Cowardice, not to stand up in your own Vindication, under such a vile
Imputation. But, truly Sir, if a Son honors his Father, and cannot endure to
see him exposed, or hear him ridiculed; I must be bold to tell you, that you
give shrewd suspicion you are but of a Spurious Brood, and no true Child of
the Heavenly Father, when you can find in your heart, so unnaturally, and even
of set purpose, to load his Name with Scorn; yea, when you can but be a tame
and silent Witness of his Dishonor, and your Blood not rise, and your Spirit
not be stirred in you, to put you upon the Vindicating and Asserting of his
Right and Glory.

Should one offer to give you the Lie, I know, Sir, you would think your Honor
so touched, there were not only Apology enough for a Quarrel, but even
necessity of a Duel. And yet, if you are a Swearer, pray what considering Man
will you ever induce to believe that you are no Liar? For what should make him
strain so much at a Lie, who has so glib a Swallow for Oath upon Oath? When the
very same Lord that said, Thou shall not forswear thy self; said also, Swear
not at all: He that sticks not to thwart him in the latter, it is hard trusting
him in the former. And to tie Truth to such Men's Oaths, how fond and senseless
is it? It is true, say you, for I heard such a one swear it: Pitiful Logic!
When the right Inference from the Premises is just on the other side, It Is
false, or nothing like to be true, because a Swearer affirmed it. For what is
said by the Swearers, be sure comes from none of Christ's Scholars, who is
Truth it self; they are better Taught, and Swear not at all. It must then come
from them, who are of his training up, that is, the Father of Lies, and is to
be credited thereafter. And such must never hope to recover their Credit among
the Wise, till they cease to be found among the Swearers; their Word then, will
indeed go a great deal further than now their Oath.

Do but see then here, Sir, how mischievous to the World, and what an
irreparable wrong to humane Society, is the weakening these Sacred Bonds of
Conscience, by the frequent use of Oaths in ordinary Chat, so to render them
cheap and contemptible; when the Awe and Reverence of an Oath is quite lost and
gone, by debasing it to every toyish purpose; And when Men can play with Oaths,
even every where; alas, who can expect they should be punctual and serious
therein any where? And after this rate, what the more satisfaction can you
have, when you give Men their Oaths, that they do not make a Lie as well as
make Oath? And how can the King and Queen be sure of such Men's Allegiance, or
any one else of their true Testimony of Fidelity to their Promise? And so
Kingdoms are shaken, and all Faith and Trust among Men destroyed, by the idle,
trivial use of Swearing. And for all such Damages accruing to the Public, from
this horrid Abuse of Speech, every Common Swearer is responsible; and much more
those of Eminent Station, who by their Examples should teach others better.

How like a Ruler then, that Rules for God, as well as Reigns by him, does the
King's most Excellent Majesty now urge the hampering those unruly Beasts of the
People with Penal Inflictions, that will not be wrought upon to forgo such a
Barbarous Practice, by any more fair persuasive Methods? And as they are the
deadly Enemies of their Country, who will not abridge themselves of this
Ungodly Pleasure, tho it were to save a Church, to save a Kingdom, and to
please God and the King both together; So I dare refer it to your self, Sir,
(when you do but entertain any serious Thoughts) what true Friends they can be
to the Public, who in such a Case as this, will Heal and Connive at the
Offenders, and not dare, what in them lies, as far as they are bound, to bring
such notorious Criminals to Shame and Suffering. But this, alas, we are not
like to have the pleasure of seeing, till the Lesser Wheels move yet more
regularly under the Greater. For the Vulgar will not think it good Manners to
lead their Betters the way, till yea, yea; and nay, nay; become the Mode of
their Landlords and Masters, as well as of their King and Queen; and not only
Sovereignty on the Throne, but Magistracy also on the Bench, fears an Oath.
But, O! how happy then would it be with us, if every one concerned would act as
Good Subjects under the Best of Rulers, who are not for bearing the Sword in
Vain, but would be (as a Joy to them that do well, so) a Terror to Evildoers.

Now, this, Sir, I cannot but think most pertinent for your Consideration, who
profess so much Love to your Country, and Loyalty to King William and Queen
Mary. They are both indeed excellent Pretensions, and it is great pity you
should be therein guilty of any Self-contradictions.

For how can you sincerely Love your Country, when you Patronize the cursed
thing that bodes nothing but its Ruin? As His Sacred Majesty, most truly and
piously, like himself, has laid down the Position, That our Religion, Peace,
and Happiness, are all endangered by reason of that overflowing of Vice, which
is too notorious in this Nation.

And what Loyalty to Their Majesty's, when still you are so much for the thing,
which they have declared themselves so much against? It Is, methinks, a strange
sort of Loyalty, only to Cross and Provoke them. Though the Ranting Loyalty of
Debauched Ruffians, it is true, was a while ago in Fashion; yet, pray good Sir,
remember, that now it is another Reign, and such Princes (blessed be God) we are
under, as do not make a Jest of all Serious Religion. And the pretense of
honoring them with God's Dishonor, is growing so fulsome, that nothing more
uncovers the Nakedness of the Authors; when the King's published Letter again
acquaints us, That He most earnestly desires, and will endeavor a General
Reformation of the Lives and Manners of all His Subjects, as being that which
must establish His Throne. What Supporters then are they of the Throne, who
think still to testify their Loyalty by the most profane Extravagancy? And
what Honor and Deference do they pay to the Royal Pleasure, who instead of
striving to promote it, only give broad Significations, how much they Scorn and
Contemn it?

I have heard you declare, Sir, That you are no Papist, Phanatick, nor
Disaffected to the Present Government. Yea, I perceive too much, you are very
forward, uncalled, to Swear, when some will not Swear now, though called to it.
But in good truth, Sir, I think it is to little purpose, what you do call your
self, as long as you abide under this Heinous Guilt; for at the bottom they can
be of no Religion at all, but are the foulest Scandal to the Christian Name,
and a heavy Plague to the World, who Name God in their Oaths, oftener than in
their Prayers; and have little to do with Him, but only thus to provoke him.
See that you do not here symbolize too right with Rome, before you are aware,
in postponing the weightiest Matters of the Law, to the Mint, Annise and
Cummin; while you inveigh most bitterly against all that (to a hairs breadth)
conform not to Humane Institutions, and in the mean time your self can swallow
the Camels of such Monstrous Oaths, as make the greatest Violation, and the
rudest Attack upon God's own express Commands.

One would think you owed the Church of England no real Kindness, Sir, when you
so eagerly lay claim to its Membership, only to Reproach it; as if it gave you
a Protection for that open Ungodliness, which the the very Light of Nature
utterly Shames and Condemns: And you would prove your self a Son of the Church,
by acting like a Child of the Devil. Sir, you too much Credit those, whom you
so divert your self to Bespatter; yea, you change Names with them, while you
Rant at them. For who in earnest is the bigger Fanatic and Madcap, he that
boggles at an indifferent Ceremony, or he that makes no Conscience at all of
the most notorious Damnable Iniquity? Do you think to Convert Dissenters with
your hairbrain'd Swearing and Damning? Or to invite them into our Holy
Communion, with such lewd Communication? Indeed, no wonder this should make the
Offering of the Lord abhorred; and bring a Scandal and Prejudice on the best
Cause it self, for the sake of such kind of Patrons and Abettors appearing in
it, only to turn the Adversaries Stomachs more, and open their Mouths wider
against it.

Be it known to you, Sir, The Church of England is no Mother of such
Abominations: It Is the silliest mistake in any, that think to find Swearing in
her Litany. And he as obstinately shuts his Eyes against the Light, who sees
not all irreverent Abuse of God's Name, cried down in her Homily. But when you
can so defile your own Nest, and Blemish the most Excellent Profession, as well
as desperately fling at the Glory of Him that made you; Here, if ever, The
Righteous Judge of all the Earth is concerned to show himself, and take such
Audacious Criminals in hand, to make them feel it in Judgments worthy of God,
who will not leave off, so to dare him to it; but carry on the Affront still,
tho their Sin has not so much as the face of any Worldly Interest, or Fleshly
Pleasure in it; and there is no Natural Inclination, or Impetuous Appetite to
it, not so much as to make the Plea of Humane Infirmity for it. But the mad
Swearer swears ever for pure Swearing sake; Sins Gratis, in Contempt of Heaven;
and Sells his Soul for no Consideration at all, but out of a Fantastic Humor,
to follow an inconsiderate Herd to his own Eternal Ruin.

Good Sir, you have Reason to Judge and Consider in Cases much less plain than
this; what Lethargy then has seized your Sense, that it does not befriend you
here? To reflect, what a fearful thing it is to fall into the Hands of the
Living God, who is a Righteous Judge, Strong, and Patient, and wretchedly
provoked (you know it) every day. But think you not that he could command the
Earth to open her Jaws, and take the Swearers down quick into Hell, as once it
did Corah and his Crew? Or think you not, that he could Rain a Hell down even
from Heaven, as he did on Sodom, and the Cities of the Plain? For certain his
Arm is not shortened, that he cannot; but his Bowels are so tender, he waits,
and gives Ill Men space to Repent and Turn; which if after all his Goodness
that should lead them to Repentance, they will not, it is time for him then to
lay to his Hand, and whet his Sword, and bend his Bow, and make ready his
Arrows, and prepare for them the Instruments of Death.

Your self, Sir, I am sure, would never endure to have such Contempt cast upon
you, and such Affronts offered you: And must he, that is so beyond all
Comparison more Excellent, be thus put upon, and take all the foulest
Indignities from you? All the Patience in the World else, would never bear at
this rate. And abundant Experience indeed, Sir, you have had of it, that God is
Long-suffering; But yet he that endures so long, will not do it always: Abused
Mercy must be righted, and will have Vengeance. Tho the profane Swearer may be
ready to think himself hail-fellow with his Glorious Maker; yet be sure his Sin
will find him out. God has his Book of Accounts, in which all the Oaths stand
upon Record; and he has said, He will not hold him Guiltless: And the
Blasphemous Wretch will be like to find a Meiosis too in that Threat, which
imports thus much more than is expressed, that such shall be proceeded against as
the most guilty. And it is as if he should say, I will be sure to punish them,
whoever else escape; because of my Name, I am most tender, even as the Apple of
mine Eye; such shall therefore take my Name in vain another day too, and in the
last Judgment, cry Lord, Lord, but I will not hear them. And after all their
time of Swearing and Slighting me, I will take my time to cast them off, and
swear they shall never enter into my Rest.

Thus is the Swearer's Doom gone out already: And he does but Antidate his own
Eternal Dirges, as he so often Anticipates the Sentence of his own Damnation;
beginning betimes to Exercise himself in that Cursing and Blaspheming, which is
like to be the best Music of his Torments for ever; and so well may Orcus
signify, both an Oath and Hell, when they are so near a kin. The Place rings
with such Sounds, and it gapes for such Miscreants, as use to belch out this
Poison, only to please a Devilish Humor.

Now, Sir, will you cry, Damn him, he Preaches Damnation? Tho you should so
vent your Indignation; you know a Reason why I am not to wonder at the very
worst you can say against your Fellow Creature. But with your leave, Sir, if I
do predict the Wrath to come, that you may flee from it, I think I do but offer
you a Blessing for your Imprecation; and let my Charity find only the
contemptuous Return, He Preaches! I shall as little regard to be made the Scorn
of the Swearers, as the Song of the Drunkards.

But I hope better things yet, Sir, from such a Temper and Reason as yours. I
hope that you, who can be so obliging to others, will not perversely shake off a
Servant of his you call your Savior, only Praying you in Christ's stead to be
Reconciled unto God. I hope that you, who know so much more than many of your
poor Inferiors, will be Wiser than to make the sad purchase of more Stripes,
for striking so madly at God himself, when as Conscience cannot choose but tell
you all the while, it is nothing but kicking against the pricks, and Struggling
with Him, who will certainly prove quite too hard for you.

Your fair Reception of a late Friendly Admonition, speaks you to be of another
nature than those Beasts that turn again, and rent their Reprovers. And it is a
thousand pities, that a Disposition and Ingenuity capable of the most Excellent
Impressions, should be so overrun with rank Weeds, and the most pernicious
Briars.

Alas, Sir, What can you ever propose to your self, in adhering to a Scandalous
Haunt, that has no manner of Satisfaction, even to the Carnal Appetite;
pleases never a Sense? You know what the Ingenious and Honorable Mr. Herbert
says, Were I an Epicure, I could bate Swearing; it is Pleasure that drills on
the Drunkard; filthy Lucre that is the Misers bait; and the Ambitious towers
after the Lure of Honor; all have some Color, tho false, for their Evil; only
the Diabolical Swearer embraces Wickedness even for it self.

Let me beseech you then, Sir, for pity to your own Soul, (if not for the Fear
and Love of God) Rescue it from the Bonds of this Ruining Custom, and do not
yield your self to be taken Captive by the Devil at his will. But after all
your impious Oaths, will you make one Religious Vow, never so to Swear again;
and Fear an Oath, even as you would dread a Chain that will bind you to Fire
unquenchable. O! let him that gave you a Tongue, and Power to use it, have the
Praise and Glory of it. And do not make it the Weapon so to Fight with your
Maker, against whom none did ever stand it out and prosper. Nor think it will
ever at all lessen your self, should you vouchsafe most highly to magnify Him,
and for ever stand in awe of Him, whom all the Noblest Creatures in the World
are Ambitious to Honor and Adore.

Can it choose, Sir, but grate hard upon your Rational Sense, to pervert that
Power of speaking, which sets you so much above the Bruits, to make you even
like the Devils? And shall the Member, styled your Glory, only serve to shame
your self, for throwing Dirt with it at your Lord and Master? O! What has he
ever done to you, that you should so fly upon him? Has he filled you so full
with his abundant Kindnesses of various Sorts, only that you should Swell and
Burst out against him, and ever and anon be speaking Evil of Him, who is
continually doing you Good? And what are you made of, if that most Venerable
Word of his, which Awes all the World, is no more to you than the most
Contemptible Ballad, which you can Trample in the Dirt; venturing still to
Swear so thick, when therein you are so strictly charged, Not to do it at all?

O! Sir, as you have, I say, not only, any Conscience and Religion of a
Christian, but any Sobriety, Decency, and Discretion of a Man; have no more to
do with such notorious Works of the Devil, but Renounce, Reprove them, and
testify your Abhorrence of them; and make all else, that ever you are able,
ashamed and afraid of them. O! use your Tongue henceforth to better purposes,
than as the Boystrous Instrument to lift up against Heaven, and destroy your
own Soul, and injure all your Neighbors, (I say, All) while you nothing but
harden some, and sadden the rest. And let not the same Mouth, with which you
pray to God, and praise him, be ever wrung to those harsh and hideous Notes of
Cursing and Blaspheming.

O! be Thankful to Him, that he has not long since taken you off in the Act of
Swearing, and thrown you down into the place of endless Cursing. And speak Good
of his Name, which he would have to be for ever exalted above all things; take
it not into your Mouth only to pollute it; nor ever mention it, but with all
Reverence and Godly Fear. If you take not the Lord for a dumb Idol, dare not
any more so to Reproach the Living God. For, alas, the little Bubble that
Swells, and arrogantly imagines to appear Big for huffing the Almighty himself,
will but thus the sooner be dashed to pieces; and God will get Glory to himself
in confounding the proud Rebel, who after a little Blaze, shall go out in a
Stench here, and awake hereafter to Shame and Everlasting Contempt. But them
that Honor him, God will Honor: Honor them with that Honor that is of
himself, a deserved Reputation on Earth, and Glory Everlasting in his Heavenly
Kingdom.

Sir, I fear you are tired with reading, and I hope you will grow as weary of
the rebuked Sin, which yet will bring you a far heavier Reckoning. I pray, that
you may so feel the Burden of its Guilt, that you may never feel the Weight of
its Punishment. And God grant that you may become as Eminent and Exemplary for
your Tenderness and Zeal to Reverence the Name of God, and Assert his Glory, as
ever you have been Obnoxious, and under Censure, for making bold with his
Titles, and trampling upon his Honor. I am, Sir,

Your most Faithful Monitor, and Humble Servant, B. J.

FINIS.

