THE Magistrate's DUTY, In a SERMON, Preached at Saint Crux In the City of
YORK: On Sunday, August the 16th. Immediately after the Reception of the
CHARTER, and the Swearing of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.

By CHR. JACKSON, M. A. and Rector there.

Imprimatur.

To. Altham. Rmo. P. D. Jo. Archiep. Ebor. a Sacris Domesticis.

YORK, Printed by Jo. White for Francis Hildyard at the Bible in Stonegate.
1685.

The Preface to the READER.
THat the ensuing Discourse, (especially in an Age so Learned and Censorious,
and in such a crowd of good Books) should be exposed to public view, will seem
strange to most, but to those Persons who can testify that this was their
choice and not mine; For I profess that after a serious Survey, I could find
nothing in it to recommend it to the candid Interpretation of any Reader, save
that it was well meant, and well timed. If indeed, because they did conceive it
might tend to His Majesty's Service, was (as I suppose) the ground of their
Request, then I most readily submit to it; for upon that account, I can
cheerfully Sacrifice a better thing then my Reputation.

The Chief Design in Composing and Preaching this Sermon, was to direct (as
well as I could on a sudden, and in the midst of so much other Business) the
Magistrates that heard me, to adorn that high Province to which they were
graciously advanced by a most Just, Wise, and Mighty Monarch, to call upon them
to give God and their Royal Master what does belong to them, that themselves
may have Countenance and Assistance from Heaven and the Crown. If what is so
plain and homely, conduce to these excellent ends, I shall greatly rejoice for
the publication. What was offered to the Ear is here presented to the Eye,
without the addition of one Sentence, or to my knowledge, often words in the
whole. I am confident, that as far as is expedient, it will be defended by them
that brought it to this unexpected Trial, whose Names had been prefixed to this
Paper, had not their singular modesty prevented it. If after all this, any do
suggest that this is but a specious Pretense, and the customary Stratagem to
get into Print, I must say, that this is not the only untruth, by a vast
number, which have ignorantly or maliciously been told of me: And that I have
learned long since to despise Detraction, as a very Unchristian, Vngentile, and
Cowardly thing. That God would in every Choice, Action and Relation, bless all
the Magistrates of this Land, (and in particular those of this City) and give
them true Zeal for the true Religion, hearts full of Loyalty to their Prince,
sincere affection to their fellow Christians, and make them happy Instruments
to do much good in their respective Stations, is, and shall be, the earnest
Prayer of

C. J.

THE Magistrate's DUTY, In a SERMON, etc.
Romans 13.3. the former part of the Verse. For Rulers are not a terror to
good works but to the evil, --
IT is well said by the Heathen Orator, That neither House, nor City, nor
Nation, nor Mankind, nor Nature, nor the World can subsist without Empire and
Government; all would return to its Primitive disorder and confusion; a Kingdom
would not be Populus, sed Turba, not a Company but a Rout, the stronger would
prey upon the weak, and a Cause would be good because it had force to maintain
it. He therefore, that made all (the Universe) thought it necessary to preserve
it by Order, which cannot be without Subordination, and a Power for some to
Guide, Direct, and (if there be occasion) to constrain the rest. He has
Substitutes, Delegates, that share in his Dominion, to see that what is amiss
be rectified, what is irregular be corrected: These are to take care that all
be kept in a good Decorum, that Society and mutual Correspondence be encouraged
and supported, and that what would unhinge and undermine the whole be removed
and suppressed; these are God's Officers, Deputies, and Vicegerents; his
representatives they are, and as they must do nothing unworthy of him, so they
must have such deference and respect, as becomes those that are in his stead.

If we look at their Original, whence they derive their Power, we cannot but
yield subjection, since it is from God; hence they are styled Gods, that is, by
Analogy and Participation; and this is the Argument in the two preceding
Verses, it is dangerous to oppose God, or not to acknowledge those, to whom he
has given Commission.

In my Text Obedience is urged from the use, end and benefit of Authority; It
is for the good of those that are enjoined to be subject. When it is said, That
Rulers are not a terror to good works; it shows what they ought to be, what is
their Duty, that men's welfare was God's design in the Institution; as
Governors, and so long as they keep their station, they are so.

It intimates too what usually they are; they convey no little advantage to the
Members of the Bodies whereof they are Heads; it manifests likewise, that all
Rulers in some respect are very advantageous to the Governed; It is still
better then that all were left to their liberty, and permitted to follow their
boundless appetites, and extravagant humors, and imaginations: It Is more
expedient that few, then that all things, be lawful; though the Showers often do
harm, especially to particular persons, yet the general good, that comes from
their Influence, makes them absolutely necessary.

Before I go farther, I will a little more examine the importance of the Words.

1. First, Who are meant by Rulers;

It is put for all, that are entrusted with the making and execution of Laws,
whether Supreme, or Subordinate; and in the Scripture frequently stands in
contradistinction to people; The great Council the Sanhedrin consisting of
seventy, and the lesser advancing no higher then twenty three are sometimes
noted by it: Whether the Sovereignty be seated in one or more, for substance it
is the same, under a different form; the Titles are variable, but the thing is
essentially alike in all.

With us we must understand the King (...), as the Higher and Supereminent
Power, and all, that bear Office under him. They are Authorized by him, act in
higher or lower Spheres, in a larger or narrower compass, as it pleases him;
They are as Slips and Branches derived from Him; they are to do all for Him,
and in Him; they can do nothing without Him, and it is their Duty to do nothing
against Him; they proceed in His name, and when they execute His just Commands,
to disobey them is to affront Him, whose Ministers they are.

When Moses called the seventy to be Assistants to him, as God had appointed
him, and to that end did qualify them, as we have it Numb. 11.16, 17. He says
not that he will take of his own Spirit, though that which he took, was the
Spirit of God,; but he is pleased to call that the Spirit of Moses, which he
gave the seventy, giving us hereby to understand, that they were always to be
reputed a part of Moses, so that he did hear, and see, and reward by them: This
hints to inferior Magistrates, that they should be faithful and true to their
Prince, and do every thing to promote his Interest, Honor, and Profit: None
will enable another to harm and prejudice him.

2. Secondly, let us examine what good, and evil Works import.

Here the Effect is put for the Cause, the works for the Workers of them; for
the Works themselves are not capable of such impressions:

Now Good Works, (to which evil are contrary) are what are enjoined by God,
agreeable to right Reason, the dictates of Nature, have the common consent of
Civilized Nations, and are profitable to Church and State; the wholesome Laws
and good Constitutions, the approved Ordinances of any Kingdom, City, or
Corporation are herein comprhended; All virtues and excellent practices, as
Justice, Temperance, Chastity, Charity, Peace, are intended by it; Omnia recta,
utilia, and conjuncta cum Legibus, as Tully specifies them, are included:

As far as men's Duties to God and man concern the public tranquillity and
settlement, they are cognoscible by the Magistrate; what is pious and sober,
what is orderly and laudable is to be upheld and countenanced by those that are
in Authority: what is profane, and unmanly, unjust, unnatural, unmerciful is
to be punished and restrained.

From this by the way take an Inference or two;

1. First, That it is the Works more then the Persons, that the Rulers are to
take notice of; neither the greatest nor the least are to be spared, when
Criminals; Thou shall not (as Levit. 19.15.) respect the person of the poor,
nor honor the person of the mighty, but in righteousness shall thou judge thy
neighbor. In Deuteronomy. 1.17. it is, Ye shall not respect persons in Judgment, but
ye shall hear the small as well as the great, ye shall not be afraid of the
face of man, for the Judgment is Gods: A Person if guilty and obnoxious, is
not to be spared, because he is a Relation, a Friend, or Benefactor, or in an
high or low condition; and if he be deserving and well qualified, he is to have
suitable encouragement, and recompense, though he be a Stranger, no Friend,
Kinsman, or Patron:

It is the Cause and Merits ^ that they are to be guided by in their Sentences,
Decrees, and Rewards, they are to deal Impartially and indifferently in all
their Inquiries, Examination, and Counsels; It was not the greatness and
quality of the Offenders, that could dishearten Phineas or Nehemias from using
sharpness and severity toward them.

2. A second Inference from this manner of speaking is,

That Power is abused, when what is lawful is prohibited, or what is
unwarrantable is imposed.

It is a saying of Tertul. that Legis injustae honos nullus est, No Reverence
is payable to what is Illegal; Here the highest Power does interpose; they are
injurious to none, that prefer God before all: None have warrant to punish any
thing but what is evil in it self, or by its Circumstances; the Time, the
Place, the Means may spoil an Action, otherwise very commendable; and so the
best Matter, because not well done, may deserve chastisement, and reproof; the
Almsgiving, the Praying, the Fasting of the Pharisees are greatly censured by
our Lord.

However, It is bad Deeds that are to be proceeded against; he that through
Flattery, or Covetousness, or Revenge, has regard only to himself, or to some
of his Companions or Allies, without equal Justice to all, according to the
Laws of God, Nature, his Conscience and Country, that pusheth on forcibly to
overthrow another Liberty and Property, is cruel, and Tyrannical; for in so
doing, he cease to act in the Capacity of a Public Person, and takes to him
the Affections incident to a private Man, and exceeds the limits of his
calling, and is a very naughty man.

3. Thirdly, Let us see what it is for Rulers to be a terror to evil Works,
that is, to Evildoers.

It is so to strike aw into them, that they may not dare to transgress, by
Threatenings, Pecuniary-mulcts, Fines, Imprisonment, and other ways and methods
of Correction, to deter them from, or to punish them for, the commission of
Evil.

Though a Ruler cannot alter their Dispositions, make them good, cure their
impetuous inclinations, yet he may obstruct their bringing them to light; They
are so affrighted that they will not publish them; their saucy Impudence is
kept in; their Mouths are muzled, their Tongues tied, their Hands held, that
they do not break out into filthy opprobrious language, into outrages, foul
enormities, and villainies; they are as some wild Beasts in Chains preserved
from doing mischief; their lusts rage and Boil within, but come not abroad for
fear of the stroke of Justice.

I shall, having made this way to the Words, offer thence this Proposition,

That it is the Duty of all, that have Authority, to hinder men from, and to
punish them for, evil doing, Or,

Evildoers are to be restrained and terrified by Magistrates.

Tho this be equally applicable to Parents, Masters, Bishops, Generals, and
other Superiors according to the extent of their Authority, yet I shall,
setting aside Oeconomical, Ecclesiastical, and Military Governors, principally
refer it to those that are Civil and political in opening the point before us.

For the Explication whereof, I shall

1. Evidence, That it is the Duty of Magistrates to terrify and punish
Evildoers. 2. I shall inquire what Evildoers in particular they are to punish
and restrain, they are to be a terror to. 3. I shall direct how they must
terrify and punish Evildoers. 4. I shall show what Rules are to be observed,
that they may terrify Evildoers. 5. And Lastly, I shall propound some
perswasives to induce Magistrates to perform this Duty, namely to be a terror
to Evildoers; thence I shall pass on, and add some Inferences by way of
Application.
1. First, I shall evidence, that it is the Duty of Magistrates to terrify and
punish Evildoers. This will be evident two ways.

1. This is the great Concern of their Office and Place; they take vengeance in
God's stead; it is their trust, they must not falsify it; they are not to bear
the Sword in vain; the correction of Vice is the debt of Authority; the Charge
of David upon the account of Shimei, after the Recital of his Crime, is, as in
1 Kings 2.9. Now therefore hold him not guiltless; for thou art a wise man, and
know what thou ought to do to him, but his hoar head bring thou down to
the grave with blood; It was but what he ought to do to such a Blasphemer and
Reviler of Majesty. He in vain, as one says here, owns a Deity in Heaven that
is so rude to his Image on Earth.

It is reported in Judge. 18.7. That the inhabitants in Laish lived in a
dissolute careless manner, for there was no Magistrate in the Land to put them
to shame in any thing; There was no Possessor, or Heir of restraint, or Master
of Prohibition; according to the Hebrew; there was none that by Succession or
Divine Election, laid claim to the Office, none that did make them ashamed of
what was ill, or indecent: And to Restrain in the Holy Book is to Reign; so we
use it 1 Samuel 9.17. where we read, That when Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said
unto him, behold the man whom I spoke to thee of, this same shall Reign over my
People; In the Original the word Signifies he shall restrain, in or among my
People.

The business then of a Ruler is to protect the virtuous, and to scare (even
for their own good) the vicious from their Impieties. The Idolatries, and other
irreguralities of the Israelites are charged upon their Princes, which never
had been done, if it had not been their duty, and that they had power to keep
them from those courses.

That is a worthy Question of one of the Ancients, Quis mentis sobrius dicat
Regibus, non advos pertinet, quis in vestro Regno velit esse Religiosus, aut
Sacrilegus? What man is in his wits, will tell Kings, that it is nothing to
them, who within their Dominions be Religious, or who Sacrilegious? All the ill
things they might and ought to prevent, and do not, lie at their doors, thus
they contract guilt, and have their other men's sins; They are Fathers of their
Country, and reclaiming and reducing them that are erroneous and insolent, is
but a product of their Paternal care; because they love them, in such
extremities they must use them hardly.

Physicians of the Body Politic, as well as Natural, sometimes are
constrained to make choice of Corrosives, and cut off Members; it is their
Prudence to begin betimes; a word may do that at first, which a Rod will not
effect afterward. By too great Clemency the number of bad men will be so
great, that it will not be safe to go about to amend them; at least not a few
will be wrackt in the Reformation; Contempt is the issue of too much Lenity.
For,

2. Secondly, This is the great support of their credit, and of the Reputation
and Dignity of their Place: They are God's Viceroys, to him vengeance belongs,
and he has entrusted them with the executing of it; they make him as far as
possible, the Author and Abettor of Crimes when they justify the Wicked and
condemn the Righteous; when they suffer any to go on in their almost
uncontrollable licentiousness, and destructive extravagancies: It was such
Indulgence, a sparing those whom God had devoted to ruin, that lost Saul his
Kingdom, and Ahab his life.

What plainer token of Disobedience, then not to smite when he bids do it, then
to favor those that he esteems the Pests and Firebrarnds of the World? This is
under his Authority, to violate his Laws, and to Patronize his Enemies: such
negligence in Servants shall not go unpunished. Thus also all good men are
disheartened; When as, Prove. 11.10. it goes well with the righteous, the City
rejoiceth, and when the wicked perish there is shouting; and Chap. 28.28. When
the wicked rise men hide themselves, but when they perish the righteous
increase.

When Oppressions, Frauds, Slanders, and all beastly Vices have freedom, all
modest, upright, orderly persons are afflicted and grieved, have no mind to
show themselves, their number, at least as to appearance, decreaseth; nay, more
then this in the estimation of the ill men themselves, that are cherished, a
Ruler falls much; he is trampled upon, vilified, represented as base by them:
They render him as odious and contemptible; he is despised in their eyes, taxed
for ignorance, weakness, and insufficiency; just as the too too cockering and
tender Mother is slighted and reproached by the pampered Child; so true is that
of God uttered (as in 1 Samuel 2.30.) when Eli had preferred his Sons before God,
Them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. Connivance, much more assistance, makes such notorious offenders
judge a Magistrate a Partner, as a poor mean spirited man, that cannot, or will
not, contradict them, as one altogether unfit for his Office.

2. Secondly, I shall enquire what Evildoers in particular, Magistrates are to
punish and restrain. They are to be a Terror to.

1. First, They are to be a terror to prophaners of Holy things; to those that
neglect or contemn God's Worship, that give no honor to his day, to his
Ordinances, to what is Sacred and nearly related to him. The Ark, a Symbol of
the Divine presence, had David's serious thoughts, his primary care: and
repairing the Lords house, having the Law read and taught, making provision for
the Levites and Priests was the Principal endeavor, of good Hezekiah and
Josiah.

The Greek Father speaks of Jovian the Emperor, (...), It was Princely wisdom
in him to defend the Truth, because the truth could best support him.

Princes are never so readily obeyed, as when the People are Religiously
disposed: and Magistrates that heed not the defense of God's Laws, do but teach
the people how to undervalue theirs: They must uphold their Church and their
Crowns too, this belongs to them as Kings, that as Advocates of the Church, as
a Father has it. Even the Kings of Persia and Babylon decreed, that the Temple
should be re-edified, and the God of the three Children, and Daniel,
Worshipped, for which they were more celebrated, then for any other Enterprise.
This made Constantine and Theodosius great, more then any other thing; And the
Act of the King of Nineveh, when destruction was threatened, makes him famous.

2. Secondly, To Blasphemers; to those, that defy heaven by horrid Oaths, and
imprecations; that without any temptation often dishonor God. The Heathens
would suffer none to revile their Gods. None of us willingly, would permit a
reverend Friend to be exposed after this rate, to have his name forced into
what is absurd, frivolous, and false, to be mentioned vainly and lightly, to be
solemnly brought to attest an untruth.

We ought not to trifle thus with the name of an Earthly King, and then not
with his, who is the King of Kings; to acknowledge God, and yet thus to
disgrace him, in some sense is worse then to deny him: It is to presume, that
he is not, what we confess him to be, Omnipotent, and Omniscient.

It is a very high provocation, and calls for Vengeance: Because of Oaths, the
Land mourns, as Jer. 23.10. Is in black, as the word implies: Perjury, which is
the addition of an Oath to a Lie, is a great indignity, and shall be followed
with sore though sometimes slow, punishment; and a rash, extrajudicial usage of
the Divine name, is as hurtful as fruitless.

3. Thirdly, they are to be a terror to turbulent persons, and contemners of
Authority; these are those, that libel and bespatter a Prince, that wound his
Reputation, which is the way to weaken his Government, and invalidate his Laws;
Inviso semel Principe, seu been seu malefacta premunt, says that ingenious
Historian Tacitus; when the King is once made contemptible, then things whether
done or managed well or ill, are uneasy.

These as St. Peter's Character is in 2 Ep. 2.10. are not afraid to speak evil
of Dignities, (...), They tremble not when they blaspheme Dignities, Governors
in Church and State. Libels are as Scouts of Sedition sent to spy out the
inclinations of the people, or as infectious breath to poison them.

These are they too, that wrest the best counsels and undertakings by a
malicious interpretation: whereas the Primitive Christians reverenced the
Emperors, Vt hominem a Deo secundum -- et solo Deo minorem, As a man next to
God, and inferior, and accountable only to him; It is a strange fallacy then
in any person to dishonor the King, and make that a Proof that he fears God.

These are those, that imbarque themselves in State Affairs, that out of a
covetous spiteful humor, or a furious frantique zeal, embroyl Kingdoms.

These finally, are those that defraud the Prince of any part of his Revenue:
when our Savior maluit supra Legem solvere, quam id quod erat legis non
solvere, as St. Ambrose phraseth it, when our Savior rather chose to give more
then the Law exacted, lest he should pay less, and under it; some remark to us,
that he was taxed in his Mothers womb.

Is not this for the good and maintenance of the whole? If the Root be without
water, will not the Branches wither? Is not the wealth of a Politic Father
both a credit and support to his Children? would not that do better in the
Exchequer, which is consumed upon men's lusts? Custom is a thing among St.
Paul's Debts, not to be paid of courtesy, but duty; not to be snipt by
fraudulent defalcations: it is not a gratuity, donative, and mere benevolence;
it is Gods part reserved for his Deputy, as an evidence of Subjection, and as a
supply for his infinite Charge and Care.

There is reason then (as His Majesty very lately by His Reverend Judges
required) that Justices of Peace should see that He, and His Officers have
Right done them as to this matter.

4. Fourthly, they are to be a terror to intemperate and luxurious persons, to
those that are hugely injurious to their Families, and impoverish them; it is
too common for many well nigh to starve for one man's sinful excess; for the
industrious and laborious to be overcharged for the relief of some, that are
idle and expensive, and thus Trade and Manufactures are not improved.

This unmanly and base vice of drunkenness makes men like low wet marsh ground,
that is too often overflown with water, that breeds nothing but Toads, and such
vermin.

These like Wens disfigure the face of the Kingdom, and burden it. These are
those, that not only put off Christianity, but Humanity, and lay themselves
open to all immodesty and indecencies.

Our Laws have made good provision against these exorbitances, that they may be
banished: Let such persons as sop and soak themselves in drink (to borrow the
expression of a learned and devout Person of our own) to their shame and loss
be made to know this.

3. Thirdly, I shall direct how Magistrates must terrify and punish Evildoers.

1. First, They must do it Verbo, by word, by good admonitions, and sharp
reprehensions: when the quality of the Offender and the offense call for it,
answerable roughness is to be used.

It was Eli's fault, that he softly addressed his Sons, when so public and
notorious in their enormities; he said to them (as 1 Samuel 2.23, 24.) Why do ye
such things, for I hear of your evil dealings, by all this People; nay my Sons,
for it is no good report that I hear, etc. Whereas he ought to have knit his
brows and frowned on them, as the word imports in 1 Samuel 3.13. He should have
talked them roundly, and in good earnest; such are resolutely and peremptorily
to be told, that without a speedy Redress, they shall come under the lash of
the Law.

When Arguments, and sweet insinuations, and meek approaches are ineffectual,
and insuccessful; then rebuking (...), cuttingly, must take place; Them that
sin, that is openly, rebuke before all, that others may fear, is an Apostolical
Canon.

2. Secondly, They are to terrify verberibus, with real punishments, with
penalties proportionable to the crime, and agreeable to the occasion: that by
corporal and other Chastisements, the Magistrates may suppress murder, theft,
and other disorders in the Commonwealth, few doubt, unless they be against the
office it self.

As to Religion many have scrupled the lawfulness of force and compulsion. St.
Augustine was once of this mind, but he retracted his opinion, when he saw the
Donatists so barbarous and inhumane.

Though the inward sentiments cannot be changed, yet the outward deportment is to
be regulated. The mad and Phrensiful are to be bound, the Lethargick to be
awakened, for their own and others good; he that seems troublesome, is most
kind. The words of a friend are better then the kisses of an enemy. Melius est
cum severitate diligere, quam cum lenitate decipere, as says the Father in
this Case, a Blow in love should be more welcome then a Complement with deceit:
Duritia vincenda, non suadenda is Tertulians Rule. Greg. Naz. had obtained some
Patience to be used toward the Apollinarists, but when he saw how ill it
succeeded, he wrote back to the President of the Country after this manner,
(...), etc. mine intercession was unseasonable, for those wicked men will not
make so good use of your indulgence, as to be ashamed and bettered. Some say
that this is the ready way to make Hypocrites; this is partly a mistake, for
many by this means become true converts, they truly love that, which they were
brought to out of fear; of many, that were compelled to the Marriage feast,
there was but one that had not on a Wedding Garment.

Besides the same may be argued against the scourges of God, the afflictions
and judgments that he he sends; Pharoh and Ahab were but humbled for a time,
they were rank Dissemblers.

The extraordinary Calamities, that God visited the irreligious with is ground
surely for the use of the Magistrates ordinary Power.

The Kings of Old, and the Emperors in the Christian state, always were
persuaded, that when other means were not prevalent, they were licensed to have
recourse to the Sword: The Church, though after the trial of all other
experiments, had recourse to the secular Arm.

3. Thirdly, They are to terrify, Vita and exemplo, by their life and
conversation.

A good life is a tart reproof, a reproach to him, that is dissolute, Castigat
qui non consentit, as Lactantius says well here, he is a Corrector, that is
holy, just, temperate, patient, to him that is otherwise.

Those that are over and above others, do seem to command what themselves do;
Why compellest thou, says St. Paul to St. Peter (...), Why do thou
necessitate the Gentiles, etc. All this Violence was in his Practice, he laid
no hands on them, as St. Hierome notes.

That disease is most dangerous, that begins at, or comes from the head; tall
Trees by their droppings destroy all the Fruits about them; the very
deformities of great men are applauded and imitated, as was seen in Alexander;
In an exalted condition the biggest offenses are powerful, as the Historian
observes concerning Cajus Caligula. And the Philosopher and Father tell us,
That men heeded more what Jupiter did, then what Plato taught; Virtuous living
creates Veneration in the Spectators and Beholders: Herod feared John, knowing
that he was a just and holy man.

Even those that will not follow, and with their lips condemn the good, yet
secretly admire, and absolve them; I find no fault in this man says Pilate,
when about to pass Sentence.

Whereas a sinful obscene life, makes a man a companion, and ranks him with the
Basest; it weakens his commands, he cannot well be severe against what he is
deeply engaged in; how can he clearly see to pull out the mote out of another
eye, that has a beam in his own? He can but faintly tax that, which every one
knows him subject to; he is obliged to be, and show himself an adversary, but
how can he be, and show himself so?

4. Fourthly, I shall in the fourth place show what Rulers are to be observed,
that Magistrates may terrify Evildoers.

1. First, They must fairly search into things, that come under their
consideration; sift out what is intricate, not be prepossest and byast by
plausible suggestions; they must hear both sides patiently, weigh matter of
fact, and skilfully determine about it.

It is said Prove. 25.2. That the honor of Kings is to search out a matter; it
advances their honor to decide nothing but after strict examination, and give
the clearest reasons of their proceedings, and not be imposed upon by false
colors, and deceitful glosses, which cunning wits are apt to put upon Causes
that are brough^ before them; They are to try all to the bottom, that they may
make a full discovery.

They that give heed to every Story, and accusation, to every Calumny, will
quickly be entangled in error.

There will never want slanderers to traduce their brethren and neighbors, and
to forestal them by sliely instilling suspicions and jealousies; there is
nothing so base, and sordid, but some can put it into an handsome dress and
mode.

2. Secondly, they must evidence their love to Justice, and their Resolution
not to recede from it.

When Solomon had made that prudent decision concerning the two women
contending whose the living and dead Child was, the conclusion is, as in 1
Kings 3.28. And all Israel heard of the judgment which the King had judged,
and they feared the King; for they saw that the wisdom of God was with him (in
the midst of him) to do judgment. Where there is no partiality, no needless
delays in Judgment, when no evil doer can hope to escape, nor innocent person
fear to be oppressed, and deprived of what is his own, there are Governors
respected

3. Thirdly, They must fear and serve God:

He will stand by them in his Service; he will direct, guide, bless them; he
will (as in 1 Chronicles. 28.20.) be with them, he will not fail nor forsake them.

And the Advice left to Solomon by David is, as V. 9. And thou Solomon my son,
know thou the God of thy Father and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a
willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts, etc.

4. Fourthly, They must be a refuge and Sanctuary to the helpless, and to them
that are overcome by might. God whom they represent, and whose receivers they
are, has undertaken the protection, and espoused the cause of the Fatherless,
of the Widow, and the Poor: they are as his menial Servants, under a peculiar
oversight, which charge he has committed to the Magistrates, his Delegates.

These are to plead their causes; they are to be eyes to the blind, hands to
the impotent, feet to the lame, shelter to all the needy, against them that
would wrong and devour them.

Behold and hear a singular pattern of Justice, one of such integrity, that
thereby he got respect; it is Job, who Chap. 29.11. of the Book that goes under
his name, thus reports of himself, When the ear heard me, then it blessed me,
and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me, because I delivered the Poor
that cried, and the Fatherless, and him that had none to help him; the blessing
of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widows heart to
sing for joy, etc. He was honored, had his praise proclaimed, because he was
always ready to listen to the complaints of the poor, and of such as had none
to take their parts, when oppressed; He appeared on their side, and looked that
none made a prey and preferment of them; He brake the jaws of the wicked, and
plucked the prey out of their Teeth, he made them restore what they had snatched
and extorted by violence: hence the worst of men stood in aw of him.

5. Fifthly, they must sue to God for assistance and conduct.

It was wisdom and understanding, gifts of Government that Solomon asked, when
he had leave to desire what he would; when he had, as it were, a blank given
him, and behold God gave him riches and honor, and all outward glory in
abundance, as an over plus.

It is prudence, courage, uprightness, knowledge, ability that they are to be
importunate for and use proper means that they may procure them. They are soon
over-reacht by flattery, mastered by difficulties, entangled by ignorance,
over-awed by greatness, surpised by craft, if God concur not with them; they
are liable to temptations, which they easily fall into, unless he vouchsafe
more then ordinary auxiliaries and advantages.

And we, even for our own good, are to beg of God, that they may be rightly
qualified for their employment, and sincere in the discharge of their Duty;
Thus we shall partake of the benefits.

There is a short Lesson for us in Number. 27. 16, 17. Let the Lord, the God of
the Spirits of all flesh, set men over the Congregation, which may go out
before them, and which may go in before them, etc. that the Congregation of the
Lord may not be as sheep without a shepherd; we have another instance in 1
Chr. 29.19. We then do well pray That under them we may be Godly and quietly
governed, and that they may truly and indifferently minister justice to the
punishment of wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of Gods true Religion
and virtue.

5. Fifthly, I shall propound some perswasives to induce Magistrates to perform
this duty, namely, to be a terror to Evildoers.

1. First, Thus they are true, honest, and beneficial to their great Master,
the Prince; Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any
people.

Religion makes a Kingdom glorious and prosperous; Sin debaseth it, as some of
the Ancients have observed as to the Heathens: This is the great Prop and
Bulwark of the Throne, as Pro. c. 16.12. and cap. 25.5. we read, Take away the
wicked (Rebels and other ungodly persons) from before the King, and his throne
shall be established in Righteousness. The continuance of David's house was upon
this condition.

He is Treacherous to the King, that punishes not the impious, that is not
active and zealous against Sedition, and other transgressions. It was as long
as Vzziah sought the Lord that he prospered, as we are informed in 1 Chr. 26.5,
6. And when Jehosaphat walked in the Commandments of the Lord, and the Priests
went about, and taught the Law, it follows, (as 1 Chr. 17.10.) And the fear of
the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Lands, that were round about Judah,
so that they made no war against Jehosaphat.

That is an excellent piece of Instruction of St. Cyprian, Esto Religiosus in
Deum, si vis illum propitium Imperatori, be thou pious toward God, if thou
would have him propitious and favorable to the Emperor.

The prosperity of the Commonwealth, as Constantine told Anilinus Governor of
Africa, did depend upon their estimation and practice of Religion, and
therefore he afforded large immunities to the Bishops and others, that were
more immediately conversant about it.

This (as Evagrius acquaint us) was plainly affirmed by Zeno the Emperor. Yea
it is delivered by an infallible hand, in 1 Samuel 12. ult. If ye (not he) do
wickedly, ye shall perish both ye and your King.

The sins of a People may ruin a Prince, though he have not offended in the like
manner.

2. Secondly, Thus Crimes will grow less numerous; It is such as are least
punished that most abound, as we see in swearing, slander and drunkenness: theft
and adultery are not so frequent and bare faced as those. Impunity invites men
to break a Law; non-execution defeats the good designs of it.

Thus those, that should lessen offenses, do multiply them; and this Toleration
of Injustice, and any impiety intitles them to it.

I shall now pass on to the Inferences to be added by way of Application.

1. Inf. First, Then there is no ground for Malefactors to think much or
murmur, when threatened or punished; stubborn Diseases call for course remedies,
and Medicines. Est mere diabolicum dogma; says Beza, sinendum esse
unumquemque, ut si volet, pereat, that everyone is to be suffered, if he will
to perish, is a Diabolical opinion. Reason will tell them, that those that are
prejudicial to themselves and others, must out of compassion be curbed;
sometimes tied hand and foot Bears, and Tigers, and Wolves, and Lions must not
run loose; nothing will prevail with some, but sharp handling, so disingenuous
they are; Let them not complain, when they have but what is their due.

2. Inf. Secondly, Then Government and Ruling is an hard task; they have
unruly, strong passions, heady, boistrous men to set limits to.

Hear Moses, a person of great learning, and rare accomplishments,
expostulating with God (as Number. 11.11.) about this matter; And Moses said unto
the Lord, wherefore have thou afflicted thy servant? And wherefore have I not
found favor in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people upon
me? He thought his shoulders unmeet for such a heavy Load.

Such various tempers it is no easy thing to overruled, that they may
proportionably Administer to the welfare of all; Solomon (as 2 Chr. 1, 10.)
accounted it as well nigh impossible, Who can judge (says he) this thy people
that is so great?

3. Inf. Thirdly, Then here is a Standard and great measure for Rulers; they
are to promote what is good, and obstruct what is sinful and evil. A King (as
Prove. 28.8.) that sits on the Throne of Judgment, scatters away all evil
with his eyes; there is not an ill thing has the confidence to come in his
sight. Every one is watchful that he may do what he ought. The young men says
Job, as Cap. 29.8. saw me and hid themselves, and the aged arose and stood up;
They could not see him without awful apprehensions.

The stourest transgressors should know that there is an holy warmth in the
Magistrates heart, and a sword in their hands; they should make those tremble
and fly into corners

They should (as one of their quality once professed) never deny justice to the
poor for their poverty, nor pardon the wealthy for their riches.

They should never give reward for affection, nor punishment for passion.

They should never suffer evil to go unpunished, nor goodness unrewarded.

They should not deny justice to him that prays for it, nor mercy to him that
deserves it.

They should never open their door to the flatterer, nor their ear to the
backbiter.

They should seek to be loved of the good, and to be feared of the evil.

They should always favor the Poor, that are able to do little, and God, that
is able to do much will favor them.

They must call to mind, that Government is rather Gratia gubernati, then
Gubernatoris, for the sake of the Governed, then Governing.

They must remember, that all the Power in the World is unable to establish in
a sinful course.

They must not screen under their Authority, any Covetous or revengeful
purposes, or Attempts.

4. Inf. Fourthly, and lastly, then see here the happiness of a people, that
has good Rulers.

What a blessing is it, that we have a Prince so Just, so Generous, and that
has declared himself an enemy to all exorbitances? Constantines Court was
applauded for being like a Temple, a Church; and when Cicero had executed the
conspirators with Cataline, the people named him the Savior and Founder of the
City.

Let us behold God in the Magistrate, and account of order as a precious thing.

We cannot so much as be without Government, and then how great a mercy is it,
when our Governors are active to prevent evil, and propagate good?

Let us give them reverence in word, gesture, action, which we ow them

Let us willingly obey their lawful commands, though sometimes (as we imagine)
inexpedient.

Let us not unnecessarily publish their mistakes.

Let it be our daily prayers (as we have been lately taughe, by a better hand)
that under them we may lead peaceable and quiet lives in all godliness and
honesty.

Let us study (be ambitious) to live peaceably and mind our own business, then
we shall procure a blessing upon them, and our selves, God will be magnified,
the Throne strengthened, vice discouraged; and whatsoever things are true,
whatsover things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
venerable, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report
will thrive and flourish.

FINIS.

