Plain Dealing: IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Mr. JOHNSON and Mr. WARY his Friend, a
Stock-jobber, and a Petitioner against the E -- I -- Company, about
Stock-jobbing, and the said Company.

MR. Wary. Mr. Johnson, your humble Servant.


Mr. Johnson. My Friend Mr. Wary, I am glad to see you, what Business brings
you to the Exchange this Evening? its rare to meet you here.


Mr. W. Truly so it is, I seldom gad abroad, but the fine Weather, and Desire
to hear how it goes with Lymerick, has forced me out this Afternoon.


M. J. You find the Sweet of it, you know the Proverb, Keep thy Shop and thy
Shop will keep thee.


Mr. W. You are pleased to be merry Sir, but what means that Crowd?


Mr. J. They are Stock-jobbers.


Mr. W. Are they so, I have heard much talk of them, and are they the Men?


Mr. J. Yes, and many of them now have their bellies full, and their purses
empty.


Mr. W. Why I thought there had been great Gain by it, a Neighbor of mine one
Mr. Hazard, if you know him, told me he had got several thousands of Pounds in
that way.


Mr. J. But had he the wit to keep 'em.


Mr. W. Truly to that I cannot answer, but by your Query I suspect not, and the
rather, observing for three Weeks or a Month past he has been very Dull to
what he was for some time before, I remember about three Months ago, asking him
how Trade went, he uppishly replied, Hang Trade, all Trade is an Ass to Stock,
there is more to be got by Stock in a Week, or sometimes in a Day then by other
Business that ever he was acquainted with in a Year, did I think he would stand
pilling straws or thrumming caps behind the Counter, no not he, for besides
East India, Africa, and Hudson's Bay Stock, there was now Linen Stock, and
Paper Stock, Copper Stock, and Venetian Metal Stock, Glass Stock, and Wrack
Stock, Mill Stock, and Dipping Stock, and almost a hundred other Stocks, for
which either Patents was granted or procuring, whereby a Man had room
sufficient to employ his Money had he never so much, to great Advantage, and
for his part he would sell off his Goods and get in his Debts, and was resolved
to have a touch at them, but I perceive then that the Tide is turned.


Mr. J. Turned, Ay that it is with a witness, and if it be not the Case of your
Neighbor Hazard I am sure most of the others had better followed the Business
they had been bred to, then meddled with matters they understood not, All covet
all lose, is a Motto most of them may assume, and how they will answer their
folly to themselves their Families and the Public they have now time to
consider.


Mr. W. I profess it was beyond my understanding, neither did I think it
possible such vast Estates could be got in so short a time as I have heard.


Mr. J. Nay it may be as the matter has been managed, and its very apparent
here has been some great Estates very lately got by Concern in Stocks, yet for
the most part, what discerning and crafty men have poquetted, the inconsiderate
upon a balance of their Accounts will find wanting, and the Broakers for
Buying and Selling and the Book-keepers for transfers have fleeced them all.


Mr. W. But pray Sir, how come the Stocks to advance thus? The E. Indian,
Affrican and Hudsons Bay Companies, are equally affected by the War with
private Traders, their present Exportations and Importations are attended with
greater Risques, higher Freight, and new Duties, their Stocks pay Taxes, etc.
One would think these Considerations should rather lower them.


Mr. J. You are in the right Sir, but Profit or Loss made or sustained by these
Trades, or the Advantages and Difficulties that attend them, are not at present
the Motives which govern their Actions, but they rise and fall as the humors
of the Buyers increase or abate, or from a necessity some are under of Buying
or Selling to answer Policies and Contracts they are unwittingly drawn into by
subtle and designing Men; and thus the Linen-Stock which may amount to upwards
of twenty thousand Pounds, while the Drapers are generally of Opinion there
will be loss by all that is made, was carried to three hundred thousand, and
has since returned to sixty or seventy thousand, not to say any thing of the
Wrack Stock, Mill Stock, or some other Stocks, of which a five hundred or a
thousand part was sold upon the Exchange for fifty or sixty Pounds, when never
ought appeared or was proposed to demonstrate their meriting so many Pence.


Mr. W. But still I cannot conceive how Policies or Contracts can be contrived
as thus to influence the Stocks or the Value of their Shares and Actions.


Mr. J. I Will inform you, without doubt you have observed, if not experienced,
that a great demand for a Commodity inhances the Price, and a glut at Market
sinks it.


Mr. W. Yes that I have.


Mr. J. Well then, suppose Praemio, (they are generally a certain number of
Guineas) are given out by A. B. to C. D. and E. F. etc. to oblige them to
deliver him such a parcel or number of Shares of such or such a Stock, as
exceeds the Quantity in their own or in the hands of others, that are willing
to sell, to complete the Parcel they must give higher Prices, this little rise
incites others to Buy, who being under like Engagements are afraid of a
greater: now A. B. by selling makes his Advantage, again suppose A. B. gives
Premio's to C. D. E. F. etc. to oblige them to accept from him in a limited
time such a Parcel or Number of Shares of this or that Stock, in pursuance of
this Contract, every thing that can be thought of to discredit the Stock is
given out by him and his Emissaries. C. D. and E. F. in prudence sell to make
room for what they are to receive, others sell out of fear, almost all offer
Guineas for Security, in this hurry A. B. by buying makes his Advantage.


Mr. W. But is there any so simples as to take Guineas upon either of these
Accounts, for I think I rightly apprehend it.


Mr. J. Too many, Gold is so bewitching.


Mr. W. But for ought I see by your suppositions, they are loosers by it.


Mr. J. They are so generally, and make good St. Peter's Saying, They that will
be rich fall into diverse temptations and a snare, but yet these Intrigues are
tolerable to those Cheats acted or attempted by some, who having whole Stocks
or the whole Number of Shares of a Stock in their power, gave or would have
given Guineas for the refusals of certain Parcels thereof, when they knew the
takers could not comply with such Contracts but upon terms which they would
afterward please to permit them.


Mr. W. Certainly Sir, none that walk here have been guilty of such Villainy,
it is worse then Padding.


Mr. J. It Is too true, and the great grief of many a by-stander to observe our
Royal Exchange, the most renowned in the Universe for its Structure, and the
daily Concourse of Merchants there, in the exercise of their noble and laudable
Professions, become a Theater for such vile Practices.


Mr. W. I am equally troubled to hear it; sure these Men never consulted
Jeremiah's Prophecy. Chap. 17. Ver. 10, 11. Where it is recorded, I the Lord
search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his way,
and according to the fruit of his doings, as the Partridge sits on eggs, and
hatcheth them not: so he that gets riches and not by right shall leave them
in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. It Is much the
Government does not take cognizance of these matters.


Mr. J. Without doubt it does Sir, I am sure several great Men at the other end
of the Town are very sensible of the mischievous Consequences, these Practices
must have, and will endeavor a Remedy next Session of Parliament. Peace, here
comes a Stock-jobber and a Petitioner against the East India Company.


St. J. We interrupt you Gentlemen, are you not busy you are so close together?


Mr. J. No really Sir, my Friend, Mr. Wary, and I, have been almost half an
hour talking about Stock Jobbing.


St.-J. A pleasant Subject: And what I pray, is your Opinion of it?


Mr. J. Truly, we are agreed, it is (as at present practiced) a Public
Grievance: and we was just come to consider, what course a Parliament will take
to remedy it.


St.-J. Hold, before we talk of a Remedy, why is it a Grievance?


Mr. J. Why's deceitful, disorderly, and excessive Gaming a Grievance; but
because among many other inconveniences that attends it, it occasions loss of
precious Time, and the ruin of Estates, so says the Act, Car. 2. Cap. -- 7.
Now the Royal Oak Lottery, and Groom-Porter's Table, come far short of this;
the Wagering about Taking Towns begins to swell, but Stock-Jobbing exceeds by
many degrees.


St.-J. I believe for Sum it out-does the Oak, the Table, and the Wagers, put
them all together: but then I deny your consequence, for Time's improved, and
Estates are got by buying and selling Stock.


Mr. J. Aye, as they are in the other three Exercises; to day A. gains, and B.
loses; to morrow B. gains, and A loses; and thus their Times and Estates are
employed, and neither are any other ways serviceable to the Public, then as at
present they maintain a parcel of Brokers and Book-keepers, whose Provision,
Poundage, and Transfers in process of time will consume all: Or do you account
Time improved, or an Estate got, when you see a cunning Man grown rich by the
ruin, in part, or in whole, of half a dozen, that have as much Honesty, but
fewer Brains than himself. Searching Mines, Improving Land, Exercising
Manufactures, Foreign and Domestic Traffic, are Noble Enterprises, which
denote a private Man public spirited: by these the Poor are employed, the
Revenues increased, the H^^our and Reputation of the Nation's inhanc'd, and his
Success affords equally satisfaction and applause: whereas, if one Stock-jobber
get an Estate, another is undone, the Curse of the Sufferer accompanies it, and
himself is despised by all Lookers-on: here is no Poor employed, nor Customs or
Excise paid, nor no --


St.-J. Nay, hold, that is a mistake; they must be very ignorant that know not,
or have not heard of our Foreign Trade, the vast Customs our Companies pay,
the Manufactures and Poor our other Stocks promote and employ.


Mr. J. Tush, tush, I am not arguing against your Companies, nor their Stocks,
but against Stock-jobbing; and I Will convince you, that this as now practiced,
is of it self sufficient to destroy, at least will greatly prejudice any
Company or Stock it relates to: Suppose I, and ten or twenty Men get a Patent
of Incorporation for the Sole Use or Management of any Trade or Manufacture,
which we extraordinarily well understand, and was morally assured it would give
us 10, 20, or 30 per Cent for our time, and Money employed therein, this is a
sufficient encouragement for us to attend, and use our utmost endeavors to
conserve and improve it; or if we part with some Shares or Proportion to
others, while the present or prospected advance or improvement measures the
Price, there is no harm; but if by any Trick or Intrigue the Price of Actions
or Shares are excessively raised (in some Stocks they have been twenty for one,
in some more) beyond their value, the consequence is the obstruction, if not
ruin of that Trade or Manufacture, at least of that Company and Stock: for
what thinking Man will not sell himself out of a Stock, which for seven or ten
years to come, succeeding to his wish, will not produce him more for his
Interest than to day (...) may have; and supposing all of that mind, the prime
Adventurers and Undertakers that understand the Affair, are exchanged for
others, who besides their Ignorance, perceiving their Error (that they must
work for a dead Horse) are discouraged from proceeding, and many of the Stocks
that have so allarum'd the Kingdom, what ere's been pretended, were formed by
the Concerned, but as Traps to ensnare the weak and inconsiderate.


St. J. I have patiently heard you, but how'll you prevent all this?


Mr. J. A Parliament's Wisdom will not want ways.


St. J. I thought so, it is easier to wound then to cure, if there is such fools
you talk of, themselves are the sufferers, sure a Man may dispose as he will of
his own without Offense to any body, and for Buying and Selling Stock as I
think it cannot, so it ought not to be prohibited or restrained.


Mr. J. You talk merrily Sir, we are not about an absolute Prohibition, only a
Remedy against the present Practice; and I have heard others of your mind, that
it is impossible to be obtained, but I have a different Sentiments which anon
I Will discover, only first let me tell you, a man cannot in all cases do with
his own what he pleases, is not Trade regulated by Law, a Man cannot export or
import sundry Commodities tho his own, a Man cannot melt down the current Coin
of the Kingdom tho his own, and what means our Statutes against Gaming (as
before) Monopolies, Jobbing, Forestalling, etc. But to square private Actions
to the good of the Community, my Tongue's my own, yet if I swear I must pay a
Shilling, I can carry all my Effects into a Field and set Fire to them, but
should it become a Practice, assure your self Care would be quickly taken to
prevent it.


St. J. What would you have a Fine or a corporal Punishment inflicted upon the
Transgressors, it must be one of them.


Mr. J. There Is no necessity for that neither, suppose some such Duty as Five
Pounds per cent. or Share to the King was laid upon Transferrs in all Stocks
incorporated by Charter that have a Public Seal, in my Opinion that alone
would cramp Stock-jobbing.


Petit. I profess I believe so too, if it was so ordered that it could not be
evaded, how Mr. Stock-jobber looks upon it.


St. J. I Will vow that never entered my thoughts.


Petit. Nor mine.


Mr. W. Nor mine.


Mr. J. Nay it might be easily secured too, every Member's taking an Oath and
entering into Bonds never to suffer another Stock in his Name, nor to Buy nor
Sell Stock without its being actually transferred, and allowing upon Account
the five per cent. or Share.


St.-J. It would infallibly do the Business, but it would crush several Stocks
to nothing.


Petit. I am sure it would quench the Thirst after new Patents.


Mr. J. Gentlemen, it would only effect Stock-jobbing, the Stock themselves
would be benefited thereby, for the concerned in any that have or shall have a
being, would then be obliged to prosecute what hitherto has only been
pretended, and a noise made of. Viz. In employing the Poor, and promoting
Manufactures, or else it will appear they petition for Patents with no other
Design, then having them to make Profit by selling them.


St.-J. But five per cent. will soon eat up the Profits and who then will be
concerned in any public Stocks?


Mr. J. Right, at the present rate of buying and selling, but Sir, a Patent or
Charter would never be sued for, unless the concerned proposed greater
Advantage by such a joint Trade or Manufacture, then can be made of their Money
and Time in ordinary and common ways, we'll suppose only ten per cent. per
annum gain, it may be twenty and so to fifty, now a single five per cent. when
a man disposes of his Interest is no great Duty, if a Proprietor immediately
sells, he cannot complain, he has his humor, if he is an old Standard he will
have reapt the Advantage he may afford it; (and I think the intrested in all
Patents of this nature, should be incapable of selling till a certain time is
elapsed, sufficient for Proofs and Experiments of the Design, that People might
know for what they part with their Money) but yet I do not say it must be just
five per cent. or share, it may be more or less as the nature of the thing
requires, and probably it may be better imposed upon the Buyer then Seller.


St.-J. Well let'm do as they please, let us call another Cause.


Petit. Then pray you Gentlemen, what do you think of the East India Company?


Mr. J. Sir, it is very honorable in my esteem, I wish I could say the same of
some of its Members and their Actions.


St.-J An Arch Rogue the other day said of another Company that seperately they
were worthy men, but together a Pack of Knaves, but I perceive Mr. Johnson has
a good Opinion of this in the bulk, but has different thoughts of some of the
Managers.


Petit. And not without reason, for he among thousands more is a Sufferer by
their late unworthy Practices, in the disposal of their Goods brought to
England, and --


St.-J. What, I warrant, you are grieved at private Contracts, the Company may
not dispose of their Goods as they think meet?


Petit. Yes that I am and many other their base Proceedings, but I hope e're
long their Wings will be clipped.


Mr. J. Look you Gentlemen, private Contracts ought not to be made by a Company
for Goods imported, (except with the Crown) unless Interlopers at the same time
are allowed, and that for two Reasons, as first, you and I that are natural
born Subjects are hereby excluded the East India Trade, we are not permitted to
trade directly, neither shall we buy the Commodities of them that do; and
secondly, allowing them this Practice, is granting them a Power to tax the
Nation, when and to what degree they please, one hundred tun of Pepper or a
hundred Bails of Muslins arrive, which being (and there is always one thing or
another) wanting, they take the Advantage of the Nation's Necessity, and prise
them accordingly, whereas were the Goods fairly exposed at the Candle in
reasonable Lots, the Company would have a sufficient Profit, we should all that
are Buyers partake of the Trade, and the Public would be served at easier
Rates.


St.-J. And how if the Company loses by a Public Sale?


Mr. J. It must be their own Faults if it be by Commodities they can gain by a
private one, if they have too much of a Commodity cannot they expose a part and
reserve the overplus till a more proper Season, if they want Money, cannot they
borrow upon as easy terms as others?


St.-J. Yes, as they did, the Bettelles, which for want of a Price they kept
several years, and during the time paid Interest for Money.


Mr. J. And at the very nick, they might have had fifty per cent. Profit upon
'em, they were privately contracted out of their hands.


Petit. That Is true Sir.


St.-J. But still the Company are in the right, I think to make the most of
their Goods, and you and your Friends may offer at a private Contract if you
will as well as others.


Mr. J. And sometimes an offer, and the highest has signified nothing, but
shall not a man trade himself, nor buy East India Commodities of the Importers,
unless in conjunction with others, or that he can procure 30 or 40000 Pounds
for a Purchase, where is Liberty and Property; I must conclude as I began, that
these clandestine doings are not allowable, a Monopoly was never designed by
their Charter, and though it is almost absolutely necessary there be a Company,
their Actions ought to correspond with the Laws, Customs and Usages of the
Realm, and the Benefit of the Public. -- vid. Charters.


St.-J. Only one word more: What Provision can possibly be made against
Caballing and Combining to run down their Goods, if fairly exposed?


Mr. J. I have heard this alleged in the Company's favor; but it is
impracticable: there is always at a Court of Sales, Friends to the Company,
well understood in all Commodities, that have more Money than there is Penny
worths for them, and you may remember what All, All, in the Long-Cloth cost the
Linnen-Drapers.


St.-J. I am satisfied.


Pet. But pray Mr. Johnson, what do you imagine the Parliament will do with the
Company.


Mr. J. I think if the Company's silent Sir, they will let them alone; but if
they Petition again, they may probably be established.


Pet. Marry, I hope not; should the War they made be winked at, the sundry
Complaints against them from India, and St. Hellens, and for Monopolies, and
private Contracts, etc. be passed by, People would be much dissatisfied.


Mr. J. Nay, that does not follow, Provision in an Act of Settlement may be
made, in these, and all other Points, to the satisfaction of the concerned.


Pet. But a calling those to Account, whose ill management has been the cause
of all, is a necessary Antecedent.


Mr. J. Every body knows, some body has been faulty, and many of their late
irregular Actions are not easily answered; but to find who are the Men, and how
far they are culpable, requires a great deal of time; if that cannot be spared,
would you have the Nation, and the Company suffer for the Miscarriages of a few
private Men. It Is most necessary some care be taken to secure this Trade; and
how you will do it better, than by establishing this Company, is beyond my
understanding.


St.-J. I yet say, the guilty ought not to go unpunished, and don't fear the
loss of the Trade; let it be declared open, and the present Company's Charter
null, and in a week's time there'll be Subscriptions enough for a New Company.


Mr. J. You're but a word and a blow, I perceive; I am not excusing the guilty,
while I argue for the Company; I have been informed by those that lived in
India before this Company's time, that in that Trade there was loss both out
and home, so subtle was the Natives in lowering our Commodities upon the
arrival of our Ships, and inhancing their own during our stay; whereas the
Company having settled Colonies and Factories, Ships constantly going and
returning, their Agents and Servants that contract with the Artificers
themselves, collecting their Manufactures in small parcels, the Trade is
brought to the perfection we now behold it: Would you have their Foundation for
others to build upon? Certainly as they have merited highly of the Nation,
they will have the preferrence.


St.-J But establish them exclusive to others, and you will destroy what you
boast of; for their Dividends have been so large, that (if any) such a Stock is
not remaining, as the Trade requires.


Mr. J. Then the Act that settles them, may oblige them to complete it.


St.-J. No, rather to open their Books, and let others subscribe for it.


Mr. J. Aye, that is pretty, How much would you have subscribed?


St.-J. 460218 to make their 739782 1200000 l.


Mr. J. So; And what if Two Millions be subscribed?


Pet. Then lower every Man's Parcel according to his Subscription.


Mr. J. An excellent Proposal; if Sir H. E. subscribe 50000, and you 100 l. he
will go into the Stock with 12500 l. and you with 25 l. Look ye Sir, if nothing
will serve, but the Books must be opened, were I to order it, the 460218 l.
should be exposed in Lots, all Persons, as well Members as others, free to bid;
the Money should be paid to the Company, and the Buyers have Credit for the Sum.


Pet. As I live, you deserve the Thanks of a General Court for this Notion.


Mr. J. I am serious Sir: but I have seen another Model for an East India
Company, which were it enacted, I believe, would give general satisfaction, the
Company, their Friends, and their Enemies must all allow of it.


Pet. Would I had a sight of it.


Mr. J. Here it is, I Will read it; the Title is only, An Expedient, etc.


THAT the Present East India Company be established.

That their Stock of 739782 l. be made a Million, (or more) as the Parliament
thinks meet.

That the 460218 l. shall be advanced by the present Members proportionable to
their Stocks, and Refusers obliged to sell.

That no Member shall at any time during the Company have above 10000 l. Stock,
and those that at present have more, be obliged to sell it.

That every Thousand Pounds Credit (whether of one or more Persons) shall have
a Vote, and he that has Ten thousand to have no more.

That every Member take an Oath, and seal a Bond, not to suffer another's Stock
in his Name, or to have any in the Name of another; and that he will not sell,
without actually transferring the same.

That for every Hundred Pound bought after the Stock is so settled, Five pounds
shall be paid to the King by the Buyer.

That no Money be taken at Interest, but if more is required, in like manner to
be advanced by the Members.

That there be no private Contracts (unless with the King) for any Goods
imported, but that they be fairly sold in reasonable Lots, in open Court, the
highest Bidder to be the Buyer.

That Commissioners be appointed to hear and determine past Matters between the
Company, and others that pretend to be injured, if they make their Appeals in a
certain time. It matters not whether the Commissioners are Members or not, if
Men of Ability, Integrity, and Honor.

Pet. Amen. I say this.


Mr. J. Then you like these Proposals.


Pet. Yes; and no body that is sincere in their Clamors can dislike them.


Mr. J. I think here is Care taken to remedy all Evils, and supply all Defects.
Gentlemen, a good Night to you.


FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for S. Eddowes, under the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1691.


