Brief Discourse OF THE STOMACH And PARTS Subservient unto it; OF THE
Generating of Blood and Humors, their degen^rating into Diseases, how and by
what means they are wrought up in the Body.

Set forth in a DIALOGUE between a Physician and a Countryman his Patie^^
Made so Plain and Easy, that any one may know so much of his own Strength and
Constitution, as to Judge of his State of Health, and Tendency to Sickness, and
be able to help Himself therein.

In Order to which, Is Subjoyned AN ACCOUNT of that Incomparable EXTRACTVM
PA^ARETON, Or, Extract of Universal Virtue and Sufficiency, in the Cure of
Most, but especially Chronical Diseases, incident to Men and Women.

Prepared by the Art and Industry of EDWARD JEWEL^

(...)

Hippocrat. Aph. lib. 2.25. LONDON; Printed in the YEAR 167^

A Brief DISCOVRSE of the Stomach, etc.
Patient. HAving been often invited to Town by some Business, I am now the
rather Persuaded thereto, by an earnest desire I have had to discourse with you
about your Writings and Pills, which you have Placed among us in the Country,
as well as in this City.


Physician. What has directed your Curiosity to me alone: since from this
Town, the Country is abundantly furnished with many sorts of Pills, Powders,
Drinks, Spirits, etc. Which promise you wonders far above what I have given you
to expect from my Pills, which notwithstanding may not be inferior to any
Medicine this day Extant.


Patient. Sir, It is not from any mis-apprehension I have of your Pills, for I
am well satisfied of their Virtues, having known many in our Parts, who have
taken them with great success and satisfaction, none complaining of any
Violence, Griping or any other ill Effects, which are commonly found in most
Purging Medicines. But that which has brought me to you, is a desire to be
better satisfied in the Nature and Differences of some Diseases which are
frequent amongst us, which though you in your Writings have described very
fully and authentically, yet not without some Obscurity and Terms of Art,
which (though they might rather recommend you to the more Learned) to me, and
others of my meaner capacity, would be much more acceptable and profitable,
were they made more plain and familiar.


Physician. I should willingly comply with your desires herein, but then I
perceive that I must treat you rather as a Pupil then a Patient, in that you
seem to require of me a History of Diseases, which would ask larger Discourses,
and more time then this opportunity will afford. But in regard that you have
applied your self to my advice, before that of others, I shall take care that
you go not from me unsatisfied in what so nearly concerns you. And therefore
shall lay you down a Method, whereby you or any other Person may apprehend and
understand the Original of Diseases in General, and be able to reduce them
practically to every ones particular Case, as occasion offers. And these shall
be drawn from some easy notions in Anatomy, by which I shall give you a
Prospect (though drawn in little) of the principal parts of the Body, which are
designed (by Nature) for the nourishment and support thereof, and their
subserviency each to other in order thereunto. And then show you how from an
accidental deficiency in their Functions, all diseases are caused: And
afterward inform you of the differencing signs of those, in which you are at a
loss.


Patient. Sir, This will more fully Answer my desires, and moreover oblige me
and many others, who wanting means to apply themselves to a Physician know not
how to beware the approaches of sickness, nor how to behave themselves in it.


Physician. You are to consider, that the substance of our Bodies suffering a
daily decay and wasting, as well by our own innate, or inbred heat,
perspiration of the purer parts of the Humors through the pores of the Skin,
the impressions of the Ambient Air, as by the common Evacuations of Nature, so
there is required a daily supply of Nourishment, to repair and make good,
whatsoever is spent of that store, which is provided to support and preserve it
in its perfection. To this end our All-wise Creator has prepared and fitted
the Members and Organs of the Body, in their several places and offices, to be
assistant to each other in order to the effecting this admirable work. The
Stomach is the first principal Agent of these, which as it were a Kitchen,
serves to dress and prepare all Meats and Drinks, though of different
substance) which are brought into it, and by its concocting faculty, reduces
them into a white Milky substance which is called Chyle. Which passing through
the lower Py^oru^^
Orifice of the Stomach into the Intrail (where having but a slow passage by
reason of the many turnings and windings by which they are united to the
Mesentery, and receiving there another kind of concoction) it is again altered,
and the purer part thereof by the Miseraick Veins (called, The Hands of the
Liver) through the Vein (called vena porta from that Office) carried into the
hollow part of the Liver, where, by a higher and more Eleborate Concoction it
is turned into that admirable Balsamic liquor called Blood. Which from thence
passes into the hollow Vein, whose trunck divides it self into two great
Branches, the one tending downwards to carry Blood to the lower parts, Vena Ca^
the other upwards, and mounteth even to the Throat, dividing again by the way
into other Branches, one of which asteneth it self to the right ventricle of
the heart, by which the Blood is brought thither from the Liver, where being
yet higher Elaborate and Enriched, it is transmitted or conveyed over to the
left vintricle, where the Arteries take their Original, which contain the Vital
Blood and Spirits, which do enliven, and exercise the faculties of the Body, by
other Branches it arises into the Brain where the Animal Spirits are made,
which also is the Seat of the Reason, Memory, Judgment and Fancy, as also of
all sense and motion, here these faculties of the soul by the said Spirit are
exercised; in the Brain also are all the Nerves, or Sinews implanted and
derived into all the parts, which cause a voluntary motion of the Body, by
which it walks, stands up, lies down, or causes any other exercise according
to the dictate of the will; which could not be done without the Nerves.

Having now showed you how the meat is turned into Chyle, the Chyle is turned
into Blood, how that it is from the Liver as from a Fountain, sent through the
Veins, like Channels or Pipes to the principal parts, and from thence by
infinite smaller Veins into every part of the Body, and by their several
faculties assimilated or made like to their own form, as into Flesh; Nerves,
Bones, Membrans, etc. In order to the making up and preserving the whole Frame
of the Body; it remains now, that I show you what use I design to make of this
discourse to your profit. And that is, to make it appear to you that as the
Actions of the Body are designed and contrived by Nature, for the support of
the whole Fabric thereof, so from these Actions being hurt or hindered, is the
Original of all Diseases. And therefore a disease is defined by Galen to be,
(...) 5. l. 1. (...) Turn.
An Affect contrary to Nature, by which the Action of the Body be hurt.

The Actions are hurt when the parts are disabled to perform their several
Offices and Functions, as when the stomach cannot concoct the Food, when the
Liver can no longer turn the Chyle into blood, nor the parts attract and
assimilate it. Now this hurt is done for the most part by what is taken into
the body, that is, our Meat and Drink^; which if either it be unwholesom, or
taken in too great quantity, it both ways offend; the body, for unwholesom
Meats and Drinks give an unwholesom nourishment all sorts thereof giving
nourishment consentaneous to their qualities; if the error be in quantity the
consequence is still worse, for Excess in eating and drinking lays the
foundation of all diseases; (...) 1. (...) de morb.
for neither the Air, Season of the year, troubles of Mind, nor immoderate
exercise or the like Causes can have their effects upon us, to beget diseases,
unless the body be predisposed by ill humors. Now this predisposition and
preparation of ill humors, is only the result of Indigestion, and caused from
the Faculty of the Stomach abused and perverted. For when the Stomach is
overcharged, it cannot rightly concoct and turn the food into Chyle, nor being
able to contain it long, thrusts it crude a^ it is into the Entralls, which
also being oppressed, cannot so speedily convey through them the indigested
load, but it receives there an imperfect alteration, and so is by the craving
veins of the Mesentery, drawn a way and carried into the Liver, which also
being indisposed by receiving this crude and unprepared matter, is unable to
convert the unequal Mass into good blood, but throws it into the larger veins
mixed and infected with evil humors and from thence to the Heart the Seat of
Life, which (like a Lamp almost drowned with Oil) is even stifled and overcom;
thus also it is carried to the Brain, the Fountain of Sense and Motion; which
b^ing clouded with vapors, and filled with superfluous humors, its faculties
are interrupted. From the larger, Vessels it is through infinite small ones
carried all over the body, every part taking its share, which by reason of its
want of d^e concoction in the principal parts, is much less prepared to give
nourishment to the parts remote, by these means often repeated, the body is
made a Magazine or Storehouse of corrupt humors, with which the most
destructive and deadly diseases are apt and ready upon all occasions to invade
the body; If any thing herein seem difficult to your understanding, I will
explain it by an Example, to wit, of the Scurvey, a disease which is the
general Complaint of the Nation; it is a malignant and infectious habit of the
parts ordained for nourishment, impressed upon them by the frequent impulse of
vicious humors, which being fermented and diffused all over the body, deprave
the faculties and functions of the parts. This is caused for the most part by
gross, seasoned, salted or dried Meats, or others, of heavy and hard digestion,
and these generally taken to excess, as also disagreeable or unwholesom drinks,
an error chargeable upon most persons, ( I speak not here of Gluttony and
Drunkenness, Natura pa^^ con^
but) that only which exceeds the Request of Nature, which is content with a
little, but too often betrayed and debauched by Appetite) I say, these Meats
and Drinks so liberally taken, and not well concocted by the Stomach pass into
the Entralls, with many raw and excrementitious humors, which from thence are
carried into the Liver and Spleen; and by that gradual proceeding before
men^ioned into all the several parts of the Body; and this work being not duly
performed, they are filled and oppressed with thick gross humors unapt for
Nourishment, which being put upon fermentation, (which is a working up like
Beer in a Barrel,) they are thereby made thin, and contract a fumous, piercing
sharpness, which separates, and throws it self all over the Body, the thinner
part fastening upon the Gums, causes them to swell, makes them loose, change
color, subject to bleed, and by degrees putrify, give an ill savor to the
Mouth and breath, and at last waste and consume. Other parts of the humor
seize the Membranes, Nerves and Tendons, which makes the Body sluggish
listless, heavy, stiff and universally indisposed; further, they diffuse
themselves upon the habit or outside of the body, from whence arise red, purple
or bluish spots upon the skin, which change color, fade and vanish, but the
disease continuing others succeed them. These are the true signs of the
Scurvey; it has many other Symptoms, but they are common with other diseases,
and very often this joins it self to other diseases, which were it not for the
aforesaid Sign; were not to be distinguished from it; Such are Giddiness,
Dullness and Pain in the Head, unquiet sleeps and starting, straight and
difficult breathing, Melancholy, Sighing, Pain in the Stomach, Windiness,
Belching, want of Appetite, weak and slow digestion, Pain in the Back and
Sides, with heaviness, and stretching out, especially of the left side;
sometimes Costiveness, other-whiles sudden Looseness of the belly, the Urine is
thick and gross, sharp Pains and Aches in the Limbs, and often in the Joints,
and may not unaptly be called A Scorbutic Gout, when the morbous Ferment is
heightened, the Blood more tainted, and humors putrified, the Symptoms are
exasperated, and the disease exercises greater cruelties upon the body, and
throws its malignity into all parts thereof, so that it swells all over,
becomes pale and wan, weak and the flesh loose, and often turns to a Dropsey;
the Pains are more sharp, and with the spots arise Pustules and virulent
Ulcers, which corrode the Flesh even to the bones; In a word, as the Disease
grows stronger, and the humors more corrupt, so the Symptoms are
proportionably aggravated, and happy is that Person, who is so prudent to put a
timely stop to the growth of this Fatal Disease.

Thus also is the Dropsy caused, by the hurt and depravation of the Actions and
Faculties of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery. For the Liver sending out a thin
watery Blood, causes all the Flesh to swell, as if it were par-boiled, and
this is called the Dropsy Anasarca: Then by default in the Stomach, Liver and
Spleen, there is a continual gathering of Serous, or a watery Matter in the
Belly, which swells up to a vast Bulk; and this is the Dropsy Ascites, and from
the like cause the Tympany.

From the same also are caused a Cachexie. Di^ (...).
or ill habit of Body, and this mostly affl^cts women: who are deprived of
their Monthly Sickness, in Virgins it is called the Green sickness, wherein the
Legsswell, the Spleen is obstructed, windiness and crudities abound, and the
complexion decays, and a multitude of evil Symptoms afflict that Sex.

Hence also proceeds the Gout, Rhewmatismes, Sciatica, all afflictions of the
Joints, and indeed there is no disease that afflicts humane Bodies, but may be
ascribed to the default and violation of the faculties of the principal Parts
appointed for Nourishment: (...)
And though I should discourse to you all the Causes, Signs and Symptoms of
every particular disease, (which would but toil your Memory) it would at last
resolve into those Principles.


Patient. Sir, you have given me great satisfaction, and prevented me in a
Query, I was about to make concerning the difference of the Scurvey from other
diseases, which it so much resembles in some of its Symptoms; but being
resolved of that, I desire you to resolve me also how the Venerial disease is
bred and propagated in the body.


Physician. The POX is a disease, which indeed comes not immediately from the
causes before treated of, but from an Infection taken by unclean Copulation,
upon which the venomous Contagion swiftly penetrates, and enters both the solid
and fluid parts of the Body, seizing the Flesh, Nerves, Membranes, Ligaments
and Tendons, and even the Bones and Marrow, giving its poisonous taint to the
Noble Parts beforementioned, vitiates all their faculties, and by that means
are the blood and humors infected, and the whole body miserably diseased, and
according to their predisposi^ion it makes various appearances, as Running in
the Reins, Sharpness of Urine, Carnosuies, Nodes on the Scull, Arms and
Shin-bones, sharp Pains in the Limbs, which invade the sick still at night in
bed, and hinder his rest; Also Gums or hard knots in the flesh; Likewise
Shankers, and Warts in the Privities; Fiery Pustules, and sanious malignant
Ulcers hard to be Cured, and spread Scabs and Itch upon the Skin, eating Ulcers
in the Mouth and Throat, which eat through the Palate and Nose; These and many
other symptoms attend this loathsome disease; but all these are not at once in
all bodies, but are more or less, according to the difference of constitutions
and preparation of humors, so that you see that this disease comes not
immediately from these causes, but after Infection is by them propagated and
carried on to these extremes.


Patient. Sir, there is one thing yet remains, and I shall give you no further
trouble at this time, and that is how to apply my self to a Remedy in these
Cases, when occasion offers.


Physician. As I have given you general Grounds and Rules for the right
understanding and tracing these Affects and Effects, to their Causes and
Original; so I have taken care to provide a general Antidote and sufficient
Medicine, which is judiciously contrived, and exquisitely prepared, as well to
prevent the growth of diseases, as to Cure and perfectly expel them, when the
Body labors under any of them; if you or any one takes the like care to take
it in time, whilst the disease is yet Curable; and that is, this Noble and most
powerful Extract, Called, PANARETON, from that universal Virtue, and Efficacy
it has in the Cure of diseases; for first of all, it cleanses the Stomach,
and takes away those tough, clammy humors which cleave unto it, and hinder its
faculty of concoction; it restores the enfeebled Appetite, and mightily
strengthens digestion; Passing thence into the Entrails, it draws out from the
veins all superabundant corrupt matter, which is apt to intermix it self with
the nourishment; it strengthens the Liver, and opens the obstructions of it and
the Spleen, and sets them free from all viscous, thick humors, which may any
way hinder the proper and just distribution of nourishment to all the parts,
and carries them all off by stools, and plentiful Urine, and performs this with
so much ease and pleasure to the Patient, that whereas some strong violent
Medicines subdue the Powers and vigor of the body, by forcing away more humor
then is prepared; this on the contrary, only attends the spontaneous endeavors
of Nature, and is (as all Physic ought to be) its Friend and Handmaid,
strengthens and promotes its expu^sive faculty, refreshes and enlivens the
whole body, and renders it universally able and ready, in the right and due
performance of all its functions. Besides, it has a peculiar property in the
Cure of the Scurvey and Dropsey, expelling all those acid, sour, salt humors,
which do so sharply assault and oppress the sensible parts, and draws from the
remoter parts such as stick fast to the Muscles, Membrans, and Nerves, and
takes away all dullness, stiffness and indisposition, and other symptoms which
proceed from thence; it carries away by Urine and stools, that serous watery
matter which causes the Dropsey, strengthening the Liver and other parts, so as
to prevent its return for the future, which is equally necessary: Moreover, it
contains in it the true Antidote for the Venerial Disease, expels its venom and
infectious quality, draws it away from all the remotest parts of the body, and
perfectly discharges it. In a word, this one Medicine (if timely used) answers
all the Requests and Exigencies of oppressed Nature, and disposes the Body to
a lasting state of Health.

This Extract for the better convenience of the Patient is made up into Pills,
of which you or any one may take four, five or six, more or less, according to
the strength of the Patient; Take them at night going to bed, and they will
begin to work the next Morring; but they who are easy to be wrong (...), and
may be surprised in the Night, may take them after their first sleep, and sleep
after them, but when they begin to work: It Is more profitable to forbear
sleeping, but rather wise and walk, for then Motion conduces more to their
beneficial Operation; if they work five or six times a day it is enough, and
the Patient may proportion their Dose accordingly; they are safely used at any
time of the year, if need require, and their Virtues are Equal at all times,
the Composition being so exact, that they keep entire for many years; They are
also taken with great Profit by Seafaring People, who by eating salted Meats
are subject to the Scurvey; And also those who live near the Sea, and in Aguish
Places, for they are a great Preservative against both Ague and Scurvey, and
will Cure both: In Agues they are to be taken an hour before the Fit, and in
three or four times they seldom fail.

Furthermore, take this Observation to your great benefit; That if you take two
or three days, every Fortnight, before the Full and Change of the Moon, they
Preserve the Body free from Customary Diseases; for the Moon has a great
Domination or Rule over moist Bodies, and then the Humors are stirring, and
most subject to take the Impression of Diseases, especially those of the Head,
the Brain being the most moist part, is subject to very many Distempers, and to
the ^^^laence of the Moon particularly; And therefore these Pills are a great
Treasure for any Family or Person, being a present Refuge to such as are
suddenly taken with any Illness: They are put up in Tin Boxes two dozen in
every Box, which is to be sold for 2 sh. 6 d. Sealed with the Crest of my Coat
at Arms, being an Eagles Head Er^s^d.


Patient. Sir, I thank you for this trouble you have taken, and the
satissaction you have given me in every particular, and I shall take Care to
observe your Rules and Directions; And as there are many, who, besides my self,
have reason to pray for you, so I doubt not that many thousands will have the
like cause to do the same.


These (known by the Name of Jewell's Pills) are Sold by
Mr. Parker bookseller at the Leg and Star against the Royal Exchange. Mr. Guy
bookseller near the Stocks Market, Cornhill. Mr. Northcott bookseller, next St.
Peter's Alley in Cornhil, and at his shop at the Anchor and Mariner on New
Fish-street hill, near London Bridge. Mr. Willson Watch maker in Thread,
needle-street, by the Exchange. Mr. Lacey Stationer at the Golden Lion in
Southwark. Mr. Deives a Cheesemonger in Bishops gate-street near great St.
Hellens. Mr. John Mill^r bookseller at the Rose, at the West End of St. Paul's.
Mr. Heldar bookseller at the Angel in Little-Britain. Mr. Dring bookseller, at
the corner of Chancery Lane in Fleet Street Mr. Battersby bookseller, at
Thavie's Inn-gate in Holbourn. Mr. Harrison at Lincoln's Inn gate in
Chancery Lane. Mr. Heyrick bookseller, at Grey's Inn-gate in Holbourn. Mr.
Samuel Lowndes over against Exceter Change, bookseller. Mr. Nest at
Westminster Hall door his Coffee-house. And at mine own Abode at the Golden
Ball in Long Acre near St. Martins lane.



