THE Jesuits Plea. IN ANSWER TO A LETTER WRITTEN BY A MINISTER, ENTITVLED,
Lying allowable with PAPISTS to deceive PROTESTANTS.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

THE Iesuit's Plea. In ANSWER to a LETTER Written By A MINISTER, ENTITLED,
Lying allowable with PAPISTS to deceive PROTESTANTS.
I Should be extremely unjust, if I in the least doubted sincerity in the
solemn Asseverations of the late Executed Jesuits at Tyburn, for I must
suppose them either Atheists, or no Atheists; if Atheists, What would they not
(...) done or confessed to save their Lives? for in that supposition their
Summum bonum would have been the pleasures of this life. If not Atheists, they
either acted at their Death according to Conscience, or against Conscience; if
against Conscience we must believe that they wittingly went about to damn
themselves without remedy, dying in Perjury known to themselves as such, to
Judge this is very uncharitable, if they acted according to Conscience,
professing Innocence for what they were Co^ndemned for, and yet were guilty;
then were they the most grossly ignorant, or of the weakest Capacity or Judgment
of any that ever were Executed, and proceeded by palpable Contradictions: they
must have believed a God, and not believed his Essence, nor believed his
Essential Verity; For he cannot believe God to be essential Verity, who
believes that he can^ Authorize a Lie; wherefore whosoever calls God to Witness
a Lie, and acts according to Conscience, grossly and palpably contradicts
himself, and to Judge this of the Jesuits, would argue gross folly and
ignorance in any knowing Person, no reasonable Creature in those Circumstances
could have dared to appear immediately before the Throne of the Eternal, Great,
and All-seeing Judge of the Living and the Dead, as it were glorying in the
most Uncharitable falsities that ever yet were pronounced by Men. If Criminal,
did they not in vindicating themselves Arraign and Condemn the Law and Common
Justice of the Nation, and with Vanity, Countenance, Perjuries, Infidelities,
and Treasons against both King and Kingdom, the blackest of all Crimes? Can you
believe they should think God can comply with any, even the least sin in any
Circumstance? is it not most detestable to his Nature? is not sin the greatest
ill, and even the only ill, and God the greatest Good, and the only absolute
goodness? Sin a negation of all good, a non Entity, a want of all due rectitude
in any action done, and malum per^se, God goodness it self, and perfection it
self, the Essence of Existence as he defined himself in Scripture Ego sum qui
sum, the only absolute being or entity, from whom it emanes or flows to all
Creatures? What then more opposite than God and Sin? Were it not then
Sacrilegious to avouch that God cannot be displeased with a Creature when he
sins, or that he can approve a Lie? Besides, if a Lie were in any Circumstance
to be allowed by God, it would argue deficiency in God, as that any thing
should be possible to be compassed out of the Sphere of Divine Activity, by
assistance of the Devil the Father of Lies; Nor could his Omniscience be less
questionable, as reasonably imputing to it an ignorance of effecting his
designs, but by the unjust ways of iniquity; likewise would his Providential
Goodness and Justice be censured, as allowing sin the medium to obtain Heaven,
nay himself who is the end of all Righteousness; This is Blasphemy, and to
Arraign God in all his Attributes; this is so absurd, that it will be folly to
spend more time in this Argument; or to believe it possible, that Men whose
Educations and Breeding have been in Schools, should be either so ignorant as
to hold such silly Opinions, or so wicked Christians as to seem to believe the
highest Crimes damnable, and Sacrilegious Lies, Perjuries, Treasons, and
Blasphemies, as meritorious Virtues, alleging God as Witness in justification
of such infernal Acts, horrid to every Christian Ear, abominable to Common
sense, opposite to the very hight of nature. And that this is not only
according to the Doctrine of St. Paul alleged by Harcourt, that no ill is to
be done, that good may come thereof; but is also the Doctrine of the Jesuits;
You may learn from Father Berry an eminent Jesuit, and modern Author, in his
excellent Book called The Sollitu de of Philargie, approved by Anthority, and
not called in again as Mariana's, and was wrote for the practice and daily
Meditations of all sorts of People, where to express the malice of Sin, he
says that it were better that the Angels were annihilated, and that all the
World perish, than to offend Godiby the least Sin, even of an idle word; this
considered, the inhumane expressions of your Paper no ways touch me, nor is my
amazement, as yours, grounded on their Proclaiming themselves innonent (for if
so, then to manifest it publicly to the whole World upon so solemn an
occasion, was but Justice to others, as well as to themselves) but at your not
crediting such pregnant circumstances, at your belying and slandering the Dead,
and your guilty detractions which I believed inconsistent with the Principles
of Christians, and therefore admire it in the practice of a Christian Minister.

Scripture and all true Morality teach us, to do as we would be done unto, to
Judge no otherwise of others than we would be Judged by others; and I thought
it the Principle and due practice of every Christian to make the best
exposition of the Words and Actions of others, to make the charitablest
Interpretation words will bear, especially the words of dying men, delivered
with Christian Courage, Modesty, Resolution, and Constancy, and not Spiderlike
to suck venom from sweetest Flowers. Can you believe they proceeded so
maliciously at the hour of Death? I have so much Charity for you, as to think,
that were you under the same Circumstances as they were when they pronounced
those Speeches, immedialely expecting Death, not then to be tempted by any
Allurements of Pleasure, Greatness or Fortune, not capable of Worldly
Advancement, or vanity, dreading the consequences of Eternity, you would then
detract such rash Judgments, even of the worst of Men, and conclude it a time
to be serious, and not to use Quirks and Equivocations to deceive, or impiously
to hide truth. Now as to what you allege to prove, they might well be guilty,
for all their Protestations to the contrary is very frivolous. We must believe
(say you) that every of them received plenary Absolution of all their sins,
from their Birth to this day, upon which Absolution they may affirm themselves
as free from, and as innocent of any Crime laid to their charge, as the Child
unborn, because whatever the Crime is, it is forgiven. So not to count you very
malicious, I am forced, as the less evil, to think you very ignorant. Where did
you ever read in any Cathol. Author, that after Absolution for any Sin, the
Penitent might think himself as innocent of it as the Child unborn? How then
can he swear it? who knows not that when by the Prophet 'twas declared to David
that his Sin was forgiven him, yet he was not so innocent, but that God
punished him afterward temporally for it, as in Scripture is declared? and who
knows with such certainty as is requisite for an Oath, whether he had a due
Disposition necessary to Absolution? No Man knows whether he be worthy of Love
or Hatred from God, is the sense of the Scripture, and Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, and that we must work our Salvation with fear and trembling,
with Christian humility, and not presumptive confidence. Moreover should it be
granted, that Absolution before hand might justify that expression of being as
innocent as the Child unborn, yet could it not justify Mr. Whitebread, saying
that to pray to God to bless his Majesty, is all the harm that he ever intended
or imagined against him; and that he never did learn, teach, or believe, that
it is Lawful upon any occasion or practice whatsoever to design or contrive the
death of his Majesty, or any hurt to his person; Mr. Harcourt saying, We hold
it in all Cases unlawful to Kill or Murder any person whatsoever, much more
our lawful King. Mr. Gavan, I do attest that I never in my life did machine or
contrive either the deposition or death of the King. Mr. Turner, I never
accused my self in confession of any thing that I am charged with. Mr. Fenwick,
I know nothing of it, ( viz. Of plotting the Kings death) but what I have
learned from Mr. Oats and his Companions, and what comes originally from them.
Mr. Langhorn, I neither am, nor ever was at any time, or times guilty, so much
as in my most secret thoughts of any Treason, or misprision of Treason
whatsoever. These sayings, even supposing a Revelation, that Absolution has
taken away all guilt, so as to render them as innocent as the Child unborn
cannot be allowed without having been ever innocent of the fact charged against
them; for even the absolute power of God cannot effect that not to have been
which was, nor could their Absolution take away their memory, or allow them to
declare they knew not that which was in their memory. But say you, If they
sinned in that their declaration of Innocence, yet they might safely do it,
having a power to absolve each other just as they were going out of the World,
as I believe they did when they laid their heads together.

Sir, Give me leave to teach you again what is the Catholic Doctrine, for I
find you have very gross mistakes therein. Observe then Sir, That there is not
one Catholic nor Christian Author I believe extant in the World that holds it
sufficient to have the words of Absolution pronounced over him, but that then
is requisite in the Penitent a real aversion, detestation, or turning away in
his heart from sin, and conversion to God, to render him a fit or disposed
subject to receive the effect of Absolution; Is it then likely that any
Christia should be so presumptive at the hour of his death, as wilfully to sin
upon confidence of such disposition immediately after, knowing that his sorrow
must be from a supernatural motive, and not in his power, but by the grace of
God whom he then offends? this is certainly the highest presumption imaginable,
and not to be paralled. What Sinner knowing he had but three Moments to live,
would make use of two to offend God upon confidence of the last? Who can think
so meanly of God, as to imagine him so subservient to Man, as that he as it
were may lure down from Heaven supernatural grace at his will and pleasure? who
has that faculty to love and hate the same thing so immediately, as if the one
were a disposition to the other its contrary, and not Sin the punishment of
preceding Sins, but grace as a^ reward? How stands this with that place of
Scripture, Neque volentis neque currentis sed miserentis est dei? What more
absurd and wicked than such proceeding, or more nonsensical and uncharitable to
suppose it, not only in any learned Christian, but even in any illiterate
Mohammedan? this is to bid farewell to all Charity, Religion, Reason, Prudence
and Common sense. But say you, If to Rob, Spoil, kill Protestants, burn their
Cities, and depose Kings, be no sin, but good and lawful, then they might
declare themselves innocent, though never so guilty, for Romanists tell us it is
no sin to take from those they count Haereticks all they have. For this you
cite the Lateran Council, sub Innoc. 2. and Syloc^ter N. 23. Q. 3. Cap. 1.
First in Answer to it, we must distinguish betwixt the Articles of Faith
declared in Councels, and the Constitutions of Government or Laws; The first
are unalterable, infallible, and irresistible, the other fallible, alterable,
and resistable, and may be suspended, and abrogated, and are so upon sundry
occasions. For example, the Counsel of the Apostles Condemned that Doctrine,
holding Circumcision necessary, this Article of Faith can never be opposed, but
the Decree they made against eating of strangled meats and blood, became
quickly of no force, and is now wholly abrogated.

Secondly, The Canon Laws so far forth as they relate to temporals oblige; or
are in force only there, where they are received, or approved by the temporal
Authority of the Kingdom, Principality or State (and where do you find the
Three States of England, the ancient and present Government of this Kingdom,
consenting to depose Kings for Haeresie, or to dispose of their Lands, etc.)
and such Canons must be formally promulged there by the Governing Authority in
due method, otherwise they are of no validity; this is seen by the Council of
Trent, which though it be received throughout the Catholic World as to its
Decrees concerning Belief, or Articles of Faith, yet as to, in other Canons, or
Constitutions of Government, is in some places wholly rejected, in other places
in part received, in others wholly. And this Kingdom when Catholic in part,
rejected the Canons of the Third Council of Lateran for making Children
legitimate after Marriage, born before, saying Nolu^^s leges Anglia mutari. So
that upon the whole matter it implies no more, then to say that any King,
Prince, or State may make or agree to such penal Laws against Dissenters in
Religion, as they in prudence shall think fit, and so may either take, or
reject the advice of Pope or Council.

Thirdly, That Canon of the Lateran Counsel was made against the Subordinate,
and Fuditary Princes of Germany and France; as the Prince of Berne, Earl
Cominge, the Earl of Foix, and the Earl of Tholous, who then countenanced and
abetted the Albigenses, the Emperors of the East and West, the King of France
and most Kings thereto consenting by their Ambassadors, and their Authority
used to suppress those Albigenses, and to prevent dissension and rebellion in
the Empire of France, and other Kingdoms; this was the motive of that Canon
which begins, Si Dominus terrae, etc. not naming Kings, Emperors, or absolute
Princes, but inferior Lords, nor Kingdoms, but Lands Terras, and not Regna.

Fourthly, Were such a Canon in force in England, yet could not such a Law be
executed against the King, who was never denounced Haeretick, nor any personal
Excommunication pronounced against him, or was ever heard, or admonished by
Pope or Counsel (the fame may be said of all the Protestants in England) so
that I say, were any such Canon admitted, even by Act of Parliament, or
Constitutions of this Kingdom, it would not reach his Majesty nor England as
guilty.

Fifthly, Though I should suppose contrary to truth, that such a Canon did
reach the King and this Kingdom, yet could it not be executed by private
persons, no more than a Jesuit or Priest can by a private Person or Authority
be hanged, drawn; and quartered: He or they must be first publicly Tried, and
legally Condemned and then Executed only by the appointed Executioner; that
Canon then does no ways Empower or Authorize in the least any person living,
Jesuit or other, to perpetrate those Crimes you mention, wherefore upon many
demonstrative Reasons, those aforementioned Crimes must by all be accounted or
denied horrid, and unchristian, and no one can justly declare himself innocent
who has committed them. Next as to your proving it law full by Dr. John
Dun-Scotus, etc. To Swear with Equivocations upon just Cause, makes not at all
to your purpose nor what you allege of Bonnacina; For the Jesuits in their
last Speeches tell you with great Asseverations that they make use of no
Equivocation, mental Reservation, etc. Nor from those Authors can it be proved,
that any one may Swear contrary to the sense the words properly bear, but all
you can deduce is, that is words Amphilogious, doubtful, or of two senses, I
may swear to that sense I think the truth, though it perhaps be understood in
another sense by him that hears me; and this only upon a just cause (as Abraham
did about Sarah his Wife, calling her his Sister) which he there explains.

The Jesuits protested they spoke in the plain sense the words bear, and
averred it with great imprecations, and I believe you, nor any body living, can
find any proper, or other sense to their words, but that of Innocence: and I
did hope with Fenwick, That Christian Charity would not have let you thought,
that by the last Act of his life he would cast away his Soul, by sealing up his
last breath with a damnable lie; Were not this greater want of Charity, than to
say, He that dies an obstinate Haeretick cannot be saved. The usual Objection
against Catholics.

In the next place you cite Soto, saying, Mendacium si non habet, etc. A Lie,
if it have no other malice than that of falsehood, it is no mortal sin? What is
this more than to say, every Lie is not a mortal Sin; for every Lie has the
malice of falsehood; and does this argue, or can any one deduce from hence, that
no Lie is a mortal Sin; that a Lie that has besides the malice of falsehood, the
malice of prejudice or wrong to my Neighbor, a false accusation of another by
protesting my own Innocence with a Lie, or to lie with perjury and imprecations
upon falsehood, can any infer from thence, these not to be mortal? and such had
been the Lies of the Jesuits, were they guilty of what they were accused.
Lastly, You ground your calumny upon these words, Certum est obligationem hujas
praecepti, etc. It is certain that the Obligation of this precept (to conceal
what is revealed in Confession) in no Case, and for no end, even the defense of
the Commonwealth from very great ill, either Spiritual or Temporal; can be
violated or broken, to this you allege Durand, Scotus, and many more. What of
all this? did the Jesuits, if guilty, know of the Plot only by hearing the
Confessions of others? If so, they could not be Actors in it, as they were
accused to be, and Condemned for; where do you find a Precept of not revealing
or owning my own Actions, although I had confessed them before? Now give me
leave here (mention being made of this Precept) to show you that this Precept
is so far from being of any ill consequence to any Kingdom, as that on the
contrary, it is very advantageous, a great hindrance, and no encouragement to
Treason. Whosoever Sacramentally confesses Treason owns it a Crime; the Priest
that has a precept of concealing it, has also a precept not to absolve him
unless he heartily repent, and if the Treason be only intended, he must
indispensably require him to desist from such intention, he must with all
possible diligence exhort him to detest such Intention or Treason in his heart,
and to discover his Accomplices, if he have any, as in Conscience he is
absolutely bound to do, here is Confession by the admonition and direction of
the Pastor and Spiritual Physician of his Soul (who hereby knows the Disease
and State of his Soul) a great means to his Spiritual Cure, to cast out of his
Heart all Treasonable thoughts, and to prevent the Actions, but if there were
not that precept of secrecy, who would confess to be Accused and Impeached?
It Is Confession that is the great security of all Catholic Kingdoms from
Treason; for when any guilty in fact or intention come to this Sacrament. they
are pressed to declare their Accomplices, and obliged to retract and hinder what
is not effected therein, knowing they cannot be Absolved without it, whereby
most Treasons are timely prevented. For this Reason we find that success in
Rebellion against Government, has commonly been joined with Rebellion in
Religion, as pretended Reformation in Religion and Rebellion against their
Sovereign, set up together in Holland, and in several Principalities of the
Empire; whereas Catholics, remaining such, contradict by Treason their own
Principles, and must acknowledge such practice damnable; wherefore had the
Jesuits been guilty, you would have had from them an acknowledgement of the
Crime, as done or acted contrary to their Conscience and Principles of their
Religion; but it is no Principle of any Religion to accuse ones self falsely.
Wherefore wonder not that they should rather dye professing Innocence to the
Crimes objected against them, with hope of Salvation and Pardon of God for all
their real Offenses, than to live by his Majesty's Pardon with false accusation
of themselves and others, and displeasure or anger of God. And I must not
wonder to find their Words and Speeches so misrepresented, whereas even the
Word of God is daily traduced by false Glosses, to the ruin of many. And what
wonder that those Five Jesuits, and many more, though never so Loyal have been
thus Condemned, and Executed as Traitors to his Majesty. Where by pretended
Justice and course of Law, one of the best of Kings has been Condemned and
Executed as a Traitor to his Country. By thus suffering they have as Christians
imitated Christ, and as loyal Subjects imitated their King Charles the First,
God bless King Charles the Second. Amen.

FINIS.

