THE Friendly Enquirer's Doubts and Objections ANSWERED: Concerning The Light
within. The Word of God. The Church of Christ. Gospel Ministers. Ordinances in
General and in Particular. Water Baptism and The Lord's Supper.


TOGETHER With a Brief Testimony against OATHS and SWEARING.

First Intended and Written for the Satisfaction of some particular
Acquaintance. And now published for more General Service.

By James Iackson.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street, School.

THE Friendly Enquirer's Doubts and Objections ANSWERED, etc.
THat which was from the beginning, even that good Word of Life, which is the
Light of Men; that which we have seen, and heard, and tasted of, is here
declared unto you, that ye also may have Fellowship with us: And truly our
Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; and for this and
no other end, write I unto you, but that your joy may be full. This then is the
Message that God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all; and if we say that
we have Fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we Lie and do not the Truth:
But if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with
another; and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sin: If
we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us; but
if we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all our Unrighteousness, 1 John. 1.1.2.3. to the 9th.

Whoever therefore would attain unto the blessed Work of Sanctification, to be
cleansed from all Sin by the Blood of Jesus Christ, and so come to enjoy the
comfortable fellowship of the Holy Ghost, which proceeds from the Father and
the Son, Must turn from Darkness to Light, ( Acts 26.18.) must Believe in the
Light ( John 12.36.) And walk in the Light, even as he is in the Light, and
will know that this Turning is an Inward Turning from the Darkness which is
within, unto the Light within, where the Day dawneth his Star arises, and the
day spring from on high, does visit us even in our Hearts, 2. Pet. 1.19.
Wherefore blessed are they who are not offended in the Light, but turn to it,
believe in it, and obey it in all things.

1. Objection, But we are afraid of being deceived: This is a new and strange
Doctrine, did ever Christ or his Apostles bid Men believe and obey the Light
within?

Answer, 1. Are you not already deceived? Consider and faithfully examine your
own conditions, if you are delivered out of the deceived State, wherein the
greatest part of the World yet remain, are you not in a sinful Trasgressing
State? For it is said, The Woman being deceived was in the Transgression, 1 Timothy
2.14.

(2.) They who believe and abide in the Light, know that they are not deceived;
seek not to deceive any, nor fear any deceiving them; though whilst we walk in
the imaginations of our own Hearts, and warmed our selves with the sparks of
our own kindling, that then as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty,
so our Minds were corrupted from the Simplicity that is in Jesus; in which
State we see many yet to stand, whom the Lord will undeceive in his own time:
But evil Men and seducers will wax worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived: And never fear deceit in those that turn you to the Light; unto
which, they that do the Truth bring all their works.

Verily you ought cautiously to be aware of, and suspect all those who pretend
safe conduct, but reject and hate the Light.

(3.) Search and Prove this Doctrine freely, without prejudice or partiality
judge, nor condemn it unheard, speak not evil of any thing unknown; for so we
may unhappily condemn the Innocent, and make our selves Guilty: We should
rightly understand what another holds, before we contend against him; least for
want of this Wisdom and Patience, we oppose not so much his Judgment, as our
own Conceit: Better it is to hear a Man's mind with meekness and candor, than
hastily to guess at it.

(4.) Be not wedded I beseech you to any Opinion, nor wise in your own
Conceits, so as to build upon your own, or other Men's Judgments; and rest
satisfied therein, because it is strengthened by Multitude, Custom, Authority
and Antiquity, for undoubtedly many have erred grossly in those things they have
thought themselves infallible.

Better it is to cleave to the clear and naked Truth's of God alone, than to
follow the Doctrines and Examples of the most learned and Eminent Professors in
the World, when they hold not the Truth as it is in Jesus

(5.) Reproach not this Doctrine, saying, it is new and strange, or that ye
never heard it so before; for this discovers your ignorance more than my Error,
for this which to you may seem to be a new Error, being rightly examined by the
Scriptures, will evidently prove an old Truth; and if you will needs reject
whatsoever to you savours of Novelty; how shall the Truths we yet know not be
brought in, and the Ignorance and Error which yet remain be purged out?

(6.) This is the same Doctrine which was preached by our blessed Savior, and
his holy Prophets and Apostles, which was believed and obeyed, by all the
Faithful Saints and Servants of God since the Creation; the same which the Lord
gave in charge to the Israelites by the mouth of Moses, saying, Behold I send
my Angel before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee to the place I
have prepared: Beware of him and obey his Voice -- Exodus 23.20. But the Soul
that does ought presumptuously, reproacheth the Lord, and shall be cut off
from his People, because he has despised the Word of the Lord, Numb. 15.30.
what is here meant by the Word of the Lord?

Answer, Nothing less than the Light of Christ in their Hearts: For says
Moses, It is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off, but the Word is very
nigh, even in thy Heart, and in thy Mouth, that thou should hear it, and do
it, Deuteronomy. 30.11. to 14. to which the Apostle gives his Testimony, that this
Word (or Light) within, is not Diabolical, nor Natural, nor Legal, but
Evangelical; and affirms, that obedience thereunto, is of the Righteousness of
Faith, Romans 10. from the 5th to the 8th. David calls it, a Lamp to his feet,
and a Light to his paths, and prays that the Light and the Truth, may be his
Leader and Guide: Solomon says, The reproof of instruction is the way of Life:
And the Prophet Isaiah testifies, thou shall hear a Word behind thee saying,
this is the Way walk in it, Isa. 30.21. John the Baptist preached Christ the
Light, which was the Word which was in the beginning of the World, and He was
sent to bear witness of this Light, (which is not a false Light, or a natural
Light) but the true Light, which lights every Man that comes into the World,
John 1.9. and our blessed Lord said, John 8.12. I am the Light of the World, he
that follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life:
While ye therefore have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the
Children of the Light, John 12.36. and he bids, seek first the Kingdom of God,
and the Righteousness thereof; which Kingdom, he told the Scribes and
Pharisees, was in them, Luke 17.21. whence it is evident, that every true
Convert must inwardly turn from the Power of Satan, and Kingdom of darkness
within, and inwardly seek and feel after the marvelous Light of God's Kingdom,
to seek the Lord if happily they might feel after him and find him, though he be
not far from every one of us, Acts 17.27. and the Apostle James writing to
Sinners, bids them lay aside all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted Word, which is able to save their Souls;
which Peter calls the sure Word of Prophecy, unto which (says he) ye do well
to give heed as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, till the day dawn,
and the day star arise in your Hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. which said ingrafted Word,
and sure Word of Prophecy, cannot be intended, or meant by the Holy Ghost to
be the Scriptures, because they are not able to Save Men's Souls, or give
Eternal Life to such as think to have it thence, John 5.39. but it is the Light
of Christ our Lord, in whom is Life Eternal, and the same Life is the Light of
Men, and his Name is called the Word of God, Rev. 19.13.

2 Object, But do thou deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God? Which is
the only rule, both for Life, and also to judge of Doctrines, and the only
Weapon to resist Satan, and confute his Ministers; and Christ overcame the
Tempter only by the Scriptures, which are the Sword of the Spirit, and the Word
of God.

Answ. 1. In obedience to the command of Christ, John 5.39. I have perused and
diligently searched the Scriptures, both in the Originals, and several
Translations, it may be as much as any Man, and find that they sufficiently
declare, and testify of, and for our blessed Savior Jesus Christ to be the
Word of God.

But through the whole Volumn of this holy Book, called the Bible, and
Scriptures of Truth; I find not therein that they are called by this Name.

(2.) And therefore that the Scriptures are the Sword of the Spirit, or the
Word of God, I have no Scripture warrant to believe, but that the Word of God,
is the Sword of the Spirit, I own and witness experimentally, and that it is
sharper than a Two edged Sword, like a Hammer and Fire, the Ax at the Root of
the Tree, and that it is Unchangeable, Incorruptible and Eternal, without
beginning of Days or end of Time, and so are not the Scriptures.

(2.) Nevertheless we prefer the Holy Scriptures (above all Books) as they
were given forth by the Holy Spirit of God, and therefore of Divine Authority,
and believe them to be a true Declaration of God, and of his Word, yet we must
not fix our hopes of Eternal Life in the Scriptures, as the Jews did, and would
not believe in Chirst, nor come to him that they might have Life, John
5.38.39.40. It is not they therefore who have the Scriptures, but only they who
have the Son of God that have life, 1 John 5.12.

(4.) Wherefore we prefer Christ Jesus above the Scriptures, for in all things
he must have the pre-eminence, therefore said John, he is preferred before me,
for he is before me, and before Abraham was (says Christ) I am: Wherefore know
that we build not upon the holy Prophets and Apostles, their Words, Works,
Writings and Experiences, but upon Jesus Christ Himself, being the Chief Corner
Stone, and the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, so that we have not
received our Light, Life, Peace, Comfort, Faith, Hope and Assurance from the
Writings of the Saints, but from him that was their Light, Life, Hope, Rest and
Foundation, and have our teaching from that inward Light, Law, Word, and
Unction, whereby Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph walked
with, and pleased God, long before the Scripture or Scriptural Rules were
written and manifested.

(5.) Neither are the Scriptures the only Rule, for they declare and testify
of the Law written in the Heart, and the Rule of a new Creature, Gal. 6.15.16.
and as for the only Judge of Doctrines, we know that the Scriptures are hard to
be understood, and therefore Men in their Carnal Wisdom, are putting their
several meanings upon one and the same Scripture, wherefore we say the Spirit
of God is the Judge of Doctrines; because he alone, who gave forth the
Scriptures, best knows the meaning thereof: For the Spirit searches all
things, yea, the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.

Answer, (6.) Neither yet do I believe that the Scriptures were the only means
which Christ made use of to overcome and repel the Tempter in the Wilderness;
for Satan allegdd and pleaded Scripture, till he indeed took the Sword of the
Spirit, even his Divine Power, and commanded him to be gone, and said, Get thee
behind me Satan.

Object. 3. Though it is granted, that Christ by his Light and Spirit is in
every true Believer; yet we cannot believe him to be so in every Man, for Paul
tells the Ephesians, that before their Conversion, they were without God, and
without Christ in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. and the same Apostle bids others to
examine and prove themselves, and to know that Jesus Christ is in you, except
you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5. whereby it appears, that Unbelievers and
Reprobates, are without Christ.

Answ. (1.) As to Unbelievers before Conversion, they are alienated from the
Life and Light of Christ, and under the Powers of the Prince of Darkness,
nevertheless the true Light shines in this Darkness, but the Darkness
comprehends it not, John 1.5. and I can truly witness to the Truth hereof,
knowing the time when I was without Christ and without God in the World, i. e.
without the true knowledge of them, living as if there was no God, yea, without
any awful regard to the Eye of God, yet I can as truly affirm, that at that
time the Light of Christ was in me, testifying against all mine Iniquities: And
though this may seem to be a Mystery, that a measure of his Light should be in a
Man; when that Man is without Christ, yet having experienced the truth hereof,
do therefore testify, that it is one thing for the Light of Christ to be in a
Man, and another thing for a Man to be in the Light of Christ; and therefore
affirm that the Light of Christ is in every Man, but no Man is in Christ Jesus,
till he be a new Creature.

Answ. (2.) And as to Reprobates, such as the Scripture testify, who have
sinned out the Day of Grace, done despite to the strivings of the Spirit, as
the old World did, such as are complained of, Jer. 6.29. and such as Stephen
reproves, Acts 7.51. even such as God has given up, cast off and rejected, yet
does not this prove, but that the Light and Spirit of Christ was once in them,
and at work in their Hearts.

Answ. (3.) And yet further, in the next place the Love of Christ constrains
us thus to Judge, because if Christ died for all, then were all dead, 2 Cor.
5.14. and as Christ dyed for all Men, so his grace is free for all Men, For the
Grace of God which brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men, Tit. 2.11. for
he is able and willing to save all, that yield obedience to the tenders of his
boundless, endless, unlimited, universal love to Mankind without exception, and
this we are verily persuaded of, from these and such like considerations.

(1.) Because the Lord is no respecter of Persons, he makes his Sun to rise on
the just, and on the unjust, and sends Rain on the evil and on the good, he
accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor regards the Rich more than the
Poor, for they all are the work of his Hands.

(2.) Because that Light which shined in our dark, ignorant, unclean and
unbelieving Hearts, before Conversion, is the very same in which we ought to
live and abide since our Conversion; that which formerly stood by, and in us,
was an Eye witness too, and bore a faithful Testimony against us, while we
walked in Darkness, is the same which since the time of our Believing and
abiding in his Light, witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the Children of
God. That very Light, which before reproved, convinced, judged and condemned
us, for all unbelief and unrighteousness both in Heart and Life, is still the
same which does convert, confirm, cleanse, justify and save, yea, that Light
which before shined in Darkness, when we were as vile as the worst of Sinners,
does now to the praise of God shine out of Darkness, whereof we are not Ashamed.

(3.) Because our Lord Jesus who cannot lie, has said, that Man's Condemnation
arises only from the contempt of, and disobedience unto this Light, saying,
this is The Condemnation that Light is come into the World, but Men love
darkness rather than light, John 3.19. Now most certain it is, that Man's
Damnation is occasioned from, viz. either want of Light, or through the
deficiency of this Light, or rather from Man's Rebellion and disobedience to
this Light.

First, we may not think so hardly of God, that Man's Condemnation arises from
the want of saving Light, this is to charge God with Injustice, as the evil and
unprofitable Servant, said, Lord I knew thee to be an Austere and hard Man,
reaping where thou have not Sown, and gathering where thou have not strewed:
And what greater Unmercifulness can be charged upon God? Than that he withholds
from any Man the benefit of his saving Light, or withdraws it before Man's
Rebellion against it.

And Secondly, It Is no less than Blasphemy to say, that the Light of Christ is
insufficient, and not able to save all that come to God thereby, for though his
appearance at first be as the day of small things, as the least of all Seeds, a
little Stone, disalowed and despised of Men, who stumble and are offended at
him, yet chosen of God, and exceeding precious to all that Believe, who know
him to be the Almighty Arm and Power of God to Salvation, the alsufficiency
whereof, is further demonstrated by its Divine Nature and Powerful effects.

(1.) The Nature of this Divine Light, in which we believe, and Know to be that
measure of the immortal, unchangeable, undefiled and perfect Principle of Life,
Light and Holiness, which never fell, nor consented to any Evil, but ever
opposed and stood against the whole corrupt nature, will and affections of fallen
Man, (a Measure, I say hereof, is given to every one to profit withal) 1 Cor.
12.7. so that the Light I speak of, is nothing of Man's Nature, but of the
Divine Nature, whereof he has made us partakers, by revealing his Son in us,
even that great Mystery, Christ in you the hope of Glory, the blessed Seed
(promised Genesis 3.15.) yea, even the Son of God, who is sent into the World,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have Eternal Life.

(2.) The Effects of the Light, when Christ was upon Earth, John saw and bare
Record, saying, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sins of the
World, and yet the Lord said, A Greater Testimony have I, than that of John,
for the Works that I do in my Fathers Name, they testify of me; so we say of
his Light, however slighted and despised by the World, if his Works be not such
as none else can do, believe him not.

Effect (1.) Hereby the Sinner is convinced of, and condemned for all Sins that
ever he commiteth, of what kind or nature soever they be, John 16.8.9.10.11.
Come (said the Woman of Samaria) and I will show you a Man that has told me
all things that ever I did: Is not this the Christ? John 4.29.

Effect (2.) Hereby the true fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of
Wisdom, is actually planted in the Heart, for while a Man in his Imaginations,
supposes God and Christ only as circumscribed at a great distance, he persists
with boldness in his evil ways; but when his mind is turned into the Light, he
is thereby made to understand, and see his condition and misery; and to see him
whom he has pierced, which forces this, or the like general Cry, Lord, I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear: But now mine Eye sees thee, wherefore
I abhor my self in Dust and Ashes.

Effect (3.) This causes not only repentance thorough Faith in Christ the
Light; but also works in the Heart, Obedience of Faith, Romans 16.26.

Effect (4.) Hereby Man's insufficiency to answer the requirings of God is
discerned, and the Alsufficient Strength and Power of Christ discovered: The
Spirit of Truth shall guide you into all Truth, for he shall Glorify me: For
he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you, John 16.13.14.

Effect (5.) They who have believed and do abide in the Light, (and they only)
are hereby enabled and made willing, freely to declare and preach their
experiences to others, and to confound, and put to silence the weakness,
ignorance and folly, of all that reproach and oppose this Doctrine, as the
illiterate young Man did to the learned Scribes and Pharisees: Why this is a
marvelous thing (said he) that ye know not whence he is, and yet he has
opened my Eyes: Since the World began was it not heard, that any Man opened the
Eyes of one that was born Blind, J^hn, 9.30. wherefore let all who look out for
another Savior, remember the answer of Christ to John Baptist, on the like
account, Go (says Christ) and tell him that sent ye to ask, saying, art thou
he, or look we for another? Tell him what ye have heard and seen; the Blind
receive their sight, the Deaf hear, the Lame walk, Lepers are cleansed, and to
the Poor the Gospel is preached; and blessed is he whosoever shall not be
offended in me: Even so in a spiritual sense, the same may be as truly affirmed
now of him the true Light, who is spiritually in the World, and the World knows
him not, nor whence he is, though he has enlightened, healed, cleansed and
quickened Thousands; and the poor and wounded [whom none of the Proud Covetous
Priests regard] even the Poor [by Virtue of the Light] have the Everlasting
Gospel of Salvation freely preached to them.

Object. (4.) But ye are against all Gospel Ministers, Churches and God's
Ordinances (viz.) The Sacraments of Christ instituting, viz, Water Baptism and
the Lord's Supper.

Answ. (1.) As concerning Ministers, all that are truly the Ministers of the
Gospel, who are Ministers of the Spirit we own, but all they whom the Lord is
against we deny, behold says the Lord, I am against the Prophets that steal my
words, every one from his Neighbor; and against them that use their Tongues,
and say he says: Who prophecy false Dreams, and do tell them, and cause my
People to Err by their lies, and by their lightness, yet I sent them not, nor
commanded them; therefore they shall not profit this People at all, says the
Lord, Jer. 33.30.31.32.

(2.) And we are against all such who oppose, and set themselves against the
Lord, his Truth and People, such as Peter declared against, They that stood up
and gathered themselves together against the Lord, and against his Christ, Acts
4.26. such as blaspheme, falsely accuse, and speak evil of the Spirit and Light
of Christ, of which the Lord says, He that speaks against the Holy Ghost, it
shall not be forgiven him neither in this World, nor in the World to come,
because they said, He had an Unclean Spirit, Mark 3.30.

(3.) We are against all ignorant and blind Guides, who know not God, believe
not in Jesus Christ, and to whom the Gospel is hid, and such are all they, who
believe not in the Light, and deny Immediate Revelation, for says Christ, No
Man knows the Father, but they to whom the Son reveals him: And the Gospel
which Paul preached, he says, It is not after Man, neither received he it of
Man, nor was he taught it by Man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal.
1.11, 12. but all who abide in Darkness and hate the Light, unto such the
Gospel is hid, 2 Cor. 4.3. Wherefore says Christ, I thank the O Father, Lord
of Heaven and Eurth, because thou have hid these things from the Wise and
Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes, even so Father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight: All things are delivered to me of my Father; and no Man
knows the Son, but the Father, neither knows any Man the Father save the
Son, and him to whomsoever the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11.26.27.

(4.) We are against all such, who [with Simon Magus, to maintain their Carnal
Priestcraft, for filthy Lucres sake] would Merchandise with, and set at sale
the free gift of God, and the Mysteries of his Kingdom, whom Peter sharply
reproves, saying, Thy Money perish with thee, because thou have thought the gift
of God may be purchased with Money, thou have neither part nor lot in this
matter, for thy Heart is not right in the sight of God, repent therefore of
this thy Wickedness, and pray God if perhaps the thought of thy Heart may be
forgiven thee, for I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of Iniquity: Now if it be said, this affects not the Ministers you oppose?
I answer, They either have the same thought, and so are in the Gall of
Bitterness, or they have not; if they have not such a thought, that the Gift of
God may be purchased with Money, then are they the vilest Wretches, and greatest
self condemned Cheats in the World; to set that at sale for Money, which they
esteem the Gift of God, and which they know cannot be purchased with Money, and
this to delude Milions of Souls: But if they have such a thought, then are they
excluded with Simon Magus from having any part or lot in the Ministry, Acts
8.20.

(5.) We are against all those Teachers, who with Balaam, loving the Wages of
Unrighteousness, and Earthly Rewards, have forsaken the right way, and gone
astray, and changed the Gospel Ministry, Order and Worship, both as to Matter,
Manner and Maintenance, from that which was practiced by the Apostles, walking
directly contrary unto, and wholly perverting the Apostles Doctrine, who says,
Feed the Flock of God, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint but
willingly; nor for filthy Lucres sake, but of a ready mind, neither as being
lords over God's heritage, but as being examples to the Flock.

(6.) We are against all such Teachers, who with those evil Spies, prejudice
the People against the good Land of Promise, Will neither enter into the
Kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer others that would to enter therein, Numb.
13.31. They brought up an evil report of the Land, saying, It is a Land that
eats up the Inhabitants thereof, and all the People that we saw in it, are
Men of a great stature, and there we saw the Giants, the Sons of Anak, which
come of the Giants, to whom we in our own sight were as Grasshoppers, and so we
were in their sight, then all the Congregation murmured Crying, Deuteronomy. 1.28.
whether shall we go? Our Brethren have discouraged our Hearts, saying, their
Cities are great and walled up to Heaven, their Men mighty and stronger than
we, even Giants, the Anakims, and we have heard say, who can stand against the
Sons of Anak?

Even so this present generation of Priests and Teachers, dissuade and
discourage the Hearts of their People 1st. By their envying and bitter
infectives against the good Land of Promise, the Spiritual Canaan, Christ's
Kingdom of Light and Righteousness. 2d. By magnifying the Power and Dominion of
Sin, and Kingdom of Darkness, and suggesting an impossibility of Conquest.

(1.) They discourage and deter the Hearts of the People, by belying and
traducing the holy and blessed Appearance of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom; even
as those spies gave a false report of Temporal Canaan, contrary to the
Character and Description, the Lord by his Servants have given thereof, as
appears in Deuteronomy. 8.7. Moses says, It is a good Land, a Land of Brooks of
Water, of Fountains, and depths that spring out of Valleys and Hills.

Verse 8. A Land of Wheat, and Barley, and Vines, and Fig Trees, and
Pomegranates, a Land of Oil Olive and Honey.

Verse 9. A Land wherein thou shall eat Bread without scarceness, thou shall
not lack any thing in it, a Land whose Stones are Iron, and out of whose Hills
thou may dig Brass.

Deuteronomy. 11.9. A Land that flows with Milk and Honey.

Verse 10. It is not as the Land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou
sowedst thy Seed, and did carry Water to it, as to a Garden of Herbs.

Verse 11. But it is a Land of Hills and Valleys, and drinks Water of the
Rain of Heaven, (no need here of Man's Pumping, Draining or Forceing.)

Verse 12. A Land which the Lord thy God cares for; the Eyes of the Lord thy
God are always upon it, from the beginning of the Year, even to the end of the
Year.

And observe what a good account Caleb and Joshua gave of the Land, in the
presence of these Men who had brought up the aforesaid evil report, to the
jeopardy of their Lives.

Numb. 14.7. It is (say they) an exceeding good Land, a Land that flows with
Milk and Honey, (and as for those Giants and mighty Men of stature, say they)
fear not the People of the Land, they are bread for us, (and upon hearing of
this) all the Congregation bad Stone them with Stones.

Whereby it is very observable, how readily the common People close with, and
embrace the evil suggestions of the Enemy, and also how hard a thing it is, to
undeceive such as are prejudiced against the Truth; though grounded only upon
bare report, and false accusations; and thus the Hearts of People are perverted.

(2.) And yet these Evil Men, do not only discourage the Hearts of the People,
by despising and Reproaching the good Land, but they also deter, and hinder
them; by suggesting such difficulties as possibly cannot be overcome, such
Enemies as never on this side the Grave can be conquered.

Although the Lord had graciously promised a total subduing of all Israel's
Enemies.

Deuteronomy. 11.22. Saying, If ye shall diligently keep all these commandments, which
I command you to do them, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways,
and to cleave to him, then will the Lord drive out all these Nations from
before you, and ye shall possess greater Nations and mightier ^han your selves,
and there shall no Man be able to stand before you: All this and much more did
the Lord promise to Israel of Old, concerning a perfect dominion and victory
over all their Enemies.

And in a more especial manner, has he promised an absolute Conquest and
Deliverance from the Kingdom and Powers of Darkness, to all that are Traveling
to the Spiritual Canaan, even unto all that receive Jesus Christ, that love
him, believe in him, and obey his Voice.

John 1.7.9. They who walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, have fellowship
one with another; and the Blood of Jesus cleanses from all Sin, and if we
confess, and forsake our Sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins,
and to cleans^ us from all Unrighteousness.

John 12.46. I am come (says Christ) a Light into the World, that whosoever
believes in me, should not abide in Darkness. And indeed for this very end, is
our Lord Jesus promised, sent and manifested to put an end to Sin, to finish
Transgression, and bring in everlasting Righteousness, to destroy the works of
the Devil; to bind the strong Man (though never so well armed) to cast him out
and spoil his Goods, not in part, but to save even to the uttermost, all that
come to the Father by him.

But these Men do not only refuse and despise the Land of Promise, and the only
way to Life and Salvation, but hinder and shut up the Kingdom, that others who
would enter in cannot; yea they deny the only means of eternal Salvation, by
their confidently affirming that Revelation is ceased, whereas our Lord Jesus
has declared, and all the Faithful Servants of God in all Ages bear witness,
That none know the Father, but he to whom the Son reveals him.

(7.) And we are against all those who are, and have with Judas [through envy
and avarice] been the betrayers of the Interest, and cause of Christ, and
People of God, into the Merciless Hands of cruel Persecutors, who will not yet
see, But [saith the Lord] they shall see and be ashamed for their envy against
my People; Of these, therefore I shall only say with Jacob, Simeon and Levi are
Brethren, Instruments of cruelty are in their Habitations; O my Soul come not
thou into their Secret, unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united,
for in their Anger they shed much Blood, and in their self-will they dug
down a Wall, Genesis 49.

But the Ministers of Christ, whom he has sent as his Ambassadors we own, and
none else; if you say who are they? I answer, they who have received their
Commission and Embassy from Christ, for says he to his Father, As thou sent
me, so have I sent them into the World, and to his Disciples he said, As the
Father sent me into the World, even so send I you into the World, John 17.

1st. Christ was the Son of God, and a Voice from Heaven testified, saying,
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him, 2ly. he was
immeasurably anointed with the Spirit, 3d. by Virtue of his Sonship and
Unction, he endured and conquered all the Assaults and Temptations of Satan,
and 4ly. he went out and preached the Gospel, and 5ly. that Doctrine which he
had preached and witnessed to in his Life, he confirmed and sealed by his Death
in his Blood. So are all true Ministers in their measure, Children of God, his
anointed ones fitted through Sufferings, to preach the Doctrine of the Gospel
in the Life and Power of the Eternal Word, and thereby made ready to Seal
thereto with their Blood if required.

Answ. (2.) As concerning Churches, we believe that the Lord had a Church and
peculier People, whom he has preserved through all Ages from the beginning to
this present time, in and with whom he will also abide for ever, and this
Church we own, which is in The Communion of Saints one with another in the
things of God, through their Union with Jesus Christ; which differs from the
Churches of Men, 1st. In their constitution, not gathered by Force, Fear,
Favor or Will of Man, but drawn of the Father, adopted through the new Birth,
and so become a Spiritual Society, first united to Christ by the Spirit of
Faith, and then knit together by the Bond of Love and Peace, 2ly. in their
Discipline, not by a Temporal Sword, nor by humane Officers, that act in the
strength of natural or acquired parts, but built, beautified and governed by
Christ himself, Isa. 54.12. Zach. 6.12. and by Instruments helped, so far as
the Spirit of Jesus Christ acts in them, 2 Cor. 13.3.

in the Church of Christ all are taught of God, Isaiah 54.13. Tit. 2.11. 1 John
2.27. 4ly. the Churches of Men are often broken to pieces, scatered and
confounded, But the Gates (which is the Power) of Hell shall never prevail
against the true Church, Mat. 16.18. 5ly. in the Churches of Men are more
Wicked than Righteous; nay, all of them being unrighteous and unclean, are more
or less the Synagogues of Satan, the Habitation of Antichrist; and have been,
yet are, and while in their carnal Sinful State, will be Persecutors of the
true Church, Gal. 4.29. but in the true Church they are all Righteous, Isaiah
60. from the 1st. to the 20th. and hereof it may be tru^y said, Who is like
thee, O People saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy help, and the Sword of
thine Excellency? Thine Enemies shall be found Liars unto thee, and thou shall
tread upon their high places, yea, this poor, despised, persecuted Flock, are
the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 6.16.

And the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.4. in which Body, 1st. there is but one Head,
2ly. there is not one dead Member, 1 Pet. 2.4.5. 3ly. there is no Law of force,
but every Member acts by the Law of Love, 4ly. all Members united into this,
Body sympathize one with another both in Comfort and Afflictions please
therefore to see, 1 Cor 12.25. This One Body is unite^ by one Spirit, into one
Hope, (...) one Lord, and has but one Fai^^ and one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. (...)
which one Baptism, leads me (...) Answer the third Branch of the last Objection.

Answ. (3.) As concerning Ordinances in General, 1st. The Scripture calls
nothing Sin, or any thing Practical, but that which is prohibited, or expressly
commanded by the great Legislator; neither shall any be saved, or are to be
judged in Spiritual matters, by any Law, but by the Law of God, or by any
Lawgiver, but by Jesus Christ, He that speaks evil of his Brother, and
judges his Brother, speaks evil of the Law, and judges the Law, thou art
not a doer of the Law, but a judge, James 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, who is
able to save and to destroy, and Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us, Col. 2. 16. let no Man
therefore judge you in meat or drink, etc. which were a shadow of things to
come, but the Body is of Christ, wherefore if ye be dead with Christ, from the
Rudiments of the World, why, as though living in the World, are ye subject to
Ordinances? Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, which all perish with the using,
after the commandments and doctrines of Men; Touch not, Taste not, Handle not,
which things indeed have a show of wisdom in Will Worship, etc. all which
perish in the using, 2ly. the Scriptures reject all Religious performances,
that are done without warrant from Heaven, Isa. 1.12. When ye come to appear
before me, who has required this at your hands to tre^^ my Courts? Bring no
more va^^ Oblations, Incense is an Abom^nation to me, etc. and Micah 6.6, 7, 8,
3ly. the Scriptures declare that all outward Ordinances, are Temporary; only
till the time of Reformation, and to be abolished by Christ, Heb. 9.1. to 14.
Col. 2.6. to the end, Ephesians. 2.15. 4ly. the Scriptures show us, that the outward
abolished Ordinances, and the Traditions of Men, hinder and prevent Obedience
to Christ, and Submission to the will and commands of God; This is the will of
God even your Sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. this is the work of God, (or the
work he requires, says Christ) that ye believe on him, whom he has sent, John
6.28. And this is the commandment (says John) that we should believe in the
Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he has given us
command: But alas! how is the work of God laid aside, his will and commands
neglected, and the beggarly Rudiments and Elements of this World pleaded for,
and maintained; and mostly by such, who reject the command of God and Christ,
that for secular ends, keep and observe their pretended Ordinances, and make
the Word of God of none effect, by their Traditions, Mark 7.5. to 13. Mat.
23.23. 5ly. as Man cannot be polluted or defiled, by that which is without him,
no more does any thing, be it what it can, Bread, or Wine, or Water, from
without, cleanse or comfort the inward Man, according to Mark 7.14. to 23. 6ly.
nor yet in matters of Faith and Worship, are we to receive our Measures or
Rules from Councils or Synods, or the best of Men, further than the express
command of the Lord for their warrant, Moses had no Authority to institute any
Laws or Ordinances, but to teach the People Obedience to those God had
prescribed, Exodus 24.12. and Christ's Commission to the Apostles was, go Teach
them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you, and Lo I am with you to the
end of the Word, Mat. 28.20.

And now more particularly, concerning the two Sacraments (so called) and
first, touching Baptism, or rather Baptisms, for there be many, we read of
diverse sorts of Washings or Baptizings, as the Baptizing of Pots and Cups (for
so it is in the Greek) Mark 7.8. and we read of the Doctrine of Baptisms, Heb.
6.2. and now concerning John's Baptism, which in its time was not only New, but
mighty Famous; insomuch that the People mused, and were all in expectation,
whether John were not the Christ, but he confessed that he was but a
forerunner, and that his Baptism was weak and imperfect, and temporary, an
elementary Figure and Shadow of Christ's Powerful Spiritual and Saving Baptism;
from hence its evident, that the Baptism of John, and the Baptism of Christ,
are, and ever was, two distinct Baptisms; and as the Heavens are high above the
Earth, so vast a difference is betwixt them.

(1.) They are two in Name, Apollos an Eloqent Man, and mighty in the
Scriptures, knew only the Baptism of John, to whom Aquilla and Priscilla
expounded the way more perfectly, Acts 18.25.

(2.) They differ in time; He that comes after me shall Baptize you with the
Holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11. and said Christ, John Baptized with Water, but ye shall
be Baptized with the Holy Ghost, not many days hence.

(3.) They are two in Nature; the one a created, visible Element, the other an
holy, invisible quickening Spirit.

(4.) They differ in their Effects; John's reaches only to the outside, the
Spirit's Baptism cleanses the Soul and Conscience.

(5.) John's Baptism was but a Sign, a Shadow, and a Legal Ceremony; but the
Baptism of the Spirit, is the Substance and the Truth, of that which Water
typified.

(6.) John's Water Baptism was Temporary, of short duration and continuance, as
all Legal Signs and Ceremonies had an end, so this being nearer the Truth and
Substance, and to the day of Christ than they, was of less continuance, and
being a shadow, must fly away by the glorious rising and brightness of his Son:
And so John's Baptism was of use a little before Christ's manifestation in the
Flesh, and was to continue till his Ascension; and then when Christ's Baptism
began, the shadow must by degrees decrease and vanish, and give way to the
Substance, the Sign abolished, and the Truth exalted, the Letter resigns to the
Spirit, the Servant to the Son: So that Christ's Fire Baptism put an end to
John's Water Baptism, for as all the Prophets were until John, so John was
until Christ; and John must no more exceed his bounds, than the Prophets
theirs; for as the Prophets continued and gave way to John, so John resigned up
to Christ. John's Temporary Ministry had a Temporary Baptism, but the
Everlasting Gospel of Christ Jesus, had an Everlasting Baptism, I must
decrease, but he shall increase, says John, therefore we leave John and his
Baptism where we found them, (viz.) Without the bounds and limits of Christ's
Kingdom (as to his dispensation) Mat. 11.11. Verily I say unto you, among them
that are born of Women, there has not risen a greater Prophet than John
Baptist, nevertheless, he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, is greater
than he; and if ye will receive it, this is the Elias which was for to come.

But now to bring Signs and Ceremonies into Christ's Kingdom (the true Church)
is acting directly against Christ, and him crucified; and surely none are so
weak as to rely upon Water Baptism, as sufficient (which I fear many Thousands
do) without the Sactification of the Spirit, or to think that Christ's
Spiritual Baptism is not complete with John's; these do worse than to build
Tabernacles for Moses, and John the Baptist, equal to one for Christ; and so
debase the greatest Glory of the New Testament, the Baptism of the Spirit.

Object. (1.) But have all our Christian Forefathers been in the dark about
this Thing, that Water Baptism which gives us our Christendom, has no room
now in the Church, and Kingdom of Christ?

Answ. (1.) The Judgments of the Lord are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out, (2.) that Christianity which proceeds from Water Baptism, is but
low and mean, it is but Skin deep: However, it is only the Baptism of Christ's
Spirit which makes a true Christian. Also our Lord said to Peter, Unless I
wash thee, thou have no part in me, John 13.8. even so it is with us, unless we
be sanctified and cleansed by the Spirit of Jesus, we shall perish our
Uncleanness.

Object. (2.) But Christ who is Lord of the Kingdom, and Head of the true
Church, submitted to this Ordinance, and was baptized with Water.

I Answer, very true; and Jesus was also circumcised, and honored John's
Baptism, (1.) because he was born under the Law, (2.) to fulfiill and finish
all legal Righteousness; and so he that knew no Sin, was made Sin for us, That
we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, wherefore beware least any
spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Traditions of Men,
after the Rudiments of this World, and not after Christ, for he is the
Substance, and in him dwelt the fullness of the Godhead bodily, And ye are
Complete in Him, in whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made
without hands, in putting off the body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ, Buried with Him in Baptism, wherein also ye are Risen
with Him, through the Faith of the operation of God, -- blotting out the hand
writing of Ordinances, which was against us, and contrary to us, and took it
out of the way, nailing it to the Cross, and having spoiled Principalities and
Powers, he made a show of them openly, Triumphing over them in it, Col. 2.8. to
15.

Object. (3.) But does not the Lord justify Water Baptism, in saying, Except a
Man be born of Water, John 3.5. and commands it, Go teach all Nations Baptizing
them, etc.

Answ. Not at all, for the Lord does not say, Except a Man be baptized of
Water, but born of Water, whence it plainly appears, such Water is here
intended, as can give a new Birth, or a new Life; And says he, if thou had
known the Gift of God, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given
thee Living Water. And so all that are regenerated, know this Well of Living
Water, and witness it to be in them, springing up to Everlasting Life, John
4.14. and I have long observed when Baptism in Scriprure is mentioned,
presently it is by some assigned, and confined to Water Baptism; whereas
nothing less can be intended, as Mat. 28.19. there is Christ's Commission to
his Apostles, Go teach all Nations baptizing them; how, or wherewith? It Is soon
answered with Material Water; but we say Material Water is not mentioned, and
no more intended in this Baptism, than the material Element of Fire is meant in
these Words, He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with Fire, Mat. 3.11.
and therefore in full answer to this last Objection, I say, that our Lord Jesus
never practiced, instituted, or commanded the use of Water Baptism in his
Church, John, 4.3. Jesus our Lord commanded to Baptize, (Mat. 28.19.) (...)
into the Name, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Here is
the Commission at large, and not a word of Water mentioned, neither does it
appear, that these words, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, was at any time expressed by the Apostles, when they, or any of
them condescended to the use of Water, for they understand the import of their
Embassy consisted not in the use of those words, but that by the effectual
ministration of the Word of Faith, they might implant such as believe, into the
Name, i. e. the Power, Virtue and Life of God the Father, Son and Spirit:
Besides Paul whose Commission was as full as the other Apostles, speaking of
Water Baptism, says thus, Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17.

Object. (4.) But the Apostles practiced Water Baptism, not only before
Christ's Spiritual Baptism came in, but afterward also.

Answ. It is granted, and they used Circumcision also, but neither of these
practices were in obedience to any command of Christ, but from the Example of
Moses and John Baptist; and in condescension, for certain it is, all, and every
outward Sign or Ceremony, having at first Divine Institution, are not easily
laid down, by reason of that Honorable Account they have obtained in the
Church; as the brazen Serpent, the use whereof was only in the Wilderness; but
being appointed of God, and very Serviceable in that time, yet it remained many
Generations, though of no use, unless for an Idol, till the Reign of Hezekiah,
who broke in pieces the brazen Serpent which Moses had made, for unto those
days the Children of Israel did burn Incense unto it: In like manner,
Circumcision being ended, an Ordinance of God, of great esteem and service
amongst the Jews, was continued long after it was abolished by Christ; but the
Apostle affirms of it to be nothing (even as it is said in another place, an
Idol is nothing in the World) so says Paul, Circumcision is nothing, and
Uncircumcision is nothing; nor is he a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is
that Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh, but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart in the Spirit, and not in the
Letter, whose Praise is of God and not of Man, Romans 2.28. wherefore we affirm,
that he is not a Christian, who is one outwardly only, neither is that (the)
Baptism, which is with Water; but he is a Christian who is one inwardly, and
the one Baptism is that of the Heart in the Spirit, for says the Apostle, 1
Pet. 3.21. The Baptism which does save us, is not an outward washing, or
putting away the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience
toward God, through the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And thus much for Water Baptism, which the Scriptures call John's Baptism, and
belonged to that middle Ministry, between the Prophets and Christ; but the
Baptism of the Spirit, which is Christ's, we own and know, and with evident
demonstrations of Truth, declare and testify the one and only Baptism of the
new Testament, and by one Spirit, we are all baptized into one Body, (says the
Apostle) whether we be Jews or Gentiles, Bond or Free, and have been all made
to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.

And this Baptism was but one in all Ages and Generations, even the very same
before Christ's coming in the Flesh, as since; Believing Jews and Gentiles,
both of the old and new Testament were made partakers of it; though the one
more fully than the other; so that although many, both before and since, might
not have the Baptism of Water, yet not one Member of the true Church has ever
wanted the Baptism of the Spirit.

But the more apparent manifestation of this Spiritual Baptism, followed after
that of John's Baptism, as appears by the promise of Christ, He that believes
on me, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Water, this spoke he of the
Spirit, which they who believe on him should receive, for the Holy Ghost was
not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified, John 7.38.39.
wherefore the Disciples waited at Jerusalem (as the Lord had commanded) until
the promise was fulfiled, Acts 1.

Now the ground of our true Comfort lies in that we are baptized (not with the
same Water, wherewith Christ was, but) with, and into the same Spirit, for as
many as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. this therefore
is the one and only Baptism: For,

(4.) This Baptism makes us partakers of the Divine Nature, John 3.3. the
Spirit's Baptism gives a new Birth, and therewith a new Nature, and so the true
Foundation of Christianity comes not from Water Baptism, but is that of Faith,
and a new Creature

(2.) This Baptism gives a new Name, I will write upon him the new name of my
God, and the name of the City of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes
down out of Heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my new Name, as the
Lord said to Jacob, thy name shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel, for as
a Prince have thou Power with God, and have prevailed, and thus says the Lord,
to all that join themselves to the Lord, that keep his Sabbaths, and that
choose the things that please me, and take hold of my Covenant, even unto them
will I give in my House, and within my Walls, a place and a name, better than
of Sons, and of Daughters, I will give them an everlasting Name, which shall
not be cut off, Isa. 66.4.5. and to him that overcomes, will I give to eat of
the hidden Manna, and will give him a White Stone, and in the Stone a new Name
written, which no Man knows, saving him that receives it.

(3.) This is the Baptism which makes all that partake thereof, Members of the
true Church of Christ. For by one Spirit, we are all baptized into one Body;
when the Sons of Zebedee desired to sit with Christ in his Kingdom, the one on
his right Hand, and the other on his left, Jesus asked if they were able to
drink of the Cup that he drank of, and to be baptized with the Baptism that he
was baptized with? And they said unto him we are able, Jesus answered, ye shall
drink indeed of my Cup, and be baptized with the Baptism that I am baptized
with, etc. now though their request savoured to much of ambition, yet shall they
have part in the Kingdom through sufferings.

(4.) It is the one Baptism only, which qualifies, fits, and enables to the
work of the Ministry, all the sharpest Wits, profoundest Learning, and the most
exquisite Accomplishments, and curious Polishings, of natures chiefest
Perfecting, cannot make a Gospel Minister, it is the pouring out, and work of
God's Holy Spirit, which makes a workman that needs not be ashamed, And in
those days says the Lord, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, and
your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy, Joel 2.28. which is witnessed,
Acts 2.4. to 17. and they were all filed with the Holy Ghost, and began to
speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance; And Blessings,
Glory and everlasting Praises to our God, who after a long Night of Darkness
and Degeneracy, has in this our Age and Generation, visited a remnant who are
brought forth through the new Birth, to feed upon the sincere Milk of the Word
of eternal Life, who find it their strength, in stilness and silence to wait
upon God, with an entire dependence on him; who act not in their own wills, nor
speak their own Words, but as the anointing which they have received and
abides in them, teaches them all things that appertains to Life and
Godliness; so that their Ministry is of the Spirit and not of the Letter, but
done according to the ability which God gives, and by the movings of his
Spirit, and if any thing be revealed to another, that sits by, the first does
hold his Peace, that all may speak one by one, and that only as the Spirit
moves and gives them utterance, that all may learn, and all may be comforted, 1
Cor. 14.30. and amongst those, there is no despising of the weak; nor do the
weak envy the strong, but they wish with Moses, that all the Lord's People were
Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them, Numb. 11.29.

(5.) This one Baptism, makes all those One with Christ, who partake of it,
John 17.23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one,
and know ye not says the Apostle, that so many of you as were baptized into
Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death; that like as Christ was raised up
from the Dead, by the glory of the Father, even so also we should walk in
newness of Life. for if we have been planted in the likeness of his Death, we
shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection, whence it appears, that by
and through this one Baptism, all that are thereby sanctified, are one with
Christ in his Life. 2ly. in his Death. and 3ly. in his Resurrection, Romans 6.3.4.

(6.) This is that one and only Baptism, which washes and cleanses from all
Sin, know ye not, says Paul, that the unrighteous shall not Inherit the
Kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Drunkards, nor
Extortioners, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Revilers, shall inherit
the Kingdom of God. But such were some of you but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are jbstified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by
the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. even as Christ loved his Church, and
gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing
of Water by the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church,
not having spot or wrinkle, nor any such thing, but that it should be Holy and
without blemish, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.

(7.) This Baptism does not only sanctify but save, For we our selves were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another; but after that the
kindness and love of God appeared toward mankind, not by works of Righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. and thus, says Peter, does
Baptism save us (not the washing away the filth of the Flesh, but) the answer
of a good Conscience toward God, through the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. 1
Pet. 3.20. so that Christ's Spirit Baptism, by the Word, is sufficient (to us)
without John's Water Baptism, for he that is truly washed from all filthiness
of Flesh and Spirit, and has the Holy Ghost in him, to wash, cleanse, renew
and sanctify his Nature; to conform his judgment, will and affection to the
Image of Christ, and to be in him as a Well of living Water springing up to
everlasting Life, what need has he of Material Water, under pretense of any
Sign or Signification whatsoever, either from Moses or John the Baptist, when
he is actually possessed of the real Truth and Substance of these Types and
Figures in himself already?

And lastly touching the Lord's Supper; which is a great Mystery, above which
all the worshipers in the Outward Courts, (since the Apostasy from the Spirit
of Faith, Power and Purity of the Primitive Church) have been, and are in
darkness and confusion; and at best, resting satisfied with the external
Shadow, and Figure of the real Substance, which is the true Spiritual Supper of
the Lord, not discerning the Lord's Body, nay, they are fallen from the very
outward form hereof, as held forth by Christ, Mat. 26.20. Luke 22.14. as he
sat, and the twelve Apostles with him, and after his Resurrection, he showed
himself to two of his Disciples in breaking of Bread as he sat with them, Luke
24.30. which was practiced by those Three Thousand converted by Peter's Sermon,
They continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in
breaking of Bread, and in Prayer, Acts 2.42. daily breaking Bread from House to
House, did eat their Meat with gladness and singleness of Heart, praising God,
Acts 2.46. they did thus at all seasons, even as often as they eat and drank,
they were to do it in remembrance of Christ, to show his Death till he come, 1
Cor. 11.26. and blessed is that Servant, says our Savior, whom his Lord when
he comes shall find so doing. But if the evil Servant shall say in his Heart,
my Lord delayeth his coming, and begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat
and drink with the Drunken; the Lord of that Servant shall come in a day that
he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut
him asunder, and give him his portion with Hypocrites, Mat. 24.46. to the end.
Wherefore such as live Voluptuously, in Rioting and Excess, in Hatred and Envy,
in Strife and Cruelty (though they may be great pretenders to partake of the
outward Bread and Wine,) and abide not steadfast in the Apostle's Doctrine, who
says, whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the Glory of God,
1 Cor. 10.31. but eat and drink to indulge the Flesh; whose God is their belly:
These, says he in the 20 verse of this Chapter, Sacrifice to, and have
fellowship with Devils; and ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of
Devils. Nor can ye partake of the Lord's Table, and the Table of Devils, verse
21. neither can they discern the Lord's Body, nor show his Death till he come.
And with such he is always to come; nay, when he does come and stand knocking
at the door of their Heart, they will not open to him, nor entertain him. but
if any Man (says the Lord) hear my voice and open the door, I will come into
him, and Sup with him and he with me, Rev. 3.20. and this is the effectual
Supper of the Lord's Table, which is the Flesh and Blood of Christ in the
Mystery; John 6.56. he that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in
me, and I in him; and here the redeemed of the Lord, have their Communion in
the Body and Blood of Christ, by his abideing in them, and they as living
Branches of the true Vine, abiding in him, and in this blessed Communion, the
Figure of the outward Supper is fulfiled, according to Christ's own Words, Luke
22.16 and 18. I will no more eat hereof, nor drink of the Fruit of the Vine,
until the Kingdom of God shall come, and it be fulfiled in the Kingdom of God,
so that they only, who are partakers of the new Wine in Christ's Kingdom, can
take the Cap of Salvation, and Praise his Name.

But notwithstanding all that can be said, none are greater opposers of the
Power of Godliness, than they who have their life only in the outward
profession thereof; and are like those Soldiers, very earnest in parting and
casting Lots for Christ's Garments; not at all regarding the crucified Jesus,
upon the Cross so near them. So, many Thousands Professors, spend most of their
precious time about Words, Names, Shadows, vain Shows, and beggarly Elements,
till they disputed and thrown away all inward sense of true Christianity. What
a noise they make about Water, Bread and Wine, and other bodily exercises;
acting in Religion? as if making, and blessing an Idol; and employed in
heartless, overly and outside Performances; but within full of Envy, Pride and
Covetousness; as if they thought to clime into Heaven that way by which Lucifer
was cast out. Here Is enough said, to satisfy the impartial and unprejudiced,
but to such as are wedded to the Forms, Customs, and Traditions of Men, this
Doctrine will seem New, Strange and Dangerous; nevertheless, though many
understand not these things at present, yet, I hope they may hereafter; and to
such as are otherwise minded, God will reveal these, and greater Mysteries in
his due time.

And therefore, to that pure Invisible, Unchangeable and Immortal Seed, and
Principle of Life and Light, Which enlightneth every one that comes into the
World; that Word which is nigh in the Heart, that everlasting Gospel which is
preached, Col 1.23. In every Creature (for so it is in the Greek Copy) under
Heaven, even to that Grace and Spirit of God, which appears, and offers
Salvation to all Men, which inwardly makes manifest the hidden works of
Darkness, reproves and condemns all unrighteousness in Heart and Life, directs
and leads into the way of Life and Peace, accepts of, and rewards for
well-doing, let every one who love their own Souls be inwardly turned, to love
it, believe in it, and obey it, that ye may no longer remain in Darkness, but
walk and abide in the Light of the Lord, to whom be Glory, Honor and Obedience
for ever, Amen.

God the Father, has committed all Power in Heaven, and upon Earth to his Son,
and made him Supreme Head and Governor over his Church; and He in his own
Divine Light manifests and reveals himself, his mind and will to Man; and is
all-sufficient, and ever present to direct and lead his People into all Truth.
And being our Lord, our Judge, and Lawgiver, requires universal Obedience to
his Royal Law written in our Hearts, and has always the Sovereign Power to lay
aside, alter, abolish and lead his People from the use of outward Observations
and Ordinances, that are idolized or abused, as well now as he did formerly, by
Temple-Worship, Sacrifices, the Passover and Circumcision; which at first was
commanded the Jews, and their Seed for an everlasting Covenant.

(1.) Even as Swearing under the old Testament; an Oath was then taken for
confirmation, etc. which under the Gospel is expressly forbidden by Christ, Mat.
5.34.35. and by the Apostle, James 5.12.

The Primitive Christians kept this Doctrine, against the commandments of
Heathen Emperors, Popes, and persecuting Princes: As,

Policarpus refused to Swear, affirming it a special Character of a true
Christian, not to Swear at all; he was burned therefore in the 86 Year of his
Age, Acts and Mon. vol. 1. fol. 55.

Basiliades, another Martyr, affirmed it was not lawful for a Christian to
Swear, Eusebius. c. 6. p. 98.

In the Plowman's Complaint, we have this Expression, Lord thou give us thy
Commandment of Truth, not to Swear, but to say, yea, yea: and nay, nay, and to
be Humble and Meek; but he that calls himself thy Vicar on Earth, has broken
both these Commandments, compelling Men to Swear, and teaches, that to save
Life, a Man may forswear himself, Acts and Mon. vol. 1. fol. 527.

Walter Brute affirms, that as it was the Perfection of the Ancients in the
Old Testament, not to forswear themselves, so the Perfection of a Christian
Man, is not to Swear at all, Acts and Mon. vol. 1. fol. 653.

And Chrysostom declares it is a Sin to Swear upon any account, Acts and Mon.
vol. 1. fol. 701.

Yea a great Master in Divinity says, It is not lawful either to give, or take
an Oath upon a Book; for says he, a Book is nothing else but diverse Creatures
whereof it is made; therefore to Swear upon a Book, is to Swear by Creatures;
and this Swearing is ever unlawful, Acts and Mon. vol. 1. fol. 701.

So likewise, other Customs which had their Rise and Authority of the Romish
Church, and Popish Councils, intruded merely for filthy Lucres sake, ought to
be laid aside, viz.

Ignatius Bishop of Rome, was the first who ordained that Infants should be
baptized, and have Godfathers and God mothers.

And anno 1500. it was ordained by the Council, held at Pisoy in France, that
Infant Baptism should be received by Tradition, because it could not be proved
by Scripture.

And Higinus the ninth Bishop of Rome, ordained the Communion to be celebrated
three times a Year.

(2.) And as for paying Tithes under the Gospel Dispensation it is sufficiently
manifest to be a Popish imposition.

Pope Pius the 5th, commanded Tithes to be paid under the penalty of
Excommunication.

The Bohemians in their Christian Exhortation to Kings and Princes, to stir
them up to Zeal for the Gospel, against the covetous practices of the Clergy,
say, They receive Tithes of Men, and will have them; and preach that Men are
bound to give them Tithes. but therein they say falsely, for they cannot prove
by the new Testament, that our Lord Jesus commanded it, neither did his
Disciples receive any; and though in the old Testament, it was commanded to give
Tithes, yet, can it not thereby be proved that Christians are bound thereunto;
for this precept of the old Testament, had an end in the first Year of our Lord
Jesus Christ, like as the precept of Circumcision. Wherefore consider, and see
how your Bishops seduce you with things that have no proof; Christ said in the
11th of Luke, Give Alms of those things that remain, but said not, give the
Tenth ye possess, Acts and Mon. vol. 1. fol. 860.

Finally, The Main and Principal Foundation of the Law of England is the Law of
God, so says the Law-Book, Doctor and Student, c. 2. p. 4. in these Words,

There is a Law written in the Heart of Man, which is Man created in the Image
of God; and this Law is always Good and Righteous, stiring up the Man to do
that which is good, and abhor the evil; and therefore against this Law (says
the Book) Prescription, Statute, Custom may not prevail, and if any be brought
against it, they are void, and against Justice.

Wherefore it does necessarily follow, that all Popish or Prelatical
Prescriptions, Customs or Penal Statutes, concerning Oaths or Tyths, or any
other thing, not sounded on the Law of God written in the Heart; are void, and
against Justice:

For undoubtedly, they who laid the first Foundation of Government, had
Authority to make such a Constitution as cannot be altered by Posterity, for
Foundations cannot be removed, without hazard of the whole building, but if
any do here plead the necessity of times, the expediency or usefulness of some
such Statutes or Customs? I Answer, 1st. the greatest necessity and care, is,
and should be to secure and maintain the Foundation, and 2ly. however necessity
might support, and indulge other Laws: it cannot, such as alter and are
pernicious to the Constitution; but every legal advantage should be taken for
restoring it, together with our just Rites and Freedoms, from all Arbitrary
oppressions, and innovations, and more particularly from the aforesaid Popish
intrusions and impositions, for Oaths and Tithes.

And this is the humble and earnest desire of every good subject, that they who
are more especially concerned, may so Vote, and so Enact, As those that shall
be judged by the Law of Liberty, James 2.12. for by this Law in the Heart, God
has showed unto them that Govern, as unto us who are under them, what is good,
and what he requires of us all, Mic. 6.8.

And that they who sit to Judge us according to the Law; may not command nor
suffer us (any longer) to be Smitten contrary to the Law Acts 23.3.

Postscript.
THE sum, and end of all Testimonies, Declarations, Words, and Writing, is, or
ought to be, to Reconcile, Recover, and Restore lost Man unto God, and into his
Favor.

And this is to be done no other way, but only, in and by Jesus Christ our
Lord. He is the Way; I am the Way, (says he) and no Man comes to the Father
but by me, John 14.4, 5, 6.

Now then: He, and he only, is in the right way to Eternal Life, who is in
Christ, that has put on Christ, that dwells and abides in Christ, and
Christ in him, John 6, 56.

But some will say, who is in Christ? Answ. The new Creature; even he or she
that is raised up from dead Works, and made alive to God by the same Spirit and
Power that raised up Jesus from the Dead, Romans 8.11.

That, like as Christ was raised up from the Dead, by the Glory of the Father,
even so, we also should walk in newness of Life, Romans 6.4.

Therefore, if any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature; behold all things
are become new. and all things are of God, who has reconciled us unto himself
by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17.

Wherefore, all my Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters, who have believed in the
Light, and do walk in the Light; and though this way is every where evil spoken
of, Acts 19.9. Yet to you, he is precious, his ways are ways of Pleasantness,
and all his paths full of Peace, Prove. 3.17. Hold on, keep in this your way to
the end; and as ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, even so walk in him,
Col. 2.6. So run, as that ye may obtain the Crown, and finish your Course with
Joy. Take heed, Watch and Pray least ye fall or enter into Temptation, of being
easy or lukewarm, or to begin to wax wanton against Christ, 1 Yim. 5.11. And
so espouse to your selves any carnal Intrest, or false Liberty, which leads
down to the Chambers of Death and Hell, Prove. 7.27.

And therefore believing, that I am in Conscience obliged both to God and Man,
and made willing, as a warning unto All, here to Insert and Publish this
following Testimony.

A Copy of the Paper sent to Nottingham, the 21st. of the 7th. Month, 1697.
To all tender and upright-hearted Friends in Nottingham, and Nottinghamshire,
James Jackson sends Greeting, in the Love and Fear of God which abides
unchangable for ever.
MY Dear Friends, whereas by my sinful Prevarications, and public Revolt, the
Glorious Name of the Lord, and his ever blessed Truth, has been greatly
dishonored: his holy Spirit, together with yours, exceedingly grieved; besides
the manifest occasion of Stumbling, Offense, and Perjudice, hereby given to the
World.

And now, (through the infinite Goodness and Mercy of God in Jesus Christ)
being brought into the weighty sense of his righteous Judgments, and just
Displeasure for my Transgressions and Backslidings; feeling also, the operation
of his mighty Power, in the fresh Visitations of his Love, renewing and
reviving his own blessed Work upon my Heart; whereby he has made me (as at
first) to look unto him whom I have Pierced, and with shame and contrition, to
yield unto, and fall under those very same Pricks and Divine Reproofs, against
which I have too too long kicked.

In the living sense hereof, I am constrained to declare unto you, and am not
ashamed to Publish unto the World, how abundantly Good, and Gracious, the Lord
has been, and is to me, who after all my Provocations and Ill requitals, has
once more in the way of his Judgments, extended Mercy; and as a God that waits
to be Gracious has given me a repenting, broken, and returning frame of Heart,
filled with Self-condemning and Self-abhorring resentments; and (withal) raised
in me a living hope, that as he has seen all my Wanderings, and perverseness of
my ways, he will also pity and heal me, and restore Comforts to me and to you,
my Mourners; according to that precious Word, Isa. 57.15, 16, 17, 18.

Neither can I here omit, to make my sincere and thankful Acknowledgements for
the many repeated Testimonies of your tender Care and Christian-like Dealing
with me; watching over me, administering wholesome and seasonable Admonitions,
faithful and compassionate Reproofs; and lastly, righteous and just Censures.
All which, (as to me) I own were very necessary; and as from you, the products
of Love and Faithfulness. The savor thereof, has ever since (by times)
affected my Heart with warm Inclinations to love you, and secret Motions to
return (with the Dove) into the Ark, back again unto you, Hos. 2.7.

And also, in tender Love and Faithfulness, I cannot but warn and beseech,
those, who in any measure or degree have swerved from the pure path of Holiness
and Selfdenial; whose Hearts are privy to any secret allowance of Sin, or
inward declinings or decay from your first Love, that ye make haste, and delay
not; but immediately look up unto Jesus (as they in the Wilderness to the
Brazen Serpent) Oh! linger not, dally not with Sin; nor take liberty to defer
from mine or any others evil Example, least hardness come, through the
deceitfulness of Sin; who knows how soon the Day of Visitation may be over, the
strivings of Gods Spirit cease, and the Door of Mercy be shut. And as for my
part (though I can truly say, the Lord has preserved me from the Spirit of Envy,
and Prejudice, (the usual Companions of Apostasy) yet I must ever pray, that
none who have known the Truth, may have the like occasion to feel the bitter
Pangs, Terrors, and Difficuties, which attend a deferred return.

And Ye, who have abode Faithful, and continued in your first Station; knowing
that all your Strenth and Sufficiency is of Grace: Put on, as the Elect of God,
Bowels of Mercy, and Pity; sustain the Weak, and pray for Us, and all that
have tasted of the Good Word of Life, and the Powers of the World to come; that
we, together with you, may be Preserved, and persevere in that Liberty wherein
the Truth does set us free; and there abiding, may keep our Dominion, in the
Authority of Truth, over the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eyes, and the
Pride of Life.

And to conclude, with the humble Expression of Nebuchadnezzar, (in the like
case) Dan. 4.37. I Praise, and Extol, and Honor the God of Heaven, all whose
Works are Truth, and his Ways are Judgment, and they that walk in Pride, he is
able to Abase.

James Iackson.

THE END.

